MY good friend Theocritus; whether away so speedily?
Know you not what is this day done in that excellent School of Virtue and literature, that most flourishing, and just Consistory of Peers and Com∣mons?
Private employments, have made me a mere stranger to public affairs. Pray, what is it?
Know my Euthimius, that this day the Judges must undergo Judgement, those Conscript Fathers whose purple we once adored are now sick of a Iudici∣all Fever, by reason of their corrupt sentence given; to the grievance of the Subject, and favour of their Prince.
Alas! In what a state are we, when Judges must render an account of their actions upon earth be∣fore Judges?
Believe me Euthymus, they must; nor will
they escape the Gallows, if they give not very good satisfaction to that Honourable and grave assembly nor will they easily so doe: For it is generally said that they were the very fountain of all the tears and tumults of this languishing Island.
Let them all dye, if they have abused the seat of Judgement; it is much better that one perish then an unity: a luxurious branch, then a fruitful vine, some kind of mercy is cruelty; by whose remissness or burden rather, every diseased common-wealth is af∣flicted: This have I always said, and this renowned Island hath found it too true by experience: to spare the evil, is an endammagement to the good. But what are these?
If I should directly express their conditions, I should show you diverse gestures arising from the self same affection. They are two Philosophers that ieere and weep at the passages of the World. He, Heraclitus plays the part of a compassionate man, hee is 〈◊〉 with tears, and no sooner sees then sighs at the vani∣ties of men; But the other, Democritus derides the age; and scoffs men's general folly; setting up this Motto over his door.
Miserum me video, &amp; rideo;
Infelicem servideo, 〈◊〉 invideo
I see my own misery and laugh at it; I see thy mise∣rye and envy it not. But many there are who doe out∣wordly rejoice, but inwardly sigh: they laugh and carol with their mouths, but lament and condole with their hearts. This may you soon perceive by their enter∣change of discourse.
My good Democritus, what is the reason that thou laugh?
Because thou weepest; for what can thou find in this 〈◊〉 Theater of the world, which is worthy thy smallest tear? where servants are made Lords, Lords servants; the Masters head is cut off, the servant rises up, and 〈…〉 into his place wives bewail the funeral of their 〈…〉 tears and offering leap into their graves; and yet before one worm hath entered into the winding 〈◊〉 or before the flowers are withered wherewith the course was garnished, they entertain new affecti∣once and 〈…〉
These things 〈◊〉 tear from my eyes: but what besides, Democritus?
What besides dost thou ask? Get thee 〈…〉, and thou shall every where find the spectacles of derision. This man is honoured in the sight of his Prince; enjoys his delights, stretches upon beds of ivory, and is 〈◊〉 with honours, as with burden; he seeks nothing, but he acquires it, he 〈…〉, but he obtains it; all men that sees his estate admires him, and esteems him the happi∣est man upon the earth: in the mean while one small cloud obsoureth all these false beams in a day, ye in a minute of an hour, his Prime leaves him, his glo∣rye departs like a dream; and his Atlas who carri∣ed such heaps, such mountains of honour upon his shoulders, hath his exit with reproach; ho, ho, ho. Yet no sooner hath this Hero suffered an inrevo∣cable fate; but he is wished alive again by them, who in his life and glory prosecuted him with extremest violence: They hate him alive; lament his dead, and with pious tears desire his restriction: but great 〈◊〉 heads are sooner taken off, then set on again. In these times it is is more security to be a foot then
a wise man; for a wise mans head is a subject for the axe, the fool keeps his upon his shoulders▪ will you hear more?
Proceed, dear Democritus; these conceits are not more pleasant to thee then my tears ate to me.
Weep child, weep, and that thou may seem the more idle in it, see how parents live penu∣riously that they may make their sons prodigal the sooner; yet how they make them selves deptors to nature that they may riot the more licentiously: walk on, into this most stately City, look about thee, thou shalt see windows opened and paintd faces looking out, inviting thee with their looks. Thou shalt find althings saleable in Troinovant; the dainty dames will untie thy purse strings with a bus: out goes the husband, in comes the friend; ho, ho, ho. Thou shalt find some that resign their offices least they should loose them; others leaving their nest, that thy and their young may not perish, others that abounded through rapine miserably exhausted; others adorned with others feathers, that have cast their own. Here thou shalt see Cobblers and husk∣sters that rise out of old shoes and panniers, bea∣ting the Pulpit, and broaching new doctrines, as if they were Regij Professors, and held by the rabble to be most profound Divinity: yea, I cannot wash my hands but me thinks I see the soapy effigies of Brun∣field in the Basin▪ nor can I go down into a cellar, but I find the lively statue of Master Abel; yea I can∣not, untie my shoe, but I call to mind that patent for Leather and deride it; For men now truly seem turned into trees bringing forth spacious branches, but fruits of vanity: in a word all the world is full of fools, and ridiculous in the eyes of Democritus.
It is a vile disposition to joy in the discom∣modityes of others.
True; but hence it is that I laugh so much, because all things are cumbred with their own dis∣commodity.
In the mean while, they become noxious unto them.
And justly, my Heraclitus; for who if hee were wise would not forsake an house of clay to come unto an heavenly dominion▪ But these mad men place their Elysium upon earth, little regarding the future that they may enjoy the present. They demo∣lish, build up, they provide clothes for moths and edifices for the wind. They no sooner perceive the hook of honour, then they greedily swallow it; that sticks in their throats, and they are worthily taken▪ Nor doe these things rage only in greener minds; for although (as says that Sicilian) It is a pro∣digy for a young man to be old, ridiculous for an old man to be young; yet you may see the hoary Elders of this land, that have a foot in the grave, and by their age should have wisdom, or at the least ado∣rity &amp; reverence, plunged into most heinous crimes; so that it may truly be said of them, they grow as old in vices as in years.
You speak strangely.
But very truly of these old doges. The wolf will sooner change his hair then his heart: the wool will not easily loose its first colour, nor the vessel its first favour.
But my hope is that you will find none in this whole Island so wickedly &amp; wretchedly doting, as to prefer worldly wealth before Elision happi∣ness.
Go on and proceed my doefull Heraclitus, in your madness, are there not many I pray of that 〈◊〉 opinion▪ that would rather loose their pants in Paradise then in Paris. The Judges can 〈…〉 those venerable and conscript Fathers, who are this very day in trial for their lives.
Alas! The Judges.
I, the Judges. Therefore let us both go thither: for wee shall there hear many things pro∣portionable to thy tears and convenient for my laughter.
I will go very willingly; where if I hear Judgment turned into Whi••••ed, I shall with my tears lament those unhappy Fathers; yea I shall transform my self wholly into a Niche.
Go on fool, go; ho, ho, ho. The whole world is diseased; as many Monopolies as in∣habitants; ho, ho, ho.
Let us follow them, Euthymius: There is room for good store of company.
I scare, Theocritus that we shall not be ad∣meted, because we are no members of that Honora∣ble Assembly.
Let not that trouble you, there is none that hath good lockes and good clothes, but hee shall have entrance I warrant you; but who are these?
They seem to be of the Country by their simple discourse. Just us listen to them; for I suspect but little cunning in their coats, they will talk much about matters of State, and their rudeness will pro∣cure us good sport.
News Althea, I have a whole dicker of news for thee.
What is that my small friend.
I will tell thee a secret, my honey: we shall have a triennial Parliament, every year.
What is that triennial? Doth it belong to the keeping of sheep or goats, stopping of gaps, or gre∣sing of sheep tell me pray?
Let that suffice, love, that we shall have this good Triennial. As for my part I must needs con∣fesse, I know not whether Triennial be man or wo∣man. But this I know, that for the report of it in the country, we past all the night in making bon-fires and playing the good fellow.
Fie, fie: That Word doth very much trouble me. This husband of mine, being sometime an Uni∣varsity man, and now a Grassier, promised that he would perform his good will to me every third year, and I kindly gave him thanks, not knowing that he would doe it but once every third year.
I am old, what can thou look for from me? But come let us go near the Parliament door, for there are great businesses to day concerning the Judges.
What shall they be hanged.
I know not, but they are in such danger, that as they say their breeches make buttons.
What shall we doe there? such matters are not fit for us; they are to high for our simple capacities.
Let us go however; if we hear nothing, we'll devise something, to make them wonder at in the Country.
Let us be as desirous to hear, since all flock thither let us hasten and join our selves to their company. A common evil should be heard with common indignation.
Go on we willingly will bestow the pains.
O Let Astrea still bear sway
In this high Court. Thus doth he pray.
Who here once got the laurel wreath
Now cut off by untimely death.
Give Justice not forgetting grace
Bee not too mild, nor to severe;
Those that deserves a Judges place,
Know how to punish and to spare
Oil is not still to be inful'd
In greene wounds Balsum's to be used.
Let King, and Kingdom still aspire
This Coriolanus doth desire.
From whom the peoples direful rage
Nor the black rod, the axe, the stage
Of blood, nor the grime face of death
Could ever draw one panting breath.
See how he lives in's funeral
More happy in a wretched fall;
For now he reigns beyond the sky
with Demigods in company.
"Farewell all that earth ere gave
"Death is my gain, my rest the grave.
What prodigies appears within this place;
Yet full of pious admonitions.
which with on voice, one vote, one hand, one motion
We all will execute — but these things▪ pass from whence they came — you officers proceed.
Ho, Roderigo, bring for your prisoners
Who shall be brought first▪
Let them be brought in order, as they gave in their answers. Ignorance of order confoun∣death the form of Justice. wherefore let us first begin with the first; proceeding from the Junior to the se∣nior Judges▪ as they have particularly offended, let them particularly receive their trial. They shall find us far more attentive and upright Judges, then they have showed themselves in the case of shipping.
Porter bring Claudius to the bar, hold up your hand Claudius: Thou art indicted by the name of Claudius, that in Hilary term 1637. Contrary so the peace of the common wealth, the liberty of the sub∣jest, and the testimony of thy own conscience, not having God before thine eyes, thou did Traitorously, Maliciously and wickedly, give sentence for ship∣money without evident necessity, due and payable to the King, in whose power it was solely to Judge of his necessity. Speak Claudius, art thou guilty of the crime for which thou stand indicted.
I confess I have been somewhat erroneous in mine office; but all men know I have continued in it but a short time▪ wherefore as my impeachments are the fewer, so I hope your censure will be the more pro∣piteous.
This conduces little to your defence; for if you had been in it longer, and governed that seat it is probable, your offences had been multiplied, it was your general crime, and you must expect a general punishment.
Ho, Chacon hire the servants; thou wilt have work sufficient; here is a press of fat Judges coming; ho, ho, ho.
Claudius stand aside Rotor, bring Cratippus to the bar: hold up thy hand Cratippus▪ Thou art indi∣ted by the name of Cratippus, that in Hilary Term 1637. thou did contrary to the peace of the commonweal, the liberty of the subject, and the testimony of thine own con∣science, traitorously, maliciously, and wickedly give sen∣tence for ship-money, due and payable to the King without evident necessity, whereof the King hath had power solely to judge, speak Cratippus art thou guilty of the crime for which thou art indicted.
Hoe has an ox in's mouth, as says the Pro∣verb, or a cup in his throat, he cannot speak a word.
O Cratippus, break not thy silence, hold thy peace desist and blush. Nor would any thing have be∣come you better if you had done so always: but a pi∣os blush is an unwonted punishment for such offen∣ders, we have heard that you were ever addicted to for∣did lucre, pinching your self to augment you gain. No unjust occasion of getting could pass you, where∣fore there is no reason you should pass unpunished. For whom have you in this company, whom in this honoured round that will rise up in your defence and vindicate your uniustice? on or none, you had one but much unlike you, your brother Hortensius, who religi∣ously sate with you on the same bench, but differed
from your affections; for his opinion in this case of Ship-mony was consonant to Curvus, Acililius. These two respected not Writs of ease, nor the thundering threats of that fugitive Chrysomitris, they preferred the odour of a good name before titles of honour, which glory of fame he that neglected, is most crew∣ell: wherefore although Hortensius be now dead, he hath left such a memory to posterity, that monu∣mints of marble, brass, and Ivory will sooner decay then his renown amongst his Countrymen.
I deny not but that I am guilty, and desire the favour of this high Court; otherwise as our sen∣tence was alike, let one boat carry us away together: I would speak more, but am hindered with the quinsie.
In reason they should possess all Anticyra, our Ancestors judged a little house to be a common∣weal, but these have contracted the whole common∣weal into their own house, yea a little corner of their house.
O the deplorable misery of wretched man!
These things deserve not a tear; I will∣lingly permit them to be mad: for see how deserved∣lie Cratippus is punished; he hath sold his tongue so long for money, that he hath not enough left to ask pardon for his life; ho, ho, ho.
Call Corticeus to the bar: hold up thy hand Corticeus, thou art indicted by the name of Corticeus, for that in Hilary Term, Anno Doom. 1637. thou did contrary to the peace of the Commonweal, the liberty of the subject, and the testimony of thine own conscience, not ha∣avenge God before thine eyes, traitorously, maliciously, and wickedly given sentence for Shipmony to be paid unto the King without evident necessity, whereof he had sole power
to Judge; speak Corticeus, art thou guilty of what thou stand indicted.
Not guilty.
Thou art found guilty, help thee God.
Wee have much to say unto you Curticeus: you have eloquence sufficient, but wisdom too lit∣tle. There was no man more readier to speak law, yea to wrest it, and like a nose of wax compose it to any form. But what avail these natural parts, this happiness of wit and genius? It is difficult to swim at first without help: you began to fly abroad like an unfledged Lapwing with your shell upon your head, In your Circuit especially in the Duchy of Lancaster, at which time that worthy Gentleman Master Farring∣don was Sheriff, you exercised your tyranny, showing, your loftiness in all places, to your no small hatred for other sins waite upon evil works that they may be done: but pride waits on good works that they perish.
Hee that flowed with a thousand virtues, lost his happiness through arrogance, other vices by the presence of God, only Pride opposes it self against him. Yea, with what audaciousness and insolence did you maintain this exploded case of Ship-mony, as if you only had the Monopoly of wit and reason? wherefore as every one shows himself more obsti∣nate in a crime, the more severely is he to bee censu∣red.
If Schism deserve punishment, Heresy merits hell.
I call Heaven to witness, I should have li∣ved and dyed in that opinion were I not contradicted by the Authority of this grave consistory, for wee read so many books, collections, statutes and An∣nils that if we were licensed to argue, we could sup∣port
this our opinion with good reasons and conclu∣sions.
Give place; we have already examined your reasons and arguments.
Of what use I marvel, is eloquence, when a man shall end his life in a string?
Ho Porter, where is Vigetius?
We have no such man.
But such an one we had, who easily assenting to his brother Corticeus opinion, never did stick unto him in any thing, but in this sentence of Shipmony. Hee always feigned himself not well if hee were to make an argument. And when he entered into it (ha∣avenge lost his reasons very happily in the street) no man ever offended with greater brevity: and in this only he hath shown himself wise, that he hath pre∣vented our censure by death.
Wherefore it may be said
of him that hee was once Greene, and Flourished, he
was descended from an ancient house, and for this was to be commended that he sought rather to keep his ancient Patrimony then to increase it.
Many men show themselves wiser by dying then by living: ho, ho, ho.
In peace let him go: bring Trivius to the bar, hold up your hand: Trivius, Thou art indicted by the name of Trivius, that in Michaelmas Term 1638. thou did contrary to the peace of the Commonweal, the liberty of the subject, and the testimony of thine own consci∣ence, not having the fear of God before thy eyes, traitorous∣lie, maliciously, and wickedly give sentence for Ship-money payable to the King without evident necessity, whereof hee himself was the sole Judge. Speak Trivius, art thou guile∣tie
of the crime for which thou stand indicted?
Why are you silent, will you be pressed?
Hee hath pressed many a rich widow, what if he be now pressed himself: ho, ho, ho.
I have little for the present to say in my de∣fence.
Nor ever will you have more; be silent and hear: This is a man whom no Lawyer exceeded in riches, yet non is more ignorant in the laws; hee is brought at last into public, to make himself a Syno∣noma to his name. For although there is no contending with Ghosts, yet we determine to portrait this snake, and delineate this prodigy of men in his right co∣lours, and with such brevity as may be least irksome to the hearers.
Let us stand up and see their painted Gore∣gons head.
This Trivius a true trivial Trivius, a man sa∣tiated with widows, but widowed of goodness, of of a strong &amp; sinewy body rather then a witty and in∣genuous heart, having good success in his suits suck∣ed more marrow from other men's realists, then ever hee received by the poor practise of his profession. Hee speaks much with little discretion, and having his brains in his tongue, will utter an ocean of words without the least drop of reason.
You have painted me to an hair, worthy Manilius, I confess I am altogether ignorant of the laws, and as blind men are wont to doe, I easily subscribed to the opinion and judgment of my bro∣theirs: wherefore my ignorance desires pardon, and cries that you should spare him whom God will spare as being an INNOCENT.
You devised a readier answer for me Trivi∣us
then any defence for your self: ignorance excu∣seth a tanto, not a toto: you had a good example be∣fore, namely Antrivius deceased, &amp; sleeping in peace, who as his pen witnesses being sick on his bed, would assent to no such opinion. But you adoring your mo∣ney not only in the Image, but in the rust; preferred your dross before your peace of conscience, where∣fore as you have milked your widows, so let the ex∣chequer milk you of all that you have.
Very good! the Goat must now be milked. This Ignoramus pays the price of his Ignorance, one day takes away what many years have gathered; and the exchequer draines the fortunes of so many wives, ho, ho, ho.
Human affairs never succeed well where divine service is neglected.
Let Trivius bee taken away and kept close prisoner, least hee escape; and Roderigo keep your hand close, lest by his stolen merchandise he procure his liberty.
To speak of you most honoured Curvus Acilius, your constancy and integrity hath with a beam of the Sun described you a father of your country, the star of the Court, and a true Son of ju∣stice, and have left you a memory to posterity which shall never be extinguished by the injury of time or forgetfulness: for you have utterly conque∣red all envy, and in this last date of your age have e∣rected a statue in the Courts of the living, whereun∣to no better Epitaph can be added, then Sacred to the memory of Curvus Acilius.
O how much doth this Trivius differ from Acilius? the one as hee singularly knew the laws, so he rightly dispensed them, the other neither dispen∣sed them nor knew them.
In this negligent and retchlesse age, vices like grass in pits are wont to spring out men's lazi∣ness from whence wee find it true, that evils are much more incurable in the old then in the young.
Yet if old men would more diligently mea∣sure their hour as much as they are nearer death, they should live more uprightly. But now there is such corruption of life, that men doe never more love the earth, then when thy should leave it; never less regard heaven, then when they should go thither: Hold my sides least I burst with laughter, young men grow old, and old men young; ho, ho, ho.
Bring forth Ioachimus.
He is departed his own prison before he was committed to our custody.
He is dead, and is beholding unto death; for although he were a very subtle Lawyer, in his cun∣ning and intricate arguments, and showed himself a true Tytides, who wavering
this way and that, doubted whether to join with Hector or Achilles, saying, whom to fly I know, whom to follow I know not; yet the more severely was he to be punished because hee was so industrious to dis∣semble and corrupt the truth.
But the fates have taken him out of your hands; and by dying in time he prevented an untime∣lie death.
Bring forth Hortensius.
He was never committed to our custody.
Thou say true, Roderigo, he was a man of such unstained life▪ that hee showed himself truly worthy both in life and death: wherefore the me∣mori
of so his just and upright
a man is to bee lamented with perpetual Elegy: for he de∣servedly got the name of an honest Judge and a poor student: in which title he might glory more then in the Empire of the World.— Hee Conquered en∣vie by his virtues, and won honour in his death.
With what pious sentences are good men's tombs to be engraven?
From hence proceed those Adagios. E∣very evil man is a fool, no evil man is happy. A wise man is every where at home: none but a fool can be banished.
He truly travels from home, my Demos. who enjoys not himself.
Let him depart, and serve for a good exam∣ple.
Call forth Antrivius.
He was called forth long since.
Where appeared he?
Where he arrived, he is far enough free from our our hands or manicles.
By what authority?
By the command of a crabbed and imperi∣os noble man, who having waited a while at the prison door, swore he would enter, or break off the hinges. He was of so fierce and terrible aspect, that I gave him way for fear; and as soon as I delivered my prisoner, he caught him by the hair and vanished
No man can resist an inevitable fate. But if that man had lived unto these days, his sentence had been so upright in this dispute, that hee had been freed and made an happy end of his long-wearied
age. Let him sleep in peace, as hee flourished in the light; and the more he flourished for being the less contentious in his cases.
Tic best to speak well of the dead; but if he had not been so sickly of body, perchance he had not been so sound in mind.
You say true Democritus; for sickness af∣flicteth the body, but cures the soul.
What mad men are those in the mean while, who being healthy in body, are diseased in their mind?
Sergeant, bring Damocles to the bar, hold up your hand: Damocles, Thou art indicted by the name of Damocles that in Hilary Term 1638. thou did contrary to the peace of the Commonweal, the liberty of the subject, and the testimony of thine own consci∣ence, not having the fear of God before thy eyes, traitorous∣lie, maliciously, and wickedly give sentence for Ship-money payable to the King, without evident necessity, whereof hee himself was the sole Judge▪ Speak Damocles, art thou guile∣tie of the crime for which thou art indicted.
I confess I am not altogether guilty nor in∣nocent: for he that will exactly scan over my argue∣mints: he shall find me disagreeing from the open∣on of my brothers: for I did not positively say that such a revenue was due; wherefore as our sentence was more moderate, so I hope your censure will bee more mild. Our arguments were defended and main∣ed by divers good circumstances. Let it bee your goodness to favour my age, which long since had a discharge, and is now miserably tyred with cares and sorrows.
O Damocles, you cannot so escape; notwith∣standing your condition is deplorable: for in many
causes you have got a good report: you never sold your breath, and if your clients cause were good and honest, you constantly pleaded it; yea, as we are in∣formed, you have little at home, but wants and debts abroad; from whence we esteem your poverty, your justice, these things may perchance procure your mi∣tigation, but no absolute freedom.
O poor Judge, will not thine indignity get thee off?
Hold your peace; this fool deserves the greatest punishment of all; for having flourished so many years amongst us, &amp; having so many occasions of gain as baits hanging before him, like an ill cooke, he could not so much as lick his fingers; ho, ho, ho.
Wee have sufficiently scoured this Lernean lake, let us now proceed unto other ranks; and I fear we shall find as many snakes in other dens. But that wee may the better cleanse these Again stables, and there may be no room for impudence or igno∣rance: as for Gliciscus, who held the place of a cipher having little learning and less law, as hee was clock keeper to the Judges, so we doom him to the keep∣ing of a clock-hoase. Hee hath little understanding, &amp; therefore should the more gently be dealt withal.
With what an asses ear he hearkens to it.
Does it please you that wee shall proceed unto others?
By all means, that they may bee joined in their punishment, as they were linked together in the crime.
Ho, sir Knight of the black rod, bring forth Chrysomitris.
He hath made an escape.
Wither I pray?
He is fled into another Country, and hath left his nest lest he should be taken in it; and ever since that time they say he hath roasted in France.
O what madness possessed him, how lively doth that saving point out Chrysomitris, that evil coun∣sell is still worse to the Counsellour.
Leaving now his consultar dignity it is said he follows the wars, and that lately upon an in∣jury offered him hee disarmed his enemy, showing himself as able a soldier as an eloquent Rhetori∣cian.
How many excellent gifts hath nature be∣stowed on him; which if they had been seasoned with humility and grace, they had made him com∣pleatly famous. But to proud men no burden is more dangerous then honour: they so easily change their conditions, that they will not know their friends and acquaintance. These tumours of the world prick on their minds with such a strange kind of fury, that they make themselves hated by their familiars and o∣theirs: wherefore an office is best aquired by a Ma∣gistrate; nor is it better bestowed on any then on him who seeks it not at all, or very coldly. This he well advised who said: let it bee given to him that denies it, and denied to him that excepts it. But long let this Chrysomitris nest in a foreign nation before hee be recalled. We have enough of such saluters alrea∣die: wee have too tenderly cherished such ominous birds; let them leave our coasts and return no more least they destroy the mother that nourished them. But that wee may comprise all in one, and never did any man show himself more ungrateful then this
For notwithstanding his infinite en∣gagements,
he imputed his crimes unto his Prince; whereas a constant and resolute mind would sooner endured a thousand deaths, yea (like that heroic spirit that lately suffered) would with a cheerful look retort the threats of inexorable fate, then cast the least aspersion upon a Prince so well deser∣avenge. But let him pass with his eloquence, then whom never was Judge more unjust, never a Lord keeper more corrupt nor more poor, no Soli∣citer more impure and more importunate: In the mean while lest wee bee reckoned in their number who have eloquent tongues, but corrupt hearts, let us discourse of every thing propounded unto us not so curiously as faithfully and discreetly, not so ex∣actually as justly and rightfully.
O miserable happiness! splendid servitude! he hath lost his fame, fortune, voice, countenance, nest and nation in the twinkling of an eye.
O the snowy balls of honour, apt to bee resolved with the least intemperate heate of mind. But what is he who walk with such stately and haughty gesture?
He is one that had an excellent opinion in the commonwealth before had his office; but when he had gotten it no man more unhappily lost it. His advancement so much changed his disposition. In sum he was a good Lawer, a bad Judge.
Call Brundusius to the bar. Hold up thy hand Brundusius, Thou art indicted by the name of Brundusius, that in Trinity Term. 1638. Thou did against the peace of the common weal, the liberty of the Subject, and the tes∣timony of thine own conscience: not having God before thine eyes traitorously, and wickedly given sentence for ship-money, to be paid to our Lord the King, without evident necessity,
whereof it was in his sole power to Judge. Speak Brundusius art thou guilty of the crime whereof thou art indicted.
Master Speaker I pray give me leave a little, for this Brundunsius is more strictly to be handled. This I will confidently aver, that no man hath de∣served worse, of the Commonwealth: when all men esteemed him the maine defendor of Justice, he ex∣pressed himself her most vowed enemy, to the re∣proach of his name, and corruption of his conscience. Hee saw and fell with open eyes: he knew the right and did the wrong; and therefore his ruin is deser∣ved. For if he had been ignorant of the laws, as Trivius, he might have had some colour of excuse, but to give sentence against the most certain rule, of his own knowledge, O prodigy!
I ingeniously confess, and no less desire best of favour, that partly by the threats, partly by the flatteries of Chrisomitris, I gave that unheard of sentence of ship-money. For Chrysomitris, who as you know had a most fortunate art in the way of perswati∣on, told me that unless I gave that judgement for the King, I should loose mine honour: and suffer a writ of Ease to my extreme disgrace.
O the follies of aged avarice! Should you pre∣far Writs of ease before ease of Conscience? should you bee the more prone, unto the earth, by how much you are nearer to your ends? to have one foot in the grave, and a mind coveting the world? O if you would consider how little would suffice nature, &amp; of that lit∣tle, how small a portion would content old age, your care for earthly things would be abated, and your de∣sires would be wholly fixed upon heaven, for you who were so eminent in the studies of the Law, are most severely to bee punished, especially having so clear,
so excellent a mirror as Curvus Acilius, a man of extreme age, but a vigorous mind, an inviolate conscience. Him you had for an example; but (although your steps were Curva vestigia) refusing to follow Curvus, you have turned the right into oblique, you know you well knew (to the aggravation of your censure, those golden sentences of Periander, most worthy your memory, that nothing must be done for moneys sake, and that favour is an enemy to Judge∣meant. For Judgment fails where it becomes matter of affection. Too much love and too much hatred pervert the truth. Nor did Ioachimus lately deceased deserve any less; but by paying his debt to nature, the destinies have made him their perpetual debtor. For though hee were intricall and knotty in his arguments, yet this Oedipus with his riddles, the Fates had not prevented, had in∣volved himself in a Gregorian knot.
Its shameful for an old man to play the knave, ho, ho, ho.
And this for the most part happens when old men place their happiness upon earth.
But let us withdraw, that with more mature counsel we may proportion our sentence to every mans offence.
Whether flock these press of women?
Thou may easily conjecture by their habits: they are citizens wives, delicate ducks, who come hither to hear Judgment past upon the Judges.
Alas can their tender ears hear these things without tears.
Think you all are composed of your tenderness? you are far out; these are women of a more coragious spy∣rit: For they can with dry eyes or at lest counterfeitly wet, bid farewell to their husbands journeying to the nether
world; yea they can see them laid in their graves with a sower look, but a merry heart, and before the funeral tapers are extinguished, entertain new fires in their minds.
But I wonder why they they come here more this day then on any other.
Know you not the cause? the former were days of examination, but this of final judgement, &amp; you know women do always love execution more then judgment.
I will go in, for if Capreolus the Courtier sit in the house I am certain hee will soon give me entrance as I have often given unto him.
Pish, pish, my little mouse, my honey, what wilt thou doe in the Court.
What will I doe in the Court? hold you peace Arietus, hold your peace Cornelius: you and I are not friends if I have not not a standing in the Court.
In good troth you shall not have a standing with the Courtier in his own place.
But I have had and will have, my small friend if you anger me.
God forbid my cony, that such a blot should bee cast upon my family, such a mark upon my forehead.
Why so? doe you think your self the first man of the row.
By no means, yet I would not willingly wear my night-cap after the new city fashion, with broad ears, nor sleep with my pillow stuffed with shavings of horn.
Let not this trouble you, you may sooner foresee your fortune then prevent it, if such ensigns be your de∣stiny, withstand it not; it is vain to strive against your de∣stiny.
O headstrong licentiousness! am not I descended of the Arietarian stock, the most ancient Cornelian family of the city?
What then, there is no family so worshipful but it is subject to this fate. But I pray what avail these tri∣fles? ho, Titillus, Titillus.
What would you have with Titillus, that lacivi∣os Courtier.
That I may have entrance the sooner.
It will be hardly granted, in these public assem∣bless there is no place for women.
Why not for women? as if wee were not capable enough! they shall find, yea they know that we are capable. I will get up where I may barter see and hear.
What would thou see and hear? whether my cony doth thy mind carry thee?
I greatly desire to see the Judges, for they say (and I would know the truth) that they have no more beard up∣on their chins, then an ape hath tail.
They will appear subtle enough without hair: but they are shaven that they may seem the more terri∣ble in their places.
I like these young men with soft downy chins. I love not these old men whose hair is like prickly bristles, what are these.
The Judges whom thou so much longest to see.
Alas what cold husbands would they make, they have perpetual I sickles upon their beards.
Hold thy peace my Liveried; since thou art come hither and gotten into a place, hear what will become of them.
Let them be hanged, it shall never trouble me. I scarcely think they are of the masculine gender. They are neutrals, traitorous beasts, enemies of generation. Let them perish with their Judgements.
Holy my sweet duck, least thou be noted.
Pish, they are blind and deaf, and can neither see nor hear me, they.
Ho, Rodorigo, bring forth your Prosoners.
What ague fits they have gotten, ho, ho, ho.
Stand forth, stand forth, Sir Judges of a mise∣rabble condition. You have not denied but that you are guilty of the crime for which you are indicted; Nor can you produce any defence of your desperate cause, which is worthy our hearing: you know, you well know that a Judge is to be judged in none of those things, which he is prove∣ded to judge in another. In which, I say, how wretchedly have you erred? For you were Judges, &amp; censurers of the self same crime, whereof you were the Authors. For a Judge to take a bribe, was a capital thing; But if so great &amp; so heavy a sentence was pronounced for one fault, &amp; that extending but to a particular subject, what punishment must be inflicted on them, who have been so iniurous to the subjects, of a whole flourishing Island; by making the Prince suspicious of his subjects: the Subjects of their Prince; by declaring new opinions against the evident te∣stimonys of their consciences; by perturbing the Halcyon days of a peaceful king, &amp; an obedient state; yea by bring∣ing all according to their power, into flames and ashes; If such a fire whereof you were the true Incendiaries, do not deserve death, what it better deserves I cannot tell. The law was first ordained to be a public benefit; but by you it
is made the very plague of the common weal; You have all very well acted the part of Midas: Being Commissaries of trust between Prince &amp; people, which you should not violate for threatenings, friends, entreaties nor rewards; you being enticed by the bail of avarice, or stricken with a Panick fear, have left Justice naked; &amp; wretchedly negle∣cted your consciences, which testified against you. And so through lucre or terror, being blinded in your under∣standing, you have provided your selves true ministers of Midas.
Mercy, mercy, most renowned Gentle∣men?
Hey day, they are enforced to use their neck verse which the so often put others unto: Lord have mercy upon you.
With the same measure that you measure to o∣theirs shall it be measured to you again.
Alas they will not have the least hope, if they have the same recompense of measure.
Observe &amp; hear what I shall say: I believe that in leisure hours, you have read how the Germanes having been rather conquered then subject by their good leading of Drusus, as soon as hee was dead, trusting upon their strength began to hate the lust &amp; insolence of virus Queen∣ctilius, and how easily they became victors. Which short conflict being ended, like Barbarians as they were, they showed themselves most savage, &amp; tyrannous conquerors: Nor in that extreme cruelty, did they show themselves more implacable towards any condition, then to men of the cōsulare dignity, thinking that through their eloquent &amp; vendible tongues, the Romans had first beleagued them, &amp; brought thē to that calamity. Virus prosecuts them with the same mind &amp; fate of Paulus at Canoe, never was greater slaughter in fields &amp; woods, never more intolerable insult∣tiō,
but especially towards those that pleaded causes. Some of their eyes pulled out, others hands cut off, one's mouth they sewed up, first cutting out his tongue, which a Bar∣barian holding in his hand said, at length; viper desist from hissing, you should likewise call to mind Manius Acilius; that unsatisfied gulf of bribery, &amp; principal Ambassador of the Romans, whom Mithridates with great cōtempt, com∣pelled to ride upon an ass, until he came unto Pergamus, where he commanded Elixir of gold to be thrust into his mouth, intimating that the Romans were to much given to briberys, &amp; had tongues, too eloquent in evil speaking. Alex¦ander Severus the greatest enemy of flatterers, commanded that Turinus one of his courtiers; should bee tied to a stake in the market place, and smothered to death with smoke, having a crier proclaiming by him. Let him perish with smoke, that sold smoke: For it is better (to use Antisthenes words) to fall amongst crows, then Parasites; a∣amongst crows to be devoured dead, then amongst Para∣sites to be devoured living. Therefore it will be an argument of wisdom, for us to deal with you, who hath brought such plagues upon the commonwealth, &amp; disturbed our peace by your slanderous judgements, as Philip King of Macedon, did with two of his subjects, men of vile conditi∣once; he cōmanded one to fly from Macedon, &amp; the other to follow him, which being done, his country was purged of such noxious sycophants: both departed but neitheir of them returned.
It is the part of goodness, to save when it may de∣stroy, rather then to destroy when it might have spared.
He that spares the evil, hurts the good: listen now to your utmost sentence. As you have made the laws like spiders webs, &amp; have tossed this commonwealth like a poor bark, with the storms &amp; winds of your opinions, you shall have no residence within this Island: get you there∣fore
packing. For this is your definitive censure to those fortunate Lands, which are called the Irish sands. For there if you are poisonous you cannot live long but if you resolve to change your conditions as well as your hair, you shall in those Lands have a temperate ayre, and so wholesome for your bodies, that you will scarcely die, unless the world be so loathsome to you, or you unto the world! that you would wish rather to die then live, yea you shall have so much time given you through the temperatenesse of the air, that your ensuing hours may redeem, what you have formerly spent amiss. This sentence is irrevocable; make no delays, we have provided you a ship but without cable, sterne, sail yard or anchors, the (fatal semblance of your government,) to be known by these characters.
It is as evil to sail in old age, as is in the winter.
There is no punishment grievous where there is so much company.
Soon let them go but never return. Now raise the Court, the old men have their doom Let Justice sit here in the judges room.
Speak Master Prinner, for your whole flock; for you are the oracle of our conventicle.
Ho, ho, ho, Ogregious flock of sheep', a drove of asses.— now hell hath opened his mouth, corn out you generation of vipers.
Speak Master Prinner speak.
Know all men by these presents, dearly beloved
men and brethren, that of us who maintain the truth compassionate the blindness of the times, burn in zeal of heart, and contend for the reformation of religion, three things are principally required.
What sport will this lunatic corrector of religion, make us? ho, ho, ho.
First that there be no order in the Church: se∣condly, that all rites ceremonies, priestly garments, In∣struments of Music be abolished in the Church. Third∣lie, that there be no form of common prayer.
O how these doting fellows, would make the Church to be headless.
Peace, and hear. Lord, with what pricked up ears these round heads harken to their orator Prinner and admire in hearing him.
But if it seem good to your wisdom, that the Church should have such degrees of higher and lower, we will have the Governors to be lay Elders. To which dig∣nity, wee think non more fit, nor generally able to bee chosen, then our venerable brethren, the cobbler, the bas∣ket maker; and button maker, (whom although that De∣micaster maker in Greens rents contended with, yet he ea∣sly excelled in efficacy of doctrine and won the victory) being men of mean learning, but wonderfully inspired. But chiefly wee will, that you command Francis Helioke, henceforth to distinguish that Apochryphall name of Bishop, with an asterisk, amongst the obsolete words to perpetual remembrance. But as for the first Article of our complaint; as we would have no order in the church, so (to come unto the 2. we abhor all rites and ceremo∣nice; because whatsoever is ancient we judge to be untrue, we disallow Priestly ornaments as well in the Presbytery, as lawn sleeves in a Bishop; we esteem the Surplice as the smock of the whore of Babylon, and the cope as Egypt∣teen
embroidery: These Idolatrous Priests in their lin∣nen appear to us like Ghosts coming out of a Church yard. As for instruments of music we esteem them as profane Babylonish tabers, yea wee cannot truly love our own members because they are called organs.
These fellows should rather be sent to Bride∣well, then the reformation of Religion.
As for the third article of our complaint: we will have no form of common prayer: no not the Lords Prayer; for it shows a diffidence of the Spirit: where∣fore we neither will have praying nor preaching Mini∣sters to be provided, but to speak extempore, that they may express the efficacy of the spirit: Turners Creed and his gloss concerning the communion of the Saints, we very well appove: and to comprehend all in general. Whatsoever is new so it be ours we like, whatsoever is an∣cient though it be confirmed by a thousand counsels we reject.
Hear ye mad men, that old but fatal Rime which we once heard in Brittany.
Tack tent to my saw my sons three
Rob. Will. and Dave.
Keep well your Pater and your Ave
And if you you mind your fathers reed
Stand close to your old Creed.
But for my daughter Gillion,
I wad she were wele bolted with a bridle
That leaves her work to play the Clarke
And lets her whele stand Idle.
For it saws not for she ministers
Farriers nor furriers
To descant on the Bible.
Parley we have heard your complaints, men and brethren with that greater attention, then they have de∣merited. As for Bishops we have left them but a dead and naked name, but we thought it fitter to cut off their vices then their offices. Desist at length from your dotages; whatsoever may commodiously be done, &amp; may be con∣venient to the peace of the Church; that you must espe∣cially provide for. If not the beams or at least the motes must be removed from your darkened eyes. They have no charity in them, who love not the unanimity of the Church; go, get you home, and follow your busi∣ness. Let it bee our parts to take care for the common good of our Prince, people and Country.
IT is determined by the Aedils the Mistress of public Plays, that the next day (by Ioves permission) the fifth Act shall bee acted upon Tyber, I should say Tyburne, by a new society of Abalmites.
Vive le Roi.

THe best of English Poets for the Stage
(Such was the envy, niceness, and the rage
Of pettish weakelings, and detracting fools,
That could praise no man; and, In the muddy pools
Of their own vices, were o'rwhelm'd) was fine
An armed Prologue to produce, on pain
Of being tongue-strucke Therefore, marvel not
The present author (having not forgot
How in 's first Play, he met with too much spite)
Sho'd send an armed Amazon, to invite
(If it be possible) all minds to affect
What of himself, he could not well expect
From his detractors: Or, to let those know,
He cares not each of them prove still a foe.
Yet, this his second (as that first) he made
To please you, not for Money; to invade
Your wills for your own profit. For, if his mind
He had sought by it to content, you 'd find
Another method in it; and not a word
Of any mirth or love wo'd he afford
To make you laugh or languish. All, rich stuff
(Though not so pleasing) he'd expose, to cuff
(And generally too) the monster vice;
Which he performs but gently, in this piece.
Yet, it's believed 't will please the most and best,
In all the passages; and for the rest,
Let 'em (if they will needs) in puddles swim:
For, he sleights them more, then they can wrong him.
IT's a noble, noble act!
And cannot
But vex the bloody usurper, let him put
Ever so good a face on it, though they were
But women only, that conspire against him.
It stirs him not: for since his conquest made
On us, and murdering of our lawful Prince,
Things have succeeded so to all his wishes,
That he's grow'n careless: nay blindly besotted
By security, and selfe-perswasion,
Locked by the tempest of his lust; so as
He fears no force of man; much less weak women,
As he is pleased to term 'em; he minds nothing
But whom to kill, or foully ravish: and
The conversation of his Bawds, and Spintries.
Is it possible, hesho'd be so secure,
And pass away in such a dying slumber?
He thinks the gods doe slumber too, or wink
At what he do's, or rather snore supinely;
Or that there are no gods, and what's spoke of 'em
Is but a mere foolish fable; He'll believe
No mans intelligence, not his own spies,
That this fleet of Denmark, now launched forth, sho'd move
Against him hither.
It's not all the power,
He for the present can command that will
Resist it, if it doe; joined to the valiant
Landgartha, with her fair sock'd troop of Ladies:
But, let's be silent; here the wretch himself comes.
Come my pretty sweet-heart, dry up those pleasing
Eyes; this liquor's too precious to be spilt
In such a cause, for a lost Maidenhead,
And to a King that will become thy slave for it,
And for more of that sport: who to please thee
In that, and whatsoever else thou can conceive,
To raise content to thee, and varied to thought,
Will ransack Kingdoms.
Leave me yet black Devil,
Thy words sound far worse than the voice of Hell.
Some kick the Spider out at the Court gates;
An angry scratching Cat. We wold not be
So vexed another night with such a fool. 
She'll soon repent Sir, and turn back, to offer
Her dainty body to your milder usage.
I rather think, she•ll to the mad Langartha;
And there make one among her furious troop
Of Furies, that will yet endure no horsing,
Though they manage bravely.
There's a Wench indeed,
What luck had I, never to lay my hands
On her? They say she's very fair and handsome.
The clappers of men's tongues proclaim that; and
Speak strange things of her.
We shall finde'em (the best
Is of it) altogether, to make a royal
Choice. We mean to single forty at least,
Of the most buxom (of which she shall be
Chief general, as now she is) for our
Own private palate.
I may hope (Sir) you'll grant
Me half the number, with her wise and modest
Aunt Elsinora, to precede: Or her fine
Valorous sister Scania, for I must
Imitate your manly virtue, Sir, as near
As I can.
Mark we will what I say now: for thy
Good service as my honest smock Attorney
(Though sometime, yet thou did begin to us, thou'lt say
For fear they'd been diseased:) thou shalt not have
One woman (were thou ever so willing) more
Or less than thirty.
O Prodigious!
I doe beseech you, Sir, to hear me speak,
Like so many Basilisks (with angry shots
From their sharpe venomed eyes) they'd strike me dead:
Or (as the Porcupine) send fether'd arrows
At me, for my slackness.
You must have thirty,
Or none.
Nay, If I must, I shall: and that's
As bad.
You will not (Sir) be altogether
Unmindful of my good endeavours.
By no means, good Sir, thou shalt possess for thy
Share, twenty five; with the pretty smug Fatyma,
To leade'em.
I humbly thank your grace, though I
Sho'd not covet so many desperate femals:
Yet, with the assistance of my kindest friends,
I shall be strongly backed.
May it please you, Sir,
Here are arrived two posts at once, all full
Of sweat and dirt; and bring bad news, it's feared.
Curse on thy fears, Go, send 'em hither to us;
It's but these women that affright fools thus.
What news? be brief.
He's full of dirt, indeed!
Landgartha with a mighty troop of women,
Gatherd to her from all the parts of Norway,
Make havoc of your soldiers, sir; and killing
All the Swed• they light upon, they likewise threaten,
They will grant you (ere long) no better quarter.
My Sweds and I will make some, here in Norway,
Pay dearly for that vant. Come, doe thou croake too
The worst tale thou can.
You had need, Sir, make quick
Resistance, or shift for your self: for, the King
Of Denmark, with a mighty fleet, has now
Put in at Mastrand; and begins to land
His forces, to join with Landgartha's: who
With maine speed, marches to meet him thither.
Which he shall soon repent, and so shall that
Male-harted Traitoress, withal the curled knot
Of rebels that attend her; We are not
So unprovided, as they doe suppose yet,
Fly therefore Hasmomd, gather thou our troops
Within and near the City. Gotar, thou
Haste to the quarters further of; and with
All possible speed draw unto us. Away
When need compels, men must use no delay.
We now (sweet Ladies and dear sisters) march not
Against th'intemperate Frollo: but ascend
The milky way, that leads to immortal fame,
Not to be ranked among the starre-made harlots:
But stated in the high'st Empyrcall heaven,
To side the gods, where Pallas and chaste Phoebe
(Armed chiefly with the weapons of their virtues)
Keep all the Masculine deities in awe.
This our design may well exalt us thither,
As their good deeds did them: that in defence
Of that all sho'd hold dearest, our honours, Ladies,
Doe now expose our selves to death, and what
A cruel, vicious, revengeful Tyrant
May inflict on us, if vanquished. Yet, this act
Of ours we must not vainly boast of: for,
The little birds will (with their beaks and wings)
Offend the ravishers of their young issue.
What then should we perform think you, that far
Pass these? yield up your bodies basely to
Foul rape and lust, and so to infamy
For ever? No, no: far be this from us
Honoured virgins, that have such arms to wield
These cutting weapons, being (too) to fight authorised,
By the examples of the noblest women,
Semiramis, Zenobia, fair Cinana
Sister unto great Macedon, stout Alvilda,
Cumilla, and the Amazonian Queens,
Great Mithridates Queen, and several others,
Are patterns now for us to imitate;
O most brave patterns! Yet this we may say,
That our chaste glories shall pass theirs, as far
As the worth of our intentions doth exceed
The cause they undertook: nor ought you doubt it.
Let then the King of Denmark fight where he list:
We will pursue no other than our worst
And strongest adversary in's own squadron;
Where I, as first, will loose my life, or give
A sudden end to his black purposes,
That fought a conquest on our chastities.
Thy virtues and example, Niece: that are not
To be reached by any imitation
(At least of our endeavours) doe far more
Excite our courages, then Harms could,
Were he now here, to play the Orator:
Lead on then; you shall find us no bad seconds.
I have more than a women's longing to begin.
I know Fatyma, though she be not great,
Has not the least desire to fight among us.
Stay till you see me knock some great ones down;
Until when, I shall well remit your praises.
Then follow me; and as you see me woo
The Swedish King, to his doe you so too.
It's my chief comfort, noble Cymbrians,
Subjects and friends, to be your guide to day,
Against a valiant, wicked adversary;
And for our right, the inheritance of this kingdom,
To show that virtue and the cause, doe more
Prevail than any humane fortitude,
Or settled Councels, when they're joined to vice;
And by injustice seek to advance their states:
Which wisely our forefathers masked beneath
The fables of the Titans against the gods.
But it sho'd seem the virtue of our foes
(Wisdom and valour) has forsooke'em, by
Their palliardise, by ease, and hourly riot;
This kingdom being more fatal unto them,
Then Capua was to Hannibal: and therefore,
Not worth your meanest fears: I must not then
Enlarge my self in words too far, because
You need 'em not; nor need you be beholding,
Unto the fems of your brave Ancestors,
Those valiant Cymbrians, that almost gave
An end to Rome, the Mistress of the world,
And not in her declining days, when her
Own vices had confounded her; as when
The Gothes and Vandals (now our enemies)
Did trample on her, being down before.
She lived full man, when great King Beleus
Did (on the borders of rich Jtaly)
Vanquish three of her bravest Generals,
Sylanus, Coepio, and Manilius.
This (if you please) you may consider; and
That our foes are more famous for their whoredoms,
Than conquering of Norway. Reflect also
How for this cause, we are assisted by
An Angel troop, of chaste and noble Ladies:
Whom neither loss of life, or other evils
Can fright, from seeking to revenge the wrongs
Done to their Sex, their parents, and their friends.
Then, let's not shame our selves now in their presence,
Or to posterity: by being out-gone
By women in a battle. Lastly, consider
The everlasting honour due to virtue;
Of which we now shall make a glorious purchase.
I am afraid you will consider (sir,)
So long of these women; until you forget
What you applaud so feelingly, your virtue.
Thou 'rt always merry, Hubba, honest withal;
And from my heart I wish, that each man here
Perform a Soldiers parts, no worse than thou;
We shall not then be beaten.
Let's march on, sir:
And you shall quickly find the meanest of 'em,
Valiant and strong to purchase what's your birth-right.
Then let us move; and prosper too, as we
Affect injustice, or impiety.
We must not loose our confidence, brave Warriors,
Though we be taken somewhat tardy, by
A sort of raw fresh-water soldiers, weak
Unmartiall women fitter for night encounters,
And some poor fugitive Norwegian rebels,
Conquered and beaten oft by us before.
What then although our numbers be the less?
Yet not by much: the glory of the adventure,
Would not be worth the pains we under took else.
Besides, if we consider what our Ancestors
Have (by their never-equall'd valours) oft
Performed against the noblest nations of
The world, this our design is nothing: nothing
To what they did: What we have done our selves,
And mean to doe hereafter. Notwithstanding,
Let me commend unto your memories,
After a general fashion (for now
The time exacts deeds more than words) what some
Of their large conquests were, not only in
Europe, Which was all theirs a most: but in
Africa, a third and richest part of th'world;
Which from the Ocean unto Nyle they won;
And from the Mid-land Sea, to the torrid Zone.
Great Rome her self (that wisdom boasted most,
And next her valour) was by our fathers taken,
Pillaged, and burnt four times at least; and her
Large Empire brought to nothing. She mastered all:
We mastered her;
And will not now degenerate first of ours.
What though men say, we are not religious?
Religion is but a toy, and first invented
By politic States, to keep fools in awe;
And of all men observed least by themselves,
If she but thwart the least of their intendments.
They glorify her much for their own ends;
And that's even almost all: and so may we.
Yet, honour by war, riches, and our pleasure,
Shall be the Altars, and the gods we'll bow to
In our free minds; and what we gain we will keep.
King Reyner therefore was not wise, in seeking
To dispossess the bravest Nation breathing,
Of what they have achieved by the right of conquest;
And shall (I hope) in snatching at our Crown,
By your more powerful arms, soon miss his own.
Furies and plagues: these wild, wild bloody whores,
Fight like so many Tigers: without the least
Apprehension of fear, or any kind
Of mercy: the purse Danes come nothing near 'em.
Having cut off our vauntgard, and right wing,
They press on our maine battle too; and force
It to give ground. Go, fly thou: and charge Hasmond
To fetch the rear with speed up; that we may
(There being no other hope for safety left us)
Upon one desperate onslaught hazard all.
I am glad I've met you, sir.
A pretty fine piece,
I wo'd fine save this. I sho'd prefer
Thy beauty, unto ought that's ours; prove kind
And gentle unto thee, sweet-heart: if thou 'lt
But yield —
To thy embraces, that must 'a' had
My sister, me and forty more. We now
Shall see what you can doe against one. Come quickly
Then, unto your guard sir: or I shall soon send forth
Your too hot blood, to cool your lustful heart.
Plague on you for a company of spiteful,
Venomous tong'd bitches. Ye had rather lye
With the worst Hynde of your own, than the best of us.
Villain, I'll answer thee another way.
Hold sister. This must only be my mate:
Go, seek you out another somewhere else?
Art thou Landgartha? or some supernal goddess,
Descended in her fairer shape, to make
A conquest now on Frollo, that must yield
Himself thy captive?
Thou once called me subject;
And I am come to tender my allegiance,
To your ungracious wickedness, thus —
Hold, for heavens sake hold, and patiently
But take my faithful vow. Doe thou withdraw
Thy troops from our defeat: and by the Olympian
Gods, I shall no sooner
Have struck King Reyner with his puny Danes,
But I'll make thee my Queen.
Thy Concubine.
All miseries light on me then for ever;
Or if I ever mix with woman but
Thy self: for thou art worthy of a Mars.
A Hercules, or Iupiter.
And have
Fully resolved never to kiss any man,
But him that shall first master me in fight:
You are best therefore look well to your self, sir;
Or I shall quickly marry your hearts blood
To this weapon.
I bleed you see: let which
Serve as an offering, to appease thy wrath
Conceived against a wretch, that now repents
(Unfeignedly) his former evil life.
May the gods chief attribute then (mercy)
Find room for me (a Convertite) in thy
Noble and virtuous soul: and I shall still
Become thy pious imitator: be
Governed by thee in all thing, and thy husband,
By heaven and all, I will.
But I hope you shall not:
For I must try your manhood once again.
O brave maid!
Fair Fury, thou hast killed me,
Hell take thee for 't my love is now cooled indeed.
But I will be revenged. I cannot, cannot rise:
The loss of blood, and pain, strike faint my powers:
That I were now on high transformed Atlas:
This being no fable, but a truth: that I
Might cut the axle-tree of heaven in two:
And tumble down the gods, and break their necks,
Proud gods, if such there be. Then, like Enceladus
(Laden with flaming Etna) I sho'd turn,
And shake out all the stars: The sun, and with
That fire, burn all to cinders. Thus I'd turn:
O devils, I cannot: but doe feel a pitchy
Cloud (darker than night) hang o'er my drowsy temples:
And must (there is no remedy) descend, to stalk
A long the infernal waves, or wafted over,
Grapple with the damned Furies, receive my soul
You beastly Hags, then: that shall torment you more,
Than you can any.
The gods are now revenged
On thee, by me, libidinous Woolfe, foul Tyrant.
And rid me (worthy Lady,) of a dangerous
Adversary.
I doe beseech, sir:
As my duty only to receive that,
Unto them and your grace, though a woman.
This to me (Madame) is too great an honour.
Pray stand up. I should rather kneel to you,
Whose beauty and incomparable virtues,
Exact no slender adoration,
From all those that love goodness; or the image
Of heaven in your face. We must acknowledge,
Notwithstanding our right to the crown of Norway,
What power so ever we have in it, gained and confirmed
Chiefly by you, that are our strongest friend.
Your poor and humble vassal, that desires
No other recompense for her small service,
Than your Kingly licence, to remain
(When your foes are wholly vanquished) from all
Employment severed: to lead a solitary
Quiet life, being compelled (in the defence
Of what I ever most esteemed) to match
Thus amongst men; which I did not covet, but
The contrary.
You will not wrong the world
(The race of man, sweet Lady,) so to rob it
Of such lustre: nay of all light, by
Dedicating of what is only good in it,
Your self, to solitude.
I must no be
Compelled to any state of life, sir.
You cannot
Madame, I see that; and (by your force my foes
Now put to flight) I shall continue always,
Not only a mere servant, but for ever
Your bondsman; not to offend you in the least thought.
Here be other noble friends (sir) to whom you
Stand bound in no small sums.
Of Princely favour
Only.
Rise fair Ladies, you shall command
Vs, being your creature. Hub. they're delicate fine wenches, pretty youths.
You are now, sir
To consider, how to use your victory.
For us, we shall hereafter (we doubt not)
Partake the fruits of your most Royal bounty,
Which we shall beg more, for the general
Good, than our particular interests, sir.
You shall be the Law-makers, to your selves:
For those, by whom we reign, shall be our guides:
In the mean time, thou Valdemar and Inguar,
Pursue the flying foe, but most with mercy,
Not of circumspection; yet, least the Van
Turn by some accident, by us not thought on;
Save all that yield, whom we doe mean to send
Home ransomelesse; to see if that benefit
May work a peace betwixt us. If it doe not,
We shall the next time be the more excused,
In our extending of severity.
Come Ladies, we'll to counsel to conclude
Concerning what we have (by you) subdued.
It's a strange humour that has seized upon him;
whatsoever the cause be.
When you are
Ignorant of it, all others must be so.
He discovers nothing to me save only
That he is full (and that he often says)
Of grief and heaviness; and sometimes sick.
His sickness may (in time) prove dangerous,
If some fit remedy be not applied.
He'll hear of none; I urged his Physicians,
At which he stormed, and bad me leave him to
Himself; and since I dare not come in sight.
It's a deadly malady, that will admit
Of no cure We are best put Captain Hubba,
Or the wise Counsel on him: for the wit
Of the one and th'others folly may remove
More of that grief he speaks on, than good counsel.
Here comes the man himself, in his usual
Meditation: and therefore let's away.
She is divinely fair, and in her mind
The noblest virtues keep their residence,
As in their loveli'st habitation,
Being all in love with her, I think, as I am,
From my sad heart warm tears (tears of affliction)
The fire of my affection doth send up
Into my eyes, that thence distill in streams,
Which yet to me, are torrents of sweet joys,
Joys, that this is for her, my grief proceeds
From a profound fear I shall never gain her,
Enjoy that unpeer'd model of perfection.
There is no way but one to pull the fruit
Jove would turn Goose, taste: she's so reserved
To the least vicious acts; Wretch, that hope
Is not (yet) left thee: For, being nobly borne
(Though she no fit match be for us, in lieu
Of worldly substance, being in her self
An ample dowry for a richer Prince)
We sho'd (and gladly) sue to be her husband.
But a report goes, she will join with no man,
In such an obligation, which (that she
Will not at all have me) is that which striks
A black despair into my soul, and will
(Unless I meet some comfort) quickly kill me;
Being sick in body, as in mind already.
See, where he stalks. Doe you but put him out
Of his sad humour; and thou shall it have—
O Captain,
I am afraid, for he looks sour upon it.
No matter: fear you nothing, but proceed;
And care not what you say, so you say something;
It's your fools fashion, and you now must seem one.
But hark, you, Captain. How sho'd I begin?
Say that you come from the Ladies: so I leave you.
Sir, what make you here?
Come from the Ladies.
Well said, speak that again.
Come from the Ladies.
Very good, and what of them?
Come from the Ladies.
What, again. Pray tell me, what did occasion
Your so kind friendly visit to the Ladies?
I went thither (being some two mile of)
To be jovial with a new acquaintance
Of mine, my brother Radger.
Some such wise man,
As thou art.
He's a very honest man.
And takes his cup soundly, I warrant.
So
Doe many honest men beside him; and
Keep wenches too, that's more.
And yet are honest.
's honest and faire-condition'd gentlemen,
As live, I know several of 'em, my self.
The Ladies are well. How did they use thee? tell.
They're all exceeding well: and used me kindly
For your sake; gave me a banquet, strawberries
And cream; we drunk helter-skelter too; the Ladies
Took your health themselves, and asked me how you did;
Landgartha said, you were a good man, and that
She loved you with all her heart.
Let me embrace
Thee from my heart for that good news.
Sweet King,
Have I found your malady?
O kind Prince!
What say? are they not delicate fine creatures?
Indifferent handsome, passable, and so forth —
You 'll with a knock be sent forth, I see that.
I was not from thy want of wit, to expect
Any true censure. But yet, tell me truly:
Which of 'em all dost thou think is the fairest?
The Lady Elsinora in my opinion,
Is the rich Pearl amongst 'em; Landgartha to her
Is but a mere milkemayde.
He makes me sick,
A dunce to wrong the worlds chief ornament.
Oh, oh my bum! my bum!
I perceive I must
Venture a beating too.
Thou met a fool
Going out that way.
And he complains of something
Under favour.
We gave some cause for 't, but
Doe now repent it. Prithee Hubba call him;
He said some at of the Ladies.
I can tell
You more of 'em than he: for, I was lately too
Where they (like a company of fine ducklings)
Wag together.
Thy words are base.
What wo'd
You have me say? they are all very valiant;
And made King Frollo pay for seeking (and
But in's good will) to domineer a little
Over 'em; he lost his life and kingdoms by 't.
We therefore ought the better to love them.
As your subjects only, sir, but not to cast
Under you on a bed, couch, or clean mat;
You know what fine Furies they are, if you vex 'em.
We are not so unwise, as to consult
Of their dishonour.
Nor so far (I hope)
Mistaken to marry any of 'em.
Why Hubba? are they not fair and virtuous,
Think thou?
I doe admire, sir you sho'd talk
So much of virtue: a thing th'arrantest Ass
Will scorn, if Money be not joined to it;
And then (although he hate it, and the possessor
Of it) he will praise 't.
Thou 'rt now in thy old humours.
Besides, you think Landgartha fair: but I say,
The Emperors daughter's worth a thousand of her.
I 'de loathly beat thee Hubba: yet, I tell thee;
Were Charlemain (the Emperors father) now
Alive, and in his Pryme of youth and glory,
Landgartha (being his Parallel in valour;
By virtue much more) were a wise enough good
For him; were she not near so fair as she is.
But all, all being joined Hubba; I suppose
He wo'd esteem her his chief eat thy blessing.
I, I, and more, a Paradise on earth.
Were she ten times better: you cannot have her.
Thou shoot'st a sudden fear (colder then death)
Into me; You were best give no bad reason,
For what you say.
She has vowed Chastity,
Unto the gods: which bond though you sho'd be
Content to forfeit, it is sure she will not.
The strongest poison could not sink me deader,
Then thy sad tongue has.
Flung away in a rage:
Well; I was to blame to tell him, what I was not
Sure on: For now I truly doe conceive
There is no plaster but one, that can cure him;
And that the fair Landgartha must apply too;
No garden herbs will doe it, any one
That has as much brain as a Wood-cocke, may now
Find that, that knows what his disease is. He's worse
Then horne-mad already; I 'll therefore after him,
And what betwixt lies and true tales, I shall go very near
To fetch him to himself, and hope again.
The King stretched on his Couch, strangely distempered,
And most unlike himself (his courage lost)
He pulls and whines most pitifully: Good heaven,
What strange disease sho'd render so divested
Such a man? So valiant? So each way noble?
We see no outward cause, that sho'd distract him;
Sho'd it be love?
Lord Inguar, I have news
For you.
I long to heare'em: For your countenance
(Showing alacrity) speaks comfort to the King.
Did you never hear of a little blind
Boy, that wounded many a proper man?
Has Cupped shot his Highness?
No mortal man,
Nor god so deep, 't will be proclaimed in open
Market shortly.
Who should the object be?
Who but Volsca de gent Camilla?
Th'fairest and best of women, brave, Landgartha
Hubba is sent (on pain of his best joint)
To fetch her hither: from whence ere she part,
Her duty and th'Kings gracious affection
Considered, she may be glad to yield to his
Commands; as I hope her sister will, to my
Entreaties to serve her.
I believe, you 'ill find
Your self mistaken in thosse virtuous Ladies.
The gods defend so good, and merciful
A Prince; I know it's but a cold that troubles
His grace.
Not so (Madame) I can assure you;
His disease proceeds rather of heate. He burns
Extremely; and its thought by some, that his
Physicians cannot cure him.
I hope
They are deceived that think so.
Welcome to Court,
Fair Ladies, Which, till now (that you lighten it
With the divine splendour of your beauties)
Was darker than a dungeon: and but a Hell
Compared unto the Paradise of the Camp,
Where in the fruition of your pleasingest
Conversations, being rapt beyond our selves
With hope of future favours, we in you
Placed the whole sum of our felicities.
You are merrily dispos' it seems, sir,
Which (to be plain) becomes you but most foully,
The King being sick, when all (and chiefly you)
Sho'd (and not for ceremony only) put
A dark face of sorrow on; and contain
Their slippery tongues, from talking over-idlely;
Some may conceive your mirth proceeds, from being
Next heir to him in blood.
It rather springs
(Sweet Lady) from your coming now to cure him
Which, with a joyful heart, I sho'd perform
If I knew how: Pray you therefore, kind sir,
Be somewhat clearer in what you conceive.
'ts quickly learnt; nature will teach you Madame,
His grace will show you too; you will not prove
Perverse.
Are you so blind a Goat, to forget
Frollo so soon? to open your eyes take that.
Pray sister hold. What doe you mean to quarrel
On a surmise? I know the Lord Valdemars
Intents are noble, and much more the Kings.
Y' are to blame, Niece, to be so sudden in such
A fond conceit.
Doe we come to be abused?
I'll back again. For your part sir, you shall
Not fail to meet me, when and where you list.
His grace will now run mad indeed.
Lord Inguar,
As you love me, follow that severe Lady;
And reduce her (if ever you did ought for
A friend) to mildness, and this way back; or I
Am lost for ever to the King and people:
Captain, go thou too once more, for my sake.
And as you mean to doe, forswear my self
That you meant no hurt. I have already told her
A hundred lies at least; and am now of the faith,
That double the number will scarce serve to quiet her;
It's such another untoward piece of flesh
She is an excellent Mistress, and has taught
Me such a Lesson, I have cause to thank her:
For she has given me patience, and wisdom;
Honesty too I think. The flat truth is
She has wrought strangely with me, very strangely,
The ravishing notes of a Cycilian Cyren,
Could not so have taken my Ear (and from thence
My heart) with a most alluring kind of
Delight, as the smart-touch of her white hand has:
It struck into me such a love,
To her sister I mean, that came so kindly
Betwixt us, as I doe now account my self,
A gainer by the blow; in hope to gain
What I now love so much, and nobly too.
Well, they will come back this way again, I know;
And I must sing a very doleful ditty,
A Palinode; or pray, where they may see me,
Being a thing I 've only done but twice
These seven years: once, that I went to sea:
Secondly and lastly, before the last battle.
Are the Ladies come yet to Court?
They are sir,
And will soon be here.
Whose that?
My Lord Inguar.
Where have you left the Ladies?
Coming after (Sir,)
Sad and much troubled for your want of health.
You'll be extremely hated, if you use
So much exception, on so little cause.
If he accost me any more, with his
Base jeering countenance, and whorish language;
My sword shall (for such kindness) kiss his middrisse.
Pray pacify your mind, you need not stand
At so much distance.
Are not they come yet?
They now are here, by much ado.
Good Inguar,
Entreat 'em to approach.
Madame, the King
Desires you wo'd be pleased to draw nearer.
You honour me, sweet Ladies, in this visit:
Which, beyond expression adds comfort
Unto a wretched sickly man. Chairs there,
Pray you sit down; y' are all exceeding welcome.
Our duty charged us (sir,) to obey your summons:
Yet, our affection to your grac's welfare,
And to that depends of it (the general good
Of the republic) were the chief motives
To our journey.
And being able (sir,) to stead you
In loving wishes only, we must expect
(With grief to see his weakness, whose good health
We most desire) your highness royal pleasure.
Thanks worthy Ladies. We must also pay
You in good wishes; being otherwise
Too indigent to cancel what we are
Engaged to you for many ways.
We have been still oppressed since your departure
From us (whose virtuous presence, was all
The comfort we had) with a heavy sadness,
Nourished by grief; nor doe we ever hope
To see the Sun again, but at a window.
The gods defend you (sir,) from giving way
To such despair.
I follow after (like
A Thief) aloof, to see what good success
The King has in his love suite; and to venture
For my particular, as he makes his voyage.
Your Majesty must never entertain
Dark melancholy thoughts, but quite cashier 'em.
Her voice founds sweeter, then the celestial spheres,
In their harmonious motion. I am more
Then ravished when I hear it; and think I shall
Fall sick too, or run frantic, ere 't belong.
I heard no mean Physician often say, Sir,
That Music and mirth were good for sickly men.
Bid the Boy sing the Song we made of Love.
Love's far more powerful than a King,
And wiser then most Statesmen are:
For it commands him, and doth spring
In them strange thoughts; in both much care
(Beside th'affaires of the Common-wealth)
To crouch and to obey. Nay more;
It makes 'em loose all joy and health,
And not be the men they were before;
Until wise love, all powerful love,
The gracious Physician prove.
This is a very loving song,
Your grace made: but the contents of it, not
To be applied to you sir, that may command
(If power and person can compel) the best
And fairest Lady in th'world to be yours,
In a noble way; and otherwise your virtue forbids it.
It does indeed forbid us what is vicious.
And seeing we doe not hope for life, we must
Crave your kind pardon now, to hear us tell
Th'occasion of our sickness, briefly thus:
You are the only cause on it.
How? I my liege?
My knowledge says not so.
Your beauty, valour,
And all the perfections (parted to others,
But) in you conjoined, protest it: and I
For one can swear it. But, being repelled
By a severely-awing rigour from your brow
(Yet sweet withal, though killing) and being told
Of a sad purpose y' have, never to marry;
We now are fallen thus low, beneath the Center
Of deep despair and sorrow: and desire,
You will say something, either to hasten our death,
Or to recall it by a loving sentence.
I must take sometime then to deliberate
Aside.
Being yours, in that you may command us.
We expected no such entertainment.
My mind foretold me still of some disaster.
Notwithstanding your resolution,
Not to marry: you have not vowed against
Obedience to a man, in that friendly
Yoke of Wedlock. The Kings sound affection
Is not then to be rejected, if you ever
Take any.
If I doe, he shall be the man.
You must not study now long for some answer.
He's desperately ill: and if you sho'd
Give him a flat denial, we might be
All seized on here at Court, and some villainy
Committed on us; being to defend our selves,
Too few by many.
They shall take our lives,
Ere we'll endure to be defiled.
And with
The loss of some of theirs.
Have you considered
Yet, of the doom y' are to pronounce?
All stand
Warily on their guard.
Your poor subjects (sir)
Must rather expect (in duty) your commands.
Nay sweet Lady. Doe not increase my torment,
By adding affliction to misery,
With a complement: but something say, that
May appertain to the matter, to rid me
Quickly of my pain.
It's sure; I have not
(Although I ever meant it) bound my self,
Unto a single life.
Then dearest Lady,
Consider who I am; and what I now am,
Lodged thus: for though I claim you not as by desert,
Or duty: Yet, being your Prince, you owe me
Some regard; and all, I ever must glory in,
Shall be to make you Queen of what is ours.
May it please you, Sir.
Pray you sit and speak;
Or I must rise, if weakness will permit.
Had I been ambitious, when you were not
Crowned King of Norway: I could then perchance
Have written Queen, unto your prejudice.
But, for that Frollo once intended foully,
I (that could not affect vice) did refuse
What he with earnestness, and many Oaths
Sought to confirm; and was his bane at last,
Though I believed that what he said, he meant.
Now therefore (Sir,) your affection (grounded
In way of honour, without taint of baseness;
With such exterior signs too, of deep love
To me, unworthy of so great a Prince:)
I cannot (nor will my heart permit it) but
In way of gratefulness, reciprocally
Requite with love again, as duty binds;
Nay, more then so. But yet, gracious Sir,
I (that am mean and poor to be your Consort;
And that things of this kind are oft repented)
Doe now beseech you, to decline a while
The vehemence of your fleet desires;
And take full time to think on what you doe:
Were 't but to take a nearer view of me,
And that in all points. For know sir, the honour
You now afford me, compared to th'infamie
That would redound to both of us, and to others
(By whom you are to be advised) if ought
Sho'd chance amiss, when things were consummate,
Is nothing: would but heighten your disgrace.
Your wise demur too, I shall take as full payment
For all my services; and rest devoted
More deeply yours: and evermore continue
Your loyal subject only, sir.
I was sure
(Noblest and best of Ladies:) That your words
(Being such as now they are) could not but work
A cure upon me. See, I can stand up:
Nay, go; I 'll throw my Cap off too. Some of you
Give me a Hat; I will walk with you forth
Into the Gallery, and tell you there,
I have considered so much what you are,
Though not to your full value this being
Impossible: that if you think me not
Unworthy (as indeed I am for you)
We shall soon be Man and Wife. To morrow
I 'll wait on you further, into the Garden.
And there (in one of the little bawdy houses)
Seal the Covenant, if it be received,
Though he were sure to die in an hour after.
I see she does affect him in good earnest.
But wisdom bids be silent; This poor kingdom
Being already torn too much, by tyranny and troubles.
Things past our help, with patience must be borne,
Until a fit time.
Lady Elsinora,
Me thinks you doe not sign our loving motion,
With a friendly countenance.
I hope, great Sir,
You will be pleas•d to entertain far better thoughts
Of your humblest hand-mayd.
I hope we shall.
In licensing our departure, for some small time
(Days five or six, and for a private Cause:)
You will for ever bind us (sir) to your commands;
And to return with all convenient speed,
To obey your Highness pleasure in all points.
That asked again, would throw me on my Couch;
Never to rise.
Madame, I sho'd make bold
To stop your journey, though the King were pleased
To grant his licence: for you (I must say
Somewhat roughly) saluted my left ear
With your right hand, as these can witness for me.
For which, you are resolved to challenge me:
But not to be your wife; I gave you no
Such promise.
I must have satisfaction.
You may declare what that is, when you list.
Nay, you shall know it now; and thus it sounds:
That you persuade this Lady, to become
My second. For, love has struck me too, so sore
A cuff (cause by her beauty, and what else
Is good in her, in my opinion
Superlatively:) that I shall ne'er be rid
Of the pain on it; unless you that are like to be
My Cousin, advance me higher, to the honour
To be your brother. We shall then be kind friends.
She is not my ward; and may take whom she fancies;
I may my self repent, to be persuaded.
Speak Lady, doe you like the man? He is
As good a Gentleman as We are: Say,
Will you have him?
You make me blush (sir,) to ask
Me such a question.
Nay then, it's granted.
I will not grant at first; nor shall you say
Hereafter I deceived you.
You deceive
Your self. Well Madame, I perceive we two
Must matelesse home to prove the Vestals.
Not, sweet Lady, if you'll deign to grace me, with
The title husband.
For your good will, sir,
I thank you: but will hear of no more coupling.
I yet must love you still.
Then let's from hence,
To entertain heavens happy influence.
Let 'em not press so fast in, to behold
A semi-maske; for now 't can be no more,
For want of fitting Actors here at Court;
The War and want of Money, is the cause on it.
Stand further off, my masters, or I shall—
Let fly amongst 'em.
Pray you my Lord, have a care
(For my sake) of this Lady; a kins-woman
Of my wives.
(I know you are Vxorious.)
He shall not need: for I will have a care
Of my self.
I sho'd gladly serve your Highness:
But can hardly yet from hence.
Come Cousin,
I will be your Gentleman usher my self.
Counsel within, make room I say there, for me and my brother.
What kind Cousins are those?
A pair of Coxcombs,
So individual by the littleness
Of their understandings, they cannot be parted.
Come away brother Radgar, we'd need make haste,
To take our places.
I shall be proud brother,
To be seated after you.
And I fortunate
To sit next before you.
It shall be my ambition brother, to
Be still (as now) your most humble servant,
It must be all my study then, brother; To
Command things only pleasing: for mark you
Dear brother. I must strive chiefly to precede,
But — in my affection.
A pretty Antimasque:
I will sit down, and hear what it concludes.
But hark you now, brother. Shall we have any
Drink, Banquets, or so —
Not a drop betwixt meals, brother,
That's but a simple Country fashion.
Are they already fallen from complement?
Yet, me thinks brother, 't were n't amiss to lay
The pots hard by; and let him drink that wo'd.
I sho'd a part keep with you, in that Catch
brother, but now (with grief enough) I say 't
(Wo'd I coed not say 't:) I cannot now (being puffed
Up here for want of ayre) drink ne'er as much,
As when I lived abroad in the Country; nor eat
The quarter quantity.
That must be believed
Generally, as a Maxim infallible:
For to day brother, the stink of your perfumed
And stuffing meates, took my stomach quite away
From me. Yet, we drunk pretty well you know.
It's certain (brother,) those that cannot eat,
Must drink, and I can drink indifferent well still
But, time there was I could 'a' paid it soundly.
As, how much? Pray sweet brother.
It is scarce
Credible, I now shall tell you: at one short
Sitting, I'd a drunk you of Wine six Flagons,
And two dozen of Beer at least, all at eight draughts;
And never 'a' seen the colour of my face,
In a Chamber pot; or sought ease, by visiting
My kind friend Aiax.
That's more by a little,
Then I ever could vent the right way. But yet,
I dare speak it brother, we are very near
As good drinkers, as you be here in the City:
For you see, when we come to Town, we doe
Nothing but run from Tavern, to Tavern;
Oft to blind Ale-houses, to visit the fine
Wenches, of purpose there placed, to draw custom;
Now and then to see a Play, when we want
Other exercise; and once a week (upon
A holy day, when all doors are shut up)
To a godly exhortation, and sleep out
(At least) three parts on it.
Especially if you
Take your liquor before hand.
Right brother, but
To morrow we will both from hence, to the Country.
Wo'd this night were over once.
We've excellent Maids with us,
And while my Ladies dance and feast it here,
Both night and day: We both will keep Court there;
Throw out the house at the windows, and fetch in
All our Towne-fidlers, with all the young fellows
In fifteen villages about us; is 't not good?
O rare!
In the mean time Sir, let me persuade you
To conduct your brother to a place: For I
Am weary of your company. Cow, 'thanke your Lordship.
Hubba within, give way there.
What lusty Gentleman's that?
Mad Captain Hubba, and as lusty a
Virago with him.
Come my brave Marfisa,
You are but just now come to Town you say?
That you may well perceive sir, by my spurs.
Here's handsome Cheese and Butter, and a Sword.
They're a pair of excellent ginglers, but pray
Tell me: Did you ride sidling, or like a man?
Howsoever, there shall ne'er a Dane ride in my Saddle.
What? not in the way of honesty? as you love me,
Say not so; I hope you'll be pleased to think of my service.
I sho'd rejoice to be well pleased in the way
Of honesty: Yet, your fair words shall not
Deceive me. As first try, then take on liking.
But, with your favour I think 't were better try:
Least you sho'd chance repent too late hereafter.
You will not put me sir, to use my Sword:
If you doe, you must first begin at that.
I think she means to make him marry her
Perforce; I shall have my part of the Mask here.
Pray Lady, take patience along with you;
I am fairly yours.
You had (on my knowledge)
But need to say so, if she be in earnest.
Then lead me to some honest place, where I may
Unspurre, untucke my Gowue, wash, and so forth —
Most willingly, my fair Marfisa, thou shall it
Have a looking-glasse too; I ever took
A strange liking to thee, since first I saw
Thee fight in the battle like a Lioness.
Y' are Coffen-german to the Lady Fatyma?
Her self dare not deny it, sir.
I doe not
Only mark your sweet face, but all things else
About you. Y' have a fine leg. The fashion
Of this Gown, likes me well too; I think you had
The pattern on it from us, as we from Ireland.
That I know not, but am sure a handsome woman
Looks as well in 't, as in any dress, or habit
Whatsoever.
So it seems by thee, my
Beautiful Mistress: For by that name, I must
Stile you henceforth. Come, let your loving squire
Conduct you. Mar, on before, I'll follow.
Loud Music. 
My Queen and I, Valdemar, are much bound
To thy free Genius, for this thy second Mask
After our nuptials; She more: but most
Of all, thy own Lady. For, it's for her sake
Thou so affect'st both us.
I could not wish
To 'a' met a kinder man.
His kindness makes
You oft ashamed, you say; nor wo'd I have
The King so over fond of me.
You stand
Confirmed, Madame, in the power your merits
Hold, to charm his faculties to your obeisance.
You deliver that, sir, to pick a thank from
My Sister; at whom you point in that language.
I doe believe he does: which yet, must be
Conceived only to proceed, from his ill-plac'd
Affection; not my desert to answer
His; much less your perfections: being
But a poor Pygmy, compared to the greatness
Of the worth in you.
This friendly Complement
We will pass over: and now Valdemar, 
To apt our apprehensions the more
To the true understanding of your Mask:
You may tell us somewhat of your scope in 't.
That is sufficiently informed in the thing
It self; though lame it be. The matter (being
All prophetical) I found in an old
Worme-eaten Book, in the Lady Elsinora's
Library. And I sho'd wrong your judgement;
And my own labour, though of little value,
By staling of it before hand.
It's a fine tale;
And cannot but please, unless it meet such minds,
As are not to be pleased.
There is no Fustian,
Non sense, Wind, or foppery in it.
It matters not
What some odd envious fool says; that grieves most
At the goodness of what he disprayses: and wo'd
Be glad 't were worse. We despise affected stuff;
Or a strained kind of Eloquence; being the smoke
And fruits or a vaineglorious, and an empty brain,
No flattery dwells we know in this. Let it begin.
The Mask.
A way unmannered deities, though hope
Raise you unto this mirth, for Troy: Your scope
In 't (formed at the counsel of the higher gods)
Makes not the issue of their Periods,
So fortunate as you doe now suppose
(In your inferior knowledges) to dispose
For Hectors safety: whom Aracides
(Matted for his loved Menetiades)
Flies to destroy. Nor can the Fates divert,
But that fierce horrid man, will soon convert
All unto sad destruction; unless
We the pryme gods and demi-gods suppress
His force, not otherwise to be resisted.
Get you away from hence then▪ and in stead
Of friskings, in these pleasant vales of Id,
Expose your aids (to the utmost can be tried)
For Pryam and his issue, ne'er till now
In danger of an utter overthrow.
And my own labour, though of little value,
By staling of it before hand.
It's a fine tale;
And cannot but please, unless it meet such minds,
As are not to be pleased.
There is no Fustian,
Non sense, Wind, or foppery in it.
It matters not
What some odd envious fool says; that grieves most
At the goodness of what he disprayses: and wo'd
Be glad 't were worse. We despise affected st•ffe;
Or astrayn'd kind of Eloquence; being the smoke
And fruits of a vaineglorious, and an empty brain,
No flattery dwells we know in this. Let it begin.
Away unmannered deities though hope
Raise you unto this mirth, for Troy: Your scope
In 't (formed at the counsel of the higher gods)
Makes not the issue of their Periods,
So fortunate as you doe now suppose
(In your inferior knowledges) to dispose
For Hectors safety: whom Aracides
(Matted for his loved Menetiades)
Flies to destroy. Nor can the Fates divert,
But that fierce horrid man, will soon convert
All unto sad destruction; unless
We the pryme gods and demi-gods suppress
His force, not otherwise to be resisted.
Get you away from hence then. and instead
Of friskings, in these pleasant vales of Id,
Expose your aids (to the utmost can be tried)
For Pryam and his issue, ne'er till now
In danger of an utter overthrow.
Though Hector now be dead, his name
And memory shall last, while fame
Sounds her loud Trumpet, loved, admired;
By his example shall be fired
To acts heroic, future ages:
And Prophets (sacred in their rages)
Shall by his virtues be installed;
And he by all a worthy called.
Much honoured and dear old man, did not hear,
How the Jdalian deities forbear
Not (sacred loving Nymphs, and grieved like thee)
To chant a mirthful pleasing melody?
Glad for the future glory of thy son,
Reason sho'd govern: and a fair fame won,
Is of mans humane life the chiefest part,
Chiefest in Hector, and shall not depart
From thy for-ever-most-fam'd house: For, know
The gods on thy line (of Dardunus) will bestow
The largest Empires; which to thee I'll now
Show for thy comfort: that thou sho'dst not bow
(Too much dejected in thy mind) to what
They in their Counsels doe predestinat.
Heavens brightest eye, I 'll doe what lies in me,
To obey thy will, and my sour destiny.
My tale in two parts, I doe thus impart:
A Prince from Troy hereafter shall depart,
When Troy takes end (as all dominion.
Of mortals must:) whose chance will fetch him on
The Lybian shores, and upon Latium next.
Before which time and after, though oft vexed
By the high-minded Juno, for her hates
Conceived against the Troians: Yet, the Fates
Have destined him that throne of Latium,
Marrying the daughter of its King. From him
(The Royal seat first changed to Alba) shall
Descend two Princes, twins; for which, a fall
Their mother takes from Mars, a votaress she,
Compelled unto that state. Impiety
In an ambitious kinsman, to be drowned
Sends both the Infants: who (saved by chance) are found
Of a she-woolfe, and nourished with her Teats;
Till by a shepherd found, and by brave feats
Made know'n to be themselves, they build a Town
Which shall be called Rome; and shall wear the Crown
Of the worlds Monarchy, hundreds of years.
This is the first part of my tale.
My fears
And sorrow (which till now I did suppose
Could not be done) the hast healed. Disclose
The other part (dear god) that's left untold.
Which (in no obscure terms) I doe unfold:
A Prince called Brutus (of the Trojan race)
Third to the first spoke of, being in the chase
Of wild beasts, by unlucky fate he kills
Sylvius his Father, with the shaft he drils
At other game: Which fact, so much doth bend
The Latines against Brutus, him they send
To sad exile. Who (after a time) arrives
At a brave spacious Island (that derives
Her name from white rocks, being a little world)
With other Troians before met, and hurled
Too on misfortunes. A town called new Troy
He builds here the Land calls Brutaine: doth enjoy
The whole as King; and his posterity
For many ages, shall reign there, as he.
Sometimes (in power and plenty) conquering
The neighbor Nations: sometimes these (for nothing
But 's subject unto change on earth) afflict
Again Troy's Brutaines, in their own district.
Of which a certain people, and called Danes
(Cymbrians by some) will prove their worst of banes.
But shall be beaten back; not without pain.
At length (in process of much time) shall reign
In this fair Isle, a Prince (one way descended
Of Trojan race: In the other side extended
Up by the Royal blood of Danes, unto
A warlike King called Reyner, that shall woo
And wed a Lady Amazonian,
Landgartha named) which Prince shall be the man
(Having his subjects in their loves combined;
Who shall to evils only be confined
By their own sad dissentions, being of all
Earths men, the properest and most martial)
To exalt thy blood. He shall (by 's right) enjoy
The Land of Danes; and in this place where Troy
Now stands, shall Conquer, and build it again.
Will also Conquer Greece, and there restrain
The impieties of wicked men. Thus, Fate
I have laid open to thee, to consolate
Thy self and sad Queen; Now I must away:
For, from the gods I've made too long a stay.
Your Majesties have now seen all; even as
I found recorded in the foresaid Book:
How true heaven only knows. Yet, all may prove true
(Being not impossible) if men be wise.
And not destroy themselves, as it's there spoke.
Our part on it has hit right; and so may that.
And now (Valdemar) to requite thy love,
My Queen and I will make your Mask complete,
By being your dancers.
I must first beg your
Pardon, to lead the measure, sir, for I have
Brought a fine friendly dancer with me; and
We will so foot it —
Hubba, thou always come in pudding time.
Let's stand; I long to see Marfisa dance.
This was excellent. We shall but shame ourselves,
In following of you; Come let us begin.
So Cousin, we have made you some amends,
For your part of the Mask: and now you shall
(Being so kind a husband) conduct your Lady
Unto her Chamber; and there use her kindly
Too as she deserves. Our Aunt and Cousin may
(After all this noise) also retire; and say
(In solitude and silence) the many prayers
They have omitted all the day. As for
The Queens grace: she must give me leave,
To usher her to bed.
Must That, in such
A servant, were too peremptory. But
If you plead your title King; I'll answer
That I know how to fight: and have ere now
Stooped a too hasty Prince. Therefore, good sir,
You are best speak me fair; or I may put you
Beside your sweet hopes;
And give you some what of the sour to taste.
That, and to kill me, were all one: For which,
I now (and ever will) humbly entreat,
As a poor suppliant with you to treat.
Is Jnguar yet returned from the Fleet?
Not yet sir.
Let him be quickly sent for then: be gone.
A poor gentlewoman, an ordinary
Noble mans daughter, to have caught me thus;
Whom Caesar would rejoice, to have made his son,
Some horrid plague confound her modesty,
And her for me, for now I care not for her;
Though I dissemble it: because I dare not
(She is so damned valiant) doe otherwise
Till I have got from hence: For she (being
So beloved too of the Norwegians) might
Cut short my life and passage. But yet, Reyner,
Think how exceeding worthy she is of love;
And of a Prince: think of her virtue, doe:
Think of her beauty, mildness, valour, and
What else: no, no, I will not; will not love her:
For I have took enough of what I most loved;
Which, I confess could not but please my Palate
But here comes Valdemar, who like an Ass
Still dotes on his wife, I 'll not therefore trust him.
Your resolution to be gone for Denmark,
Men doe admire; and I must tell you, sir,
(Seeing you will needs be constant, in so bad
A purpose) some doe fear your projects are
Ignoble. I then (as one that loved you once;
And will doe still, unless you forfeit your self)
Wo'd be your adviser, if you dare take advice.
Y' are too saucy; and what I have resolved on,
I will not alter. Must we be curbed by you,
In tendering the welfare of our subjects?
Shall Denmark be still forgotten?
That colour
Dyes but very poorly; though you stalk with it.
The fall of your obstreperous passion, to
Your Queen (sir) people take notice of: though she,
Poor Lady, (a sliam'd to be deceived or scorned)
Say nothing of it; restrained too, by her love
To you. But, we that are your Countrymen
(Whom you mainly dishonour in it) can have
No such patience.
Our affection to our
Loved fair Consort (though you be pleased to doubt it)
Will not be questioned, but by your slanderous tongue
You cannot, sir. Nay shall not, mask your black
Intentions so from me; they doe appear
Too many. And she whom you most wrong, is more
Then worthy of you; had you but the wisdom
And grace to think so still. But be assured
(When she is rid of the burden she now carries)
She 'll be revenged at full for her dishonour;
And snatch the Crowns you wear from of your trech'rous Temples.
You will not play the Traitor, in
Conspiring with her?
Though I sho'd not, sir,
You need not doubt but Harold will; who thinks
His right to Denmark, as good as yours to Norway.
That Christian dog-shead and yours too, had been
chopped off ere this, had I not been a fool.
If you durst (you make me now believe) that had
Been so. But I'll make shift to save one of 's;
And think you 'll hardly save your self from to other.
You may doe what you lift; and so will I,
Are all the Shipping ready?
They are sir, but —
Come, spare your breath; I know what you wo'd say.
Wo'd all the Cables and Sails were burnt:
You brought us hither with the hazard of our lives,
To gain this kingdom for you; and now you have it,
You 'll wisely give 't away; and fetch 'em all
Upon our backs.
Who made you a Counsellor?
There's your reward.
I shall take more then this
Ere long if I stick to you.
You doe well
To practise before hand.
Traitor, doe you upbraid us?
I beseech you sir, to suppress your passion;
And not to raise a tumult here: knowing
How truely-loyall the Prince Valdemar,
Has ever been to you, sir, and now pleads
Strongly against himself; in seeking to
Detain you, with your gracious noble Queen.
He accounts his friends, his nearest enemies,
We take heaven to witness, we are wronged.
But peace; here she comes.
Will you needs be gone, sir,
And leave me thus?
It is but two hours sailing,
In a fair day; and we shall soon be back.
I doe not use to weep: But now I must;
My heavy mind fore-speakes some future evil.
Death (which shall be welcome) I know 's not far from me.
May the gods grant to hasten it.
The time was
When she, sir, could with a nod a' forced your fancy,
In a far greater matter, then your stay
For some small time.
And shall again sweet Sister,
But the mere necessity of our departure,
Is such: that we must needs away, at this
Very instant.
Then give me leave (dear sir,)
To share the worst may happen in your voyage.
So to endanger your life, we'd loose ours first,
You shall by no means stir, my only soul, Come:
We will conduct you to your Chamber, and there
Leave you (with your friends and mine) to be guided
By your accustomed virtue, and strong heart.
O brother, brother, I know the very grief on it,
Will kill me out right, as dead as a Herring.
O dear, loving brother. I shall fare no better,
I'm sure of that; wo'd I had never seen you.
Besides brother, I took such an affection
To the women, fine, courteous, honest cre'tures.
And we to you brother, and to all the Daues.
You came not to pray on's, but to deliver
Us from the Swedes.
We ought to love each other,
Brother, being so near neighbours, and friends.
So we doe, dear brother, all those are good and honest.
Who wo'd 'a' thought his grace sho'd leave the Queen
So abruptly, in the latter end of her time too?
Hard against our wills: but says, he 'll soon be back.
In the mean time brother, and before we part,
We are best take to other cup.
I thought to 'a'
Made that now my motion brother, we shall
Remember you in Denmark.
And when we
Forget you brother, may the gods forget us.
Ho! drawer, Rolfo,
Within, Anon anon sir.
Honest Rolfo, one flagon more of that
You gave us last, the very same I charge thee,
Without tricks or mixture.
By Love sir, you shall:
What? Doe you think I 'll use you like a stranger?
Prithee kind Rolfo, let not us be forced
To knock again.
Captain Hubba (as I
Conceive brother) goes not along with you;
I met him spurring to our house, as I came.
The Princess Scania, by much entreaty
Got leave of the Lord Inguar, his Coronell,
To stay only two days; and he is gone
A visit to his Mistress.
Welcome Rolfo.
Come, give it me: for we shall need no glasses.
Here worthy brother, half to your good journey
Let me see brother,  you have drunk the full half—
Here Rolfo, fill 't again.
O sweet brother, that you coed stay all night,
I sho'd never be weary of your company.
Nor I of yours brother, and now from the deep
Bottom of my heart to the wide mouth of my stomach
I speak it dearest brother, here's a whole one,
To our next merry meeting —
Quickly Rolfo,
Fetch it, and be honest. O sweet brother,
That I coed embrace you thus for ever, ever.
I must kiss at parting.
Y' are a couple of the arrantest kind gentlemen.
Give me the pot: I ne'er drunk in my life
With more sorrow, and a better desire. —
Here, take Money Rolfo, my brother paid last,
I must kiss thee too Rolfo,
Within, Rolfo. Rogue.
Anon, anon, sir.
Nay Rolfo, for all
Your haste: I must (for my brothers sake) take
Off that kiss, from thy now sweet (though greasy) lips.
And now farewell, but not for ever, my dearest
And best of friends. Rad. we 'll part at t'other Tavern.
Then arm in arm let 's march, most worthy brother.
I could not otherwise choose, Mistress (though
Your distrust of my unfeigned affection,
Kept me thus long from enjoying, what I
Most desired in a noble way) but come
(Urged by that love, that ever shall remain
With me, wheresoever I go) to tender
The duty of a servant, in taking leave
Of you, before my sudden departure.
It 's indeed too sudden: and I doe now
Repent the not embracing, what I was not
Enough good to accept, your love. For, I confess
Though somewhat late, I loved you more then you
Did me; and ever shall unless the fault
Be only yours, in proving (which I doe
Not yet suspect) a changeling. I shall for
My part, punish severely in my self,
The offence of not being yours, by a continued
Sadness and grief, till once again I see you.
And though I have been too much noted for
My mirth (which yet, was never sawe'd with spite,
Or other bad condition:) I promise
(Pore my misfortune in thus missing of you)
Not to laugh once (unless against my will,
At some unlucky chance) till I possess
The treasure I most covet.
That (if you
Mean me) shall be yours when we meet next, and
Safely kept for you, until then. In the mean time,
I shall charily preserve (though but a poor
Satisfaction for you) your image in
The interior of my mind.
Which overpay's,
With much advantage, all my services.
't was a strange resolution of the King,
To leave his Queen, she being so much against it;
And he so strangely fond of her at first:
Which she deserved, being a Lady the world
Cannot match.
He is these thirty hours in Denmark:
Where if he prove unkind to her, that cannot
(In true judgement) condemn others, that like not
Such proceeding.
He had need be circumspect
In what he do's; or he may soon repent it,
And perchance,
When matters prove past remedy to him,
Yet, while I find you sound: no alien faults
Shall make me hate, what once I so affected,
Resting on that assurance, I must now
Crave the kind, favour of a parting kiss.
That you shall have  and half a dozen more,
When you come to your Ship: For, so far I
Will with you; and wo'd along to Denmark, but to try
If I may build upon your constancy.
It's now but need, we both look to our selves:
Or we may pay the forfeit of our slackenesse
(With the loss of both our heads) upon a Scaffold.
For, Reyner having cast the fair Landgartha
Off, (of whom he was not worthy:) and by
A dreadful precipice, fallen from much goodness:
He will not stop at his first fault. But (hurried
By the guiltiness of his Conscience)
Run headlong down the hill, upon the rock
Of dangerous mischief; to which he 's now engaged.
She is a Lady of so stout a heart,
That when she finds him base (although she loved him
Exceedingly) she cannot but be revenged
For her repudiation, and disgrace.
And may prove our strong friend to ruin him;
That has threatened (and that not privately)
To rid himself on us.
And will, if he can:
You may by his death then, that wo'd be yours,
Settle your self securely in his kingdoms,
By matching and partaking now with her.
Brother, the man whose deity we adore
(And who to give us rest, still lived without it)
Can witness for me, could I but persuade
My mind by any probability,
't were possible, for me to live in peace here,
And not have my throat cut: although my right
Unto the Crown of Denmark be apparent,
My title while I slept or waked, sho'd sleep;
As when King Reyner lived a virtuous kind man.
For I delight not in the expense of blood;
Though I fear not to spend my own in a
Just cause. But seeing all rest is denied me:
As the strong law of nature binds, I must
Shift for my self, the best I may. Which shall not
Be effected by base treachery, or murder.
Nor doe I chiefly yet mean to rely
On the brave Landgartha's assistance; whom the
Love of a wife, and hope of reconcilement,
May urge beyond all spirit of revenge.
What is 't you mean to plot then for our safety?
We'll to the pious Christian Emperor,
Lewis the Debonair; who (as you know)
Do's oft solicit me to plead my right
To the Crown, by dent of sword; that being the best
(Nay only) Patent, Reyner has to show for 't.
Though he from 's father got it: which doth lessen
Much his guilt.
It's not his guilt that now most troubles him;
But by more sin to guard it.
Twelve thousand.
Expert Soldiers (that lye near here, of the borders
Of Germany) I may have when I list;
To add (with all speed) to our own sure friends.
And unto others that will fall in troops,
From now dishonoured Reyner, for his base
Adultery intended with Vraca,
To strengthen himself against his wife and me.
Unheard of madness, so vilely to betray
(And to 's own ruin) a poor and virtuous Lady;
That but for him, and his damned shameless lies,
Had never married any. Being withal
(As 't is reported) most extremely fair,
Far, far beyond the other,
Such are the follies
Of humane nature, when it is forsaken
Of him that made it: But we'll now make use on it.
You sho'd be sudden, least we be laid hold on;
And to take him unprepared.
When night ascends
Her sable chariot, we will both of us
(Mounted on our best horses) post away;
And be (I hope) cre we be missed, passed danger.
Come, let us therefore in, and loose no time:
Which, in necessity 's a fatal crime.
You are happy beyond expectation
In your Embassage: for all men did conceive
(And very probably) the Queen would aid
With the utmost of her power, Harold in his
Design for Denmark. But, she noble Lady,
(Although in outward show, she have not granted
What you demand) I know (such is her virtue
And loving nature) is coming in her mind,
Now to assist your most ungracious King.
For which in chief he is to you beholding;
Though he deserved it not, at his departure.
But now, Contrition has wiped off his guilt,
Though not the punishment, before the gods.
Nor is there any hope left us on earth,
But what we now may gain here by your means
Had you but been a witness of her griefs
(Able to rive a heart of steel) you had
Melted (as we almost did) into tears:
Especially when she heard of the infamous
Marriage, with Swealands daughter (told her by
A whispering flatterer:) how then she tore
Her golden hair, and used such cruelty
On her fair limbs, which had well near ended her
(Notwithstanding what we could doe to hinder 't:)
Cursing the time when she ever saw a Dane;
Not for her husbands renogading most:
But the loss of her virginity, and foul
Disgrace.
We heard of all: Yet, were compelled
By strong necessity (perforce) to build
On her heroic goodness, and your worth.
't was well conceived; and better put to trial,
That compulsion may work peace again.
Here the divine Lady comes (her self) unto us.
Although (Lord Inguar,) your sovereign, and my
Unkind husband, were rather to expect
Sharpe war and hate then any aid from me
In his distress: having (as far as 't lay
In him) disgraced me by his flight; and as
I 'd used false play with others: yet, my love
To him (deeply engraven in my heart.)
Joined to my own innocence and merit, has
(As all may see) got the upper-hand; and stopped
My once intended course of strict revenge;
Though he enjoy another wife, now the Mistress
Of what is mine by bond.
Most gracious Queen,
I can say nothing, to excuse his guilt;
Or lessen it: but that your virtue shines
The brighter for his deep ingratitude,
Which now 's the greatest Corrosive to himself,
And cause of all his evils, by the loss
Of in a manner all was his before:
And that his act, has rendered both of you
Famous to all the world, in different manners:
You as the glorious mirror of all worth,
But him (with grief I speak it) for 's offence.
Which now (dear Madame) as it is repented,
Exacts your mercy more then punishment.
To prove a lasting Pyramid to all
Succeeding times, of such a noble act.
It can yield you no benefit to ruin
Him and his poor subjects, being also yours;
And in their loves, they're yours.
Much more then his
I doe believe.
Madame. I can depose it.
And that they 've ever deemed it their chief glory,
To have had her for their Queen; their hearts he lost,
When he lost her: nor is there ought can raise
The minds of the few, that now stick to him, but her
Strong assistance, and the tried valour of the
Norwegian Ladies, that before
Gave us the victory against the Swedes.
King Reyner and your self (Lord Inguar) have
Too many friends here, to be denied in what
Our power may stead him, or you demand.
And I'm the more induced to pardon his fault,
That I acknowledge my self faulty too
(And which my heart has oft accused me for,
With no small grief) in granting that to him
Under the flattering title of marriage, which I
Resolved ne'er to 'a' lost; and which he durst not
Seek to have forced from me. But it 's now past help.
There 's one way yet left (Madame) to help all.
He then transported, by his fierce desire,
Which slaved him: by craft (I'll give it no worse
A name) did that wrong to my modesty,
Which I (being not so deep in passion)
Might well have hindered; and by yielding to it,
Have given scope for others to condemn me.
Which none can justly doe: For, I'm assured,
Madame (though you have cause not to believe it)
That his intents to your grace, were sincere
At first, as now they are: and therefore (dear Queen,)
You are to meet his past ill, with your goodness.
Which, if you doe not speedily: there will be
No time, nor means hereafter, left for you
To exercise your valour in this cause.
When we behold our neighbours house on fire,
The Proverb says we ought look to our own:
This you conceive; and I suppose you are
Informed by these that love you, that we have
As many valiant men and women, in
A readiness, as may, if heaven be pleased
(For we are pleased in 't) reinthrone your King;
And chase those rebels that now urge his flight.
Let then my brother (the Prince Valdemar)
And you, make all the haste you can before us;
With news of our approach. And, one thing more
I must entreat you doe for me: which is
To deliver this Letter, unto him that
Cause my sorrow; and left me great with child.
Which fruit of his, he shall soon look on, young Frideslaus.
He sho'd 'a' stayed, to have got
Such another.
In honesty, he could
Have done no less.
Your graces Letter, I hope
Within these three hours, he shall read at furthest.
You 'll give me leave to go before, to provide
A lodging for you?
Yes: for I mean to be
Your bedfellow to morrow night.
And I shall strain my self, to bid you welcome.
The King will doe as much too, for your Highness.
Fie, not so soon man, that were a shame indeed,
People wo'd then say, that I went to ask it.
Nor does he need me; having one (at least)
Already to keep him warm.
He thinks of none,
But your Grace.
We must be now abrupt in our
Leave taking?
Be gone Scania, fare you well. Inguar, may all
The gods be your guides.
And now Marfisa.
Silence declares with you, how gladly your heart
Consents, to go for Denmark.
I mean to doe
Your Majesty some service there, now that
You measure my affection by your own.
But what, if you come to wear the Willow garland,
By the inconstancy of Captain Hubba?
Not (doe as the Queen did) forgive the offence.
No less then 's life would satisfy your anger.
Doe you make doubt on it?
I believe him honest.
What is your own opinion? Marfisa.
I still suppose the best.
Then wait upon
My cousin Fatyma: and both of you make haste
To summon with all speed (on pain of death)
All our troops (both men and women) in Anstoy,
Saltsburge, and thereabouts. Our Sister and Aunt
Shall to the nearer quarters; whilst I prepare
Here all things requisite for our departure.
And as we once made no small haste to meet
King Reyner, when he brought us aid against
Our foes: let's doe the same in gratitude
(And with more honour) now, in assisting of him.
Those which we leave, will keep safe here. Away.
The trust imposed on us, we 'll not betray.
We must make haste, Lord Lothaire, (now that by
The help of heaven, for which we chiefly move:
And the assistance which you Lord and ours,
The noble Emperor Lewis, true inheritor
Of his great fathers virtues did afford us,
We are ascended to what is our right,
Being thereto lifted by your manly worth too)
To make all sure, by joining our last issue
With Reyner, ere the brave Landgartha come
(Whom he once more thinks to deceive:) For, where
She leads, all goes to wrack in the other side.
It 's strange so stout a mind as hers, sho'd ever
Yield love or obedience to a man that has
So basely dealt to her.
She squares all her
Actions by the rule of goodness, not
Of passion; and thinks this deed of hers,
A very grateful offering to her gods,
Yet, we doe hope to send (before she land here:
Her husbands rank soul, to great Beelzebub.
Then let's march on with speed; and trust our cause
To him, that only gives life by his laws.
Hear you no news from Inguar (Hubba) yet
Not a word: But a ship is now on entering
In at the haven; and we hope it 's his.
No, no. We are of all the world forsaken,
But most of heaven: For, we have deserved it,
And our repentance now comes too too late.
I doe beseech you sir, not to yield to
Such weak, unmanly diffidence.
We wronged
Thee (Hubba) too; and now thy loyalty
And kindness wounds our soul deeper, then if thou had
Proved false, all turns to my confusion.
It was your passion and not you, struck me, sir.
Would I were quickly dead, or never borne,
To see the evils which I have occasioned,
And must needs feel, if I but live a while.
Your noble Queen Landgartha, will I doubt not
(If in the mean time sir, you doe what lies in you,
With patience) soon rid you of those fears;
And State you as before; and in her love too.
I ne'er shall see that Halcyon day again,
To see her, Hubba, though you all suppose
The contrary; and cause me send to move
Her goodness. She is too magnanimous
Ever to look at such a wretch as I am,
That deceived her once so foully.
You'll find
Your self deceived, I hope sir, in that ere long.
Had I but faithful proved to her, as she
Deserved (thou know's it Hubba,) I might then
'a' played at stoole-ball with young children, or
Have wasted time more idly, if I'd listed;
And have my estate multiplied to many
Kingdoms. Now, thou see, we are not worth one
Province, Struck me heaven.
Honest Captain, I
Am glad to meet you alive.
Your Highness poor servant.
The King walks strangely sad.
He's not himself: and therefore, whatsoever
News you bring; y' had need use your accustomed
Discretion in the relating of it.
You are both as welcome hither, as my
Distraction will give me leave to bid you.
I never knew you (sir) too much exalted
At flattering Fortunes smiles, or when you Conquered:
And (now she frowns) you still ought to preserve
A valiant indifference.
Healthy men
Know how to afford good counsel unto others,
Whose forces being too weak, to bear the blows
Of their diseases, yield and languish under
The weight that 's insupportable.
The weaker
Their minds are, the more they yield; beyond
Necessity: and thereby become chief Actors
In their own Tragedies.
I know you speak this,
To prepare my mind, for the bad news you bring.
Your virtue will now most consist, in not
Being over joyed, when you read this Letter,
Written and sent by her, that says she loves you.
Let me see 't. I know the hand, it's hers,
O let me, let me kiss it, kiss it still,
And not presume to look what it contains,
To plague my guilty conscience. Vald. read and be ruled.
If this my second duty, may prove as happy in the recovery of thy kingdoms, as my first was against a Tyrant; yet honouring thee with the victory; J shall account my travel well bestowed. Make head bravely (as wisdom permits) against the enemy: for I am coming with all speed, to let him know, that Landgartha (being thy Queen and only lawful Wife) is a warrior: and will prove so to his prejudice, and thy advantage: having from her heart (notwithstanding thy unkindness) absolved thee of all the wrongs thou did her.
A gracious language! O you gods defend me,
From turning altogether fool at this. For, my
Frail vessel is not able to contain,
The forcible excess of this sweet comfort.
My soul results so strangely, mounts, mounts up,
That I have much ado, to keep from dancing:
My nimble spirit elevats my body,
And my very life (I think) will now with joy
Forsake me, fly away.
Be not in extremes,
So like a mere frantic Pray recall your wits,
Before she comes, you may loose all; your self, and us.
Excuse me, worthy Cousin, you feel not
The force of my impulsion. Yet, I confess
I'm (but as others are) a poor weak man;
Subject to many changes against my will.
Collect your self, were 't but in obedience
To your wise and noble Queen. What news with you?
That Harold and his brother Eric, with
A mighty power of Danes and Germans, march
Hither with speed, doubtless to force a battle.
Which we must decline, till our best soldier
Come: and then we are for 'em.
Lead us from hence,
To guard your works; and doe not now forget
(Your wished aid being so near you) your old valour;
And judgement to command.
I hope we shall not.
Our foes have fortified themselves so strongly,
With Waggons, Carts, huge timber, and deep trenches:
As it is impossible almost to force 'em.
Which if you doe not, you'll find it a worse task,
To quail Landgartha; whose fleet's now at sea;
Nay hard on landing.
The present attempt will not
Perchance, prove so dangerous, as to the eye
It seems; if we valiantly engage
Our selves in the onset.
Let us boldly on then;
And to conclude what hitherto, we have
So prosperously achieved. I will begin:
And die, rather then loose what I have won.
All 's lost beyond recovery, they are broke
Upon us in, and fight like hungry Lyons,
Tearing our men to pieces, that now leave,
In foul disorder.
Doe you (whilst I charge up,
To give some stop unto their fury) rally
And hearten yours, the best you may. For, if
We can hold out, but one full hour: the noble
Landgartha (that with speed incredible,
Has almost landed all her forces) will be
With us, to mend all again.
She shall never meet me flying.
You hear this Music, Ladies, and perceive
What need our friends have of our swift assistance.
We are not therefore now, to insist upon
A tedious consultation; or on words
By me delivered, to encourage those
Whose words I know already. Doe you Aunt
(Assisted by Fatyma and Marfisa)
Lead half our Army: and wheel round about
(With speed and silence) to charge strongly home,
Upon our enemies backs. My sister and I
Will to our Husbands, that are hardly pressed;
Their men all routed, and a number slain.
Farewell, I hope that we shall meet again.
Stand Traitor!
Thou usurper, I will stand;
And could afford you other glorious titles:
But that I mean not (having met you) to
Waste time in words, until your foolish sweet-heart
(Whom you wo'd still deceive) come to your rescue.
But now, I hope you never shall enjoy her,
You know how.
You shall know somewhat from me, howsoever.
Is it you? I were not beholding, to
Have done this for you now. Go, look to your self &amp; people.
Dear heaven, where am I? or, is this a dream?
It was Landgartha sure. O no, it was not,
That glory and great miracle of the world,
Could not afford such grace to me, the mere
Fallen dregs of villainy. But yet, 't was she,
The figure of her heavenly face, was once
(And still is) so imprinted in my soul,
As 't is impossible I sho'd forget her,
Therefore you gods, heap all those mountains on me,
Which the impious Giants lifted against you,
Or sink me down into the very Center,
That I may ne'er behold her any more,
That is so like you, both in shape and goodness.
For, both I have contemned, and my most base
Ingratitude, never appeared at full;
Till now. O Jove, pound pound me with thy thunder,
For, my confusion is the worst of torments.
The King 's in danger; and we had need make haste
To disengage him.
That 's done (I hope) already.
Welcome dear Sister, I am ashamed to look
You in the face.
We heard (sir) you were in danger.
I was: But now may (when I list) go take
A nap. Wo'd the infernal dogs would tear
My limbs to callops: or add some worse torment
Unto my minds affliction.
You need not
Afflict your self so much, for ought we see:
For, now the wheel is turned to your advantage;
My Sister is friends with you too, sir.
She said
My life, when I was down; and ready to
Receive the last (and mortal) blow. But then,
Gave me so sad a look, O loving Sister,
That life which is her gift, if I must keep
In her displeasure, is much worse then death.
Sir, if you will be ruled by me, you must not
Express too much, those vehement affections:
For, she's acquainted but too well already,
With your sad passion, and the continuance of it.
Seeing you (dear Lady,) in love and wisdom,
Esteem that my best course: I shall be dumb
As night, calm as the calm'st evening after
A stormy day. Scania, let's follow, where she went then.
After our loss and watching these two nights,
I cannot brother (the toil of our journey,
Lying so heavy too, on my tired body)
But sleep a little, though it be dangerous.
My neede's no less; a little sleep will serve.
Let's take it here then, the place being solitary.
Heaven has decreed, another day
Shall gain what you have lost. Your way
Take both (as you were forced before)
Unto the pious Emperor.
One of you shall be King: whose seed
Shall be so too, until 't all bleed.
Then (when that issue is extinct)
Norway and Denmarkes whole precinct
Shall be ruled by Landgartha's line,
And Reyners. Her the powers divine
Will (for her Moral virtues) turn
A Christian, ere she come to the Urn:
Yield faith to this: For, without doubt,
What I have said shall come about.
Sir, you sleep exceeding soundly: Pray wake.
I now am fresh enough; Come let's be gone.
Dream't you nothing, while you slept?
No, did you?
Me thought I heard a most heavenly Music;
And that an Angel did appear: and wished us,
Betake our selves again to the Emperor,
That what we lost, another day sho'd purchase;
And that the fair Landgartha (as the reward
Of her Moral virtues) would be made Christian,
Before she died.
Though we afford no credit
Unto such dreams: Yet, we must steer our course
That way; there being (after so great a loss)
No comfort left, where our foes are so strong.
Heaven will in time (I hope) revenge our wrong.
Come brother Ridge, it is now concluded,
We shall never part again.
O dear brother,
I never had a good day on it (much less
A good night) since (being barred the comfort of your
Sweet conversation) you parted from me.
Nay brother, I can howl the same sad Madrigal
Too: For look you brother, we were all so frighted
By those fat-foggy Germans (who men say
Are nothing but flesh and belly:) that we durst
Allow no time for mirth and drinking.
Very
Strange that brother. For, they say themselves are
Exceeding good fellows.
Just of that seize.
I'll tell you more what I heard spoken of 'em,
Brother, they 're sour: and never worth the trusting,
Or honest in their bargains, until they
Be drunk, or at least half drunk.
That's as true,
Brother, as that you and I drunk half a score
Flagons yesternight a piece. The North wind
Is not so bitter in a morning, till he
Has took a buttrum, or his Wine.
And then,
Makes as good Music, as a Bag-pipe when it's
Full blow'n. What doe you think of the Swedes? brother▪
They are not (yet) altogether so good drinkers,
As the Germans are: but well fallen to 't of late.
Which makes me suppose, brother, they'll be beaten
Out too. For besides, the King will no more kiss
The Queen Vraca, is it is spoken: But stick
To 's own old Comrade, being indeed the fairer.
Yet, in my opinion brother: his Grace
Being married to both, sho'd doe exceeding well,
To keep both still: Sleep betwixt both 'a' nights.
And embrace both by turns. What say you brother?
What? But to concur with you? and for many
Good, and convincing reasons. 's for example:
The King being kept so warm on both sides, by
Two such delicate cre'tures, 't were impossible
He sho'd catch cold; I, or perchance be troubled
With Coughs, Scyaticas, or other bone-ach;
And to have Swealand and Norway at command,
Were a matter of no small importance,
You conceive me, brother.
Few wise men better,
In part. But, stand aside: themselves are coming.
You will not (gracious Madame) thus deceive
The expectations of your poor, and loving
People: whose whole hopes, comfort, safety (nay all
We can for the present, or hereafter call ours)
Are but benefits derived from the fountain
Of your warm bounty; at whose goodness yet,
We most rejoice. Doe not then (dear Empress,) strike
Sorrow to our lately bleeding hearts; that still
Pant (and not slowly) by our former fears;
And the sore stripes we took: Which, but for you,
For ever were incurable; and now
By your forsaking of us, will fester worse
Then before.
That you need not fear, Lord Inguar.
For, I shall ne'er be wanting in my care,
And love unto this Nation. Leaving here
The best half of our Army, now behind us;
To prevent all future mischiefs.
Our dishonour
In your departure, we shall ne'er recover.
My offence (which now 's my worst affliction,
With what it does occasion) all may see,
Took origin and issue, more of humane
Frailty, and foolish pride: then want of love
To you; or of desert in you, to merit
A better and more powerful man then I am;
The worlds only Monarch, if there were but one,
For which, I (without your mercy to restore me
Once more unto your heart, as to my kingdoms)
Must spend my days (which shall not then be many)
Like to a sickly beast without a soul.
My heart shall still receive you: But, on my word,
The rest of my body you shall not enjoy, sir,
I now am gaunt you see,
All though you must not have a feeling of it;
And if I doe play false, my belly will show it
Questionless: For, I am fruitful if
I sho'd be touched.
Although but weakly, Madame.
On you, and this your kind friend: but that I wav'd
Him for my husband, that despised me as
His honest Mate; and wo'd 'a' loved me for
By-blowes. Therefore, enjoy him still: for, I suppose
You are a Hen, that must be trod.
That 's more then you know; or I hope shall find.
She shall ne'er enjoy me; nor has not
Of a long time I'll swear, if that will serve.
It shall not sir) believe it. Yet, ne'er fear
You shall be armed in the front by me; which is
A wrong this other Lady cannot doe you,
If she wo'd.
I'll leave that now for you, that have
The abler body.
And you the frailer mind.
But if you chop words with me thus, or insult:
I may (for a farewell) crack your birds neck,
Before we part.
I must not stand so near
You then.
Nor I prove any safeguard for you.
But sho'd take part with her, whom I love best;
And has best right unto me.
That you say
To flatter her, and for mere fear. But if
I had you in private, I know what you
Wo'd sing; and play too, if I sho'd but yield.
What doe you mean?
That I will ne'er have him,
That is resolved.
Your resolution
(I must say) in that, is worse then madness.
I'll not quarrel with you, Aunt. Yet, doe admire
A Lady of your know'n modesty, should be
So far mistaken, and in such a cause.
It's you that are mistaken: I confess.
I was at first an opposite in your love
Unto the King: but, seeing you would needs
Yield (then) your virgin Forte unto his Highness:
I now wo'd have you take what wives doe use;
And let me still live chaste, that doe profess it.
My Aunt says more (to me I am sure she did:)
All ought to live according their vocation.
And not preposterously prove aliens to it.
Nor will it serve to say he tore the bond,
Now that he's sorry for it: For, still the general good
Must be preferred to all particular
Merit; or that devotion that may
By foolish zeal, prove a too great offence.
I must hear more opinions, ere I part
From my strong purpose: therefore sir, adieu.
Be merciful in chief, unto your subjects;
To allure their hearts, by love: that being the tie
That will hold strongest; never can be broken,
Unless by fools, or mad men. For, that party
That sho'd tend any mischief, against a good Prince:
Were first to kill all his subjects, being the Kings friends;
Or perish himself, by his fatal and bad
Purpose. Be just and virtuous, and you need not
Fear poison, poynards, or conspiracy.
To end: Norway shall be preserved for your young son;
And as for me (though yours:) I'll end my life,
An honest widow, or forsaken wife:
I must take leave too.
Farewell, worthiest Cousin.
You know the way to Norway, Sir, and if
I might advise so wise a King to follow
Us thither, and not slowly: that honourable
Obligation would so bind your Queen
(Being seconded by us your friends, and reason)
That I believe what now she does deny,
She wo'd then grant; especially, when she
Perceives you constant in your vowed affection:
For this perchance she do's to tempt and try you.
Nay, I am sure she do's; and that she will be
Yours again, if you persevere in your love to her,
In the mean time, I shall not fail to prove,
Your grace's faithful, loving advocate.
In you the anchor of my trust lies only fixed,
Dear sister. I must follow your advise.
O brother, brother: must we part at last?
No, no: get before; I'll steal along with you.
Inguar, Did think our hopes sho'd end in this?
It may prove better; and I hope it will sit.
Accursed Fate of man, of foolish man,
That cannot prize a Jewel while he has it,
Till it be lost, and then his grief is vain,
Vain and unprofitable, when no hope
Is left to find it, which I feare's my case;
Our misery the mirror's made, by which
We only see our faults, our dangerous wounds.
Which likely then can never be recurred:
Being Gangrene filthy sores, that doe Corrode
So far into the very soul of man,
That they hale to sad desperation.
To which point I'm almost arrived, the Gem
I lost, being so rich, as all earths Potentates
A richer could not boast. Which if I find not
(Struck with my dire misfortune) my own hand
Shall send my spirit to the Stygian strand.
And seeing I've walked astray, I will from hence:
By future good to expiate my offence.
THough our Author cares not, how his Play may take:
Yet, cause he purposes not to forsake
In his affection, any Worthy here;
He hath sent me before the Court break up, to appear
For him again; to see how it hath pleased:
For, notwithstanding he means to be eased;
For ever of the like task: Yet, from his heart
He wishes, you and he sho'd fairly part.
And this he more (for him) desired me say:
Where others spend a year about a Play
(Picking a sentence here, a word from thence)
This Tragie-Comedy with the expense
Of less then two Months time he penned: For he
's not too ambitious of the dignity
Of a prime Poet; which he needs must know,
The Muses chief (Apollo) doth bestow
But very rarely. Himself he knows too
Better in the Art, then some that to be so
Thought worthy, malign him. If this please you,
It's all he 'll ask of Hellicon: Adieu.

A Parliament is held, Bills and complaints
Referd and heard, with several restraints
Of usurped freedom, Instituted law,
To keep the common wealth of Bees in awe.
TO us, who warranted by Obrons love,
Write our self Mr. Bee, both field and grove,
Garden and Orchard, lawns &amp; flowery meads,
Where th'amorous wind plays with the golden heads
Of wanton Cowslips, Daisies in their prime,
Some loving Marigolds, the blossomed Thyme,
The blue-veined Violets, and the Damask rose,
The stately Lily, mistress of all those,
Are allowed and given by Obrons free areede,
Pasture for me and all my swarms to feed.
Now that our will and sovereign intent,
May be made known, wee call this parliament,
And as the wise determiner of power,
Proportion, time to moments, minutes, hours,
Weeks, months, years, ages, distinguished day from night
Winter from Summer, profundity from height
In Sublunaries, as in the course of Heaven
The bodies Metaphysical run even,
Zeniths and Zones have their apt stations,
Planets and Stars their Constellations,
With Orbs to move in, so divinely made
Some spherically move, some retrograde,
Yet all keep course; so shall it be our care
That every Family have his proper Sphere.
And to that purpose, Auticus be groom
O fall our lodgings, and provide fit room
To lay in wax &amp; Honey, both for us
And all our household: Oeconomicus,
Be you our steward, carefully to fit
Quotidian diet, and so order it,
Each may have equ•ll portion: And beside
Needful provision, carefully provide
Store against war and Famine: Martio thee
I have found valiant, thy authority
(Being approved for Discipline in arms)
Shall be to muster up our warlike swarms
Of winged lances, for like a peaceful King,
Although we were, we are loath to use our sting.
Speaker, inform us what petitions
Our Commons put up at these Sessions.
A bill preferred against the Humble Bee.
A Bill preferred, against a public wrong:
The surly Humble Bee, who hath too long
Lived like an Out-law, and will neither pay
Honey nor wax, doe service, nor obey)
But like a felon couched under a weed
Watches advantage to make boot and feed
Upon the top-branch blossoms, and by stealth
Makes dangerous inroads on your common-wealth,
Robs the day-labourer of his golden prize
And sends him weeping home, with empty thighs.
Thus like a thief, he flies ore hill and down
And Out-law-like doth challenge as his own
Your Highness due, nay Pyratick detains
The waxen fleet sailing upon your plains.
A great abuse, which we must have redressed
Before it grows to high: on too the rest.
A bill preferred against the Wasp.
A bill preferred against the Wasp; a Fly
Who Merchant-like under preteuce to buy
Makes bold to borrow, and pays too.
But when?
Why ad Kalendas Graecas, never then.
A bill against the Hornet.
Theres the strange Hornet, who doth ever wear
A scaly armour, and a double Spear,
Couched in his front, rifles the Merchants packs
Upon the Rhode, your honey and your wax
He doth by stealth transport to some strange shore,
Makes rich their hives, and keeps your own groves poor.
I thank your Industry, but we will devise
A statute that no such Outlandish flies
Shall carry such high wing:
A bill preferred against the Drone:
Yet these alone
Doe not afflict us, but the lazy droane
Our native country Bee, who like the Snail
(That bankrowt-like makes his own shell his jail
All the day long) Ith'evening plays the thief,
And when the labouring Bees have tan relief,
Be gone to rest, against all right and law
Acts burglary, breaks op their house of straw,
And not alone makes pillage of their hives;
But (Butcher-like) bereaves them of their lives.
Against all these Out-lawes. Martio bee thou
Lieutenant General, thou know well how
To hamper such Delinquents. Dicastes thee
We make our advocate, thy office be
To moderate each difference and jar
In this our civil Oeconomicke war,
And let both plaintiff, and defendant be
Heard and dispatcht for conscionable fee
And more to keep our Anomoi in awe
Our self (the chief) will live under a law.
To each desert Isle render lawful weight,
The scale of justice shall use no deceit:
It looses name and nature, if it shut,
Next Villicus, thou that frequentst the wood
Our painful russet Bee, we create thee
Chief bailiff both of fallow-field and lee?
Appoint each Bee his walk, the medow-bee
Shall not encroach upon the upland lee,
But keep his bound, if any with intent
To wrong our state fly from our government,
Hoarding their honey up in rocks or trees,
Sell or transport it to our enemies,
Break down their Garners, seize upon their store,
And in our name divide it amongst the poor,
Only to us reserve our royalties,
High ways and wastes, all other specialties
We make thee ruler of Will: and Isle impart
To all with a free hand and faithful heart:
Now break up Court, and each one to his toil,
Thrive by your labours, drones live a'the spoil,
Fear neither Wasp, nor Hornet, foreigners
Be bard from being intercommoners,
And having laboured hard from light to light,
With golden thighs, come singing home at night,
For neither Droane, Wasp, Fly nor Humble-Bee,
Shall dare to rob you of your treasury.
So to your Summer harvest, work and thrive
Bounti's the blessing of the labourers hive.
THe Author in his Russet Bee,
Characters Hospitality,
Describes his hive; and for his feasts
Appoints fit days, and names his guests.
Your hiv's a rare one, Rome did never raise
A work of greater wonder.
Spare your praise,
Tic finished, and the cost stands on no score,
None can for want of payment, at my door
Curse my foundation; seeing the smoke go
Out of those lovers, for whose straw I owe.
Why to your hive have ye so many ways?
They answer just the number of seven dais,
On Mondays such, whose fortunes are sunk lowe,
By good houskeeping, Isle my alms bestow.
On Tewsdaies such as all their life-times wrought
Their countries freedom, and her battles fought;
On Wedensdaies, such as with painful wit
Have dived for knowledge in the sacred writ;
On Thursdays such as proved unfortunate
In Counsel, and high offices of state;
On Fridays such as for their Conscience sake
Are kept in bonds; on Saturdays Isle make
Feasts for poor Bees past labour, Orphan fry
And widows ground in Mils of usury.
And Sundays for my Tenants and all Swains
That labour for me on the groves and plains.
The windows of my hive, with blossoms dight
Are Porters to let in (our comfort) light,
In number just six hundred, sixty five,
Because in so many days the Sun doth drive
His Chariot (stuck with beams of burnished gold,)
About the world by Spherical Motion rolled,
For my alms shall diurnal progress make
With the free sun in his bright Zodiac.
Some Bees set all their Tenants on the Rack
Not to feed bellies, but to cloth the back.
I with their actions hold no Sympathy,
Such eat the poor up, but the poor eat me.
And you'll perform all this?
Fair &amp; upright
As are the strict vows of an Anchorite,
An alms that by a Niggards hand is served
Is mold and gravelly bread, the hunger-sterv'd
May take, but cannot eat: Isle deal none such
Who with free hand shakes out but Crumbs, gives much.
You'll have bad helps in this good course of life,
You might doe therefore well to take a wife.
A wife? when I should have one hand in Heaven
To write my happiness (in leaves as even
And smooth as Porphyry) she would by the other
Pluck me quite down, virtue scarce knows a mother.
Pardon sweet Females, I your Sex admire,
But dare not sit too near your wanton fire,
Fearing your fairer beauties tempting flame
My sound affections might put out of frame.
In like manner said Alexander by the daughters of
Drius.
Nescio quid latentis veneni habit caro foeminea,
Vt prudentiores citius corrumpat.
Who then shall reap the golden crop you sow?
Tic half a curse to have wealth, and not to know
Whom to call heir.
My heirs shall be the poor
Bees wanting limbs, such as in days of yore
Pend learned Canzons, for no other meed,
But that in them unletterd Bees might read,
And reading lay up knowledge, being alive
Such Isle maintain, and being dead my hive
Honey and wax I will bequeath to build
A skip where weekly meetings may be held
To read and hear such ancient moral saws
As may teach ignorance the use of laws;
And these will be a true Inheritance,
Not to decay, neither sword, fire, nor chance,
Thunder of Jove, nor mundane Casualties
Can ruin the succession of these:
Manors, Parks, Towns, nay Kingdoms may be sold,
But still the poor stand like a Lords free-hold
Vnforfeited; of all lawe-tricks not one
Can throw the poor out of possession:
Should I loose all my hives and waxen wealth,
Out of the poor mans dish I should drink health,
Comfort and blessings, therefore keep aloof
And tempt no further, whilst I live my Roof
Shall cover naked wretches, when I dye
Isle dedicate it to Saint Charity.
INvention here doth Character
A mere vaineglorious Reveller,
Who scorns his equals, grinds the Poor
Hunts only Riots, and his (: :)
The Room smells: foh, stand off, yet stay dee hear,
Of the saucy Sun, which mounted in our sphere,
Strives to out-shine us?
So the poor Bees hum.
Poor Bees? potguns, Illegitimate scum
And bastard flies, taking adulterate shape
From reeking dunghills, if that meddling ape
Zanying my greatness, dares but once presume
To vie expense with me, I will consume
His whole hive in a month. Say you that saw
His new-raisd frame, how is it built?
Of straw
Dyed in quaint colours, here and there a row
Of Indian bents, which make a handsome show.
How, straw and bents, say? I will have one built
Like Pompeys Theatre, the seeling guilt
And enterseam'd with Pearl, to make it shine
Like high Ioves palace, my descents divine.
My great Hall I have paved with Clouds, which done
(By wondrous skill) an Artificial Sun
Shall roll about, reflecting golden beams,
Like Phebus dancing on the wanton streams,
And when tic night, just as that Sun goes down
Isle have the Stars draw up a silver Moon,
In her full height of glory, over head
A roof of woods, and Forests Isle have spread.
Tree's growing down-wards, full of Fallow-deare,
When of the sudden (listening) you shall hear
A noise of Horns, and hunting, which shall bring
Action to Diana in the spring,
Where all shall see her naked skin: and there
Actions hounds shall their own Master tear,
As Emblem of his folly that will keep
Hounds to devour and eat him up asleep.
All this Isle doe, that men with praise may crown
My fame for turning the world upside-downe,
And what plush Bees sit at this Flesh-flies Table.
None but poor lame ones and the ragged rabble.
My board shall be no manger for scabbed Jades,
To lick up provender, no Bee that trades
Sucks Honey there.
poor scholars.
Beg &amp; starve,
Or steal and hang, what can such rogues deserve?
Gallows and Gibbets, hang i'm: give me Lutes
Vials and Clarions, such Music suites
Scholars like common Beadles, lash the times,
Whip our abuse, and fetch blood of our crimes,
Let him feed hungry Scholars, fetch me whores,
They are mans bliss, the other Kingdoms sores:
We gave in charge to seek the grove for Bees
Coming in Cookery, and rare qualities
And wanton females, that sell sin for gold.
Some of all sorts you have.
They are stale and old
I have seen 'em twice.
We have multiplied your store
Unto a thousand.
More, let me have more
Then the Grand signior. And my change as rare
Tall, low, and middle-siz'd, the browne and fair.
Id give a Prince his ransom now to taste
Black Cleopatras cheek, only to wast
A richer pearl then that of Anthonyes,
That fame might write up my name and race his.
Oh that my mother had been Paris whore,
And I might live to burn down Troy once more,
So that by that brave light I might have ran
At barly-brake with my sleek courtesan.
Yet talk of Scholars? see my face no more.
Let the Portcullis down and bolt the door.
But one such tattered ensign here being spread
Would draw in numbers, here shall my rogues be fed;
Charge our Mechanic Bees to make things meet
To manacle base beggars hands and feet,
And call it Polypragmus whipping post
Orth' beggars ordinary, they shall taste my roast.
And if ye spy a Bee that has a look,
Stigmatical, drawn out like a black book,
Full of Greek 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉; to such Isle give large pay,
To watch and ward for poor Bees night and day,
And lash 'em soundly if they approach my gate,
Whipcord's my bounty, and the rogues shall have it.
The poor are but the earths dung fit to lye
Covered in muck-heaps, not offend our eye.
Thus in your bosoms Jove his bounty flings
What are gold Mines, but a rich dust for Kings
To scatter with their breath, as chafe with wind.
Let me then that have gold, bear a Kings mind
And give till my arm aches, who bravely powers
But into a wenches lap such golden showers,
May be Ioves equal, there his ambition ends
In obscure Rivalship, but he that spends
A world of wealth, makes a whole world his debtor,
And such a noble spender is Ioves better:
That man Isle be, I'm Alexanders heir
To one part of his mind, I wish there were
Ten worlds,
How for to conquer?
No to sell
For Alpine hills of silver, I could well
Husband that Merchandise, provided I
Might at one feast draw all that treasure dry.
Who hoards up wealth is base, who spends it brave.
Earth breeds gold, so I tread but on my slave
Oh wonderful! yet let all wonder pass
Hes a great Bee, and a vain-glorious ass.
THe Poet under Armiger
Shadows a soldiers Character
His worth, the Courtiers coy neglect
His pen doth sparingly detect.
Is Master Bee at leisure to speak Spanish
With a Bee of service?
No.
Smoked Pilcher vanish:
Proud Don with th'oaker face, I'd but desire
To meet thee on a breach midst smoke and fire,
And for Tobacco, whiffing Gunpowder
Out of a brazen pipe, that should puff louder
Then thunder roars, there (though illiterate Dawe)
Thou ne'er could spell, thou should read Canon law.
How the Jade prance in golden trappings, ho?
Is master Bee at leisure.
What to doe?
To hear a soldier speak.
I cannot tell,
I am no eare-picker.
Yet you hear well,
Ye'ar of the Court?
The Mr. Bees chief harbour.
Then Don you li'd, you are an eare-picker.
Well, if thou comes to beg a suit at Court,
I shall descend so low, as to report
Thy paper business:
I beg proud Don,
I scorn to scrible: my petition
Is written on my bosom in red wounds.
I am no Surgeon Sir: Alloone.
Base hounds!
Thou god of gay apparel, what strange looks
Make suit to do thee service? Mercers books
Show men's devotions to thee, Hell cannot hold
A Fiend more stately: my acquaintance sold,
Cause poor? stood now my beaten taylor by me,
Plaiting of my rich hose, my silke-mannye me,
Drawing upon my Lords-ships Courtly calfe
Payers of embroidered stockings, or but half
A dozen things called creditors, had my Barber
Perfumed my lousy thatch (this nitty harbour)
These pi'd-wingd Butterflies wud know me than,
But they ne'er landed in the Isle of Man.
That such a thing as this, a decoy fly
Should buzz about the ear of Royalty,
Such whale-bon'd bodied rascals, that owe more
To Linnen-drapers, to new vamp a whore,
Then all their race from their grand beldam forth
To this their reign in clothes were ever worth,
That such should tickle a commanders ear
With flattery, when we must not come near,
But stand (for want of clothes) tho we win towns
Amongst almsbasket men, such silken clowns
When wee with blood deserve, share our reward
We held scarce fellow-mates to the black guard;
Why should a soldier being the worlds right arm
Be cut off by the left? (infernal charm)
Is the world all ruff and feather? is desert
Bastard? doth custom cut of his child's part
No difference twixt a wilde goose and a swan,
A Taylor and a true borne gentleman?
So the world thinks, but search the Heralds notes,
And you shall find much difference in their coats.
A field Bee speak with me? bold Armiger,
Welcome, thy bosom is a register
Of thy bold Acts: virtue's still poor I see.
Poor? rich:
In scars:
In wealth, in honesty.
Since I first read my ABC of war,
In nine set fields I sailed by that bright star,
Ere I was tronchion high, I had the stile
Of beardless Captain, and I all this while
Drild under honesty, near pursed dead pay,
Never made week the longer by a day.
A soldier dead, his pay did likewise dye,
And still I served one General honesty.
From his own trencher I was daily fed
With Canon bullets, taught to chew steel and lead,
Nay digest Iron, and when ere I dye
Isle have no Epitaph but honesty
Writ over me.
I know it, thou black Swan,
I have seen this Bee, (in his fate more then man)
Write in the field such stories with his sting,
That our best leaders reading ore his writing
Swore it was a new philosophy of fighting,
His acts were so remarkable in one field
Fought against the surly wasp, (I needs must yield
Desert his due,) having bruised my filmy wing,
And in fierce combat blunted my keen sting
(Beaten into a tuft of Rosemary)
This manly Bee (armed with true honesty)
Three times that day redeemed me, and bestride
My body with Colossus thighs, he did,
Whilst all the thunder-bolts that war could throw
At me, fell on his head he cannot now
Choose but be honest still, and valiant: still
His hive with wax and honey-combes Isle fill,
And in reward of thy bold chivalry
Make thee commander of a Colony,
Wishing all such as honour Discipline
To serve him, and make honesty their shrine.
HEre Invention aims his drift
At Poets wants and patrons thrift,
Servile scorn and Ignorant pride
Free Judgement slightly doth deride.
A Scholar speak with me?
He says a Poet,
I think no less for his apparel show it,
He's of some standing, his cloth cloak is worn
To a serge.
He's poor, that proves his high things scorn
Mundane felicity, disdains to flatter
For empty ayre, or like crow poets chatter
For great men's crumbs. But what's his suite to me.
To beg a dinner, old dame charity
Lame of all four limps out, and sounds a Call
For all the rogues.
Out senseless Animal,
Hearing of my retirement, and the hate
• bear to Court attendance, and high state,
Hoe's come perhaps to write my Epitaph.
Some lousy ballad? I cannot choose but laugh
At these poor squitter pulps.
Thou ignorant elf
•hold he know this, he would make thee hang thy self
In strong Iambics:
whats that hemp? or flax?
A halter stretch thee, such ill-tutord jacks
Poison the fame of Patrons, I shall I doubt me,
be thought Jobs wife, I keep such scabs about me.
Seal up thy lips, and if thou needs must sin,
Do it privately, out spaniel, bring him in.
He's come: Poet: to you my love presents this book.
I am unworthy on it. Except a hook
Hung at each line to choke me, stay what name
Hast given thy brat? To the most honoured Dame.
Come lying into th'world? be thy leaves torn,
Rent, and used basely, as thy title's borne?
Rare sport: no marvel if this poet begs
For his lame verses, they've nor feet nor legs.
Nor thou humanity.
Go burn this paper spright.
Sir your dark Poetry will come to light:
You are not noble, thus to wound the heart,
Tear and make martyrs of the limbs of art,
Before examination: Caesar taught
No such Court doctrine, Alexander thought
Better of Homers lofty Iliades,
And hugged their Mr. tho this, and such gald jades
Were spurre-gald-hackneyes, kick at their betters, though
Some hide-bound worldlings neither give, nor show
Countenance to Poets: yet the noble spirit
Loves virtue for it own sake, and rewards merit
Tho ne'er so meanly habitat, nor Bee
That frequents Hibla, takes more pains then wee
Doe in our Canzons, yet they live and thrive
Richly, when we want wax to store our hive.
I honour Poesy, nor dislike I thee,
Only thy fawning title troubled me,
I love your groves, and in your libraries,
(Amongst quaint odes, and passionate Elegies)
Have read whole volumes, of much injured dames
Righted by poets; assume thy brightest flames,
And dip thy pen in worm wood-juyce for me,
Can write a satire? Tart authority
Doe call 'em Libels: can write such a one?
I can mix ink, and copperesse.
So go on.
Dare mingle poison with 'em.
Do it for me,
Thou hast the theory.
Yes each line must be
A corde to draw blood.
Good.
A lie to dare
The stab from him it touches.
Better, rare.
Such satyrs, as you call 'em, must lance wide
The wounds of men's corruptions, op the side
Of vice, search deep for dead flesh and rank coars.
A Poets ink can better cure some soars
Then surgeons balsum.
Undertake this cure,
Isle crown thy pains with gold.
Isle do it be sure,
But I must have the parties Character.
The Mr: Bee.
That thunder doth deter
And fright my muse, I will not wade in ills
Beyond my depth, nor dare I pluck the quills
Of which I make pens, out of the Eagles claw.
Know I am a loyal subject.
A jack-dawe.
This baseness follows your profession,
You are like common beadles, easily won,
To whip poor Bees to death (scarce worth the striking,
But fawn with slavish flattery, and throw liking
On great droanes vices, you clap hands at those
Which proves your vices friends and virtues foes,
Where the true Poet indeed doth scorn to guilde
A cowards tomb with glories or to build
A sumptuous Pyramid of golden verse
Over the ruins of an ignoble hearse.
His lines like his invention are borne free,
And both live blameless to eternity.
He holds his reputation so dear,
As neither flattering hope, nor servile fear
Can bribe his pen to temporise with Kings,
The blacker are his crimes, the louder sings,
Go, go thou dare not, can not write, let me
Invoke the help of sacred Poesy.
May not a woman be a Poet?
Yes
And learn the art with far more easiness
Then any man can doe, for Poesy
Is but a feigning, feigning is to lye,
And women study that art more then men.
I am not fit to be a Poet then;
For I should leave off feigning and speak true.
You'll ne'er then make good Poet.
Very few,
I think be good.
I think so too.
Be plain.
How might I doe to hit the Mr. vain
Of Poesy?
I descend from Persius,
He taught his pupils to breed Poets thus,
To have their temples girt and swaddled up
With night-caps: To steal juice from Hobos cup,
To steep their barren crowns in, pilfer clouds
From off Parnassus top. To build them shrouds
Of laurel boughs to keep invention green,
Then drink nine healths of sacred Hippocreene
To the nine muses, this says Perseus,
Will make a Poet, I think cheper thus,
Gold, music, wine, tobacco, and good cheer
Make Poets soar aloft, and sing out clear.
Are you born Poets?
Yes.
So die.
Die never.
My miserie's then a Poet, that lives ever,
For time has lent it such eternity;
And full succession it can never dye,
How many sorts of Poets are there?
Two,
Great and small Poets:
Great and small ones? so
Which doe you call the great? the fat ones?
No,
But such as have great heads which emptied forth
Fill all the world with wonder at their worth.
Proud flies, swollen big with breath and windy praise,
Yet merit brakes, and nettles stead of baize.
Such, title Cods, and Lobsters of arts Sea;
The small ones, call the shrimps of Poesy,
The greater number of spawn feathered Bees
Fly low like Kites, the other mount on trees,
Those peck up dunghill garbadge, these drink wine
Out of Ioves cup: those mortal, these divine.
Who is the best Poet.
Emulation,
The next necessity; but Detraction
The worst of all.
Imagine I were one,
What should I get by it?
Why opinion.
I've too much of that already, for tic known
That in opinion I am overthrown,
Opinion is my evidence, Judge and jury,
Opinion has betrayed me to the fury
Of vulgar scandal, partial opinion
Gapes like a Sheriff for execution.
I wonderd still how Scholars came undone,
And now I see tic by opinion;
That foe to worth, sworn Enemy to art,
Patron of ignorance, Hang man of desert,
Ask any man what can betray a Poet
To scandal? base opinion shall doe it.
Isle therefore be no Poet, no nor make
Ten muses of your nine, my reason take.
Verses (tho freemen borne,) are bought and sold
Like slaves; their makers too, (that merit gold)
Are fed with shalls: whence grows this slight regard?
From hence Opinion gives their reward.
INvention labours to discover
The pretty passions of a lover,
Showing how in amorous fits,
Long lost, a Bee may find her wits.
well met fair beauty, pray you can you tell
News of Meletus?
Such a Bee doth dwell,
In my fathers hive, but ask you as a friend?
Yes, and as one who for his good would spend
Living and life.
Yet not so much as I.
Why do you love him?
I'm mine own echo, I,
Wherefore?
I know not, there's some fallacy,
For not a Village fly, nor meadow Bee
That traffikes daily on the neighbour plain,
But will report how all the winged train
Have sued to me for love, when we have flown,
In swarms out to discover fields new blown,
Happy was he could find the forwardst tree
And cull the choicest blossoms out for me:
Of all their labours they allowed me some
And like my Champions mand me out, and home,
Yet I lovd none of them, Philon a Bee
Well skilled in verse and amorous Poesy,
As we have sat at work, both of one rose
Has humd sweet canzons both in verse and prose,
Which I ne'er minded, Astrophel a Bee
(Although not so poetical as he)
Yet in his full invention quick and ripe,
In summer Evenings on his well-tun'd pipe
Upon a woodbine blossom in the sun
(Our hive being clean swept and our days work done)
Would play me twenty several tunes, yet I
Nor minded Astrophell, nor his melody.
Then there's Amniter, for whose love fair Lead
(That pretty Bee) flies up and down the Mead
With rivers in her eyes, without deserving
Sent me trim Akron boughs of his own carving,
To drink May dew and Mead in; yet none of these
My hive-borne play fellows and neighbour bees
Could I affect, until this strange Bee came,
And him I love with such an ardent flame
Discretion cannot quench.
Now I begin
To love him, fresh examples ushers sin,
How doth he spend his time?
Labours and toils,
Extracts more honey out of barren soils
Then twenty lazy droans, I have heard my father
Steward of the hive profess, that he had rather
Loose half the swarm then him; if a bee poor or weak
Grow faint on's way, or by mis-fortune break
A wing or leg against a twig; alive
Or dead, he will bring into the Mrs. Hive
Him and his burden; but the other day
On the next plain, there grew a mortal fray
Betwixt the wasps and us, the wind grew high,
And a rough storm raged so impetously,
Our bees could scarce keep wing, then fell such rain,
It made our Colony forsake the plain,
And fly to garrison, yet still he stood
And against the whole swarm made his party good,
And at each blow he gave, cried out his vow,
His vow and Arethusa, on each bough
And tender blossom he engraves her name,
With his sharpe sting, to Arethusaes fame
He consecrates his actions, all his worth
Is only spent to character her forth.
On damask roses and the leaves of pines
I have seen him write such amorous moving lines,
In Arethusaes praise, as my poor heart
Have when I read them, envied her desert,
And wept and sighed to think that he should be
To her so constant, yet not pity me.
Oh.
Wherefore sigh you?
Amoratho. Oh
My marble heart melts.
What sigh &amp; weep you too?
Yes in mere pity that your churlish fate
Should for true love make you unfortunate.
I thank you, what this Arethusa is
I do not know, only my suit is this,
If you doe know this Bee, when you next meet him
(Hes labouring in that mead,) In my name greet him,
And tell him that I love him more, far more
Then Arethusa can, nay I adore
His memory so, that he shall be my Saint;
And when his tender limbs grow weak and faint,
Isle doe his labour and mine own, the spring
Being dry grows much unfit for labouring.
To prevent famine and a sudden dearth,
For his sake Isle befriend the barren earth
And make it fruitful with a shower of tears,
In which Isle drown his scorn and mine own fears.
What have I heard? Amoratho pardon me,
For I have been (by much) too cruel to thee,
Yet (if as she reports) I find thy heart
Bequeathd to Arethusaes weak desert
Nature shall work a miracle so strange,
All amorous Bee's shall wonder at my change.
THe thrifty Bee doth tantingly deride
The prodigal, inveighing against his pride.
THou art my kinsman, yet had not thy mother
Been constant to thy father, and none other,
I would have sworn some Emperor had got thee.
Why so he might, let not opinion sot thee.
Suppose all Kingdoms in the world were balls
And stood'st with a Racket twixt four walls
To toss ad placitum, how would thou play?
Why as with balls, bandy 'em all away,
They gone play twice as many of the score.
A tennis Court of Kings could do no more
But (faith) what dost thou think that I now think
Of thy this days expenses?
How in drink,
Dice, drabs, and music? why that it was brave.
No, that thou art a proud vaine-glorious knave,
That teeming womb thy father left so full
Of golden issue, thou like a brainless gull,
Hast Viper-like eat through: oh here's trim stuff,
A good mans state in garters, rose, and ruff.
How one mans state? that beggar's wretched poor
That wears but one mans portion, Isle do more,
Had I my will, betwixt my knee and toe
Id hang more pearl and diamonds then grow
In both the Indies, poor Fucus musk my hose,
Match your old greasy cod-piece.
Let's not part foes:
Id have thee live in compass.
Fool isle be,
Like Phebus in the Zodiake, I am he
That would take Phaetons fall, tho I set fire
On the whole world, to be Heavens Charioteer.
Tha'st fired too much already, parks and chases
Have no part left of em save names of places.
Tha'st burnt so much, tha'st not one tree to fell,
To make a fire to warm thee by in hell.
Isle warm me by thy bones then.
Say and hold;
Want fire till then; thy lust will starve with cold:
Tic voiced abroad too, that thy lands are sold.
They are: what then?
And that the money went
Towards great last proud entertainment.
Its a lye.
I thank you.
But suppose it true
That I spent Millions, what's all that to you?
Had I for every day in the year a friend,
For each hour in that year a mine to spend,
Id wast both Indies but id feast em all.
And starve thy self, still a true prodigal:
What should thy stews have then?
Out lazy droan,
Thou enviest Bees with stings, because thine is gone.
Plate, Jewels, treasure, all shall fly.
They shall,
And then some dunghill give the burial.
No isle turn pickled thief.
whats that?
A pit∣cate.
If gold keep house, a Sea or land Isle hate,
As to feed riot I the land did brave.
So scorning land, water shall be my grave.
Mean while the circle I've begun Isle run,
Should the Devil stand in the Center, like the Sun
In his Meridian, my ascent's divine.
The vanity of all mankind is mine.
In me all prodigals looseness fresh shall flow
Borrow and spend, ne'er look back what I owe,
Wine, Harlots, Surfeits, rich embroidered clothes,
Strange fashions, all sins sensual, new kind oaths
Shall feed and fill me, Isle feast every sense.
Nought shall become me ill but innocence.
Farewell, I spy a wallet at thy back.
Who spends all young, ere age comes, all shall lack.
IN this, the Poet spends some art,
To character a lovers heart:
And for a sigh, his love let fall,
Prepares a solemn funeral.
OH Arethusa, cause of my souls moving,
Nature, save thee, hath no work worth the lo∣avenge
For when she fashioned thee, she summoned all
The Graces, and the Virtues Cardinal;
Nay the whole swarm of Bees came laden home,
Each bringing thee a rich perfection;
And laid them up with such Art in the hive,
Thy brain, as since that, all thy beauties thrive;
For being mixed at thy creation,
They made thee fair, past Art or imitation.
It is he, is not your name Chariolus?
Son to our Mr. Bee?
What art that thus
Bluntly salut'st me?
One that has to say
Somewhat to you from lovely Arethusa.
How doth she?
Well.
Ill tutored Bee, but well?
The word's too sparing for her, more than well;
Nay, more than excellent's an Epithet
Too poor for Arethusa.
This is right
As the Bee told me, Can she better well
Than with the Gods?
The Gods?
A passing bell
Proclaimed her death, and the whole swarm of Bees
Mourned at her Hearse in sable liveries:
Long she lay sick, yet would not send, till death
Knocked at lifes gate to fetch away her breath:
But just as he came in, go thou (quoth she)
Seek out Chariolus, greet him from me,
And pray him that he would no longer shroud
His fair illustrate splendour in a cloud,
For I am gone from the worlds vanities
Unto the Gods (a pleasing Sacrifice)
Yet there I'll wish him well, and say, Good youth,
I bequeath nothing to him, but my truth.
And even as death arrested her, she cried,
Oh my Chariolus; so with a sigh she died.
So with a sigh she died.
What mean you, Sir?
I have told him like a foolish messenger,
What I shall first repent.
Come, let us divide
Sorrows and tears, for with a sigh she died.
Nay then she lives.
It is false, believe it not,
I'll have that sigh drawn on a chariot
(Made of the bones of lovers, who have cried,
Beaten their breasts, sighed for their loves and died)
Covered with azure-colour'd velvet; where
The sun of her affections shall shine clear,
In careless manner, about the canopy
Upon the Blew (in quaint embroidery)
Arethusa and Chariolus shall stand
As newly married, joined hand in hand.
The chariot shall be drawn by milk-white Swans,
About whose comely necks (as straight as wands,
In stead of reins, there shall hang chains of pearl
As precious as her faith was: The prime girl
That shall attend this chariot shall be Truth,
Who in a robe, composed of ruined youth,
Shall follow weeping, hanging down the head,
As who should say, My sweet companion's dead.
Next shall the Graces march, clad in rich sables,
With correspondent hoods, about which large tables
Of pearl and gold (in rich embroidery)
Shall hang sad motto's of my misery.
Oh no, my misery.
Next these shall go
All Arethusa's virtues in a row:
Her wisdom first in plain Habiliments
(As not affecting gaudy Ornaments)
Next them her chastity attired in white
(Whose chaste eye shall her Epitaph indite)
Looking as if it meant to check desire
And quell th'ascention of the Paphian fire,
Next these her beauty, (that immortal thing)
Decked in a robe that signifies the spring,
The loveliest season of the quartered year,
Last shall her virgin modesty appear,
And that a robe, nor white nor red shall wear
But equally participating both,
Call it a Maiden blush, and so the cloth
Shall be her Hieroglyphic, on her eye
Shall sit di sretion, who when any spy
Would at that Casement, (like a thief) steal in
Shall like her hearts true porter keep out sin:
These shall be all chief mourners, and because
This sigh kilt Arethusa, here weel pause
And drop a tear, the tribute of her love,
Next this because a sigh did kill my Dove
(A good conceit, I pray forget it not)
At the four corners of this Chariot
Isle have the four winds statued, which shall blow
And sigh my sorrows out, above, below,
Into each quarter, then Sir, on the top
Over all these gaudy trim things, Isle set up
My Statue in jet, my posture this
Catching at Arethusa; my lost bliss:
For over me by Geometric pins
Isle have her hang betwixt two Cherubins,
As if they had snatched her up from me and earth
(In Heaven to give her a more glorious birth)
The word this what should virtue doe on earth?
This Isle have done, and when tic finished: All
That love come to my poor sighs funeral.
Swell gall, break heart, flow tears like a full tide,
For with a sigh fair Arethusa died.
Rather then thus, your youthful flames should smother,
Forget her thought and entertain another.
Oh never never with the Turtle dove
A sigh shall bear my soul up to my love.
THis Satire is the Character
Of an imposterous Quicksilver,
Who to steal practise and to vent
His drugs would buy a patient.
VVHat's he?
The party.
How? what party Sir?
A most sweet rogue, an honest Quack∣salver:
That sues to be your household Apothecary,
What sees he in my face that I should buy
His drugs and drenches? my cheek wears a colour
As fresh as his, and my veins channel's fuller
Of crimson blood than his; my well-knit joints
Are all trussed round, and need no Physical points.
Read the whole alphabet of all my age,
Amongst sixty letters shalt not find one Ach:
My blot's not boiled with fevers, nor (tho old)
Is it isicled with cramps, or dropsy cold:
I am healthful both in body and in wits,
Coughs, rheumes, catarrhes, gouts, apopleptick fits:
The common sores of age on me ne'er ran,
No Galenist, nor Paracelsian,
Shall ere read Physic lectue out of me,
Isle be no subject for anatomy.
They are two good artists, Sir.
All that I know,
What the Creator did, they in part do,
A true Physitian's a man-maker too.
My kitchen is my Doctor, and my garden,
My college, Master, chief Assistant, Warden,
And Apothecary, when they give me pills,
They work so gently, I'm not choked with bills,
Ounce, Drachma, Dram, the mildest of all these
Is a far stronger grief than the disease.
Were it not for bills, Physicians might go make
Mustard.
I know it, nor bills, nor pills Isle take;
I stand on sickness shore, and see men tossed
From one disease to another, at last quite lost:
But on that sea of surfeits where they're drowned,
I never hoisting sail am ever sound.
How, ever sound? were all our Gallants so,
Doctors and Apothecaries might go sow
Dowlasse for saffron-bags, take leave of silk,
And eat greene chibbals, and sour butter-milk,
Would you know how all physic to confound?
Why it is done thus, keep but your Gallants sound.
It is their own faults, if they before springs or false,
Emptying wine-glasses fill up urinals.
Man was made sound at first; if he grows ill,
It is not by course of Nature, but free will:
Distempers are not ours; there should be then,
Were we our selves, no physic, men to men
Are both diseases cause, and the disease.
Thank Fate I'm sound, and free from both of these.
Steward, my fifty crowns, Red.
Not I.
Isle give you then a glister.
Me Sir, why?
Isle tell your Master, Sir, tho you'll take none,
Let me give your Steward a purgation.
Why, I am well.
No, you are too hard bound,
And you must cast me up the fifty pound
I gave you in bribe-powder.
Be patient.
You'll practise on me then.
If this be true,
My health I see is bought and sold by you:
A Doctor buys me next, whose Mess of potions,
Striking me full of ulcers; oils and lotions
Bequeath me to a Surgeon; last of all
He gives me diet in an Hospital.
Then comes the Scrivener, and he draws my will,
Thus slaves for gold their Mrs. sell and kill,
Nay nay, so got so keep it, for thy fifty
Take here a hundred, we'll not now be thrifty,
But of such artless Empiricks Isle beware,
And learn both when to spend &amp;, when to spare.
IN which the Poet lineats forth,
That bounty feeds desert and worth:
Checks Counterfeits, inveighs'gainst Bribes,
And Foenerators nest describes.
what rings this Bell so loud for?
Suitors great Bee
Cal for dispatch of business.
Say what they be.
Wrecked Fen-Bees, aged, lame, and such as gasp,
Under late bondage of the cruel wasp.
Cheer them with hearty welcomes, in my chair
Seat the Bee most in years, let no one dare
To send 'em sad hence, will our Janitors
Observe them nobly, for the Mariners
Are clocks of danger, that doe ne'er stand still,
But move from one, unto an other ill,
There dials hand still points to th'line of death,
And tho they have wind at will, they oft loose breath.
Of all our Bees that labour in the mead
I love them, for they earn the dearest bread
That life can buy; when th'Elements make war
To ruin all, they'are saved by their good Star.
And for the Gally-slaves, oh love that Bee,
Who suffers only for pure Constancy,
What suitors that?
A very sorry one.
What makes thee sorry?
Pale affliction:
My hive is burnt.
And why to me dost come?
To beg a 100. pound:
Give him the sum.
Now the Gods:
Nay nay, kneel not nor be mistook:
Faces are speaking pictures, thine's a book,
Which if the proof be truly printed, shows.
A page of close dissembling:
High Heaven knows.
Nay tho thou be one, yet the mony's thine
Which I bestow on Charity, not her shrine.
If thou cheat'st me; thou art cheated, and hast got
(Being Licourish) poison from my Gally-pot
In stead of honey, thou art not my debtor:
I'm ne'er the worse, nor thou (I fear) much better.
Who's next?
A one legged Bee.
Oh use him well.
Cannons defend me, Gunpowder of Hell!
Whom hast thou blown up here?
dost know him friend?
Yes for the Kingdoms pestilence, a fiend,
A mouth takes up all petticoats he meets,
Eats Feather-beds, Bolsters, Pillows, Blanquets, Sheets,
And with sale bills, lays Shirts and smocks abed,
In Linen close adultery, and (instead
Of clothes, strows Lavender so strongly on 'em
The owners never more can smell upon 'em.
This Bee sucks honey from the blooms of sin.
Be it ne'er so rank or foul, he crams it in,
Most of the Timber, that his state repairs,
He haw's out ot'he bones of foundered players,
They feed on Poets brains, he eats their breath.
Most strange Conception, life begot on death?
Hoe's a male powl-cat; a mere heart-bloud soaker,
Amongst Bees the Hornet, but with men a broker.
Well Character'd, what scath has he done thee?
More then my legs loss: in one month eat three
Of my poor fry, besides my wife; this Jew
Though he will eat no pork, eats Bees, tic true.
He told me, when I asked him why he mournd,
His hive, (and all he could call his) was burned.
Hoe's burned himself (perhaps) but thats no news,
For he both keeps, and is maintained by the stews,
He buys their sins, and they pay him large Rents
For a Long-lane of lousy Tenements.
Built up in stead of Mortar, Straw, and Stones
With poore-pawne-plaister, and starved debtors bones,
He may be fired, his rotten hives are not
To this Autume Woodsare, Alias Kingdoms rot
I pound my weapons, to buy course browne bread,
To feed my fry and me, being forfeited,
Twice so much money as he lent I gave,
To have mine arms again, the griping slave
Swore not to save my soul, unless I cood,
Lay down my stump here, my poor leg of wood
And so hop home.
Unheard of villainy.
Is this true?
I dare not say it's a lye.
And what say thou to this?
Nothing but crave
Justice against this Hypocritical knave,
This three-pile-velvet rascal, widows decayer,
The poor fries beggerer and rich Bees betrayer.
Let him have Russian law for all his sins.
Whats that?
A 100. blows on his bare shins:
Come home and take thine arms.
Isle ha thy legs:
Justice great Bee, tic a wronged cripple begs.
And thou shalt have it: I told thee goods ill got
Would as ill thrive, my gift I alter not,
That's yours. But cunning Bee, you played the knave
To crave not needing, this poor Bee must have
His request too, else justice loose her chair:
Go take him in, and one his shins stripped bare
In ready payment, give him a 100. strokes:
Hew down his shanks, as Carpenters fell Oaks.
Nor think me partial, for I offer thee
A hundred for a hundred.
Just his usury.
A hundred pound, or else a hundred blows
Give him the gold, he shall release you those.
Take it and rot with it.
Follow thee thy curse:
Wud blows might make all brokers thus disburse.
OBron his royal progress makes,
To Hibl•, where he gives, and takes
Presents, and privileges, Bees
Of worth he crowns with offices.
THe sessions full to avoid the Heat,
In this cool shade each take his seat.
The winged Tenants of these Lawns,
Decked with blooms, and downy pawns,
Like Subjects faithful just and true,
Bring Obron tribute.
What are you?
A poor Bee that by Obrons will,
First invented how to till
The barren earth, and in it throw
Seeds that dye, before they grow,
And being well read in natures book,
Devi'sd Plow, Sickle, Sith and hook,
To weed the thistles, and rank brakes,
From the good Corn: his voyage makes,
From Thessalie, my native shrine,
And to great Obron all Divine
Submit my self. This wreath of wheat
(Repent by Apollos heate)
My bosom filled with ears of corn,
To thee that were before time borne
I freely offer.
May thy field,
Laden with bounty, profit yield,
May the root prosper, and each ear,
Like a teeming female, bear
April deluge, and May frosts,
Lightnings and Mildews fly thy Coasts;
As thou in service true shalt be
To Obrons Crown and Royalty:
True bailiff of our husbandry
Keep thy place still; the next:
A Bee,
That's keeper of King Obrons Groves,
Sheepreeve of his flocks and Droves,
His Goats, his Kids, his Ewes, and Lambs,
Steers and Heifers, Syres, and Dams,
To express homage at the full,
Greets Obron with this fleece of wool.
May thy News in yeaning thrive,
Stock and increase, stand and survive,
May the Woodsare, Coffe and rot
Dye, or living, hurt thee not,
May the Wolf and wily Fox
Live exiled from thy Herdes and flocks;
Last, not least, prosper thy Grove,
And live thou blessed in Obrons love,
As thou in service true shalt bee
To us and our high Royalty:
The next.
High Steward of thy vines,
Taster both of grapes and wines,
In these ripe clusters that present
Full bounty, on his knees low bent,
Pays Obron homage, and in this bole
Brimmed with grape blood, tender told
Of all thy vintage.
May thy grapes thrive
In Autumn, and the roots survive
In churlish winter, may thy fence
Be proof against wild Bores violence:
As thou in service true shalt be
To us and our high royalty:
A female Bee thy character?
Flora, Obrons Gardiner,
Huswife both of herbs and flowers,
To strew thy shrine, and trim thy bowers,
With Violets, Roses, Eglantine,
Daffa down, and blew Columbine,
Hath forth the bosom of the Spring
Plucked this nose-gay, which I bring
From Eleusis mine own shrine.
To thee a Monarch all divine;
And as true imposed of my grove,
Present it to great Obrons love.
Honey dews refresh thy Meads,
Cowslips spring with golden heads,
July-flowers, and Carnations wear
Leaves double streaked with Maiden hair,
May thy Lilies taller grow,
Thy Violets fuller sweetness owe;
And last of all may Phoebus love
To kiss thee, and frequent thy Grove,
As thou in service true shalt be
Unto our Crown and Royalty,
Keep all your places, well we know
Your loves, and will reward 'em too.
In sign that we thy words believe,
As well the birth-day as the eve
We will keep holy; Our winged Swains,
Neither for pleasure, nor for gains,
Shall dare profane't, so lead away
To solemnise this holy day.
OBron in his Star-Chamber sits,
Sends out Subpoena's, High Court Writs,
To the Mr. Bee, degradeth some,
Frees others, all share legal doom.
NOw summon in our Mr. Bee,
With all his swarm, and tell him wee
Command our homage.
He is come,
Room for great Prorex there, make room.
What means this slackness?
Royal Sir,
My care made me a loiterer,
To bring in these transgressing Bees,
Who by deceits and fallacies
Clothed with a smooth and fair intent,
Have wronged me in my government.
The manner how?
These wicked three,
The Wasp, the Droane, and Humble Bee,
Conspired like Traitors, first the Wasp,
Sought in his covetous paw to grasp
All he could finger, made the Sea
Not only his monopoly;
But with his winged swarms scoured the plains,
Robbed and slew our weary Swains
Coming from work: The Humble Bee
(A fly as tyrannous as hee)
By a strange yet legal stealth,
Non-suited Bees of all their wealth.
The Drone, a Bee more merciless,
Our needy commons so oppress,
By hoording up, and poisoning th'earth,
Once in three years he would make a dearth,
A needless one, transporting more
To strangers than would feed our poor,
At quarter day, if any lacks
His rent, he cease both honey and wax,
Throwing him out to beg and starve
For which.
As they your self deserve
Due punishment, for servants sins
We commit their Masters, Justice wins
More honour, and shines more complete
In virtue, by suppressing great,
Than hanging poor ones; yet because
You have been zealous in our Laws,
Your fault we pardon; for Delinquents
We have legal punishments:
Vespa that pillaged sea and land,
Engrossing all into his hand,
From all we banish, dead or alive,
Never shall Vespa come in Hive;
But like a Pirate and a Thief,
Steal and pilfer his relief:
Thou hast fed riots, lusts, and rapes,
And drawn vice in such horrid shapes,
As very Horse-flyes, had they known 'em,
For credits cause, yet would not own 'em:
You have made thy Hive a Brothel, acted sin
Against Nature, and the royalty of kin,
So base, as but thy self none could invent:
They are all thine own, and thou their president:
For which, as thou thy fame hast lost,
So be thine Arms and Titles crossed
From forth the roll of Heraldry,
That blazons out true Gentry,
Live ever exiled: Fucus, you
That engrossed our Honey dew,
Bought wax and honey up by the great,
(Transporting it as slaves doe wheat)
Your Hive (with honey hid in trees
And hollow banks) our poor lame Bees
Shall share, and even as Vespa so
Unpatroniz'd live banished too.
Last, you that by your surly hum,
Would needs usurp a Praetors room,
Your chamlet gown, your purple hood,
And stately phrase scarce understood,
Or known from this our Mr. Bee,
Made th'ignorant think that you were hee,
And pay you reverence, for your hate
To th'poore, and envy to our State,
We here degrade and let you fall
To the dunghill, your original;
From Nettles, Hemlocks, Docks and weeds,
(On which your Pesant-linage feeds)
Suck your diet: to be short,
Ne'er see our face, nor haunt our Court.
And whither must these flies be sent?
To everlasting banishment,
Underneath two hanging rocks,
(Where babbling Echo sits and mocks
Poor Travellers) there lies a grove,
With whom the Sun's so out of love,
He never smiles on it, (pale Despair
Calls it his monarchal chair)
Fruit half ripe, hang rivelled and shrunk
On broken arms, torn from the trunk:
The moorish pools stand empty, left
By water, stolen by cunning theft
To hollow banks, driven out by Snakes,
Adders, and Newts, that man these lakes:
The mossy weeds half sweltered, served
As beds for vermin hunger-sterv'd:
The woods are Yew-trees, rent and broke
By whirle-winds, here and there an Oak
Half cleft with thunder, to this grove
We banish them.
Some mercy, Jove.
You should have cried so in your youth,
When Chronos and his Daughter Truth
Sojourned amongst you, when you spent
Whole years in riotous merriment,
Thrusting poor Bees out of their hives,
Ceazing both honey, wax, and lives,
You should have called for mercy, when
You impaled common blossoms, when
In stead of giving poor Bees food,
You eat their flesh and drunk their blood.
Be this our warning.
It is too late,
Fairies thrust them to their fate:
Now Prorex our chief Mr. Bee,
And Vice-Roy, thus we lesson thee,
Thy preterit errors we forgive,
Provided you hereafter live
In compass, take again your Crown,
But make your subjects so your own,
As you for them may answer.
Sir,
(For this high favour you confer)
True loyalty (upon my knee)
I promise both for them and me.
Rise in our love then, and that you,
What you have promised may pursue,
Chaste Latria I bestow
On vou in Marriage, sheele teach you how
〈◊◊〉 your self; fair truth and time,
Boulvatch, and constant Chime,
To all your actions: Now adieu,
Prorex shall again renew
His potent reign: the massy world
Which in Glittering Orbs is hurled
About the poles, be Lord of: wee
Only reserve our Royalty,
Field-musicke? Obron must away
For us our Gentle Fairies stay,
In the Mountains and the rocks
We'll hunt the Gray, and little Fox,
Who destroy our Lambs at feed,
And spoil the Nests, where Turtles breed,
If Vespa, Fucus, or proud Error
Fright thy Bees, and be a terror
To thy Groves, it is Obrons will
As Out-lawes you them seize and kill,
Apollo, and the Muses dance,
Art has banished ignorance,
And chased all flies of Rape and stealth
From forth our winged Common-wealth.

No more, I'll sooner be reconciled to want, or sickness, then that Rascal; A thing, that my Charity made sociable; one, that when I smiled would fawn upon me, and wag his stern, like starved Dogs; so nasty, the Com∣pany cried foh upon him; He stunk so of Poverty, Ale, and Bawdry. So poor and despicable, when I relieved him, he could not avow his calling, for want of a Cassock, but stood at Corners of Streets, and whispered Gentlemen in the Ear, as they passed, and so delivered his Wants like a Message which being done, the Rogue vanished, and would dive at Westminster like a Dabchick, and rise again at Temple-gate; The ingenuity of the Rascal, his Wit being snuffed by want, burnt clear then, and furnished him with a bawdy Jest or two, to take the Company; But now the Rogue shall find he has lost a Patron.
As I live, if I had thought you would have been in such a fury, you should never have known it.
Treacherous Rogue, he has always railed against thee to me, as a danger his Friendship ought to give me warning of; and nightly cried, yet look back, and hunt not, with good Nature and the beauties of thy Youth, that false Woman; But hear thy Friend, that speaks from sad Experience.
Did he say this?
Yes, and swears ye are as unsatiate as the Sea, as Cove∣tous,
and as ungrateful: that you have your Tempest too; and Calms, more dangerous then it.
Was the slave so Eloquent in his malice?
Yes, faith, and urged, you (for your part) were never particular, and seldom sound.
Not sound? Why, he offered to marry me, and swore he thought I was chaste, I was so particular; and proved it, that con∣sent was full marriage, by the first Institution, and those that love, and lie together, and tell, have fulfilled all Ceremonies now.
Did he offer to marry thee?
Yes, yes.
If ever then I deserved from thee, or if thou be deer to thy self, as thou hast any thing thou hop'st shall be safe or sound about thee, I conjure thee, take my Counsel; Marry him, to af∣flict him.
Marry him?
If I have any power I shall prevail; thou know he has a fat Benefice, and leave me to plague him, till he give it me to be rid of thee.
Will you not keep me then?
I keep thee? prithee, wilt thou keep me? I know not why men are such Fools to pay? We bring as much to the sport, as Wo∣men; Keep thee? I'd marry thee as soon; Why? that's Wedding sin; No, no keeping I, that you are not your own, is all that pre∣fers you before Wives.
I hope this is not real.
Art thou such a stranger to my humour? Why I tell thee, I should hate thee if I could call thee mine, for I loath all Wo∣men within my knowledge, and it is six to four if I knew thy sign I'd come there no more; A strange Mistress makes every night anew, and these are your pleasing sins; I had as live be good, as sin by course.
Then I am miserable.
Not so, if you'll be instructed, and let me pass like a stranger when you meet me.
But have you these humours?
Yes faith; yet if you will observe them, though you Marry him, I may perchance be your Friend; But you must be sure to be coy; for to me the hunting is more pleasure then the Quarry.
But if I observe this, will you be my Friend hereafter?
Firm as the day; Hark, I hear him; I knew he would  follow me, I gave him a small touch that wakened his guilt; Re∣solve to indear your self to him, which you may easily do, by ta∣king his part when I have vexed him; No dispute, Resolve it, or as I live here I disclaim thee for ever.
It is well, something I'll do.
Open the door, I say, and let me in; your favourite and his Tithes, shall come no more here.
Yes, but he shall; it is not you, nor your braced Drum, shall fright me hence, who can command the souls of men; I have read
Divine Seneca; thou know nothing but the earthly part, and can cry to that, Faces about.
Thou read Seneca? thou steal his Cover, to clothe thee, naked and wicked, That for money would sell thy share of the Twelve, and art allowed by all that know thee, fitter to have been Judas, then Judas was for his treachery.
Rail, do Rail, my illiterate Captain, that can only abuse by memory; and should I live thou could read my Sentence, I should never die.
No ungrateful, live till I destroy thee; and thankless Wretch, Did all my care of thee deserve nothing but thy malice, and trea∣cherous speaking darkly still? with thy fine, No, not he, when any malicious discourse was made of me, and by thy false faint, No, Faith; Confess, in thy denials, whilst thy smiling Excuses stood a greater and more dangerous Evidence against me, then my En∣mies Affidavits could have done.
I'll lie for never a lean Soldier of you all.
I have, for thee, slave, when I have been wondered at for keeping Company with such a face; But they were such as know thee not; all which thy looks deceived, as they did me; They are so simple they'd Cousin a Jury, and a Judge that had Wit would swear thou ly'dst, should thou confess what I know to be true, and award Bedlam for thee; it is so strange and so new a thing, to find so much Rogue lodge at the sign of the Fool.
Leave this injurious language, or I'll lay off my Cassock, for nothing shall privilege your Braggers tongue, to abuse me, a Gentleman, and a Soldier ancienter then thy self.
Yes, thou were it so; and now I think on it, I'll recount the Cause, which, it may be, thou hast forgot, through the variety of sins; It was a Hue and Cry that followed thee a Scholar, and found thee a Soldier.
Thou lie; thou, and scandal have but one tongue, hers dwells with thy Cowards teeth.
Oh! do you rage? nay, I'll put the cause in Print too, I am but a skirvy Poet, yet I'll make a Ballad shall tell how like a faithful disciple you followed your poor Whore, till her Martyrdom in the Suburbs.
I'll be revenged for this scandal.
Then shall succeed, thy flight from the University, dis∣guessed into Captain only the outside was worse Buff, and the in∣side more Atheist, then they furnished with an Insolent Faith, un∣charitable heart, envious, as old Women, cruel and bloody as Cowards; thus armed at all points, thou went out, Threatening God, and trembling at men.
I'll be revenged, thou poor man of War, I'll be re∣veng'd.
And why so bitter? whose house is this? who dares tell this story?
Why sweet? hath he not treacherously broke into our Cabinet, and would have stolen thee thence? By these hilts, I'll
hang him; and then I can conclude my Ballad with, Take warning all Christian People by the same: I will, you lean Slave; I'll prosecute thee, till thou art fain to hide in a Servitors gown again, and live upon Crumbs with the Robin Red-breasts that haunt the Hall, your old Mess-Mates; Do you snarl? I'll do it, I will, and put thee to fight with the Dogs for the Bones that but smell of meat; those that your hungry Students have polished with their teeth.
If you do this, good Captain, Lieutenant, and Company (for all your Command, I think, is within your reach) I say, if you dare do this, I shall sing a song of one that bad stand, and made a Carrier pay a dear Rent for a little ground, upon his Majesties high-way.
How now, Mistress Wanton? What's this? What's this?
This? It is matter for a Jury, I'll swear, and positively, I'll hang thee, I'll do it, by this hand, let me alone to swear the Ju∣rye out of doubt.
But you are in Jest, Mistress Wanton, and will confess (I hope) this is no truth.
Yes Sir, as great a truth, as that you are in your unpay'd-for Scarlet; Fool! did think, I'd quit such a Friend, and his stayed fortune, to rely upon thy dead pay, and hopes of a second Covenant?
His fortune? what is'st? Th'Advowson of Tybourn Deanery?
No, nor Rents brought in by long staff-speeches, that asks Alms with frowns, till thy looks and speech have laid violent hands upon men's Charity.
Let him alone, I'll warrant, he will never be indicted for drawing any thing but his tongue, against a man.
Very good.
Dear Mrs Wanton, you have won my heart, and I shall live to dote upon you for abusing this impetuous Captain; will you listen to my old suit? will you marry me, and vex him? say, dare you do it, without more dispute?
It was a good Question; she that dares marry thee dares do any thing; she may as safely lie with the great Bell upon her, and his Clapper is less dangerous then thine.
Why, I pray?
What a miserable condition wilt thou come to? his wife cannot be an honest Woman; and if thou should turn honest, would it not vex thee to be chaste and Paxat, a Saint without a Nose? what Calendar will admit thee, by an incurable slave that's made of Rogues flesh, consider that.
Why, that's something yet; Thou hast nothing but a few scars, and a little old Fame to trust to, and that scarce thatches your head.
Nay then I see you're base, and this Plot (not Ass∣dent,) and now I'doe not grudge him thee; go together, it is pity to part you, Whore and Parson, as consonant.
As Whore and Captain.
Take her, I'll warrant her a breeder, I'll prophecy she shall lie with thy whole Congregation, and bring an Heir to thy Parish, one that thou moist enclose the Common by his Title, and recover it by Common Law.
That's more then thy dear Dam could do for thee, thou Son of a thousand Fathers, all poor Soldiers, Rogues, that ought mischiefs, no Midwives for their Birth; But I cry thee Mercy, my Patron has an Estate of old Iron by his side, with the Farm of old Ladies he scrapes a dirty living from.
He earn from an old Lady? hang him, he's only wicked in his desires; and for Adultery he cannot be condemned, though he should have the vanity to betray himself; God forgive me for belying him so often as I have done; the weak-chin'd slave hired me once to say, I was with Child by him.
This is pretty, Farewell; and may the next Pig thou far∣row'st have a promising face, without the Dads fool or Gallows in it, that all may swear, at first sight, That's a Bastard; and it shall go hard but I'll have it called mine; I have the way, it is but praising thee, and swearing thou art honest before I am asked: You taught me the trick.
Next Levy I'll preach against thee, and tell them what a piece you are; your Drum and borrowed scarf shall not prevail, nor shall you win with Charms half-ell-long, (hight ferret Rib∣band) the youth of our Parish, as you have done.
No, lose no time, prithee study and learn to preach, and leave railing against the Surplice, now thou hast preached thy self into Linen; Adieu, Abigal, Adieu, Heir apparent to Sir Oliver Marre-text; To Church, go, I'll send a Beadle shall sing your Epi∣thalamium.
Adieu, my Captain of a tame band, I'll tell your old Lady how you abused her breath, and swore you earned your money harder then those that dig in the Mines for it. Exit Captain. A fart, fill thy sail, Captain of a Gally Foist. He's gone, come sweet, let's to Church immediately, that I may go and take my Revenge; I'll make him wear thin Breeches.
But if you should be such a Man as he says you are, what would my Friends say, when they hear I have cast my self away?
He says? Hang him, lean, mercenary, provant Rogue; I knew his beginning when he made the stocks lousy, and swarmed so with vermin we were afraid he would have brought that Curse upon the County; He says? but what's matter what he says? a Rogue, by Sire and Dam; his Father was a broad fat Peddler, a what do you lack, Sir, that haunted good houses, and stole more then he bought; His Dam was a Gypsy, a pilfering canting Sibyl in her youth, and she suffered in her old age for a Witch; Poor Stromwell, the Rogue was a perpetual Burden to her, she carried him longer at her back then in her belly; he dwelt there, till she lost him one night in the great Frost upon our Common, and there he was found in the morning candid in Ice: a pox of
their Charity that thawed him, you might smell a Rogue then in the bud, he is now run away from his Wise.
His Wife?
Yes, his Wife; Why, do you not know he's married ac∣cording to the Rogues Liturgy? a Left-handed Bridegroom; I saw him take the Ring from a Tinkers Dowager.
Is this possible?
Yes, most possible, and you shall see how I'll be revenged on him; I will immediately go seek the Ordinance against Re∣formadoes.
What Ordinance?
Why, they do so swarm about the Town, and are so de∣structive to Trade and all Civil Government, that the State has declared, No person shall keep above two Colonels and four Captains, (of what Trade soever) in his Family; For now the War is done, Broken breech, Wood-monger, Rag-man, Butcher, and Link-boy, (Comrades that made up the ragged Regiment in this holy War) think to return and be admitted to serve out their times again.
Your Ordinance will not touch the Captain, for he is a known Soldier.
He a Captain? an Apochryphal Modern one, that went Convoy once to Brainford with those Troops that conducted the Contribution-Puddings in the late holy War, when the City ran mad after their Russet Levites, Apron-Rogues, with horn hands; Hang him, he's but the sign of a Soldier; and I hope to see him hanged for that Commission, when the King comes to his Place again.
You abuse him, now he's gone; But,—
Why? dost thou think I fear him? No Wench, I know him too well for a Cowardly slave, that dares as soon eat his Fox, as draw it in earnest; the slave's noted to make a Conscience of nothing but fighting.
Well, if you be not a good Man, and a kind Husband—
Thou know the Proverb, as happy as the Parsons Wife, during her Husbands life.
SEcret, give me the Glass, and see who knocks.
Niece, what, shut the Door? as I live this Music was meant to you, I know my Nephews voice.
Yes, but you think his friends has more Music in it.
No Faith, I can laugh with him, or so, but he comes no nearer then my lace.
You do well to keep your smock betwixt.
Faith, Wench, so wilt thou and thou be wise, from him and all of them, and be ruled by me, we'll abuse all the Sex, till they put a true value upon us.
But dare you forbid the travelled Gentlemen, and abuse them and your servant, and swear, with me, not to marry in a twelve month, though a Lord bait the hook, and hang out the sign of a Court Cupped, whipped by a Country Widow; then I believe we may have mirth cheaper then at the price of our selves, and some sport with the wits that went to lose themselves in France.
Come, no dissembling, lest I tell your servant, when he re∣turns, how much you're taken with the last new fashion.
Madam, it is almost Noon, will you not dress your self to day?
She speaks as if we were Boarders; Prithee, Wench, is not the dinner our own, sure my Cook shall lay by my own Roast till my stomach be up.
But there may be Company, and they will say, we take too long time to trim. Secret. Give me the flowers my servant sent me, he swear it was the first the Wench made of the kind.
But when he shall hear you had Music sent you to day, twill make him appear in his old clothes.
Marry, I would he would take exception, he should not want ill usage to rid me of his trouble; as I live, custom has made me so acquainted with him, that I now begin to think him not so displeasing, as at first; and if he fall not out with me, I must with him, to secure my self. Sure (Aunt) he must find Sense and Rea∣son absent, for when a Question knocks at his head, the Answer tells that there is no body at home; I asked him, the other day, if he did not find a blemish in his understanding, and he swear a great Oath, Not he; I told him it was very strange, for Fool was so visible an eye-sore, that neither Birth nor Fortune eould reconcile to me.
Faith, methinks his humour is good, and his purse will buy good company, and I can laugh and be merry with him sometimes.
Why, pray, Aunt, take him to your self, and see how merry we will be; I can laugh at any bodies Fool, but mine own.
By my troth, but that I have married one Fool already, you should not have him. Consider, he asks no portion, and yet will make a great jointure; a Fool with these conveniences, a kind loving Fool, and one that you may govern, makes no ill hus∣band; Niece, there are other Arguments too, to bid a Fool well∣come, which you will find without teaching; think of it, Niece; you may lay out your affection to purchase some dear wit, or judgement of the City, and repent, at leisure a good bargain, in this Fool.
Faith, Aunt, Fools are cheap in the Butchery, and dear in the Kitchen; they are such unsavoury infipid things that there goes more charge to the sauce then the Fool is worth, ere a woman can confidently serve him, either to her bed or board; then if he be a loving Fool, he troubles all the world a days, and me all night.
Friendship-love, Madam, has a remedy for that.
See if the air of this place has not inclined Secret to be a Baud already. No, Secret, you get no Gowns that way, Upon my word; if I marry, it shall be a Gentleman that has wit and honour, though he has nothing but a sword by his side; such a one naked is better then a Fool with all his Trappings, Bells and Baubles.
Why, as I live, he's a handsome fellow, and merry; mine is such a sad soul, and tells me stories of Lovers that died in de∣spair, and of the lamentable end of their Mistresses (according to the Ballad) and thinks to win me by Example.
Faith mine talks of nothing but how long he has loved me; and those that know me not, think I am old, and still finds new causes, (as he calls them) for his love; I asked him the other day if I changed so fast or no.
But what think thou, Secret; my Nephew dances well, and has a handsome house in the Piazza.
Your Nephew? not I, As I live; he looks as if he would be wooed; I'll warrant you, he'll never begin with a woman till he has lost the opinion of himself; But since you are so courteous, I'll speak to his friend, and let him know how you suffer for him.
Him! marry God bless all good women from him; why, he talks as if the Dairy-maid and all her Cows could not serve his turn; then they wear such baudy-breeches, it would startle an ho∣nest woman to come in their company, for fear they should break, and put her to count from the fall of them; for I'll warrant, the year of the Lord would sooner out of her head then such a sight.
I am not such an enemy now to his humour as to your Nephews, he rails against our sex, and thinks by beating down the price of women to make us despair of Merchants; But if I had his heart-strings tied on a True-lovers-knot, I would so firk him till he found physic in a Rope.
He's a scurvy tongued fellow, I'm sure of that; and if I could have got a staff, I had marked him.
What did he do to thee, Secret?
Why, he swore, he had a better opinion of her then to think she had her Maiden-head; but if she were that Fool, and had preserved the toy, he swore he would not take the pains of fetching it, to have it; I confess, I would fain be revenged on them, because they are so blown up with opinion of their wit.
As I live, my Nephew travels still; the sober honest Ned Wild will not be at home this month.
What say you? will you abuse them and all the rest, and stand to my first Proposition?
Yes, faith, if it be but to bury my servant, Sad; for he can∣not last above another Fall, and how, think you, will your servant take it?
Mine! oh God help me, mine's a healthy Fool, I would he were subject to pine and take things unkindly; there were some hope to be rid of him; for I'll undertake to use him as ill as any body.
As I live, I am easily resolved; for if I would marry, I know neither who nor what humour to choose.
By my troth, Madam, you are hard to please; else the Courtier might have served turn.
Serve turn! Prithee what haste, Secret? that I should put my self to bed with one I might make a shift with; when I marry, thou shalt cry, I, marry, Madam; this is a husband without blushing wench, and none of your so-so husbands; yet he might half overcome my aversion, I confess.
Overcome! I think so, he might have won a City his way; for when he saw you were resolved he should not eat with you, he would set himself down as if he meant to besiege us, and had vowed never to rise till he had taken us in; and because our sex forbad force, he meant to do it by famine; yet you may stay, and miss a better market; for hang me, I am of Secrets opinion; he had but two faults, a handsome fellow, and too soon denied.
It is true, he was a handsome fellow, and a civil, that I shall report him; for as soon as it was given him to understand; I desired he would come no more, I never saw him since, but by chance.
Why did you forbid him?
There were divers exceptions; But that which angered me then, was, he came with the Kings Letters Patents, as if he had been to take up a wife for his Majesties use.
Alas! was that all? why, it is their way at Court, a com∣mon course among them, and was it not one the King had a great care of? when my mother was alive, I had such a packet from the Court directed unto me, I bid them pay the Post, and make the fellow drink, which he took as ill as I could wish, and has been ever since such a friendly enemy.
Nay, as I live, she was for the Captain too; his Scarf and Feather won her heart.
Truly, Madam, never flatter your self; for the Gentle∣man did not like you so well as to put you to the trouble of say∣ing, no.
Lord, how I hated and dreaded that Scarf and Buff∣c•at?
Why, Mistress Pleasant, a Captain is an honourable Charge.
Prithee, Secret, name them no more, Colonel and Cap∣tain, Commissioner, Free-quarters, Ordance and Contribution; When Buff utters these words, I tremble and dread the sound; it frights me still when I do but think on them; Cuds body, they 're twigs of the old Rod (Wench) that whipped us so lately.
I, I, and they were happy days, Wench, when the Captain was a lean, poor, humble thing, and the Soldier tame, and durst not come within the City, for fear of a Constable and a Whipping-post; they know the penal Statutes give no Quarter; Then Buff was out of countenance, and skulked from Ale-house to Ale-house, and the City had no Militia but the Sheriffs-men; In
those merry days, a Bailiff trod the streets with terror, when all the Chains in the City were rusty, but Mr. Sheriffs, when the people knew no evil but the Constable and his Watch; Now every Committee has as much power, and as little manners, and examines with as much ignorance, impertinence and authority, as a Constable in the Kings key.
See, who's that so loud? 
The men you talked of, newly come to Town.—
Remember our covenants, get them that can, all friends; and be sure to dispatch the Plot, to carry them into the Country, lest the brace of new-come Monsieurs get them.
Those flesh-flies? I'll warrant thee from them, yet it was foolishly done of me to put on this gravity; I shall break out, and return to my self if you put me to a winters wooing.
A little patience do's it; and I am content to suffer any thing till they're out of Town: Secret says, they think my pale face proceeds from my love.
Do's she? that shall be one hint to advance your designs, and my revenge; for so she be cozened I care not who do's it, for scorning me, who (by this hand) loved her parlously.
Sir, what shall I do with the horses?
Carry them to Brumsteds.
What shall I do with your worships.
Mine? take him, hamstring him, kill him, any thing to make him away, lest having such a convenience I be betrayed to another journey into the Country. Gentlemen, you are all well∣come to my Country-house; Charing-cross, I am glad to see thee, with all my heart.
What? not reconciled to the Country yet?
He was not long enough there to see the pleasure of it.
Pleasure? what is it called? walking or hawking, or shoot∣ing at Butts?
You found other pleasures, or else the story of the Meadow is no Gospel.
Yes, a pox upon the necessity. Here I could as soon have taken the Cow, as such a Milk-maid.
The wine and meat's good, and the company.
When, at a Tuesday-meeting the Country comes in to a match at two shillings Rubbers, where they conclude at dinner what shall be done this Parliament, railing against the Court and Pope, after the old Elizabeth-way of preaching, till they are drunk with zeal; and then the old Knight of the Shire from the boards end, in his Coronation breeches, vies clinches with a silenced Mini∣ster,
a Rogue that railed against the Reformation merely to be eased of the trouble of preaching.
Nay, As I live, now you are to blame, and wrong him, the man's a very able man.
You'll be able to say so, one day, upon your wives report; I would he were gilt, and all that hold his opinion: By this good day, they get more souls then they save.
And what think you of the Knights Son? I hope he's a fine Gentleman, when his green Suit, and his blew stockings are on; and the welcomest thing •live to Mrs. Abigail, but Tib and Tom in the Stock.
Who, Mr. Jeoffry? Hobinol the second; By this life, it is a very Veal, and he licks his Nose like one of them; By his discourse you'd guess he had eaten nothing but Hay; I wonder he doth not go on all four too, and hold up his leg when he stales; he talks of nothing but the stable. The Cobblers Black-bird at the corner has more discourse; he has not so much as the family-jest, which these Coridons use to inherit; I posed him in Booker's Prophesies, till he confessed he had not mastered his Almanac yet.
But what was that you whispered to him in the Hall?
Why, the Butler and I, by the intercession of March beer, had newly reconciled him to his Dads old Cod-piece Corslet, in the Hall; which, when his zeal was up, he would needs throw down, because it hung upon a Cross.
But what think you of my neighbour? I hope her charity takes you.
Yes, and her old Waiting-womans devotion; she sighed in the Pew behind me; A Dutch Skip• belches not so loud, or so sow∣er; my Ladies miserable sinner, with the white 〈◊〉 she do's so squeeze out her prayers; and so wring out, Have 〈◊〉 upon us; I warrant her, she has a waiting-womans sting in her conscience; she looks like a dirty souled Baud.
Who is this, my Lady Freedom's woman that he de∣scribes?
The same, the Independent Lady, I have promised to send her a Cripple or two by the next Carrier; her subject husband would needs show me his house one morning; I never visited such an Ho∣spital, it stunk like Bedlam, and all the servants were carrying Poultisses, Juleps, and Glisters, and several Remedies for all Dis∣eases, but his; The man sighed to see his Estate crumbling away; I counselled him either to give or take a ounce of Rats-bane, to cure his mind.
She is my Cozen; but he made such a complaint to me, I thought he had married the Company of Surgeons Hall; for his di∣reactions to me for several things for his Wives use, were fitter for an pothecaries-shop then a Ladies Closet.
I advised him to settle no Jointure, but her old Stills, and a Box of Instruments upon her; she hates a man with all his Limbs; a Wooden-leg, a Crutch and Fistula in Ano, wins her heart; her Gentleman-usher broke his leg last Dog-days, merely
to have the honour to have her set it, a foul rank Rogue, and so full of salt humours, that he posed a whole College of old Wo∣men with a Gangrene; which spoiled the jest, and his ambling be∣fore my Lady, by applying a hand-saw to his gartring place; and now the Rogue wears booted Bed-staves, and destroys all the young ashes to make him legs.
I never saw such a nasty affection; she would ha done well in the incurable; a Hand-maid to have waited on the Cripples.
She converses with naked men, a•• handles all their mem∣bers though never so ill affected, and calls the Fornication Charity; all her discourse to me was flat bawdry, which I could not chide, but spoke as flat as she, till she rebuked me, calling mine beastliness, and hers, Natural Philosophy; By this day, if I were to marry, I would as soon have chosen a drawn whore out of mine own Hos∣petal, and cure the sins of her youth, as marry a she-Chirurgeon; one that for her sins in her first Husbands days cures all the crimes of her Sex in my time. I would have him call her Chiron, the Centaur's own Daughter; a Surgeon by Sire and Dam, Apollo's own Colt, she's red-hair'd too, like that bonny beast with the golden Mane and flaming tail.
You had a long discourse with her, Jolly; what wa'st about?
I was advising her to be divorced, and marry the Man in the Almanac; it would be fine pastime for her to lick him whole.
By this day, I never saw such a Mule as her Husband is, to bear with her madness; the house is a good house, and well fur∣nished.
Yes, but it is such a sight to see great French Beds full of found 〈◊〉, sons of Bachelors, Priests Heirs, Bridewell Orphans; there they lie by dozens in a Bed, like sucking Rabbits in a dish, or a row of pins; and then they keep a whole Dairy of milch Whores to suckle them.
She is successful, and that spoils her, and makes her deaf to counsel; I bad him poison two or three, to disgrace her; for the Vanity and Pride of their remedies make those Women more dili∣gent then their Charity.
I asked him why he married her; and he confessed, if he had been sound he had never had her.
He confessed, she cured him of three Claps before he married her.
Yes, and I believe some other member (though then ill affected) pleaded more then his tongue; and the Rogue is like to find her business still, for he flies at all; My God, I owe thee thanks for many things; but it is not the least, I am not her Husband, nor a Country Gentleman, whither I believe you can∣not easily seduce me again, unless you can persuade London to stand in the Country; To Hide Park, or so, I may venture upon your Lady-fair days, when the Filly Foales of fifteen come kick∣ing in, with their Mains and tails tied up in Ribbons, to see
their eyes roll and neigh, when the Spring makes their blood prick them; so far I am with you by the way of a Country Gentleman and a Beer-drinker.
For all this dislike, Master Jolly; your greatest acquaint∣ance lies amongst Country Gentlemen.
I, at London, there your Country Gentlemen are good Company, where to be seen with them is a kind of credit; I come to a Mercers shop in your Coach; Boy, call your Master; he comes bare, I whisper him, Do you know the Constants and the Sadds of Norfolk? yes, yes, he replies, and strokes his beard; they are good Men cry I, yes, yes; No more, cut me off three suits of Satin, he does it, and in the delivery whispers, Will these be bound? pish, drive on Coachman, speak with me to morrow.
And what then?
What then? why, come again next day.
And what if the Country Gentleman will not be bound?
Then he must fight.
I would I had known that before I had signed your Bond, I would have set my sword sooner then my Seal to it.
Why, if thou repent there's no harm done, fight rather then pay it.
Why, do you think I dare not fight?
Yes, but I think thou hast more wit then to fight with me; for if I kill thee, it is a fortune to me, and others will sign in fear; and if thou should kill me, any body that knows us would swear it were very strange, and cry, there's Gods just judgement now upon that lewd youth, and thou procur'st his hang-mans place at the rate of thy Estate.
By this hand, he is in the right; and for mine I meant to pay when I signed; hang it, never put good fellows to say, prithee give me a hundred pounds.
It is true, it is a good ganty way of begging; yet, for being killed, if I refuse it, would there were no more danger in the Widows unkindness, then in your fighting; I would not mistrust my design.
Why I, there's a point now in nicety of Honour, I should kill you for her; for, you know I pretended first; and it may be if I had writ sad lines to her, and hid my self in my Cloak, and haunted her Coach, it may be in time she would have sought me; not I, by this hand, I'll not trouble my self for a Wench, and married Wid∣owes are but Customary authorised Wenches.
Being of that Opinion, how can thou to think of mar∣rying one?
Why, faith, I know not, I thought to rest me, for I was run out of breath with pleasure, and grew so acquainted with si•, I would have been good (for variety;) in these thoughts, it was my fortune to meet with this Widow, handsome, and of a clear Fame.
Did love her?
Yes, faith? I had Love, but not to the disease that makes
men sick; and I could have loved her still, but that I was angry to have her refuse me for a fault I told her of my self, so I went no more.
Did she forbid you but once?
Faith, I think I slipped a fair Opportunity, a handsome wench, and three thousand pounds per annum in certainty, besides the possibility of being saved.
Which now you think desperate? 
That is you; Cross or Pile, will you have him yet or no?
Peace, observe them.
Faith no, I do not despair, but I cannot resolve.
Who are those?
Captain, whither in such haste? what defeated? call you this a retreat, or a flight from your friends?
Your Nephew, and his Governor, and his Friend! here will be a Scene, sit close, and we may know the secret of their hearts.
They have not met yet since they returned, I shall love this bay window.
Prithee let me go, there's mischief a Boiling; and if thou shake me once more thou wilt Jumble a lye together I have been hammering this hour.
A pox upon you, a studying lies?
Why, then they are no lies, but something in the praise of an old Ladies Beauty, what do you call that?
Who are those?
I'st not the Captain, and my Friend? 
Ned Wild? Tom Careless? What ail thou, dost thou scorn my embraces?
I see you have never been abroad, else you would know how to put a value upon those whose careful observation brought home the most Exquisite Garb and Courtship that Paris could sell us.
A pox on this fooling, and leave off Ceremony.
Why then agreed, off with our masks, and let's embrace  like the old knot.
Faith, say, where have you spent these three years time? in Our Neighbour France? or have you ventured o'er the Alps, to see the seat of the Caesars?
And can tell us (Ignorant, doomed to walk upon our own Land) how large a seat the Goddess fixed her flying Trow∣jans in.
Yes, yes, and have seen, and drunk (perhaps) of Tybers fa∣mous stream.
And have been where Aeneas buried his Trumpeter, and his Nurse; Tom looks as if he had sucked the one, and had a Bat∣tel sounded by the other, for Joy to see our Nation ambitious not to be understood or known when they come home.
So, now I'm welcome home, this is freedom, and these are Friends, and with these I can be merry; for Gentlemen, you must give me leave to be free to.
So you will spare us miserable men, condemned tc London, and the Company of a Michelmas Term, and never travelled those Countries that set Mountains on fire a purpose to light us to our lodging.
Why this is better then to stay at home, and lie by hear∣say, wearing out your selves and Fortunes like your clothes, to see her that hates you for being so fine, then appearing at a Play dressed like some part of it, while the Company admire the Mercers and the Taylors work, and swear they have done their parts to make you fine Gentlemen.
Then leap out of your Coach, and throw your Cloak over your shoulder, the Casting Nets to catch a Widow, while we have seen the world, and learned her Customs.
Yes, Sir, and returned perfect Mounsieurs.
Yes, even to their diseases; I confess my Ignorance; I can∣not amble, nor ride like S. George at Waltham. 
Yet, upon my Conscience, he may be as welcome with a trot, as the other with his pace; and faith, Jack, (to be a little free) tell me, dost thou not think thou had been as well to pass here, with that English Nose thou carryedst hence, as with the French tongue thou hast brought home?
It is an Accident, and to a Soldier it is but a scar; it is true, such a sign upon Mr. Jolly's face had been as ill as a Red Cross, and Lord have mercy upon us, at his lodging door, to have kept women out of Court.
For ought you know of the Court.
I know the Court, and thee, and thy use, and how you serve but as the handsomest movables, a kind of Implement above stairs, and look much like one of the old Court Servants in the hangings.
But that they move, and look fresher, and your Apparel more Modern.
Yet, faith, their Office is the same, to adorn the Room, and be gazed on: Alas! hoe's sad, Courage man, these riding clothes will serve thee at the latter day.
Which is one of their grievances, for nothing troubles them more then to think they must appear in a foul winding sheet, and come undressed.
Gentlemen, I am glad to find you know the Court; we know a Traveller too, especially when he is thus changed and Ex∣changed, as your Worships, both in Purse and Person, and
have brought home foreign visages and Inscriptions.
Why that's their perfection, their ambition to have it said, there go those that have profitably observed the vices of other Countries, and made them their own; and the faults of several Nations, at their return, are their Parts.
Why there's Jack Careless, he carried out as good stable manners as any was in Suffolk, and now he is returned with a shrug, and a trick to stand crooked, like a skirvy Bow unbent, and looks as if he would maintain Oil and Salads against a Chyne of Beef; I knew a great Beast of this kind, it haunted the Court much, and would scarcely allow us (fully reduced to Civility) for serving up Mutton in whole joints.
What, silent?
Faith, the Captain is in a study.
Do, do, Conn the Rivers and Towns perfectly, Captain; thou may become Intelligencer to the People, and lie thy two sheets a week in Corrantoes too.
And could you not make Friends at Court, to get their Pictures cut ugly, in the Corner of a Map, like the old Navigators.
We'll see, we'll see.
I'll interrupt them; Servant, you're welcome to Town; how now, Nephew? what, dumb? where are all our travelled tongues?
Servant! who doth she mean? By this hand, I disclaim the Title.
Captain, Secret has taken Notes, and desires you would instruct her in what concerns a waiting Woman, and an Old Lady.
Very good, yet this shall not save your Dinner.
Nay, while you are in this humour I'll not sell your Com∣panies; and though Master Jolly be incensed, I hope he will do me the favour to dine with me.
Faith, Lady, you mistake me if you think I am afraid of a widow; for I would have the world know I dare meet her any where, but at Bed.
No more Aunt, we'll come; and if you will give us good meat, weel bring good humours, and good stomachs. 
By this day I'll not dine there, they take a pleasure to raise a spirit that they will not lay, I'll to Banks's.
A Pox forbid it, you shall not break Company, now you know what we are to do after Dinner.
I will consent, upon condition you forbid the spiritual Non-sence the age calls Platonic Love.
I must away too; But I'll be there at Dinner, you will join in a Plot after dinner.
Any thing, Good, Bad, or Indifferent, for a Friend and Mirth.
I must go and prevent the Rogues mischief, with the Old Lady.
AWay, unworthy, false, ungrateful; with what Brow dare thou come again into my sight, knowing how unworthy you have been, and how false to love?
No, it is you are unworthy, and deserve not those truths of Love I have paid here; else you would not believe every report that Envy brings, and condemn, without hearing me, whom you have so often tried and found faithful.
Yes, till I too credulous had pity on your tears; till I had mercy you durst not be false.
Nor am not yet.
What dost thou call False? is there a treachery beyond what thou hast done; when I had given my Fame, my Fortune, my self, and my husbands honour, all in one Obligation, a sacrifice to that Passion; which thou seem to labour with despair of, to tell and Brag of a conquest o'er a Woman, fooled by her Passion, and lost in her love to thee, unworthy;—
By this Day, it is as false as he that said it; hang him, son of a Bachelor; a slave that envying my Fortune in such a happiness as your love, and chaste embraces, took this way to ruin it; Come, dry your Eyes, and let the guilty weep; if I were guilty I durst as soon approach a Constable drunk, as come here; you know I am your slave.
You swore so, and honour made me leave to triumph over your miseries.
Do you repent that I am happy? if you do, command my death.
Nay, never weep, nor sit sadly, I am Friends, so you will only talk and discourse; for it is your company I only covet.
No, you cannot forgive, because you have injured me; it is right women's Justice; Accuse first, and harder to reconcile when they are guilty, then when they are Innocent, or else you would not turn from me thus.
You know your youth hath a strong power over me; Turn those bewitching Eyes away; I cannot see them with safety of mine honour.
Come you shall not hide your Face, there's a Charm in it against those that come burnt with unchaste fires; for let but your Eyes or Nose drop upon his heart it would burn it up, or quench it strait.
No Cogging, you have injured me; and now though my  love plead, I must be deaf, my honour bids me; for you will not fear again to prove unworthy when you find I am so easy to for∣give—Why, you will not be uncivil.
So, the storm is laid, I must have those Pearls—she shov'd me away with her mouth, I'll to her again.
Where are you? what do you take me for? why you  will not be uncivil?
Uncivil! By thy chaste self, I cannot, Chick; thou hast such a terror, such a guard in those eyes, I dare not approach thee, nor can I gaze upon so much fire; Prithee, Sirrah, let me hide me from their power here.
You presume upon the weakness of our sex; what shall I say or do? Tyrant Love!
There's a charm in those Pearls; pull them off; if they have a Frost in them, let me wear them, and then we are both safe.
I would you had taken them sooner, I had then been innocent, and might with whiteness have worn my love which I shall ne'er out-live.
Dear, do not too fast pour in my joys, lest I too soon reach my heaven.
Be gone then, lest we prove (having gained that height) this sad truth in Love; The first minute after noon is night.
Part now? The Gods forbid; take from me first this load of joys you have thrown upon me; for it is a burden harder to bear then sadness; I was not born till now, this my first night in which I reap true bliss.
No, no; I would it had been your first night, then your falsehood had not given argument for these tears; and I hate my self to think I should be such a foolish fly, thus again to approach your dangerous flame.
Come, divert these thoughts; I'll go see your Closet.
No, no, I swear you shall not.
You know, I am going out of Town for two days.
When you return, I'll show it you; you will forget me else when you are gone, and at Court.
Can your love endure delays? or shall business thee from hence remove? these were your own Arguments; come, you shall show it me.
Nay, then I perceive what unworthy way your love would find; Ye Gods, are all men false?
As I live, you shall stay; come, you ought to make me 
 amends for slandring of me; Hang me, if ever I told; and he that reports it is the damn'dst Rogue in a Country, Come, I say.—
Ah! As I live, I will not, I have sworn; do not pull me, I will not be damned, I have sworn.—
As I live, I'll break your Bodkin then, a weeping Tyrant! Come; by this good day, you shall be merciful.
Why, you will not be uncivil; you will not force me, will you? As I live, I will not.
Nay, and you be wilful, I can be stubborn too. 
Hang me, I'll call aloud, why Nan! nay, you may force me; But, As I live, I'll do nothing.
A Pox upon you, are you earthed? The Rogue has got her Neck-lace of Pearl; but I hope he will leave the Rope to hang me in, how the pox came they so great? I must have some trick to break his neck, else the young Rogue will work me out; it is an excellent old Lady, but I dare not call her so; yet would she were young enough to bear, we might do some good for our heirs, by leaving such a charitable brood behind; she's a woman after the first kind; it is but going in to her and you may know her; then she'll oblige so readily, and gives with greater thanks then others receive, takes it so kindly to be courted. I am now to obe∣leg her (as she calls it) by professing young Wilds love, and de∣siring an assurance; she's sensible of his sufferings, which though it be false, and beyond my Commission, yet the hopes of such a new young thing that has the vogue of the Town, for handsomest, twill so tickle her age, and so blow up her vanity, to have it said, He is in love with her, and so endear her to me for being the means that the Parsons malice will be able to take no root;—She comes, I must not be seen.—
Give me that Letter I'll swear, you shall not read it.
Take it, I'll away, What time shall I call you, in the even∣ing? there's a Play at Court to night.
I would willingly be there, but your Ladies are so cen∣sorious, and malicious to us young Ladies, in the Town, especially to me, because the Wits are pleased to afford me a visit, or so; I could be content else to be seen at Court; Pray what humour is the Queen of? the Captain of her Guard I know.
The Queen? Who's that knocks at the back-door.— 
Smooth my Band, I know not, go down that way, and look you be not false; if you should be false, I'll swear, I should spoil my self with weeping.
Farewell, in the evening I'll call you.
Who's there? Captain? Where have you been all this while; I might sit alone, I see, for you, if I could not find con∣versation in Books. 
Faith, Madam, friends newly come to Town engaged me, and my stay was civility rather then desire, what Book's that?
I'll swear he was a Witch that writ it; for he speaks my thoughts as if he had been within me; the Original, they say, was French.
Oh, I know it, it is the accomplished Woman, Your self, he means by this, while you are your self.
Indeed, I confess, I am a great friend to conversation, if we could have it without suspicion; But the world's so apt to judge, that it is a prejudice to our honour now to salute a man.
Innocence, Madam, is above opinion, and your fame's too great to be shook with whispers.
You are ever civil, and therefore welcome; pray, what news is there now in Town? for I am reclus'd here; unless it be yours, I receive no visits; and I'll swear, I charged the Wench to day not to let you in; I wonder she let you come.
Faith, Madam, if it had been my own business I should not have ventured so boldly; But the necessity that forces me to come concerns my friend, against whom if your mercy be now bounded with those strict ties of honour, and cold thoughts which I have ever found guard your heart, My friend, a young and handsome man, is lost, is lost in his prime, and falls like early bloc∣soms; But methinks you should not prove the envious frost to de∣stroy this young man, this delicate young man, that has whole bun∣dles of Boys in his Breeches; yet if you be cruel, he and they dye, as useless as open Arses gathered green. 
Good Captain, out with the particular, what way can my charity assist him; you know by experience I cannot be cruel, remember how I fetched you out of a swooned, and laid you in my own bed.
That act preserved a life, that has always been laboured in your service; and I dare say, your charity here will find as fruitful a gratitude.
But, I hope, he will not be so uncivil as you were; I'll swear, I could have hanged you for that Rape, if I would have followed the Law; but I forgave you upon condition you would do so again; but what's this young man you speak of?
Such is my love to you and him, that I cannot prefer mine own particular before your contents; else I'd have poisoned him ere I'd have brought him to your house.
Why, I pray?
Because, he's young, handsome, and sound parts; that I'm sure will ruin me here.
His love may make all these beauties, else I have an honour will defend me against him, were he as handsome as young Wild.
Why I, there it is; that one word has removed all my fears and jealousies with a despair; for that's the man whose Love, Life and Fortune, lies at your feet; and if you were single, by law∣full ways he would hope to reach what now he despairs of.
Let him not despair, Love is a powerful pleader, and youth and beauty will assist him; and if his love be noble I can meet it; for there's none that sacrifices more to friendship-love, then I.
My friends interest makes me rejoice at this; dare you trust me to say this to him, though it be not usual, pray speak; Nay, you are so long still a resolving to be kind: Remember, cha∣rity is as great a virtue as chastity, and greater, if we will hear na∣ture plead; for the one may make many Maids, the other can but preserve one: But I know you will be persuaded, let be my impor∣tunity
that prevailed, shall I bring him hither one evening?
Why do you plead thus? pray be silent, and when you see him, tell him he has a seat here, and I— 
Out with it, what is it? shall he call you Mistress? and his Platonic?
Away, away; Me?
No niceness, is it a match?
Lord, would I were as worthy as willing (pray tell him so) he shall find me one of the humblest Mistresses that ever he was pleased to honour with his affections.
Dare you write this to him, and honour me with bear∣ing it? I confess, I am such a friend to friendship-love too that I would even bring him on my back to a mid-nights meeting.
If you will stay here, I'll go in and write it.— 
Madam, I forgot to ask your Ladyship one Question.
What was it?
There happened a business last night betwixt Mr. Wild and one Jolly, a Courtier that brags extremely of your favour; I swear, if it had not been for friends that interposed themselves there had been mischief, for Mr. Wild was extreme zealous in your cause.
Such a Rascal I know; Villain, to bring my name up∣on the Stage, for a subject of his quarrels, I'll have him cud∣geld.
And I'll swear, he deserved it; for the quarrel ended in a Bet of a Buck-hunting-nag, that sometime to day he would bring a Neck-lace and chain of Pearl of yours (not stolen, but freely go∣ven) to witness his power.
Did the vain Rascal promise that?
Yes, but we laughed at it.
So you might; and, as I live, if the Neck-lace were come from stringing I'd send them both to Mr. Wild, to wear as a favour, to assure him I am his, and to put the vain slave out of countenance.
I marry, such a timely favour were worth a dozen Let∣ters, to assure him of your Love, and remove all the doubts the others discourse may put into his head; and faith I'd send him the chain now, and in my Letter promise him the Neck-lace, he'll deserve such a favour.
I'll go in and fetch it immediately, will you favour me to deliver it?
I'll wait upon your Ladyship.
I'll swear you shall not go in, you know I forswore  being alone with you.
Hang me, I'll go in; do's my Message deserve to wait an Answer at the Door?
I, but you'll be nought.
O, ne'er trust me if I break.
If you break some such forfeit you'll lose; Well, come in for once.
You are so suspicious.
I'll swear, I have reason for it, you are such another man.
IS he gone?
Yes, he's gone to the old Ladies, high with mis∣chief.
Fare him well, easy Fool, how the Trout strove to be tickled, and how does this Ring become me? Ha! they are  fine kind of things these Wedding Rings.
Besides the good custom of putting so much Gold in 'em, they bring such conveniences along.
Why I, now I have but one to please; and if I please him, who dares offend me? and that Wife's a fool that cannot make her Husband one.
Nay, I am absolutely of Opinion, it was fit for you to marry; but whether he be a good Husband or no.
A pox of a good Husband, give me a wise one; they only make the secure Cuckolds, the Cuckold in grain; for die a Husband that has wit but with an Opinion thou art honest, and see who dares wash the colour out; Now your fool changes with eve∣rye drop, dotes with confidence in the Morning and at Night, jealous even to Murder, and his Love (Lord help us) fades like my Gredaline Petticoat.
This is a new Doctrine.
It is a truth, Wench, I have gained from my own Obser∣vations, and the Paradox will be maintained. Take wise Men from Cuckolds, and fools to make them; for your wise Man draws eyes and suspicion with his visit, and begets jealous thoughts in the Husband, that his Wife may be overcome with his parts; when the fool is welcome to both, pleases both, laughs with the one, and lies with the other, and all without suspicion; I tell thee, a fool that has money is the Man. The wits and the we's, which is a distinct Parreal of Wit bound by it self, and to be sold at Wit-hall, or at the sign of the Kings-head in the Butchery; these wise things will make twenty jealous, ere one Man a Cuckold; when the fa∣mily of fools will head a Parish ere they are suspected.
Well, I see one may live and learn; and if he be but as good at it now, you are his own; as he was, when he was your Friends Friend, (as they call it) you have got one of the best hid∣ers of such a business in the Town; Lord, how he would Sister you at a Play!
Faith, tic as he is used at first; if he get the bridle in's teeth he'll ride to the Devil; but if thou be true, we'll make him amble ere we have done; the Plot is here, and if it thrive I'll al∣la the Proverb, The Parson gets the Children, to, the Parson Fa∣theirs them.
Any thing that may get Rule; I love to wear the Breeches.
So do we all, Wench; Empire? it is all our aim; and I'll put my ranting Roger in a Cage but I'll tame him; he loves already, which is an excellent Ring in a fools nose, and thou shalt hear him sing.—
Happy only is that Family, that shows
A Cock that's silent, and a Hen that crows.
Do this, I'll serve you for nothing; the impetuous slave had wont to taunt me for beating of my Husband, and would sing that song in mockery of me.
In Revenge of which, thou (if thou wilt be faithful) shalt make him sing.
Happy is that Family that shows
A Cock that's silent, and a Hen that crows.
GO, you are a naughty Man; do you come hither to rail against an honest Gentleman? I have heard how you fell out, you may be ashamed on it, a Man of your Coat.
What? to speak Truth and perform my Duty? the world cries out you are a scabbed sheep, and I come to tar you, that is, give you notice how your Fame suffers in the opinion of the world.
My Fame, Sirrah? it is purer then thy Doctrine, get thee out of my house.
You uncivil fellow, do you come hither to tell my Lady of her faults, as if her own Levite could not discern 'em?
My own Levite? I hope he's better bred then to tell me of my faults.
He finds work enough to correct his dearly beloved sinners.
And the Right Worshipful my Lady, and your self, they mend at leisure.
You are a saucy fellow, Sirrah, to call me Sinner in my own house; get you gone with—your Madam, I hear, and (Madam) I could advise, but I am loath to speak; take heed, the world talks, and thus with dark sentences put my Innocence into a fright, with you know what you know good Mistress Faith∣full; so do I, and the world shall know too thou hast married a Whore.
Madam, a Whore?
No, Sir, it is not so well as a Madam-whore, it is a poor Whore, a Captains cast Whore.
Now bless me, marry a Whore? I wonder any Man can endure those things, what kind of Creatures are they?
They are like Ladies, but that they are handsomer; and though you take a privilege to injure me, yet I would advise your Wo∣man
to tie up her Tongue, and not abuse my Wife.
Fie, art thou not ashamed to call a Whore, Wife? Lord bless•ns, what will not these men do when God leaves them! But for a Man of your Coat to cast himself away upon a Whore, come Wench, let's go and leave him! I'll swear, it is strange, the State doth not provide to have all Whores hanged or drowned.
I, and it is time they look into it, for they begin to spread so, that a man can scarce find an honest woman in a Country; they say, they're voted down now, it was moved by that charitable Mem∣ber that got an Order to have it but five miles to Croydon, for ease of the Market-women.
I, I, it is a blessed Parliament.
That I have plaid the fool, is visible; this comes of rash∣nos; something I must do to set this right, or else she'll hate, and he'll laugh at me, I must not lose him, and my revenge too, something that's mischief, I am resolved to do.
NOW is the Parsons Wife so contemptible?
No, but I'm so full of that resolution to dislike the sex, that I will allow none honest, none handsome; I tell thee, we must beat down the price with our selves, court none of 'em; but let their Maiden-heads and their Faces lie upon their hands, till they're weary of the commodity, then they'll haunt us to find proper Chap-men to deal for their ware.
I like this, but 'twil be long a doing, and it may be ever they be forced to sell, our bank will be exhausted, and we shall not be able to purchase.
I, but we will keep a credit, and at three six months, thou and the Captain shall be my Factors.
You had best have a partner, else such an undertaking would break a better back then yours.
No partners in such commodities, your Factor that takes up Maiden-heads, it is upon his own account still.
But what course will you take to purchase this trade with women?
I am resolved to put on their own silence and modesty, answer forsooth, swear nothing but Gods negs, and hold Argue∣mints of their own cold Tenants, as if I believed there were no true love below the line, then sigh when it is proper, and with forced studies betray the enemy, who seeing my eye fixed on her, her va∣nity thinks I am lost in admiration, calls and shakes me ere I wake out of my design, and being collected, answer out of purpose. Love, divinest? yes, who is it that is mortal and do's not, or which amongst all the Senate of the Gods, can gaze upon those
eyes, and carry thence the power he brought? This will start her.
Yes, and make her think thee mad.
Why that's my design; for then I start too, and rub my eyes, as if I waked, then sigh and strangle a yawn, 'till I have wrung it into tears, with which I rise, as if overcome with grief; then kiss her hands, and let fall those witnesses of faith and love, bribed for my design. This takes; for who would suspect such a Devil as Craft and Youth to live together?
But what kind of women do you think this will take?
All kind of women, those that think themselves hand∣some; it being probable, concludes it real; and those that are handsome in their opinion, that small number will believe it, be∣cause it agrees with their wishes.
And when you are gone, it may be they sigh, and their Love breaks out into Paper, and what then?
What then? why then I'll laugh, and show thee their Letters, and teach the world how easy it is to win any woman.
This is the way, and be sure to dislike all, but her you design for; be scarce civil to any of the sex besides.
That's my meaning, But to her that I mean my prey, all her slave; she shall be my Deity; and her opinion my religion.
And while you sad it thus to one, I'll talk freer then a pri∣viledg'd fool, and swear as unreasonably as losing Gamesters, and abuse thee for thinking to reclaim a woman by thy love, call them all bowls thrown that will run where they will run, and Lovers like fools run after them, Crying, Rub, and fly, for me; I believe none fair, none handsome, none honest, but the kind.
We must make the Captain of our Plot, lest he betray us; this will gain us some revenge upon the Lovers to whom I grudge the Wenches, not that I believe they're worth half the cost they pay for them; and we may talk, but it is not our opinion can make them happier, or miserable.
Jolly, Will, where hast thou been? We had such sport with the Parson of our Town, he's married this morning to Wanton.
Who? the Captains Wench? he's in a good humour then; as you love mirth, let's find him, I have news to blow his rage with, and twill be mirth to us, to see him divided betwixt the several causes of his anger, and lose himself in his rage while he disputes, which is the greater; your opinion, Gentlemen; is this, or his Wench, the greater loss? 
What hast thou there? Pearl! they're false, I hope.
Why do you hope so?
Because I am thy friend, and would be loath to have thee hanged for stealing.
I will not swear they are honestly come by; but I'll be sworn, there's neither force nor theft in it.
Prithee, speak out of Riddles, here's none but your Friends.
Faith, take it, you have heard the Captain brag of an old
Lady, which he thinks he keeps close in a Box; but I know where hangs a key can let a friend in, or so: From her, my brace of worcester∣this, whose wits are dulled with plenty, this morning, with three good words, and four good deeds, I earned this toy.
The mirth yet, we will all share; I am in pain till we sind him, that we may vex his wit that he presumes so much on.
Let's go, let's go, I will desire him to let me see his Wench; I will not understand him if he says she's gone.
I'll beg of him, for old acquaintance sake, to let me see his old Lady.
Hark, I hear his voice.—
Which way?
The Game plays it self; begin with him, Ned, while we talk, as if we were busy, we will take our Q.
When I put off my hat.
'sBlood, I thought you had been sunk, I have been hunt∣ing you these four hours. Death, you might ha left word where you went; and not put me to hunt like Tom Fool, it is well you are at London, where you know the way home.
Why in choler? We have been all this while searching you; come, this is put on to divert me for claiming your promise, I must see the Wench.
You cannot a dad, a dad you cannot.
I did not think you would have refused such a kindness.
What's that?
Nothing, a toy, he refuses to show me his Wench.
The Devil he do's; what have we been thus long Com∣rades, and had all things in common, and must we now come to have common Wenches particular? I say, thou shalt see her, and lye with her too, if thou wilt.
What? in thy dumps, Brother, call to thy aid thy two edged wit; the Captain sad? it is prophetic, I'd as live have dreamt of Pearl, or the loss of my teeth; yet if he be musty, I'll warrant thee, Ned, I'll help thee to a bout; I know his Cloak, his long Cloak that hides her; I am acquainted with the Parson, he shall befriend thee.
It is very well, Gentlemen; but none of you have seen her yet?
Yes, but we have, By thy self, by thy anger, which is now bigger then thou; By chance we crossed her, coming from Church, leading in her hand the Parson, to whom she swore she was this day married.
And our friendships were now guiding us to find thee out, to comfort thee after the treachery of thy Levite.
Come, bear it like a man, there are more Wenches, What hast thou spied?— 
His Pearl, I believe.
Gentlemen, I see you are merry; I'll leave you; I must go a little way, to enquire about a business.
Has got a sore-eye, I think.
I will only ask one Question, and return.
No faith, stay, and be satisfied.
Do, good Brother, for I believe there is no question that you now would ask, but here's an Oracle can resolve you.
Are those Pearl true?
Yes?
And did not you steal them?
No.
Nor he did not buy them with ready money; But took them upon Mortgage of himself to an old Lady.
Dwelling at the sign of the Buck in Broad-street; are you satisfied, or must I play the Oracle still?
No, no, I am satisfied.
Like Jealous men, that take their wives at it, are you not?
Well, very well, it is visible, I am abused on all hands; But Gentlemen, why all against me?
To let you see your Wit's mortal, and not proof a∣against all.
The Parson hath shot it through with a Jest.
Gentlemen, which of you, faith, had a hand in that?
Faith, none; only a general Joy, to find the Captain over reached.
But do you go sharers in the Profit, as well as in the Jest?
No faith, the Toy's mine own.
They are very fine, and you may afford a good penny worth, will you sell them?
Sell them? I, whore's a Chapman?
Here, I'll purchase them.
Thou? No, no, I have barred thee, By and Mayn, for I am resolved not to fight for them; that excludes thy purchase by the sword; and thy wench has proved such a loss, in thy last Adventure of Wit, that I'm afraid, it will spoil thy credit that way too.
Gentlemen, as a Friend, let me have the refusal, set your price.
Hoe's serious.
Leave fooling.
Why if thou coldest buy them, what would thou do with them.
They're very fair Ones, let me see them, me-thinks they should match very well with these.
These, which?
Which?
They are true.
Yes, But not earned with a pair of stolen verses, of, I was not born till now, this my first night, and so forsooth; nor given as a Charm against lust.
What means all this?
What? why it is truth, and it means to shame the Devil; by this good day, he repeats the same words with which I gathered these Pearls.
Why then we have two to laugh at.
And all Friends hereafter, let's fool altogether.
Gentlemen with the fine Wits, and my very good Friends do you, or you, or he think I'll keep you Company, to make you laugh, but that I draw my honey from you too?
Come, come, the Captain's in the right.
Yes, yes, the Captain knows it, and dares tell you, your Wit, your Fortune, and his Face, are but my Ploughs; and I would have my fine Monsieur know, who, in spite of my Counsel, will be finer then his Mistress, and appears before her so curiously built she dares not play with him for fear of spoiling him; and to let him know the truth I speak, To his fair hands I present this letter, but withal give him to understand, the Contents belong to me. 
The Pearl are sent to me.
I deny that, unless you prove you sent me; for the Letter begins, Sir, this noble Gentleman, the bearer, whom you are pleased to make the messenger of your love, and so forth; And now you should do well to enquire for that noble Gentleman, and take an Account of him how he has laid out your Love, and it may be he will return you Pearl for it; and now Gentlemen, I dare propose a peace, at least a Cessation of Wit (but what is defensive) till such time as the Plot which is now in my head be effected, in which you have all your shares.
So she knows I have not the Pearl, I am content.
She'll quickly find that, when she see's you come not to night, according to my appointment, and hear's I have sold the Pearl.
Here then cease our Offensive War.
I'll give you Counsel worth two Ropes of Pearl.
But the Wench, how came the Parson to get her?
Faith it is hard to say which laboured most, he, or I, to make that Match, but the knave did well; There it is (if you as∣sist) I mean to lay the Scene of your mirth to night, for I am not yet fully revenged upon the Rogue; for that I know him miserable is nothing, till he believe so too; Wanton and I have laid the Plot.
Do you hold Correspondence?
Correspondence? I tell thee the plots we laid to draw him on would make a Comedy.
Sir, the Ladies stay Dinner.
And as we go I'll tell you all the story, and after Dinner, be free from all Engagements, as we promised thee; and follow but your directions, I'll warrant you mirth and a pretty Wench.
Agreed, any thing that breeds mirth is welcome.
Not a word at the Widows, let them go on quietly, and steal their Wedding too.
I heard a Bird sing, as if it were concluded amongst the Couples.
They have been long about it; my Couze is a girl de∣serves more haste to her Bed, he has arrived there by Carriers Journeys.
But that I hate wooing, by this good day, I like your
Aunt so well and her humour she should scarce be thrown away upon Pale-face, that has sighed her into a Wedding Ring, and will but double her Jointure.
Why I, thus it should be, pray let us make them the Seat of the war all Dinner, and continue united and true among our selves, then we may defy all foreign danger.
And with full Bowls let us crown this peace, and sing, Wit, without war, no Mirth doth bring.
WAs she deaf to your report?
Yes, yes. 
And ugly, her Abigail, she had her say too?
Yes, yes.
And do you walk here biting your Nails: do you think I'll be satisfied with such a way of righting me?
What would have me do?
Have you no Gall? be abused and laughed at by a dull Captain, that a strict Muster would turn Fool? you had Wit, and could rail, when I offended you, and none so sudden, none so la∣rible, none so sure in his Revenge, when I displease you.
Something I'll do.
Do it then, or I shall curse that ever I saw you Death, let the sign of my Lady, an out of fashion whore, that has paid for sin, ever since yellow starch and wheel Fardingales were cried down, let her Abuse me, and say nothing? if this passes.
As Christ bless me, but I did (sweet heart:) and if it were not Church livings are mortal, and they are always hitting me in the teeth with a man of your Coat, she should find I am no Church man within, nor Mr. Parson but in my Coat; Come to Dinner, and after Dinner I'll do something.
I shall do something will vex some body.
Will you please to come to Dinner? the Company stays.
Come, let's go in.
No, I must walk a little to digest this breakfast, the guests else will wonder to see I am troubled.
Come, let this day pass in Mirth, spite of mischief, for lucks sake.
I'll follow you, and do what I can to be merry.
Why, he stands already.
Peace, let me alone, I'll make him Jostle, like the Millers Mare, and stand like the Dun Cow, till thou may milk him.
Pray break him of his miserableness, it is one of the chief Exceptions I have against him; he reared a puppy once, till it was ten days old, with three hap' worth of milk, and then with his own Dagger slew it, and made me dress it: blessed my self to see him eat
it, and he bid me beg the Litter, and swore it was sweeter and wholesomer then sucking Rabbits, or London Pigs, which he called Belmens issue.
Hark, he calls me, we must humour him a little, he'll  rebel else.
YOu re welcome all, but especially Master Jolly; no reply, with I thank your Ladyship.
I beseech you, Sir, let us never be better acquainted.
I shall endeavour, Lady, and fail in nothing that is in my  Jolly power to dis-oblige you; for there is none more ambitious of your ill Opinion then I.
I rejoice at it, for the less Love, the better welcome still.
And as ever you had an ounce of Love for the Widow, be not Friends among your selves.
Aunt, though we were at strife when we were alone, yet now we unite like a Politic State against the common Enemy.
The common Enemy, what is that?
Women, and Lovers in general.
Nay, then we have a party Niece, claim; quickly, now is the time, according to the Proverb; Keep a thing seven years, and then if thou hast no use on it throw't away.
Agreed, let's challenge our Servants; by the Love they have professed, they cannot in honour refuse to join with us; and see where they come.—
Sir, tic done.
Be secret and grave, I'll warrant our design will take as we can wish.
Sweet Mistress Pleasant.
Servant Sad.
Madam.
We are threatened to have a War waged against us, will you not second us?
With these youths we'll do enough, Madam.
I'll swear my Servant gave hit for hit this morning, as if he had been a Master in the Noble Science of Wit.
Mine laid about him with spik and span new Arguments, not like the same Man, his old sayings and Presidents laid by.
Thus armed, then, we'll stand and defy them.
Whore's your Points, sure Aunt, this should be your
Wedding day, for you have taken the Man for better for worse.
No, Nephew, this will not prove the day that we shall either give or take a Ring.
Hang me, if I know you can go back again with your Honour.
Or in Justice refuse him Liberty, that has served out his time; either marry him or provide for him, for he is maimed in your service.
Why Servant Sad? you'll arm; my Nephew has thrown the first dart at you.
Hast hit, hast hit?
No, Captain, it was too wide.
Too wide? Marry he's an ill Marks-man that shoots wider then a Widow.
We are both in one hole, Captain; but I was loath to venture my Opinion, lest her Ladyship should think I was angry; for I have a good mind to fall upon the Widow.
You're a constant Man, Master Jolly; you have been in that mind this twelve-months day.
You are in the right, Madam; she has it to show under his hand, but she will not come in the List with him again; she threw him the last year.
Come, shall we eat Oysters? Who's there? call for some Wine, Master Jolly; you are not warm yet, pray be free, you are at home.
Your Ladyship is merry.
You do not take it ill, to have me assure you you are at home here?
Such another invitation (though in jest) will take away Master Sadds stomach. 
No, faith, Ned, though she should take him, it will not take away my stomach; my Love is so fixed I may wish my wishes, but she shall never want them to wait upon hers.
A Traitor, bind him, has pulled down a side; profess your Love thus public?
I by my faith, continue Master Sad, give it out you Love, and call it a new Love, a Love never seen before, we'll all come to it as your Friends.
Gentlemen, still I Love; and if she to whom I thus sacri∣fice will not reward it, yet the worst Malice can say, is, I was un∣fortunate and misfortunate; not false made me so.
In what Chapter shall we find this written, and what verse? you should preach with a Method, Master Sad.
Gentlemen, if ever he spoke so much dangerous sense before (either of Love or Reason) hang me.
Madam, my Love is no news where you are; Know, your scorn has made it public; and though it could gain no return from you; yet others have esteemed me for the Faith and Con∣stance I have paid here.
Did not I foretell you of his Love? I foresaw this danger,
shall I never live to see Wit and Love dwell together?
I am but a poor Soldier, and yet never reached to the Honour of being a Lover; yet from my own observations, Master Sad, take a Truth; it is a folly to believe any Woman loves a Man for being constant to another, they dissemble their hearts only; and hate a Man in Love worse then a Wencher.
And they have Reason; for if they have the grace to be kind, he that loves the Sex may be theirs.
When your constant Lover, if a Woman have a mind to him, and be blessed with so much grace to discover it; He, out of the noble mistake of Honour hates her for it, and tells it per∣chance, and preaches Reason to her Passion, and cries, miserable Beauty, to be so unfortunate as to inhabit in so much frailty.
This counsel makes her hate him more then she loved before; These are troubles, those that love are subject to, while we look on and laugh, to see both thus slaved while we are free.
My prayers still shall be, Lord deliver me from Love.
It is Plague, Pestilence, Famine, Sword, and sometimes sudden death.
Yet I love, I must love, I will love, and I do love.
In the present tense.
No more of this Argument, for Loves sake.
By any means, Madam, give him leave to love, and you are resolved to walk tied up in your own Arms, with your Love as visible in your Face, as your Mistresses colours in your Hat; that any Porter at Charing-Cross may take you like a Letter at the Carriers, and having read the superscription, deliver Master Sad to the fair hands of Mistress or my Lady such a one, lying at the sign of the hard heart.
And she, if she has wit (as I believe she hath) will scarce pay the Post for the Packet.
Treason, how now Niece, join with the Enemy?
A health, Ned, what shall I call it? 
To Master Sad, he needs it that avows himself a Lover.
Gentlemen, you have the Advantage, the Time, the Place, the Company; But we may meet when your wits shall not have such advantage as my Love.
No more of Love, I am so sick on it.
By your Pardon, Mistress, I must not leave Love thus un∣guarded, I vow my self his follower.
Much good may Love do him, give me a Glass of Wine here; Will, let them keep company with the blind Boy, give us his Mother, and let them preach again; hear that will, he has good luck, persuades me it is an ugly sin to lie with a handsome Woman.
A pox upon my Nurse, she frighted me so when I was young with stories of the Devil, I was almost fourteen ever I could prevail with Reasons to unbind my Reason, it was so slaved to Faith and Conscience; she made me believe Wine was an evil spy∣rit,
and Fornication was like the Whore of Babylon, a fine face, but a Dragon under her Pety-coats; and that made me have a mind to peep under all I met since.
Fie, fie, for shame, do not talk so; are you not ashamed to glory in sin, as if variety of women were none.
Madam, we do not glory in Fornication; and yet I thank God, I cannot live without a woman.
Why, do's your Ladyship think it a sin to lye with variety of handsome women? if it be, would I were the wicked'st man in the company.
You have been marked for an indifferent sinner; that way Captain.
Who I? No faith, I was a fool, but and I were to begin again, I would not do as I have done, I kept one; but if ever I keep another, Hang me; nor would I advise any friend of mine to do it.
Why, I am sure it is a provident and safe way; a man may always be provided and sound.
Fie upon this discourse.
Those considerations betrayed me, A pox; it is a dull sin to travel, like a Carriers-horse, always one Road.
Fie, Captain, repent for shame, and Marry.
Your Ladyship would have said, Marry, and repent; No, though it be not the greatest pleasure, yet it is better then marry∣ing; for when I am weary of her, my inconstancy is termed ver∣tu, and I shall be said to turn to grace. Beware of women, for better for worse; for our wicked nature, when her sport is lawful, cloys straight; therefore, rather then Marry keep a Wench.
Faith, he is in the right, for it is the same thing in number and kind; and then the sport is quickened, and made poignant with sin.
Yet it is a fault, faith, and I'll persuade all my friends from it; especially here where any innovation is dangerous; it was the newness of the sin that made me suffer in the opinion of my friends; and I was condemned by all sorts of people; not that I sinned, but that I sinned no more.
Why I, had thou been wicked in fashion, and privily lain with every body, their guilt would have made them protect thee; so that to be more wicked is to be innocent at lest safe; A wicked world, Lord help us.
But being particular to her, and not in love, nor subject to it, taking an Antidote every morning, before I venture into those in∣fectious places where Love Beauty dwells; this enraged the My∣den, Beauties of the Time, who thought it a prejudice to their Beauties to see me careless, and securely pass by their conquering eyes; my name being found amongst none of those that decked their Triumphs. But from this it is easy to be safe, for their Pride will not let them love, nor my leisure me. Then the old Ladies that pay for their pleasures; they, upon the news, beheld me with their natural frowns, despairing when their money could not pre∣vail;
and hated me when they heard that I for my pleasure would pay as large as they.
Gentlemen, take warning; a Fee from every man; For by this day, there's strange counsel in this confession.
Captain, you forget to pledge Mr. Careless; here, will you not drink a cup of wine, who's there? Bring the Oysters.
Yes, Madam, if you please.
Proceed, Captain.
Fie, Mr. Wild, are you not ashamed to encourage him to this filthy discourse.
A glass of wine then; and I'll drink to all the new marri∣ed Wives that grieve to think, at what rate their Fathers purchase a little husband. These when they lie thirsting for the thing they paid so dear for.
These, methinks, should be thy friends, and point thee out as a man for them.
Yes, till the faithful Nurse cries; Alas, Madam, he keeps such a one, he has enough at home; then she swells with envy and rage against us both, calls my Mistress ugly, common, unsafe; and me, a weak secure fool.
These are strange truths, Madam.
I, I, but these Oysters are a better jest.
But she's abused that will let such reason tame her desire, and a fool in Loves School; else she would not be ignorant that va∣riety is such a friend to love, that he which rises a sunk coward from the Ladies bed would find new fires at her Maids; nor ever yet did the man want fire, if the woman would bring the fuel.
For Gods sake, leave this discourse.
The Captain has a mind we should eat no Oysters.
Aunt, we came to be merry, and we will be merry, and you shall stay it out; Proceed Captain.
Fie Captain, I'm ashamed to hear you talk thus: Marry, then you will have a better opinion of women.
Marry! yes, this knowledge will invite me, it is a good encouragement, is it not think you? What is your opinion? were not these Marriages made in Heaven? By this good day, all the world is mad, and makes haste to be fooled, but we four: And I hope there's none of us believes there has any Marriages been made in Heaven, since Adam.
By my faith, it is thought the Devil gave the Ring there to.
Nephew, I'll swear I'll be gone.
Hold her, Ned, she goes not yet; there's a fourth kind of wo∣men that concerns her more then all the rest, Ass signum—She is  one of those who, clothed in Purple, triumph over their dead hus∣bands; these will be caught at first sight, and at first sight must be caught; it is a Bird that must be shot flying, for they never sit; if a man delay they cool, and fall into considerations of Jointure, and friends opinion; in which time, if she hears thou keep a Wench, thou had better be a Beggar in her opinion; for then her Pride, it may be, would betray her to the vanity of setting up a proper
man; (as they call it) but for a Wencher no Argument prevails with your Widow; for she believes they have spent too much that way, to be able to pay her due benevolence.
As I live, I'll be gone if you speak one word more of this uncivil subject.
Captain, let me kiss thy cheek, for that Widow; you un∣derstand this, Widow? I say no more; Here Captain, here's to thee; as it goes down, A pox of care.
Jesus! Mr. Jolly, have you no observations of the Court, that are so affected with this of the Town?
Faith, they say, there's good sport there, sometimes.
Mr. Jolly is afraid to let us partake of his knowledge.
No faith, Madam.
By this drink, if he stay till I have eaten a few more, I'll describe it.
What should I say, it is certain the Court is the bravest place in the Kingdom, for sport, if it were well looked to, and the Game preserved fair; But as it is, a man may sooner make a set in the Strand. And it will never be better, whilst your divine Lovers inhabit there.
Let the King make me Master of the Game.
And admit us Laiety-lovers.
I would he would; for as it is, there's no hopes amongst the Ladies; besides, it is such an example to see a King and Queen good, Husband and Wife, that to be kind will grow out of fashion.
Nay, that's not all, for the women grow malicious, be∣cause they are not courted; nay, they bred all the last mischiefs, and called the Kings chastity a neglect of them.
Thou art in the right; An Edward, or a Harry, with seven Queens in Buckram, that Haught among the men, and Stroked the wo∣men, are the Monarchs they wish to bow to; they love no tame Princes, but Lyons in the Forest.
Why, and those were properly called the Fathers of their People, that were indeed akin to their Nobility; now they wear out their youth and beauty, without hope of a monumental Bal∣lad, or Trophy of a Lie-bell that shall hereafter point at such a Lord, and cry that is the royal Son of such a one.
And these were the ways that made them powerful at home; for the City is a kind of tame Beast; you may lead her by the horns any whither, if you but tickle them in the ear sometimes. Queen Bess, of famous memory, had the trick on it; and I have heard them say, In Eighty eighty, ever I was born, as well I can re∣member, she rode to Tilbury on that bonny Beast, the Mayor.
I would I might counsel him; I'd so reform the Court.
Never too soon; for now, when a stranger comes in, and spies a Covey of a Beauties, would make a Falconer unhood, be∣fore he can draw his Leash he is warned that's a marked Partridge; and that, and every he, has by their example a particular she.
By this light, the six fair Maids stand like the Working∣days in the Almanac; one with A scored upon her breast, that is
as much to say, I belong to such a Lord; the next with B for an elder Brother; C for such a Knight; D possessed with melancholy, and at her breast you may knock an hour ever you get an answer, and then she'll tell you there's no lodging there; she has a constant fellow Courtier that has taken up all her heart to his own use: in short, All are disposed of, but the good Mother; and she comes in like the Sabbath, at the weeks end; and I warrant her make any one rest that comes at her.
I marry; but if she were like the Jews Sabbath, it were somewhat; but this looks like a Broken Commandment, that has had more work done upon her, then all the week besides.
And what think you, is not this finely carried? you that are about the King, counsel him, if he will have his sport fair, he must let the Game be free, as it has been in former Ages; then a stranger that has wit, good means, and handsome clothes, no sooner enters the privy Chamber, and beat about with three graceful legs, but he spring a Mistress that danced as well as he, Sung better, as free as fair; those at first sight could speak, for wit is always acquainted: These fools must be akin ever they can speak; and now the friends make the bargain, and they go to Bed ever they know why.
Faith, he's in the right, you shall have a Buzzard now hover and beat after a pretty Wench, till she is so weary of him she's forced to take her Bed for covert, and find less danger in being trussed then in flying.
And what becomes of all this putter, after he has made them sport for one night, to see him towse the Quarry, he carries her into the Country, and there they two fly at one another till they are weary.
And all this mischief comes of Love and Constancy; we shall never see better days till there be an Act of Parliament against it; Enjoining Husband not to Till their Wives, but change and lay them fallow.
A pox, the women will never consent to it; they'll be till'd to death first.
Gentlemen, you are very bold with the sex.
Faith, Madam, it is our care of them; why you see they are married at fourteen, yield a Crop and a half, and then dye, it is merely their love that destroys'em; for if they get a good hus∣bondsman, the poor things yield their very hearts.
And do you blame their loves, Gentlemen?
No, not their love, but their discretion; let them love, and do, a Gods name; but let them do with discretion.
But how will you amend this?
Instead of two Beds and a Physician; I'd have the State prescribe two Wives and a Mistress.
Ho! it will never be granted; the State is made up of old men, and they find work enough with one.
We will petition the lower House, there are young men, and (if it were but to be factious) would pass it, if they thought
the upper house would Cross it; Besides, they ought to do it, Death! they provide against cutting down old Trees, and pre∣serving high-ways and Post-horses, and let pretty Wenches run to decay?
Why may it not come within the Statute of Depopulation? As I live, the State ought to take care of those Pretty creatures; Be you Judge, Madam; Is it not a sad sight to see a rich young Beauty, with all her Innocence and Blossoms on, subject to some rough rude Fellow, that ploughs her; and esteems and uses her as a chattel, till she is so lean, a man may find as good Grass upon the Common, where it may be she'll sit coughing with sunk Eyes, so weak that a Boy (with a Dog) that can but whistle, may keep a score of them?
You are strangely charitable to Our Sex, on a sudden.
I know not what they are; but for my part, I'll be a Tray∣tor ere I'll look on, and see Beauty go thus to wrack; it is enough, custom has made us suffer them to be enclosed; I am sure, they were created common, and for the use of Man, and not intended to be subject to jealousy and choler, or to be bought or sold, or let for term of lives or years, as they are now, or else sold at Out-crys; Oh! Yes; who'le give most take her.
Why do not some of you, Excellent men, Marry, and mend all these Errors, by your good Example?
Because we want Fortunes, to buy rich wives, or keep poor ones, and be loath to get Beggars, or whores, as well as I love 'em.
Why, are all their Children so that have no fortune think you?
No, not all; I have heard of Whittington and his Cat, and o∣theirs, that have made Fortunes by strange means; But I scarce believe my Son would rise from Hope, a half penny, and a Lambs∣skin; And the Wenches commonly having more Wit &amp; Beauty then Money, foreseeing small Portions, grow sad, and read Romances, till their Wit spy some unfortunate merit like their own, without money too, and they two sigh after one another, till they grow my∣stereos in Colours, and become a Proverb for their constancy; and when their Love has worn out the cause, marry in the end a new Couple, then grown ashamed of the knowledge they so long hunted, at length part, by consent, and vanish into Abigail and Governor.
Well Gentlemen, Excuse me for this One time; and if ever I invite you to Dinner again, punish me with such another discourse, in the mean time let's go in and dine, meat stays for us.
Faith Madam, we were resolved to be merry; We have not met these three years till to day, and at the Bear we meant to have dined; and since your Ladyship would have Our Company, you must pardon Our humour; here Mistress Sad, here's the Wi∣dows health to you.
NEphew, how do you dispose of your self this afternoon?
We have a design we must pursue, which will rid you of all this troublesome Company; and we'll make no Excuse, be∣cause you peeped into our privacies to day.
Your humble servant, Ladies; Gentlemen, we'll leave you to pursue your fortunes.
Farewell Widow, may thou live unmarried till thou run'st away with thy self.
No, no, When that day comes, Command the humblest of your Servants.
Farewell Aunt; sweet Mistress Pleasant, I wish you good fortune.
Farewell, farewell Gentlemen; Niece, now if we could be rid of these troublesome Lovers too, we would go see a Play.
Rid of them? Why, they are but now in season; as I live,  I would do as little to give mine content as any she in Town, and yet I do not grudge him the happiness of carrying me to a Play.
I, but the world will talk, because they pretend; and then we shall be sure to meet my Nephew there, and his wild Company, and they will laugh to see us together.
Who will you have? Tym the Butler, or Formal your Gentleman Usher? I would take Philip the foreman of the shop as soon.
Let's mask our selves, and take Secret, and go alone by water.
Yes, and follow her like one of my Aunts of the Suburbs; it is a good way to know what you may yield in a Market; for I'll undertake, there are those shall bid for you before the play will be done.
As I live, Madam, Mistress Pleasant is in the right; I had such a kindness offered me once, and I came to a price with him in knavery; and hang me, if the Rogue was not putting the earnest of his affection into my hand.
Let's go to the Glass-house then.
I'll go to a Play with my Servant, and so shall you; hang Opinion, and we'll go to the Glass-house afterwards; it is too hot to Sup early.
Pray Madam go, they say it is a fine Play, and a Knight writ it.
Pray let Secret prevail, I'll propose it to the Lovers; in the mean time go you, and bid the Coachman make ready the Coach.
Alas, Madam, hoe's sick, poor fellow, and gone to bed, he could not wait at Dinner.
Sick?
Why, see how all things work for the young men, either their Coach, or a Foot; Mr. Constant, what think you of seeing a Play this afternoon? is it not too hot to venture, this Infectious time?
Fie, Madam, there's no danger, the Bill decreased Twenty last week.
I swear, they say, it is a very good Play to day.
Shall we go, Niece?
Faith it is hot, and there's no body but we.
Do's that hinder? pray Madam, grudge us not the favour of venturing your self in Our company.
Come, leave this Ceremony, I'll go in, and put on my Mask; Secret shall bring you yours;
No, I'll go, and put it on within.
BY this day, you have nettled the Widow.
The Captain neglected his dinner for his mirth, as if he had forgot to eat.
When did he oversee his drinking so?
Gentlemen, still it is my fortune to make your worships Merry.
As I live, Captain, I subscribe, and am content to hold my wit as Tenant to thee; and to night I'll invite you to Supper, where it shall not be lawful to speak till thou has victual'd thy Man of War.
Shall's be merry? what shall we have?
Half a score dishes of meat, choose them your self.
Provide me then the Chines fried, and the Salmon Cal∣ver'd, a Carp, and black sauce, Red-Dear in the blood, and an Assembly of Woodcocks, and Jack-snipes, so fat you would think they had their winding Sheets on; And upon these, as their Pages, let me have wait your Sussex Wheat-Ear, with a Feather in his Cap; Over all which let our Countrey-man, General Chyne of Beef, Command: I hate your French pottage, that looks as the Cook maid had more hand in it then the Cook.
I'll promise you all this.
And let me alone to Cook the Fish.
You Cook it? No, no, I left an honest fellow in Town, when I went into Italy, Seignior Ricardo Ligones, one of the ancient house of the Armenian Ambassadors; if he be alive he shall be our Cook.
Is he so Excellent at it?
Excellent? You shall try, you shall try; Why, I tell you, I saw him once dress a shooing-horn, and a Joiners apron, that the Company left Pheasant for it.
A Shooing-horn?
Yes, a shooing-horn; marry, there was Garlic in the Sauce.
Is this all you would have?
This, and a Bird of Paradise, to entertain the rest of the night, and let me alone to Cook her.
A Bird of Paradise, what's that?
A Girl of Fifteen, smooth as Satin, White as her Sunday Apron, Plump, and of the first down: I'll take her with her guts in her Belly, and warm her with a Country dance or two, then pluck her, and lay her dry betwixt a couple of sheets; There pour into her so much oil of Wit as will make her turn to a man, &amp; stick into her heart three corns of whole love, to make her taste of what she is doing, then having strewed a man all over her, shut the door, and leave us, we'll work our selves into such a Sauce as you can never surfeit on, so Poignant and yet no Hogough; Take heed of a hogough, your Onion and woman make the worst sauce; This shook together by an English Cook (for your French seasoning spoils many a woman) and there's a Dish for a King.
For the first Part, I'll undertake.
But this for Supper; Capt. No more of this now; This af∣ternoon, as you are true to the Petticoat, observe your Instructions, and meet at Neds house in the Evening.
We will not fail.
I must write to Wanton, to know how things stand at home, and to acquaint her how we have thrived with the Old Lady to day.
Whither will you go to write?
To thy house, it is hard by, there's the Fleece.
Do, and in the mean time I'll go home and dispatch a little business, and meet you.
Make haste then.
Where shall I meet you?
Whither shall we go till it be time to attend the design.
Let's go to Court for an hour.
Do, I'll meet you at the Queens side.
No, prithee, we are the Mounsieurs new come Over; and if we go fine they will laugh at Us, and think we believe Our selves so; if not, then they will abuse our clothes, and swear we went into France only to have our cloaks cut shorter.
Will you go see a Play?
Do, and thither I'll come to you, if it be none of our Gentlemen Poets, that excuse their writings with a Prologue that professes they are no Scholars.
On my word this is held the best penned of the time, and he has writ a very good Play; By this Day, it was extremely applauded.
Do's he write Plays by the day; Indeed a man would ha judged him a labouring Poet.
A Labouring Poet? by this hand hoe's a Knight; upon my recommendation venture to see it; hang me if you be not extreme∣lie well satisfied.
A Knight and write Plays? it may be, but it is strange to us; so they say there are other Gentlemen Poets without Land or Latin; this was not ordinary; prithee when was he knighted?
In the North; the last great knighting, when it was Gods great Mercy we were not all Knights.
I'll swear, they say, there are Poets that have more Men in Liveries, then Books in their studies.
And what think you, Gentlemen, are not these things to start a Man? I believe it is the first time you have found them lie at the sign of the Page, Foot-men and gilded Coaches; They were wont to lodge at the thin Cloak, they and their Muses made up the Family; And thence sent Scenes to their Patrons, like Boys in at windows, and one would return with a Doublet, another with a pair of Breeches, a third with a little ready Money; which, to∣gether with their credit with a company, in three Terms you rare∣lie saw a Poet repaired.
This truth no body denies.
Prithee let us resolve what we shall do, lest we meet with some of them: for it seems they swarm, and I fear nothing like a Dedication, though it be but of himself; For I must hear him say more then either I deserve or he believes; I hate that in a Poet, they must be dull, or all upon all Subjects; so that they can oblige none but their Muse.
I perceive by this you will not see the Play; what think you of going to Sims, to Bowls, till I come?
Yes, if you will go to see that Comedy; but there is no reason we should pay for our coming in, and Act too; like some whose interest in the Timber robs them of their Reason, and they run as if they had stolen a Bias.
Resolve what you will do, I am contented.
Let's go walk in the Spring-garden.
I'll do it for Company, but I had as live be rid in the Horse-market, as walk in that fools fair; where neither wit nor money is, nor sure to take up a Wench; there's none but honest Women.
A pox on it, what should we do there? let's go and cross the Field to Pikes, her kitchen is cool Winter and Summer.
I like that motion well, but we have no time, and I hate to do that business by half; after Supper, if you will, we'll go and make a night on it.
Well, I must go write, therefore resolve of somewhat; shall I propose an indifferent place where it is probable we shall all meet.
Yes.
Go you before to the Devil, and I'll make haste after.
Agreed, we shall be sure of good Wine there and in Fresco, for he is never without Patent snow.
Patent snow, what doth that project hold?
Yes, faith, and now there is a Commission appointed for Toasts against the next Winter.
Marry, they are wise, and fore-saw the Parliament, and were resolved their Monopolies should be no grievance to the People.
Farewell, you will be sure to meet.
Yes, yes.
BId them ply him close and flatter him, and rail upon the old Lady and the Captain; and, do you hear, give him some hints to begin the story of his life, do it handsomely, and you shall see how the Sack will clip his tongue.
I warrant you, I'll fit him.
When he is in his discourse, leave him and come down into the Parlour, and steal away his box with the false Rings that stands by his bed-side; I have all his little Plate here already.
Make you haste, I'll warrant you I'll dress him.
SIR, the Lady Love-all passed by even now.
The Lady Love-all? which way went she.
To the rich Lady the Widow, where your Worship dined.
It is no matter; here, carry this Letter, and bring an an∣swer to the Devil quickly; and tell her we'll stay there till the time be fit for the design.
JAck, How goes the world? Bring us some bottles of the best Wine.
You shall, Sir; your Worship is welcome into England.
Why look you, who says a Drawer can say nothing, but anon, anon, Sir? score a quart of Sack in the half-moon.
Your Worship is merry; but I'll fetch you that, Sir, shall speak Greek, and make your Worship prophecy, you drank none such in your journey.
Do it then, and make a hole in this Angel thou moist creep through; who is it that peepes, a Fiddler? Bring him by the  Ears.
A Taylor, an't like your Worship.
A Taylor? hast thou a stout Faith?
I have had, an't like your Worship; But now I am in despair.
Why then thou art damned; go, go home, and throw thy self into thine own Hell, it is the next way to the other.
I hope your Worship is not displeased.
What dost do here? a Taylor without faith, dos't come to take measure of ours?
No, I come to speak with one Master Jolly, a Courtier, a very fine spoken Gentleman, and a just Counter, but one of the worst pay-masters in the world.
As thou love me, let's keep him here till he comes, and make him valiant with Sack that he may urge him till he beats  him; we shall have the sport, and be revenged upon the Rogue for dunning a Genleman in a Tavern.
I'll charge him: Here drink, poor fellow, and stay in the next room till he comes.
I thank your Worship, but I am fasting; and if it please your Worship to call for a dozen of Manchets that I may eat a crust first, then I'll make bold with a glass of your Sack.
Here, here, drink in the mean time, fetch him some bread.
Will your Worship have me drink all this vessel of Sack?
Yes, yes, off with it, twill do you no harm. 
Why do you not take some Order with that Jolly to make him pay thee?
I have petitioned him often, but can do no good.
A pox upon him, petition him, his heart is hardened to ill, threaten to arrest him; nothing but Sergeant can touch his Con∣science.
Truly, Gentlemen, I have reason to be angry, for he uses me ill, when I ask him for my money. 
Where is Master Wild, and Master Careless?
I hear his voice.
Let the Coach stay. How now, who would he speak with?
Do not you know?
Yes, and be you Judge if the Rogue does not suffer deser∣vedly; I have bid him any time this twelve month but send his wife, and I'll pay her, and the Rogue replies, no body shall lie with his wife but himself.
Nay, if you be such a one.
No more they shall not, I am but a poor man.
By this hand, he's drunk.
Nay then, I arrest you in mine own Name at his Majesties Suit.
As I live, thou shalt not beat him.
Beat him? I'll kiss him, I'll pay him, and carry him about with me, and be at the charge of Sack to keep him in the humour.
Help, rescue, I'll have his body, no Bail shall serve. 
Sir, yonder is a Gentleman would speak with you; I do not like his followers.
What are they, Bailiffs?
Little better.
Send him up alone, and stand you ready at the Stairs feet.
How can that be?
It is the Scrivener at the Corner, pick a Quarrel with him for coming into our Company; the Drawers will be armed be∣hind them, and we will so rout the Rascals; take your swords, and let him sleep.
What Scrivener?
Crop the Brownest, he that the Ballad was made on.
What Ballad?
Have not you heard of the Scriveners Wife that brought the Black-moore from the holy Land, and made him a Brownest; and in pure charity lay with him, and was delivered of a Mag-Pie; a pied Prophet; which when the elect saw, they prophesied, if it lived, it would prove a great enemy to their Sect; for the Mid-wife cried out, it was born a Bishop, with Tippet and white-sleeves; at which the zealous Mother cried, Down with the Idol; so the Mid-wife and she in pure devotion killed it.
Killed it? what became of them?
Why, they were taken and condemned, and suffered under a Catholic Sheriff, that afflicted them with the Litany all the way from New-gate to the Gallows, which in Rog'ry he made to be set up Altar-wise too, and hanged them without a Psalm.
But how took they that breach of Privilege?
I know not, Gregory turned them off, and so they de∣scended, and became Brown-martyrs.
And is the husband at door now?
Yes, yes, but he's married again to a rich Widow at Wap∣ping, a Wench of another temper, one that you cannot please bet∣la then by abusing him; I always pick quarrels with him, that she may reconcile us, the peace is always worth a dinner, at least. Hark, I hear him.—Save you Mr. Crop, you are come in the nick to pledge a health.
No, Sir, I have other business, shall I be paid my money, or no?
Yes. 
Sir?
You asked whether you should be paid your money, or no, and I said, Yes.
Pray, Sir, be plain.
And be you so, Sir; how durst you come into this Room, and company, without leave?
Sir, I have come into good Lords company, ever now.
It may be so, but you shall either fall upon your knees,
and pledge this health, or you come no more into Lords comp∣niece, no, By these hilts.
It is Idolatry; Do, martyr me, I will not kneel, nor join  in sin with the wicked.
Either kneel, or I'll tear thy Cloak, which by the age and looks, may be that which was writ for in the time of the Primitive Church.
Pay me, and I'll wear a better; it would be honestlier done, then to abuse this, and profane the Text; a Text that shows your Bishops in those days wore no Lawn-sleeves; and you may be ashamed to protect him that will not pay his debts; The cries of the Widow will come against you for it.
Remember, Sirrah, the dinners and suppers, fat Venison and good words, I was fain to give you, Christening your Children still, by the way of Brokadge; count that charge, and how often I have kept you from fining for Sheriff, and thou art in my debt; then I am damned for speaking well of thee so often against my conscience, which you never consider.
I am an honest man, Sir.
Then ushering your wife, and Mistress Ugly her daughter, to Plays and Masques at Court; you think these courtesies deserve nothing in the hundred; it is true, they made room for themselves with their dagger Elbows; and when Spider your daughter laid about her with her breath, the Devil would not have sat near her.
You did not borrow my money with this language.
No, Sirrah; then I was fain to flatter you, and endure the familiarity of your family, and hear (nay fain sometimes to join in) the lying praises of the holy Sister that expired at Tyburn.
Do, abuse her, and be cursed; it is well known she died a  martyr; and her blood will be upon some of you, it is her Orphans money I require; and this is the last time I'll ask it, I'll find a way to get it.
Ar't serious? By that light, I'll consent, and take it for an infinite Obligation if thou wilt teach the rest of my Creditors that trick; twill save me a world of labour; For, hang me if I know how to do it.
Well, Sir, since I see your resolution, I shall make it my business.
Prithee, let's be rid of this fool.
Fool? let him pay the fool his money, and he'll be gone.
No, Sir, not a farthing; it was my business to borrow it, and it shall be yours to get it in again; nay, By this hand, I'll be feasted too, and have good words; nay, thou shalt lend me more ever thou got this again.
I'll lay my Action upon you.
Your Action you Rogue, lay two. 
Lay three for Battery; What have we here? a she Credi∣tor too? who would she speak with?
She looks as if she had trusted in her time.
Would you speak with any here, old Gentlewoman?
My business is to Mr. Jolly.
From your self, or are you but a Messenger?
My business, Sir, is from a Lady.
From a Lady? from what Lady, pray? Why so coy?
From a Lady in the Town.
Ho! ho! from a Lady in the Town; Is it possible I should have guest you came from a Lady in the Suburbs, or some Country-madam, by your riding face?
I think we have routed the Rascals. Faithful? what makes thy gravity in a Tavern?
Sport, it seems, for your saucy companions.
Ho, ho, Mull, ho; No Fury, Faithful.
It is well, Sir; my Lady presents her service to you, and hath sent you a Letter, there's my business.
Prithee, who is her Lady?
The Lady Love-all.
Oh, oh, do's she serve that old Lady? God help her.
God help her: Pray for your self, Sir, my Lady scorns your prayers.
Faithful, come hither; Prithee is thy Lady drunk?
Drunk, Sir?
I, drunk, or mad, she'd never writ this else; she requires me, here, to send back by you the Pearl she gave me this morning; which sure she'd never do if she were sober; for you know, I earned them hard.
I know? What do I know? you will not defame my Lady, will you?
By no means, this is by way of counsel; fie, give a thing, and take a thing; if he did not perform, he shall come at night, and pay his scores.
It is well, Sir; is this your return for my Ladies Favours? shall I have the Pearl, Sir?
No; and tell her it is the opinion of us all, he that opens her stinking Oyster is worthy of the Pearl.
You are a foul-mouth'd fellow, Sirrah; and I shall live to see you load a Gallows, when my Lady shall find the way to her own again.
If she miss, there are divers can direct her, you know; adieu, Faithful, do you hear? steal privately down by the back∣door, lest some knavish Boy spy thee, and call thine age, Baud.
Prithee, who is this thing?
It is my Ladies Waiting-woman, her Baud, her she Confess∣for, her self at second hand; her beginning was simple and below stairs, till her Lady finding her to be a likely promising Baud; se∣cret
as the Key at her Girdle, obedient as her thoughts, those ver∣tues raised her from the flat Peti-coat, and Kercher, to the Gorget and Bum-roll; and I remember it was good; sport at first, to see the Wench perp! axed with her Metamorphosis; she since has been in love with all the Family, and now sighs after the Levite; and if he for∣sake her too, I prophecy, a Waiting-womans curse will fall upon her, to dye old, despised, poor, and out of fashion.
Why do you not hang out a painted cloth? and take two pence a piece, and let in all the tame fools at door, those sons of wonder that now gape, and think you mad.
It is no matter what they think, madness is proper here; are not Taverns Bacchus his Temples, the place of madness, Do's not the sign of madness hang out at the door?
While we within possess our joys and cups, as full of plea∣sure as weeping Niobe's afflicted eyes were swelled with grief and tears; Blessing on the cause that made our joys thus complete; for see Plutus in our Pockets, Mars by our sides, Bacchus in our head, self-love in our hearts, and change of Virgins in our Arms, Beau∣ties whose eyes and hearts speak love and welcome; No rigid thinkers, no niggard beauties that maliciously rake up their fire in green sickness to preserve a spark that shall flame only in some dull day of Marriage; let such swear and forswear, till (of the whole Parish) they love each other least, whilst we wisely set out our cob∣webs in the most perspicuous places to catch these foolish flies.
He's in the right; dost think we retreated hither to beat a bargain for a score of Sheep, or dispute the legality of Votes, and weigh the power of Prerogative and Parliament, and club for concluding Sack, or read the Fathers here, till we grow costive, like those that have worn their suffering Elbows bare, to find a knowledge to perplex'em? A pox on such brain-breaking thoughts; avoid them, and take with me into thy hand a glass of eternal Sack, and prophecy the restoration of senses, and the fall of a Lover from grace, which our dear friend, Mr. Jolly, will prove to whom the Lady Love-all (by Faithful lately departed) sent for the Pearl you wot of.
But, I hope, he had the grace to keep them.
No, no; I'm a fool, I.
Was not my Boy here?
No, we saw him not.
A pox of the Rogue, he's grown so lasy.
Your Boy is come in just now, and called for the key of the back-door, there's women with him.
Oh! that's well, it is Wanton; I sent for her, to laugh over the story of the old Lady and her Pearl; where have you been all this while, Sirrah?
I could overtake the Coach, Sir, no sooner.
The Coach? what Coach?
The Lady Love-alls.
The Lady Love-alls? why what had you to do with her Coach?
I went to give her the Letter your worship sent her.
The Letter? what Letter?
That your worship gave me.
That I writ, at Neds house, to Wanton?
The Letter you gave me, Sir, was directed to the Lady Love-all, and she stormed like a mad-woman at the reading of it.
Why, thou wilt not beat the Boy for thy own fault? what Letter was it?
It was enough, only a relation of the Pearl, wherein she finds her self sufficiently abused to Wanton.
Now, Gentlemen, you have two to laugh at.
A pox of fooling, let's resolve what to do, there's no deny∣ing, for she has all the particulars under my hand.
You must resolve of something, for she's coming, and stayed only till the back-door was opened.
How did she know I was here?
Your worship bad me tell her, you would stay here for her.
How came this mistake?
Why, the Devil ought us a shame it seems. You know I went home to give Wanton an account how we advanced in our design; and when I was writing the superscription, I remember the Boy came in and told me the Lady Love-all passed by.
And so, it seems, you in pure mistake directed your Letter to her.
Well, resolve what you'll do with her, when she comes.
Faith, bear it like men, it is but an old Lady lost; lets re∣solve to defy her, we are sure of our Pearl; but lest we prolong the war, take the first occasion you can all to avoid the room; when she's alone, I'll try whether she'll listen to a composition.
Have you no friends in the close Committee?
Yes, yes, I am an Essex man.
Then get some of them to move, it may be voted no Letter.
I, I; and after it is voted no Letter, then vote it false, scan∣dalous and illegal, and that is in it; they have a president for it in the Danish packet, which they took from a foolish fellow, who pre∣suming upon the Law of Nations, came upon an Embassy to the King without an Order, or Pass from both houses.
Hark, I hear her coming.
Sir, I received a Letter, but by what accident I know not; for I believe it was not intended me, though the contents con∣corn me.
Madam, it is too late to deny it; is it peace or war you bring? without dispute, if war, I hang out my defiance; if peace, I yield my weapon into your hands.
Are you all unworthy? your whole sex falsehood? is it not possible to oblige a man to be loyal? this is such a treachery no age can match; apply your self with youth and wit to gain a Ladies love and friendship only to betray it? was it not enough
you commanded my fortune, but you must wrack my honour too, and instead of being grateful for that charity which still assisted your wants, strive to pay men with injuries, and attempt to make the world believe I pay to lose my fame? and then make me the  scorned subject of your Whores mirth; Base and unworthy, do you smile, false one? I shall find a time for you too, and my avenge∣ance shall find you all.
Yea, Sir; and you that had such a ready wit to proclaim my Lady, Whore and me Baud, I hope to see you load a Gallows for it.
Once again, is it peace or war?
Peace? I'll have thy blood first, Dog; whore's my Pearl?—You ought to right me, Sir, in this particular; it was to you I  sent them.
Madam, I sent not for them.
No more words; I have them, I earned them, and you paid them.
You are a foul-mouth'd fellow, Sirrah.
Peace, Wench, I scorn their slander, it cannot shake my honour; it is too weighty and too fixed for their calumny.
I'll be sworn for my part on it, I think it is a great honour; I am sure I had as much as I could carry away in ten nights, and yet there was no miss on it.
You? I think so; there's no mark of my work, you see, and yet I came after thee, and brought away loads would have sunk a Sedan-man.
By this relation she should be a woman of a great fame.
Let that consideration, with her condition, and her age, move some reverence, at least to what she was; Madam, I am sorry I cannot serve you in this particular.
I see all your mean baseness, pursue your scorn; Come, let's go, Wench, I shall find some to right my fame; and though I have lost my opinion, I have gained a knowledge how to destine∣guish of Love hereafter; and I shall scorn you and all your Sex, that have not Soul enough to value a noble Friendship.
Pray, Madam, let me speak with you.
We'll have no whispering; I said it, and I'll maintain it with my sword.
Sir, there's one without would speak with you?
With me?
No, Sir, with Master Wild.
Madam, I'll wait upon you presently.
Madam, I know my Company is displeasing to you, therefore I'll take my leave; Drawer, show me another Room? 
Oh Faithful, Faithful; I am most miserably abused, and can find no way to my Revenge.
Madam, I'll give them Rats-bane, and speedily too, ere they can tell; for that Rascal the Captain has a Tongue else, will proclaim you, and undo your Fame for ever.
I, I, my Fame, my Fame, Faithful; and if it were not for mine Honour, (which I have kept unstained to this minute) I would not care.
This it is; you will still set your affection upon every young thing; I could but tell you on it.
Who could have suspected they would have been so false in their Loves to me that have been so faithful to them.—Honest Friend, where is Master Wild?
The other Gentlemen carried him away with them?
Are they all gone then?
Yes, by this hand; These Gentlemen are quickly sa∣tisfi'd; what an ugly Whore they have got! how she states it! 
Come, let's go Wench. 
Mistress, who pays the reckoning?
What says he?
He asks me, who pays the reckoning?
Who pays the reckoning? why, what have we to do with the reckoning?
Shut the door, Dick, we'll have the reckoning before you go.
Why, good-man sawce-box, you will not make my La∣die pay for their reckoning, will you?
My Lady? a pox of her Title, she'd need of something to make her pass.
What do you say, Sirrah?
I say, the Gentlemen paid well for their sport; and I know no reason why we should lose our reckoning.
What do you take me for, my Friend?
In troth, I take you for nothing; but I would be loath to take you for that use I think they made shift with you for.
Madam, this is that Rascally Captains plot.
Patience, Patience, oh for a bite at the slaves heart. Friend, mistake me not, my name is Love-all, a Lady; send one along with me and you shall have your money.
You must pardon me, Madam, I am but a Servant; if you be a Lady pray sit in an Inner Room, and send home your Woman for the money; The sum is six pounds, and be pleased to remem∣ber the Waiters.
Go Faithful, go fetch the money; Oh Revenge, Re∣avenge: shall I lose my Honour, and have no Revenge.
BY all that a longing Bride hopes for, which I am not, I am better pleased with this Revenge then mine own plot, which takes as I could wish; I have so anointed my high Priests with Sack, that he would have confuted Bail's Priest; and now he do's
so slumber in his Ale, and calls to bed already, swears the Sun is set.
Faith, Wench, her abusing of me made me leave her for the Reckoning.
Yes, faith, they have treated her upsey Whore lain with her, told, and then pawned her.
Yes, yes, you are fine things; I wonder Women, can en∣dure you; for me, I expect you worse, and am armed for it.
Faith let's send and release her, the jest is gone far enough; as I live, I pity her.
Pity her? hang her, and rid the Country of her, she is a thing wears out her limbs as fast as her clothes, one that never goes to bed at all, nor sleeps in a whole skin, but is taken to pieces like a Motion, as if she were too long; she should be hanged for offering to be a Whore.
As I live, she is in the right; I peeped once to see what she did before she went to bed; By this light, her Maids were dis∣secting her; and when they had done, they brought some of her to bed, and the rest they either pined or hung up, and so she lay dis∣membred till Morning; in which time, her Chamber was strewed all over, like an Anatomy School.
And when she travels any where she is transported with as great a care, and fear of spoiling, as a Jugglers Motion, when he re∣moves from Fair to Fair.
She is a right broken Gamester, who, though she lacks wherewithal to play, yet loves to be looking on.
He is awake, and calls for you impatiently, he would fain be in Bed, the Company is all gone.
Are you instructed?
Let me alone, I'll warrant you for my part.
Farewell then, you are all ready; who plays Master Constable?
I, I; and Ned Jolly the sumner.
Farewell, farewell then.
It is a delicate wench.
She has excellent flesh, and a fine face; by this light, we  must depose the Captain from his reign here.
I like her shrewdly; I hate a wench that is all Whore and no Company; This is a Comedy all day, and a Fair at night.
I hope to exalt the Parsons horn here.
And what think you? is it not a sweet sin, this lying with another mans Wife? 
Is Jolly come
No, but he'll be here instantly.
Is he a bed?
Yes, yes, and he sleeps as if he had been put to bed by his Sexton, with dust to dust, and ashes to ashes.
And we'll wake him with that shall be as terrible to him as the latter day.
Let him sleep a while that he may be fresh, else the Jest is spoiled; for it is his sense of his disgrace must work my Ends.
I'll go home then, and get supper ready, and expect you.
Do, Our Scene lies here; Who's there, Jolly?
Yes.
Are you fitted?
Yes, I have got the Black-fryers Music; I was fain to stay till the last Act; and who do you think I saw there?
I know not.
Guess.
Prithee, I cannot guess.
Your Aunt and Mistress Pleasant, and trusty Secret.
What man?
The Lovers only, so close in a Box!
It will be a match, and there's an End; prithee let them go to it; what is it to Us, let's mind our business now, and think on them hereafter.
A pox upon them for a couple of Stauk-hounds; have they killed at last? Why, this is Fools fortune; it would be long enough ere one that has wit got such a wife.
No more of this now; have you borrowed the watchmens Coats?
Yes, and Bills, Beards, and Constables staff, and Lantern; and let me alone to fit him, for the Summer; But when this is done I expect my Fee, a Tithe Night at least; Wanton, I will lie with thee for thy Roguery; what are you dumb, you will not refuse me, I hope?
Not, if I thought thou desired it; but I hate to have it desired indifferently, and but so so done neither when it is done.
I hope you will not disgrace my work, will you?
Faith, they say thy pleasure lies in thy Tongue; and there∣fore, Though I do not give thee leave to lie with me, yet I will give thee as good a thing that will please thee as well.
Some Roguery I expected.
No Faith, I am serious; and because I will please you both, Master Wild shall lie here, and you shall have leave to say you do, which will please you as well.
Faith, and my part is some pleasure, else, I have loved, en∣joyed, and told, is mistook.
I, but never to love, seldom enjoy, and always tell? Faugh, it stinks, and stains worse then Shoreditch dirt, and wo∣men hate and dread men for it; Why, I that am a whore professed cannot see you, he digest it, though it be my Profit and Interest. For
to be a private whore in this Town starves in the nest like young Birds when the old one's killed.
Excellent Girl, it is too true Jolly; your tongue has kept, many a woman honest.
Faith, it is a truth, this I shall say, you may all better your pleasures by, if you will observe it; I dare say, the fear of telling keeps more women honest then Bridewell Hemp; And were you wise men, and true Lovers of liberty, now were the time to bring winching to that perfection no age could ever have hoped; now you may sow such seed of pleasure, you may be prayed for here∣after; Now, in this Age of zeal and Ignorance, would I have you four, in old clothes, and demure looks, present a Petition to both Houses, and say, you are men touched in Conscience for your share in that wicked nos which is known to their worships by the plea∣sure of Adultery, and desire it may be death, and that a Law may be passed to that purpose; How the women will pray for you, and at their own charges rear Statu's in memory of their Benefactors; the young and kind would then haunt your Chambers, Pray, and present you, and Court the Sanguine youth, for the sweet sin se∣cured by such a Law; None would lose an Occasion, nor chur∣lishly oppose kind Nature, nor refuse to listen to her summons, when youth and Passion calls for those forbidden sweets; when such security as your lives are at stake, who would fear to trust; with this Law all Oaths and Protestations are cancelled; Letters and Bawds would grow useless too; By instinct the Kind will find the Kind; and having one nature become of one mind; Now we lose an Age, to observe and know a mans humour, ere we dare trust him; But get this Law, then it is, like and enjoy; and whereas now, with expense of time and Fortune, you may glean some one Mistress amongst your neighbours wives, you shall reap women whole Armfuls as in the Common field; there is one small Town, wise only in this Law; and I have heard them say, that know it well, There has been but one Execution this hundred years; yet the same party searched seven years, and could not find an honest wo∣man in the Town.
An Excellent Plot, let us about it; Ink and Paper, dear Wanton, we will draw the Petition presently.
Will Master Jolly consent too? You must not then, as soon as a handsome woman is named, smile, and stroke your Beard, tell him that is next you, you have lain with her; such a lie is as dangerous as a truth, and it were but Justice to have thee hanged for a sin thou never commitedst, for having defamed so many women.
If all those Liars were hanged, I believe the scale would weigh down the guilty.
One Rogue hanged, for Example, would make a thousand kind Girls: If it take it shall be called my Law, Wanton's Law; Then we may go in Petticoats again, for women grew imperious and wore the Breeches, only to fright the poor cuckolds, &amp; make the Fools digest their Horns—Are you all ready, shall I open the door?
Yes.
I'll expect you at my house.
We'll come, we'll come.
So, knock louder. 
Who's there? what would you have?
Here's his Majesties Watch, and Master Constables Worcester∣ship must come in; We have a warrant from the Lords to search for a Delinquent.
You come not here, I'll answer your warrant to morrow.
Break open the door.
I would you durst.
Lord! Dear what shall we do?
Why, sweet, I'll warrant you, art thou not my wife, my Rib, bone of my bone? I'll suffer any thing ere one hair of thee shall be touched.
Hark, they break open the door.
They dare not; why dost thou tremble so? alas, sweet Innocence, how it shakes?
Break open the door.
I'll complain to the Bishop of this Insolence.
They come, they come, Lamb.
No matter sweet; They dare not touch thee; what would  you have Mr. Constable? you are very rude.
Read our Warrant, and our business will excuse us? do you know any such person as you find there?
Yes, Sir, but not by this name; such a woman is my wife, and no Lindabrides; we were married to day, and I'll justify her my wife the next Court day; you have your answer, and may be gone.
We must take no notice of such Excuses now; if she be your wife, make it appear in Court, and she will be delivered unto you.
If she be my wife Sir? I have wedded her and Bedded her, what other Ceremonies would you have? Be not afraid, sweet heart.
Sir, We can do no less then Execute our Warrant; we are but Servants; And, Master Constable, I charge you in the Kings Name to do your Duty; behold the body of the Delinquent.
Touch her that dares; I'll put my Dagger in him, fear 
 nothing, sweet heart; Master Constable you'll repent this Insolence offered to a man of my Coat.
Help, my dearest, will you let me be hauled thus?
Villains, what will you do? Murder, Rape.
Yes, yes, it is likely; I look like a Ravisher.
Hold him, and we'll do well enough with her.
What have we here, an old woman? 
Let me go, slaves and Murderers.
Let him go.
Do any of you know this woman? this is not she we looked for.
No? Rascal, that mistake shall not excuse you.
It is old Goodman what do ye call him? his wife.
Hold the Candle, and let's see her face.
What have were here, Adultery? take them both, here will be new matter.
Master Constable, a little Argument will persuade you to believe I am grossly abused; sure this do's not look like a piece that a man would sin to enjoy, let that then move your Pity, and care of my Reputation; consider my calling, and do not bring me to a public shame for what you're sure I am not guilty of, but by plot of some Villains.
Dear, will you disclaim me now?
Oh, Impudence!
Master Constable, do your duty; take them both away, as you will answer it.
Give him his Cassock, to cover him. 
Why Gentlemen, whither will you carry me?
To the next Justice, I think it is Master Wild, he is newly come from travel, it will be a good way, Neighbours, to express our Respects to him.
No faith, Gentlemen, even go the next way to Tybourn, and dispatch the business without Ceremony, for yee'll utterly dis∣grace me; this is that damned Captain; My wife is abroad too, I fear she is of the Plot.
Come, away with'em.
Whither will they lead us, Dear?
Oh, oh, Impudence! Gentlemen, do not lead us together I beseech you.
Come, come, lead them together, no Ceremony's; your faults are both alike.
YOu had best brag now, and use me like my Lady whet ye call; But if you do I care not.
Come, you're a Fool, I'll be a faithful Friend, and make good conditions for thee before thy husband be quit.
You must do it now or never.
Hark, hark, I hear them—What's the news? 
We have brought a Couple of Delinquents before your Worship, they have committed a very foul fault.
And we have brought the fault along too, that your Worcester∣ship may see it, you will be the better able to judge of the of∣fenders.
Ha! What do I see? my wife in Master Justices Lap?
What has the poor fellow done?
Why Madam, he has been taken a Bed with this woman, another mans wife.
In bed with her? and do you raise him to punish him? Master Constable, if you would afflict him, Command them to lie together again; Is not the man mad?
This is fine Roguery, I find who rules the roast.
Well, to the business; you say, he was taken in bed with another mans wife.
Yes, and't like your Worship.
Make his Mittimus to the Hole at New-gate.
Sure I have seen this Fellows face.—Friend, have I no∣ver seen your face before?
If I mistake not, I have seen one very like your Ladyships too, she was a Captains cast-whore in the Town. I shall have a time to be revenged.
How now, Sirrah? are you threatening? away with him.
I'll fetch a stronger Watch, Sir, and return presently.
Do, Master Constable, and give the poor Woman some∣thing, and set her free; for I dare say it was his wickedness, she looks like one that ne'er thought on such a thing.
God bless your Worship, I am innocent; he never left making Love till I consented.
Oh miserable! miserable!
How now, what's the news here? my honoured Friend, and Master Parson, what makes you here at this time of night? Why I should have thought this a time to have envied you for your fair Brides embraces, do you give these favours? are these your Bride-laces? It's a new way. 
Is it new to you?
How now Captain?
Wanton, is this your plot to endear your Husband to you?
No, it is thy plot, poor beaten Captain, but I shall be revenged.
Yes, faith, it was my plot, and I glory in it, to undermine my Machiavell, which so greedily swallowed that sweet bait that had this hook.
It is well.
But my anger ends not here. Remember the base language you gave me, Son of a thousand Fathers, Captain of a tame band, and one that got my living by the long staffe-speeches; for which, and thy former Treacheries, I'll ruin thee, Slave; I'll have no more Mercy on thee, then old women on blind puppies; I'll bring you to your Commendations in Latin Epistles again, nor leave thee any thing to live on, no, not Bread, but what thou earn'st by raking Gentlewoman's names in Anagrams; and Master Justice, if ever you'll oblige me, stand to me now, that I may procure the whipping of him from the Reverend Bench.
I am undone.
I can do nothing but Justice, you must excuse me; I shall only make it appear how fit it is to punish this kind of sin in that Coat in time, and to crush such serpents in the shells.
Mercy, Oh Mercy! 
Officers, away with him.
No Mercy?
Yes, upon Conditions there may be some Mercy. 
And these they are—let the watch stay in the t'other Room.—First, your Wife shall have her liberty, and you yours, as she reports of you; and when you bring her with you, you shall be welcome; then you shall not be jealous, that's another point.
That he shall have a Cure for—
Yes, yes, I'll apply something to his Eyes shall cure him of his doubt.
Then you shall ask the Captain pardon and your Wife; to him you shall allow half your Parsonage to maintain her; The Deeds are ready within; if you'll sign them, and deliver your Wife to our use, she shall discharge you.
I submit, Sir, But I hope your Worship will desire no wit∣nos to the use of my Wife; The Sumner and the Watch too; I hope your Worship will enjoin them silence.
You shall not need to fear, I'll have a Care of your Credit;  call in the Watch; Do you know these Faces?
Ha! abused?
Nay, no flinching, if you do, I betake me to Master Sumner again.
And I become severe Master Constable in a trice.
No, no, I submit, and I hope we are all Friends; I'm sure I have the hardest part, to forgive.
And I, before all this Company, promise to forget and forgive thee, and am content to take thee again for my dear and mortal Husband, now you are tame; but you must see you do so no more, and give your self to be blind; when it is not fit for you to see; and practise to be deaf; and learn to sleep in time, and find business to call you away when Gentlemen come that would be private.
Why so, now things are as they should be; and when you will obey, you shall command: But when you would be imperi∣os, then I betake me to my Constables Staff 'till you subscribe. Cedunt Arms Togae; and if it be false Latin, Parson, you must par∣don that too.
By this hand, I must have my Tythe-night with thee; thou art such a wag; say, when? when wilt thou give me leave? ha!
Never.
Never?
No, never.
D' ye hear, I am none of them that work for Charity; ei∣there resolve to pay, or I kick down all my Milk again.
What would you have?
Give me leave to lie with you.
No indeed.
No?
No; but rather then quarrel, as I said before, I will give you leave to say you have lain with me.
I am of opinion she owes you nothing now, so Mistress Wanton, take your Husband; and to remove all doubts, this night I'll be at the charge of a Wed ding supper.
This is better then Newgate hole yet, Bridewell Hemp, brown bread and whip-cord.
BY my troth, is was a good Play.
And I am glad I am come home, for I am and as weary with this walking; For Gods sake whereabouts do's the pleasure of walking lie? I swear, I have often sought it till I was weary, and yet I could ne'er find it. 
What do these Halberds at your door?
Halberds, where?
There, at your Lodging.
Friend, what would those Watch-men have?
The house is shut up for the sickness this afternoon.
The sickness?
Yes forsooth, there's a Coach-man dead full of the Tokens.
Where is the Officer?
He is gone to seek the Lady of the House, and some other Company that dined here yesterday, to bring her in, or carry her to the Pest-house.
Ha! What shall we do, Niece?
If you please to command our Lodging.
It will be too much trouble.
Let's go to Love-all's.
Not I, by my Faith; it is scarce for our Credits to let her come to us.
Why? is she nought?
Faith, Madam, her Reputation is not good.
But what shall we do then?
Dare you adventure to oblige us?
Thank you Sir, We'll go to my Nephews at Covent-Garden; he may shift among his acquaintance.
It was well thought on, the Piazza is hard by too.
We'll borrow your Coach thither, and we'll send it you back again strait.
We'll wait upon you, Madam.
This accident troubles me; I am heartily sorry for the poor Fellow.
I am sorry too; but pray, Aunt, let us not forget our selves in our grief; I am not ambitious of a Red-cross upon the door.
Mistress Pleasant is in the right; for if you stay the Off∣cers will put you in.
We shall trouble you, Sir, for your Coach.
I Am reconciled; and will no longer be an uncharitable Church-man; I think this sack is a cooler.
What? do's it make you to see your error?
Yes, and consider my man of war; nor will I again dispute his Letters of Mart, nor call them Passes for Pirates; I am free.
And welcome, any thing but anger is sufferable, and all is jest when you laugh; and I will hug thee for abusing me with thy eyes in their scabbards; but when you rail with drawn eyes, red and naked, threatening a Levites second revenge to all that touches your Concubine, then I betake me to a dark-lanthorn, and a Con∣stables-staff, and by help of these Fathers whom I cite I prove my Text, women that are kind ought to be free.
But Captain, is it not lawful for us Shepherds to reclaim them?
A mere mistake; for sin like the Sea may be turned out, but will ne'er grow less; and though you should drain this Mistress Doll, yet the Whore will find a place, and perhaps overflow some Maid, till then honest; and so you prove the author of a new sin, and the defiler of a pure Temple; therefore I say, while you live, let the Whore alone till she wears out; nor is it safe to vamp them, as you shall find, read Ball the first and the second.
No more discourse. Strike up Fiddlers.
See, who's that knocks?
Sir, it is Mistress Pleasant, and the two Gentlemen that dined there to day.
My Aunt, and Mistress Pleasant.
What a pox makes them abroad at this time of night?
It may be, they have been a winching.
Sir, they were upon alighting out of the Coach when I came up.
Quickly, Mrs. Wanton, you and your husband to bed, there's the Key; Mr. Parson, you know the way to the old Cham∣ber, and to it quickly, all is friends now.
Sweet heart, we will steal away.
The Devil on them, they have spoiled our mirth.
Jack, get you and your company down the back-way in∣to the Kitchen, and stay there till we see what this Visit means.
Means! What should it mean? it is nothing but the mis∣chievous Nature all honest Women are endued with, and natu∣rally given to spoil sport: I wonder what Fart blew them hither to night.
Nay, have a little patience, Captain; you and Mr. Jolly must sit quietly a while within, till we know the cause.
It is but deferring our mirth for an hour, or so. Servant. Sir, here's my Lady.
Quickly remove those things there: Captain, step in there.—
Nephew, do you not wonder to see me here, at this time of night?
I know it is not ordinary, therefore I believe it is some de∣sign: what is it, Mrs. Pleasant? Shall I make one?
As I live, Sir, pure necessity; neither mirth nor kind∣nos hath begot this Visit.
What, is your Coach broke?
Faith, Nephew, the truth is, the Sickness is in my house, and my Coach-man died since Dinner.
The Sickness?
I, as I live, we have been walking since the Play; and when we came home we found the Watch at the door, and the house shut up.
And a Constable gone in search of all those that dined there to day, with order to furnish us lodgings in the Pest-house.
Are you not afraid to receive us?
As I live, the accident troubles me; and I am sorry such a misfortune should beget me this favour; and I could wish my self free from the honour, if the cause were removed too.
As I live, Mr. Wild, I must have been forced to have lain with my servant to night, if you had not received me.
If I thought so, I would carry you out in my arms, I am so much Mr. Constant's friend.
But are you more his friend then mine, Mr. Wild?
No, but I presume by this he has gained so much interest as he would not be very displeasing to you.
Oh! your humble servant, Sir.
If I had had a mind to that lodging, I had ne'er come hi∣there; for when I have a mind to it, I'll marry without dispute; for I fear no body so much as a husband; and when I can conquer that doubt, I'll marry at a minutes warning.
No dispute now, can you furnish us with a couple of Beds?
Yes, yes.
And have you ever a woman in the house?
My Sisters Maid is here.
Madam, if you resolve to do us this honour, you shall find clean linen, and your Beds quickly ready.
But where will my Nephew and you, Sir, lie to night?
Oh, Madam, we have acquaintance enough in the Town.
Well, Sir, we will accept this curtsy; and when you come into Suffolk you shall command my house.
Prithee call Bess, and bid her bring sheets to make the Bed; I'll go and fetch in a Pallet, it is as good a Bed as the other, and if you will stay the removing, we will set up a Bed-stead.
No, a Pallet, pray; but what shall we do for night clothes, Aunt?
Why, what are those you bought my Sisters?
Is not that Linen gone yet?
No faith, Madam, his man forgot it, till the Carriers were gone last week.
Will that serve?
Yes, yes, pray do us the favour to let us have it, it is but washing of't again.
Nay, if it will serve, discourse no more; I'll fetch the bundle; and prithee fetch the Combs and Looking glasses I bought the other day; for other necessaries that want a name the wench shall furnish you with.
Nay, but where is she, Nephew?
I'll call her, if she be not gone to Bed; it is an ignorant young thing, I am to send her to my Sisters in the Country; I have had such ado to put her in the Fashion.
What Country is she? Prithee, Mr. Wild, let's see her.
I'll call her down.
Madam, now we see you're safe we will kiss your hands, and wait upon you to morrow.
It must be early then, Sir; for I shall borrow my Nephews Coach, and be gone betimes into the Country to take a little fresh Air, and prevent the search.
Pray, Madam, be pleased to command ours.
No, Sir, I humbly thank you; my Nephew's will hold our company.
Your humble servant, Mistress Pleasant.
Your servant, Madam.
Good night, Mr. Constant.
Sir, you'll excuse us, we have no body here to light you down.
Madam, I am here your servant as much as those that wear your Livery; and this house holds no other; we can be civil, Madam, as well as extravagant.
Your humble servant, Mr. Careless.
Gentlemen, if you'll wait on my Lady to her Chamber, then I'll wait upon you down.
You oblige us, Sir.
THe Plague?
The Plague; As I live, and all my relation is truth, every syllable; But, Mrs. Wanton, now must you play your master-piece; be sure to blush, and appear but simple enough, and all is well; thou wilt pass for as arrant a Chamber-maid as any is in the Parish.
Hum! new Plots?
Let me put on a Petti-coat and a Muffler, and I'll so Cham∣ber-maid it, and be so diligent with the clean Smock and the Cham∣ber-pot: now would I give all the Shoes in my Shop to lie with 'em both.
Let me alone to fit them, I can make a scurvy Curtsy na∣turally; remember, I am an Essex woman, if they ask.
Come, come quickly, take those Sweet-meats; bring the great Cake and Knife, and Napkins, for they have not supped; and Captain, make some Lemonade, and send it by the Boy to my Chamber; and do you hear, Jolly, you must stay till we come, for we must lie with you to night.
We will stay, but make haste then.
And bring our Cloaks and Swords out with you.
I will, I will; but be quiet all.
Mr. Wild, I hope there is no Plot in this.
There's no jealousy, Mr. Parson; it is all serious upon my life.
FAith, Aunt, it is the first time I have had the honour to see you in my house; and as a stranger I must salute you.
As I live, Nephew, I'm ashamed to put you to this trouble.
It is an obligation.—Mrs. Pleasant, I know you have not supped; I pray you be pleased to taste these Sweet-meats, they are of Salls doing; but I understand not Sweet-meats, the wine I'll an∣swer for; and, in a word, you are welcome: You are Patron, and we your slaves.
Good rest, and a pleasing dream, your humble servant wishes you.
Good night, Nephew; good night, Mr. Careless.
Good night, Mr. Careless; your humble servant, Mr. Wild.
Why I, here are men have some wit; By this good night, had we lain at my servants, we should have found the laced Cap and Slippers that have been entailed upon the Family these five de∣scents, advanced upon the Cup-boards-head instead of Plate. 
They are a couple of the readiest youths too; how they run and do all things with a thought! I love him for sending his Sister, a pretty wench.
Pray, let's go to bed; I am weary.
You will not go to bed with all those windows open; sweet heart, prithee shut them, and bring me hither;—Dost understand me? As I live, it is a great while since I went to the Play.
It has been one of the longest days; a year of them would be an Age.
Oh, do you grow weary; you'll break your Covenant ere the year go out.
Prithee, shut the windows, and come pin up my hair. 
SEE you wait diligently, and let them want nothing they call for; come shall we go? it is very late.
But how do's Wanton carry it?
They saluted her; and Mrs. Pleasant swore you might see the Country-simplicity in her Face.
A pox upon her, crafty Gypsy.
Why, art not thou glad to see she can be honest when she will?
I'll show you all a Trick, for her, within these few days, or I'll miss my aim.
Come, let's go. 
I have a mind to stay till Wanton comes.
Stay a little then, for twill not be long ere they be a Bed.
I hear VVanton's voice.
Are they a Bed?
Yes, and have so admired you, and Mr. Careless, and a∣bus'd the Lovers; well, Gentlemen, you are the wits of the time; but if I might counsel, well they might lye alone this night; but it should go hard if I lay not with one of them within a month.
Were they so taken with their lodging?
All that can be said they said, you are the friendliest men, the readi'st men, the handsom'st men that had wit; and could tell when to be civil, and when to be wild; and Mrs. (what's her
name) the Younger, asked why Mr. Wild did not go a wooing to some rich Heir; upon her conscience, she said, you would speed.
Well, well, there's a time for all things; come let's go.
Take a light.—Good night, Wanton. 
Do ye hear, do ye hear; let me speak with you.
What's the business? 
I cannot get hence this night: but your good angels hang at my heels; and if I can prevail, you shall stay.
What to do?
What to do? why I'll be hanged if all this Company do not guess.
Prithee, what should we stay for?
For the widow, and her Niece; are they worth the watch∣ing for a night?
Yes, certainly.
Then take my counsel, and let me give it out you're mar∣ried, you have new clothes come home this morning, and ther's that you spoke of I'll fetch from the Taylors, and here's a Parson shall rather give them his living, then stay for a License; the Fid∣lers too are ready to salute 'em.
But if they refuse?
Which, upon my conscience, they will.
As you hope, else you are laughed at for missing the wi∣dow: Ned, follow my counsel, appear at her Chamber window in thy Shirt, and salute all that passes by; let me alone to give it out, and invite Company and provide dinner; then when the business is known, and I have presented all your friends at Court with Rib∣bands, she must consent, or her honour is lost, if you have but the grace to swear it, and keep your own counsel.
By this hand, he has reason; and I'll undertake the widow.
It will incense them, and precipitate the business which is in a fair way now; and if they have wit, they must hate us for such a treachery.
If they have wit they will love you; beside, if it come to that, we two will swear we saw you married, and the Parson shall be sworn he did it:—Priest, will you not swear?
Yes, any thing; what is it, Captain?
If this jest could do it, yet it is base to gain a wife so poor∣lie; she came hither too for sanctuary; it would be an uncivil and an unhospitable thing, and look as if I had not merit enough to get a wife without stealing her from her self; then, it is in mine own house.
The better; nay, now I think on it, why came she hither? how do you know the Plague is there? all was well at dinner; I'll be hanged if it be not a Plot; the Lovers too whom you abused at dinner, are joined with them; a trick, a mere trick of wit to abuse us; and to morrow when the Birds are flown, they'll laugh at you, and say, Two Country Ladies put themselves naked into the hands of three travelled City-wits, and they durst not lay hold on them.
A pox upon these Niceties.
If they have not some design upon you hang me, why did they talk so freely before me else?
Let's but try, we are not now to begin to make the world talk; nor is it a new thing to them to hear we are mad fellows.
If you get them, are they worth having?
Having? yes.
If you miss them the Jest is good; Prithee, Ned, let me prevail, it is but a mad trick.
If we would, how shall we get into the Chamber?
Let me alone for that; I'll put on my country simplicity, and carry in a Chamber pot; then under Pretence of bolting the back door I'll open it, and yet I grudge them the sport so honest∣lie; for you wenchers make the best husbands; after you are once married, one never see's you.
I warrant thee wench.
No faith, I have observed it, they are still the doting'st husbands, and then retreat and become Justices of the Peace, and none so violent upon the Bench, as they, against us poor sinners; yet I'll do it, for upon my Conscience the young Gentlewoman will fall upon her back, and thank me.
Away, go then, and leave your fooling, and in the Morn∣ing, Ned, get in, and plead naked with your hands in the bed.
And if they cry, put your lips in their mouths, and stop them.
Why look you, you have the Authority of the Church too.
Well, I am now resolved; go you about your part, and make the Report strong.
And do ye here? be sure you set the Cook at work, that if we miss we may have a good Dinner, and good wine, to drink down our grief.
Miss? I warrant thee thrive.
Nay, if I knock not down the VVidow, geld me, and come out to morrow complete Uncle, and salute the Comp∣ny, with, you are well-come Gentlemen, and good morrow Nephew Ned.
Uncle Tom, good morrow, Uncle Tom.
Ell's done, the door is open, and they're as still as Childrens thoughts; it is time you made you ready, which is, to put off your breeches, for it is almost day; and take my Council, be sure to offer force enough, the less reason will serve; Especially you, Master Wild, do not put a may it to the pain of saying, I.
I warrant thee, wench; let me alone.
We'll in, and undress us, and come again; for we must go in at the back door.
I'll meet you, is the Captain gone?
Yes, yes, hoe's gone.
Come Master Parson, let us see the Cook in Readiness, where are the Fiddlers? what will become of our Plot? for the
Coach-man; Master Sad and his friend will stink of their jest if this thrive.
They have slept all night, on purpose, to play all day.
When the Ribbons and Points come from the Exchange, pray see the Fiddlers have some, the Rogues will play so out of tune all day else, they will spoil the dancing if the plot do take.
Let's see them in the Chamber first, and then I shall go with some heart about the business; so, so, creep close and quietly; you know the way, the widow lies in the high bed, and the Pallet is next the door.
Must we creep? 
Yes, Yes, down upon your knees, always, till you get a woman, and then stand up for the Cause; stay let me shake my smock over you for luck sake.
Why so, I warrant you thrive.
A pox take you, I'll pare your nails when I get you from this place once.
Sweet heart, sweet heart, off with your shoe.
I, with all my heart, there's an old shoe after you; would I gave all in my shop the rest were furnished with wives too.
Parson, the Sun is rising, go send in the Fiddlers, and set the Cook on work, let him chap soundly.
I have a tithe Pig at home, I'll even sacrifice it to the Wedding.
They will find them in good Posture, they may take Privy marks if they please; for they said it was so hot they could endure no clothes, and my simplicity was so diligent to lay them naked, and with such twists and turns fastened them to the feet, I'll answer for it, they find not the way into them in an hour.
Why then they may pull up their Smocks, and hide their faces?
Master Jolly, there was one without would speak with you.
Who was it?
It is the Lady that talks so well.
They say indeed she has an Excellent Tongue, I would she had changed it for a face; it is she that has been handsome.
Who? not the Poetess we met at Master Sadds?
Yes, the same.
Sure shoe's mad.
Prithee tell her I am gone to bed.
I have done as well Sir; I told her Mistress Wanton was here, at which discreetly, being touched with the guilt of her Face, she threw out a Curse or two and retreated.
Who is this you speak of, I will know who it is.
Why it is she that married the Genoway Merchant; they consigned one another.
Who? Pig Driver, Bewgle Eyes?
The same, the same.
Why she is ugly now?
Yes, but I have known her, by this hand, as fine a wench as ever sinned in Town or Suburbs; when I knew her first, she was the Original of all the wainscot Chambermaids, with Brooms, and barefoot Madams, you see sold at Temple-Bar, and the Exchange.
Ah! you are a Devil; how coldest thou find in thy heart to abuse her so? Thou love Antiquities too; The very memory that she had been handsome should have pleaded something.
Was handsome signifies nothing to me.
But shoe's a wit, and a wench of an Excellent Discourse.
And as good company as any's in the Town.
Company? for whom? Leather-Ears, his Majesty of New∣gate watch? There her story will do well, while they louse them∣selves.
Well, you are curious now, but the time was, when you have skipped for a kiss.
Prithee, Parson, no more of wit, and was handsome, but  let us keep to this Text—and with joy think upon thy little Wan∣ton here, that's kind, soft, sweet and sound; These are Epithets for a Mistress; Nor is there any Elegance in a woman like it; give me such a naked Sconce, to study Night and Day; I care not for her Tongue, so her face be good; A whore dressed in verse, and set speeches, tempts me no more to that sweet sin, then the Statute of whipping can keep me from it; This thing we talked on, which re∣tains nothing but the name of what she was, is not only Poetical in her discourse, but her Tears and her Love, her health, nay her Pleasure, were all Fictions, and had scarce any live-flesh about her till I administered.
Indeed it is time she sat out, and gave others leave to play; for a Reveren'd whore is an unseemly sight; besides it makes the sin malicious, which is but venial else.
Sure, he will make a case of Conscience on it; you should do well (sweet heart) to recommend her Case to your Brethren that attend the Committee of Affection, that they may order her to be sound and young again, for the good of the Commonwealth.
OH, are you ready? are you ready?
Yes, and't like your worship.
And did you bid the Cook chop Lustily, and make a Noise?
Yes, Sir, hoe's at it.
I hear the Captain.
Have you brought Clothes and Ribbons?
Yes, yes, all is ready; did you hear them squeak yet?
No, by this light; I think, it is an appointment, and we have been all abused.
Give the Fiddlers their Ribbons, and carry the rest in; Mistress Wanton, you must play my Ladies Woman to day, and Mince it to all that come, and hold up your head finely when they kiss you, and take heed of swearing when you are angry, and pledge∣ing whole cups when they drink to you.
I'll warrant you, for my part.
Go get you in then, and let your husband dip the Rosemary.
Is all ready?
All, all, some of the Company are below already, I have so blown it about, one Porter is gone to the Exchange, to in∣vite Master Welt's Merchant to his Wedding, and, by the way to bid two or three Fruiterers to send in Fruit for such a Wedding, another in my Ladies name to Sall's, for sweet meats; I swore at Bradborn in his Shop my self, that I wondered he would disappoint Master Wild for his Points, and having so long warning; He protested it was not his fault, but they were ready, and he would send John with them presently; One of the Watermen is gone to the Melon Garden, the other to Cooks at the Bear, for some Bottles of his best Wine, and thence to Gracious-street, to the Poulterers, and all with directions to send in Provisions for Master Welt's Wedding; and who should I meet at Door, but Apricot Tom, and Mary, waiting to speak with her young Master; they came to beg that they might serve the Feast; I promised them they should, if they would cry it up and down the Town, to bring Company; for Ma∣ster Wild was resolved to keep open house.
Why then here will be witnesses enough.
But who should I meet at the corner of the Piazza, but Joseph Taylor; he tells me, there's a new Play at the Fryers to day, and I have bespoke a Box for Master Wild and his Bride.
And did not he wonder to hear he was married?
Yes; but I told him, it was a Match his Aunt made for him, when he was abroad.
And I have spread it sufficiently at Court, by sending to borrow Plate for such a Wedding.
There's half a dozen Coach fulls of Company lighted; they call for the Bride-Laces and Points.
Let the Fiddlers play then, and bid God give them joy, by the name of my Lady Careless and Mistress Wild.
Where shall we play, Sir?
Come with us, we'll show you the window.
NIece, Niece, Niece Pleasant.
Ha! I hear you, I hear you, what would you have? 
Do you not hear the Fiddlers?
Yes, yes, but you have waked me from the finest dream.
A dream, what was it? some knavery.
Why, I know not, but it was merry, even as pleasing as some sins; well, I'll lie no more in a mans bed, for fear I lose more then I get.
Hark, that's a new Tune.
Yes, and they play it well; This is your Jaunty Nephew; I would he had less of the Father in him, I'd venture to dream out my dream with him; In my conscience hoe's worth a dozen of my dull Servant, that's such a troublesome visitant, without any kind of convenience.
I, I, so are all of that kind; give me your Subject Lover; Those you call Servants are but troubles, I confess.
What is the Difference, pray, betwixt a Subject, and a Ser∣vant Lover?
Why, one I have absolute Power over, the other's at large; Your Servant Lovers are those take Mistresses upon trial, scarce give them a Quarters warning before they are gone.
Why, what do your Subject Lovers do? I am so sleepy.
Do? All things for nothing; then they are the diligent'st and the humblest things a Woman can employ; Nay, I have seen of them tame, and run loose about a house; I had one once, by this light, he would fetch and Carry, go back, seek out, he would do any thing; I think some Falconer bred him.
By my Troth, I am of your mind.
He would come over, for all my Friends; but it was the dogged'st thing to my enemies, he would sit upon's tail before them, and frown, like John a Napes when the Pope is named; he heard me once praise my little Spaniel Bitch Smut for waiting, and hang me if I stirred for seven years after, but I found him lying at my door.
And what became of him?
Faith, when I married he forsook me; I was advised since, that if I would ha'spit in's mouth sometimes he would have stayed.
That was cheap, But it is no certain way; for it is a gene∣rall opinion, that marriage is one of the certain'st cures for Love that one can apply to a man that is sick of the sighings; yet if you were to live about this Town still, such a Fool would do you a
world of service; I'm sure Secret will miss him, and would al∣ways take such a care of her he's saved her a hundred walks for Hoods and Masques.
Yes, and I was certain of the earliest Fruits and Flowers that the Spring afforded.
By my troth, it was foolishly done to part with him; a few crumbs of your affection would have satisfied him, poor thing.
Thou art in the right; in this Town there's no living with∣out 'em; they do more service in a house for nothing, then a pair of those, what d' ye call 'ems, those he waiting-women, Beasts, that Custom impose upon Ladies.
Is there none of them to be had now, think you? I'd feign get a tame one, to carry down into the Country.
Faith, I know but one breed of them about the Town that's right, and that's at the Court; The Lady that has them brings 'em all up by hand; she breeds some of them from very puppies; there's another wit too in the Town that has of them; but hers will not do so many tricks; good sullen diligent waiters those are which she breeds, but not half so serviceable.
How do's she do it? is there not a trick in it?
Only patience, but she has a heavy hand with 'em (they say) at first, and many of them miscarry; she governs them with signs, and by the Eye, as Bank's breeds his Horse; there are some too that arrive at writing, and those are the right breed, for they commonly betake themselves to Poetry; and if you could light on one of them, it were worth your money; for it is but using of him ill, and praising his verses sometimes, and you are sure of him for ever.
But do they never grow surly, Aunt?
Not, if you keep them from raw flesh, for they are a kind of Lyon-lovers; and if they once taste the sweet of it, they'll turn to their kind.
Lord, Aunt, there will be no going without one this Summer into the Country; pray let's enquire for one; either a he one to entertain us, or a she one to tell us the story of her Love; it is excellent to bed-ward, and makes one as drowsy as Prayers.
Faith, Niece, this Parliament has so destroyed 'em, and the Platonic Humour, that it is uncertain whether we shall get one or no; your leading Members in the lower House have so cowed the Ladies, that they have no leisure to breed any of late; Their whole endeavouts are spent now in feasting, and winning close Committee-men, a rugged kind of sullen Fellows, with implaca∣ble stomachs and hard hearts, that make the gay things court and observe them, as much as the foolish Lovers use to do; Yet I think I know one she-Lover, but she is smitten in years of the wrong side of forty; I am certain she is poor too; and in this lean Age for Courtiers, she perhaps would be glad to run this Summer in our Park▪
Dear Aunt, let us have her; has she been famous? has she good Tales, think you, of Knights? such as have been false or true to Love, no matter which.
She cannot want cause to curse the Sex; handsome, witty, well born, and poor in Court, cannot want the experience how false young men can be; Her Beauty has had the highest fame; and those Eyes that weep now unpitied have had their Envy, and a dazzling Power.
And that Tongue, I warrant you, which now grows hoarse with flattering the great Law-breakers, once gave Law to Princes; was it not so Aunt? Lord, shall I die without begetting one story?
Penthesilea, nor all the cloven Knights the Poets treat of, yclad in mightiest Petticoats, did her excel for gallant deeds; and, with her Honour, still preserved her Freedom; My Brother loved her; and I have heard him swear, Minerva might have owned her Language; An Eye like Pallas, Juno's wrists, a Venus for shape, and a Mind chaste as Diana, but not so rough; never uncivilly Cruel, nor faulty kind to any; no vanity, that sees more then Lo∣verse pay, nor blind to a gallant Passion; Her Maxim was, he that could Love, and tell her so handsomely, was better Company, but not a better Lover then a silent Man; Thus, all Passions found her Civility, and she a value from all her Lovers. But alas, Niece, this was (which is a sad word) was handsome, and was beloved, are abhorred sounds in Women's ears. 
Hark, the Fiddlers are merry still; will not Secret have the wit to find us this morning, think you?
God give you joy, Master Careless; God give your La∣dyship joy, my Lady Wild.
What did the Fellow say? God give me joy?
As I live, I think so.
God give you joy, Mistress Pleasant Wild.
This is my Nephew, I smell him in this knavery.
Why did they give me joy by the name of Mistress Wild? I shall pay dear for a nights lodging if that be so, especially lying  alone; By this light, there is some knavery afoot.
Rise, rise, for shame, the year's before you.
Why, Ned Wild, why Tom, will you not rise and let's in? what, is it not enough to steal your wedding over night, but lock your selves up in the morning too? All your Friends stay for points here, and kisses from the Brides.
A little Patience, you'll give us leave to dress us? 
Why, what's a Clock, Captain?
It's late.
Faith, so it was before we slept.
Why, Nephew, what means this rudeness? As I live, I'll fall out with you. This is no jest.
No, as I live, Aunt. We are in earnest; but my part lies here, and there's a Gentleman will do his best to satisfy you;  and sweet Mistress Pleasant, I know you have so much wit as to perceive this business cannot be remedied by denials; here we are, as you see, naked, and thus have saluted hundreds at the window that past by, and gave us joy this morning.
Joy, of what? what do you mean?
Madam, this is visible, and you may coy it, and refuse to call me Husband; But I am resolved to call you Wise, and such  proofs I'll bring as shall not be denied.
Promise your self that; see whether your fine wits can make it good; you will not be uncivil?
Not a hair but what you give, and that was in the Con∣tract before we undertook it; for any Man may force a Women's Body, but we have laid we will force your Mind.
But that needs not, for we know by your discourse last night and this morning, we are Men you have no aversion to; and I believe, if we had taken time and wooed hard, this would have come a course; but we had rather win you by wit, because you defied us.
It is very well, if it succeed.
And, for my part, but for the jest of winning you, and this way, not ten joynters should have made me marry?
This is a new way of wooing.
It is so, Madam; but we have not laid our plot so weakly (though it were sudden) to leave it in any bodies power but our own to hinder it.
Do you think so?
We are secure enough, if we can be true to our selves.
Yet we submit in the midst of our strength, and beg you will not wilfully spoil a good jest by refusing us. By this hand, we are both sound, and we'll be strangely honest, and never in ill humours, but live as merry as the Maids, and divide the year be∣tween the Town and the Country; What say you, is it a Match? Your bed is big enough for two, and my meat will not cost you much; I'll promise nothing but one heart, one purse betwixt us, and a whole dozen of boys, is it a bargain?
Not, if I can hinder it, as I live.
Faith, Mistress Pleasant, he hath spoken nothing but reason, and I'll do my best to make it good; Come faith, teach my Aunt what to do, and let me strike the bargain upon your Lips.
No, Sir, not to be half a Queen; if we should yield now your wit would dominere for ever; and still in all disputes (though never so much reason on our side) this shall be urged as an Argue∣meant of your Master wit to confute us; I am of your Aunts mind, Sir; and if I can hinder it, it shall be no match.
Why then know, it is not in your Powers to prevent it.
Why, we are not married yet.
No, it is true.
By this good light then I'll be dumb for ever hereafter, lest I light upon the words of Marriage by chance.
It is hard, when our own Acts cannot be in our own pow∣er, Gentlemen.
The plot is only known to four, the Minister and two that stood for Fathers, and a simple Country Maid that waited upon you last night, which plays your Chamber-maids part.
And what will all these do?
Why, the two friends will swear, they gave you; the Parson will swear, he married you; and the wench will swear, she put us to bed.
Have you men to swear we are married?
And a Parson to swear he did it?
Yes.
And a wench that will swear, she put us to Bed?
Yes, By this good light, and witness of reputation.
Dare they or you look us in the face, and swear this?
Yes faith, and all but those four know no other but re∣ally it is so; and you may deny it, but I'll make Mr. Constable put you to bed, with this proof, at night.
Pray, let's see these witnesses.
Call in the four only.
Well, this shall be a warning to me; I say nothing, but if ever I lye from home again.
I'll lye with you.
It is well; I dare say, we are the first women (if this take) that ever were stolen against their wills.
I'll go call the Gentlemen.
I that have refused a fellow that loved me these seven years, and would have put off his hat, and thanked me to come to bed, to be beaten with watch-mens staves into another; For by this good light, for ought that I perceive, there's no keeping these out at night.
And unless we consent to be their wives, to day, M. Ju∣stice will make us their whores at night: oh, oh, what would not I give to come off! not that I mislike them, but I hate they should get us thus.
Follow.—Will not you two swear we were married last night?
Capt. Yes, By this light, will we.
Will not you swear you married us?
Yea, verily.
And come hither, pretty one, will not you swear you left us all a bed last night, and pleased?
Yes forsooth; I'll swear any thing your worship shall ap∣point me.
But, Gentlemen, have you no shame, no conscience; will you swear false, for sport?
By this light, I'll swear, if it be but to vex you: Remem∣ber you refused me, [That is contrary to Covenants though with my brace of Lovers; what will they do with their Coach-mans  plot? but 'tis no matter, I have my ends; and so they are couzen'd I care not who does it.]
And, faith, Madam, I have sworn many times false, to no purpose; and I should take it ill, if it were mine own case, to have a friend refuse me an Oath upon such an occasion.
And are you all of one mind?
Verily we will all swear.
Will you verily? what shall we do, Aunt? 
Do you laugh? By this light, I am heartily angry.
Why, As I live, let's marry them, Aunt, and be revenged.
Marry, whore's the Parson?
Here, here, M. Parson, come and do your Office.
That fellow? No, by my troth, let's be honestly joined, for lucks sake, we know not how soon we may part.
What shall she do for a Parson? Captain, you must run and fetch one.
Yes, yes; but methinks this might serve turn; By this hand, he's a Marshal, and a Case, by Sire and Dam; pray try him, By this light, he comes of the best preaching kind in Essex.
Not I, As I live, that were a blessing in the Devils name.
A pox on your wedding; give me my wife and let me be gone.
Nay, nay, no choler, Parson; the Ladies do not like the colour of your Beard.
No, no, fetch another, and let them escape with that trick, then they'll jeer your beards blew, y'faith.
By this hand, he's in the right; either this Parson, or take one another words; to Bed now, and marry when we rise.
As I live, you come not here till you are married; I have been no body's whore yet, and I will not begin with my husband.
Will you kiss upon the bargain, and promise before these witnesses not to spoil our jest, but rise and go to Church.
And what will M. Constant and M. Sad say?
Why, I'll run and invite them to the wedding; and you shall see them expire in their own Garters.
No, no, ne'er fear't, their jest is only spoiled.
Their jest, what jest?
Faith, now you shall know it, and the whole Plot: In the first place, your Coach-man is well, whose death, we, by the help of Secret, contrived, thinking by that trick to prevent this danger, and carry you out of Town.
But had they this Plot?
Yes faith, and see how it thrives; they'll fret like carted Bawds when they hear this news.
Why, Aunt; would you have thought M. Sad a Plotter? well, it is some comfort we have them to laugh at.
Nay faith, then, Gentlemen, give us leave to rise, and I'll take my venture, if it be but for a revenge on them.
Gentlemen, bear witness.
Come, come away, I'll get the points; I'm glad the Coach-man's well, the Rogue had like to have spoiled our Comedy.
MArried?
And to them?
I, married, if you prevent it not; caught with a trick, an old stale trick; I have seen a Ballad on it.
We shall go near to prevent 'em.—Boy, My Sword.
Whither so fast?
You guess.
If you mean the wedding, you come too late.
Why, are they married?
No, but lustily promised.
We may come time enough to be revenged though.—
Upon whom? your selves, for you are only guilty: who carried them thither last night? who laid the Plot for the Coach∣man?
Why, do they know it?
Well, you'll find the Poet a Rogue, it is he that has be∣tray'd you; and if you'll take my counsel, be revenged upon him.
Nay, we were told he did not love us.
By my life, you wrong him; upon my knowledge the Poet meant you should have them.
Why, who had the power to hinder then?
I know not where the fault lies directly; they say, the wits of the Town would not consent to it, they claim a right in the Ladies, as Orphan-wits.
The wits! hang 'em in their strong lines.
Why I, such a clinch as that has undone you; and upon my knowledge it were enough to hinder your next match.
Why, what have they to do with us?
I know not what you have done to disoblige them; but they crossed it; there was amongst 'em too a pair of she-wits, some∣thing stricken in years; they grew in fury at the mention of it, and concluded you both with an authority out of a modern Au∣thor; besides it is said, you run naturally into the six-peny Room and steal sayings, and a discourse more then your peny-worth of jests, every Term; why, just now, you spit out one jest stolen from a poor Play, that has but two more in five Acts; what conscience is there in it, knowing how dear we pay Poets for our Plays?
It was, Madam, with the ill face, one of those whom you refused to salute the other day, at Chipps house; a Chees-cake had saved all this.
Why do you not make haste about your business, but lose time with this Babbler?
Madam, will you give us leave to make use of your Coach?
You may command it, Sir; when you have done, send him to the Exchange, where I'll dispatch a little business, and be with you immediately.
So, this fire's kindled; put it out that can. What would not I give for a Peepers place at the meeting; I'll make haste, and it shall go hard but I'll bear my part of the mirth too.
MAster Jolly, I find I am naturally inclined to mirth this day, and methinks my Corns ache more then my Horns; and to a man that has read Seneca a Cuckold ought to be no grief; especially in this Parish where I see such droves of St. Lukes clothing; there's little Secret too, th'allay of waiting-woman, makes me hope, she may prove metal of the Parsons standard. Find a way to rid me of Wanton, and I'll put in to be Chaplain to this merry family; if I did not inveigle formal Secret, you should hang me; I know the trick on it; it is but praying too, and preaching of the waiting-woman, then carefully seeing her cushion laid, with her book and leaf turned down, do's it, with a few Anagrams, A∣crosticks, and her name in the Register of my Bible: these charm the soft-soul'd sinner; then sometimes to read a piece of my Ser∣mon, and tell her, a Saturday, where my Text shall be, spells that work more then Philtres.
If you can be serious, we will think of this at leisure.—See how they eye Wanton.
What? consulting Parson? let us be judges betwixt you; do ye hear, Jack, if he offers ready money, I counsel, as a friend, take it; for, By this light, if you refuse it, your wife will not; do ye see those gay Petti-coats?
Yes, if you mean my wives.
You know they are his, and she only wears 'em for his plea∣sure; and it is dangerous to have a wife under another mans Petti∣coats; what if you should find his breeches upon hers?
Are not you married too? take care that yours do's not wear the Breeches, another kind of danger, but as troublesome as that, or sore-eyes; and if she get but a trick of taking as readily as she's persuaded to give, you may find a horn at home; I have seen a Cuckold of your complexion; if he had had as much hoof as horn, you might have hunted the beast by his slat.
How fine she is! and, By this light, a handsome wench, Mr. Jolly, I am easier persuaded to be reconciled to your fault, then any mans; I have seen, of this kind; her eyes have more Argue∣mints in 'em then a thousand of those that seduce the world; hang me if those Quivers be not full of Darts; I could kiss that mouth,
my self, is this she my Aunt quarrelled with you for?
The same, self-same. And by this hand, I was barbarous to her, for your Aunts sake; and had I not escaped that mischief of ma∣trimony, By this light, I had had never seen her again; but I was resolved not to quit her, till I was sure of a wife, for fear of what has followed; had I been such an Ass as to have left her upon the Aerie hopes of a widows Oaths; what a case had I been in now? You see, your Aunt's provided of a man. Bless him, and send him patience, it would have been fine to have seen me walking, and sigh∣ing upon cold hunting, seeking my whore again, or forced to make use of some common mercenary thing that sells sin and diseases, crimes, penance and sad repentance together; here's consolation and satisfaction, in Wanton, though a man lose his meal with the widow. And, faith, be free, how do you like my Girl; rid thee of her; what do's she want now, pray, but a jointure, to satisfy any honest man? speak your conscience; Ladies don't you think a little repentance, hereafter, will serve, for all the small sins that good nature can act with such a sinner?
Pray, Sir, remember she's my wife; and be so civil to us both, as to forget these things.
For that, Jack, we will understand hereafter, it is but a trick of youth, man, and her jest ill make us both merry, I warrant thee.
Pray, Sir, no more of your jests, nor your Jack; remem∣ber my Coat and Calling. This familiarity both with my wife and my self, is not decent; your Clergy with Christen names are scarce held good Christians.
I wonder at nothing so much as M. Jollies mirth, to day; where lies his part of the jest? cozened or refused by all, not a fish that stays in's Net. 
No, what's this? show me a fairer in all your streams; nor is this my single joy, who am pleased to find you may be cozened; rejoice to see you may be brought to lie with a man for a jest; let me alone to fit you with a trick too.
Faith, it must be some new trick; for thou art so beaten at the old one, twill neither please thee nor her; besides, I mean to teach her that my self.
I shall never be perfectly quiet in my mind, till I see some body as angry as my self; yet I have some consolation when I think on the wise plot that killed the Coach-man, how the Plague, Red-cross and Halberd has cut their fingers that designed it, their anger will be perfect. Secret says they are coming, and that the Lady Love-all has given 'em the Alarm.
And see where the parties come,—Storms and tempests in their minds, their looks are Daggers.
Servant, what? you're melancholy and full of wonder; I see you have met the news.
Yes Madam, we have heard a report that will concern both your judgement and your honour.
Alas, Sir, w'are innocent; it is mere predestination.
All weddings, Mr. Sad, you know go by chance, like hanging.
And, I thank my Stars, I have escaped hanging; to have been his Bride had been both.
This is not like the promise you made us yesterday.
Why truly, Servant, I scarce know what I do yet; the fright of the Plague had so possessed my mind with fear that I could think and dream of nothing, last night, but of a tall black man, that came and kissed me in my sleep, and slap'd his whip in mine Ears, it was a saucy Ghost, (not unlike my Coach-man that's dead) and accused you of having a hand in his murder, and vowed to haunt me till I was married, I told my niece the dream.
Nay, the Ghost sighed, and accused Secret and Master Sad; of making him away confess, faith, had you a hand in that bloody jest?
Fie, Servant; could you be so cruel as to join with my woman against me?
It is well, Ladies; why a Pox do you look at me, this was your subtle plot; a Pox on your Clerks wit; you said the jest would beget a Comedy when it was known, and so I believe twill.
Madam, I find you have discovered our design, whose chief end was, to prevent this mischief which I doubt not, but you'll both live to repent your share of, before you have done tra∣velling to the Epsams, Burbons, and the Spawes, to cure those tra∣vell'd diseases these Knights errant have, with Curiosity, sought out for you; It is true, the are mischiefs that dwell in pleasant Countries, yet those Roses have their thorns; and I doubt not, but these gentlemen's wit may sting as well as please, sometime; and you may find it harder to satisfy their travailed Experience, then to have suffered our home-bred ignorance.
Hark, if he be not fallen into a fit of his Cozen; These names of Places he has stolen out of her Receipt-book; amongst all whose diseases, find me any so dangerous, troublesome or in∣curable, as a fool, a lean, pale, sighing, coughing fool, that's rich and poor both, being born to an estate, without a mind or heart capable to use it, of a nature so miserable he grudges himself meat; nay, they say, he eats his meals twice, a fellow whose breath smells of yesterdays dinner, and stinks as if he had eat all our Suppers over again; I would advise you Mr. Sad to sleep with your mouth open, to air it, or get the Brewer to Ton it; Faugh, an empty Justice, that stinks of the Lees and Casks, and belches Littleton and Ploydens Cases; dost thou think any woman that has wit, or honour, would kiss that Bung-hole; by this light, his head and belly look as blew and lank as French Rabbits, or stale Poultry; Alas, Sir, my Lady would have a husband to rejoice with, no green-tail'd Lecturer, to stand Sentry at his beds side, while his nasty soul scores through him, sneaking out at the back door.—These, Sir, are diseases which neither the Spew, or Bath, can cure your Garters and Willow are a more certain remedy.
Well, Sir, I find our plot's betrayed, and we have pati∣ence left; It is that damned Captain has informed.
Yet it is one comfort, Madam, that you have missed that
man of war, that Knight of Finsbury; His Dowager, with Ale and Switches, would have bred a Ballad.
Faith, Sir, you see what a difficulty it is, in this Age, for a woman to live honest, though she have a proper man to her hus∣band; therefore it behoves us to consider, who we choose.
The Lady has Reason; for being allowed but one, who would choose such weasel's as we see daily married, that are all head and Tail, crooked, dirty, sold Vermin, predestined for Cuckolds, painted Snails, with houses on their backs, and horns as big as Dutch Cows; would any woman marry such? nay, can any wo∣man be honest, that lets such Hod-man-dods crawl o'er her Virgin breast, and Belly, or suffer 'em to leave their slimy paths upon their bodies only for Jointures? Out, it is Mercenary and base; The generous heart has only the Laws of Nature and kindness in her view; and when she will oblige, Friend is all the ties that nature seeks, who can both bear and excuse those kind crimes; And I be∣lieve, one as poor as the despised Captain, and neglected Courtier, may make a woman as happy in a Friendship as Master Sad, who has as many faults as we have debts; one, whose Father had no more credit with Nature, then ours had with Fortune; whose soul wears Rags as well as the Captains body.
Nay then, I'll laugh; for I perceive, you're angrier then we; Alas, has lost both ventures, Wanton, and the Widow.
Both, and neither so unlucky as to be thy wife; thy face is hanged with blacks already, we may see the Bells toll in thy Eyes; A Bride and a Wedding Shirt? a Sexton and a winding sheet? a Scrivener to draw up Jointures? A Parson to make thy will, man; by this light hoe's as Chap-fallen as if he had lain under the Ta∣ble all night.
Faith, Master Sad, hoe's parlously in the right; ne'er think of marrying in this dull clime, wedlock's a trade you'll ne'er go through with; wives draw-bills upon sight, and't will not be for your credit to protest 'em; rather follow my counsel, and Marry la Venetiano for a night and away; a Pistol Jointure do's it; then it is but repenting in the morning, and leave your woman, and the sin both, in the Bed; But if you play the fool, like your friends, and Marry in serious earnest, you may repent it too, as they do; but wher's the remedy?
What was it you said, Sir, do you repent?
By this hand, Widow, I don't know; but we have pursued a jest a great way. Parson, are you sure w'are married.
Yes, I warrant you, for their escaping.
Their escaping? fool, thou mistake me, ther's no fear of that; but I would fain know, if there be no way for me to get out of this Noose; No hole to hide a mans head in from this Wedlock?
Not any, but what I presume she'll show you anon.
Hum! Now do I feel all my fears flowing in upon me; Wanton and Mistress Pleasant both grow dangerously handsome, a Thousand Graces in each, I never observed before, now, just now,
when I must not taste, I begin to long for some of their Plums.
Is this serious, Sir?
Yes truly, Widow, sadly serious; Is there no way to get three or four mouthfuls of Kisses from the Parsons wife?
This is sad, Sir, upon my Wedding day, to despise me, for such a Common thing.
As sad, as I could wish; This is a jest makes me laugh.—Common? no Madam, that's two bitter, she's forest only, where the Royal Chase is as free as Fair.
Were not you a Widow to day?
Yes faith, Girl, and as foolish a one as ever Coach jum∣bled out of joint.
Stay then till to morrow, and tell me the difference betwixt us.
I hope, thou'lt prove a She-prophet; could I live to see thee turn honest wife, and she the Wanton Widow.
I cannot but laugh, to see how easy it is, to lose or win the opinion of the world; a little custom heals all, or else what's the difference betwixt a Married Widow and one of us? can any wo∣man be pure, or worth the serious sighing of a Generous heart, that has had above one hand laid upon her? is there place to write a∣bove one Lovers name, with honour, in her heart; it is indeed for one a Royal Palace; but if it admits of more, an Hospital, or an Inn, at best, as well as ours; only off from the Road, and less frequented.
Shrewdly urged.
And though the sins of my Family threw me into want, and made me subject to the treachery of that broken faith, to whose perjury I owe all my Crimes, yet still I can distinguish be∣twixt that folly and this honour, which must tell you; He or she that would be thought twice so, was never once a Lover.
Parson, thou art fitted; A whore, and Apophthegms! what sport will she make us under a Tree, with a Salad, and sayings, in the Summer?
Come, Wanton, no fury; you see my Aunts angry.
So am I, Sir, and yet can calmly reason this truth; Marry∣ed Widows, though chaste to the Law and Custom, yet their second Hymens make that which was but dying in the first husbands Bed, a stain in the second sheets, where all their kindness and repeated embraces want their value, because they're sullied and have lost their Lustre.
By this light, I'll go to School to Wanton, she has opened my Eyes, and I begin to believe I have escaped miraculously; By this hand, wench, I was within an inch of being married to this Danger; for what can we call these second submissions, but a tolerated law∣full Mercenaryness, which though it be a rude and harsh express∣on, yet your Carriage deserves it.
Fie, Master Sad, pray leave being witty; I fear, it is a mortal sin, to begin in the fifth Act of your Days upon an old sub∣jest too, abusing of Widows, because they despise you.
Alas, Niece, let him alone, he may come in, for his share; the Parson, that has so oft received 'em, will not refuse him Tithes, there, in Charity.
That, or Convenience, Interest, or Importunity, may, by your Example prevail; But it is not fair play, Madam, to turn your Lover to the Common, as you call it, now hoe's rid lean in your ser∣vice; take heed, Mr. Careless, and warning Mr. Sad; you see how fit for the Scavengers team your Lady leaves her Lovers.
Such a Lecture before I had Married would have made me have considered of this matter. D'ost thou hear Wanton, let us forgive one another, being Married, for that folly has made us guilty alike.
And I would fain know the difference betwixt ours, and a wedding crime, which is worst; to let love, youth and good humour betray us to a kindness, or to be gravely seduced by some aunt or un∣cle, without consideration of the disparity of Age, Birth, or Persons, to lie down before a Jointure; Ladies, you may flatter your selves, but the ingenuous part of the world cannot deny, but such minds, had they been born where our faults are not only tolerated but protect∣ed, would have listened to the same things, Interest counsels thereto.
Parson, what Boot betwixt Our Wives? either come to a Price, or draw off your Doxy.
Propose, propose, here will be mirth anon.
Yes, yes, propose, while I break it to your Lady; Madam, you see, here's a proper man to be had, and money to boot—what, dumb?
No, shoe's only thinking; faith, Madam, try 'em both to Night, and choose tomorrow.
Come, no more of this; Aunt, take my word for your hus∣band, that have had more experience of him then all these; it is true, he will long for these Girls, as children do for plums; and when he has done, make a meal upon cheese; and you must not wonder, nor quar∣rel at what he says in his humour, but Judge him by his Actions; and when he is in his fit, and raves most, put him into your bed, and fold him close in your Arms, Aunt; if he do's not rise as kind and as good a husband as he that sings Psalms best, hang me; why, you're a fool, aunt; a widow, &amp; dislike a longing Bridegroom! I thought you had known better; do you love a spurred horse, rather then a Duker, that neighs, and scrapes? I would not say this, but that I know him; let him not go out of your sight, for hoe's now in season, a Ripe mature hus∣band; No delays; if you let him hang longer upon hope his fruit will fall alone.
You are merry, Sir; But if I had known this humour. 
You'd have kissed him first; but being ignorant, let me make you blush; come, a kiss, and ell's Friends.—how now, Sir, again, again, Aunt, look to your self.
Um! By this light, sweet heart, and I thank thee; Nay wi∣dow, there's no jesting with these things—Nay, I am a Lyon, in my  Love: Aware, Puss, if you flatter me, for I shall deceive you.
Since all are cozened, why should I be troubled at my fortune; faith Gentlemen, what will you two give me for a wife, betwixt you?
Faith, they 're mischiefs dear bought, though a man get 'em for nothing.
I'm almost of his mind; and if other people find no more pleasure in a married life then I, upon my wedding day, I'd pass my time in the Piazza, with the Mountebank, and let him practise upon my Teeth, and draw'em too ere he persuades the words of matrimony out of my mouth again. I, I, M. Constant, you may laugh, you ha missed a wife; would I were in your case, the world should see how cheerfully I should bear such an affliction.
Jack, I ha made my peace at home, and by seeing others ship-wrack'd will avoid the danger, and here resolve, never to sigh again for any woman; they are weeds grow in every hedge; and trance∣planting of'em thus to our Beds gives certain trouble, seldom pleasure, never profit.
See where the enemy comes; now if you be wise, arm, and unite against him, as a common foe; he's come from his old Lady, designing a reconciliation; the Rogue's provident, and would fain have a Nest for his Age to rest in; Buff and Feathers do well in the youth and heat of thirty; but in the winter of old age, Captain at threescore, lame and lean, may lie with the Alma∣nack out of date.
The Parson's grown witty, and prophesies upon the strength of Bride-Cake; if I guess aright, thou'lt be hanged; for it is a truth, I have been endeavouring to make it appear, her fears were mistaken in me: but I find the witch more implacable then the Devil; the waiting-woman is harder to forgive her part, then my Lady. Faithful will not be reconciled, the merciless Baud is all fire and sword, no quarter; Bless me from an old waiting-wo∣mans wrath; she'll never forgive me the disappointing her of a pro∣mise when I was drunk; her Lady and she are coming, but in such a fury, I would not have the storm find you in the street; therefore. I counsel you to avoid the boys, and take shelter in the next house.
No, let's home, and with all diligence get our dinner, to defend us; and let the Porter dispute it at the wicket, till she signs Articles of peace.
Agreed.—
See how they pair now, it is not threescore year will part 'em now he has tasted a kiss or two.
Parson, I'll be your Bride-man.
It is well, Sir, I shall ha my time too.
I by this hand; nay, we will share fairly.
That's but reason, Wanton; and since he grows tame, use him kindly for my sake.
Can any of you digest Sponge and Arsenic?
Arsenic? what's that?
An Italian Salad, which I'll dress for you, By Jove, ever I'll walk in my Canonical-coat lined with horn; Death, if I suffer this, we shall have that damned Courtier pluck on his shoes with the Parsons Musons; fine y'faith, none but the small Levites brow
to plant your shooing-horn-feed in?—How now? 
Prithee, Jack, stay, and say something to the Gentlemen, by way of Epilogue. Thou art a piece of a scurvy Poet thy self, prithee oblige the Author, and give us a line or two in praise of his Play.
I oblige him? hang him and all his friends, and hurt no body; yes, I'm likely to speak for him; you see how I'ha been used to day betwixt you, I shall find a time to be revenged, let go my cloak; I have a Province, within, of mine own to govern, let me go.
Who, thy wife? faith stay, and give them an opportune∣tie; thy pain will be the sooner over: you see it is a thing resolved betwixt 'em, and now you're satisfied in the matter, be wise and filent; who knows what good she may do thee another time; I dare say, if she had as many souls in her as she had men, she'd bring thee a cure of her self.
Let me go, or I shall be as troublesome as you are injuri∣os, for all your Titles, Sir.
Lend me your cloak then, to appear more decent; you'd not ha me present Epilogue in Buff, whoreson Dunce, with a red nose.
Sir, my business is praying, not Epilogues.
With that face? By this light, it is a scandal to see it flame∣ing so near the altar; thou look as if you would cry top, in the face of the Congregation, instead of Amen.
You're an Ass, it is proper there, t'has zeal and servor in it, and burns before the Altar like the primitive Lamps.
I cry thee mercy; By this light, he'll make it sacrilege anon to steal his nose; thou'lt entitle the Altar to that Coal; was it not kindled Ex voto? nay, I will have your cloak.
Take it; would it were Nessus his shirt, for you and your Poets sake.
What, do's the Rogue wish it were made of Nettles?
By your favour, Sir; did you see any company pass this way? 
None, but the three Brides, and they are gone just before you.—Hark, the Music will guide you.
Is it certain then they re married?
Yes, Lady, I saw the Churches rights performed.
Why do's your Ladyship lose time in talking with this fellow; don't you know him, Madam? it is the rascally Captain, hid in a black cloak; I know you, Sirrah.
She has reason; now I mark him better, I should know that false face too; see Faithful, there are those treacherous eyes still.
Alas, you mistake me, Madam, I am Epilogue now; the Captain's within; and as a friend I counsel you, not to incense the Gentlemen against the Poet, for he knows all your story; and if you anger him he'll put it in a Play; but if you'll do friendly offices, I'll undertake, instead of your Pearl you lost, to help you to the Jewel, the Scotch Dictionary will tell you the value of it; let them go alone, and fret not at their loss; stay, and take my counsel, it shall be worth three revenges.
Well, what is it, Sir?
They say, you have a great power over the Parson; if you can prevail with him to express his anger in some Satiric Comedy (for the knave has wit, and they say his genius lies that way,) tell him, it is expected he should be revenged upon the elite∣rate Courtier that made this Play; if you can bring this business about, I may find a way, as Epilogue, to be thankful, though the Captain abused you to day. Think on it, Stephen is as handsome, when the Play is done, as Mr. Wild was in the Scene.
There's something of reason in what he says.—But my friend, how shall one believe you; you that were such a Rascal to day, in Buff, is it to be hoped you can be honest only with putting on a black cloak? well, I'll venture once again; and if I have any power, he shall sting the malicious Rascal; and I think he is fit for such a business. I'm sure he has the worst tongue; and a conscience that neither honour nor truth binds; and therefore it is to be belie∣ved, if he will rail in public he may be even with your Poet; I will cloth and feed him and his Muse this seven years, but I will plague him: Secret tells me, it was your Poet too that pawned me, to day, in the Tavern.
By my faith, did he; nay it was he that told me of your friendship with Jolly.
I wonder the Parson has been so long silent; a man of his coat and parts, to be beaten with a pen, by one that speaks sense by rote, like Parrots; one that knows not why sense is sense, but by the sound; one that can scarce read, nay, not his own hand; well, remember your promise.
Leave it to me, he is yours; and if our Plot take, you shall all have your shares in the mirth; but not the profit of the Play; and the Parson, more then his Tithe, a second day.
We will discourse of this some other time; and pray dispatch what it is you have to say to this noble company, that I may be gone; for those Gentlemen will be in such fury, if I stay; and think, because we are alone, God knows what.
It is no matter what they think, it is not them we are to study now; but these guests, to whom pray address your self civil∣lie, and beg that they would please to become Fathers, and give those Brides within; what say you, Gentlemen, will you lend your hands to join them; the Match you see is made; if you refuse, Stephen misses the Wench, and then you cannot justly blame the Poet. For you know, they say, that alone is enough to spoil the Play.


is here all the dishes, that are provided?
My Lord, there is all: and tic enough, were for a Princes table,
Ther's 24. several dainty dishes, and all rare.
Are these rare: no, no, they please me not,
Give me a Carbinadoed cheek or a tippet of a Cocks comb:
None of all this, here is meat for my Pallet.
My Lord, here is both Cock and Pheasant,
Quail and Partridge, and the best varieties the shambles yield.
Shambles, I am not tied to such a strait,
Give not me common things, that are in the shambles;
Let me have of the rarest dainties, dressed after the Italian fashion.
My Lord, here are nothing but rarities; please you to give me leave to crave a blessing,
That your Lordship may fall too and eat.
My Lord, is it your pleasure I shall.
you vex me,
Ho, ho, come away,
These Rascals torment me.
What is the matter my Lord: wherefore doe you call us.
call you quoth I:
It is time to call I think, when I am fine to waite:
Nay call and ask, yet cannot have what I desire.
What would you have my Lord?
Them fellows, bring them to me.
What will your Lordship doe with me.
Only cut off your ears.
That would be an unchristian action, a practice without a precede•t.
O cruelty, tyranny! Hold me, hold me, or else J dye:
Heavens support me under this tyrant.
Come Lawyer, your two ears will make me.
That is almost a little dish for rarity.
Will your Lordship be so cruel.
Our blood will be required at your hands.
This J doe, to make you examples,
That others may be more careful to please my palate.
Henceforth, let my servants know: that what I will, I will have done,
What ere is under heavens Sun.
What mkes your Grace here, my Lord.
My knife is something dull friend:
Therefore I make bold to sharpen it here,
Because an opportunity is here so ready.
Excuse me, Sir, you shall not doe it:
What reason have you to sharpen your knife on my stone: you'll serve me, as you did the other three? No, stay!
Isle make you free of the Grinde-stone, before you go away.
Oh man what doe you mean.
Hold down your head, it will blood you bravely;
By the brushing of your nostrils, you shall know what the paring of an ear is, Turn Boy.
O hold, hold, hold.
Turn, quoth. I, here is turning indeed, such turning will soon deform my face:
O I bleed, I bleed, and am extremely sore..
But who regarded hold before, remember the cruelty you have used to others, whose blood cries out for vengeance.
Were not their ears to them, as precious as your nostrils can be to you•
If such dishes must be your fare, let me be your Cooke,
Isle invent you rare sippets.
Right Reverend Sir,
What makes your Grace
In such a sad condition?
Tic sad indeed, time was, when all the land was swayed by me:
But I am now despised, bound fast, and scorned you see?
What shall I doe for ease.
I'll try conclusions for you;
I'll go in to him, &amp; to his wife; i'll woo them both, i'll speak them fair,
I'll tell them things they never knew, &amp; if I can, I will procure your liberty:
That so your Grace, may escape this danger.
There will be great difficulty in it?
What shall I do, my joys are gone;
My face defaced, and all my comforts left.
Fear not, there is yet hope: comfort your self.
I have a force, may chance, make Rome to flourish:
That your gray hairs, may once more sit in Glory,
Which England little dreams of.
O good husband, put in these Cormorants into this Cage;
They that have cut of ears at the first bout,
God knows what they may cut off next: put them in, put them in.
What mean you by this,
Only to teach you to sing.
Alas. we cannot sing, we are not Nightingales.
Come, come, husband;
We'll make them sing, before they come out again:
A Black-bird, and a Canary-bird, will sing best together.
Why should they be so strict to us.
Yet if we still abide it: though we dye, we dye in honour,
Our merits we shall leave for others wants, when we are gone.
Mirth quoth I:
If Tower-hill and Tyburne had their due,
We should have less Jesuits, and fewer Masse-priests?
There is many a man, that have merited a rope,
That have not yet met with an halter.
O my King ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, I cannot forbear laughing.
Why what is the matter Sirrah;
O the strangest sight, that ever I saw,
They have put the B. of Canterbury, &amp; the Confessor into a Cage together.
Did you ever see the like,
The one looks like a Crow, and the other like a Mag-pye:
I waited long to hear them sing, and at last 〈◊〉 did,
What note did they sing,
What note, I am sure it was 9 Notes and an half lower then they use to sing at Court.
What was the Song,
One sung thus:
I would I was at Court again for me,
Then the other answered,
I would I was at Rome again with thee
Well sirrah, you will never leave your flouts.
If I should, my Liege, I were not fit to be a Jester.
What news sir, what news, I pray you know you,
Correction doth waite sir, to catch up his due.
His due sir, whats that, I pray you tell me,
not blew cap, nor red cap, but cap of the See,
What caps are these pray you, shall I never know,
The caps that would us, and our Church overthrow,
O wellady, wellady, what shall wee doe then.
Weel wear tippet fool caps, and never undo men.
Did you never hear pray, of Lambeth great Pair.
Where white puddings were sold for two shillings a pair.
Yes Sir I tell you I heard it and wept,
I think you are broke ever since it was kept,
Broke I am not, you fool I am poor.
your master is sick you are turned out of door,
O wellady, wellady, &amp;c.
I might have been Easter once as well as you,
you Jested too much, which now you doe rue,
wherein have I jested, like a fool in place,
to work projects for such, who practise disgrace,
you fool will not profit make any thing done,
such profit make fools, son after to run,
O wellady, wellady, &amp;c.

I Ack Manly, well met.
Noble Sir William the hum∣blessed of your servants.
Come, thou shalt along with me.
Whither?
To see my Mistress.
May you thrive in your courtship to her: at this time I am engaged to other business.
Can any thing concern a Gentleman equal with a handsome Lady?
Yes, the receiving of money is more considerable with me at this time, than all the women in the world. But who is your Mistress Knight?
I dare tell thee, Madam Beaufield, the
Lady of spirit, and entertainment, the only Mag∣netick widow in the Town.
They talk her a wit, and a most supersti∣tious observer of persons, and their garbs; I no∣ver had the happiness to kiss her hand, or be known to her, but I converse with some who are very high and loud in her character; another time
Isle wait upon you. Who are these?
In what grotto hast thou spent thy time, that thou art ignorant of these people? These two are held the wits; That is the remarkable Jeerer of the Town, and 'has purchased to himself the title of a Jeer Major.
Why, Is there a Regiment of Jeerers?
You shall pardon me, there are sets of them, as there are of Fiddlers; there is first a set of Court Jeerers, spruce half-witted men, con∣fident, and fierce in their opinions; these are men that make themselves music, and their cloths make room for their wic; and go before in all comp∣niece: Then there is the town Jeerers, like Ho∣boys or Waits of the City, that think they are wise when they are loud, and make a noise when they come to Plays, to distract the next mans understanding. There are Jeerers at time of the year that go down into the Country, and in∣fact Wakes, and Fairs, and the Sizes, with their impudence, with which they save charges, and are never without the name of a great Lord, to whom they are cousin Germane.
But what has he deserved to be called 〈◊〉 Jeer Major, and to bear such a title? I have seen the Rooke.
An excellent ill nature has preferred him to opinion: the other has merited but the name of a Jeer minor; yet they can see me pleasant in their reproaches, and laugh in their own defence, which many times keeps off the cudgel.
Nay, Jeering is a blessing that every man may have if he give his mind to it: but wit (if I remember what I was taught) happens not to one amongst five hundred on 'em. But I forget my affair.
Shall's meet and be merry this Evening.
Theres no music in me without my sing∣ing birds about me, then I am a Lord, and when I put on my habit of Leister, I am his own excel∣lence.
Dost thou preserve that him or still?
I may chance by the false light of the Evening march to thy Lodging.
Dost know where tic? I am removed. 
So, no discoveries what Prince I am.
A match: that shape will beget us some mirch.
Your most humble servant. 
My Mistress is somewhat melancholy, if he come in that fantastical habit, we shall have rare sport beyond his expectation, to have the La∣dies laugh at him. 
This is very fine wit ysaith, and soon learned I think; a little more on it sweet Gentle∣men.
Suppose you were foxed last night; thus I come to you, and accost; Save you Sir; you must
know I must laugh all the while; how fare you Sir? Do not some fumigations remain, some va∣pours not dissipated, a kind of Vertigo, a weak∣ning of the Nerves, or so? Ha, ha, ha, what thinks your Worship of milk now, thin broth, or a Julep of pitiful Six for a penance to settle you, or a hair of the same whelp? Ha, ha, ha, there's wit for you.
There's no harm in the world in it, nor no exceptions if you laugh in the right place.
Now imagine you met an honourable Gentleman that had got a hurt in the groin; thus I invade you; but the laugh must hold me too.
By any means, I cannot choose but laugh my self.
There is no safe jeering without it.
Sir, you have been at push of pike and received a hurt, upon some unslaught in some fe∣male service, Ha, ha, ha; your breath is Aroma∣tick since you kissed your Mistress, and your water out-smells the violet, ha, ha, ha; by the powerful—yclipped Turpentine, tic true; what pity tic you went without a charm, or had no acquaintance with a Laplander, to make you Venus-shot-free? Ha, ha, ha; and how many french tennistalls have you in your flank now? ha, ha, ha.
You sate up at play all night, and lost your money; another now.
Not I a penny, I sent a buff Gentleman that looked big upon me, after an ill hand, twenty pieces upon half a dozen oaths.
A good pawn, keep his oaths, if he do not pay your money, take the forfeit, and if he be
a Gamester he'll be undone for want of swearing.
Suppose it lost?
Me thinks Cavalier you look pale since you came from the charnelhouse, did the bones affright you? you are a most religious Gentleman when you are at dice, and do so pray for 3 fives 3 foures at in and in: with what devoti∣on you look on the seven of Spades and eight of Diamonds at cribbish? ha, ha; how zealouly you invoke the Saints to fit you with cards at picket, or lebet.
I invoke the Saints?
I speak to the catholic gamester, that understands all games.
By the way though, doe you think there are any gamesters in heaven?
It is to be feared, they may lose so much upon earth, they will hardly purchase a place there, or if any get thither, (which must be excellent throwing) he would be more called upon, and perhaps pulled down again, upon every dispute at play to be Groom porter.
How like you these?
You shall both with me to my Mistress, and help to Jeer my rivals.
Your Mistress?
I Mistress Luoy, Lady Beaufeilds daugh∣la, my Landlady Mistress Ʋoluble has commend∣ed me to her, and I hope to carry her, if one Gentle. that she loves better do not get her away?
We'll jeer him to death.
That were an excellent way, I think there is no statute against that, I care not what becomes on him, he put bitter jests upon me to∣there
day before the Ladies, and I making use of your wit Gentlemen, he told me to my face, that I talked nothing but clinches; as I am a Gentleman he did.
Oh barbarous!
You shall wound him with his own weapon, and by a direction we can give you, you shall so jeer him, that he shall offer boot to change understandings with you.
We'll make him so ridiculous, he shall laugh at himself.
That will be rare; I have sent for my Mother to town to be acquainted with La∣dies, and learn dressing; my Landlady, hath pro∣missed to commend a Gentlewoman to waite upon her, and teach her the art of painting, and all the postures of a great woman; I do mean she shall marry some Knight or other, and be Ladified.
It will be necessary.
Though I say it, the woman is flexible, and has been in her days—My Father might have been a Knight, and he had not been an Ass, and loved his money; but we lose time, let's to my Mistress Gentlemen.
We attend sir. 
The same day, a Dolphin taken in a net at Woolidge, and ten live Pilchards in a Salmons belly—strange things! the 13. of July, the Caramountaine kittend in the Tower: an Eel∣ship spring a leak shooting the Bridge,—here are prodigious things. 
Mr. Newman.
Mr. Usher, how does your Lady?
She is in health.
And Mistress Lucy?
Both in the Garden. Sir you have good intelligence, what news abroad? a touch to your servant.
Alas you are acquainted with the state mysteries.
Troth Sir, I know little, or if I did, I would be loath to speak it, but to a friend, the times are dangerous.
You're right Mr. Formal, but be not nice, I know you are furnished with news, as well as some that give pensions, though it were to a Cap∣taine in these warlike-times, to have it made for 'em; you being a quotidian ambler upon imperti∣nent visits, must needs glean the secrets of the court and state.
Sir I dare trust you with any thing, but pray do not speak on it; there is a great man in the world—
Think you so?
That—
What has he done?
You shall excuse me; but—
What his name?
You shall excuse me for that too; a word to the wise; you can guess what I mean, and let that pass; and now we talk of state af∣fairs, there is a packet come out of the North, and abox—in your ear sir.
What is said to be in that packet?
Ther's the business, but that no body knows.
Is it possible?
Tak't upon my word; you are a friend, I hear further at Mr. Secretaries, but you must say nothing of it, you undo me if you doe, the King goes to Hampton Court next week, but how long he stays is uncertain. Sir, you see I put my self into your hands.
But is this done like a wiseman to reveal these mysteries, to trust these secrets to one you have not known above 7 Year, if I should inform what will become of you, and your estate? oh you must be cautious, though for my part—
Oh Sir! I know to whom I speak, and will tell you more, for I dare trust you with my soul; they say the Northern progress holds this year, and that the Elke is dead in the new great park
I hope not.
Tic as I tell you, by the fall of a tree, doe not you remember a tempest four nights ago? then it was, blustering times Mr. Newman.
That makes Ʋan Trump so troubled with the wind colic, but now the Hollanders, as they report, have many Engineers and Ma∣thematitians set a work, how to keep and vent it at their pleasure, and so to serve in Navigation for their ships, that there may be ventus liber, as well as ventus clausus, answerable to the two Seas.
Ha, ha! that's news indeed, alas mine is but domestic, but what do you hear of London Bridge? it is whispered by some it will, and some again point blank say it will not be repaired; but make not me the Author.
And I do hear the Camels decay at
Tiballs: but pray no more of it from me.
You shall not doubt me Sir, you do not hear of the Dolphin—
Of France?
Taken as Woolidge in a net.
Of Italian cutworke.
The news is not common of the Pile∣chards, the Catamountaine, nor the Eeleship?
Not a word.
You shall hear more; I am your servant. Here is Mistress Lucy Sir, and Mistress Ʋoluble.
I confess he has no overcharge of wit, that will be your happiness, he has a good estate, and you may live with more delight than a court Lady, he is a handsome man too, I am bound to give you my advise, for your mothers sake, whose servant I am by many obligations, she has been my customer for face-water, and pomatum these many years.
But if you be so skilful, as you are professed, and read in the secrets of nature, you can tell by your art where I shall fix my affection, doe not you know Mr. Newman.
I never see the Gentleman, but I am not ignorant that he matches in the Vanne, and leads the file of your amorous servants, but—
But what?
If you love your self.—
He is a well-bred Gentleman, and one deserves my good opinion, hoe's here.
They observe me— 
I kiss your hand fair Mistress Lucy: whats she that looks so like one of the Sibills?
Is this the Gentleman you declare so civil, and well-bred, Lady? If I have any skill take heed on him, he has an unlucky countenance.
This Gypsy will but cozen you.
She is excellent cunning, and has foretold str ange things, believe it.
If my Mistress have an opinion of her Art, she may do me a displeasure; I have heard much talk of this woman, some say she is a Witch too, and wears the Devil in her thumb Ring, I would not anger one of her Familiars. Take no of∣fence Mistress at the rudeness of my Language, this Lady shall give a very fair pawn, the word of a Gentlewoman, that I shall be of good beha∣viour, if you please not to interpret me too ha∣stily.
There is some texs in your forehead Sir that wants a comment, but Isle not so much study your satisfaction.
Nay, thou shalt not be displeased with him.
Alas, I am not angry; here is my Lady and Sir William.
You are Master of an excellent language Sir.
You honour me too much, it is because you are the excellent Subject Madam, and being the perfection of your Sex, an argument to create Eloquence in every tongue.
Then I must think you flatter; these prai∣ses are misplaced. I shall suspect you love me not, or are not wise.
Why Madam?
You take such pains, and make a pilgri∣mage to thats within your reach; I must confess I like Discourse, but think not all my soul placed in my ear; although I love a Lute well, it foal∣lows not I should dote upon a Cimball.
A Cimball?
And dance as I were story with a Taran∣tula, when you are at it, rosting of a Galliard? You overdo this instrument, give me your courtship in a phrase is fit to own and understand.
Your pardon Madam; I affect not bold and over-rack'd Hyperboles, although I might in∣sist upon the wealth and fullness of your merits, to which, all praise, that can flow from me, is Ju∣stice, such command you have upon your humble Servant, I rather wish my tongue a forfeit to per∣petuall silence, then with one harsh sound offend your ear; you'll give me leave I hope to say I love you.
This is English Sir, and some do call it sense; it is fair, and fit, when any Lady's private with her Servant; it is what I learned a child, I have not yet outgrown the knowledge.
Did you love so young?
I understand the meaning of your lan∣gauge, it is not perplexed, and you may love me too, and tell me so, and I may understand you; what need compartments here, freeses, and words of Architecture, that will make things hard to the un∣derstanding? As you could not build a sense in love without 'em? Yet I bar not the freedom of Dis∣course, and use of Metaphors: And you may praise us too in Verse, or Prose, to show the exal∣tation of your wit in company, but it is the worst
discourse when we are private.
If I had confidence she would direct me—action I believe when opportunity In∣vites—
To what good Knight? be not mistaken, I commend courtship in words, that are made round like pills fit to be swallowed, and not rag∣general bullets.
It is a strange Lady, I know not how to take her.
My Lady? Madam—
Art thou come?
Is it your Ladyships pleasure I shall read to day?
By any means, the Ladies will not fail, we should forget our Academy: Sir William we must entreat your patience, and Ma∣ster Newman. 
Madam, the Ladies.
Say I wait upon 'em.
Isle take my opportunity.
You will engage him to credulity, and prepare some mirth.
Monsieur Galliard the Dancer attends Madam.
He must give way to another exercise; Sir William you shall do us a favour if you please to entertain a little time with him in the next Chamber, our Lecture will not be long, and sweet Mr Newman the French-man will delight you with his discourses, he has a tongue as confident as his feet, if you can but humour him.
You shall command us Madam.
That Done we'll join societies and mirth. Come Mrs Voluble.
I hope you will excuse my imperfect∣once. 
IT is an infinite favour, (most excellent Ladies) and must needs speak the sweet∣nos of your nature and dispositions, that you're pleased to hear me, so weak and un∣worthy of the Chair, rather deserving to be in the number of Disciples, than a professor in any of the female sciences; but as your ver∣tues are more exemplary, in this honour to me, the humblest of your Servants, it will become me, in the gratitude to so noble a bounty, not to waste time, but succinctly to deliver, what I could not finish without trespass on your patience; at my last reading I did conclude with old Ladies, that will cozen Nature, and Time, and abuse the men they love best; to these I only add, it is not Mercu∣rye to change their skins like Snakes, but they must fill up wrinkles as well as hide gray hairs: your red leather is for Country Wenches, your white wash, or Spanish Fucus is the best, but a tire wo∣man,
or coverer of time or nakedness must be kept in pension: sor it is now fashionable to buy one of her apprencice Girls out of her time, as Lords and Gentlemen do Barbers boys. Amongst other ornaments, Ribbons challenge no mean place, the variety, and blazon of these, I have elsewhere examined. For your finest Laces, the Angel in Cheap, but they must be dearer then o∣theirs, because they come in Coaches, for pride or stateliness in any thing adds charges. Touching Gloves, might I advise, I would have a few select∣ed Ladies, to procure some ingenious Gentleman at a reasonable pension to lye Larger for them at Rome for Frangepane Gloves, and such other cor∣respondent things as may be of moment and great consequence to your Ladyships: But then I must advertise, and most seriously, that he may be a man of parts, and somewhat smelling toward the Roman Wash, that he may give you intelli∣gence of that State, and humours of the Gardi∣nils, or those that pretend to it, be they little or great, for this concerns the state Ladies here: For your swarfie Mountebank Italian, he utters sophisticated Holborn Gloves for Frangepane, Esse• Cheese for Parmesan, rotten post for sweet powder, pickled white Leather for Mushromes, and cozens more with his broken English, then the wits can get honesily with their best language.
The Merchant of Italian Saulsages, A meet Quack.
But then I would advise your Ladyships to have another Gentleman sent into Spain for perfumes, pocket Fans, orange flower water, Orange flower butter beauty, Aqua de Chedrey,
and many provocatives, as Country yerua, and Joco lata.
It is a very learned Gentlewoman.
For Holland, it is too dear in Spain, there∣fore for a conscionable cozenage over and above, here are honest Dutchman will serve you most faithfully. For Jewels, you may buy them at what rates you please, they add lustre to a Lady, and you may sell them at a fifth or sift part, which is very well for a great Madam, if you would put them off at the best rate, you must get some Do∣ctor of Physic, or broking Apocriphall Captain, to show them (as if there were fornication in it) behind the door, hanging or curtain, which makes his fingers like Jewellers cards to set rings on, for there are bawds for rings and Jewels, as well as for other commodities.
What do you think of this caution Ma∣dam?
For your Linen, it must be fine, and fresh every day, therein consists humane delight. For linen breeches, though some think them cleanly, in my opinion they imitate a Dutch Stove too much. For Aprons, plain Holland is most be∣coming, starched Lawn was in Queen Elizabeths time, and will not endure rumpling, every thing must be squared by use and elegance; but for your white Shoes, rich Roses, light-coloured silk Stock∣ings, and such variety below stairs, they are great Inducers, as a learned man told me, (I will not say a Divine) for Love, most excellent Ladies, doth sometimes ascend, as well as descend.
But still remember Ladies, that your Fan be so little, as not to lose the least smirk, or grace
of your countenance for it, for then being so small, when you put it to your face, some Courtiers may take it for a black patch. Then for your oaths, I protest is out of fashion, I profess for a Justice of Peaces Wise, I vow too masculine, in faith for a Chambermaid, In truth for a Landerer, As you hope to live, too like a Prayer; Never stir, would disadvantage a Lady many ways, besides visits; For the active wenches of the time, May they be damned eternally, and lose all their designs if it be not so; Upon my honour sounds well, which in a great Lady can never be forfeited if she be in love, for great women have their privilege of Nobility, and can never be forsworn like the Com∣mon people.
Is Perjury in women no breach of Laws?
You have the Doctors opinion.
One touch, if you grow old, which I omit∣ted formerly, When time, which is the mouth of beauty, creeps upon you, you must be sure to have so many leaves and curtains before your windows, that you may show your selves at more varions lights than the most cozening Mercer his faded and deceitful Wares, for the youth of your white Satin will be then but pearl colour at the best, it may be but ash-colour, and therefore re∣fuse no advantage to give it gloss, according to the conclusion of a modern Poet, which at this pre∣sent shall be mine.
Wise Ladies must refuse no Art
For age will snow upon their heart:
You have done us a great honour, and Ladies you shall not deny me this favour to taste of a small banquet that waits upon you in the
next room, shall I show the way. 
Me be content to have de little patience, and be my trot, me tell you, vat me have seen a to day, de fine sport in devarle, me come into de great man to day, me make de reverence Ala∣mode, come ill faut, and he make me de estrange a Sir reverence de tired time, dat ever you saw.
That was not civil.
Oh Monsieur, every man has not the activity of your feet.
By my fat, it is very estrange a ding, dat they will suffer a des men to be near a de King, a de Queen, de Prince, or de Princess, they vile marra de understanding very mush.
Why Monsieur that lies at the o∣there end.
Begar you shall excuse a me, for de Courtier Alamode, dere de vit lie in de foot, begar dere is nobody can be viseman, dat does no make a de most excellent reverence, dat is most certain, dat is the best ting in de hole varle.
I am clear of his opinion.
But do you think Caesar Sir, or most of the Emperors or worthies of the world, studied the liberal science of the foot, or puissant toe?
No, but begar dat make them dye all un∣fortunate, for if they had think of noting but de reverence, they might ha live a great a while.
Excellent well argued, and very clear in my understanding.
I confess the wisdom of it Sir, but
for the wit do you think that lies there?
Dat be de best vit can be possible, for your vit, vat is your vit? your vit is to break a de jest, vel, look you now a me, me vile break a de jest, dat is like dat a me lore, dat is like dat of de Knight, dat is like dat of de Ientilman, ha, ha, ha! dere is now one, two, tree very good jeasts, by my trot they are so very good jest, dat make a me sick wide laugh, and begar me vile make a de page, de lackey, &amp; all de fool in de court, break a des very good jest, very quickly, dat is a noting.
To any purpose?
What doe you think of the grave Aldermen? they are wise, and yet they doe not trouble themselves much about legs.
Be my trot, me speak a to de King, and to de Queen, to give me a patten, dat none shall teach a de Aldermen to make a de reverence but my self, and me vile undertake dat vet in one 12 a mont, but den they must doe nothing else, they shall make a de reverence, vet de Aldermen in de paris, and dance a Coran, a Cereban, a Moun∣tongue, and dat vile be very brave.
What faculties some men have?
But what shall business do in the mean time Monsieur?
Is not dis very great a business? may be∣gar, me vile undertake to de King and to de Queen to make a my Lore Moire de Sheriff and de Al∣aldermen very fine a mask.
And to write it Monsieur?
Awe, de write? dat is noting alamode, your speech two, tree, yard long, pshaw? give a me de quick a spirit, de fancy, de brave scene,
de variety of de Antimasque, de nimble a foot, no matre de sense, begar it vole be de brave¦ting in de christian varle.
There is no question to be made.
And be my trot if me have a noder patten for de counsel learned in the law, for to teach them de reverence, dat vile be very great varke, but my diligence, and skill in dat matre, have no despair, to effect in time dis great benefit, and dat vile make a de law flourish; and Englan a brave Englan, begar.
I won't doubt your abilities, but I fear the capacity of the Gentlemen you undertake.
But what will you look for now, for your pains Monsieur? that is considerable.
Begar me look for very mush, for tic mush pain, and tic brave ting, beside me look for a stature of de brass, in de palace yard, ven me go out of dis varle.
You will deserve it as a rare patriot; but what manner of reverence would you have the grave lawyers to Imitate, you must consider their robes:
Observe a me.
Such a reverence under your favour, would not become men of their gravity, one al∣ways looks for a Coranto after it, and provokes a man to whistle, or fing when he sees it, and makes one think still, what you would have a month, a little too much of the activity.
Begar you no understand de matre, vere is your brain? dere is noting in de varle like a dat motion, for de Ientillman, and for de Ientilvoman.
Yes by your leave sir there is some∣thing
else that is as good for them.
I vile tell you now, begar, here is a de kinsman dat is a me, and he live here very much time, before he come, they vent in vet deir toes, and hold der cloak just a dere, and de hat so, fie, le diable! and now they valk vet deir toes out for brave genty, you call dat a de splay foot, but me vonder dat de Lady no come, begar me no use to dis patience, and de vaite, pray tell you Madam dat me have autre business vet de Lore, and de autre Lady have de use of my foot begar.
Oh Monsieur by no means.
Let us prevail.
Tic no good you hold a me, begar, me no stay two minute to save a your soul, dat is de re∣solution of de Cavalier de France.—
Would any man believe there should be so much folly in this Cubit square?
Do you think he is a French Dancer? let that answer you, and wonder he has no more Caprichios. But these Ladies are very tedious, we must have this Lecture put down.
They are more like to purchase Gresham College, and enlarge it for public Professors, you may live to see another University built, and only women commence Doctors.
But now we talk of learned women, you have been acquainted with Mistress Voluble, has she the abilities the women talk of? they say she is a Fortune-teller.
She is for more then Artificial White and Red, some think her guilty of the Black-Art, she has foretold so many strange things; she has had two Husbands, and prophesied long before, how,
and when they should give up the Ghost, if she be not a Witch she has the more wrong, for she is be∣leaved a devilish cunning woman.
Possible!
There's no• a Lady with child but con∣sults her Astrology, whether it shall be male or female; and the waiting women how long they shall keep their maidenheads, and who shall fa∣there the first borne, the Master or the serving-man; she is held a Sibill in the City, and tells oracu∣lously whether the Husband or the Wife shall die first, how, when, and where, and all this some∣time by observation of the hand, or forehead; she can see a maid through a mask, and is excel∣lent at stolen goods, for she can see a thief through a millstone as well as a conjuring glass; in brief, she is held prodigious at Divination, and most specially seldom fails in her Judgment of the two destinies, Matrimony, and Hanging, this I have heard Sir.
Sr William Your Servant, Master Newman? that's he.
Jeer him soundly.
What Gentlemen are these?
He has betrayed his ignorance already, he does not know us.
What, not the Major, and the Minor?
Not the Major, nor the Minor.
Cede majori Sir, Cede majori.
Parce minori Sir, Parce minori.
Here will be a fine conclusion from these premises, and they were worth considering.
These two are wits.
Are they your wits? Pray heaven you may not lose 'em.
If you love wit observe a little, and if I do not make you laugh, never laugh while you live.
I thank you Sir.
You shall here how I will jeer Newman, my Rival now; such wit, wit of the last Edition: Let me have fair play, and these most ingenious friends of mine shall be judges.
I think so, twill pass time till the La∣dies come.
Mr Newman, you are a pretty Scholar, pray what is wit?
A thing you want.
A very pretty Problem.
Will you or these Gentlemen be bound to understand me?
Ha, ha, ha, that's a clinch, to under∣stand me.
A clinch?
I understand none.
Oh sir, a palpable clinch; Ha, ha, ha, ask my friend.
Is that your opinion?
Theres another clinch in faith, ha, ha, ha.
Pray sir, what is it a clock?
The mystery of this?
What is a clinch sir, do you know what it is?
I neither know, nor care what it is, so I laugh, and swear it is a clinch, that's disgrace and reproach enough to any man. With what ease can we cry up our own wit and another down, only by
saying that's a clinch. I think I ha jeerd him.
Oh the ways to wit are much shortened in these latter times, it is a picant age.
They have a gunpowder-plot to blow up sense; pray Gentlemen take truce with your spleens, and the wisest of you three inform me what is wit; you have; no patience to hear me; or if you will not define it, speak something that is witty, and in fashion.
Isle tell you then:
You speak English to be understood, O base!
What language is your wit?
English, but elaborate, for example—now beat up your kettle drums.
Sir, if my optics fail not, I have read
Each mystic line within your brow, my Genius
Is much exalted at your gaudy Physiognomy;
Shal's to the house of mighty noise and surfeits,
There tinctiour souls with blood of purple grape?
VVhat's all this?
Ha, ha, I thought you were ignorant.
Give him the Paraphrase.
All this is, he remembers perfectly he has seen you before.
And desires you but to go to the Tavern, and drink a pint of wine; here's language!
Is it possible?
What a deal of Embroidery is spent upon I am glad to see you well; How long has this been a vulgar language? You would court a Mistress rarely in this Cabal.
But how shall a man beget such high conceits?
Have you a desire to know Sir William? shall I tell him?
If he will make it a secret.
Why, turn your self round as fast as you can, and the first things you speak, your head being dizzy, will be these.
What a heavy of Buffoons have we here?
We are at your mercy Gentlemen; but you that had a patience to expect so long, cannot want virtue to forgive, since we had no intent to make so great a trespass; whore's Monsieur Gal∣liard?
Madam, he's gone, something displeased you had no more regard to a Gentleman of his quality; his time was precious, and some other Lords and Ladies expected him.
His absence will admit of easy pardon, it is a most superstitious fool; what Gent. are these?
They are things were meant by nature, Madam, a cure for melancholy, we have had such sport and non-sence with 'em
We shall lose time upon 'em, please you, we'll take a turn in the Gallery.
Mistress Lucy be tender-hearted to these Gentlemen.
They are only fit for your compassion.
They are worth your acquaintance, Ma∣ster Newman knows 'em; have not their wits a pretty edge?
Dismiss your Beagles I shall beat you all three else, and monstrously, indeed I shall; be ruled, and keep your wits warm, I shall sling out like winter.
I thank you sir and you be in earnest; I
protest Major, and Minor, the man's in wrath, away.
How now Iames.
I am glad I ha found you sir, your mother's come to town, she rode behind me.
Not too loud, where is she? I would not have it known till she have other clothes, and bet∣la breeding.
She's at your Lodging sir.
Mistress Ʋoluble, my mother's come by directions, mum, and make haste; sweet Mistress Lucy, I beseech you take it not unkindly if I de∣part.
By no means noble sir.
This is my man that has brought me news out of the Country forsooth.
None of your Tenants dead I hope?
Some are Coppyholders, and I hope you wish me no harm, but I vow it is not my fault that I must take my leave so abruptly.
You have a cheerful licence sir.
As I hope to make new Leases, and sell a hundred Acres of wood this Term, I am very sorry, but I will waite upon you in the Evening. Noble Mr. New.
Ha, ha, that's a clinch.
I am your humble Servant.
Another Clinch I protest. 
Now we have opportunity I prithee Mrs Voluble for my sake tell him his Fortune; I have been a s•tor to know your destiny.
It will be a favour, it was in my ambition to desire it.
My Lady desires your presence in the gallery.
I must observe her command, but you may satisfy the Gentleman in my absence, and Mr: Newman when you know how the stars have determined of you, make not me a more stranger.
I shall be only fortunate to be yours.
Now Mistress Ʋoluble, if you be acquainted with my stars, and know what fortune they de∣cry me, I stand full prepared; what lines are in my forehead, you observe so?
Pray let me see your hand.
Freely command it.
Some that doe make a trade of fortune∣telling (which is beneath my practise) flatter mea for their base end of profit, Isle be plain.
Truth loves no other habit, you pre∣pare me to give you the more faith.
Tic very strange, but this is most pro∣pheticall, you are—
What?
In love.
It is very likely.
It may not prove so lucky, love is a ma¦lanchoy business.
I think it be. Is this all you can tell by your art?
You would know your destiny.
What please my stars and you?
Take this for oracle then, you will do something in a melancholy humour will enda•¦ger your neck.
My neck? shall I be hanged? better the witch were burned.
Fare you well Sir. 
A pox a your prognostic, she has put me
Into a sweat, and I doe more than half
Believe she is a witch, or worse, in a melan∣choly humour; must I doe something to endanger my neck? unth? I shall put my self into a des∣pirate melancholy with thinking on it; I will be mercy, it is time to laugh and sing, thoughts doe not vex me to a new tune, ther's no way but to a Tavern, Isle seek out company.
Love by your leave a while, and lazy folly,
Sack is the Antidote to melancholy. 
I Have obeyed you son, but I shall never sadge with these things you talk of.
Then you're an ass, every child can doe it.
I, if I had been a Gentlewoman of a child, much might ha been done.
Alas after a little time, you will take pride every day of your self; I wonder this wench
comes not! what? your son has a care of you, and it is never too late to learn to be a Lady; this maid I commend to you, is a very rare dresser to a pin, and will keep your linen with all variety of sweet bags and powders, that can be imagined; and for your rich gowns, she will preserve 'em with the new fashion-sereclothes, and make them outlast Egyptian bodies.
But must my old Mistress be a Lady? that will be fine in faith.
The Taylor has taken measure for a Lady I am sure, and three or four yards of Sat∣tin, more than will serve for a Gentlewoman.
Then she mun be kirstned, and called Madam.
Peace and harken to my Landlady.
Besides she has the rarest receipts to de∣stroy moathes, and such a sovereign medicine a∣against fleas, that your maids need never to squeak as if they were ravished, peeping into their smocks before they go to bed.
That will be fine.
The weneh I tell you on, knows how to consume Corns too, and for fidelity about your box of teeth, false hair, your glass eye.—
My Mother has two eyes of her own, but that one squints.
Then for all manner of Caudles, Aleber∣ries, Posits, and preserves in all kinds, and should you lye in this maid will be the most diligent creature about warming of clothes, and for broths and gellies most excellent, and for all strengthners of nature; then if any of your wo∣men be to apt to conceive any thing that is ill,
she hath her drinks of retention, and expulsi∣on—but Madam
She is no Lady yet.!
Sir I speak what I foresee, and there∣fore among our selves, Madam again, this maid is very discreet, you will know what that means, not troublesome when your Ladyship would be private, nor suffer any else to trouble you, and beside she will never be in love, which is no small matter for a waiting woman; she is here already—
Mrs. Nice you are fortunate to be recom∣mended, to attend this, (but a Gentlewoman yet.).
She is too fine.
Hold your prating, and hear my Land∣lady, have not you clothes to come home?
I shall think my stars have been care∣full of me, if I may have the happiness to show my duty to so noble a Lady.
She calls me Lady too.
They know what will become on you.
Oh that I could speak so gainely; I am but new come out of the Country, but if you please to be as good as your word, I will doe the best I can, to be thankful, as they say.
My mothers very raw, you must coddle her, you will have but a foul hand with her, doe you think she will ever come to any good? the truth is, I am ashamed on her, and therefore be not a known that she is my mother, till you have disciplined her, she must live very privately.
How shall her name, person and estate be published? do not you mean to have her a La∣die?
By any means sir, and let me be one of her Gentlemen.
I have it; do you observe the maid I commended to her? She is a Gentlewoman al∣ways bred among Ladies, and knows how to talk, and carry her self, before any Knight or Lord in the Court: What, if for the more expedite way to your mothers instructions this wench should take upon her sometime to be her Mistress, and in her name, before strangers, exercise some pride and courtship? it is a nearer way by example than precept to arrive at any thing; and by observing her Fashion, Garb, and Language, your mother may be sooner ripe for a Ladyship by at least two months, beside all the rules she may receive from us in private.
Admirable! My mother is a towardly old woman.
Old? you do not know how painting may transform Age; and the wench is not so young as she seems; howsoever this will be only to stran∣gers, and you may with more reputation own her for your mother among Gallants, it is but saying she was married at twelve, and you popped into the world before thirteen.
I will leave her to your tuition, and this Gentlewoman's education.
Then it is thus Madam, come hither Nice.
Iames, thou shalt wait upon me to my Mistress when thou hast better clothes.
I have a new suite coming up from top to toe.
Isle never live in the Country again, such another clod was I when I came to London; mo∣there
you must be dutiful, it is for your own good; but do you hear Landlady, have you spoke the powerful word to my Mistress? Shall I have her from Newman?
I have read his destiny, and if things hit with his credulous nature, he will make himself incapable of her affection; you are the next in preferment, never fear it, and leave your mother to our method and government, we will both edi∣fie, and Ladifie her.
With all my heart: buoy Lady mother.
If please you we'll withdraw; you must be secret Iames. 
What have we here?
The Ghost of Leister?
Thus I have seen him painted,
It is some humorous Gentleman.
A proper fellow?
It is not dark enough; how they gape at me?
Let's make sport with him, he shows admirably by twilight, he has not travelled far sure; such a shape would get money in Barthol∣mew Fair.
Are you a high German sir?
Yes, it is a Fencer; did you not hear of a Swiss that came over to be beaten at eight several weapons?
By your favour sir, no, it is no high Ger∣man, those breeches are not worn in Switzer∣land,
there is something of the codpiece—
It is not His Majesties Operator for the Teeth, that hangs about Fleet-bridge.
He's not so handsome.
Were not you one of the brothers that guarded the Dial at Bow Church, and used to put Cheapside in mind of their quarters?
No, he wants a Pollaxe; do you think he came not off some Conduit?
I am sure he came not off of the saltcellar, He is a size too tall.
These rogues will draw a Regiment of Prentices about me presently, and then shall I be apprehended for some sea monster, and thrown into the Thames at the next Stairs, to show their worships how well I can swim—have you any thing to say to me?
It is English that he speaks, he is one of us.
I am one that will venture to beat you both in the same language, if you leave me not the sooner.
It is some that skulkes in this disguise for debt; we will say we are Officers, and pretend to arrest him.
Nay then have at you bandogs—
A reskue?
Hold.
Down with the Bailiffs, arrest a Gentle∣man in the Kings high way— 
So, so, he is escaped. 
You cursed tadpoles, cannot a Gentle∣man
walk in the streets, but such Tenterhookes must catch him by the cloak?
Noble Master Newman, we are your servants; do not you know us? we are no off∣cers.
Ha? If my optics err not, I have read
Each mystic line within your brows,
Ye shall both—
Have our skins cut into measures.
To the Tavern with me.
With all our hearts.
We will be drunk together.
You shall command us..
At my new Tavern where the wine shall flow as at a Coronation; fifty Fiddles, and a noise of Trumpets come along with me; you two shall send your tickets out for wenches.
Of all complexions, and degrees, from the Madam Alamode, to the humble Wastco∣teere. 
I beseech you Mrs Lucy make not me the Author, I affect Mr Newman, but this I received from good intelligence.
I am miserable; I did not think his nature could degenerate into so wild a change, it is some witchcraft, I must grieve for him though I dare not show it.
There is a report, I would be loath you should name me in it, but they confidently say; I dare not justify upon my knowledge, that he has kilt—
Good heaven defend; then I am more un∣done.
Nay, these are the fruits of wine and sir∣fets; I did not see him bleed, but I heard it from a man of quality, and one that had been Coll∣ctor in the Parish, who told me for certain that Mr Newman did kill him.
Whom? my afflicted heart.
It was an Ossicer that was slain.
The more unpardonable.—Where?
In the Parish of Alhallowes Barking, the Bell man never dawnd since, coming drunk out of a Tavern at twelve—he made no more ado—there was not such another dog within the VVals; it waited upon the foresaid Bell-man a nights in His Majesties service, to waken the Pa∣rich, and all day was hired out by a Blind-man, that begged, with a Bell about his neck.
Is that all the murder he has committed?
All? you do not consider the blind Beggar that's undone by it, or who shall carry the Lantern at midnight, to light Gentlemen to the best Ale, and a Bawdy-house; but for my part Isle be no evidence, if the City will suffer such an in∣justice within their Walls I can be silent, and think.
Would this were all the danger, but I sear since he took up this rudeness and strange carriage he may deserve more sorrow.
I love not to meddle in other men's affairs, but I know something.
I prithee tell me all.
The Tavern he frequents he has made his Pheater at his own charge to act intempe∣rance; o'er the great Room be uses to be drunk in, they say, he has built a heaven, a Players hey∣ven,
and thence a Throne's let down, in which, well heated, successively they are drawn up to the clouds to drink their Mistress health, while the mad mortals adore their God of Grape, and gaping look like earth that's chap'd with heat, although before within three minutes they were drenched.
Dost know that place?
You shall excuse me, I know nothing.
Prithee be not so cautious, I am his friend, and pity him; if for my sake thou woo't but find him out, and tell him I desire to change but a few words, trust me, I may amply requite this service.
You must then keep secret what I un∣dertake, Isle do it. Be cautious to whom you speak, we must be circumspect. I will go off invisible. 
Monsieur Galliard, my Lady expects you.
Begar me no like a dat reverence, me vile change a dat:
It is the French fashion as you taught Me Monsieur.
Oy, tic de French fashion, but de French fashion is always to change, and dis reverence displease a me very mush, because you go back, back vet your buttock, as if some vote take you by dat, to vat me vile give a no name.
Monsieur Galliard my Lady will be here presently.
Sweet Mrs Lucy.
Dat de reverence is no good of de man, me must change dat too; by me trot me doubt dat dis great business vile almost break a my brain,
dis great varke, and before a mask of de King and de Queen, me can eat a no meat, no drink, no sleep, and me grow so very a lean, vet de contemplation, a so much, by my trot de privy counsel is no so much troubled as me be vet dis, oh, le Diable! deirs is noting, they sit all the vile they doe deir business, me bissey bo'te head, and de foot cap a pie, in de french tune, and dat is great matre begar.
You esteem it highly Monsieur.
Me tell you, and me tell you no tale, tic great matre to make a de Lore, to make a de Lady, to make a de Gentleman, to make a de Gentile∣woman, and de autre man to dance, and to make a de good reverence, for begar dat vile make a de King, de great kin in de varle.
How can that be Sir?
Me tell you, ven they are so bissey, to learn a de dance, they vile never think of de Re∣billion, and den de reverence is obedience to Monarchy, and begar obedience is ale de ting in de varke.
I'll swear your state affairs lie in your foot, and you are wifer there, than some heads are, and may be a president for after ages; but what music would you govern the people by?
Begar by de best french fiddles can be got?
What think you of an Irish harp, a state organ, or a pastionate voice to a lovers lute?
Des dull tings make a de men melancho∣lique, and den they think on de Devil, and de
treason, and do any ting dat is no good, but be∣gar des french fiddles doe fiddle all deis tings out of deir head, vet such a Jerk, as ma foy make a them so fantastical, and make a them as good subject, as any is in de France begar.
I must waite upon my Mother.
She will be here immmediately.—
She is not right yet.
Here be one of my coliers, Monsieur Simon∣platon, say you no dat de french fiddle make a de brave government in de varle?
I say any thing becomes a Gentleman.
Observe you dat? he have been but two are mont and he say any thing, dat is very brave? he have de grand understanding in de foot; tell a me, ven you hear a de little fidell, vat is your think? is your head no free from de treason, and plot of de rebel, as your leg? begar you no stand upon de ground for Joy of de Coran, de Cerebran, de Marquess, de Mountague, ha!
My Lady.
Me be your humble servant Madam, and stay one two tree hour.
I am now ready for you Monsieur, come Lucy the practise of the last he taught us.
The Gentleman you expect Sir VVilliam is come.
Madam prepare your self for mirth, twill be a sight beyond the pageants.
We'll not be seen at first, Lucy with∣draw.— 
What means this flourish? have you a play in hand?
To bid your excellence welcome to this lodging.
Fore Jove he looks prodigiously, vouchsafe
Us the honour of your hand.
Ha!
Vat Antic be dis?
One of the supporters of the Brewers Arms.
Ha, ha, ha, does he take upon him to be a Prince too, and will he speak?
These Ladies have ambition to kiss your hand, and have a great desire to know, how fares the camp at Tilbury, and please your Ex∣cellencie.
It is one of Arthurs Knights of the round Table.
With his circular sippets; would you think that a pygmy poisoned should swell thus?
I am betrayed, there's no retreat with honour, I must be confident.
Laugh and Jeer him handsomely.
Oh that the Major, and the Minor had been here now, they would teeze him in faith, Monsieur, ask that Maypole and he can dance.
Plait il Monsieur? a la Galliard, de Goran, la Princess, le Buckingham, heigh!
Put up your rosin, and your cats∣guts
presently and be gon, or I shall find a grave for you in the pocket of my sleeve, and this shall be your winding sheet.
Me no play dat lesson, pocket de sleeve, dat is no tune de France, poket, le grand pock:—  pardon moi Monsieur: me put up my fidell and be gon, adieu Madam, Servitor gentilhomes; pocket de sleeve? 
But I must not seem angry, Lady, my business is to you.
Business to me?
I am bold to present a suit to you, I confess it was not made by a French Tailor, I can make a leg and kiss my hand too after the fashion of my clothes, this served in those honest days, when Knights were Gentlemen, and pro∣per men took the walls of dwarfs; here's a belly piece, that looks like armour, with what come∣lines may a man unbutton his doublet, when he seems to take the wall to make urine? your sleeve so near your nose, with a handkerchief, which I take out thus with a grace, after Emuncti∣on, I put up again, with the corianders hanging out, Geometrical breeches in several slices, in which a man is not ashamed of his thighs, nor hides his bow legs, which at the bottom sir∣rounded with points make him look like a rough∣sooted Pigeon, these things were worn when men of honour flourished, that tamed the wealth of Spain, set up the States, helped the French King, and brought Rebellion to reason Gentle∣men.
So they doe now.
Peace pepper corn; and all this at less charge than a masque comes to now, with the rare and new invention of hobbiehorses; which of our two habits (be you Lady, but the indifferent Judge, and squint not,) is the more grave and manly, his lean upper chin, or this goodly promontory? my Trunks with a round walk paved with gold and silver, or your trouses, cut close to your dock, and drawn on with a screw? in which if you venture but half a crown, looks like a poltisse, or a swelling in the groin; your habit is fantastical as the time, you squirt into your doublet, which you wear so careless as you had not buttoned it since you came from a bow∣die house, where men of this garb, coming from the stews, march with that gravity as they came from a conventicle, so soherly they would carry it.
I see whoring was equal in all times, only the carrying of it.
Why that's all?
But surely I doe wonder, how my Grandfather could kiss my Grandmother, or embrace in that strange apparel.
They made a shift Knight, or else your wise worship had not been here; but that I want so much beard, I could show how your Grandfa∣there stroked his three or four handful of hair, to the terror no doubt of the standers by, and could stab I warrant you, with his two handed beard then, as well as you with your dagger beard now. It was never a good time since these clothes went out of fashion; oh, those honourable days and persons!
Is it possible?
As how?
I pray enlarge your self.
To have seen but a St. Georges feast then.
Why, what difference sir?
When they were installed, to see the twenty mile to Windsor strewn with blew∣coats, feathers and cognizances, as they do coun∣try towns with boughs, and flowers for Princes Entries, and not to go privately in a coach, with a page and a barber to cut off charges.
How doe you like this Gentleman, Is it not a pretty humour?
Then you should have the best knight of the Country, with the ragged staff on their sleeves.
The Bear, the Boar, and Talbot with his tuskish white,
Oh so sore that he would bite,
The Talbot with his Tuskish white
Soudledum Soudledum;
The Talbot with his Tuskish white Soudledum, bell.
The Talbot with his Tuskish white
Oh so sore that he would bite
Orebecke soudledum, sing orum bell.
Every Knight had his hundreds, and these would take up all the Taverns in the Town, be druoke to the honour of their Lords, and rather than not pay their reckoning, pawn their chains, though they pawned something for them the night before, and such merry catches then, as
The Hart loves the high wood,
The Hare loves the hill,
The Knight loved his bright sword,
And the Lady loved her will.
So the Ladies do still.
It may be so, but for your Knights bright Sword it is at pawn, or at home in his Armoury; then we had, God bless the Duke of Norfolk, there was a jest, and another Song.
The great Choe bent,
The little Choe bent,
Sir Pierce leigh under the line;
God bless the good Earl of Shrewsbury
For he's a good friend of mine.
He's very confident.
Alas, he is compelled to it.
How do you like this Mrs Lucy, is he not a pretty ill-favour'd Gentleman in this habit?
He sings rarely.
No question he can dance too, in that disguise he looks like famous Cartel the dancing. Master in Queen Elizabeths time, I have seen his Picture.
And he with your Worships favour, was held a wise man, and for his gravity he might have been Treasurer, he went with that settled and solid Pian-piano.
And when he danced a measure, you should have had him with his Rapier, short Cloak,
his black Cap, and his white Feather, his single and double, both backward and forward, with that excellence—
And now he must be in Cuerpo, or like a fellow on the ropes, or a Tumbler when he shoots his body through a hoop; there was music then, and a Heaven and Earth, beyond your brawls, or your Mountague, with a la, la, la, like a Bachana∣lian dancing the Spanish Morisce, with knackers at his fingers.
It must needs be a rare sight.
He plaid to himself on a grave Lute, or a modest Citterne, with a politic quill, far beyond your Geofrey fiddle, or your French kit, that looks like a broken faggot stick, at the biggest, and sounds as if it had got the French disease, when it snivels out a Coranto, or so hoarse with a cold, as if some great base Fiddle had filenc'd it.
What misery is it, the Monsieur is gone now? here had been a French Duel.
But had you seen my Lord Lofty dance the Galliard, with such capers, such half capers, such turns of the toe, and above ground, you would have sworn 'em sound for nine Generations, and for Lavaltoes, La, la, la, &amp;c. and then the Lady.
How did he use her?
With wonderful skill, he put his right arm about her, and took her lest hand in his, and then he did so touse her with his right thigh and leg, and list her up so high, and so fast, and so round—
As what I pray, be courteous.
Marry as soon as he had ended his dance she would lye down as dead as a swinged chicken,
with the head under the wing, so dizzy was she, and so out of breath; and all these wonders were extant Knight when this old Cap was new.
Is not this very fine sport Madam?
Sir, you're welcome; pray excuse me, if being prepared for some folly, your garb and per∣son seemed at first ridiculous; you have changed my opinion, and there wants but such a noble lea∣der to reduce, and make this habit fashionable; it shows a proper man, and if I were worthy to ad∣vise, or could lay an obligation upon you, I should take it for an honour if you would often visit me in these ornaments, I like 'em infinitely, and the Wearer shall be ever welcome; please you we'll walk and talk a turn in the Gallery.
You too much grace me Madam.
How's this?
I have wound my self into a pretty business,
She neglects me.
In my judgment it is an indifferent pret∣tie fellow, but that his clothes are out of fashion.
They are most becoming; I do not like your new fantastical shapes, that transform a man from his masculine aspect; you appear to me like a Jackanaps; there's a waste, and a Long lane cut close to your honchos. 
Hum! she takes after the old one, I will try and shift my self, if the mother be taken with the habit in Qu. Elizabeths days, why may not the daughter affect that in K. Jameses, and so the humour run in a blood? I am resolved; she loves sing∣ing too, I am furnish' with Ballads, o'my consci∣ence
this will do it; Isle fit her with a fashion, and about it presently. 
They are here again, and laugh at me: How familiar the Turtles are?
Ha, ha, ha.
We'll taste some air in the garden, ha, ha, ha.
So, so, if I did love this widow for her self, what a case were I in? but I must not sit down thus, and something must be thought on for my honour. 
SO, so, thou dost carry it excellently, it spreads like a Proclamation, what a rich widow lies at my house, her wealth, and wit, must be exercised.
She must not appear to be herself yet but in private, and the Chiause her Son has be∣stowed this Jewel upon me for expedition, for he dares not yet acknowledge her; she wonders at her¦self now she is painted, &amp; swears in her conscience she looks by her glass like one of four and twenty, and simpers, and licks her leathern lips as she had eaten Marmalade.
Sir William has heard of her, and (upon some affront, as I conjecture received from my Lady) has writ to me, and articled already to dispose her affections, I expect him every minute.
He will discover us.
He shall never see thee act her part.
Do you think he can affect her?
Courtiers do not marry into the City for love, and this Farmers wife has wealth enough to
buy a Ladyship; here's the gull, away and be dili∣gent. 
They'll fit you as well as my self for whom they were made in the Country.
How now sir, preparing for a race?
Is no body else with you? Do not en∣quire what stratagem is in hand, there be more ways to catch a Mistresses heart; how does my mother?
She is pretty apt for one of her years: I can tell you news, there is a Knight about her already.
She shall have him.
Not with your favour if a greater person Interpose, I have so much care of her honour, now she is my charge.
Mistress Voluble, here's a Footman, laced all over, enquires for you, he serves a French Lord, he says he must needs speak with you, he has a letter. 
What if this Lord come hither for the same purpose?
Tic too much happiness; Isle not be
seen thus, nor let my Mother appear in her roughcast, use the Footman kindly, if his mes∣sage concern us, away— 
And will this Fashion become me, dost think? I prithee tell me some old stories in to'ther reign, thou can talk and make me ready too.
Ah sir, I knew a time, when two and twen∣years was but a merry Christmas, nothing but Ambassadors, Masques, Plays, Entertainments, Hawking, Hunting, Winter and Summer, New-Market and Roiston morn now, ha! had you seen the Court foxed upon Gouries night, and the Gunpouder treason began then; oh we had rare sport, and then every body was knighted, they hardly lest a Gentleman in those days; and afterword they got a trick of making Lords.
For what?
I know not that, but they hardly left a Knight, man, woman, and child were made right honourable.
Right honourable, right worshipful, and well beloved, I have heard that in the Coun∣tree•y.
But the fashion of welbeloved is left off, for we doe not now love one another.
But had you no misfortunes?
Faith Sir, a rainy day was the worst, and that had but made the ground more soluble the next day for hunting.
No complaints James?
Oh yes sir! I hard a Gentleman complain mightily that he had lost the highest flying tassel gentle, that ever was seen, another that he had
pricked his grey Nag, that was an excellent buck∣hunter; a third, that he had fretish'd his best hound, Beauty, and that Lily was killed at a Bay a stag-hunting, it had almost cost the Genleman his life.
And what else James?
By my troth sir, a Gentleman waiter, that shall be nameless, removing a pasty of Venison, spilt it all, on a new satin doublet, and spoiled it utterly, there was such laughing, but his Master being gracious gave him a suit for his doublet, I think it was a Knight; but the Knight market is risen now.
I and the Lord Market too, James.
And please your worship, they say, the Herald would not make a Gentleman now, under ten pound.
Oh yes, they'll take reason to my knowledge, and give the prettiest fantastical arms, I have all the colours of the Rainbow in my new coat, every fool may be a Gentleman of three generations now.
I can derive my self knave three de∣scents under your ancestors.
Then thy children may write them∣selves knaves of blood, take that upon my Heral∣dry; but had not you brave songs then James?
In those days was the quintessence of ballads, you went to school with 'em, I remem∣ber and learned no other books, I shall never for∣get the Lord of Lornes son in Scotland and the false steward, to the tune of greene sleeves, those were the days indeed, oh there was then such a company for dancing singing and fooling, I doe
not mean the wits, for sooling is another thing clear from it; It does so bravely in company, when there is a great many that care not for wit, and pleases better than all the wit in the world; and then there was such brave jeasts, at the death of a Stag, and Buck; to throw blood up and down, upon folks faces; the very Footn en and Pages understood those Jeasts then; there was a time; and the Landerers were as well Employed in a progress then as now, and the Surgeons got as much by 'em too; oh, I shall never forget those times.
So, so, how doe I look in this transfor∣motion? will any body know me dost think? Mistress Lucy, shall have the first sight of my shape; some body is gone into the dining room, let us out at the back door James. 
It is well done Nice to be careful about your Mistress.
I am giving her some instructions about dressing, and was saying, she must not go above once to court in black, it would be very scent∣lous without intermixing colours, in her petti∣cote, sleeves, and stomacher, and the colours now in fashion are blew, pink, and incarnadine, yale∣low is much worn too.
But it is very material, what lace you will choose, as silver and gold for blew, (Tha•'s a court maxim) and plain silver for incarnadine, single or mixed will serve for pink colour.
I shall never remember all this.
It is your Gentlewoman's duty to remem∣ber.
Let me alone Madam. When you will keep house, a long handkerchief, or a round one with a quaife tied under your chin, and a lit∣tle hair curled, with a black taffa ta hood, or white sarfenet.
When you pretend to have a cold, you must show no hair, but wear a forehead cloth, with a pinner over that, these clothes are much worn by old Ladies, with which they bind down a piece of sea recloth upon their forehead, to keep wrinkles in obedience. How is her hair?
That little that she has is crazie.
She has enough to curl, and you have the discretion to know what proportion is to be lest out, according to the latitude of her face; and to be curled with pins and orrice powder, which will neither hurt nor break it, and then in the Morning to let the comb pass through it once, and open it, between a curl and a freeze, and draw up some of the curls with a bodkin within the other hair.
My hair will never endure all this.
You must endure more, if you mean to be a Lady of fashion, and attractive; where be the pendants?
Must she not wear a Feather?
Not without a diamond bodkin; have you no Jewels?
Yes, In the knot of my handker∣chief.
Oh fie, you must buy a Cabinet. What's here? a Toad stone, two Turkeys, six thumb∣rings, three Aldermens seals, five Gemmals, and four Deaths-heads; these are Alehouse orna∣mints—Yet these Diamonds are tolerable, and these Pearls will make a half Chain.
Would she were hanged in the fellow, con∣dition we had the rest.
They must be changed, but Nice may wear these till you get new, they will serve to practice in. 
There's a Coach at door.
Isle pawn my ability the French Lord, it is about the time I gave directions to his Foot∣man; for his entertainment, you must take upon you the rich widow, and be you careful to obe∣serve Mrs Nices Language, garb, and behaviour, to men of his quality; your Rings and Jewels up∣on her will credit the cause, and person he comes to visit, which is your self, but under a veil. Isle prepare his Lordship. 
This is all for your instruction; these rings fit me excellent well, and hereaster you may take pride upon you by my example.
I hope I shall learn in time; but I shall be more than a Lady if I marry with a Lord.
Alas, I am but the Lady in the Play.
Now you put me in mind, I have seen pret∣tie harlotry Ladies in a Country Play, so proud, and so knavish, one would have sworn they had been women indeed.
Hoe's here, you must be modest, and obe∣serve your distance now; Is this the Lord? He
looks like an over-grown Monkey.
What pretty foolish things some of these young Lords are?
Your Lordship is bountiful; that is she whom fame hath delivered to you; your honour may advance.
Begar dis rich viddow look young as my self.
If my eyes be not in a mist this is the French Dancer.
Vat is your name?
He means to catechise her.
I shall be happy if your Lordship please to own me by the title of your servant.
You must learn to complement thus—It is Galliard sure.
She kiss very vel begar, she have de Ala∣mode touch of de lip ma foy; can you dance Madam?
I am now confirmed.
Will he kiss me too?
Vat is she?
A Gentlewoman that attends me for the present.
Dat is a de reverence for de devil, she look like a de wihch Madam, but me tell you Ma∣dam, for me love you very mush in the little time, as any man in de varle; me be French Lore, and me have lodging in de autre street, Duke de Me∣morency my kinsman, and two tree hundred great Lors have lose deir head in France begar for no matre, and me fly to Englan to save a me neck by me trot.
Were you guilty of any treason?
No more begar than your little self.
What is your estate?
Begar very grand estate in Orleans, me have two tree Litre from de Cardinal, and he write a me, dat de King send for me to kiss his hand: Now as me was in de resolution to take a de ship for France, me hear of you Madam in de Strand, and me very glad to marry you before me go presently.
Your Lordship is very brief, but I find not my self inclined to cross the Seas.
The Sea, mary shield, Isle not see the salt water for any Lord in Christendom, I, Isle rather be no Lady.
Who, how now insolence, how dare you interpose?
Will you be ridiculous, and betray your self now?
Begar you have de Gypsy complexion, and look like de sign of-de Robin Hood and maid a Marian.
Robin Hood in thy face, does he maid a Marian me?
She is not worth your Lordships passion, I shall teach you better manners.
Begar you shall have mush need of dat.
My Lord, you did ask me if I could dance.
The wench has found him.
Dere is noting in de varle for de Lady, like a de understanding in de foot.
I cannot praise my own ability, but I ad∣mire the excellence of other Ladies, and should be fortunate to meet with some Master in thafa∣culty, that would Instruct, and exercise me in private.
Me love you de better for da•, begar no body exercise you in private but my self, me teach you Alamode de Court dance, hold up your little fingre you command a my foot.
Your Lordship is too humble, it is an office would become one that is mercenary; I af∣fact dancing infinitely, oh that we had but some music here; la, la, ra. 
•is coming out.
What's that a bedstaffe?
It is a French pocket-pistoll.
Will he shoot it oft here? I could never endure a gun. 
Forboon, brave, ah, dat is like a de Prin∣cess, Allez.
You shall not be so public in your graces to me; conceal your Fiddle tillsome private op∣po•runity.
Me understand.
How does your Lordship like her? You have her in an excellent humour.
Kiss a me madam—ho? it is heaven? de Poet talk of de Nectar, begar here is it; me never drink de•vine blank or de Claret, so me have but two tree drop divine from your lip—Metresse speak a for me.
The fool is extasied; in his worst conditi∣on he will serve for a husband; how he dances in a Net?
He has money, and a Trade, he will serve wench.
If me get dis rich widow, me cozen 'em both begar.
Do you think he loves me indeed. 
You no think madam dat me be so hot in love, and do burn, dat my reine a do melt, as me vere in de oven, me need a go into de river pre∣santly to cool and vater my heart, vere is de Mi∣stress de la Maison? Gone? dat is vel, dere is no honour like a dat, as you take a de little air in my Coach.
I have not been abroad to day, but I dare trust my self with your Lordship.
Oh Madam, a vostre service, now if me get a de Priest all is perfect.
Be all these Trunks hers?
We ha not stowage enough for half, she is infinitely rich.
Hast thou prepared her?
I find her very apt, it is her only ambition to be a Lady, a French Lord has her in chase, but I have delivered your character, and what privy∣ledge she may have by charter of her Knight.
I long to see her, is she handsome?
What she wants in beauty and breeding, she has in estate Sir.
That, that's enough, I can have beauty in other places, and will exceed what I conditi∣on it for, if I prosper. I will have this Widow in spite.
How Sir William?
To spite the Lady Beaufield, and her Magog that affronted me; I would lose no opor∣tunity, a widow must be taken in the pick; say I am come and commend me to the heavens, Isle make all good.
To the heavens? will you dye before her?
For that we must take our chance; thou shalt be sure of a good lease for thy life, and desti∣ny agree upon us afterword.
Shall I direct you?
Shall it be my evening, and my morning star. 
You too much afflict your self Mistress Lu∣cy, it is but some humour he put on to try the strength of your affection.
He is lost; not for my sake, but for his own I pity him, and I am confident, if I were so hap∣pie to speak with him again, I should prevail to win him to his first and noble temper; my end being so just, I could dispense with modesty to find him out, and perfect the act of charity.
You have employed Formoll, from whom you may expect to hear such an account, as may dry up your sorrows.
I see Sir you preserve your confidence.
I dare be just in your commands, and in a service you but smile upon, despise the censure of the world.
Saw you not the Knight since?
The sweet hopes that he swallowed, to prepare me a ridiculous object to you Madam, was gall upon his stomach, when he found you had mercy on my confidence; he dares not converse with so unlicked a bear, as this shape must present
his critical eye sight. Whats here? one sent to affront me?
When Robin came to Nottingham dairy, dairy down,
His dinner all for to dine:
There met him fifteen •olly Foresters,
Were drinking Ale, and Wine, hey down.
Madam your most humble servant; there be other men, and manners, and garbs as fashionable in the eyes of discreet Ladies.
Have we got Adam Bell, and Clim of the Clough?
We be three, good Mr William of Cloudesly.
It is so.
And how, and how show matters Mistress Lucy? every mans Cap is not made of the same matter.
Have you felt the wool of Beaver?
—Or sheep down ever?
—Have you smelt of the bud of the Rose?
—In his pudding hose.
—Or have tasted the bag of the Bee?
Oh so fine!
—Oh so fond!
—Oh so brave!
—Such a knave!
—Such a knave is he. 
Sir, this is most uncivil, and your rash∣ness, beside the forfeit of your own discretion, will lay an imputation to wound my fame; with∣in my presence, and beneath my roof, which should protect all strangers, to affront a Gentle∣man that visits me—
How's this?
Be bold sir, and presume you have my favour, you never appeared handsome till this minute; bear up, your mirth becomes you rare∣lie.
Dos't isaith?
What does my mother mean?
Spit of thy hand, and clap me of the shoulder Iames, the widow her self is in love with me.
She cast an eye on little Musgrave
As bright as the summers sun.
I may turn o'er the Daughtet to thee.
I would I had her in an Embroiderd clout.
Sure my Lady is but in jest.
Show me said he whose men ye be
That hunt so boldly here,
That without my consent do chase
And kill my follow Dear.—
His follow Dear?
Ere thus I will out braved be
One of us two shall dye,
I know thee well an Earl thou art,
Lord Percy, so am I.
Thou Douglas?
This Lady has but fooled me all this while; make much of your new Antic Madam, I can shift into my self again, and if that thing were worth my anger, or my envy, beat him;
you have a pretty humour, cherish it, and that William of the Wisp, till I visit you again.— 
The Gentleman is jealous.
I protest Madam if it had hot been not your sake, and that it had been pity to have spilt any blood, in your Dining room, I would ha done something
In his breeches.
But I shall report your nobleness a∣broad.
Doe not play the fool to much, I am out of the humour to laugh at you; he cannot leave me thus.— 
This was no trick to catch the old one.
How came you into this habit Simpleton?
By reading Ovids Metamorphosis, and to show the variety of my wit.
Let me entreat you hold your feet toge∣there,—now you put me mind of a Smiths bell∣lowes, your body is not all of a piece sure, but several limbs thrust into several pudding bags, you would show terrible to the crows in a wheat field, you are no living creature.
Persuade me to that, am I not sensible?
He that does that cure upon you, will de∣serve a chronicle; so desiring you would take home your flail there, for here is like to be no thrashing work, I commit you to the Barn, where like another Orpheus, you will draw the horse, and sheep, to the melody of your voice, and ravish all the Cowes in the Country, to hear you sing Packingtons pound.— 
She has made a coxcomb on you.
Hum? I wo'not out of the pit for all this, I
have another devise, and thou shalt assist me, if that fail, I'll dye a bachelor, and make thee my heir.
I shall but pray for your death sir.
Back again, back again quoth the Pindar,
The wrong way have you go•, &amp;c.
So, so, I'll dance no more, a song, lets have a song now.
Take heed of the old ballads, ecclip∣ed, Like Hermit poor, eyes hide my love, or Pane in the brazen Tower.
Or the lamentable complaint of Ariad∣no, and Theseus, and the more lamentable for being so long.
Doe you hear Madam virtue, Lady modesty cannot you play your part?
Not upon the violin.
They are both for the Gambo.
You shall play the part of my Mistress, you must be witty then, and extreme coy and scurvy, in your answers; go behind that hanging, I will suppose it your chamber; now Boy the Song I made to the window, while I mustle my self with the fiddlers, to bid my Mistress good morrow in the street, observe the conjuration.
I conjure thee, I conjure thee, by thy skin that is so fair,
Thy dainty curled hair,
And thy favour and thy grace,
With the patches on thy face,
And thy hand that doth invite
The cold, dullest appetite,
—Appear appear,
Ʋpon these terms I doe invite thee,
And if thou come I will delight thee.
If not so, I doe not care,
Though thy breasts be ne'er so bare,
Roses rich, with shoe that's white,
Or thy Venus best delight,
If not touch thy softer skin
What care I for thee a pin,
Appear appear.
For to hear, and not to see
Is a dull flat history,
And to see and not to touch
If you think the last too much,
Know all woman's but one joy
If we men not them enjoy,
Appear appear.
She's not awake, play a rattling tune that may startle her; whore's this whore? ha!—
She's gone.
Vanished? so he might have sung a∣way his lungs.
It may be, she is retired, for you know what Lady; come let us drink.
Was your Muse at all this expense
to the fiddles? do you write to no other company sir?
Till they have my liveries; Isle maintain 'em in songs, wind up your voice again▪
Thine eyes to me like suns appear
Or brighter stars their light;
Which makes it summer all the year,
Or else a day of night:
But truly I doe think they are
But eyes, and neither sun nor star.
Thy brow is as the milky way,
Whereon the gods might trace:
Thy lips Ambrosia I dare say
Or Nectar of thy face:
But to speak truly I doe vow
They are but women's lips and brow.
Thy check it is a mingled bath
Of Lilies and of Roses;
But here there's no man power hath
To gather loves fresh posies:
Believe it here the flowers that bud
Are but a women's flesh and blood.
Thy nose a promontory fair,
Thy neck a neck of land;
At natures gifts that are so rare
All men amazed doe stand:
But to the clearer judgement those
Are but a women's neck and nose.
For four lines in passion I can dye
As is the lovers guise,
And dabble too in Poetry
Whilst love possessed, then wise
As greatest States-men, or as those
That know love best, yet live in Prose.
The pure spirit of Sack in it.
The wits Elixir.
No jeering Gentlemen, I shall grow loud and break the peace.
These Gentlemen are for nothing but song and drink, I see no market all this while; Isle get me hence too; if please you, Isle see if I can find out my sister. 
There's but one stool in the counting house, and Lady you shall stay till she return; Gentlemen there's no life in you; I cannot do this roaring and whoring handsomely; little thinks Lucy what Comrades I have got.
I have a precious confidence in you Gen∣tlemen, to trust my single modesty amongst so many.
What would you give to be ravished now? thou hast an excellent complexion for it.
Ravished? preserve the Gentleman's dear wits Sack I beseech thee.
You would not lose by it if he ravish you.
another Song, and direct your voice to this Lady.
I'd have her merry, laugh, and smiles
And then look grave and sad:
In every humour but a while,
Make love as it is, that's made
I'd have your dress of sever all shapes,
Like Proteus carved, not he,
In humour a she coy Jackanapes
Then a grave Monkey be.
Discourse of all that comes to sense,
But speak none, yet still speak,
No matter here is no offence,
But to speak matter weak.
With thy soft voice sing me asleep,
Then startle me awake,
With Loves notes-passion make me weep,
Then merry for thy sake.
A discovery?
What new-found Land?
The Pigeon that left us hath been in another room with Mr Formal my Lady Beau∣fields Gentleman Usher, there he sits like the picture of a Harry Sovereign in a chair, while she is picking on's pocket.
Fetch him, and his Fairy hither, but for his Mrs sake usher him with loud music. 
We'll have some sport. 
Whore's the wench?
The wench has made an escape, she had a glimpse before and suspected me, but here's the wicked Elder.
What says my wise▪ Lu•ullus?
Sir, my business was to you, though I met a Remera that is already sunk, I was sent by a Gentlewoman, but no body must know it.
We hear no business till he have wound up a bottle, and then he shall have audience.
That's but your fee for entrance, your garnish only; come sir there's no remedy.
I hope you will conceal it Gentlemen.
Why then let us drink,
Away scurvy think,
And do it till we wink;
Which is just to be
So drunk not to see.
First Maudlin to weep,
Then after to sleep;
Why they let us drink,
And do it till we wink,
Away skurvy' think.
VVhar will become of me? would you and I Lady were in a back room.
So now speak my Lord Ambassador, I know your sovereign Lady greets us well.
Alas sir, my Lady does not know of my coming; I would speak with you from one that shall be nameless, who thinks you are a debauched Gentleman, under the Rose, and desires to talk with you when you are sober: I would be loath to disgrace you before this good company, neither was I willing to tell her what I heard about your drinking and whoring.
To the point.
I, I, to the point.
The principal matter then, and indeed my whole employment at this time to you is—
What in the name of circumspection?
You shall excuse me sir, filence is a virtue; but if you knew who sent me—
He would make a costive Statesman.
It is sufficient one desires to speak with you, I name no time, nor person, I know my office; Mistress Lucy is not to be named at all times.
Mistress Lucy, I am her servant; come drink this narrow sea to her health, you must be drunk insallibly, Isle give a reason; I swear by Muscatel That I do love her well; come ye Mermaids—
Isle do you reason then; but is this Mus∣cadell? Mr Newman has sworn; for my own part, Gentlemen, I desire it should go no further.
I swear by Muscatel
That I do love thee well,
And more than I can tell.
By the White, Claret, and Sack
I do love thy Black, black, black,
I do love thy black, black, black.
No Goddess amongst them all
So slender, and so tall,
And grateful too with all,
Which makes my smews to crack
For thy black, black, black,
For thy dainty black, black.
So lovely, and so fair,
Though shadowed with thy hair,
So nimble, just like air;
All these set me on loves wrack
For thy black, black, black,
For thy dainty black, black.
Thy kind and cunning eye,
When first it did espy,
Our love it did descry,
Dumb speaking, what do you lack?
Mine answered, thy black, black,
Thy dainty black, black, black.
Excellent!
Now give Mr Formal his cup.
I have had the narrow sea, I cannot drink an Ocean.
His t'other cup; you had my wench as I remember, and Isle prescribe you a penance; there's another whore for you, drink to her and she shall pledge.
Give me thy hand, and set thy foor to mine.
You may trust your single modesty with him.
For my own part, I had rather do things privately; come kiss me first—here's to thee, my flesh tingles—
A word with you two Squires.
Any thing for a shelter, I foresee a storm; and what is one Cat among so many Mastives?
You are melancholy.
You lye, you that say nothing lye, if you be of his opinion.
Me thinks we are very merry.
We are exceeding merry.
Have you discharged your Culvering? whore's the paraquito?
I drunk it off.
She is vanished too.
Then we are our selves, and make me
your example; you know your Province Sir, make ready for an Angel, sing the design of ho∣nor, and of fancy. 
But first in Fancy we will fool,
Pull off our Dublets, drink more cool,
Our hats upon our heads not stay,
For each health we'll throw them away
So Periwig, or Fringe, or Border,
The naked truth we'll drink in order.
And to the Music as they play
A Fancy Piece we'll throw away,
Ʋntill we are drein'd, can draw no more,
And the next day all cry therefore.
Off With Formals Doublet, off with his Doublet, throw't into the fire, that's a good phone∣sic; now he is Formal right.
I did not drink hard, for I am cold, the wench would keep me warm, she's a notable fire∣drake; will it please you sir to go to the party?
Now does he betray what a Bawd he would be.
Does no body know where to get a Ser∣pent with two legs that hath never a sting?
I have a great mind to drink a health in one of my boots.
I drink no beer glasses, if a shoe will serve turn—
His shoe, my scabbard, a match.
My glove.
His cap.
Fill brimmers, every man to his Mistress; now do not I like this fancy.
We ha don't.
There's wool in my scabbard, which is a spungious matter, and when I ha done  I may leave my drink behind me, and that's a hanging matter, which I am principally to avoid—Do you hear the Music of the Spheres Gentle∣men?
What's that?
From the roof a Throne?
This room is mine, and called the field of Tempe; Because I woonot stay while  the Plays are done when I have a humour to be merry, and drink healths in the clouds, I built this Elisium; and when bright Sack hath crowned my brow, how soon I am made immortal, you may guess.
As I singing now came down,
I do bring you Bacchus Crown:
From the plump Lord of the vine
Clusterd grapes to make you wine,
Your swelled Temples circling in,
Crowned with this, and bathed within;
Therefore your best wishes bring,
Place this Garland on your King.
Is not Bacchus the best good fellow God on 'em all? Let me see, Formal shall be King, and he sent to heaven presently.
Send me to heaven? why should I be sent thither before another man?
Ret, Ret, verily Ret, here's the Fartridge under the Table.
They'll be good company, they shall both be immortal together, help Gentlemen. Boy you must be deposed.
Alas what shall I doe?
You shall to heaven Lady?
What before my time? and whether I will or no?
It shall be with as much ease, as if it were in a Featherbed.
Let us sleep together.
Ah pity a poor Gentlewoman, if you have hearts of flesh, do not use me worse than heathen Prentices.
So crown 'm, and give to each a glass of wine, for a sceptre.
Gentlewoman, if we must mount, it is none of our seeking, we are but Angels in our own defence, for my own part, I desire to go thither in no better company.
Up with 'em, and preserve your sceptre glasses, doe not spill your blood royal.
Alas, hold there for heavens sake, I must meet three Innes of court Gentlemen at the Stillyard to night, it may be out of my way 20. pound, consider your own cases.
Peace gentle Queen of grapes.
Thou art a traitor too, oh!
Doe not jog the chariot, let us take our preserment patiently, and drink a health to the humble mortals, that turn up their whites to us, this is pretty high drinking.
Drunkards, devils? oh that I were up∣on earth again.—
Is this the Gentlewoman's wine, or water?
He mounts insensibly.
They have a heavenly time on it; you know me sir.
Noble Mr. Newman.
There's for your attendance.
What's to pay?
They shall pay you the reckoning in the other world, you know the back way thither; come my boys to the departed, having paid all rites
We now return.
Like woeful Adamites.
Jam resolved, since fair means can∣not prevail with Mistress Lucy, to steal her away, this is the key of the back-gate of the garden, to the fields, be ready when I give the sign to hurry her into the coach, and when I have her at my Countrey-House, Isle take in her maiden town, upon my own composition.
You wo'not ravish her.
There are twenty ways to deal with a woman, and never ravish her; no, I have plaid the fool too much.
I am of your opinion.
But she shall find if I get possession.—
The Coachman is a lusty fellow too, and will help to clap her abroad; the curtains being close she cannot be heard, and the horses will run, as the devil were in the poop, for he drives like a Tamberlaine.
Holla ye pamperd Jades.
One Traitor more were not amiss for al that.
Thou say right, for though she be a little woman, her voice may be too strong for us.
Let us alone, mind your own part.
Be resolute James. 
The course I am in, hath brought some men to the Gallows, and doe I take it for pre∣vention?
What desperate fellow's that?
I am weary of wine and noise, is there no other cure for melancholy? I doe not love the cramp in my neck.
He looks like a Gentleman that were in debt; my friend doe you come hither to find a tree? you are a proper fellow, dost want employment, for though your clothes have a good gloss, they look as they were ill lined, they want money.
I suffer that which made the old woman mend her pace fir.
Doe as Isle direct thee.
Whom doe you serve?
I serve my self; my Master is a fool; did you never hear of Simpleton?
That worshipful puppy?
He knows him. I have seen you before, but it is no matter where; I like thy countenance; can keep counsel? walk o'this hand o'me.
Nay a little further Mistress Lucy, it seems Mrs Ʋoluble told him no great good fortune, she saw it in his stars, for you know she wears A∣strology at her apron strings; but she told me in private who should be the man, your dear En∣dymion.
Who I beseech you?
The object is presented, and it is in vain to oppose the Constellations, what must be must be, and there were no more Ladies in the world, I am the man.
To steal her away?
My Master is resolved. They are here; close.
She is betrayed.—
Now.—
Help; thieves.
Stop her mouth.
Then every man take his chance.
Murder, murder.
Are you so cunning sir? you shall along with us. 
Worried by Hedghogs!
Are you not killed outright sir?
I am not certain, be sure you hold him fast; to the next Justice; I must get a Surgeon. You are my rival, I know you well enough, if I miscarry, it shall cost me a hundred pound, but Isle ha thee hanged for it. 
I understand you perfectly Mistress Voluble, and like your proposition; but a word more of the widow that is at your' house, she is very rich you say?
Not in understanding.
Tic the better.
Her's all your worship must promise her, to be knighted, for she hath a great mind to bee a Lady.
I know where a blank lies dormant for a Baronet, it will carry more noise and authority on the bench too.
You have done me some discourtesy here tofore, in believing the complaints of Intempe∣rate tongues against me, but you see my charity I desire to live in your worships fair opinion 〈◊〉 a neighbour.
I will make you amends sweet Mistress V•¦luable, you're a virtuous Gentlewoman on my con¦science: but how shall this widow be wrought?
Thats done already. The truth is she in∣quir'd
of me, (for we women use to open our se∣crets one to another) for some stayed Gentleman that was a Lawyer, (because she has so great an e∣state, and many suits to follow) on whom she might bestow her self, for the security of her for∣tune, and I have already prepared her, and such a commendation of your person, and learned gre∣vity, a Justice of Peace and Quorum, out of my private respects to you, without desire or expect∣tion of any bribe or reward.
I understand that very well.
I know you doe.
How much I am bound to your virtue?
The widow has a great mind to see you, but I will contrive it for your honour, she shall come hither, as to her learned Counsel.
The invincible wit of a woman! how I honour it.
There can bee no loss in it if you get a Chaplain in readiness, widows are taken in the opportunity.
A Gentleman brought to be examined, that has wounded one Master Simpleton.
Simpleton? that's the widows son.
Richard, send to the Curate of the Parish, say I would speak with him presently.
Alas who hurt you?
My rival Master Newman, Is this the •ustice?
A former quarrel; if you die, I have •awe
enough to make it murder, for your good Mo∣theirs sake.
Cannot you make it manslaughter, and let me live? for I desire but his death.
Hee shall make it what you please. This Gentleman is to bee Knighted, and loves your mother above all the world, things meet as close, as if they went to engender.
My Mother is worth six thousand pound, if you will promise to make her a Lady, and doe your best to hang the Gentleman, you shall be my Father in Law, when my Landlady says the word.
Sir Isle take my leave.
Sweet Mistress Voluble, leave your friend to me, I understand the matter perfectly, and it shall go hard, but wee will have all the Law on our side. Call in the offender; please you sit; Ri∣chard be ready with your Ammunition, Pen, Ink and Paper.
What is your name sir?
My name is Sear.
He is the Surgeon sir.
Isle teach you •o follow your profession sir, Isle make you an example to all Phleboto∣mers; how often have you been indicted for letting of blood firra?
I understand you nor.
But I understand you sir; how durst you vi &amp; arms, feloniously assault this noble Gentle∣man in contempt of peace, and the Kings Law,
his Crown and dignity? answer me sir to that. Isle seeze him.
You Worship is mistaken, I never see the Gentleman before, I was sent for—
He is the Surgeon sir, that is come to take measure of my Masters wounds, it was that Gent∣lemon that let him blood.
Why do they not change faces then? away you knave, and look to the Gentleman; you stand idling here to stumble authority with a fell∣lonious countenance.
Let us be for sworn both in a tale.
Sir, you are one that should doe Justice; where is my poor friend? bee not so much de∣jested, you did but rescue me sir from disho∣nor.
I was in a melancholy humour; it is come about as the wise woman concluded.
VVher's Simpleton? I may accuse him for a Rape.
Take heed what you say.
Or some such black intent; this Gentle∣man but interposed to save me from their surie, and with his sword punished a bold offender by letting out some blood that was corrupted.
Thats not material; will you confess you wounded Master Simpleton? come to the matter.
I confess it sir, but hear the reason.
I will hear no reason, that were simple justice; take him aside, and you may follow your
business. Stay young Gentlewoman, I must exa∣mine you.
Shall I withdraw, and shut the door?
What Justice •ir, or Law is this?
It is not Polton, Crompton, nor Fitzerhert, A Justice ought to have some discretion without book, especially in these cases. I grant you are the root and cause of this misfortune.
I •ir?
Be wise, and understand me; nd being in∣duet with such gifts of nature, native beauty and favour, (come a little nearer) and you to abuse your self—
How sir?
Or suffer your self to be abused (come a little nearer) is not to be thankful for those ex∣cellent benefits.
Will you translate an Insolence in others upon my guilt?
You accuse an honest Gentleman for an intent of rape; alas poor soul, it was pure af∣fection in him, hee would have ravished you no doubt, with your own consent, the fault was your Ingratitude, (a little nearer) Seneca doth write much of Ingratitude, that I may come (a little nearer) or else Narrow had not let him blood, (yet nearer) this Narrow was a most wicked Tyrant, for all he could play upon a fiddle, make ballads, and sing them himself, and therefore take heed of cruelty, and be gentle,  •or, sweet-heart Narrow died a violent death.
My Mother.
Lucy you made haste.
Your pardon Madam.
I understand she is a Lady.
In the defence of my own virtue, and the noble Gentleman that suffers for his charity to me—
I came to assist you. It were an injury to doubt your justice. My name is Beaufield. If my credit may be interposed security for New∣man my daughters knowledge in the cause will
give a most clear satisfaction.
Richard, call in the delinquent, this Lady has spoken very much to the matter, as I under∣stand it. Has the Surgeon done yet?
They are coming down.
Now sir, how many of his wounds are mortal?
There is not one considerable, the Gen∣tleman is in no danger.
But have not you authority to hang him? Isle take my oath, he had an intent to kill me. My Lady and Mistress Lucy? Iames, Isle stay no lone∣ger, since I am not mortally wounded, sneak af∣la me.
My hanging •it is over, and the witch∣craft, I am now my self again, if you can pardon
me Madam this too great an honour to your worthless servant.
How now? what saucy fellow's this?
Shoe's here too. I am bold Cozen to visit you, they say, ther's a Gentleman brought before you, for breach of the peace, I come to bail him.
We take no foreigners; what outlandish thing are you, pray?
You know me sir, my name is Manly, you ca•lt me cozen yesterday.
I never saw you before. I know that name, and a Gentleman that owns it, a kinsman of mine too, but he is no such Brandemart. Richard, doe you know this Mahound? he calls himself my cozen Manly.
Why in this habit?
Transmigration?
Is it not some spy •ir?
Constable take him to your charge. Isle teach you sir, to usurp a Gentleman's name; tic fello∣ny ipso facto, write his mittimus.
By what statute? Trigesimo Secundo of King Phillip? I doe not Madam desire your cer•ificate.
You're• a stranger sir to me, yet I dare bee engaged for his forth coming, hee has an honest face.
Come hither Richard, theres half a piece, rub thy eyes woo't, are they open yet?
I see you plainly now •ir, you're my Ma∣sters
cozen, it is Master Manly.
It is your best course to own me too; is it so long since you took bribes, since you divided and manumisd a crooked chambermaid that robbed her Mistress of old Gold? there was a Lancepresa∣do stripped a hedge, when you were out of Linen; Peuter has been left at the back-doore, when you did study Alchemy; I leave the trick you showed the Sailors wife in your Closet, when you pro∣missed a reprieve to her goodman from Wapping; I know not that you have run your withered mot∣ley face into a prem•ne'er; doe not know me, why do ye no• charge the constable?
What is a Justice without eyes, I mean spectacles? it is he indeed, I understand, and see him perfectly; welcome, a Chair for my Co∣sen?
So then. Madam a word with you, I'll make you know me too, ere I have done.
There is a matted Chamber &amp; a Couch—More business?
Vere is de matre Justice? begar they have put de shear upon me, me expect de rich vidow, and have marry the chambermaid, she confess dat, Maitre Justice, pray take her to your self, me desire your warrant, for Metresse Ʋoluble, dat she bring the vidow Simpleton to marry me sans ceremoine, dat is your commissi∣on, or begar me complain of you to de King.
Did you expect the rich widow Simple∣ton? h•, ha! I know this trifle, my Clarke knows her better
Bergar Matre Justice, and Matre Clarke make your division, dat is all you see.
Sir I have only cause to complain, he told me he was a French Lord, Mistress Ʋoluble shall make affidavit, and courted me to be his Lady, and now we are married, he proves but a cinquepace. I looked for thousands per annum, and he is but one, two, three, four, and five.
How, did he pretend himself to be a Lord? it is Scandalum Magnatum in the highest degree: and by a statute quinquagesimo of the Queen, if she prosecute, he is to be whipped, and lose his ears three several market days.
How will you divide his Ears into three equal portions?
Me give a de whip, and me Iose a mine 'ares!
You hear the law, if I complain.
Sir—Mistress Ʋoluble—
Is the widow come?
The Gentlewoman is come, and de∣sires to speak with your worship in private.
The Curat's in the Hall sir.
So, so, I must entreat your patience for a few minutes; how I am blessed! 
Tell a me de trot, have you no Argent, no portion?
But I have a trade.
I dare be sworn thou hast.
Awe dat is someting, here is my hand, you no tell a de tale, a me, and me keep your
secret by my trot.
I took boldness Madam upon sight of your Ladyships new Coach at the door, to intrude and present a poor forsaken servant; give you joy of your old fashioned young Gentle∣man.
Your companion wants no antiquity, if she have no Vizard on.
I hope you are not married Sir?
The matters done, and tic more honourable to make a Lady than to marry one. Does any body know this Gentlewoman, she was a widow till this morning, and a rich one I thank my stairs, and wants the subtle art, some Ladies have to make themselves ridiculous, by doting upon antics.
What name has your most reverend Lady?
She was called the wealthy widow of old Simpleton, before I married her.
Ha, ha, ha!
What Is it makes you so merry Monsieur?
Begar some body make arrant ass of de Knight, hold a me, or me shall crack a my rib we'd laugh, dat is no Simpleton, but an autre Chambermaid, de servant to my wife, begar he be sheated too.
I must confess she waited upon me.
How?
Ha, ha, ha!
Ma foy dat is certain, ha, ha, ha!
I desie her, that was but a plot.
Begar it was very fine a plot, me have
patience, dat dere be more fool in de come∣die.
Mistress Ʋoluble can justify what I am, that I am, or would I might ne'er be, a Lady, and I be'nt, that I be'nt.
I will have Justice.
You may have him sir.
The reason of this noise my right worshipful?
Give me a warrant presently.
Against whom?
Ʋol•ble, I'll have her whipped.
Wrong not the virtuous Gentlewoman.
Virtuous? vexation.
Why doe you take on so, of my consci∣ence she is honest enough; does this woman look like a whore?
I thank you Gentleman.
She has gravity enough to be a bawd, and then the worst is past.
Is not the widow weight, not perfect sterling?
This is not the widow.
What widow?
The rich widow Simpleton.
I doe believe it, did she promise you marriage?
The devils proctor Mistress Ʋoluble made me believe so.
Doe not wrong I say again that virtuous Gentlewoman Mistress Ʋoluble, I know her, and know her virtuous, but the rich widow Simpleton, you talk of (thanks be to providence) is
newly married, the Priest hath scarce wiped his oraculous lips, since they pronounced us, Man
and Wife, in my stone Parlour, in good faith la, she's here, her own tongue will confirm it Gentlemen.
Why does she veil her face.
It is her modesty, to hide her blushes, that I should so soon prevail upon her: and thus the morning breaks out of the clouds.
By your leave Landlady, wher's my mother.
Mistress Ʋoluble?
Here's my son, he shall be a witness I am his mother, I am married to this Knight, and they would persuade me out of my self.
It is come about again, Is this your mother?
I have asked her blessing in my days.
There is no remedy, it was your own Curate did it.
Give you joy Mr. Justice.
Conspiracy, is there no law for this?
Yes, yes, the canon law, and you must keep her.
Let me obtain Madam your fair con∣struction, Sir William you are sped to your desires, and you are fitted Monsieur Galliard, but Nice, the Jewels must return to their right owner.
Excuse a moi.
It must be so, I keep my wedding ring for thee sweet heart.
I ask you pardon sir, and Mistress Lucy,
I had a plot upon your loves, to endear young Simpleton, in hope your credulous nature, to avoid melancholy, might have been engaged to some licentious rudeness, and so made your self unworthy of her affection, but here I must con∣fesse I have no skill in stars nor fortune telling, and am but one among the rest that have de∣ceiv'd your easy faith, forgive me, as I wish you may thrive in your affections.
I am confirmed.
Nay then let marriages go round, with this take both possession of my heart and fortunes.
You but enlarge my power to doe you service.
Your love, and joys be constant. Mr. Justice you must embrace Mistress Ʋoluble.
Well, I will love thee for thy wit; but no more wandering.
You wholly sir shall steer me, and to invite more welcome from you sir, I have not lived upon the common charity, I have a state is not to be despised.
Say thou so, we'll put our stocks to∣gether and live merrily.
Will they not take his word? alas poor Formal, there, there's their ransom, bid the whore be honest, I'll plead his reconcilement to my Lady.
I am gone.
But do ye hear, must I have no wench, at the end of the play? that have taken all this pains? what will you doe with me?
Well remembered, this Lady did accuse
him; though I missed of the Mother, I will make sure of the son, make his warrant for New∣gate presently.
How Sir?
I know how very well Sir.
You called it love before, I freely pardon him.
Let this Day be consecrate to peace, and Hymen.
And the Night to Ʋenus; let it be so, and thank this Gentlewoman.
I thank you all, and will never trust a witch for your sake, I'll go seek out my wits.
Let no man part, so many hearts here tid'd,
Stay till we drink a health to every Bride.
Flourish—

WHo is that?
The Duchess Se•rotary.
Signior.
Your Lordships Servant.
How does her Grace since she left her mourning
For the young Duke Mendoza, whose timeless death
At Sea, left her a Virgin and a Widow?
Shoe's now inclining to a second Bride,
When is the day of mighty marriage
To our great Cardinals Nephew, Don Columbo?
When they agree; they wo'not steal to Church,
I guess the ceremonies will be loud, and public.
Your Lordships will excuse me.
When they agree? alas poor Lady, she
Dotes not upon Columbo, when she thinks
Of the young Count D' Alvarez, divorced from her
By the Kings power.
And Counsel of the Cardinal to advance
His Nephew to the Duchess bed; it is not well.
Take heed, the Cardinal holds intelligence
With every bird in the air.
Death on his purple pride,
He governs all, and yet, Columbo is
A gallant Gentleman.
The darling of the War, whom Victory
Hath often courted; a man o• daring
And mostexalted spirit, pride in him
Dwells like an ornament, where so much honour
Secures his praise.
This is no argument
He should usurp, and wear Alvarez title
To the fair Duchess, men of coarser blood
Would not so tamely give this treasure up.
Although Columbos name is great in war,
Whose glorious art and practice is above
The greatness of Alvarez, yet he cannot
Want soul, in whom alone survives the virtue
Of many noble Ancestors, being the last
Of his great family
It is not safe, you'll say, to wrestle with the King.
More danger if the Cardinal be displeased,
Who sits at helm of State; Count D' Alvarez
Is wiser to obey the stream, than by
Insisting on his privilege to her love,
Put both their fates upon a storm.
If Wisdom, not inborn Fear make him compose,
I like it; how does the Duchess bear herself?
She moves by the rapture of another wheel
That must be obeyed, like some sad passenger,
That looks upon the coast his wishes fly to,
But is transported by an adverse wind, sometimes
A churlish Pilot
She has a sweet and noble nature.
That commends Alvarez, Hymen cannot tie
A knot of two more equal hearts and blood.
Alphonso?
My good Lord.
What great affair
Hath brought you from the confines?
Such as will
Be worth your counsels, when the King hath read
My Letters from the Governor; the Arragonians,
Violating their confederate oath and league,
Are now in arms; they have not yet marched towards us,
But it is not safe to expect if we may timely
Prevent Invasion
Dare they be so insolent?
This storm I did foresee.
What have they, but the sweetness of the King,
To make a crime?
But how appears the Cardinal.
At this news?
Not pale, although
He knows they have no cause to think him innocent,
As by whose Counsel they were once surprised.
There is more
Than all our present art can fathom in
This story, and I fear I may conclude,
This flame has breath at home to cherish it;
Ther's treason in some hearts, whose faces are
Smooth to the State.
My Lords, I take my leave.
Your friends good Captain.
Sweet Madam be less thoughtful, this obedience
To passion, will destroy the noblest frame
Of beauty that this Kingdom ever boasted.
This sadness might become your other habit,
And ceremonious black for him that died;
The times of sorrow are expired, and all
The joys that wait upon the Court, your birth,
And a new Hymen that is coming towards you,
Invite a change.
Ladies, I thank you both,
I pray excuse a little melancholy
That is behind, my year of mourning hath not
So cleared my account with sorrow, but there may
Some dark thoughts stay, with sad reflections,
Upon my heart for him I lost; even this
New dress, and smiling garment, meant to show
A peace concluded twixt my grief and me,
Is but a sad remembrance: but I resolve
To entertain more pleasing thoughts, and if
You wish me heartily to smile, you must
Not mention grief, not in advice to leave it;
Such Counsels open but afresh the wounds
Ye would close up; and keep alive the cause,
Whose bleeding you would cure; lets talk of something
That may delight; you two are read in all
The Histories of our Court; tell me Valerie,
Who has thy vote for the most handsome man?
Thus I must counterfeit a peace, when all
Within me is at mutiny.
I have examined
All that are Candidates for the praise of Ladies.
But find—may I speak boldly to your Grace?
And will you not return it in your mirth,
To make me blush?
No, no; speak freely.
I wo'not rack your patience Madam▪ but
Were I a Princess, I should think Count D' Alvarez
Had sweetness to deserve me from the world.
Alvarez! shoe's a spy upon my heart.
Hoe's young, and active, and composed most sweet∣lie.
I have seen a face more tempting.
It had then
Too much of woman in it, his eyes speak movingly
Which may excuse his voice, and lead away
All female pride his captive; His hair Black,
Which naturally falling into curl's—
Prithee no more, thou art in love with him.
The man in your esteem Celinda now?
Alvarez is (I must confess) a Gentleman
Of handsome composition, but with
His mind (the greater excellence) I think
Another may delight a Lady more,
If man be well considered, that's Columbo,
Now, Madam, voted to be yours.
My Torment!
She affects him not.
He has person, and a bravery beyond
All men that I observe.
He is a Soldier,
A rough-hewn man, and may show well at distance;
His talk will fright a Lady; War, and grim-
Fac'd-honor are his Mistresses; he raves
To hear a Lute; Love meant him not his Priest.
Again your pardon Madam; we may talk,
But you have art to choose and crown affection.
What is it to be born above these Ladies
And want their freedom? they are not constrained,
Nor slaved by their own greatness, or the Kings;
But let their free hearts look abroad, and choose
By their own eyes to love; I must repair
My poor afflicted bosom, and assume
The privilege I was born with; which now prompts me
To tell the King he hath no power nor art
To steer a Lovers Soul.
What says Count D' Alvares?
Madam he will attend you.
Wait you as I directed, when he comes
Acquaint me privately.
Madam, I have news,
It is now arrived the Court, we shall have wars.
I find an Army here of killing
thoughts.
The King has chosen Don Columbo General,
Who is immediately to take his leave.
What flood is let into my heart! how far
Is he to go?
To Arragon.
That's well
At first, he should not want a pilgrimage
To the unknown World, if my thoughts might convey him.
Tic not impossible he may go thither.
How?
To the unknown other World, he goes to fight,
That's in his way, such stories are in nature.
Conceal this news.
He wo'not be long absent;
The affair will make him •weft to kiss your Graces hand.
He cannot fly
With too much wing to take his leave; I must
Be admitted to your conference; ye have
Enlarged my spirits, they shall droop no more.
We are happy, if we may advance one thought
To your Graces pleasure.
Your ey before was in eclipse, these smiles
Become you Madam.
I have not skill to contain my self.
The Cardinals Nephew, Madam, Don Columbo.
Already? attend him.
Shall we take our leave?
He shall not know Valerie how you praised him▪
If He did, Madam, I should have the confidence
To tell him my free thoughts.
My Lord, while I'm in study to requi•e
The Favour you have done me, you increase
My debt to such a sum, still by a new honouring
Your servant, I despair of my own freedom.
Madam, he kisses your white hand, that must
Not surfeit in this happiness—and Ladies,
I take your smiles for my encouragement;
I have not long to practise these Court tacticks.
He has been taught to kiss.
Ther's something, Sir,
Upon your brow I did not read before.
Does the Character please you Madam?
More,
Because it speaks you cheerful.
It is for such
Access of honour, as must make Columbo
Worth all your love; the King is pleased to think
Me fit to lead his Army.
How, an Army?
We must not use the Priest, till I bring home
Another triumph, that now stays for me
To reap it in the purple field of glory.
But do you mean to leave me, and expose
Your self to the devouring war? no enemy
Should Divide us; the King is not so cruel.
The King is honourable, and this grace
More answers my ambition, than his gift
Of thee, and all thy beauty, which I can
Love, as becomes thy Soldier, and fight
To come again, a conqueror of thee;
Then I must chide this fondness.
Madam, the King, and my Lord Cardinal.
Madam, I come to call a Servant from you,
And strengthen his excuse; the public cause
Will plead for your cōnsent; at his return
Your marriage shall receive triumphant ceremonies;
Till then you must dispense.
She appears sad
To part with him, I like it fairly Nephew.
Is not the General a gallant man?
What Lady would deny him a small curtsy?
Thou hast converted me, and I begin
To wish it were no sin.
Leave that to narrow Consciences.
You are pleasant.
But he would please one better. Do such men
Lie with their Pages?
Would thou make a shift?
He is going to a bloody business;
It is pity he should dye without some heir;
That Lady were hard-hearted now that would
Not help posterity, for the mere good
Of the King and Common-wealth.
Thou art wild, we may be observed.
Your will must guide me, happiness and conquest
Be ever waiting on his sword.
Farewell.
Pray give leave to examine a few thoughts;
Expect me in the Garden.
Ladies We attend.
This is above all expectation happy;
Forgive me virtue that I have dissembled,
And witness with me, I have not a thought
To tempt or to betray him, but secure
The promise I first made to love and honour.
The Count D' Alvarez Madam.
Admit him,
And let none enterrupt us; how shall I
Behave my looks? the guilt of my neglect,
Which had no seal from hence, will call up blood
To write upon my cheeks the shame and story
In some red Letter.
Madam, I present
One that was glad to obey your Grace, and come
To know what your commands are.
Where I once
Did promise love, a love that had the Power
And office of a Priest to chain my heart
To yours, it were injustice to command.
But I can look upon you Madam, as
Becomes a servant, with as much humility,
(In tenderness of your honour and great fortune,)
Give up, when you call back your bounty, all that
Was mine, as I had pride to think them favours.
Hath love taught thee no more assurance in
Our mutual vows, thou can suspect it possible,
I should revoke a promise made to heaven
And thee so soon? this must arise from some
Distrust of thy own Faith.
Your Graces pardon
To speak with freedom, I am not so old
In cunning to betray, nor young in time
Not to see when, and where I am at loss,
And how to bear my fortune, and my wounds,
Which if I look for health must still bleed inward,
(A hard and desperate condition;)
I am not ignorant your birth and greatness,
Have placed you to grow up with the Kings grace,
And jealousy, which to remove, his power
Hath chosen a fit object for your beauty
To shine upon, Columbo his great fvavorite;
I am a man, on whom but late the King
Has pleased to cast a beam, which was not meant
To make me proud, but wisely to direct,
And light me to my safety. Oh, Dear Madam!
I will not call more witness of my love
(If you will let me still give it that name)
Than this, that I dare make my self a loser,
And to your will give all my blessings up;
Preserve your greatness and forget a trifle,
That shall at best when you have drawn me up,
But hang about you like a cloud, and dim
The glories you are born to.
Misery
Of birth and state! that I could shift into
A meaner blood, or find some art to purge
That part which makes my veins unequal; yet
Those nice distinctions have no place in us,
Ther's but a shadow difference, a title,
Thy stock partakes as much of noble sap
As that which feeds the root of Kings, and he
That writes a Lord, hath all the essence of
Nobility.
It is not a name that makes
Our separation, the Kings displeasure
Hangs a portent to fright us, and the matter
That feeds this exhalation is the Cardinals
Plot to advance his Nephew; then Columbo,
A man made up for some prodigious Act,
Is fit to be considered; in all three
There is no character you fix upon
But has a form of ruin to us both.
Then you do look on these with fear.
With eyes
That should think tears a duty to lament
Your least unkind fate; but my youth dares boldly
Meet all the tyranny of the stars, whose black
Malevolence but shoot my single tragedy;
You are above the value of many worlds
Peopled with such as I am.
What if Columbo
Engaged to war, in his hot thirst of honour,
Find out the Way to death?
Tic possible.
Or say, no matter by what art or mot•iv
He gives his title up, and leave me to
My own Election?
If I then be happy
To have a name within your thought, there can
Be nothing left to crown me with New blessing;
But I dream thus of heaven, and wake to find
My amorous soul a mockery; when the Priest
Shall tie you to another, and the joys
Of marriage leave no thought at leisure to
Look ba•k upon Alvarez, that must wither
For loss of you, yet then I cannot lose
So much of what I was, once in your favour,
But in a sigh pray still you may live happy.
My Heart is in a mist, some good star smile
Upon my resolution, amd direct
Two lovers in their chaste embrace to meet;
Columbo's bed contains my winding sheet.
I See no face in all this Council, that
Hath one pale fear upon it though we arrived not
So timely to secure the Town, which gives
Our enemy such triumph.
It was betrayed
The wealth of that one City
Will make the enemy glorious.
They dare not plunder it.
They give fair quarter yet,
They only seal up men's Estates, and keep
Possession for the Cities use, they take up
No wares without security, and he
Whose single credit will not pass, puts in
Two lean comrades, upon whose bonds tic not
Religion to deny 'em.
To repair this
With honour Gentlemen?
My opinion is
To expect a while.
Your reason?
Till their own
Surfeit betray 'em, for their Soldier
Bred up with coarse and common bread, will show
Such appetites on the rich •ates they find,
They will spare our swords a victory, when their own
Riot and Luxury destroys 'em.
That
Will show our patience too like a fear.
With favour of his excellence I think,
The spoil of Cities takes not off the courage,
But doubles it on Soldiers; besides,
While we have tameness to expect, the noise
Of their success and plenty will increase
Their Army.
It is considerable, we do not
Exceed in Foot or Horse, our Muster not
'Bove sixteen thousand both; and the Infantry
Raw, and not disciplined to act.
Their hearts,
But with a brave thought of their Countries honour,
Will teach 'em how to fight, had they not seen
A Sword; but we decline our own too much,
The men are forward in their arms, and take
The use with Avarice of Fame.
Colonel.
I do suspect you are a coward.
Sir.
Or else a traitor, take your choice, no more,
I called you to a Council Sir, of war,
Yet keep your place.
I have worn other names.
Deserve 'em, such
Another were enough to unsoul an Army;
Ignobly talk of patience till they drink
And reel to death? we came to fight and force 'em
To mend their pace; thou hast no honour in thee,
Not enough noble blood to make a blush
For thy tame Eloquence.
My Lord, I know
My duty to a General, yet there are
Some that have known me here; Sir, I desire
To quit my regiment.
You shall have licence. Ink and paper—
The General's displeased.
How is it Hernando?
The General has found out employment for me▪
He is writing Letters back.
To his Mistress.
Pray do not trouble me, yet prithee speak,
And flatter not thy friend, dost think I dare
Not draw my sword, and use it, when cause
With honour calls to action?
With the most valiant man alive▪
You'll do me some displeasure in your loves,
Pray to your places.
So,
Bear those Letters to the King,
It speaks my resolution before
Another Sun decline to charge the enemy.
A pretty Court way
Of di missing an Officer, I obey; success
Attend your Counsels.
If here be any dare not look on danger,
And meet it like a man with scorn of death,
I beg his absence, and a cowards fear
Con•um him to a ghost.
None such here.
Or if in all your Regiments you find
One man that does not ask to bleed with honour,
Give him a double pay to leave the Army;
Ther's service to be done, will call the spirits
And aid of Men.
You give us all new flame.
I am confirmed, and you must lose no time;
The Soldier that was took last night, to me
Discovered their whole strength, and that we have
A party in the town; the River that
Opens the City to the West unguarded;
We must this night use 〈◊〉 and resolutions,
We cannot fall ingloriously.
That voice is every mans.
What now?
Letters.
Whence?
From the Duchess.
They are welcome;
Meet at my Tent again this evening; yet stay,
Some Wine—The Duchess health—
See it go round.
It wo'not please his Excellence.
The Duchess health.
To me! more wine.
The Clouds are gathering, and his eyes shoot fire;
Observe what thunder follows.
The General has but ill news, I suspect
The Duchess sick, or else the King.
May be the Cardinal.
His soul has long been looked for.
She dares not be so insolent! it is
The Duchess hand; how am I shrunk in Fame
To be thus plaid withal? she writes, and counsels,
Under my hand to send her back a free
Resign of all my interest to her person,
Promise, or love; that ther's no other way
With safety of my honour to revisit her.
The woman is possessed with some bold Devil,
And wants an exorcism; or I am grown
A cheap, dull, phlegmatic fool, a Post that's carved
In the common street, and holding out my forehead
To every scurrill wit to pin disgrace
And libels on it; did you bring this to me Sir?
My thanks shall warm your heart.
Hold, hold, my Lord.
I know not what provokes this tempest, but
Her Grace ne'er showed more freedom from a storm
When I received this paper; if you have
A will to do an execution,
Your looks without that engine, Sir, may serve
I did not like the employment.
Ha, had she
No symptom in her eye, or face, or anger
When she gave this in charge?
Serene, as I
Have seen the morning rise upon the spring,
No trouble in her breath, but such a wind
As came to kiss and fan the smiling flowers.
No Poetry.
By all the truth in prose,
By honesty, and your own honour Sir,
I never saw her look more calm, and gentle.
I am too passionate, you must forgive me;
I have found it out the Duchess loves me dearly,
She expressed a trouble in her when I took
My le•ve, and chid me with a sullen ey;
It is a device to hasten my return;
Love has a thousand arts; I'll answer it,
Beyond her expectation, and put
Her soul to a noble test; your patience Gentlemen;
The Kings health will deserve a sacrifice of Wine.
I am glad to see this change, and thank my wit
For my redemption.
Sir▪ The Soldiers curse on him loves not our Master.
And they curse loud enough to be heard.
Their curse has the nature of Gunpowder.
They do not pray with half the noise.
Our General is not well mixed,
He has too great a portion of fire.
His Mistress cool him, her complexion
Carries some phlegm, when they two meet in bed?
A third may follow.
It is much pity.
The young Duke lived not to take the virgin off.
It was the Kings act to match two Rabbit suck∣ers.
A common trick of State,
The little great man marries, travels then
Till both grow up; and dies when he should do
The feat; these things are still unlucky
On the male side.
This to the Duchess fair hand.
She will think
Time hath no wing, till I return.
Gentlemen,
Now each man to his quarter, and encourage
The Soldier; I shall take a pride to know
Your diligence, when I visit all your
Several commands.
We shall expect,
And move by your directions.
You're all noble.
I shall perform a visit daily, Madam,
In the absence of my Nephew, and be happy
If you accept my care.
You have honoured me,
And if your entertainment have not been
Worthy your Graces person, it is because
Nothing can reach it in my power; but where
There is no want of zeal, other defect
Is only a fault to exercise your mercy.
You are bounteous in all; I take my leave;
My fair Niece, shortly, when Columbo has
Purchased more honours to prefer his name,
And value to your noble thoughts; mean time
Be confident you have a friend, whose Office,
And favour with the King, shall be effectual
To serve your Grace.
Your own good deeds reward you,
Till mine rise equal to deserve their benefit.
Leave me a while.
Do not I walk upon the teeth of serpents;
And, as I had a charm against their poison,
Play with their stings, the Cardinal is subtle?
Whom tic not wisdom to incense, till I
Hear to what destiny Columbo leaves me;
May be the greatness of his soul will scorn
To own what comes with murmur, If he can
Interpret me so happily; art come?
His Excellence salutes your Grace.
Thou hast
A melancholy brow; how did he take my Letter?
As he would take a blow, with so much sense
Of anger, his whole soul boiled in his face,
And such prodigious flame in both his eyes
As they'd been the only seat of fire; and at
Each look a Salamander leaping forth,
Not able to endure the Furnace.
Ha! thou dost
Describe him with some horror.
Soon as he
Had read again, and understood your meaning,
His rage had shot me with a pistol, had not
I used some soft, and penitential language,
To charm the Bullet.
Wait at some more distance;
My soul doth bath it self in a cold dew;
Imagine, I am opening of a Tomb,
Thus I throw off the Marble to discover,
What antic posture death presents in this
Pale monument to fright me—
Ha? my heart that called my blood and spirits, to
Defend it from the invasion of my fears,
Must keep a guard about it still, le•t this
Strange and too mighty joy crush it to nothing▪
Antonio.
Madam.
Bid my Steward give thee
Two thousand Ducats; art sure I am awake?
I shall be able to resolve you, Madam,
When he has paid the money.
Columbo now is noble.
This is better than I expected, if my Lady be
Not mad, and live to justify her bounty.
The War is left to him. but we must have
You reconciled, if that be all your difference.
His rage flows like a torrent, when he meets
With opposition, leave to wrestle with him,
And his hot blood retreats into a calm,
And then he chides his passion; you shall back
With letters from us.
Your Commands, are not
To be disputed.
Alvarez.
Lose not
Your self by cool submission, he will find
His error, and the want of such a Soldier.
Have you seen the Cardinal?
Not yet.
He wants no plot—
The King I must obey;
But let the purple Gownman place his engines
In the dark that wounds me.
Be assured
Of what we can to friend you, and the King
Cannot forget your service.
I am sorry
For that poor Gentleman.
I must confess, Sir,
The Duchess has been pleased to think me worthy
Her favours, and in that degree of honour,
That has obliged my life to make the best
Return of service, which is not, with bold
Affiance in her love, to interpose
Against her happiness, and your election;
I love so much her honour, I have quited
All my desires, yet would not shrink to bleed
Out my warm stock of life, so the last drop
Might benefit her wishes.
I shall find
A compensation for this act, Alvarez,
It hath much pleased us.
Sir, you are the King,
And in that sacred title it were sin
To doubt a justice, all that does concern
My essence in this world, and a great part
Of the other bliss, lives in your breath.
What intends the Duchess?
That will instruct you, Sir, Columbo has
Upon some better choice, or discontent,
Set my poor soul at freedom.
Tic his character—
Madam, I easily discharge all my pretensions
To your love, and person, I leave you to your
Own choice, and in what you have obliged
Your self to me, resume a power to cancel
If you please.
This is strange.
Now do an act to make
Your Chronicle beloved and read for ever.
Express your self.
Since by Divine infusion,
For tic no art could force the General to
This Change, second this justice and bestow
The heart you would have given from me, by
Your strict commands to love Columbo, where
It was meant by heaven, and let your breath return
Whom you divorced, Alvarez, mine.
This is but justice, Sir.
It was decreed above,
And since Columbo has released his interest
Which we had wrought him, not without some force
Upon your will I give you your own wishes,
Receive your own Alvarez, when you please
To celebrate your Nuptial, I invite
My self your guest.
Eternal blessings Crown you.
And every joy your Marriage
I know not whether I shall wonder most
Or joy to meet this happiness.
Now the King hath planted us
Methinks we grow already, and twist our loving souls
Above the wrath of thunder to divide us.
Ha? The Cardinal
Has met the King, I do not like this conference;
He looks with anger this way, I expect
A tempest.
Take no notice of his presence,
Leave me to meet, and answer it, if the King
Be firm in's Royal word, I fear no lightning;
Expect me in the Garden.
I obey,
But fear a shipwreck on the coast.
Madam.
My Lord.
The King speaks of a Letter that has brought
A riddle in it.
Tic easy to interpret.
From my Nephew? may I deserve the favour?
He looks as though his eyes would fire the paper.
They are a pair of Burning glasses, and
His envious blood doth give 'em flame.
What lethargy could thus unspirit him?
I am all wonder; do not believe Madam,
But that Columbo's love is yet more Sacred,
To honour, and your self, than thus to forfeit
What I have heard him call the glorious wreath
To all his merits, given him by the King,
From whom he took you with more pride than ever
He came from victory; his kisses hang
Yet panting on your lips, and he but now
Exchanged religious farewell to return,
But with more triumph to be yours.
My Lord,
You do believe your Nephews hand was not
Surprised or strained to this?
Strange arts and windings in the world, most dark,
And subtle progresses; who brought this Letter?
I enquired not his name, I thought it not
Considerable to take such narrow knowledge.
Desert, and honour urged it here, nor can
I blame you to be angry, yet his person
Obliged, you should have given a nobler pause,
Before you made your faith and change so violent
From his known worth, into the arms of one,
How ever fashioned to your amorous wish,
Not equal to his cheapest fame, with all
The gloss of blood and merit.
This comparison,
My good Lord Cardinal, I cannot think,
Flows from an even justice, it betrays
You partial where your blood runs.
I fear Madam,
Your own takes two much licence, and will soon,
Fall to the censure of unruly tongues;
Because Alvarez has a softer cheek,
Can like a woman trim his want on hair,
Spend half a day with looking in the glass
To find a posture to present himself,
And bring more effeminacy than man,
Or honour to your bed; must he supplant him?
Take heed, the common murmur when it catches
The sent of a lost Fame—
My Fame Lord Cardinal?
It stands upon an innocence as clear
As the devotions you pay to heaven,
I shall not urge my Lord your soft indulgence
At my next shrift.
You are a fine Court Lady.
And you should be a reverend Churchman.
One, that if you have not thrown off modesty.
Would counsel you to leave Alvarez.
Cause you dare do worse
Than Marriage, must not I be admitted what
The Church and Law allows me?
Insolent? then you dare marry him?
Dare? Let your contracted flame and malice, with
Columbo's rage higher than that, meet us
When we approach the holy place, clasped hand
In hand, we'll break through all your force and fix
Our sacred vows together there.
I knew
When with as chaste a brow▪ you promised fair
To another; you are no dissembling Lady.
Would all your actions had no falser lights
About 'em.
Ha?
The people would not talk and curse so loud.
I'll have you chid into a blush for this.
Begin at home great man, ther's cause enough,
You turn the wrong end of the perspective
Upon your crimes, to drive them to a far,
And lesser sight, but let your eyes look right
What gaints would your pride and surfeit seem?
How gross your avarice, eating up whole families?
How vast are your corruptions and abuse
Of the Kings ear? at which you hang a pendent,
Not to adorn, but ulcerate, while the honest
Nobility, like pictures in the Arras,
Serve only for Court-Ornament; if they speak,
It is when you set their tongues, which you wind up,
Like clocks to strike at the just hour you please;
Leave, leave, my Lord, these usurpations,
And be what you were meant a man to cure,
〈…〉 in Agues to Religion;
Look on the Churches wounds.
You dare presume
In your rude spleen to me, to abuse the Church?
Alas you give false aim, my Lord, it is your
Ambition and Scarlet Sins that tob
Her Altar of the glory, and leave wounds
Upon her brow; which fetches grief, and paleness,
Into her cheeks; Making her troubled bosom
Pant with her groans, and shroud her holy blushes
Within your reverend purples.
Will you now take breath?
In hope, my Lord, you will behold your self
In a true glass, and see those injust acts
That so deform you, and by timely cure,
Prevent a shame before the short haird men
Do crowd and call for justice. I take leave.
This woman has a spirit, that may rise
To tame the Devils, ther's no dealing with
Her angry tongue, it is action and revenge
Must calm her fury; were Columbo here,
I could resolve, but Letters shall be sent
To the Army which may wake him into sense
Of his rasn folly, or direct his spirit
Some way to snatch his honour from this flame,
All great men know, The soul of life is •am.
I Did not think Celinda when I praised
Alvarez to the Duchess, that things thus
Would come about▪ what does your Ladyship
Think of Columbo now? it staggers all
The Court, he should forsake his Mistress, I
Am lost with wonder yet.
It is very strange
Without a spell; but ther's a fate in love,
I like him ne'er the worse.
Nothing but marriages, and triumph now.
What new access of joy, makes you, my Lord,
So pleasant?
Ther's a Packet come to Court
Makes the King merry, we are all concerned in it?
Columbo hath given the enemy a great,
And glorious defeat, and is already
Preparing to march home.
He thrived the better for my prayers.
You have been his great admirer, Madam.
The King longs to see him.
This news exalts the Cardinal.
He's here,
He appears with discontent, the Marriage
With Count D' Alvarez hath a bitter taste,
And not worn off his palate; but let us leave him.
We will to the Duchess.
He has not won so much upon the Arragon
As he has lost at home, and his neglect
Of what my studies had contrived to add
More luster to our Family by the access
Of the great Duchess fortune, cools his triumph,
And makes me wild.
My good Lord Cardinal. (neral.
You made complaint to the King about your Ge∣neral.
Not a complaint my Lord, I did but satisfy
Some questions of the Kings.
You see he thrives
Without your personal valour, or advice,
Most grave and learned in the wars.
My Lord,
I Envy not his fortune.
It is above
Your Malice, and your noise not worth his anger,
It is barking against the moon.
More temper would
Become that habit.
The Military thing would show some spleen;
I'll blow an Army of such Wasps about
The world; go look your sting you left in the Camp, Sir.
The King.
This may be one day counted for.
All things conspire my Lord to make you fortunate,
Your Nephews glory—
It was your cause and justice
Made him victorious, had he been so valiant
At home, he had had another conquest to
Invite and bid her welcome to new wars.
You must be reconciled to providence, my Lord;
I heard you had a controversy with
The Duchess, I will have you friends.
I am not Angry.
For my sake then you shall be pleased,
And with me grace the Marriage▪
A Churchman must show Charity, and shine
With first example, she's a woman.
You shall prescribe in all things; Sir, you cannot
Accuse my love, if I still wish my Nephew
Had been so happy to be constant to
Your own, and my election; yet my brain
Cannot reach how this comes about; I know
My Nephew loved her with a near affection.
He'll give you fair account at his return.
Colonel, your Letters may be spared, the General
Has finished, and is coming home.
I am glad on it, sir; my good Lord Cardinal
It is not impossible but some man provoked,
May have a precious mind to cut your throat.
You shall command me Noble Colonel;
I know you wo'not fail to be at th'wedding.
It is not Columbo that is married Sir.
Go teach the postures of the Pike and Musket▪
Then dril your Mi•midons into a ditch,
Where starve, and stink in pick•e, you shall find
Me reasonable, you see the King expects me.
So does the Devil; some desperate hand
May help you on your journey.
Here this, I this will fit your part: you shall wear the
Slashes, because you are a Soldier; here's for the blue
mute.
This doublet will never fit me, Pox ont', are these
Breeches good enough for a Prince too? Pedro plays
but a Lord, and he has two laces more in a seam.
You must consider Pedro is a foolish Lord, he may
wear what lace he please.
Does my beard fit my clothes well Gentlemen?
Sec Pox o'your beard.
That will fright away the hair.
This fellow plays but a mute, &amp; he is so troublesome,
and talks.
Mr. Secretary might have let Iaques play the soldier,
He has a black patch already.
By your favour Mr. Secretary, I was asked who writ
this play for us.
For u? why art thou any more than a blew mute?
And by my troth, I said, I thought it was all your own.
Away you Coxcomb.
Dost think he has no more wit then to write a Co∣medy?
my Ladies Chaplain made the Play, though he is
content for the honour and tronble of the business, to
be seen in it.
Did any body see my head Gentlemen it was here but
now? I shall have never a head to play my part in.
Is thy head gone? it is well thy part was not in it,
Look, look about, has not Iaques it?
I his head? two'not come on upon my shoulders.
Make hast Gentlemen I'll see whether the King has
supped; Look every man to his wardrobe and his part.
Is he gone? in my mind a masque had been fitter
for a marriage.
Why mute? there was no time for it, and the scenes
Are troublesome.
Half a score Deal tacked together in the clouds,
what's that? a Throne to come down and dance; all the
properties have been paid forty times over, and are in
the Court stock, but the Secretary must have a play to
show his wit.
Did not I tell thee it was the Chaplains? hold your
tongue Mute.
Under the Rose and would this cloth of Silver dou∣blet
might never come off again, if there be any more plot
then you see in the back of my hand.
You talk of a plot, I'll not give this for the best Poets
plot in the world and if it be not well carried.
Well said Mnte.
Ha, ha; Pedro since he put on his doublet, has repea∣ted
but three lines, and he has broke five butt once.
I know not but by this false beard, and here's hair e∣nough
to hang a reasonable honest man, I do not re∣member
to say a strong line indeed in the whole Co∣medy;
but when the Chambermaid kisses the Cap∣tain.
Excellent mute.
They have almost supped, and I cannot find my head
yet.
play in thine own.
Thank you for that, so I may have it made a proper∣tie,
if I have not a head found me, let Mr. Secretary play
my part himself without it.
Are you all ready my Masters? the King is coming
through the Gallery, are the women dressed?
Rogero wants a head.
Here with a pox to you, take mine, you a player?
You a puppy-dog is the Music ready?
Gentlemen, it is my Ladies pleasure that you
expect till she call for you, there are a company of Ca∣valiers
in gallant Equipage newly alighted, have offered
to present their Revels in honour of this Him•n; and it is
her Graces command, that you be silent till their Enter∣tainment
be over.
Gentlemen?
Affronted?
Mr. Secretary, ther's your head again; a man's a
man; have I broken my sleep to study fifteen lines for
an Ambassador, and after that a Constable, and is it
come to this?
Patience Gentlemen, be not so hot, tic but de∣fer'd,
and the play may do well enough cold.
If it be not presented, the Chaplain will have the
greatest loss, he loses his wits.
This Music speaks the King upon entrance; retire,
retire, and grumble not.
With me!
Do you know the Masquers Madam?
Not I Sir.
Ther's one, but that my Nephew is abroad,
And has more soul than thus to Jig upon
Their Hymenrall night, I should suspect
It were he.
Wher's my Lord D' Alvarez?
Call in the Bridegroom.
What Mystery is this?
We want the Bridegroom still.
Where is Alvarez
Oh it is my Lord hoe's murdered.
Who durst commit this horrid act?
I Sir.
Columbo? ha!
Yes; Columbo that dares stay
To justify that act.
Most barbarous.
Oh my dearest Lord!
Our guard seize on them all, this sight doth shake
All that is man within me; poor Alvarez
Is this thy wedding day?
If you do think there is a heaven or pains,
To punish such black crimes in the other world,
Let me have swift, and su•h exemplar justice
As shall become this great assassinate,
You will take off our faith else, and if here
Such innocence must bleed, and you look on,
Poor men that call you Gods on earth, will doubt
To obey your Laws, nay practise to be Devils,
As fearing if such monstrous sins go on
The Saints will not be safe in Heaven.
You shall,
You shall have justice.
Now to come off were brave.
The Masquers, Sir, are fled, their horse prepared
At gate expected to receive 'em, where
They quickly mounted, coming so like friends
None could suspect their hast, which is secured
By advantage of the night.
I answer for '•m all, it is stake enough
For many lives, but if that poniard
Had voice, it would convince they were but all
Spectators of my act; and now if you
Will give your judgments leave, though at the first
Face of this object your cool bloods were frighted,
I can excuse this deed and call it Justice;
An act, your honours, and your office Sir,
Is bound to build a Law upon, for others
To Imitate; I have but took his life,
And punished her with mercy, who had both
Conspired to kill the soul of all my fame
Read there,—and read an injury as deep
In my dishpnour, as the Devil knew
A Woman had capacity or malice
To execute read there, how you were cozened Sir,
Your power affronted, and my faith, her smiles
A juggling witchcraft to betray and make
My love her horse to stalk withal, and catch
Her curled Minion.
Is it possible
The Duchess could dissemble so, and forfeit
Her modesty with you, and to us all?
Yet I must pity her; my Nephew has
Been too severe, though this affront would call
A dying man from prayers, and turn him Tiger,
There being nothing dearer than our fame,
Which, If a common man, whose blood has no
Ingredient of honour, labour to
Preserve, a Soldier (by his nearest tie
To glory) is above all others, bound
To vindicate; and yet it might have been less bloody:
Charitable Devil!
To this your Answer was a free resign?
Flattered with great opinion of her faith,
And my desert of her (with thought that she
Who seemed to weep and chide my easy will
To part with her, could not be guilty of
A treason, or Apostasy so soon,
But rather meant this a device to make
Me expedite the affairs of War) I sent
That paper, which her wickedness not justice,
Applied (what I meant trial) her divorce;
I loved her so, I dare call heaven to witness
I knew not whether I loved most; while •he,
With him, whose crimson penitence I provoked,
Conspired my everlasting infamy;
Examine but the circumstance.
It is clear,
This Match was made at home before she sent
That cunning writ, in hope to take him off,
As knowing his impatient Soul would scorn
To own a blessing came on crutches to him;
It was not well to raise his expectation,
(Had you, Sir, no affront) to ruin him
With so much scandal and contempt.
We have
Too plentiful a circumstance to accuse
You Madam, as the cause of your own sorrows,
But not without an accessory, more
Than young Alvarez.
Any other instrument?
Yes I am guilty, with her self, and Don
Columbo, though our acts looked several ways,
That thought a lover might so soon be ransomed;
And did exceed the office of a King
To exercise dominion over hearts,
That owe to the prerogative of heaven
Their choice, or Separation; you must therefore,
When you do kneel for Justice, and Revenge,
Madam, consider me a laterall agent
In poor Alvarez Tragedy.
It was your love to Don Columbo Sir.
So, so; the King is charmed; do you observe,
How to acquit Columbo, he would draw
Himself into the plot; Heaven, is this Justice?
Your Judgment is divine in this.
And yet,
Columbo cannot be secure, and we
Just in his pardon, that durst make so great,
And insolent a breach of Law and Duty.
Ha, Will he turn again?
And should we leave
This guilt of blood to Heaven, which cries, and strikes,
With loud appeals the palace of eternity,
Yet here is more to charge Columbo, than
Alvarez blood, and bids me punish it,
Or be no King.
It is come about my Lords.
And If I should forgive
His timeless death, I cannot the offence,
That with such boldness struck at me. Has my
Indulgence to your merits which are great
Made me so cheap, your rage could meet no time
Nor place for your revenge, but where my eyes
Must be affrighted, and affronted with
The bloody execution? This contempt
Of Majesty trar scends my power to pardon,
And you shall feel my anger Sir.
•thou shalt have one short prayer more for that.
Have I in the progress of my life
No actions to plead me up deserving,
Against this ceremony?
Contain your self.
I must be dumb then; where is honour?
And gratitude of Kings, when they forget
Whose hand secured their greatness? take my head off,
Examine then which of your silken Lords,
As I have done, will throw himself on dangers;
Like to a floating Island move in blood;
And where your great defence calls him to stand
A Bulwark, upon his bold breast to take
In death, that you may live: but Soldiers are
Your valiant fools, whom when your own securities
Are bleeding you can cherish, but when once
Your state and nerves are knit, not thinking when
To use their surgery again, you cast
Them off, and let them hang in dusty armories,
Or make it death to ask for pay.
No More,
We thought to have put your victory and merits
In balance with Alvarez death, which while
Our mercy was to Judge, had been your safety;
But the affront to us, made greater by
This boldness to upbraid our royal bounty,
Shall tame or make you nothing.
Excellent.
The Cardinal is not pleased.
Humble your self
To the King.
And beg my life? let cowards do it
That dare not die, I'll rather have no head
Than owe it to his Charity.
To the Castle with him.
Madam, I leave you to your grief, and what
The King can recompense to your tears, or honour
Of your dead Lord, expect.
This shows like Justice.
THis is the age of wonders.
Wondrous mischiefs.
Among those guards which some call Tutelar Angels,
Whose office is to govern Provinces,
Is there not one will undertake Navarre?
Hath heaven forsook us quite?
Columbo at large?
And graced now more than ever.
He was not pardoned,
That word was prejudicial to his fame.
But as the murder done had been a dream
Vanished to memory, he's courted as
Preserver of his Country; with what chains
Of Magic does this Cardinal hold the King?
What will you say my Lord if they enchant
The Duchess now; and by some impudent art,
Advance a Marriage to Columbo yet?
Say? I'll say no woman can be saved, nor is it
Fit, indeed, any should pretend to Heaven
After one such impiety in their sex,
And yet my faith has been so stager'd, since
The King restored Columbo, I'll be now
Of no Religion.
It is not possible
She can forgive the murder, I observed
Her tears.
Why so did I, my Lord,
And if they be not honest, it is to be
Half damned to look upon a woman weeping.
When do you think the Cardinal said his prayers?
I know not.
Heaven forgive my want of charity
But if I were to kill him, he should have
No time to pray, his life could be no sacrifice,
Unless his soul went too.
That were too much.
When you mean to dispatch him, you may give
Time for Confession, they have injured me
After another rate.
You are too passionate Cozen.
How the gay men do flutter to congratulate
His Goal delivery? ther's one honest man,
What pity it is a gallant fellow should
Depend on knaves for his preferment.
Except this cruelty upon Alvarez,
Columbo has no mighty stain upon him;
But for his Uncle—
If I had a Son
Of twelve years old, that would not fight with him,
And stake his soul against his Cardinals Cap,
I would dis-inherit him; Time has took a lease
But for three lives I hope, a fourth may see
Honesty walk without a crutch.
This is
But Air and Wildness.
I'll see the Duchess,
You may do well to comfort her,
We must attend the King.
your pleasures.
A Man of a brave soul.
The le•s his safety;
The King and Cardinal in consult.
Commend us to the Duchess, and employ
What language you think fit, and powerful
To reconcile her to some peace. My Lords.
Sir, I possess all for your sacred uses.
Madam, you are the welcom'st Lady living.
To whom, Mr. Secretary?
If you have mercy
To pardon so much boldness, I durst say,
To me—I am a Gentleman.
And handsome.
But my Lady has much wanted you.
Why Mr. Secretary?
You are the prettiest,
So.
The wittiest,
So.
The merriest Lady in the Court.
And I was wished to make the Duchess pleasant▪
She never had so deep a cause of sorrow,
Her Chamber's but a Coffin of a larger
Volume, wherein she walks so like a Ghost,
T'would make you pale to see her.
Tell her Grace I attend here.
I shall most willingly.
A spirited Lady, would I had her in my closet,
She is excellent company among the Lords,
Sure she has an admirable treble—Madam.
I do suspect this fellow would be nibbling
Like some whose narrow fortunes will not rise
To wear things when the inventions rare, and new,
But treading on the heel of pride, they hunt
The fashion when tic crippled, like fell tyrants;
I hope I am not old yet, I had the honour
To be saluted by our Cardinals Nephew
This Morning, ther's a man!
I have prevailed,
Sweet Madam use what Eloquence you can
Upon her, and if ever I be useful
To Your Ladyships service, your least breath commands me.
Madam, I come to ask you but one question,
If you were in my State, my state of grief,
I mean an exile from all happiness,
Of this world, and almost of heaven, for my
Affection is finding out despair,
What would you think of Don Columbo?
Madam?
Whose Bloody hand wrought all this misery?
Would you not weep as I do? and wish rather
An everlasting spring of tears to drown
Your sight, than let your eyes be cursed to see
The murderer again? and glorious?
So careless of his sin, that he is made
Fit for new Parricide, even while his soul
Is purpled o'er, and reeks with innocent blood.
But do not, do not answer me, I know
You have so great a spirit (which I want,
The horror of his fact surprising all
My faculties) you would not let him live:
But I, poor I, must suffer more, ther's not
One little star in Heaven will look on me,
Unless to choose me out the mark, on whom
It may shoot down some angry influence.
Madam, her's Don Columbo says he must
Speak with your Grace.
But he must not, I charge you.
None else wait? Is this well done,
To triumph in his Tyranny? speak Madam,
Speak but your conscience.
Sir, you must not see her▪
Not see her? were she cabled up above
The search of Bullet, or of Fire, were she
Within her Grave, and that the toughest Mine
That ever nature teem'd and groaned withal,
I would force some way to see her; do not fear
I come to Court you Madam, you're not worth
Th• humblest of my kinder thoughts, I come
To show the man you have prokvo'd, and lost;
And tell you what remains of my revenge.
Live, but never presume again to marry,
I'll kill the next at the Altar, and quench all
The smiling tapers with his blood; if after
You dare provoke the Priest, and heaven so much,
To take another, in thy bed I'll cut him from
Thy warm embracc, and throw his heart to Ravens.
This will appear an unexampled cruelty.
Your pardon Madam, rage, and my revenge
Not perfect, took away my eyes, you are
A noble Lady, this, not worth your ey-beam,
One of so slight a making, and so thin,
An Autumn leaf is of too great a value
To play, which shall be •oonest lost in the Air;
Be pleased to own me by some name, in your
Assurance, I despise to be received
There, let her witness that I call
You Mistress; honour me to make these Pearls
Your carkanet.
My Lord, you are too humble in your thoughts.
Ther's no vexation too great to punish her.
Now Nadam?
Away you saucy fellow; Madam, I
Must be excused, if I do think more honourably
Than you have cause of this great Lord.
Why is not
All woman kind concerned to hate what's impious?
For my part—
Antonio, is this a woman?
I know not whether she be man or woman,
I should be nimble to find out the Experiment,
She looked with less state, when Columbo came.
Let me entreat your absence, I am cozened in her,
I took you for a modest, honest Lady.
Madam, I scorn any accuser, and
Deducting the great title of a Duchess,
I shall not need one grain of your dear honour
To make me full weight, if your Grace be jealous
I can remove.
She is gone.
Prithee remove
My fears of her return,—she is not worth
Considering, my anger's mounted higher;
He need not put in caution •or my next
Marriage, A•var•z, I must come to thee,
Thy Virgin, Wife, and Widow, but not till
I have paid tho•e Tragic duties to thy Hearse,
Become my piety and love, but how?
Who shall instruct a way?
Madam, Don
Hernando much desires to speak with you.
Will not thy own discretion think I am
Unfit for visit.
Please your Grace he brings
Something he says imports your ear, and love
Of the dead Lord Alvarez.
Then admit him.
I would speak, Madam, to your self.
Your absence.
I know not how you Grace will censure so
Much boldness, when you know the affairs I come for.
My Servant has prepared me to receive it,
If it concern my dead Lord.
Can you name
So much of your Alvarez in a breath
Without one word of your revenge? O Madam,
I come to chide you, and repent my great
Opinion of your virtue, that can walk,
And spend so many hours in naked Solitude,
As if you thought that no arrears were due
To his death, when you had paid his Funeral charges,
Made your eyes red, and wept a handkercher;
I come to tell you that I saw him bleed,
I, that can challenge nothing in his name,
And honour, saw his murdered body warm,
And panting with the labour of his spirits,
Till my amazed Soul shrunk and hid it self,
While barbarous Columbo grinning stood,
And mocked the weeping wounds; it is too much
That you should keep your heart alive, so long
After this spectacle, and not revenge it.
You do not know the business of my heart,
That censure me so rashly; yet I thank you,
And if you be Alvarez friend, dare tell
Your confidence, that I despise my life,
But know not how to use it in a service,
To speak me his revenger, this will need
No other proof, than that to you, who may
Be sent with cunning to betray me, I
Have made this bold confession, I so much
Desire to sacrifice to that hovering Ghost,
Columbo's life, that I am not ambitious
To keep my own two minutes after it.
If you will call me coward, which is equal
To think I am a Traitor, I forgive it,
For this brave resolution, which time
And all the Destinies must aid, I beg
That I may kiss your hand for this, and may
The soul of angry honour guide it.
Whither?
To Don Columbo's heart.
It is too weak I fear alone.
Alone? are you in earnest? why? will it not
Be a dishonour to your Justice, Madam,
Another arm should interpose? but that
It were a saucy act to mingle with you,
I durst, nay I am bound in the revenge
Of him that's dead, (since the whole world has interest,
In every goodmans loss) to offer it;
Dare you command me, Madam?
Not command,
But I should more than honour such a truth
In man, that durst against so mighty odds,
Appear Alvarez friend and mine; the Cardinal—
Is for the second course, Columbo must
Be first cut up, his Ghost must lead the dance.
Let him die first.
But how?
How? with a Sword, and if I undertake it,
I wo'not lose so much of my own honour,
To kill him basely.
How shall I reward
This infinite service? it is not Modesty,
While now my husband groans beneath his tomb,
And calls me to his marble bed, to promise
What this great act might well deserve, my self
If you survive the Victor, but if thus
Alvarez ashes be appeased it must
Deserve an honourable memory;
And though Columbo (as he had all power,
And grasped the fates) has vowed to kill the man
That shall succeed Alvarez—
Tyranny.
Yet if ever,
I entertain a thought of love hereafter,
Hernando from the world shall challenge it,
Till when, my Prayers, and fortune, shall wait on you.
This is too mighty recompense.
It is all just.
If I outlive Columbo I must not
Expect security at home.
Thou can
Not fly, where all my fortunes, and my love,
Shall not attend to guard thee.
If I dye—
Thy memory
Shall have a shrine, the next within my heart
To my Alvarez.
Once again your hand,
Your cause is so religious you need
Not strengthen it with your prayers, trust it to me.
Madam, the Cardinal.
Will you appear?
And he had all the horror of the Devil
In's face, I would not balk him.
What makes Hernando here? I do not like
They should consult, I'll take no note; the King
Fairly salutes your Grace, by whose command
I am to tell you, though his will and actions
Illimited, stoop not to satisfy
The Vulgar inquisition, he is
Yet willing to retain a just opinion,
With those that are placed near him, and although
You look with Natures ey upon your self,
Which needs no perspective to reach, nor art
Of any optic to make greater, what
Your narrow sense applies an injury,
(Our selves still nearest to our selves) but ther's
Another ey that looks abroad and walks
In search of reason, and the weight of things,
With which if you look on him, you will find
His pardon to •olumbo cannot be
So much against his justice, as your erring
Faith would persuade your anger.
Good my Lord,
Your phrase has too much landscape and I cannot
Distinguish at this distance you present
The figure perfect, but indeed my eyes
May pray your Lordship find excuse, for tears
Have almost made them blind.
Fair, peace restore 'em!
To bring the object nearer, the King says,
He could not be severe to Don Columbo
Without injustice to his other merits,
Which call more loud for their reward and honour,
Than you for your revenge; the Kingdom made
Happy by those; you only by the last
Uunfortunate, nor was it rational,
I speak the Kings own Language, he should die
For taking one mans breath, without whose valour
None now had been alive, without dishonour.
In my poor understanding, it is the Crown
Of virtue to proceed in its own tract,
Not deviate from honour, if you acquit
A man of murder, because he has done brave
Things in the War, you will bring down his valour
To a crime, nay to a baud, if it secure
A rape, and but teach those that deserve well
To sin with greater licence; but dispute
Is now too late, my Lord, it is done, and you,
By the good King, in tender of my sorrows,
Sent to persuade me, it is unreasonable
That Justice should repair me.
You mistake,
For if Columbo's death could make Alvarez
Live, the King had given him up to Law
Your bleeding Sacrifice; but when his life
Was but another treasure thrown away,
To obey a clamorous Statute, it was wisdom
To himself and common safety to take off
This killing edge of Law, and keep Columbo
To recompense the crime by noble acts,
And sorrow, that in time might draw your pity.
This is a greater tyranny, than that
Columbo exercised, he killed my Lord,
And you not have the charity to let
Me think it worth a punishment,
To that
In my own name, I answer; I condemn
And urge the blody guilt against my Nephew,
It was violent, and cruel, a black deed,
A deed whose memory doth make me shuddet,
An act that did betray a tyrannous nature,
Which he took up in War, the school of vengeance;
And though the Kings compassion spare him here,
Unless his heart Weep it self out in penitent tears.
This sounds
As you were now a good man.
Does your Grace
Think I have conscience to allow the murder?
Although when it was done, I did obey
The stream of nature, as he was my Kinsman,
To plead he might not pay his forfeit life,
Could I do less for one so near my blood?
Consider Madam, and be charitable,
Let not this wild injustice, make me lose
The character I bear, and reverend habit.
To make you full acquainted with my innocence,
I challenge here my soul, and heaven to witness•
If I had any thought, or knowledge with
My nephews plot, or person, when he came
Under the smooth pretence of friend to violate
Your hospitable laws, and do that act
Whose frequent mention draws this tear, a whirlwind
Snatch me to endless flames.
I must believe,
And ask your Graces pardon, I confess
I have not loved you since Alvarez death,
Though we were reconciled.
I do not blame
Your Jealousy, nor any zeal you had
To prosecute revenge against me, Madam,
As I then stood suspected, nor can yet
Implore your mercy to Columbo, all
I have to say is to retain my first
Opinion and credit with your Grace,
Which you may think I urge not out of fear
Or ends upon You, (since, I thank the King,
I stand firm on the base of royal favour)
But for your own sake, and to show I have
Compassion of your sufferings.
You have cleared
A doubt my Lord, and by this fair remonstrance,
Given my sorrow so much truce, to think
That we may meet again, and yet be friends.
But be not angry, if I still remember
By whom Alvarez dyed, and weep, and wake
Another Justice with my prayers,
All thoughts
That may advance a better peace, dwell with you.
How would this cozening Statesman bribe my Faith
With flatteries to think him innocent?
No, if his Nephew die, this Cardinal must not
Be long-liv'd; all the prayers of a wronged Widow
Make firm Hernando's Sword, and my own hand
Shall have some glory in the next revenge;
I will pretend my brain with grief distracted,
It may gain easy credit, and beside
The taking off examination
For great •olumbo's death, it makes what act
I do in that believed want of my reason,
Appear no crime, but my defence; look down
Soul of my Lord, from thy eternal shade,
And unto all thy blessed companions boast,
Thy Duchess busy to revenge thy Ghost.
Hernando, now I love thee, and do half
Repent the affront my passion threw upon thee▪
You wo'not be too prodigal of your penitence.
This makes good thy Nobility of birth,
Thou may be worth my anger and my sword,
If thou dost execute as daringly,
As thou provok'st a quarrel, I did think
Thy soul a starveling, or a sleep.
You'll find it
Active enough to keep your spirit waking,
Which to exasperate, for yet I think
It is not high enough to meet my rage—
Do ye smile?
This noise is worth it, Gentlemen;
I'm sorry this great Soldier has engaged
Your travel, all his business is to talk.
A little of your Lordships patience,
You shall have other sport, and swords that will
Be as nimble about your heart, as you can wish,
It is pity more than our two single lives▪
Should be at stake.
Make that no scruple Sir.
To him then that survives if fate allow
That difference, I speak that he may tell
The World, I came not hither on slight anger,
But to revenge my honour stained, and trampled on
By this proud man, when General, he commanded
My absence from the field.
I do remember,
And I'll give your Soul now a discharge.
I come to meet it, if your courage be so fortunate.
But there is more than my own injury
You must account for Sir, if my sword prosper,
Whose point and every edge is made more keen
With young Alvarez blood, in which I had
A Noble interest; does not that sin benum
Thy Arteries, and turn the guilty flowings,
To trembling gelly in thy veins? can hear
Me name that murder, and thy spirits not
Struck into air, as thou were shot by some
Engine from heaven?
You are the Duchess Champion;
Thou hast given me a quarrel now; I grieve
It is determined all must fight, and I
Shall lose much honour in his fall.
That Duchess
(Whom but to mention with thy breath, is sacrilege)
An Orphan of thy making, and condemned
By thee to eternal solitude, I come
To vindicate, and while I am killing thee,
By virtue of her prayers sent up for justice,
At the same time, in heaven I am pardoned for it.
I cannot hear the Bravo.
Two words more
And take your chance, before you all I must
Pronounce that noble Lady, without knowledge,
Or thought of what I undertake for her.
Poor soul, Shees now at her Devotions,
Busy with heaven, and wearing out the earth
With her stiff Knees, and bribing her good Angel
With treasures of her eyes, to tell her Lord
How much she longs to see him; my attempt
Needs no commission from her, were I
A stranger in Navarre, the inborn right
Of every Gentleman to Alvarez loss,
Is reason to engage their swords, and lives,
Against the common enemy of virtue.
Now have you finished? I have an instrument
Shall cure this noise, and fly up to thy tongue,
To murder all thy words.
One little knot
Of phlegm that clogs my stomach, and I •a' done;
You have an Uncle called a Cardinal
Would he were lurking now about thy heart,
That the same wounds might reach you both, and send
Your reeling souls together. Now have at you.
We must not Sir be idle.
What think you now of praying?
Time enough;
Commend me to my friend; the scales are even,
I would be merciful, and give you time,
Now to consider of the other World,
You'll find your soul benighted presently.
I'll find my way in the dark.
Colu A stumble's dangerous.
Now ask thy life—Ha?
I despise to wear it,
A gift from any but the first bestower.
I scorn a base advantage—ha.
I am now
Out of your debt.
You have don't, and I forgive thee.
Give me thy hand, when shall we meet again?
Never, I hope.
I feel life ebb apace, yet I'll look upwards,
And show my face to heaven.
The matters done,
I must not stay to bury him.
COlumbo's death doth much aflict the King.
I thought the Cardinal would have lost his wits
At first, for's nephew, it drowns all the talk
Of the other that were slain.
We are friends.
I do suspect Hernando had some interest
And knew how their wounds came.
His flight confirms it,
For whom the Cardinal has spread his nets.
He is not so weak to trust himself at home
To his Enemies gripe.
All strikes not me so much,
As that the Duchess, most oppressed Lady,
Should be distracted, and before Columbo
Was slain.
But that the Cardinal should be made
Her Guardian, is to me above that wonder.
So it pleased the King, and she, with that small stock
Of reason left her, is so kind, and smooth
Upon him.
She's turned a child again; a madness,
That would have made her brain and blood boil high
In which distemper she might have wrought something.
Had been to purpose.
The Cardinal is cunning, and how ever
His brow does smile, he does suspect Hernando
Took fire from her, and waits a time to punish it.
But what a subject of disgrace, and mirth,
Hath poor Celinda made herself by pride,
In her belief Columbo was her servant.
Her head hath stooped much since he died, and she
Almost ridiculous at Court.
The Cardinal
Is come into the Garden, now—
Walk off,
It troubles me the Duchess by her loss
Of brain is now beneath my great revenge,
She is not capable to feel my anger,
Which like to unregarded thunder spent
In woods, and lightning aimed at senseless trees,
Must idly fall, and hurt her not, not to
That sense her guilt deserves a fatal stroke,
Without the knowledge for what crime to fright her,
When she takes leave, and make her tug with death,
Until her soul sweat, is a Pigeons torment,
And she is sent a babe to the other World,
Columbo's death will not be satisfied,
And I but wound her with a two edged feather;
I must do more, I have all opportunity,
(She by the King now made my charge) but she's
So much a turtle I shall lose by killing her,
Perhaps do her a pleasure, and preferment;
That must not be.
Is not this she, that would be thought to have been
Columbo's Mistress? Madam, his grace is private,
And would not be disturbed, you may displease him.
What will your worship wager that he shall
Be pleased again before we part.
I'll lay this Diamond Madam, against a kiss,
And trust your self to keep the stakes.
It is done.
I have long had an appetite to this Lady,
But the Lords keep her up so high—this toy
May bring her on.
This interruption tastes not of good manners.
But where necessity my Lord compels,
The boldness may meet pardon, and when you
Have found my purpose, I may less appear
Unmannerly.
To the business.
It did please
Your Nephew, Sir, before his death to credit me
With so much honourable favour, I
Am come to tender to his nearest of blood,
Your self, what does remain a debt to him.
Not to delay your Grace with circumstance,
That deed, if you accept, makes you my heir
Of no contemptible estate—this way
Is only left to try up scurrile tongues,
And saucy men, that since Columbo's death
Venture to Libel on my pride, and folly;
His greatness, and this gift which I enjoy,
Still for my life, beyond which term; a Kingdom's,
Nothing, will curb the giddy spleens of men
That live on impudent rime, and railing at
Each wandering fame they cat•h.
Madam, this bounty
Will bind my gratitude and care to serve you.
I am your Graces Servant.
Antonelli,
And when this noble Lady visits me
Let her not wait.
What think you my Officious, Sir; his grace
Is pleased, you may conjecture? I may keep
Your Gem, the kiss was never yours.
Sweet Madam—
Talk if you dare, you know I must not wait,
And so farewell for this time.
It is in my brain already, and it forms
Apace, good, excellent revenge, and pleasant!
She's now within my talons, it is too cheap
A satisfaction for Columbo's death,
Only to kill her by soft charm or force,
I'll rifle first her darling chastity,
'Twil be after time enough to poison her,
And she to the world be thought her own destroyer.
As I will frame the circumstance, this night
All may be finished; for the Colonel,
Her agent in my Nephews death (whom I
Disturbed at Counsel with her) I may reach him
Hereafter, and be Master of his fate.
We starve our Conscience when we thrive in State.
Placentia, We two are only left
Of my Ladies Servants, let us be true
To her, and one another, and be sure
When we are at prayers, to curse the Cardinal.
I pity my sweet Lady.
I pity her too, but am a little angry;
She might have found another time to lose
Her wits.
That I were a man?
What would thou do Placentia.
I would revenge my Lady.
It is better being a woman, thou may do
Things that may prosper better, and the fruit
Be thy own another day.
Your wit still loves
To play the wanton.
It is a sad time Placentia,
Some pleasure would do well, the truth is, I
Am weary of my life, and I would have
One fit of mirth before I leave the world.
Do not you blush to talk thus wildly?
It is good manners
To be a little mad after my Lady;
But I have done; who is with her now?
Madam Valerie.
Not Celinda? Ther's a Lady for my humour,
A pretty book of flesh and blood, and well
Bound up, in a fair letter too; would I
Had her with all the Errata.
She has not
An honourable Fame.
Her Fame? that's nothing,
A little stain, her wealth will fe•ch again
The colour, and bring honour into her cheeks
As fresh; if she were mine, and I had her
Exchequer▪ I know the way to make her honest,
Honest to the touch, the test, and the last trial.
How Prithee?
Why, first I would marry her, that's a verb Mate∣real;
Then I would Print her with an End•x
Expurgatorius, a table drawn
Of her Court Her•sies, and when she's read
Cum Privilegio, who dares call her Whore?
I'll leave you, if you talk thus.
I have done,
Placentia, thou may be better company
After another progress; and now tell me,
Did ever hear of such a patient madness
As my Lady is possessed with? she has raved
But twice; and she would fright the Cardinal,
Or at a supper if she did but poison him,
It were a frenzy I could bear withal;
She calls him her dear Governor—
Who is this?
Her Secretary? Sir,
Here is a Letter if it may have so
Much happiness to kiss her Graces hand.
From whom?
That's not in your Commission Sir
To ask, or mine to satisfy, she will want
No understanding when she reads.
Alas,
Under your favour Sir, you are mistaken.
Her Grace did never more want understanding.
How?
have you not heard, her scull is broken Sir
And many pieces taken out, she's mad.
The sad fame of her distraction
Has two much truth it seems.
If please you Sir
To exp•ct a while, I will present the Letter.
Pray do
How long has she been thus Distempered Sir?
Before the Cardinal came to govern here,
Who for that reason by the King was made
Her Guardian, we are now at his devotion.
A Lamb given up to a Tiger! may diseases
Soon eat him through his heart!
Your pardon Sir,
I love that voice, I know it too, a little,
Are not you? be not angry noble Sir,
I can with ease be ignorant again,
And think you are another man, but if
You be that valiant Gentleman they call—
Whom? What?
That killed, I would not name him if I thought
You were not pleased to be that very Gentleman.
Am I betrayed?
The Devil sha'not
Betray you here, kill me, and I will take
My death you are the Noble Colonel;
We are all bound to you for the Generals death,
Valiant Hernando? when my Lady knows
You are here, I hope 'twil fetch her wits again,
But do not talk too loud, we are not all
Honest in the house, some are the Cardinals creatures.
Thou were faithful to thy Lady, I am
glad
It is night, but tell me how the Churchman uses
The Duchess?
He carries Angels in his tongue, and face, but I
Suspect his heart, this is one of his spawns.
Signior Antonelli.
Honest Antonio.
And how, and how—a friend of mine, where is
The Cardinals Grace?
That will be never answered.
He means to sup here with the Duchess.
Will be?
We will have the charming bottles at my chamber,
Bring that Gentleman, we will be mighty merry.
I may disturb your jollity.
Farewell sweet—
Dear Antonelli—a round Pox confound you.
This is Court Retorick at the back stairs.
Do you know this Gentleman?
Not I.
My Lady presently dismissed Val•ria,
And bad me bring him to her bed-chamber.
The Gentleman has an honest face.
Her words fell from her with some evenness &amp; joy.
Her. Grace desires your presence.
I'll attend her.
I would this Soldier had the Cardinal
Upon a promontory, with what a spring
The Churchman would leap down, it were a spectacle
Most rare to see him topple from the precipice,
And souse in the salt water with a noise
To stun the fishes; and if he fell into
A net, what wonder would the simple Sea• gulls
Have, to draw up the o'rgrown Lobster,
So ready boiled? he shall have my good wishes,
This Colonels coming may be lucky. I
Will be sure none shall interrupt 'em.
Is her Grace at opportunity?
No sweet Madam,
She is a sleep, her Gentlewoman says.
My business is but visit, I'll expect.
That must not be, although I like your company.
You are grown rich Mr. Secretary.
I Madam, Alas!
I hear you are upon another purchase.
I upon a purchase?
If you want any sum—
If I could purchase your sweet favour Madam?
You shall command me, and my fortune Sir.
How's this?
I have observed you Sir a staid,
And prudent Gentleman—and I shall want—
Not me?
A Father for some Infant; he has credit
In the world; I am not the first cast Lady
Has married a Secretary.
Shall I wait upon you?
Whither?
Any whither.
I may chance lead you then—
I shall be honoured to obey, my blood
Is up, and in this humour I'm for any thing.
Well Sir, I'll t•y your Manhood.
It is my happiness,
You cannot please me better.
This was struck
In the opportunity.
I am made for ever.
Dear Madam, do not weep.
You're very welcome,
I ha done, I wo'not shed a tear more
Till I meet Alvarez, then I'll weep for joy;
He was a fine young Gentleman, and sung sweetly,
And you had heard him but the night before
We were married, you would have sworn he had been
A Swan, and sung his own •ad Epitaph;
But we will talk of the Cardinal.
Would his death
Might ransom your fair sense, he should not live
To triumph in the loss, beshrow my manhood;
But I begin to melt.
I pray Sir tell me,
For I can understand, although they say
I have lost my wits; but they are safe enough,
And I shall have'em when the Cardinal dyes;
Who had a Letter from his Nephew too
Since he was slain.
From whence?
I know not where he is? but in some Bower
Within a Garden he is make•ng Chaplets,
And means to send me one, but I'll not take it,
I have flowers enough I thank him while I live.
But do you love your Governor?
Yes, but I'll never marry him, I am promised
Already.
To whom Madam?
Do not you
Blush when you ask me that, must not you be
My Hue•band? I know why, but that's a secret;
Indeed if you believe me, I do love
No man alive so well as you, the Cardinal
Shall never know it, he will kill us both, and yet
He says he loves me dearly, and has promised
To make me well again, but I'm afraid,
One time or other he will give me poison.
Prevent him Madam, and take nothing from him.
Why, do you think 'twil hurt me?
It will kill you.
I shall but dye, and meet my dear loved Lord,
Whom when I have kissed, •'l come again, and work
A bracelet of my hair for you to carry him,
When you are going to heaven, the poesy shall
Be my own name, in little tears, that I
Will weep next winter, which congealed in the frost
Will show like feed-Pearl, you'll deliver it?
I know he'll love, and wear it for my sake.
She is quite lost.
I pray give me Sir, your pardon,
I know I talk not wisely, but if you had
The burden of my sorrow, you would miss
Sometimes your better reason; now I'm well,
What will you do when the Cardinal comes?
He must not see you for the world.
He sha'not,
I'll take my leave before he come.
Nay stay,
I shall have no friend left me when you go,
He will but sup, he sha'not stay to lie w•' me,
I have the picture of my Lord abed,
Three are to much this weather.
Madam▪ the Cardinal.
He shall sup with the Devil.
I dare not stay,
The Red-cock will be angry, I'll come again.
This sorrow is no fable, now I find
My curiosity is sadly satisfied;
Ha? if the Duchess in her stragled wits,
Let fall words to betray me to the Cardinal,
The Panther will not leap more fierce to meet
His prey, when a long want of food hath parched
His starved maw, than he to print his rage
And tear my heart-strings, every thing is fatal,
And yet she talked sometimes with chain of sense,
And said she loved me; ha, they come not yet;
I have a sword about me, and I left
My own security to visit death.
Yet I may pause a little, and consider
Which way does lead me to it most honourably;
Does not the Chamber that I walk in tremble?
What will become of her, and me, and all
The world in one small hour? I do not think
Ever to see the day again, the wings
Of night spread o'er me like a sable Herse-cloath,
The Stars are all close mourners too; but I
Must not a•one to the cold silent grave,
I must not; If thou can Alvarez open
That Ebon curtain, and behold the man,
When the worlds justice fails shall right thy ashes,
And feed their thirst with blood, thy Duchess is
Almost a Ghost already; and doth wear
Her body like a useless upper garment,
The trim and fashion of it lost. Ha?
You need not doubt me, Sir, My Lady prays
You would not think it long, she in my ear,
Commanded me to tell you, that when last
She drank, she had happy wishes to your health.
And did the Cardinal pledge it?
He was not
Invited to it nor must he know you are here.
What do they talk of prithee?
His Grace is very pleasant
And kind to her, but her returns are after
The sad condition of her sense, sometimes unjoynted.
They have Music.
A Lute only,
His Grace prepared, they say, the best of Italy
That waits upon my Lord.
He thinks the Duchess
Is stung with a Tarantula.
Your pardon.
My duty is expected.
Gentle Lady.—a voice too?
Come my Daphne, come away,
We do wast the Crystal day;
It is Strephon calls. Da What says my love?
Come follow to the Myrtle Grove,
Where Venus shall prepare
New Chaplets for thy hair.
Were I shut up within a Tree,
I'drend my bark to follow thee.
My Shepherdess, make hast,
The minutes slide too fast:
In those cooler shades will I
Blind, as Cupped, kiss thine ey.
In thy bosom then I'll stay,
In such warm Snow who would not lose his way.
VVE'llaugh and leave the world behind,
And Gods themselves that see,
Shall envy thee, and m•▪
But never find
Such joys, when they embrace a Deity.
If at this distance I distinguish, it is not
Church music, and the air's wanton, and no Anthem
Sung to it, but some strange Ode of love, and kisses,
What should this mean?—ha, he is coming hither,
I am betrayed, he marches in her hand,
I'll trust a little more, mute as the Arras
My sword and I here.
Wait you in the first Chamber, and let none
Presume to interrupt us.
She is pleasant; now for some art to poison all her inno∣cence.
I do not like the Cardinals humour, he
Little suspects what guest is in my Chamber.
Now Madam you are safe.
How means your Lordship?
Safe in my Arms, sweet Duchess.
Do not hurt me
Not for the treasures of the world, you are
My pretty charge, had I as many lives
As I have careful thoughts, to do you service,
I should think all a happy forfeit to
Delight your Grace one minute; it is a heaven
To see you smile.
What kindness call you this?
It cannot want a name while you preserve
So plentiful a sweetness, it is love.
Of me? how shall I know it my Lord?
By this, and this, swift Messengers to whisper
Our hearts to one another.
Pray do you come a wooing?
Yes sweet Madam,
You cannot be so cruel to deny me.
What my Lord?
Another kiss.
Can you
Dispense with this my Lord? Alas I fear
Hernando is asleep, or vanished from me.
I have mocked my blood into a flame, and what
My angry soul had formed for my revenge,
Is now the object of my amorous sense,
I have took a strong enchantment from her lips,
And fear I shall forgive Columbo's death
If She consent to my embrace; come Madam.
Whither my Lord?
But to your bed or couch,
Where if you will be kind, and but allow
Your self a knowledge, love whose shape and raptures
Wise Poets have but glorified in dreams,
Shall make your chamber his eternal Palace;
And with such active and essential streams
Of new delights glide o'er your bosom, you
Shall wonder to what unknown world you are
By some blessed change translated; why d'e pause?
And look so wild? will you deny your Governor?
How came you by that Cloven foot?
Your fancy
Would turn a traitor to your happiness;
I am your friend, you must be kind.
Unhand me,
Or I'll cry out a rape▪
You wo'not sure?
I have been consent with Hernando's shadow,
Here's none but heaven to hear me, help, a rape.
Are you so good at understanding then,
I must use other argument.
Go to, Cardinal.
Hern•ndo▪ Murder, Treason, help.
An army sha'not rescue thee, your blood
Is much inflamed, I have brought a Lancet wi'me,
Shall open your hot veins, and cool your fever;
To vex thy parting Soul, it was the same
Engine that pinc'd Columbo's heart.
Help, Murder.
Some ring the bell, 'twil raise the Court,
My Lord is murdered, it is Hernando.
I'll make you all some sport,—So, now we are even,
Where is the Duchess, I would take my leave
Of her, and then bequeath my curse among you.
How come these bloody objects?
With a trick my sword found out, I hope he's paid.
I hope so to; a Surgeon for my Lord Cardinal.
Hernando?
Justice, Oh Justice Sir, against a ravisher.
Sir I have done you service.
A bloody service.
It is pure Searlet.
After such care to perfect my revenge
Thus banded out of the world by a women's plot?
I have preserved the Duchess from a rape,
Good-night to me and all the world for ever.
So impious.
It is most true, Alvarez blood
Is now revenged, I find my brain return,
And every straggling sense repairing home.
I have deserved you should turn from me Sir,
My life hath been prodigiously wicked,
My blood is now the Kingdoms balm; oh Sir,
I have abu••d your ear, your trust, your people,
And my own sacred Office, my conscience
Feels now the sting, oh show your charity,
And with your pardon like a cool soft gale
Fan my poor sweating soul; that wanders through
Unhabitable climes, and parched deserts;
But I am lost, if the great World forgive me,
Unless I find your mercy for a crime
You know not Madam, yet against your life.
I must confess, more than my black intents
Upon your honour, you're already poisoned.
By whom?
By me,
In the revenge I owed Columb•'s loss,
With your last meat was mixed a poison that
By subtle, and by sure degrees must let in death.
Look to the Duchess, our Physicians?
Stay, I will deserve her mer•y, though I cannot
Call back the deed, in proof of my repentance,
If the last breath of a now dying man
May gain your charity, and belief, receive
This Ivory box in it an antidote
'Bove that they boast the great magistrall medicine,
That p•udder mixed with wine by a most rare
And quick access to the heart w•ll fortify it
Against the rage of the most nimble poison,
I am not worthy to present her with it,
Oh take it and preserve her inn•cent life.
Strange, he should have a good thing in such readiness•.
This that which in my jealousy and state
Trusting to false predictions of my birth,
That I sh die by poison, I preserved
For my own safety, wonder not, I made,
That my companion was to be my refuge.
Her's some touch of grace.
in greater proof of my pure thoughts I take
This first, and with my dying breath confirm
My penitence, it may benefit her life,
But not my wounds; oh hasten to preserve her,
And though I merit not her pardon, let not
Her fair soul be divorced
This is some charity, may it prosper Madam.
Valerie. How does your grace?
And must I owe my life to him whose death
Was my ambition? take this free acknowledgment,
I had intent this night with my own hand
To be Alvarez lusticer.
You were mad,
And thought past apprehension of revenge.
That shape I did usurp, great Sir, to give
My Art more freedom and defence, but when
Hernando came to visit me, I thought
I might defer my execution,
Which his owe rage supplied without my guilt,
And when his lust grew hight, met with his blood.
The Cordial smiles.
Now my revenge has met
With you my nimble Duchess, I have took
A shape to give my act more freedom too,
And now I am sure she's poisoned, with that doze
I gave her last.
You are not so horrid?
Ha! some Cordial.
Alas no preservative
Hath wings to overtake it, were her heart
Locked in a quarry, it would search, and kill
Before the aids can reach it; I am sure
You sha not now laugh at me.
How came you by that poison?
I prepared it,
Resolving when I had enjoyed her, which
The Colonel prevented, by some art
To make her take it, and by death conclude
My last revenge; you have the fatal Story.
This is so great a wickedness, it will
Exceed belief.
I knew I could not live.
Your wounds, Sir, were not desperate.
Not mortal? ha? were they not mortal?
If I have skill in Surgery.
Then I have caught my self in my own Engine.
It was your fate you said to die by poison.
That was my own prediction to abuse
Your faith, no humane art can now resist it,
I feel it knocking at the seat of life,
It must come in, I have wrecked all my own
To try your charities, now it would be rare,
If you but waft me with a little prayer,
My wings that flag may catch the wind, but it is
In vain, the mist is risen, and ther's none
To steer my wandering bark.
He's dead?
With him
Die all deceived trust.
This was a strange impiety.
When men
Of Gifts and sacred Function once decline
From virtue, their ill deeds transcend example.
The minute's come that I must take my leave too.
Your hand great Sir, and though you be a King,
We may exchange forgiveness, heaven forgive,
And all the world. I come, I come Alvarez
D•spose their bodies for becoming funeral;
How much are Kings abused by those they take
To royal grace? whom when they cherish most
By nice indulgence, they doo often arm
Against themselves: from whence this maxim springs,
None have more need of Perspectives than Kings.
I Am coming to you Gentlemen, the Poet
Has helped me thus far on my way, but I'll
Be even with him; the Play is a Tragedy,
The first that ever he composed for us,
Wherein be thinks he has done prettily,
And I am sensible; I prithee look
Is nothing out of joint? has he broke nothing?
No Sir, I hope.
Yes, he has broke his Epilogue all to pieces,
Can thou put it together again?
N•t I Sir.
Nor I, prithee be gone, hum? M•. Poet,
I have a teeming mind to be revenged.
You may assist, and not be seen in it now.
If you please Gentlemen, for I do know
He listens to the issue of his cause,
But blister not your hands in his applause,
Your private smile, your nod, or hum, to ••ll
My fellows, that you like the business well;
And when without a clap you go away,
I'll drink a small•bear health to his second day;
And break his heart, or make him swear, and ra••
He'll write no more for the unhappy Stag•;
But that's too much, so we should lose; faith sh••
And if you l•ke his play, 'ts as well, he knew it.

