HIther ye come, dislike, and so undo
The Players, and disgrace the Poet too;
But he protests against your votes, and swears
He will not be tried by any, but his Peers;
He claims his privilege, and says it is fit,
Nothing should be the Judge of wit, but Wit.
Now you will all be Wits, and be I pray;
And you that discommend it, mend the Play:
It is the best satisfaction, he knows then,
His turn will come, to laugh at you again.
But Gentlemen, if ye dislike the Play,
Pray make nowords on it till the second day,
Or third be past: For we would have you know it,
The loss will fall on us, not on the Poet:
For he writes not for money, nor for praise,
Nor to be called a Wit, nor to wear Baize:
Cares not for frowns or smiles: so now you'll say,
Then why (the Devil) did he write a Play?
He says, it was then with him, as now with you,
He did it when he had nothing else to doe.
It is done, and we alive again, and now
There is no Tragedy, but in your brow.
And yet our Author hopes you are pleased, if not;
This having failed, he has a second Plot:
It is this; the next day send us in your friends,
Then laugh at them, and make your selves amends.
Thus, whether it be good, or bad, yet you
May please your selves, and you may please us too:
But look you please the Poet, lest he vow
A full revenge upon you all, but how?
It is not to kill you all twenty a day,
He will do it at once, a more compendious way
He means to write again; but so much worse,
That seeing that, you'll think it a just curse
For censuring this: faith give him your applause,
As you give Beggars money; for no cause,
But that hoe's troublesome, and he has swore,
As Beggars do, he will trouble you no more.
MY Lord, you have good intelligence, what news
From the Army, any certainty
Of their design or strength?
We know not their design: But for their strength,
The disproportion is so great, we cannot, but
Expect a fatal consequence.
How great my Lord?
The Turks are fourscore thousand Foot,
And fifty thousand Horse. And we in the whole
Excceed not forty thousand.
Mee-thinkes the Prince should know
That Judgement's more essential to a General,
Then Courage, if he prove victorious
It is but a happy rashness.
But if he lose the battle, it is an error
Beyond excuse, or remedy, considering
That half the lesser Asia will follow
The Victors fortune.
It is his single virtue
And terror of his name, that walls us in
From danger, were he lost, the naked Empire
Would be a prey exposed to all Invaders.
But is it not necessary
The King should know his danger?
To tell him of so great a danger,
Were but to draw a greater on our selves:
For though his eye is open as the mornings,
Towards lusts and pleasures, yet so fast a lethargy
Has seized his powers towards public cares and dangers
He sleeps like death.
Hoe's a man of that strange composition,
Made up of all the worst extremities
Of youth, and age.
And though
He feels the heats of youth, and colds of age,
Yet neither tempers, nor corrects the other;
As if there were an Ague in his nature
That still inclines to one extreme.
But the Caliph, or Holy, or some that know
His softer hours, might best acquaint him with it.
Alas, they show him nothing
But in the glass of flattery, if any thing
May bear a show of glory, fame, or greatness,
It is multiplied to an immense quantity,
And stretched even to Divinity:
But if it tend to danger, or dishonour,
They turn about the Perspective, and show it
So little, at such distance, so like nothing,
That he can scarce discern it.
It is the fate of Princes, that no knowledge
Comes pure to them, but passing through the eyes
And ears of other men, it takes a tincture
From every channel; And still bears a relish
Of Flattery, or private ends.
But danger and necessity
Dare speak the truth.
But commonly
They speak not till it is too late:
And for Holy,
He that shall tell him of the Princes danger,
But tells him that himself is safe.
Clear up, clear up, sweet Erythaea,
That cloud that hangs upon thy brow presages
A greater storm then all the Turkish power
Can throw upon us, me-thinkes I see my fortune
Settling her looks by thine, and in thy smile
Sits victory, and in thy frown our ruin:
Why should not hope
As much erect our thoughts, as fear deject them;
Why should we
Anticipate our sorrows? It is like those
That die for fear of death:
What is it you doubt, his courage or his fortune?
Envy it self could never doubt his courage.
Then let not love doe worse, by doubting that
Which is but valours slave; a wise well-temper'd valour,
For such is his, those Giants death, and danger,
Are but his Ministers, and serve a Master
More to be feared then they; and the blind Goddess
Is led amongst the Captives in his triumph.
I had rather she had eyes, for if she saw him,
Sure she would love him better; but admit
She were at once a Goddess, and his slave,
Yet fortune, valour, all is overborne
By numbers: as the long resisting Bank
By the impetuous Torrent.
That's but rumour,
Ne'er did the Turk invade our Territory,
But Fame and Terror doubled still their files:
But when our troops encountered, then we found
Scarce a sufficient matter for our fury.
But hark, a Post, Solyman conduct him in,
It is surely from the Prince.
Give it our Secretaries, I hope the Prince is well.
The Letter will inform you.
Sir, the Lords attend you.
What news from the Army?
Please you to hear the Letter.
Read it.
The Turk enraged with his last years overthrow,
Hath re-enforc't his Army with the choice of all his Janizars,
And the flower of his whole Empire, we
Understand by some fugitives, that he hath commanded
The Generals to return with victory, or expect
A shameful death: what I shall further do,
(Their numbers five times exceeding ours)
I desire to receive directions from your Majesties command.
Let twenty thousand men be raised.
Let fresh supplies of victuals, and of money,
Be sent with speed.
Sir, your Treasures
Are quite exhausted, the Exchequer's empty.
Talk not to me of Treasures, or Exchequers,
Send for five hundred of the wealthiest Burgers,
Their shops and ships are my Exchequer.
It were better you you could say their hearts.
Sir upon your late demands
They answered they were poor.
Sure the Villains hold a correspondence
With the enemy, and thus they would betray us:
First give us up to want, then to contempt,
And then to ruin; but tell those sons of earth
Isle have their money, or their heads.
It is my command, when such occasions are,
No Plea must serve, it is cruelty to spare.
The Prince transported with his youthful heat,
I fear hath gone too far: It is some disaster,
Or else he would not send so thick: well, bring him in;
I am prepared to hear the worst of evils.
What, is the Prince besieged in his Trenches,
And must have speedy aid, or die by famine;
Or hath he rashly tried the chance of war
And lost his Army, and his Liberty.
Tell me what Province they demand for ransom:
Or if the worst of all mishaps hath fallen,
Speak, for he could not die unlike himself:
Speak freely; and yet me-thinkes I read
Something of better fortune in thy looks,
But dare not hope it.
Sir, the Prince lives.
And hath not lost his honour?
As safe in honour as in life.
Nor liberty?
Free as the air, he breathes.
Return with speed:
Tell him he shall have money, victuals, men,
With all the haste they can be levied.
But Sir, I have one word more.
Then be brief.
So now you are prepared, and I may venture.
What is it?
Sir, a Fathers love mixed with a Princes care.
This showing dangers greater, and that nearer,
Have raised your fears too high; and those removed,
Too suddenly would let in such a deluge
Of joy, as might oppress your aged spirits,
Which made me gently first remove your fears,
That so you might have room to entertain
Your fill of joy: Your sonn's a Conqueror.
Delude me not with fained hopes, false joys,
It cannot be. And if he can but make
A fair Retreat, I shall account it more
Then all his former conquests, (those huge numbers
Armed with despair) the flower of all the Empire.
Sir, I have not used to tell you tales or fables,
And why should you suspect your happiness,
Being so constant. On my life it is true Sir.
Well, Isle no more suspect
My fortune, nor thy faith:
Thou and thy news most welcome, Solyman
Go call the Princess and the Lords, they shall
Participate our joys, as well as cares.
Fair daughter, blow away those mists and clouds,
And let thy eyes shine forth in their full lustre;
Invest them with thy loveliest smiles, put on
Thy choicest looks: hoe's coming will deserve them.
What, is the Prince returned with safety? it is above
Belief or hope.
I, sweet Erythaea,
Laden with spoils and honour: all thy fears,
Thy wakeful terrors, and affrighting dreams,
Thy morning sighs, and evening tears have now
Their full rewards. And you my Lords
Prepare for Masques and Triumphs: Let no circumstance
Be wanting, that becomes
The greatness of our State, or Joy.
Behold he comes.
Welcome brave son, as welcome to thy father
As Phoebus was to Jove, when he had slain
The ambitious Giants that assailed the sky;
And as my power resembles that of Ioves,
So shall thy glory like high Phoebus shine
As bright, and as immortal.
Great Sir, all acquisition
Of Glory as of Empire, here I lay before
Your Royal feet, happy to be the Instrument
To advance either: Sir, I challenge nothing,
But am an humble suitor for these prisoners,
The late Commanders of the Turkish powers,
Whose valours have deserved a better fortune.
Then what hath thine deserved; the are thine brave Mirzah,
Worthy of all thy Royal Ancestors,
And all those many Kingdoms, which their virtue,
Or got, or kept, though thou had not been borne to it.
But daughter still your looks are sad,
No longer Isle defer your joys, go take him
Into thy chaste embrace, and whisper to him
That welcome which those blushes promise.
My Erythaea, why entertain thou with so sad a brow
My long desired return, thou wast wont
With kisses and sweet smiles, to welcome home
My victories, though bought with sweat and blood;
And long expected.
Pardon Sir,
It is with our souls
As with our eyes, that after a long darkness
Are dazzled at the approach of sudden light:
When in the midst of fears we are surprised
With unexpected happiness: the first
Degrees of joy are mere astonishment.
And it was so lately in a dreadful dream
I saw my Lord so near destruction,
Deprived of his eyes, a wretched Captive;
Then shrieked my self awake, then slept again
And dreamt the same; my ill presaging fancy
Suggesting still it was true.
Then I forgive thy sadness, since love cause it,
For love is full of fears; and fear, the shadow
Of danger, like the shadow of our bodies,
Is greater then, when that which is the cause
Is farthest off.
But still there's something
That checks my joys,
Nor can I yet distinguish
Which is the apparition, this, or that.
An apparition?
At night I shall resolve that doubt, and make
Thy dreams more pleasing.
The time has been my Lord,
When I was no such stranger to your thoughts;
You were not wont to wear upon your brow
A frown, or smile, but still have thought me worthy,
At least to know the cause.
It is true,
Thy breast hath ever been the Cabinet
Where I have locked my secrets.
And did you ever find
That any art could pick the locke, or power
Could force it open.
No, I have ever found thee
Trusty and secret. But is it observed in the Court
That I am sad?
Observed? it is all men's wonder and discourse,
That in a Joy so great, so universal,
You should not bear a part.
Discour'st of too?
Nothing but treason
More commonly, more boldly spoken.
So singular a sadness
Must have a cause as strange as the effect:
And grief concealed, like hidden fire consumes;
Which flaming out, would call in help to quench it.
But since thou can not mend it,
To let thee know it will but make thee worse;
Silence and time shall cure it.
But in diseases when the cause is known,
It is more then half the cure: You have my Lord
My heart to counsel, and my hand to act,
And my advice and actions both have met
Success in things unlikely.
But this
Is such a secret, I dare hardly trust it
To my own soul. And though it be a crime,
In friendship to betray a trusted Counsel,
Yet to conceal this were a greater crime,
And of a higher nature.
Now I know it,
And your endeavour to conceal it,
Speaks it more plainly. It is some plot upon the Prince.
Oh thou hast touched my soar, and having searched it,
Now heal it if thou can: The Prince doth hate me,
Or loves me not, or loves another better,
Which is all one. This being known in Court,
Has rendered me despised, and scorned of all:
For I that in his absence
Blazed like a star of the first magnitude,
Now in his brighter sun-shine am not seen:
No applications now, no troops of suitors;
No power, no not so much as to doe mischief.
My Lord, I am ashamed of you,
So ill a master in an art, so long
Professed, and practised by you to be angry,
And angry with a Prince. And yet to show it
In a sad look, or womanish complaint:
How can you hope to compass your designs,
And not dissemble 'em. Go flatter and adore him,
Stand first among the crowd of his admirers.
Oh I have often spread those nets, but he
Hath ever been too wise to think them real.
However,
Dissemble still, thank him for all his injuries;
Take 'em for favours, if at last
You cannot gain him; some pretty nimble poison
May doe the feat. Or if he will abroad
Find him some brave and honourable danger.
Have I not found him out as many dangers
As Iuno did for Hercules: yet he returns
Like Hercules, doubled in strength and honour.
If danger cannot doe it, then try pleasure,
Which when no other enemy survives,
Still conquers all the Conquerors. Endeavour
To soften his ambition into lust,
Contrive fit opportunities, and lay
Baits for temptation.
Isle leave nothing unattempted:
But sure this will not take, for all his Passions,
Affections, and Faculties are slaves
Only to his ambition.
Then let him fall by his own greatness,
And puff him up with glory, till it swell
And break him. First, betray him to himself,
Then to his ruin: From his virtues suck a poison,
As Spiders doe from flowers; praise him to his father,
You know his nature: Let the Princes glory
Seem to eclipse, and cast a cloud on his;
And let fall something that may raise his jealousy:
But least he should suspect it, draw it from him
As fishers doe the bait, to make him follow it.
But the old King is so suspicious.
But withal
Most fearful: He that views a Fort to take it
Plants his Artillery against the weakest part:
Work on his fears, till fear hath made him cruel;
And cruelty shall make him fear again.
Me thinks (my Lord) you that so oft have sounded
And fathomed all his thoughts, that know the deeps
And shallows of his heart, should need no instruments
To advance your ends, his passions, and his fears
Lye Liegers for you in his breast, and there
Negotiate their affairs.
Solyman, be it your care to entertain the Captains
And the Prisoners, and use them kindly.
Sir, I am not for entertainments now I am melancholy.
What, grieved for our good fortune?
No Sir, but now the wars are, done, we want pretences
To put off Creditors: I am haunted Sir.
Not with Ghosts.
No Sir,
Material and Substantial Devils.
I know the cause, what is it thou ow'st them?
Not much Sir, but so much, as spoils me for a good fellow;
It is but 2000 Dollars. A small sum???to you Sir.
Well, it shall be paid.
Then if the Devil come for drinking, let me alone with him.
Well, Drink, I love thee but too well already,
But I shall love thee better hereafter: I have often
Drunk my self into debt, but never out of debt till now.
Captains, me-thinkes you look like fishes out of water,
I see the Court is not your element:
You must to the wars again.
Faith Sir, These young Gallants are so taken up with
Their Mistresses; I doubt their edge is taken off from
The wars.
I, and their backs too.
But for us old ones we're weary of being laughed at
By these Court hobby-horses, for making legs, and
Kissing hands unhandsomely.
And to be censured by the she critics, because our
Legs are bigger then the Court standard,
And therefore out of fashion.
And such a giggling, because ones band's unpined;
Another beard not well turned up: And such a
Fiddle faddle, it is not to be endured.
Well, howsoever you are dealt with,
Pray let these strangers find such entertainment
As you would have desired,
Had but the chance of war determined it
For them, as now for us; and you brave enemies
Forget your Nation, and ungrateful Master:
And know that I can set so high a price
On valour, though in foes, as to reward it
With trust and honour.
Sir, your twice conquered Vassals,
First by your courage, then your clemency,
Here humbly vow to sacrifice their lives,
(The gift of this your unexampled mercy)
To your commands and service.
I pray (my Lord) second my suite,
I have already moved the King in private,
That in our next years expedition they may have
Some command.
I shall, my Lord,
And glad of the occasion.
I wonder Sir you'll leave the Court, the sphere
Where all your graces in full lustre shine.
I Holy, but the reputation
Of virtuous actions past, if not kept up
With an access, and fresh supply of new ones,
Is lost and soon forgotten: and like Palaces,
For want of habitation and repair,
Dissolve to heaps of ruin.
But can you leave, Sir,
Your old indulgent father, and forsake
The embraces of so fair, so chaste a wife,
And all the beauties of the Court besides,
Are mad in love, and dote upon your person:
And is it not better sleeping in their arms,
Then in a cold Pavilion in the camp,
Where your short sleeps are broke and interrupted
With noises and alarms?
Holy, thou know not me, how I despise
These short and empty pleasures; and how low
They stand in my esteem which every Peasant,
The meanest Subject in my fathers Empire
Enjoys as fully, in as high perfection
As he or I; and which are had in common
By beasts as well as men: wherein they equal,
If not exceed us, pleasures to which wee're led
Only by sense; those creatures which have least
Of reason, most enjoy.
Is not
The Empire you are borne to, a Scene large enough
To exercise your virtues? There are virtues
Civil as well as military; for the one
You have given the world an ample proof already:
Now exercise the other, it is no less
To govern justly, make your Empire flourish
With wholesome laws, in riches, peace and plenty,
Then by the expense of wealth, and blood to make
New acquisitions.
That I was borne so great, I owe to fortune,
And cannot pay that debt, till virtue set me
High in example, as I am in title;
Till what the world calls fortune's gifts my actions,
May stile their own rewards, and those too little.
Princes are then themselves, when they arise
More glorious in men's thoughts then in their eyes.
Sir, your fame
Already fills the world, and what is infinite
Cannot receive degrees, but will swallow
All that is added, as our Caspian sea
Receives our rivers, and yet seems not fuller:
And if you tempt her more, the wind of fortune
May come about, and take another point
And blast your glories.
No,
My glories are past danger, they're full blown,
Things that are blasted are but in their bud;
And as for fortune, I nor love, nor fear her:
I am resolved, go Holy, flatter still your aged Master,
Still sooth him in his pleasures, and still grow
Great by those arts.
Well, farewell Court,
Where vice not only hath usurped the place,
But the reward, and even the name of virtue;
We'll go and hunt, it is a Princely sport
And much resembles war.
Such wars as ours,
Where we have used to follow chases.
It shows us pretty dangers, and acquaints us
With scituations, while I view the hills,
The thickets, and the rivers; here me-thinkes,
With best advantage I could pitch my camp:
Here range my Army, there the battle join;
Here make a safe retreat, and there enclose
The enemy, as beasts within a toil:
And yet I can observe the chased Stag,
How he can cast about to seek his safety;
And when he sees his death is unavoidable,
How he will weep. I can observe the Dogs too,
How some in swiftness, some in scent excel;
Others in cry: But let us lose no time,
Me-thinkes the Courts a prison.
Still, still,
Slighted and scorned, yet this affront
Hath stamped a noble title on my malice,
And married it to Justice. The King is old,
And when the Prince succeeds,
I'm lost past all recovery, then I
Must meet my danger, and destroy him first;
But cunningly, and closely, or his son
And wife, like a fierce Tigress will devour me.
There's danger every way; and since it is so,
It is brave, and noble, when the falling weight
Of my own ruin crushes those I hate:
But how to doe it, that's the work, he stands
So high in reputation with the people,
There's but one way, and that's to make his father
The instrument, to give the name, and envy
To him; but to my self the prize and glory.
He's old and jealous, apt for suspicions, against which tyrants ears
Are never closed. The Prince is young,
Fierce, and ambitious, I must bring together
All these extremes, and then remove all Mediums,
That each may be the others object.
My Lord,
Now if your plots be right, you are befriended
With opportunity; The King is melancholy,
Opted for any ill impressions.
Make an advantage of the Princes absence,
Urge some suspected cause of his departure,
Use all your art, hoe's coming.
Sir, have you known an action of such glory
Less swel'd with oftentation, or a mind
Less tainted with felicity. It is a rare temper in the Prince.
Is it so rare to see a son so like
His father? Have not I performed actions
As great, and with as great a moderation?
I Sir, but that's forgotten.
Actions of the last age are like Almanacs of the last year.
It is well, but if with all his conquests, what I get in Empire
I lose in fame, I think my self no gainer.
But am I quite forgotten?
Sir, you know
Age breeds neglect in all, and actions
Remote in time, like objects
Remote in place, are not beheld at half their greatness;
And what is new, finds better acceptance,
Then what is good or great: yet some old men
Tell Stories of you in their chimney corners.
No otherwise.
They're all so full of him: some magnify
His courage, some his wit, but all admire
A greatness so familiar.
Sure Holy
Thou hast forgot thy self: art thou a Courtier,
Or I a King? my ears are unacquainted
With such bold truths; especially from thee.
Sir, when I am called to it, I must speak
Boldly and plainly.
But with what eagerness, what circumstance,
Unasked, thou take such pains to tell me only
My sonne's the better man.
Sir, where Subjects want the privilege
To speak; there Kings may have the privilege
To live in ignorance.
If it were a secret that concerned my life
Or Empire, then this boldness might become thee,
But such unnecessary rudeness savours
Of some design.
And this is such a false and squint-ey'd praise,
Which seeming to look upwards on his glories,
Looks down upon my fears; I know thou hat'st him,
And like infected persons fine would rub
The ulcer of thy malice upon me.
Sir, I almost believe you speak your thoughts,
But that I want the guilt to make me fear it.
What mean these guilty blushes then?
Sir, if I blush, it is because you doe not,
To upbraid so tried a servant, that so often
Have waked, that you might sleep; and been exposed
To dangers for your safety.
And therefore think
Thou art so wrapped, so woven into all
My trusts and counsels, that I now must suffer
All thy Ambition aims at.
Sir, if your love grows weary,
And thinks you have worn me long enough, I'm willing
To be left off; but hoe's a foolish Sea-man,
That when his ship is sinking, will not
Unlade his hopes into another bottom.
I understand no Allegories.
And hoe's as ill a Courtier, that when
His Master's old, desires not to comply
With him that must succeed.
But if
He will not be complied with?
Oh Sir,
There's one sure way, and I have known it practised
In other States.
What's that?
To make
The fathers life the price of the sons favour,
To walk upon the graves of our dead Masters,
To our own security.
It is this must take: Does this plainness please you Sir?
thou know my nature, too too apt
To these suspicions, but I hope the question
Was never moved to thee.
In other Kingdoms Sir.
But has my son no such design.
Alas,
You know I hate him; and should I tell you
He had, you'd say it was but malice.
No more of that good Holy, I know thou love me,
But least the care of future safety tempt thee
To forfeit present loyalty; or present loyalty
Forfeit thy future safety.
Isle be your reconciler, call him hither.
Oh Sir, I wish he were within my call, or yours.
Why, where is he?
He has left the Court Sir.
I like not these excursions, why so suddenly?
It is but a sally of youth, yet some say hoe's discontented.
That grates my heart-strings. What should discontent him?
Except he think I live too long.
Heaven forbid:
And yet I know no cause of his departure,
I'm sure hoe's honoured, and loved by all;
The Soldiers god, the peoples Idol.
I Holy,
The Persians still worship the rising sun;
But who went with him?
None but the Captains.
The Captains? I like not that.
Never fear it Sir,
It is true, they love him but as their General, not their Prince.
And though he be most forward and ambitious,
It is tempered with so much humility.
And so much the more dangerous;
There are some that use
Humility to serve their pride, and seem
Humble upon their way, to be the prouder
At their wished journeys end.
Sir, I know not
What ways or ends you mean; it is true
In popular States, or where the Princes Title
Is weak, and must be propped by the peoples power;
There by familiar ways it is necessary
To win on men's affections. But none of these
Can be his end.
But there's another end,
For if his glories rise upon the ruins
Of mine, why not his greatness too?
True Sir,
Ambition is like love, impatient
Both of delays and rivals. But Nature.
But Empire.
I had almost forgot Sir, he has
A suit to your Majesty.
What is it?
To give the Turkish prisoners some command
In the next action.
Nay, then it is too apparent,
He fears my Subjects loyalty,
And now must call in strangers; come deal plainly,
I know thou can discover more.
I can discover (Sir)
The depth of your great judgement in such dangers.
What shall I doe Holy?
Your wisdom is so great it were presumption for me to advise.
Well, we'll consider more of that, but for the present
Let him with speed be sent for: Mahomet, I thank thee
I have one faithful servant, honest Holy.
How did he take it?
Swallowed it as greedily
As parched earth drinks rain.
Now the first part of our design is over,
His ruin, but the second our security,
Must now be thought on.
My Lord, you are too sudden, though his fury
Determine rashly, yet his colder fear
Before it executes, consults with reason,
And that not satisfied, with shows, or shadows,
Will ask to be convinced by something real;
Now must we frame some plot, and then discover it.
Or intercept some letter, which our selves
Had forged before.
And still admire the miracle,
And thank the providence.
Then we must draw in some body
To be the public Agent, that may stand
Twixt us and danger, and the peoples envy.
Who fitter then the grand Caliph?
And he shall set a grave religious face
Upon the business.
But if we cannot work him,
For hoe's so full of foolish scruples;
Or if he should prove false, and then betray us.
Betray us? sure (my Lord) your fear ha'sblinded
Your understanding; for what serves the King?
Will not his threats work more then our persuasions,
While we look on, and laugh, and seem as ignorant
As unconcerned; and thus appearing friends
To either side, on both may work our ends.
My Lord, the Turkish Pashas
Desire access.
Admit 'em, I know their business.
They long to hear with what success you moved
The King in their behalf.
But now they're come I'll make 'em doe my business
Better then I did theirs.
Leave us a while.
My Lords, my duty and affection to the Prince,
And the respects I owe to men of honour,
Extort a secret from me, which yet I grieve to utter:
The Prince departing, left to me the care
Of your affairs, which I, as he commanded,
Have recommended to the King, but with so unlooked for
A success.
My Lord, fear not to speak our doom, while we
Fear not to hear it, we were lost before,
And can be ready now to meet that fate
We then expected.
Though he that brings unwelcome news
He's but a losing Office, yet he that shows
Your danger first, and then your way to safety,
May heal that wound he made; you know the King
With jealous eyes hath ever looked awry
On his sons actions, but the fame and glory
Of the last war hath raised another spirit,
Envy and Jealousy are twined together,
Yet both lay hid in his dissembled smiles,
Like two concealed serpents, till I, unhappy I,
Moving this question, trod upon them both,
And roused their sleeping angers; then casting from him
His doubts, and straight confirmed in all his fears,
Decrees to you a speedy death, to his own son
A close restraint, but what will follow
I dare not think; you by a sudden flight may find your safety.
Sir, Death and we are not such strangers,
That we should make dishonour, or ingratitude
The price of life, it was the Princes gift,
And we but wear it for his sake and service.
Then for his sake and service
Pray follow my advice, th??????gh you have lost the favour
Of your unworthy master; yet in the Provinces
You lately governed, you have those dependences
And interests, that you may raise a power
To serve the Prince: I'll give him timely notice
To stand upon his guard.
My Lord, we thank you,
But we must give the Prince intelligence,
Both when, and how to employ us.
If you will write,
Commit it to my care and secrecy,
To see it safe conveyed.
We shall my Lord.
These men were once the Princes foes, and then
Unwillingly they made him great: but now
Being his friends, shall willingly undo him;
And which is more, be still his friends.
What little Arts govern the world! we need not
An armed enemy, or corrupted friend;
When service but misplaced, or love mistaken,
Performs the work: nor is this all the use
I'll make of them, when once they are in arms,
Their Master shall be wrought to think these forces
Raised against him; and this shall so endear me
To him, that though dull virtue and the gods
Overcome my subtle mischief, I may find
A safe retreat, and may at least be sure,
If not more mighty, to be more secure.
But Holy, what confederates he's the Prince
In his conspiracy?
Sir, I can yet suspect
None but the Turkish prisoners, and that only
From their late sudden flight.
Are they fled? for what?
That, their own fears best know, their entertainment
I'm sure was such as could not minister
Suspicion, or dislike; but sure they're conscious
Of some intended mischief, and are fled
To put it into act.
This still confirms me more,
But let 'em be pursued; let all the passages
Be well secured, that no intelligence
May pass between the Prince and them.
It shall be done Sir.
Is the Caliph prepared.
Hoe's without, Sir,
And waits your pleasure.
Call him.
I have a great design to act, in which
The greatest part is thine. In brief it is this,
I fear my sons high spirit, and suspect
Designs upon my life and Crown.
Sure Sir, your fears are causeless,
Such thoughts are strangers to his noble soul.
No, it is too true, I must prevent my danger,
And make the first attempt; there's no such way
To avoid a blow, as to strike first, and sure.
But Sir, I hope my function shall exempt me,
From bearing any part in such designs.
Your function? [Laugh's] do you think that Princes
Will raise such men so near themselves for nothing?
We but advance you to advance our purposes:
Nay, even in all religions
Their learned, and their seeming holiest men, but serve
To work their masters ends; and varnish o'er
Their actions, with some specious pious colour.
No scruples; do it, or by our holy Prophet,
The death my rage intends to him, is thine.
Sir, it is your part to will, mine to obey.
Then be wise, and sudden.
My Lords, it grieves me to relate the cause
Of this Assembly; and twill grieve you all:
The Prince you know stands high in all those graces
Which Nature, seconded by fortune, gives:
Wisdom he he's, and to his wisdom courage;
Temper to that, and unto all, success. But
Ambition, the disease of Virtue, bred
Like surfeits from an undigested fullness,
Meets death in that which is the means of life.
Great Mahomet, to whom our Sovereign life,
And Empire is most dear, appearing, thus
Advised me in a vision: Tell the King,
The Prince his son attempts his life and Crown;
And though no creature lives that more admires
His virtues, nor affects his person more
Then I; yet zeal and duty to my Sovereign
Have canceled all respects, nor must we slight
The Prophets revelations.
Remember Sir, he is your son,
Endeared to you by a double bond,
As to his King, and father.
And the remembrance of that double bond
Doubles my sorrows. It is true,
Nature and duty bind him to obedience;
But those being placed in a lower sphere,
His fierce ambition, like the highest mover,
He's hurried with a strong impulsive motion
Against their proper course. But since he has forgot
The duty of a son, I can forget
The affections of a father.
But Sir, in the beginning of diseases
None try the extremest remedies.
But when they're sudden,
The cure must be as quick; when I'm dead, you'll say
My fears have been too slow: Treasons are acted
As soon as thought, though they are ne'er believed
Until they come to act.
But consider Sir,
The greatness of the attempt, the people love him;
The lookers on, and the enquiring vulgar
Will talk themselves to action: thus by avoiding
A danger but supposed, you tempt a real one.
Those Kings whom envy, or the peoples murmur
Deters from their own purposes, deserve not,
Nor know not their own greatness,
The peoples murmur, it is a sulphurous vapour
Breathed from the bowels of the basest earth;
And it may soil, and blast things near it self:
But ere it reach the region we are placed in,
It vanishes to ayre, we are above
The sense, or danger of such storms.
True Sir, they are but storms while Royalty
Stands like a Rock, and the tumultuous vulgar,
Like billows raised with wind, (that's with opinion)
May roar, and make a noise, and threaten;
But if they roll too near, they're dished in pieces
While they stand firm.
Yet Sir, Crowns are not placed so high,
But vulgar hands may reach 'em.
Then it is when they are placed on vulgar heads.
But Sir,
Look back upon your self; why should your son
Anticipate a hope so near, so certain, we may wish and pray
For your long life: But neither prayers nor power
Can alter Fates decree, or Natures Law.
Why should he ravish then that Diadem
From your gray temples, which the hand of time
Must shortly plant on his.
My Lords,
I see you look upon me as a sun
Now in his West, half buried in a cloud,
Whose rays the vapours of approaching night
Have rendered weak and faint: But you shall find
That I can yet shoot beams, whose heat can melt
The waxen wings of this ambitious boy.
Nor runs my blood so cold, nor is my arm
So feeble yet, but he that dares defend him
Shall feel my vengeance, and shall usher me
Into my grave.
Sir, we defend him not,
Only desire to know his crime: It is possible
It may be some mistake, or mis-report,
Some false suggestion, or malicious scandal:
Or if ambition be his fault, it was yours,
He had it from you when he had his being;
Nor was it his fault, nor yours, for it is in Princes
A crime to want it; from a noble spirit
Ambition can no more be separated
Then heat from fire: Or if you fear the vision,
Will you suspect the noble Prince, because
This holy man is troubled in his sleep,
Because his crazie stomach wants concoction,
And breeds ill fumes; or his melancholy spleen
Sends up fantastic vapours to his brain:
Dreams are but dreams, these causeless fears become not
Your noble soul.
Who speaks another word
Hath spoke his last: Great Mahomet we thank thee,
Protector of this Empire, and this life,
Thy cares have met my fears; this on presumptions
Strong and apparent, I have long presaged,
And though a Prince may punish what he fears,
Without account to any but the Gods;
Wise States as often cuts off ills, that may be,
As those that are; and prevent purposes
Before they come to practise; and foul practises
Before they grow to Act: you cannot but observe
How he dislikes the Court, his rude departure,
His honour from the people and the soldiers,
His seeking to oblige the Turks his prisoners,
Their sudden and suspected flight:
And above all, his restless towering thoughts.
If the business be important,
Admit him.
Sir, upon your late command
To guard the passages, and search all packets,
This to the Prince was intercepted.
Here Abdall, read it.
Sir, we are assured how unnaturally your fathers intentions
Are towards you, and how cruel towards us; we have
Made an escape, not so much to seek our own,
As to be instruments of your safety: We will be
In arms upon the borders, upon your command
Either to seek danger with you, or to receive you
If you please, to seek safety with us.
Now my Lords,
Alas my fears are causeless, and ungrounded
Fantastic dreams, and melancholic fumes
Of crazie stomachs, and distempered brains:
Has this convinced you?
Sir, we see
Some reason you should fear, but whom, we know not;
It is possible these Turks may play the Villains,
Knowing the Prince, the life of all our hopes,
Staff of your age, and pillar of your Empire;
And having failed by force, may use this Art
To ruin him, and by their treason here
To make their peace at home.
Now should this prove a truth, when he he's suffered
Death, or disgrace, which are to him the same,
Twill be too late to say you were mistaken,
And then to cry him mercy: Sir, we beseech you
A while suspend your doom, till time produce
Her wonted off-spring Truth.
And so expecting
The event of what you think, shall prove the experiment
Of what I fear; but since he is my son,
I cannot have such violent thoughts towards him
As his towards me: he only shall remain
A prisoner till his death, or mine enlarge him.
Away, away, wee're serious.
But not so serious to neglect your safety.
Art thou in earnest?
Nay Sir, I can be serious as well as my betters.
What's the matter?
No, I am an inconsiderable fellow, and know nothing.
Let's hear that nothing then:
The Turks Sir.
What of them?
When they could not overcome you by force, they'll
Doe it by treachery.
As how?
Nay, I can see as far into a millstone, as another man.
They have corrupted some ill-affected persons.
What to doe?
To nourish Jealousies twixt you and your sons.
My son? where is he?
They say hoe's posting hither.
Holy, we are betrayed, prevented, look to the Ports, and let
The Guards be doubled: how farre's his Army hence?
Is the City in arms to join with him?
Arms? and join with him? I understand you not.
Did thou not say the Prince was coming?
I heard some foolish people say you had sent for
Him, as a Traitor, which to my apprehension was on
Purpose spoken to make you odious, and him desperate;
And so divide the people into faction. A Plot of
Dangerous consequence, as I take it Sir.
And is this all, thou saucy trifling fool? Away
With him.
Sir, this seeming fool is a concealed dangerous knave,
Under that safe disguise he thinks he may say or doe
Any thing: you'll little think him the chief conspirator,
The only spy t'informe the Prince of all is done in Court.
Let him be rack't and tortured, till he confess
The whole conspiracy.
Rack't, and tortured? I have told you all I know, and more;
There's nothing more in me Sir, but may be squeezed
Out without racking, only a stoop or two of Wine;
And if there had not been too much of that, you had
Not had so much of the other.
That's your cunning, sirrah.
Cunning Sir, I am no Politician; and was ever thought to have
Too little wit, and too much honesty for a States-man.
Away with him.
But something must be done Sir, to satisfy the people:
It is not enough to say he did design,
Or plot, or think, but did attempt some violence,
And then some strange miraculous escape,
For which our Prophet must have public thanks;
And this false colour shall delude the eyes
Of the amazed vulgar.
It is well advised.
Sir, His highness is returned.
And unconstrained? But with what change of countenance
Did he receive the message.
With some amazement,
But such as sprung from wonder, not from fear,
It was so unexpected.
Leave us.
Holy, I ever found thee honest; truer to me
Then mine own blood, and now's the time to show it:
For thou art he my love and trust hath chosen
To put in action my design: surprise him
As he shall pass the Galleries. I'll place
A guard behind the Arras; when thou hast him,
Since blinded with ambition, he did soar
Like a seel'd Dove; his crime shall be his punishment
To be deprived of sight, which see performed
With a hot steel??? Now as thou love my safety
Be resolute, and sudden.
It is severe,
But yet I dare not intercede, it shall be done;
But is that word irrevocable?
I, as years, or ages past; relent not, if thou dost
Why so melancholy? is the design discovered.
No, but I am made the instrument,
That still endeavoured to disguise my plots
With borrowed looks, and make'em walk in darkness,
To act 'em now my self; be made the mark
For all the peoples hate, the Princess curses,
And his sons rage, or the old Kings inconstancy,
For this to Tyranny belongs,
To forget service, but remember wrongs.
But could not you contrive
Some fine pretence to cast it on some other.
No, he dares trust no other; had I given
But the least touch of any private quarrel,
My malice to his son, not care of him,
Had then begot this service.
It is but t'other plot my Lord, you know
The King by other wives had many sons
Soffy is but a child, and you already
Command the Emperors Guard; procure for me
The government of the City, when he dies,
Urge how unfortunate those States have been
Whose Princes are but children: then set the Crown
Upon some others head, that may acknowledge
And owe the Empire to your gift.
It shall be done Abdall, who commands
The City, is the Princes friend, and therefore
Must be displaced, and thou shalt straight succeed him.
Thou art my better Genius, honest Mirvan,
Greatness we owe to fortune, or to fate,
But wisdom only can secure that state.
You're double welcome now (my Lord) your coming
Was so unlooked for.
To me I'm sure it was;
Know thou the cause? for sure it was important,
That calls me back so suddenly.
I am so ignorant,
I knew not you were sent for.
Waking I know no cause, but in my sleep
My fancy still presents such dreams, and terrors,
As did Andromache's the night before
Her Hector fell; but sure it is more then fancy.
Either our guardian Angels, or the Gods
Inspire us, or some natural instinct,
Fore-tells approaching dangers.
How does my father.
Still talks and plays with Fatyma, but 'his mirth
Is forced, and strained: In his look appears
A wilde distracted fierceness, I can read
Some dreadful purpose in his face; but where
This dismal cloud will break, and spend his fury,
I dare not think: pray heaven make false his fears.
Sometimes his anger breaks through all disguises,
And spares nor gods, nor men; and then he seems
Jealous of all the world: suspects, and starts,
And looks behind him.
Sir, with hazard of my life I've ventured
To tell you, you are lost, betrayed, undone;
Rouse up your courage, call up all your counsels,
And think on all those stratagems which nature
Keeps ready to encounter sudden dangers.
But pray (my Lord) by whom? for what offence?
Is it a time for story, when each minute
Begets a thousand dangers? the gods protect you.
This man was ever honest, and my friend,
And I can see in his amazed look,
Something of danger; but in act, or thought,
I never did that thing should make me fear it.
Nay good Sir, let not so secure a confidence
Betray you to your ruin.
Prithee woman
Keep to thy self thy fears, I cannot know
That there is such a thing; I stand so strong,
Enclosed with a double guard of Virtue,
And Innocence, that I can look on dangers,
As he that stands upon a Rock,
Can look on storms, and tempests. Fear and guilt
Are the same thing; and when our actions are not,
Our fears are crimes.
And he deserves it less that guilty bears
A punishment, then he that guiltless fears.
This is the place appointed, assist me courage,
This hour ends all my fears; but pause a while,
Suppose I should discover to the Prince
The whole conspiracy, and so retort it
Upon the King; it were an handsome plot,
But full of difficulties, and uncertain;
And hoe's so fooled with downright honesty,
He will ne'er believe it; and now it is too late;
The guards are set, and now I hear him coming.
It is ominous, but I will on; destruction
O'retakes as often those that fly, as those that boldly meet it.
By your leave Prince, your father greets you.
Unhand me traitors.
That title is your own, and we are sent to let you know it.
Is not that the voice of Holy that thunders in my ears.
I, virtuous Prince, I come to make you exercise
One virtue more: your patience.
Insolent villain, for what cause?
Only to gaze upon a while, until your eyes are out.
O villain, shall I not see my father?
To ask him what's my crime? who my accusers?
Let me but try if I can wake his pity
From his Lethargic sleep.
It must not be Sir.
Shall I not see my wife, nor bid farewell
To my dear children?
Your prayers are all in vain.
Thou shalt have half my Empire Holy, let me but
See the Tyrant, that before my eyes are lost
They may dart poys'nous flashes like the Basilisk,
And look him dead: These eyes that still were open,
Or to fore-see, or to prevent his dangers,
Must they be closed in eternal night?
Cannot his thirst of blood be satisfied
With any but his own? And can his tyranny
Find out no other object but his son?
I seek not mercy, tell him I desire
To die at once, not to consume an age
In lingering deaths.
Our ears are charmed: Away with him.
Can ye behold (ye Gods) a wronged innocent?
Or sleeps your Justice, like my fathers Mercy?
Or are you blind? as I must be.
I ever feared the Princes too much greatness
Would make him less, the greatest heights are near
The greatest precipice.
It is in worldly accidents
As in the world it self, where things most distant
Meet one another: Thus the East, and West,
Upon the Globe, a Mathematick point
Only divides; Thus happiness, and misery,
And all extremes are still contiguous.
Or, if twixt happiness, and misery, there be
A distance; it is an Aerie Vacuum,
Nothing to moderate, or break the fall.
But oh this Saint-like Devil!
This damned Caliph, to make the King believe
To kill his son,'s religion.
Poor Princes, how are they mis-led,
While they, whose sacred office it is to bring
Kings to obey their God, and men their King,
By these mysterious links to fix and tie
Them to the footstool of the Deity:
Even by these men, Religion, that should be
The curb, is made the spur to tyranny;
They with their double key of conscience bind
The Subjects souls, and leave Kings unconfined;
While their poor Vassals sacrifice their bloods
T'Ambition; and to Avarice, their goods;
Blind with Devotion. They themselves esteem
Made for themselves, and all the world for them;
While heavens great law, given for their guide, appears
Just, or unjust, but as it waits on theirs:
Used, but to give the echo to their words,
Power to their wills, and edges to their swords.
To varnish all their errors, and secure
The ills they act, and all the world endure.
Thus by their arts Kings awe the world, while they,
Religion, as their mistress, seem to obey;
Yet as their slave command her, while they, seem
To rise to Heaven, they make Heaven stoop to them.
Nor is this all, where feigned devotion bends
The highest things, to serve the lowest ends:
For if the many-headed beast hath broke,
Or shaken from his neck the royal yoke,
With popular rage, religion doth conspire,
Flows into that, and swells the torrent higher;
Then powers first pedigree from force derives,
And calls to mind the old prerogatives
Of free-borne man, and with a saucy eye
Searches the heart, and soul of Majesty;
Then to a strict account, and censure brings
The actions, errors, and the ends of Kings;
Treads on authority, and sacred laws,
Yet all for God, and his pretended cause,
Acting such things for him, which he in them,
And which themselves in others will condemn;
And thus engaged, nor safely can retire,
Nor safely stand, but blindly bold aspire,
Forcing their hopes even through despair, to climb
To new attempts; disdain the present time,
Grow from disdain to threats, from threats to arms,
While they (though sons of peace) still sound the alarm's:
Thus whether Kings or people seek extremes,
Still conscience and religion are their Themes:
And whatsoever change the State invades,
The pulpit either forces, or persuades.
Others may give the fuel, or the fire;
But they the breath, that makes the flame inspire.
This, and much more is true, but let not us
Add to our ills, and aggravate misfortunes,
By passionate complaints, nor lose our selves,
Because we have lost him; for if the Tyrant
Were to a son so noble, so unnatural,
What will he be to us? who have appeared
Friends to that son.
Well thought on, and in time;
Farewell unhappy Prince, while we thy friends,
As strangers to our Country, and our selves,
Seek out our safety, and expect with patience
Heavens Justice.
Let's rather act it, then expect it:
The Princes injuries at our hands require
More then our tears, and patience:
His army is not yet disbanded,
And only wants a head; thither we'll fly,
And all who love the Prince, or hate the Tyrant,
Will follow us.
Nobly resolved, and either we'll restore
The Prince, or perish in the brave attempt.
Ye Gods, since what we mean to execute,
Is your high office (to avenge the innocent)
Assist us with a fortune, equal to
The justice of our action, lest the world
Should think it self deluded, and mistrust
That you want will, or power to be just.
It is done, and it was my master-piece, to work
My safety twixt two dangerous extremes;
Now like a skilful sailor have I past
Scylla and Charybdis, I have escaped the rock
Of steep Ambition, and the gulf of Jealousy,
A danger less avoided, because less feared.
What's done my Lord?
Enough I warrant you; imprisoned, and deprived of sight.
No more? this but provokes him: can you think
Your self secure, and he alive?
The rest of the business will doe it self;
He can as well endure a prison, as a wilde Bull the net:
There let him struggle, and toil himself to death,
And save us so much envy.
But if his father should relent, such injuries
Can receive no excuse or colour, but to be
Transferred upon his Counsellors; and then
The forfeiture of them redeems his error.
We must set a mark upon his passion,
And as we find it running low,
What ebbes from his, into our rage shall flow.
Why, should we be more wicked
Then we must needs?
Nay, if you stick at conscience,
More gallant actions have been lost, for want of being
Completely wicked; then have been performed
By being exactly virtuous. It is hard to be
Exact in good, or excellent in ill;
Our will wants power, or else our power wants skill.
But Gentlemen, was the King in earnest?
I can scarce believe it.
You will when you feel it.
I pray have any of you felt it, to tell me what it is.
No Sir, but
Some of your fellow Courtiers can tell you,
That use something like it, to mend their shapes,
Twill make you so straight and slender.
Slender? because I was slender in my wits, must I be drawn
Slender in my waste? I'd rather grow wise,
And corpulent.
Come Sir, it is but a little stretching.
No, no more's hanging; and sure this will be the death of me:
I remember my Grandmother died of Convulsion fits.
Come Sir, prepare, prepare.
I, for another world: I must repent first.
Quickly then.
Then first I repent that sin of being a Courtier.
And secondly, the greatest sin one can commit in that place, the speaking of truth.
Have you no more sins?
Some few trifles more, not worth the remembering;
Drinking, and whoring, and swearing, and such like:
But for those let 'em pass.
Have you done now?
Only some good counsel to the standers by.
We thank you for that Sir.
Nay Gentlemen, mistake me not,
It is not that I love you, but because it is a thing of course
For dying men.
Let's have it then.
First then, if any of you are fools (as I think that
But a needless question) be fools still, and labour still
In that vocation, then the worst will be but whipping,
Where, but for seeming wise, the best is racking.
But if you have the luck to be Court fools, those that have
Either wit or honesty, you may fool withal and spare not;
But for those that want either,
You'll find it rather dangerous then otherwise; I could give you a modern
Instance or two, but let that pass: but if you happen to be State fools, then it is
But fooling on the right side, and ell's well; then you shall at least be
Wise men's fellows, if not wise men's masters.
But of all things take heed of giving any man good counsel,
You see what I have got by it; and yet like a fool, must
I be doing on it again.
Is this all.
All, but a little in my own behalf. Remember, Gentlemen,
I am at my full growth, and my joints are knit; and yet
My sinews are not Cables.
Well, we'll remember't.
But stay Gentlemen, what think you of a bottle now?
I hope you are more serious.
If you but knew how dry a thing this sorrow is,
Especially meeting with my constitution; which is
As thirsty as any serving-mans.
Let him have it, it may be twill make him confess.
Yes, I shall, I shall lay before you all that's within me,
And with most fluent utterance.
Here's to you all Gentlemen, and let him that's good
Natured in his drink, pledge me.
So, me-thinkes I feel it in my joints already,
It makes 'em supple.
Now I feel it in my brains, it makes 'em swim,
As if the rack would be a shipwreck.
You are witty Sir.
This is nothing but a poor clinch, I have
A thousand of 'em, (a trick I learned amongst the Statesmen.)
Hold Sir, you have no measure of your self.
What doe you talk of measure, you'll take
Measure of me with a vengeance.
Well rack, I defy thee, doe thy worst,
I would thou were Man, Giant, or Monster.
Gentlemen, now if I happen to fall asleep
Upon this Engine, pray wake me not too suddenly;
You see here's good store of wine, and if it be
Over-rackt, twill come up with lees and all:
There I was with you again, and now I am for you.
Nature,
How did thou mock mankind to make him free,
And yet to make him fear; or when he lost
That freedom, why did he not lose his fear?
That fear of fears, the fear of what we know not,
While yet we know it is in vain to fear it:
Death, and what follows death, it was that that stamp't
A terror on the brow of Kings; that gave
Fortune her deity, and Jove his thunder.
Banish but fear of death, those Giant names
Of Majesty, Power, Empire, finding nothing
To be their object, will be nothing too:
Then he dares yet be free that dares to die,
May laugh at the grim face of law and scorn,
The cruel wrinkle of a Tyrants brow;
But yet to die so tamely,
Overcome by passion and misfortune,
And still unconquered by my foes, sounds ill,
Below the temper of my spirit;
Yet to embrace a life so poor, so wretched,
So full of deaths, argues a greater dullness;
But I am dead already, nor can suffer
More in the other world. For what is Hell
But a long sleepless night? and what's their torment,
But to compare past joys with present sorrows.
And what can death deprive me of? the sight
Of day, of children, friends, and hope of Empire;
And whatsoever others lose in death,
In life I am deprived of, then I will live
Only to die revenged: nor will I go
Down to the shades alone.
Prompt me some witty, some revengeful Devil,
His Devil that could make a bloody feast
Of his own son, and call the gods his guests.
Her's that could kill her aged Sire, and cast
Her brothers scattered limbs to Wolves and Vultures.
Or his that slew his father, to enjoy
His mothers bed; and greater then all those,
My fathers Devil.
Come mischief, I embrace thee, fill my soul;
And thou revenge ascend, and bear the Sceptre
O'er all my other passions; banish thence
All that are cool, and tame.
Know old Tyrant,
My heart's to big to break, I know thy fears
Exceed my sufferings, and my revenge,
Though but in hope, is much a greater pleasure
Then thou can take in punishing. Then my anger
Sink to the Center of my heart, and there
Lye close in ambush, till my seeming patience
Hath made the cruel Tyrant as secure,
Though with as little cause, as now hoe's jealous.
Whose there?
I find my nature would return
To her old course, I feel an inclination
To some repose; welcome thou pleasing slumber;
A while embrace me in thy leaden arms,
And charm my careful thoughts.
Conduct me to my bed.
How doe's the Prince? how bears he his restraint?
Why Sir, as all great spirits
Bear great and sudden changes, with such impatience
As a Numidian Lyon; when first caught,
Endures the toil that holds him.
He would think of nothing
But present death, and sought all violent means
To compass it. But time hath mitigated
Those furious heats, he now returns to food
And sleep, admits the conversation
Of those that are about him.
I would I had not
So easily believed my fears, I was too sudden,
I would it were undone.
If you lament it,
That which now looks like Justice, will be thought
An inconsiderate rashness.
But there are in nature
Such strong returns: that I punish't him
I doe not grieve; but that he was my son.
But it concerns you to bear up your passion,
And make it good; for if the people know
That you have cause to grieve for what is done,
They'll think you had no cause at first to doe it.
Go visit him from me, and teach him patience,
Since neither all his fury, nor my sorrow
Can help what's past; tell him my severity
To him shall in some measure be requited,
By my indulgence to his children. And if he desire it,
Let them have access to him: endeavour to take off
His thoughts from revenge, by telling him of
Paradise, and I know not what pleasures
In the other world.
I shall, Sir.
Mirvan, the King relents, and now there's left
No refuge but the last, he must be poisoned;
And suddenly, lest he survive his father.
But handsomely, lest it appear.
Appear!
To whom? you know there's none about him
But such as I have placed; and they shall say
It was discontent, or abstinence.
But at the best
Twill be suspected.
Why, though't be known,
We'll say he poisoned himself.
But the curious will pry further
Then bare report, and the old Kings suspicions
Have piercing eyes.
But those nature
Will shortly close: you see his old disease
Grows strong upon him.
But if he should recover?
But I have cast his nativity, he cannot, he must not.
In the mean time I have so besieged him,
So blocked up all the passages, and placed
So many Sentinels, and Guards upon him,
That no intelligence can be conveyed
But by my instruments. But this business will require
More heads and hands then ours: Go you to the prison
And bring the Keeper privately to me,
To give him his instructions.
Sir, I am commanded by the King
To visit you.
What, to give a period to my life?
And to his fears? You're welcome; here's a throat,
A heart, or any other part, ready to let
In death, and receive his commands.
My Lord, I am no messenger, nor minister of death,
It is not my function.
I should know that voice.
I am the Caliph, and am come to tell you, your father
Is now returned to himself: Nature he's got
The victory o'er passion, all his rigour
Is turned to grief and pity.
Alas good man!
I pity him, and his infirmities;
His doubts, and fears, and accidents of age,
Which first provoked his cruelty.
He bid me tell you,
His love to yours should amply recompense
His cruelty to you: And I dare say it is real;
For all his thoughts, his pleasures, and delights,
Are fixed on Fatyma: when he is sad
She comforts him; when sick, shoe's his Physician.
And were it not for the delight he takes
In her, I think he would dye with sorrow.
But how are his affections fixed so strangely
On her alone? sure it is not in his nature,
For then he had loved me, or hated her,
Because she came from me.
It is her desert,
Shoe's fair beyond comparison, and witty
Above her age; and bears a manly spirit
Above her sex.
But may not I admire her,
Is that too great a happiness? pray let her make it
Her next suit to be permitted to visit me her self.
She shall Sir: I joy to see your mind
So well composed, I feared I should have found
A tempest in your soul, and came to lay it.
I'll to the King,
I know to him that news will be
Most acceptable.
Pray doe, and tell him
I have cast off all my passions, and am now
A man again; fit for society
And conversation.
I will Sir.
I never knew my self till now, how on the sudden
I'm grown an excellent dissembler, to out-doe
One at the first, that he's practised it all his life:
So now I am my self again, what is it
I feel within? me thinks some vast design
Now takes possession of my heart, and swells
My labouring thoughts above the common bounds
Of humane actions, something full of horror
My soul hath now decreed, my heart does beat,
As if'twere forging thunderbolts for Jove,
To strike the Tyrant dead: so now, I have it,
I have it, it is a gallant mischief,
Worthy my father, or my fathers son.
All his delight's in Fatyma, poor innocent,
But not more innocent then I, and yet
My father loves thee, and that's crime enough.
By this act old Tyrant
I shall be quit with thee: while I was virtuous
I was a stranger to thy blood, but now
Sure thou wilt love me for this horrid crime,
It is so like thy own. In this I'm sure,
Although in nothing else, I am thy son:
But when it is done, I leave him yet that remedy,
I take my self Revenge, but I as well
Will rob him of his anger, as his joy,
And having sent her to the shades,
I'll follow her.
But to return again, and dwell
In his dire thoughts, for there's the blacker hell.
Sir, your wife the Princess is come to visit you.
Conduct her in, now to my disguise again.
Is this my Lord the Prince.
That's Erythaea,
Or some Angel voyc't like her. It is she, my struggling soul
Would fine go out to meet and welcome her, Erythaea:
No answer but in sighs (dear Erythaea.)
Thou came to comfort, to support my sufferings,
Not to oppress me with a greater weight,
To see that my unhappiness
Involves thee too.
My Lord, in all your triumphs and your glories,
You called me into all your joys, and gave me
An equal share, and in this depth of misery
Can I be unconcerned, you needs must know,
You needs must hope I cannot; or which is worse,
You must suspect my love: for what is love
But sympathy, and this I make my happiness
Since both cannot be happy,
That we can both be miserable.
I prithee doe not say thou love me
For love, or finds out equals, or makes 'em so
But I am so cast down, and fallen so low,
I cannot rise to thee, and dare not wish
Thou should descend to me; but call it pity,
And I will own it then, that Kings may give
To beggars, and not lessen their own greatness.
Till now I thought virtue had stood above
The reach of fortune; but if virtue be not,
Yet love's a greater Deity; what ever fortune
Can give or take, love wants not, or despises;
Or by his own omnipotence supplies:
Then like a God with joy beholds
The beauty of his own creations.
Thus what we form and image to our fancies,
We really possess.
But can thy imagination
Delude it self, to fix upon an object
So lost in miseries, so old in sorrows;
Paleness and death hang on my cheek, and darkness
Dwells in my eyes; more changed from what I was
In person then in fortune.
Yet still the same to me:
Alas my Lord, these outward beauties are but the props and scaffolds
On which we built our love, which now made perfect,
Stands without those supports: nor is my flame
So earthy as to need the dull material fuel
Of eyes, or lips, or cheeks, still to be kindled,
And blown by appetite, or else t'expire:
My fires are purer, and like those of Heaven,
Fed only, and contented with themselves,
Need nothing from without.
But the disgrace that waits upon misfortune,
The mere reproach, the shame of being miserable,
Exposes men to scorn, and base contempt,
Even from their nearest friends.
Love is so far from scorning misery,
That he delights in it, and is so kindly cruel,
Sometimes to wish it, that he may be alone;
In stead of all, of fortunes honours, friends, which are
But mere diversions from loves proper object,
Which only is it self.
Thou hast almost
Taught me to love my miseries, and forgive
All my misfortunes. I'll at least forget 'em;
We will receive those times, and in our memories
Preserve, and still keep fresh (like flowers in water)
Those happier days: when at our eyes our souls
Kindled their mutual fires, their equal beams
Shot and returned, till linked, and twined in one,
They chained our hearts together.
And was it just, that fortune should begin
Her tyranny, where we began our loves:
No, if it had, why was not I blind too?
I'm sure if weeping could have don't, I had been.
Think not that I am blind, but think it night,
A season for our loves; and which to lovers
Ne'er seems too long, and think of all our miseries,
But as some melancholy dream which he's awaked us,
To the renewing of our joys.
My Lord, this is a temper
Worthy the old Philosophers.
I but repeat that lesson
Which I have learned from thee. All this morality
Thy love hath taught me.
My Lord, you wrong your virtue,
T'ascribe the effect of that to any cause,
Less noble than it self.
And you your love,
To think it is less noble, or less powerful,
Then any the best virtue: but I fear thy love
Will wrong it self; so long a stay will make
The jealous King suspect we have been plotting:
How doe the pledges of our former love?
Our Children.
Both happy in their Grandsires love, especially
The pretty Fatyma; yet she
According to her apprehension, feels
A sense of your misfortunes.
But let her not too much express it,
Lest she provoke his fury.
She only can allay it
When it is provoked; she
Plays with his rage, and gets above his anger,
As you have seen a little boat
To mount and dance upon the wave, that threatens
To overwhelm it.
To threaten is to save, but his anger
Strikes us like thunder, where the blow out-flies
The loud report, and even prevents men's fears.
But then like thunder
It rends a Cedar, or an Oak, or finds
Some strong resisting matter; women and children
Are not Subjects worthy a Princes anger.
Whatsoever
Is worthy of their love, is worth their anger.
Love's a more natural motion, they are angry
As Princes, but love as men.
Once more I beg,
Make not thy love thy danger.
My Lord, I see with what unwillingness
You lay upon me this command, and through your fares
Discern your love, and therefore must obey you.
Farewell my dearest Erythaea,
There's a strange music in her voice, the story
Of Orpheus, which appears so bold a fiction,
Was prophesied of thee; thy voice he's tamed
The Tigers and the Lyons of my soul.
Sir your daughter Fatyma.
Conduct her in, how strangely am I tempted
With opportunity, which like a sudden gust
Hath swelled my calmer thoughts into a tempest:
Accursed opportunity,
The midwife and the bawd to all our vices,
That work our thoughts into desires, desires
To resolutions; those being ripe, and quickened,
Thou give 'em birth, and bring 'em forth to action.
Leave us O opportunity,
That when my dire and bloody resolutions,
Like sick and froward children
Were rock't asleep by reason, or religion;
Thou like a violent noise came rushing in,
And make 'em wake and start to new unquietnesse.
Come hither pretty Fatyma,
Thy Grandsires darling, sit upon my knee:
He loves thee dearly.
I father, for your sake.
And for his sake I shall requite it.
O virtue, virtue,
Where art thou fled? thou were my reasons friend,
But that like a deposed Prince he's yielded
His Sceptre to his base usurping vassalls;
And like a traitor to himself, takes pleasure
In serving them.
But father
I desired him that you might have liberty, and that
He would give you your eyes again.
Pretty Innocent,
It is not in the art, nor power of man to doe it.
Must you never see again then father?
No, not without a miracle.
Why father, I can see with one eye, pray take one
Of mine.
I would her innocent prate could overcome me:
O what a conflict doe I feel! how am I
Tossed like a ship twixt two encountering tides;
Love that was banished hence, would fine return
And force an entrance, but revenge
(That's now the Porter of my soul) is deaf,
Deaf as the Adder, and as full of poison.
Mighty revenge! that single can o'rethrow
All those joint powers, which nature, virtue, honour,
Can raise against thee.
What doe you seek for, your handkerchief? pray use mine,
To drink the bloody moisture from your eyes;
I'll show it my Grandfather,
I know twill make him weep.
Why doe you shake father?
Just so my Grandsire trembled at the instant
Your sight was taken away.
And upon the like occasion.
O father, what means the naked knife?
It is to requite thy Grandsires love. Prepare
To meet thy death.
O, it is I, it is I,
Your daughter Fatyma.
I therefore doe it.
Alas, was this the blessing my mother sent me to receive?
Thy mother? Erythaea? there's something in that
That shakes my resolution.
Poor Erythaea, how wretched shall I make thee,
To rob thee of a husband and a child?
But which is worse, that first I fooled and won thee
To a belief that all was well; and yet
Shall I forbear a crime for love of thee,
And not for love of virtue? But what's virtue?
A mere imaginary sound, a thing
Of speculation; which to my dark soul,
Deprived of reason, is as indiscernible
As colours to my body, wanting sight.
Then being left to sense, I must be guided
By something that my sense grasps and takes hold of;
On then my love, and fear not to encounter
That Giant, my revenge (alas poor Fatyma)
My father loves thee, so doe's Erythaea:
Whether shall I by justly plaguing
Him whom I hate, be more unjustly cruel
To her I love? or being kind to her,
Be cruel to my self, and leave unsatisfied
My anger and revenge? but Love, thou art
The nobler passion, and to thee I sacrifice
All my ungentle thoughts. Fatyma forgive me,
And seal it with a kiss? What is it I feel?
The spirit of revenge re-inforcing
New Arguments fly Fatyma
Fly while thou may, nor tempt me to new mischief,
By giving means to act it; to this ill
My will leads not my power, but power my will.
O what a tempest have I escaped, thanks to Heaven,
And Erythaea's love.
No: it was a poor, a low revenge, unworthy
My virtues, or my injuries, and
As now my fame, so then my infamy,
Would blot out his, And I instead of his Empire,
Shall only be the heir of all his curses.
No: I'll be still my self, and carry with me
My innocence to the other world, and leave
My fame to this: twill be a brave revenge
To raise my mind to a constancy, so high,
That may look down upon his threats, my patience
Shall mock his fury; nor shall he be so happy
To make me miserable, and my sufferings shall
Erect a prouder Trophy to my name,
Then all my prosperous actions: Every Pilot
Can steer the ship in calms, but he performs
The skilful part, can manage it in storms.
If happiness be a substantial good,
Not framed of accidents, nor subject to 'em,
I erred to seek it in a blind revenge,
Or think it lost, in loss of sight, or Empire;
It is something sure within us, not subjected
To sense or sight, only to be discerned
By reason my souls eye, and that still sees
Clearly, and clearer for the want of these;
For gazing through these windows of the body,
It met such several, such distracting objects,
But now confined within it self, it sees
A strange, and unknown world, and there discovers
Torrents of Anger, Mountains of Ambition;
Gulfs of Desire, and Towers of Hope, huge Giants,
Monsters, and savage Beasts, to vanquish these
Will be a braver conquest, then the old
Or the new world.
O happiness of blindness, now no beauty
Inflames my lust, no others good my envy,
Or misery my pity: no mans wealth
Draws my respect, nor poverty my scorn,
Yet still I see enough. Man to himself
Is a large prospect, raised above the level
Of his low creeping thoughts; if then I have
A world within my self, that world shall be
My Empire; there I'll reign, commanding freely,
And willingly obeyed, secure from fear
Of foreign forces, or domestic treasons,
And hold a Monarchy more free, more absolute
Than in my fathers seat; and looking down
With scorn or pity, on the slippery state
Of Kings, will tread upon the neck of fate.
Sir, it is of near concernment, and imports
No less than the Kings life, and honour.
May not I know it.
You may Sir. But in his presence we are sworn
T'impart it first to him.
Our Persian state descends not
To interviews with strangers: But from whence
Comes this discovery, or you that bring it?
We are Sir of Natolia.
Natolia? heard you nothing
Of two Villains that lately fled from hence?
The Pashas Sir.
The same.
They are nearer than you think for.
Where?
In Persia.
In arms again to 'tempt another slavery?
No Sir, they made some weak attempts, presuming on
The reputation of their former greatness:
But having lost their fame and fortunes,
It is no wonder they lost their friends, now hopeless and forlorn
They are returned, and somewhere live obscurely,
To expect a change in Persia; nor will it be hard
To find 'em.
Do it, and name your own rewards.
We dare doe nothing till we have seen the King,
And then you shall command us.
Well, though it is not usual,
Ye shall have free access.
Sir, there were two Turkish prisoners lately fled
From hence for a supposed conspiracy
Between the Prince and them.
Where are the villains?
This is the villain, Sir;
And we the wrongfully accused, you gave life, Sir,
And we took it
As a free noble gift; but when we heard
It was valued at the price of your Sons honour,
We came to give it back, as a poor trifle,
Prized at a rate too high.
Holy,
I cannot think my favours placed so ill,
To be so ill requited, yet their confidence
Has something in it that looks like innocence.
Is it come to that? Then to my last and surest refuge.
Sure if the guilt were theirs, they could not charge thee
With such a gallant boldness; If it were thine,
Thou could not heare't with such a silent scorn,
I am amazed.
Sir, perplex your thoughts no further,
They have truth to make 'em bold,
And I have power to scorn it: it was I, Sir,
That betrayed him, and you, and them.
Is this impudence, or madness?
Neither;
A very sober, and sad truth???to you, Sir.
A Guard there.
Seize him.
Seize them; now
Though it is too late to learn, yet know
Against you are King again, what it is to let your Subjects
Dispose all offices of trust and power:
The beast obeys his keeper, and looks up,
Not to his masters, but his feeders hand;
And when you gave me power to dispense
And make your favours mine, in the same hour
You made your self my shadow: and it was my courtesy
To let you live, and reign so long.
Without there?
What, none but Traitors? Has this villain
Breathed treason into all, and with that breath,
Like a contagious vapour, blasted loyalty?
Sure hell it self has sent forth all her Furies,
T'inhabit and possess this place.
Sir, passions without power,
Like seas against a rock, but lose their fury:
Mirvan, Take these villains, and see 'em strangled.
Farewell, Sir, commend us to your son, let him know,
That since we cannot dye his servants,
We'll dye his Martyrs.
Farewell, unhappy friends,
A long farewell, and may you find rewards
Great as your innocence, or which is more,
Great as your wrongs.
Come, thou art troubled,
Thou dost not fear to dye?
No: but to lose my death,
To sell my life so cheap, while this proud villain
That takes it must survive.
We shall not lose our deaths,
If Heaven can hear the cries of guiltless blood,
Which sure it must; for I have heard the are loud ones:
Vengeance shall overtake thee.
Away with 'em.
Stay, Holy, they are innocent; yet life, when it is thy gift;
Is worse than death, I disdain to ask it.
And we to take it.
Do not ask it, Sir,
For them to whom you owe your ruin, they have undone you,
Had not they told you this, you had lived secure,
And happy in your ignorance; but this injury,
Since it is not in your nature to forgive it,
I must not leave it in your power to punish it.
Heaven, though from thee I have deserved this plague,
Be thou my Judge and witness, from this villain
It is undeserved.
Had I but felt your vengeance from some hand
That first had suffered mine, it had been justice:
But have you sent this sad return of all
My love, my trust, my favours?
Sir, there's a great resemblance
Between your favours, and my injuries;
Those are too great to be requited, these
Too great to be forgiven: and therefore
It is but in vain to mention either.
Mirza, Mirza,
How art thou lost by my deceived credulity?
I'll beg thy pardon.
Stay, Sir, not without my leave:
Go some of you, and let the people know
The King keeps state, and will not come in public:
If any great affairs, or State addresses,
Bring 'em to me.
How have I taught the villain
To act my part? But oh, my son, my son,
Shall I not see thee?
For once you shall, Sir;
But you must grant me one thing.
Traitor, dost thou mock my miseries?
What can I give, but this unhappy life?
Alas, Sir, it is but that I ask, and it is my modesty
To ask it, it being in my power to take it:
When you shall see him, sir, to dye for pity,
It were such a thing, it would so deceive the world,
And make the people think you were good natured;
Twill look so well in story, and become
The stage so handsomely.
I ne'er denied thee any thing, and shall not now
Deny thee this, though I could stand upright
Under the tyranny of age and fortune;
Yet the sad weight of such ingratitude
Will crush me into earth.
Lose not your tears, but keep
Your lamentations for your son, or sins;
For both deserve 'em: but you must make haste, sir,
Or he will not stay your coming.
It is now about the hour the poison
Must take effect.
Poisoned; oh Heaven!
Nay, sir, lose no time in wonder, both of us
Have much to doe, if you will see your son,
Here's one shall bring you to him.
Some unskilful Pilot had shipwrecked here;
But I not only against sure
And likely ills have made my self secure:
But so confirmed, and fortified my state,
To set it safe above the reach of Fate.
Sir, the Princess and your son.
Soffy, thou come to wonder at
Thy wretched father: why dost thou interrupt
Thy happiness, by looking on an object
So miserable?
My Lord, me thinks there is not in your voice
The vigour that was wont, nor in your look
The wonted cheerfulness; Are you well, my Lord?
No: but I shall be, I feel my health a coming?
What's your disease, my Lord?
Nothing, but I have taken a Cordial,
Sent by the King or Holy, in requital
Of all my miseries, to make me happy:
The pillars of this frame grow weak,
As if the weight of many years oppress 'em;
My sinews slacken, and an icy stiffness
Benums my blood.
Alas, I fear hoe's poisoned:
Call all the help that Art, or Herbs, or Minerals
Can minister.
No, it is too late;
And they that gave me this, are too well practised
In such an Art, to attempt and not perform.
Yet try my Lord, revive your thoughts, the Empire
Expects you, your father's dying.
So when the ship is sinking,
The winds that wrecked it cease.
Will you be the scorn of fortune,
To come near a Crown, and only near it?
I am not fortunes scorn, but she is mine,
More blind than I.
O tyranny of Fate! to bring
Death in one hand, and Empire in the other,
Only to show us happiness, and then
To snatch us from it.
They snatch me to it;
My soul is on her journey, do not now
Divert, or lead her back, to lose her self
In the maze, and winding labyrinths of the world:
I prithee do not weep, thy love is that
I part with most unwillingly, or otherwise
I had not staid till rude necessity
Had forced me hence.
Soffy, be not a man too soon,
And when thou art, take heed of too much virtue;
It was thy fathers, and his only crime,
Twill make the King suspicious; yet ere time,
By natures course, has ripened thee to man,
Twill mellow him to dust, till then forget
I was thy father, yet forget it not,
My great example shall excite thy thoughts
To noble actions. And you, dear Erythaea,
Give not your passions vent, nor let blind fury
Precipitate your thoughts, nor set 'em working,
Till time shall lend 'em better means and instruments
Than lost complaints. Whore's pretty Fatyma?
She must forgive my rash ungentle passion.
What do you mean, sir?
I am ashamed to tell you,
I prithee call her.
I will, sir, I pray try
If sleep will ease your torments, and repair
Your wasted spirits.
Sleep to these empty lids
Is grown a stranger, and the day and night,
As undistinguished by my sleep, as sight.
O happiness of poverty! that rests
Securely on a bed of living turf,
While we with waking cares and restless thoughts,
Lye tumbling on our down, courting the blessing
Of a short minutes slumber, which the Plough-man
Shakes from him, as a ransomed slave his fetters:
Call in some music, I have heard soft aires
Can charm our senses, and expel our cares.
Is Erythaea gone?
Yes, sir.
It is well:
I would not have her present at my death.
SOmnus the humble God, that dwells
In cottages and smokey cells,
Hates gilded roofs and beds of down;
And though he fears no Princes frown,
Flies from the circle of a Crown.
Come, I say, thou powerful God,
And thy Leaden charming Rod,
Dipped in the Lethaean Lake,
O'er his wakefall temples shake,
Lest he should sleep and never wake.
Nature (alas) why art thou so
Obliged to thy greatest foe?
Sleep that is thy best repast,
Yet of death it bears a taste,
And both are the same thing at last.
So now he sleeps, let's leave him
To his repose.
The horror of this place presents
The horror of my crimes, I fine would ask
What I am loath to hear; but I am well prepared,
They that are past all hope of good, are past
All fear of ill: and yet if he be dead,
Speak softly, or uncertainly.
Sir, he sleeps,
O that's too plain, I know thou mean???st his last,
His long, his endless sleep.
No, Sir, he lives; but yet
I fear the sleep you speak of will be his next:
For nature, like a weak and weary traveller,
Tired with a tedious and a rugged way,
Not by desire provoked, but even betrayed
By weariness and want of spirits,
Gives up her self to this unwilling slumber.
Thou hast it, Holy, it is indeed a sad
And sober truth, though the first
And only truth thou ever told me:
And it is a fatal sign, when Kings hear truth,
Especially when flatterers dare speak it.
I thought I heard my father, does he think the poison
Too slow, and comes to see the operation?
Or does he think his engine dull, or honest?
Less apt to execute, than he to bid him:
He needs not, it is enough, it will succeed
To his expectation.
It is indeed thy father,
Thy wretched father; but so far from acting
New cruelties, that if those already past,
Acknowledged and repented of, can yet
Receive a pardon, by those mutual bonds
Nature has sealed between us, which though I
Have cancelled, thou hast still preserved inviolate;
I beg thy pardon.
Death in it self appears
Lovely and sweet, not only to be pardoned,
But wished for: had it come from any other hand,
But from a father; a father,
A name so full of life, of love, of pity:
Death from a fathers hand, from whom I first
Received a being, it is a preposterous gift,
An act at which inverted Nature starts,
And blushes to behold her self so cruel.
Take thou that comfort with thee, and be not deaf to truth:
By all that's holy, by the dying accents
Of thine, and my last breath, I never meant,
I never wished it, sorrow has so over-fraught
This sinking bark, I shall not live to show
How I abhor, or how I would repent
My first rash crime; but he that now
Has poisoned thee, first poisoned me with jealousy,
A foolish causeless jealousy.
Since you believe my innocence,
I cannot but believe your sorrow:
But does the villain live? A just revenge
Would more become the sorrows of a King,
Than womanish complaints.
O Mirza, Mirza:
I have no more the power to doe it,
Than thou to see it done: My Empire, Mirza,
My Empire's lost: Thy virtue was the rock
On which it firmly stood, that being undermined,
It sunk with its own weight; the villain whom my breath created,
Now braves it in my Throne.
O for an hour of life; but twill not be:
Revenge and justice we must leave to heaven.
I would say more, but death has taken in the out-works,
And now assails the fort; I feel, I feel him
Gnawing my heart-strings: farewell, and yet I would.
O stay, stay but a while, and take me with thee;
Come Death, let me embrace thee, thou that were
The worst of all my fears, art now the best
Of all my hopes. But Fate, why hast thou added
This curse to all the rest? the love of life,
We love it, and yet hate it; death we loath,
And still desire; fly to it, and yet fear it.
Hoe's gone, hoe's gone for ever:
O that the poison had mistaken his,
And met this hated life; but cruel Fate
Envied so great a happiness: Fate that still
Flies from the wretched, and pursues the blessed.
Ye Heavens! But why should I complain to them
That hear me not, or bow to those that hate me?
Why should your curses so out-weigh your blessings?
They come but single, and long expectation
Takes from their value: but these fall upon us
Double and sudden.
Yet more of horror, then farewell my tears,
And my just anger be no more confined
To vain complaints, or selfe-devouring silence;
But break, break forth upon him like a deluge,
And the great spirit of my injured Lord
Possess me, and inspire me with a rage
Great as thy wrongs, and let me call together
All my souls powers, to throw a curse upon him
Black as his crimes.
O spare your anger, it is lost;
For he whom thou accused has already
Condemned himself, and is as miserable
As thou can think, or wish him; spit upon me,
Cast all reproaches on me, women's wit
Or malice can invent, I'll thank thee for them;
What ever can give me a more lively sense
Of my own crimes, that so I may repent 'em.
O cruel Tyrant! could thou be so barbarous
To a son as noble, as thy self art vile?
That knew no other crime, but too much virtue;
Nor could deserve so great a punishment
For any fault, but that he was thy son?
Now not content to exceed all other Tyrants.
Exceed'st thy self: first, robbing him of sight,
Then seeming by a feigned and forced repentance,
To expiate that crime, did win him to
A false security, and now by poison
Hast robbed him of his life.
Were but my soul as pure
From other guilts as that, Heaven did not hold
One more immaculate. Yet what I have done,
He dying did forgive me, and had thou been present,
Thou would have done the same: for thou art happy,
Compared to me; I am not only miserable,
But wicked too; thy miseries may find
Pity, and help from others; but mine make me
The scorn, and the reproach of all the world;
Thou, like unhappy Merchants, whose adventures
Are dashed on rocks, or swallowed up in storms,
Ow'st all thy losses to the Fates: but I,
Like wasteful Prodigals, have cast away
My happiness, and with it all men's pity:
Thou see how weak and wretched guilt can make,
Even Kings themselves, when a weak women's anger
Can master mine.
And your sorrow
As much o recomes my anger, and turns into melting pity.
Pity not me, nor yet deplore your husband;
But seek the safety of your son, his innocence
Will be too weak a guard, when nor my greatness,
Nor yet his fathers virtues could protect us.
Go on my boy, the just revenge of all
Our wrongs I recommend to thee and Heaven;
I feel my weakness growing strong upon me:
Death, thou art he that wilt not flatter Princes,
That stoops not to authority, nor gives
A specious name to tyranny; but shows
Our actions in their own deformed likeness.
Now all those cruelties which I have acted,
To make me great, or glorious, or secure,
Look like the hated crimes of other men.
O save, save me, who are those that stand,
And seem to threaten me?
There's no body, it is nothing,
But some fearful dream.
Yes, that's my brothers ghost, whose birth-right stood
Twixt me and Empire, like a spredding Cedar
That grows to hinder some delightful prospect,
Him I cut down.
Next my old fathers ghost, whom I impatient
To have my hopes delayed, hastened by violence before his fatal day;
Then my enraged son, who seems to beckon,
And hale me to him, I come, I come, ye Ghosts,
The greatest of you all; but sure one hell's
Too little to contain me, and too narrow
For all my crimes.
Go muster all the Citie-Bands, pretend it
To prevent sudden tumults,
But indeed to settle the succession.
My Lord, you are too sudden, you'll take 'em unprepared;
Alas, you know their consciences are tender.
Scandal and scruple must be first removed,
They must be prayed, and preached into a tumult:
But for the succession,
Let us agree on that, there's Calamah
The eldest son by the Arabian Lady,
A gallant youth.
I, too gallant, his proud spirit will disdain
To owe his greatness to another gift;
Such gifts as Crowns, transcending all requital,
Turn injuries.
No, Mirvan; he must be dull and stupid, lest he know
Wherefore we made him King.
But he must be good natured, tractable,
And one that will be governed.
And have so much wit to know whom hoe's beholding to.
But why, my Lord, should you look further than your self?
I have had some such thoughts; but I consider
The Persian State will not endure a King
So meanly borne; no, I'll rather be the same I am,
In place the second, but the first in power:
Solyman the son of the Georgian Lady
Shall be the man: what noise is that?
My Lord, the Princes late victorious Army
Is marching towards the palace, breathing nothing
But fury and revenge; to them are joined
All whom desire of change, or discontent,
Excites to new attempts, their Leaders
Abdall and Morat.
Abdall and Morat! Mirvan, we are lost, fallen from the top
Of all our hopes, and cast away like Sailors,
Who scoping seas, and rocks, and tempests, perish
In the very port, so are we lost in the sight
And reach of all our wishes.
How has our intelligence failed us so strangely?
No, no, I knew they were in mutiny;
But they could ne'er have hurt us,
Had they not come at this instant period,
This point of time: had he lived two days longer,
A pardon to the Captains, and a largess
Among the Soldiers, had appeased their fury:
Had he died two days sooner, the succession
Had as we pleased, been settled, and secured
By Soffy's death: Gods, that the world should turn
On minutes, and on moments.
My Lord, lose not your self
In passion, but take counsel from necessity;
I'll to 'em, and will let them know???
The Prince is dead, and that they come too late
To give him liberty; for love to him
Has bred their discontents: I'll tell them boldly,
That they have lost their hopes.
And tell them too,
As they have lost their hopes of the one, they have lost
Their fears of the other: tell their Leaders we desire
Their counsel in the next succession,
Which if it meet disturbance,
Then we shall crave assistance from their power,
Which Fate could not have sent in a more happy hour.
My Lord,
Ye hear the news, the Princes Army is at the gate.
I, I hear it, and feel it here;
But the succession, that's the point
That first requires your counsel.
Who should succeed, but Soffy?
What, in such times as these, when such an Army
Lies at our gates, to choose a child our King?
You, my Lord Caliph, are better read in story,
And can discourse the fatal consequences
When children reign.
My Lords, if you'll be guided
By reason and example,
My Lords, you come most opportunely, we were entering
Into dispute about the next succession.
Who dares dispute it? we have a powerful argument
Of forty thousand strong, that shall confute him.
A powerful argument indeed.
I, such a one as will puzzle all your Logic
And distinctions to answer it;
And since we came too late for the performance
Of our intended service to the Prince,
The wronged Prince, we cannot more express
Our loyalty to him, than in the right
Of his most hopeful son.
But is he not too young?
Sure you think us so too; but he, and we
Are old enough to look through your disguise,
And under that to see his fathers enemies.
Seize him, and you that could show reason or example.
Seize me! for what?
Can thou remember such a name as Mirza,
And ask for what?
That name I must remember, and with horror;
But few have died for doing,
What they had died for if they had not done:
It was the Kings command, and I was only
Th'unhappie minister.
I, such a minister as wind to fire,
That adds an accidental fierceness to
Its natural fury.
If it were the Kings command, it was first thy malice
Commanded that command, and then obeyed it.
Nay, if you have resolved it, truth and reason
Are weak and idle arguments;
But let me pity the unhappy instruments
Of Princes wills, whose anger is our fate,
And yet their love's more fatal than their hate.
And how well that love hath been requited,
Mirvan your Confident,
By torture has confessed.
The story of the King, and of the Pashas.
Mirvan, poore-spirited wretch, thou hast deceived me;
Nay then farewell my hopes, and next my fears.
What horrid noise was that of drums and
Trumpets, that struck my ear?
What mean these bonds? could not my Grandfires jealousy
Be satisfied upon his son, but now
Must seize his dearest favourite? sure my turn comes next.
It is come already, Sir; but to succeed him, not them:
Long live King Soffy.
But why are these men prisoners?
Let this inform you.
But is my Grandsire dead?
As sure as we are alive.
Then let 'em still be prisoners, away with 'em;
Invite our mother from her sad retirement,
And all that suffer for my fathers love,
Restraint or punishment.
Dear mother, make
Our happiness complete, by breaking through
That cloud of sorrow,
And let us not be wanting to our selves,
Now the heavens have done their part,
Lest so severe and obstinate a sadness
Tempt a new vengeance.
Sir, to comply with you I'll use a violence
Upon my nature; Joy is such a foreigner,
So mere a stranger to my thoughts, I know
Not how to entertain him; but sorrow
Ill made by custom so habitual,
It is now part of my nature.
But can no pleasure, no delight divert it?
Greatness, or power, which women most affect,
If that can doe it, rule me, and rule my Empire.
Sir, seek not to rob me of my tears, Fortune
Her self is not so cruel; for my counsels
Then may be unsuccessful, but my prayers
Shall wait on all your actions.
Alas poor Solyman, how is he altered?
I know not, Sir, it an art your Grandfather had to make
Me grow, I think he took me for some crooked Lady,
I'm sure the engine is better for the purpose, than
Steel bodies, or bolsters.
But for what cause was all this cruelty?
Why, because I would not accuse your father, when he
Saw he could not stretch my conscience, thus he has
Stretched my carcass.
I think they have stretched his wit too.
This is your fathers love that lies thus in my joints,
I might have loved all the pocky whores in Persia, and
Have felt it less in my bones.
Thy faith and honesty shall be rewarded
According to thine own desire.
Friend, I pray thee tell me whereabout my knees are,
I would fine kneel to thank his Majesty:
Why Sir, for the present my desire is only to have
A good Bone-setter, and when your Majesty has done the office
Of a Bone-setter to the Body Politic, and some skilful
Man to this body of mine (which if it had been a Body
Politic, had never come to this) I shall by that
Time think on something according to my deserts:
But must none of these great ones be hanged for
Their villainies?
Yes certainly.
Then I need look no further, some of their places
Will serve my turn.
Bring back those villains.
Now to your tears, dear Madam, and the Ghost
Of my dead father, will I consecrate
The first fruits of my justice: Let such honours
And funeral rites, as to his birth and virtues
Are due, be first performed, then all that were
Actors, or Authors of so black a deed,
Be sacrificed as Victims to his ghost:
First thou, my holy Devil, that could varnish
So foul an act with the fair name of Piety:
Next thou, th'abuser of thy Princes ear.
Sir, I beg your mercy.
And I a speedy death, nor shall my resolution
Disarm it self, nor condescend to parley
With foolish hope.
It were cruelty to spare 'em, I am sorry
I must commence my reign in blood, but duty
And justice to my fathers soul exact
This cruel piety; let's study for a punishment,
A feeling one,
And borrow from our sorrow so much time,
To??????ent a torment equal to their crime.

I Like not this last Proclamation.
Nor I.
It startled me to read it.
Did you read? tic a fault Strozzo a fault!
I'll have no thief hereafter learn to read;
Threaten us with long winded Proclamations?
We are safe within our Woods, and Territories,
And are above his Edicts; Have not wee
A Common-wealth among our selves, ye Tripolites?
A Common-wealth? a Kingdom; and I am
The Prince of Qui-Vala's, your Sovereign thief,
And you are all my Subjects.
We are
And is there one so base to change Complexion,
Because we are proscribed? I'll be no Prince.
I have a grudging on me to be honest,
And leave you to the fear of hemp, and hunger;
Have I by stratagems so oft preserved you,
When you were howling out your lives, and lead
Away in Dog-couples by rusty Officers?
And are you struck dead with a Paper pellet?
Your blood turned Whey, because there is reward
Promised to bring our heads in? I renounce you
Land Rts
Most excellent Frapolo, they recant;
A little humane frailty may be pardoned.
Shall thieves, whose predecessors have been Kings,
And conquered worlds, be factious, and schismatic?
I speak not for my self, but your own sakes,
Whose Impudence, and art in valiant theft,
Hereafter, may advance you to be Princes.
You have confirmed us.
You were best be rogues, and one betray another,
To get the base reward; do, lose your honour,
Live branded and be pointed at in the street,
There goes a Rascal that betrayed his Prince,
Or cut the throat of his Comrade, this will
Show well in the ChroniclesStand fair you varlets,
Because we cannot tell whose heart is treacherous,
I will examine all your Phisnomies,
And in whose face soever I can find
A scandalous line, or look that may beget
Suspicion of a Man that wo'not die
An honourable Rebel, and defy
The Laws, I'll shoot him presently.
Hang Laws,
And those that make 'em, Conscience is a Varlet;
Stand fair and show complexions.
Ye are all valiant, honest thieve lenders,
And I will be your Prince again, and die w'ee,
As boldly, as they dare invent
Hang Cowards.
I will not have you thieves among your selves.
How's that, and please thy Excellence, not thieves?
Not thieves one to another; but Religious
There is a kind of a Religion
We Outlaws must observe.
I never knew
Religion yet, and twill be now unseasonable
o learn.
I'll be of no Religion.
Who was so bold
To say he would have no Religion?
What man is he, hopes to be drunk, to whore,
To scpe the wheels, the Galleys, and the gallows
And be of no Religion?
He says right.
Ye shall be of what Religion I please.
Tic fit we should, Frapolo is our Monarch.
And yet I must consider of some fit one
That shall become our trade
And constitutions; hum! Silence.
Nay, nay Prince, take time to think on it,
Ther's no hast.
I have thought,
And you shall be no Pagans, Jaws, nor Christians.
What then?
But every man shall be of all Religions.
I like that well.
Why should I clog your Conscience or confine it?
Do but obey your Prince, and I pronounce
You shall live Grandees, till the State Fangs catch you
And when you come unto the Wheel, or Gibbet,
Bid figo for the World, and go out Martyrs.
A Prince, a Prince!
Provided, that no thief
Makes a Confession at his Death, or peach
His Tribe, or make a show of penitence,
To make the Butter-women melt, and draw
Compassion from the toothless musty rabble;
This will exclude the benefit of that Canon
Declares you Martyrs for the Cause.
Scout and discover.
Tic a howling voice.
What Cry was that?
Of one, whose pocket has given up the Ghost,
And with the fear his body should do so,
He howls O'this fashion.
Bring him to our presence.
Gentlemen, tic very cold, I beseech you
Do not strip my Skin off, you are not sure
I shall go to a fire when I go out of
This World; and yet as I am I confess
I shall yield very little burned.
Knock out his brains.
Pistol him.
Cuts throat.
Gentlemen, hear meI am very sorry,
I had no greater sumbut if you please
To reprieve a poor wretch, I may do you service,
And if you knew my inclination,
You would not be too Cruel.
To what are you inclined Sir?
I have been commended for a Dexterity
At your felonious trade; for Gentlemen,
I have been a Pickpocket of a child, and have
These many years been thought a pretty house-theef
Mary I have not yet breeding abroad
With such deserving men, but I shall be
Most glad to learn, and if you please to accept
Me to your tribe, I have Intelligence
Where money lies hid, and very few Spirits
To guard it.
Be confident, and be covered.
Let him be one of us.
Be brief, where is this treasure?
I have an old Father, and Mother, Gentlemen,
Please you bestow a visit upon them;
They have some Goldfinches, having new sold
A piece of Land, was given 'em by the rich
Vincenzo, Father to the famous, proud
Pauline, now his heir.
The glorious Daughter
Of old Vincenz? she's a Semiramis.
The very same; if you would visit her,
I am acquainted with the house.
We'll take a time to think on her; to th'point,
What ready money has your Father Sir?
Tic but two days ago since he received
Six hundred Pistolets, I can direct
To a Cedar Chest, where the fine sum lies dormant.
What Servants has your Father?
Alas none, they are miserable Hinds,
And make me all the drudge, you need not fear
The Court-du-Guard; if you please let me go
An honest thieves part, and furnish me
Wih a Devils complexion, to hide my own,
I will conduct you.
A very honest fellow!
I do not love to be ungrateful where
I'm kindly used, my heart is honest.
Is he thy own Father?
My own Father and Mother Sir, the cause
Would not be so natural else, and meritorious.
A precious rogue, fit him instantly
With a disguise, and let him have that face
The Devil wore in the last anti-masque.
It cannot be too ugly Sir to fright 'em.
But if he fail in any Circumstance
It is not far off, I know the nearest way.
Or give the least suspicion to betray you,
Be sure you cut his throat.
We shall.
I thank You Sir, do ye think I'll be a Traitor?
Come first along with us.
You heard this fellow name the proud Pauline,
Her Chests are worth the rifling.
The Castle is impregnable she lives in.
Was that spoke like an understanding thief,
A true Bandit? How I do blush for thee?
Was not the Orchard of Hesperides
Watched by a fierce, and flaming Dragon, robbed?
Shall wee despair to reach her golden Apples?
We'll make discovery of the place, and persons,
Put it to Fate, let Stars do what they please;
Mercury is a Stronger thief than Hercules.
What a brave time have we had, since our
Old Master died?
Though he were a gallant man, his Daughter
Makes his Memory burn dim, and (compared
To her) he lived but like a Hermit in a Cell,
She is all Magnificent, a ,
Every hair of her head worth stellyfying.
But my Lady, for so we must call her,
May be of kin to Lucifer for pride;
How many brave Gentlemen hath she despised,
When once their blister of Love broke out,
And they made offer of Marriage?
Here is her Sister Angellina a virgin
Of another constitution, their two natures
As different are, as the two Poles, our Mistress
Cannot be so Tyrannically proud
As she is sweet, and humble.
That's the reason her Father left her only
As much as would commend her to a Nunnery.
Her Uncle dotes upon her.
He does love her.
Tic an old blunt brave fellow; but he has
Quite lost our gallant Ladies good opinion,
He is out of grace.
Because he would correct her insolence,
Who obliged by her father to the care of
Her governor, wo'not tie up his Counsel,
Which he enforces sometimes so passionately,
It is a sport to hear her contempt of his gravity.
He has met my Lady, I see a quarrel
In their looks already, let us withdraw
Behind that Lobby, we may hear, and
Laugh securely.
How long have you been speechless? am
Not I your Uncle? why do you look so scurvily?
I do not think you are a Princess yet,
And therefore take the boldness to salute you,
Without the Ceremony of Petitioners
That haunt your Ladyships charity; or if
You thought me despicable, your Sister has
Deserved your smile.
It may be so
Buffoons,
That make an Idol of you, and can pawn
Their Souls to flatter you, should be entertained,
And Courted to your vanity. I blush for you;
Will nothing bring you into sense of Honour
Or Modesty? I ha done.
It will become you;
You do presume too much.
Presume? why, are
Not you Pauline am not I Antonio
Your Uncle? speak.
I do remember Sir,
I called you so, while you preserved your wits,
And may acknowledge you again, upon
Sober Conditions, and your Senses perfect.
Sober Conditions? am I Drunk, Gypsy?
What flesh is able to forbear. Dost hear?
Thou hast drunk a Devil.
I did not see him in my Cup.
And he has swelled thee to this monstrous pride,
More than thy Sex beside; if thou goosed on
At this rate, thou wilt make Lucifer an Ape,
He must be thy Disciple.
The Old thing raves:
Thing? what thing? thank heaven thou
Art a woman; I would beat thee into a Poltise
When did thou say thy prayers?
You know I keep a Chaplain.
Thy Soul wants desperate lancing;
Ther's an eternal Ulcer in thy heart,
Te Witches cannot suck it dry, there is
A bath of Poison in thee.
I shall pity him;
A Posit, and to bed with him, his head
Does want the benefit of sleep; how wild
The good man looks?
Thou art
The Mistress of this Castle as I take it,
Without your Legacy.
I could rail upon the dead for it; dost thou not fear
Thy Fathers ghost should haunt thee?
I never think upon him, and it was
His providence to leave me an estate,
To keep me from those Melancholy fancies,
And I will have you my caprichious Uncle
Know, in the Circle of these my Dominions,
I will have no Competitor.
Dominions?
Was ever such an insolence? are not you
Some Queen concealed?
I am Independent, and sole regent here.
So so,
Whore's your Nobility? they are to blame
Not to attend
Who waits?
But they do want white Staves, this is
Not State enough.
It shall be mended, let them be remembered.
She's in earnestand
If I were worthy to advise you Madam,
Your grace should be a little more reserved,
And entertain none that did treat of Marriage
To your private conference, until they had
In public received audience like Ambassadors.
I like the Counsel well, it shall be so,
The next that comes shall find it my good Uncle.
She's incorrigible.
What if you commanded those that do attend
Your person to observe you on their knees
Sometimes, they must be humble to your highness;
I can forget my gray hairs, name, and blood,
And teach your Servants duty.
The example
Will edify the household, and you may,
By fair degrees rise to our Princely favour.
Madam, the Lord Contarini is arrived
The Castle.
He comes a wooing to me, let it be
Your Office reverend Uncle to acquaint him,
Our pleasure is to give him Audience
To Morrow in full State, until when Uncle,
Make it your care, his entertainment be
Such as becomes the greatness of his blood,
And one, on whom the Prince, we know, bestows
His special grace.
Do ye hare sweet Niece? be not you transported;
This is no dream, the man is no mock-lord.
I'll be a Princess here, as you directed,
If he can humble himself to Ceremony,
Promise him honourable access, and freedom,
If the Conditions please him not, he may
Return, and leave our Court.
Is this in Nature? well I'll follow her,
And if she be not past al shame, and senses,
I will humble or confound her.
AH sweet Gentlemen, we are very poor,
And have a great Charge.
We do come to ease you of your charge.
Pity my age.
You must then pity our youth.
Here, share and share like.
Alas we are undone.
What shall we do with them?
If you have bound her hands and feet, you
May try whether she be a Witch or no, there's
A Pond in the backside, if she swim, so
For him?
Have some compassion, tic our whole estate.
You have a Son, a pious child we hear.
He will not let you want.
Alas poor boy, he little thinks what we
With care and providence laid up for him
Should thus be lost. O pity Gentlemen.
BohLets away.
I begin to find a kind of a compunction,
Let us be charitable thieves for once
And return half,
What say you?
Not a gazette, you're not such foolish thieves;
Part with present money? part with my life first.
Not to your Parents?
We use them well, because we do not carry
Their Cowes away; there they have Cheese, and Butter,
Bread comes by nature, and they both can glean,
There's water in the Well too; not a penny
If you will be so charitable, defalk
From your own shares, mine is a just thieves part;
I look for thanks, distribute your own alms;
These things must be employed to better uses.
Is a Father, and Mother considerable
To ready money; oh! fieboh!
Then we must over-rule you.
Ah what do you mean?
Bale and betray your self at your own peril.
We will be bold with your thieves part
Come nearerLook you good Woman,
You shall not lose your thirds, say you have met
With honest thieves; this shall suffice at present,
Which we but borrow neither, that you may not
Suspect our payment, you shall have security,
This honest man bound for it, and so we leave you.
Tic money.
And left one of their fellows bound.
Do we not dream Wife? I dare not come near
Him.
They are gone, I'll see his complexion;
Who's this?
Our own Son Piperollo?
Pray Father give me your blessing, ah
Mother do not stone me to death with that
Money bag, I am your Son.
My Son?  know thee not.
A liar, you know Mother, is worse than a
Thief; do not destroy the hopes of your Family,
Alas, I was drawn in, and made a thief
In my own defence, they swore to cut my throat
Else, do you think I had so little grace
Did they so? I'll try what I can do.
Oh my quibibles! sweet Mother remember
You were a woman in your days, that knew
What's what, and the true difference of things.
I am a man yet, your forgiveness may
Make me a true man. Libbing, and hanging
Are no helps to posterity, I am your own
Sweet flesh and bloodOh.
Kick him out of doors.
I thank you, this Correction may do me good;
Gently, ah gently; shall I not ask you blessing,
A twelve-month hence?
Both Never.
I wo'not.
My Mother has a deadly life with her leg.
Boh, you tadpole.
I shall do no good o'this trade.
Now to my wits, this is no world to starve in.
This is very fine; do not these Staves become us?
But will my Lady be thus mad, and give
The Lord Cntarini Audience in such State?
She takes upon her like a very Princess.
But is it not strange her Uncle should thus humour her?
He gave her the first hint, which she pursues
To his vexation.
But will my Lord stoop to this mockery?
He is prepared by her Uncle; 'twil be sport,
If she but carry it with pride enough.
Let her alone.
And if my Lord wants confidence
I think her impudence will make him blush,
And put him out; I have seen a Counterfeit
With such a Majesty compose himself,
He thought himself a Prince, could frown as scornfully,
And give his hand out to great Lords to kiss,
With as much grace, as all the Royal blood
Had mustard in his veins.
Some Monarch
Of Innes a Court in England sure; but when
His reign expires, and Christmas in the grave
Cold as the Turkeys coffind up in crust,
That walk like Ghosts, and glide to several Tables,
When Instruments are hoarse with sitting up,
When the gay triumph ceases, and the treasure
Divided, all the Offices laid up,
And the new clothes in Lave der, what then?
Why then the man that kissed his highness hand
O'er night, may justly him for the wall next morning,
And have it too; if he come off with all
His wits the Play is paid for, and he fit
For travel.
My Ladies Uncle, and the Lord Contarini.
My Lord Contarini expects when he
May have the happiness to present his service
To your great Lady.
We shall Sir acquaint her.
Your Office Sir?
Her Steward.
Yours I pray?
Mine, Treasurer.
Mine, Controller.
I kiss your hands; this may be worth my Lords
Curiosity.
For the mirths sake, my Lord be pleased, you may
Do an act of Charity and restore her Senses;
I'll wait on you again.
Now Vergerio?
The expectation is increased, her Officers
Observe the State; were your affections earnest
And I my Lord your Mistress, I should trust
Her pride.
Unless she ravish me.
She's upon entrance, her madness holds,
Your confidence may convert her, shees my Niece
And I am sorry for it.
Give him access.
What Ladies that stands on her right hand?
Her younger Sister, that does vex me as much
With her humility, as the other with
Her impudence.
An excellent piece, Vergerio.
Which my Lord?
Madam, the glory of your time and Nation,
Whose looks do shine with Majesty, and shoot
A flame to undo the admirer, O call in
Some beams that wait upon the thrones of light,
Or I shall fall your sacrifice, and not finish
What my great Master gave me in charge.
Has the Prince a mind to her himself.
Tic not impossible.
Speak on my Lord.
Gypsy, she does believe the lightning of her eyes
Will blast indeed, how scornfully she squinnies?
I come from the great Sovereign of hearts,
Whose glorious monarchy uncircumscrib'd,
Extends to all the habitable world,
Where ever land or loverstretched his arm,
Whose Scepter's not like that of common Kings,
But a bright golden shaft feathered with sighs,
And headed with a flame, which finds access,
Like subtle lightning to the most secure,
And stubborn Cell that ever yet enclosed
A humane thought
He flies high.
Tic his arrow
Speak this great name.
The most immortal Prince of Love
A high and mighty Prince indeed.
Tic not our Prince of Parma then?
Unto your beauty Madam, that makes sweet
The breath of Fame, in his name I am sent
To offer up a Servant, rich with wonder,
And humble thoughts that honour you; who can
See those perfections and not adore
The Divine Owner? Brightness that offends
The innocent eye that gazes, is in you
The cure of blindness, and the films that hang
Upon the humble sight, fall off and vanish,
That it may take new life and light from you.
Is she not yet ridiculous to her self?
I can leave Cupids Court to live with you,
And all those bowers, where an eternal spring
Makes every flower in love with it's own beauty.
The wind whose airy wings convey all sweetness
That sense can entertain, I would exchange
But to be near your breath; and think there dwells
A harmony in your voice, above the airs
Of all those charming Birds by love selected
From every wood to be his quire. I fear
I am too bold, and may be thought to wander;
If Madam you accept my amorous vows,
Which live yet in the weak expression
Of him that honours you, time will produce
A white and fortunate hour to crown our loves
With nuptial happiness.
You have relation
To the Court of Parma, your name Lord
Contarini, you have no Message from you Master?
Madam your fame hath filled his Court, and he
Presents by me his Princely wishes of
Your happiness, and should he see your person,
Like mine, his heart I fear would melt into
A stream of Love and Admiration.
Sir, we accept in good part greeting from
The Prince, but you have no commission
To treat for him; the substance of your own
Affair will ask our pause, we will take time
To answer, which till you receive, you may
Command our Court.
Proud folly!
Prodigious impudence!
What think you Signior?
I am confounded, I'll to her again.
When shall I awake?
This sure is but a dream, the Gentleman
Cannot so much mistake his time and Language.
I came with Curiosity to see
Her pride so talked of, but my heart I feel
Is taken with an object of true sweetness.
Is it not a lovely figure? say Vergerio.
If but her mind answer that fair proportion,
My Lord she is worth love, but being Sister
To a woman of such pride
I prithee leave me.
She is very beautiful; my Lord is taken.
Lady, but that ther's story for your births,
I should make judgment by your modest face,
This arrogant woman could not be your Sister.
Sir, if your expectation be not answered
With her full worth, I shall beseech you name her
With less disgrace, (our blood so near) it cannot
Be grateful to my ear, to hear her blemishes.
I was prepared before to meet this goodness;
These words and looks become that innocent spring
From whence they flow, virtue hath such an army
About your heart, ther's nothing can approach
Ill to betray it, or proceed from you
But warranted by honour.
I know not,
But sure my Lord, you talk too fine a language
For me to understand; we are far from Court,
Where though you may speak Truth, you cloth it with
Such trim and gay apparel, we that only
Know her in plainness, and simplicity,
Cannot tell how to trust our ears, or know,
When men dissemble.
By your own love
To truth, you must believe me, when I say,
Although it took beginning from this visit,
I love no beauty but your self.
You said you loved my Sister, and expressed
Your passion in such mighty phrase and fancy
I thought your soul had made a business on it,
Pardon the weakness of my faith if I
Dare not believe this change.
Your Sister, Lady,
I came to visit, not affect, I heard,
And had a purpose but to try how near
The wonder of her pride (pardon sweet Virgin)
Came to a truth, nor did I Court her with
The language of a meaning lover; but
Prepared by your Uncle, meant to make her see
Her miserable folly; I dare not
Present such Mockeries to you; suspect not
This hasty address; by your fair self, I love you.
My Lord, If I believed this, real Courtship,
I should not entertain your honour with a
A fruitless Expectation, but declare,
Besides my want of fortune, beauty, birth,
To make me worth your love, I am already
Contracted by my Father to Religion,
Whose will I cheerfully obey, and wait
When my good Uncle will dispose me to
A Nunnery.
A Nunnery?
Where for
So great an honour you pretend to me
A most unworthy maid, I'll offer up
My prayers, that you may choose a heart more equal
To your own love, and greatness.
Nay you must
Not leave me so, we are interrupted, you
May trust me fair one with a nearer Conference,
Alas poor old man.
The Old man before your borrowed Ladyship
Is bold to keep his head warm, and to tell you
You are a Puppet, take that to your titles
Of honour.
So Sir, none restrain his insolence?
I'll make him swallow down his staff of Office
That stirs. I haven't done. Can be so impudent
To think his Lordship does not laugh at thee?
Your eyes the thrones of light? a brace of Lanterns,
In which two snufs of Candle close to th'socket,
Appear like fire-drakes, and will serve to light
A traveller into a Ditch. You Madam Majesty,
And the glory of a Nation?
Tho'art a disease to Honour, Modesty,
A Fever in thy Fathers blood, a Gangrene
Upon his name, a Pox upon thee for it;
Ther's one disease more, yet I have not done.
My Charity may invite, if these fits hold,
Some close provision for you among mad men;
I do command you leave my house.
I wo'not,
I'll fire the house; dost hear? thou wo't burn well,
You have Oil enough about thy face, and all
Thy body Pitch, very combustible.
But I'll not be damned for thee, now I think on it,
And since no Counsel will prevail, I'll save
My self. Before I go, give but a reason
Why thou dost slight this gallant Lord, and squint
As if he were Groom or Foot man.
I'll tell you,
You would have the truth.
If thou can speak any.
I do esteem my self
More equal for his Master.
Who, the Prince?
No, the blind Prince of Love, you are wise Uncle,
But I am out of Poetry.
I think I were best cut off thy head, and save
The Laws a labourTher's no talking to her.
I am of your mind Uncle, you may edify
Your charge, my younger Sister, she's not proud,
Pray take her w'ee, she'll become the Cloister;
Go, and be mortified together, take her,
I am weary of her.
And I of thee;
She shall be further off too, thou'lt infect her,
Although her foolish Father, (yet he was
My Brother) I have not power to speak
Well of the dead, gave thee his whole Estate,
I have a fortune, dost thou hear? I have,
And to vex thee, thy Sister shall have that,
I'll see, and I can make her proud, I'll do it;
She shall have Servants, Suitors, Fiddlers, Flatterers,
Fine Clothes, and all the food that can provoke
Yo glorify her sense; I have bags to spare,
She shall not to a Nunnery to vex thee,
I say again she shall not, we'll have humours;
The to'ther Pox upon thee, and farewell.
I fear he's mad indeed. Let me have Music,
This talk has made me Melancholy.
FOr thy Mothers sake thou shalt be entertained.
An under Butler would fit me rarely,
Ther's none in the house that shall be sooner drunk,
Nor oftner for my Ladies credit Sir.
Can you write?
And read in print Sir.
Art thou faithful? may a man trust thee?
For more than I'll speak on; trusted? I was bound
For two Gentlemen lately, that could not take up
Five hundred Pistols upon other security,
My Father and Mother knows it; I shall never
Endure a thief for a thing that I know, alas
You know I am a neighbours child, my mother
Was your good Ladies nurse.
Do not I know thy Mother?
Better it may be, than I know my Father.
Till some Office fall in the house, you shall serve me,
And ride with me, to receive my Ladies Rents.
Mr. Steward, yonder are the rarest fellows,
In such fantastical habits too, they call
Themselves Mathematicians.
What do they come for?
To offer their service to my Lady, and tell fortunes.
Have they no chief?
Yes a quaint philosophical fellow, they call
Him a Caldean, a great Scholar, they do
Not come for money like your starched faced
Egyptians, but carry things for the credit of
The Mathematiques honourably; my Lady hath
Given the Caldean her Nativity, who is to consult
With the Ephemerids, and give account how
The Stars will dispose of her.
We shall know all our fortunes then.
The worst of his train can decipher hands,
Tell foreheads.
And Noses.
One at the first sight did but whisper to my
Ladies Gentlewoman, and she did so blush
Through her Tiffany.
That's no great matter, I have seen one blush
Through a Plaster of Paris.
How's that?
A kind of French painting Sir.
Well said Piperll;
I have entertained him; but my Lady.
The Caldean
Pleases me, I long to hear my fortune,
If it be good he shall have a reward
To cherish his great Art, and worth my bounty;
What if my Stars should frown?
Did bid 'em follow?
They are all ready Madam.
Musical knaves.
Beauty and the various grace,
That adorn the sweetest faces,
Here take their glorious throne; may he
That is the God of Archery,
Never aim one angry Dart,
But soft, and gentle as your heart,
Court it with flame, and rich perfume,
To light, and sweeten, not consume.
Not the Caldean come yet? my thoughts are
Inflamed with fierce desire to know my Destiny;
You have skill Gentlemen; but I'll expect
The judgment of your Master on my Fate;
When the great man of art returns acquaint me.
Come my friends, lets lose no time; Sir.
I am for you to the extent of my Art Seignior.
If it please you, let me peruse your hand.
It is at your service.
Please you to examine my Palm; can you
Tell me learned Sir, what is past?
You know that already.
Twill be a satisfaction to me, if you can
Make it appear, that you know something
In that point.
A Fracture in the Mercurial line, and the
Mount of Saturn ill characted! you are
Near a misfortune Sir.
Iupiters Mount is well formed and coloured
A Cross conspicuous, the Suns Mount well
Figured, and linca solis, without any intersection,
Your Judgment upon that Sir?
More Antics yet? What Nation have we here,
Fortune flingers!
You shall know yours immediately.
Her house is open for these Mountebanks,
Cheaters, and Tumblers, that can foist and flatter
My Lady Gugaw; Every office open,
When Poor men that have worth and want an Alms,
May perish ere they pass the Porters lodge;
What are you Sir?
One of the Mathematicians noble Signior.
Mathematicians? Mongrel,
How durst thou take that learned name upon thee?
You are one of those knaves that stroul the Country,
And live by picking worms out of fools fingers.
And something out of your trunks, my reverend
Busy the raskals are, how the rogues stink?
I'll send your Regiment a Quarter-master.
Now to my other gamester.
You have been
What Sir?
In your eara thief.
He has a Devil; good Sir not too loud.
And you shall be
Hanged I warrant you.
Let me see tother hand.
Shall it scope with burning?
You shall be a Lord.
A Lord.
Hum, yes, a Lord infallibly.
You shall be a Knight Sir.
Of the thieves Order, and wear my rich
Collar of hemp; is it not so?
An honourable Knight, upon my word.
A LordPray give your opinion.
Your handyou shall be a right worshipful
One of your tribe told me I should be a Lord.
And shall be used accordingly, Lords are transitorye.
Let me see tother hand. I marry Sir, this line
Clears the doubt, and marks you right
Honourable, which makes up the tother half
Of your fortune Signior, these two parallel lines
From the dexter angle to be the Mount of Sol,
Has made all plain, you must be a Lord.
He has given you a very good reason Sir,
A man can have but half his fortune in one
Hand, and two right worshipfulls makes up
One right honourable; these are rare fellows,
I am predestinate to be a Knight,
The Stars may do their pleasure, I obey.
This should be the Caldean.
I have narrowly observed the Castle, and
Where the treasure lies, I know my Lady
In honour will entertain us this night, and
When they are asleep we'll take our opportunity
To rifle her Exchequer, boys, mean time
Let me alone to humour her proud Nature;
I will so claw her ambition.
In the interim, I'll put a question to
His Astrology. Sir, If you please till my Lady
Return to satisfy her Seward, and oblige him
By your Art, one of your under Mathematics
Has given me a Comfortable Destiny.
Your hand. When were you born?
I know not Sir. Ran. A Lord[R. whispers
No Matter, Venus in the Ascendant with
Sol, being Lady of your seventh; hum, hum,
With Iupiter, designs you to be a Lord.
They all agree; the miracle of learning!
One question more I beseeth you Sir, I
Am to ride with my Man to receive my Ladies
Rent to morrow through the Forest
Go to.
Now I desire to know, whether we shall be
Robed in our return or no?
What time do you think precisely to come
Back Sir, for we should know the very minute.
The Money is ready Sir, and we do purpose,
In your ear
Yes, you shall be robed, ther's nothing in
Nature to prevent it.
Will they kill us, and please you?
No, they shall not kill you, they shall only
Take your money, and break your pate, that
Will be all.
Why let 'em rob us Sir, the loss of our Money
Will be an evidence of our preferment, and you
May have more assurance to be a Lord, and
I of my KnighthoodMy Lady Sir.
Madam, the Stars shine with their full beams
Upon you, Who by me their interpreter, salute
You with a glorious fortune: For Leo's Lord of your
Horoscope in the right angle of heaven, and a royal
Fixed Sar called Regulus, or the Lions hart, culminating
With him, and a natural reception between Mars,
And Sol Lord of the tenth, being in the first with
Mercury and Venus in the house of honour, besides
A Conjunction of Iupiter and Luna in Pisces, in
The house of Marriage, I must give Judgment.
I shall beseech your clearer language.
You shall be Married to a Prince, it is inevitable.
A Prince?
May not I come to be a Lord then?
And I a Knight?
When shall I see him?
He shall within few days visit your Castle,
Drawn hither with the fame of your person,
And bravery. I need not instruct you to entertain
Him with State and Ceremony becoming his
Excellence, but if he Court you not into his arms,
I will renounce the Stars, and say there is no
Truth in Astrology.
How my thoughts swell already.
She has swallowe'd it.
Give him five hundred Pistolets.
Do not wrong so much
One that does honour you; as I bribe not
The Stars to tell me their Decrees, I dare not
For money sell their Secrets, and if any
That have relation to me presume
To take a Iulio
By no means Madam
I like it that no Mercenary ends
Guide 'em to flatter me.
Is not that a March?
If it entrench not too far upon your art,
This Prince, Sir, has a Name.
And rules this Province,
Fernese is a Bachelor.
The Prince of Parma?
My blood refines in every vein already,
Dull heavy Souls that are content to drudge
In humble thoughts.
I Fear we are betrayed;
The Countries up and marching to the Castle,
We may be all surprised let us to, horse
Deny not, Sir, this night an entertainment,
Such as my Castle yields, it sha'not spread
To receive guests more welcome.
A Drum Madam.
Must we not stay and rob the house to night?
Madam, my art foretells I cannot be
Safe to remain here, at my return
I wo'not balk your Castle, in the mean time
Cherish high thoughts, your Stars do call you Princess,
So kissing your fair hand
Make me not so unhappy.
There is no dispute with Destiny,
I take my humble leave, away to horse.
This more amazes me, what danger should
Provoke this hast, if it prove their concernment,
I must believe they do converse with Fate,
And trust to them as Oracles; a Princess?
Was not my Soul Prophetical?
Madam, some accident hath raised your tenants,
They march in fury this way, in strange postures
And Arms, as if they came to storm the Castle.
Madam, we are all undone, the Clubs are up,
Your Tenants are turned Rebels, and by this time
Entered the Hall; and threaten to surprise
I know not whom; But the Caldea, and
His troop are vanished, they foresaw this tempest.
What should this mean?
I Come on you men of lusty Chine, Dear Lady
Be not affrighted, Captain of thy Guard
Am I, thy natural Tenant, and thy Vassal;
Where be these Sunburned Aethiopians?
I wo'not leave one Canting Rogue alive.
What Aethiopians, what Canting Rogues?
Do not your Clounships know me?
I Know our Princess?
We honour thee, and rise in thy defence;
Where be these thieves? we heard there were
A Regiment, that came to Cheat and Plunder.
You're a Knot
Of knaves and fools, and shall repent this insolence;
You that command in chief, good Captain Bombard,
May teach your Raggamuffins face about,
Was it your stratagem to fright my guests?
I Your Uncle told us Madam, and commanded.
Was it his plot? he's still my enemy.
I Pardon us Madam,
We came simply hither to do you service;
Kneel, or we shall all be stripped out of our Tenements.
My Uncle has abused you,
But this submission takes our anger off,
Continue dutiful to my Commands,
And you shall be remembered; Piperollo
I know the Buttery Madam; follow me,
It is my Ladies pleasure you be drunk,
And thank her grace ye keep your Copiholds;
Dee you bring up the rear, I'll march in front.
Passion O'me, it is to great an honour,
Refuse a man of your high blood and name,
That Courts her honourably? I could beat her.
It is not impossible at my return
To find a change. I must to Court again.
The horses my Lord are ready.
Vergerio
What a Baggage it is, shees all for the Nunnery,
She sha'not have her will, I'll undo my self
But I'll destroy this Modesty; if I could
But make her proud there were some hope on her.
My Lord you may command, but how unfit,
I am to manage this affair.
Thou hast a powerful Language, it prevailed
On me when I first saw thee, since which time
I have not deserved unkindly from thee, and
This trust speaks more than Common favour.
Make me his advocate to Angellina?
My Lord, if you can still preserve these thoughts
Of honour to us, leave her to my Counsel.
Most cheerfully, I am not desperate;
This Gentleman I'll leave to wait upon her,
Who is privy to my Counsels, and affection.
Your Lordship hath found trust in him, but that
Sha'not excuse my care, to make her know
Her happiness, and the Honour of our Family,
By meeting your commands. She's here.
Francescina tell me, what hope of your Mistress?
How does thy Counsel work? does she pray less
Then she was wont? or listen now and then
When thou talk wantonly, does she smile upon it?
Between our selves, I put her to a smiling
Blush.
What said she, tell me on thy modesty,
When she found her dear delight, the legend
Of the Saints removed, and Ovids tales of
Iupiter put in the place?
She said, that Iupiter
Was a most sensual Heretic, and the cactus
That Venus wore was not St. Francis girdle.
How did she like the picture of Lender,
Swimming the Hellspont upon his back?
How that of Cleopatra kissing Antony?
She Says that Queen was none of the poor Clares,
But one bread up in black Egyptian Darkness;
All I can say, she is not desperate,
I sing no Anthems to her.
What says she to her dancing Master?
She is past her honour; that's a precious fellow,
She'll laugh to see him gambol with his limbs,
His head flies like a Ball about the room;
You'd think he were at Tennis with it.
Though in the guilt and knowledge of my own
Defects, to answer such an honourable
Esteem of me, I dare not yet presume
To meet it; I shall want no pious thoughts
For this so great a bounty to a poor
Desertlesse Virgin.
Hang your pious thoughts
And love my Lord.
Not for the wealth of Parma
Should my Cause force one cloud upon her face
Or put her eyes to the expense of tears,
It shall be argument for me to hope,
If she accept this youth to wait upon her,
Who may in some auspicious hour, prepare me
A gentle seat within her heart, mean time
I leave upon your Virgin lip the faith,
Of your true Servant Lady.
I'll attend you
To horse my Lord.
Poor miserable maid,
Fallen now beneath the pity of thy self;
My heart, on which so late a flame of Heaven
Streamed comfort in my holy resolutions,
Is filed with love, but not of Contarini,
Whose passion may deserve another welcome,
I prithee Francescina take thy Lute
And let me hear thy voice.
I can sing Venus and Atones to you.
Any thing.
Or will you hear the pleasant Ditty
How fair Calisto first became a Nun.
I prithee do not name a Nun, the flame
That I feel here deserves no Vestal name.
I'll do my best to fit you,
Ther's no such tool in nature as a Chambermaid
To work upon her Mistress.
IT was a fatal business to lose such
An opportunity.
My Lady was wound up so rarely.
We were betrayed for certain; it was high
Time to scud, and get into our Territories;
Now we are safe in our Grots, secure as
The Minotaur, and keep the clew of our
Own Labyrinths.
We lost a rare design, but in my opinion,
Tic better scouting here with our heads on,
Than have 'em carried in by Clowns at the Court rate.
The ignorant Rogues would ne'er ha 'sold
Them to their worth.
And they dare as soon venture upon Hell,
As Shoot their heads into this Furnace.
But this Claridiana sha'not scope so,
I am resolved to visit her again, and I am
Glad I prepared another expectation, these
Difficulties shall make our next attempt
More glorious.
Those shapes will conjure up the Bores again.
She does expect the Caldean.
Hang the Caldean. I have a new device
Shall scour the Castle; and make Dame
Guinever with all her pride, thank and adore
The invention.
How dear Frapolo? how?
Scout and discover, Strozzo.
I see but two men coming down the Hill.
Cannot their worships travel with less noise?
They durst not be so confident without a number,
It is good to be secure, the noise approaches,
Lets to our shells.
Do you lie perdue still.
I do not like their confidence, these may be
The enemies scouts, lets non engage to soon
For fear of a reserve. The State has threatened
To send their Vermin forth.
Obscure: close, close.
What dost thou mean?
Thou hast a mind to be robed indeed.
I would have art maintained in reputation,
You know my Lady is to be a Princels,
And you must be a Lord, and I be dubbed,
But if we be not robed, I know not how
To trust the Mathematics or the Stars;
I am afraid all the Bandits are hanged,
A thousand Pistols should not fear to travel.
It is not wisdom to proclaim our charge,
Though I could be content to be a Lord,
I am not over hearty, thieves are thieves,
And life is precious, prithee lets make hast.
Illo ho ho,
Think upon your honour, are there no Gentlemen?
No wanting Gentlemen that know how to spend
A quantity of Gold?
There is no thief in Nature.
The Gentleman
Is very merry, they that mean well, and
Have their wits about 'em, do not use
To call upon our Tribe. This is a plot,
A very plot, and yet the Coast is leer,
Now I may reach their voice.
It wo' not be, was ever men distressed so?
Come we are well yet Piperollo, if
The Stars Decree our robbery, it will follow.
I pray Sir lets sit down here, as you hope to
Be a Lord, we must do our endeavour and help
The Fates. Do but hear reason Sir.
It is my proud Madams Steward, and our quondam
Fellow thief; they were told their fortunes
To be robed; Here had been a purchase lost
If I had not lain perdue. You shall be
Disparcht presently, never fear it.
What's that? I do not like that tune.
Hum, I am not in love with that Quailpipe.
I could dwindle, but that I have a strong
Faith in the Mathematics Thieves and be
Thy Will.
If they should cut our throats nowthis is
Your folly; would I were off.
Would I were a Knight in an embroidered
Dish clout. Have a good heart Sir, ther's
No more to be said in it, let the Stars take
Their course, it is my Ladies moneyand if
We be robed, we are so much the nearer to preferment.
Ah sweet Gentlemen take but the Money
It is ready told; nay, nay, we are friends;
Give us but a Note under your hands for
My Ladies satisfaction, that you have received
It Gentlemen.
You need not trouble your selves to tell it Gemen,
It is all right.
So, so, we'll take your words.
I should know that vizard, the garments
That you wear too I have seen Old acquaintance?
Does he know you? cut his throat.
No Sir, I do not know him, nor any man, nor
My self, I was not once robed before, neither
Did I help any man to rob my own Father and Mother;
I knew no Cedar chest I, I disclaim it, nor
Was any man that I know left bound for the
Money; ye are all honest Gentlemen,
And I congratulate our good fortune, that you
Came so luckily in the very nick, we had carried
Home the money else in good sadnessSir,
We are made for everrare Mathematicians!
What's that you talk sir of Mathematicians?
It pleased some of the learned tribe to visit
My Lady not long since, but they are well I
Hope, they told us we should be robed, and
It is done; blessed Caldean!
What became on 'em?
They escaped a scouring, for my Ladies Cynical
Uncle, in mere malice to learning, rai 'd
The Towns upon 'em, persuading the hobbinolls
They came to rob the house; but honoured
Be the Stars, they brought 'em off at the
Back gate.
They seem honest fellows, let 'em live, and
Pass.
We humbly thank you Gentlemen, come
Piperollo.
And yet, now I remember, there wants a
Circumstance, my pate is not broke yet,
That was a Clause, the Caldean was a little
Out.
I had forgot, will you be prating sir?
Now tic done, I thank you, dear Gentlemen,
I thank you go forth and be a Knight;
Mathematician I adore thee, it bleeds;
Where are you Sir? all is complete, and my
Head is broke according to prophecy. Oh
Admirable Caldean!
We have not lost all my Ladies money, but
To your plot Frapolo.
This hath repent it, and I appear a
Blazing Star already.
What's the mystery?
You know I am your Prince.
It is Acknowledged.
We will in State visit the proud Pauline,
I am the Prince Farness, and you
Are all my Lords and privy Counsellors
Bear up for honour of your Prince.
I apprehend it, it is a most rare design,
She will be mad to meet it.
Will you marry her?
I cannot tell, there may be a necessity,
But when I have the wench, her Plate and Jewels,
And other sums, I have cast already whither
We must transport our selveswe'll divide all.
And the wench too?
No not the wench, until I cast the Concubine;
Remember who I am, the choice of flesh
Is my prerogative; no murmuring,
You shall provide our Robes.
Now we are rogues to purpose.
I am your Prince, and the worst thief
A States-man.
Where is Vergerio?
I know not Madam.
Madam? I prithee leave that folly,
I am no Lady, call me Angellina.
I'll call you Madam, it is a name in fashion,
What do you want to justify that title?
Have you not Beauty, Jewels, Gold at pleasure?
Fine Clothes, high Food, and men as motley, as
The Ambassadors to wait? does not your Uncle
Allow you all that can make up a Lady?
Pardon my boldness Madam, I beseech you.
What are these?
The Gentlewomen were commended, Madam,
Most excellent in their Art about great Ladies;
And come to tender you their humble service.
Most proud if you accept our duties Madam.
Look you, they're proud already, they have nothing
But their trade to live on; she with the face
Spotted with Ermins, hath been late in France,
And knows the mode to a Mathematical point,
She has the theory of Song, but lost
The practick part by sitting up a nights;
She dances still, can talk in several languages,
And has the art of every game, to instruct
A novice Lady
To lose time.
And what
Age, do you think the other Gentlewoman
Carries? that simpers so? the miracle
Of Painting! she presents scarce five and twenty,
But if you credit Church Records, she numbers
But five short of threescore, Medea had
No charms like her, to preserve youth, and beauty;
She hath the art of making eyes, new hair,
And Ivory teeth, hath skill in making fruitful,
And is an excellent Midwife; she hath cured
A man that had no Nose, and a Court-Lady
That had no Tongue.
These are transcendent qualities;
Since tic my Uncles pleasure, they may wait,
But not to serve me.
Who's that knocks so modestly?
It is not your Dancing-Master, nor the Doctor,
They have more confidence.
It is the Parsons Nephew, come from the University,
Some say a pretty Scholar, and a wit;
Hath an Ambition to kiss your hand
And tender his first fruits.
What's that?
Some Poetry.
By any means Madam, you must be flattered,
Great Ladies cannot live else.
Let him enter.
Darling of beauty, fairest Angellina,
Thus low the Muses bow, and send by me
An abstract of your self; oh make the Paper
More white by kissing your fair hand, and with
Your breath, like a soft Western gale, perfume
These lines created in your praise.
What's heer?I am
A stranger to you Sir, and to your language,
These words have no relation to me;
I pity men of your high fancy, should
Dishonour their own names, by forming such
Prodigious shapes of beauty in our sex.
If I were really what you would commend,
Mankind would fly me; get a Painter Sir,
And when he has wrought a woman by your fancy,
See if you know her again; were it not fine,
If you should see your Mistress without hair?
Dressed only with those glittering beams you talk of?
Two Suns instead of Eyes, and they not melt
The forehead made of Snow; no Cheeks, but two
Roses inoculated upon a Lilly?
Between, a pendent Alabaster Nose?
Her Lips cut out of Coral, and no Teeth,
But Strings of Pearl; Her Tongue a Nightingales;
Her chin a rump of Ivory, and so forth?
Would not this strange Cimera fright your self?
And yet you take the boldness to present us,
And think we must applaud, and thank you for
Our selves made Monsters by your art; no more
Of this for shame; lose not your time and honour
In this fantastic Idol; you will say,
The world is peevish, and not kind to virtue;
Give him ten Pistolets to cure hs poverty,
There are good seeds in him and they may
Grow with some Cherishing.
You are enough
To vindicate your Sex, I shall not blush
To write your story.
You shall owe me Sir
An Anagram, and a Poesy too for
My next Ring.
You shall command my faculty,
My dearest Abigall
Thank you sweet Sir Roger.
Is her Ladyship at leisure?
What are these?
We are humble suitor Madam for your Favour.
Speak your request.
I am a Tailor Madam
That holds intelligence with foreign Courts
To furnish Ladies with new Fashions,
And I have patterns of the strangest shapes
That ever Ladies longed for.
I believe it.
I have the ambition to own the name
Of your Perfumer Madam.
 your Jeweller;
What think you of that Carcanet sweet Madam?
The Pearls are Orient, I have a Diamond
The Sultan gave one of his Concubines,
It weighs20 carat, if it please you Madam,
To wear it in the Court, and I'll attend
Your Ladyship six months hence to pay me for it;
I know your Uncle Madam.
This is his plot.
By all means take it.
Excuse me; what are you? speak your desire.
I would present you Madam with a pair
Of curious Spurs.
For what use prithee?
For what you pleae, I see all men of trade
Apply themselves to gain relation to you,
And I would be your Spurrier.
Do Ladies wear Spurs my friend?
They may in time, who knows what may be done,
If one great Lady would begin, they ride
Like Men already; it is all one to me,
So I may have the Credit of your name,
And privilege to swell above my neighbours.
When I stand, Gentlemen, in need of your
Professions, I'll send for you, in the mean time
You shall need no Solicitor.
Your Servants.
Buy a Spur.
I prithee let me not be troubled with
This kind of People Francescina; Ladies
Have a fine time, if they be all thus visited.
You are rude and fawcy fellows to intrude
So far without my Ladies licence.
What makes thee so impatient? will they not
Be gone?
Gone? here's a new regiment is pressing forward
What are they?
Beggars.
How?
And tell me I abuse your Charity,
To keep off their Petitions; we must have
A Court-du-guard, I think, and Centuries placed
At every door.
I prithee let 'em enter.
The room will not be sweet again this three days;
But if it be your pleasureknow your distance.
The blind, and lame, what's your condition Sir?
As miserable Madam as the Sea,
That swallowed all my wealth, can make a man,
That once commanded thousands, I blush to beg
But Nature too impatient of starving
Compels me to this boldness, you may soon
Peruse my tragic story there.
Good old man!
What is his loss to you?
My Petition too;
A poor blind man, that hath lost more by fire
Than his estate valued a thousand times;
And it is but equal, fire should spoil my eyes,
That ravished me of all, was precious to 'em,
A wife and pretty Children.
Burned?
All burned;
And what my eyes cannot afford their memory
My poor heart weeps in blood.
I am a Soldier
That in my Countries service lost my limbs;
I've had more lead in bullets taken from me
Than would repair some Style.
Ring the bells,
That was a loud one!
I have given wounds have killed the lookers on
With horror of their gaping, and have marched
Ten miles a day thus deep
In dirt?
In blood.
Upon those wooden legs?
Poor souls! I pity 'em here honest men,
Divide this bag, and pray for my good Uncle.
Blessings on you, Madam.
Equal division, come.
Stay, in the first place, I brought you hither,
Therefore my part is most considerable.
I'll have no Prerogative.
Nor I.
But I will.
Do not I know you both for cheating Rascals?
Thus are good meanings cozened, and you sha'not
Lose your reward; send for some Officers.
We are betrayed.
My Uncle.
They have found their eyes and legs again,
Niece I observe your Charity, but you see not
The inside of these things, and I did mean
And hope these sums might serve your self;
Some Ladies would have considered
A new Gown and trinkets; Francescina,
I see little amendment, she'll undo me
In pious uses.
She has entertained these Gentlewomen.
And that young Gentleman does good upon her.
I like it well, he's careful of my Lord,
And if she meet his honourable treaty,
She may learn Pride at Court, should our Art fail.
She smilesI wo'not interrupt 'em.
My Lady entreats the presence of her Sister.
Do's she entreat? Yes, you may visit her
Sir if you please, I'll trust her to your conduct.
It is my ambition to attend her.
Hark you,
Remember who you are, and carry things
For the credit of my heir, and one that must be
Right Honourable shortly, if I hear
Thou flout'st her, thou shall it have another Gown
And Petticoat embroidered, or but beat her
And put me to a pension; fare you well,
Francescina wait, wait all upon you Mistress.
No news yet of the Prince? he filled my dreams
Last night, it was a golden glorious slumber;
Me-thought we both were led into a Temple,
Where all our rites of Marriage were performed
In the presence of a thousand Angel-Cuids.
It was my devotion Madam, to present you
The News, I could not break my neck upon
A better cause.
Is the Prince come?
The Prince is at your service; though I slipped
At Chamber door, it is my happiness
To be the first Messenger.
Of what?
I desire no reward Madam, it is sufficient
I know what will become of us all, you
Remember the Caldean; all has happened,
I thank Astrology.
For what?
Your money is gone, your rents have been received,
And my head broke to purpose; things are visible.
My Master can confirm it.
What's this prodigy?
Madam it is done, we have been robed.
How?
As the Caldean and the Stars would have it,
Just to a minute.
Rare Mathematician!
I'll hang you both,
You may, and be no Princess.
Did he foretell this loss?
Is my pate broken? Do I live, and hope
To kneel, and say, If please your Grace, to call
Him Lord, and answer to a Knight? -we 're made.
Be at a distance,
If there be truth in the Caldeans Art,
These inconsiderable losses are
A new presage of my approaching greatness.
One from the Prince.
His Highness Farnese, Madam, greets your
Ladyship, and intends to be your Guest this night,
It will be an honour
My life must ow him duty for.
Do not you feel a Lordship creep up
By your short ribs?
His Grace is not far off.
Present the humble duty of his handmaid,
And say my Castle droops till it receive him;
I shall Madam.
We must prepare to meet and entertain him;
All things have been Prophetical.
My very good Lord.
Right Worshipful Piperollo.
In my pity
That so much innocence should not be lost
On faithless Contarini, I have landed
Upon your knowledge this unhappy secret.
Promised his faith to another? it was ill done,
To work my Uncle, and destroy my thoughts
Of a religious life.
You may collect
Those pure desires again,
Heaven will be soon invited, and a second
Resolve confirm that happiness.
May we not,
Without so  forsaking of the world,
Be capable of blessing, and meet heaven
At last, though erring Nature guide sometime
Out of the nearest way?
Yes Angellina.
I must be no Votary,
But when you turn a Fryer then,
How Lady?
Sir you have merited for this discovery
All that I am to serve you, and unless
You help me in this Labyrinth, I must
Live in despair of Freedom.
Any service;
There's so much sweetness in you, I could lay
My life a Sacrifice, be confident
I must be left of heaven, when I forsake you.
And I dare trust your Virtue with a secret
I have not told my Ghostly Father.
I know not what opinion my Lord has
Of his smooth Advocate, but I should gather
By Symptoms of my Mistress, she is sick
Of the younger Gentleman.
I dare not hope
This blessing, it is an honour placed on me
That has no value, I am a stranger,
You are no stranger here.
Your Uncle too
May err in his election.
But his anger
My prayer and tears may soften.
Do not dress
Your eyes with sorrow Angellina, this
Too gracious an influence upon
Your servant must command my utmost duty.
Upon this white hand I breath out my heart,
And when I pay affection to another
Mistress, in Your revenge, her beauty blast me!
But we may be observed.
Be all my guide.
This must be marag'd wisely, we are lost else.
We are now arrived the Castle Francescina.
We attend.
I am obscured sufficiently.
My life on it.
Here are great preparations, and the people
Flock as to see some triumph, this Pauline
Will be adored in the Country.
But her Sister,
With an extreme of sweetness, and humility
Will take the wonder off, she so transcends.
Your words fall from you,
I have observed my Lord, with too much passion;
She's but a woman, and may be no miracle,
When a clear eye is Judge.
Sir I owe
All that I am in fortune, name and greatness
Unto your person, next whom, give me leave
To say I rate no expectation
Equal to be her servant, yet I find
Her cold to those desires, that court her with
All honour, I snall humbly beg, your grace
When you converse, will interpose your favour,
And by your Mediation perfect all
That can be named my happiness.
You express
A strong Captivity in so small acquaintance;
Well my Lord trust to me; is this her Castle?
By your favour Sir.
Speak quickly whats your business?
Is this Paulina's Castle?
Plain Pauline? and is this her Castle?
My friend you want some breeding, she that owes
This Palace, for a Prince hath made it so,
Is not far off; turn your eyes backward Sir,
And tell your self without a perspective
What man is coming towards us?
Worthy Sir.
Put of your hats and hear his name, Farnese
The Prince of Parma's there, I kissed his hand,
My breath is since the sweeter.
The Prince, where?
You'll find him with my Lady whom he came
To visit, if you'll promise to be drunk,
Take what's a secret yet, he comes to marry her,
Or ther's no truth in Stars, she is to be
His spouse; farewell, and thank my worship heartily.
This fellow's mad!
He kissed the Princes hand,
What mystery is this?
See, they approach.
I am not lost sure in this cloud, they march
In State this way.
How, an Impostor?
Sure I know the Prince.
Conceal it yet.
What Gentleman is that?
The Prince of Parma Sir.
This will be worth observing.
Do we not both dream? that Pauline?
How disdainfully she moves?
That's her younger Sister upon whom
Vergerio waits.
He knows I am the Prince.
How do you like her Sir?
Ha? tic not fit to tell thee.
Does she not answer my Character?
On my heart a fair one?
Pray tell me how you like her Sir.
Not yet.
I am lost in wonder of her sweetness. Bid
Vergerio bring her to Antonio's;
I'll be his guest to night.
I shall obey Sir.
Make room for the Prince, fellows bear back;
You are not to be Knighted friend I take it.
Thus can the flame of Heaven with subtle art,
Leave the skin whole, yet quite consume the heart.
MY Niece has had a pretty warm night on it,
It is a bold knave to take the Prince upon him
I did believe the noyes, and was considering
How to contrive my peace with her good grace.
You have no fear to suffer now?
I thank
Your Lordship, that has made my house and knowledge
So fortunate, by the presence of our great
Fernse, it is an honour makes me young;
And yet this Rascal troubles me, that durst
Come in the Princes name, and charge my Niece
So home too; Is it not reason Sir?
Of highest nature.
Let him then taste the Law; yet I commend
His Spirit, that would scorn to die for Felony,
And when his head goes off the shame and grief
May help to break her heart: I do not love her,
And then my Girl, my Angellina's heir,
And you her Lord and mine.
My hopes are fair,
The Prince himself having vouchsafed to be
My Advocate.
He must command all here.
It is a good Prince, and loves you well, and let me
Without boast, tell you my Lord, she brings
No common Blood, though we live dark in the Country
I can derive her from the great Usini,
But we have been eclipsed.
Contarini leave us. You may stay Antonio;
Is it not an honour to your Family
A Prince should court your Niece into his arms?
I must confess, it is good enough for such
A Baggage, they will make together Sir,
A most excellent show upon the Scaffold.
The Impostor, and Paulina's pride, takes off
Your understanding; I do court your Niece
Fair Angellina. Ant. How Sir?
And as becomes a Princess.
Your Grace is merry.
I know not, but there's Magic in her eyes.
Magic? and she be a Witch, I have done with her.
Does he love Angelina? Please your Highness
Do you affect this Girl?
Religiously.
And have you all your Princely wits about ye?
This Language is but coarse. I tell you Sir
The Virgin must be mine.
Your Whore?
My Princess.
That's another matter.
Show your obedience,
You have commands upon her as a Father.
I know not what to say, but I'll persuade;
Hark you Niece, you hear what the Prince says,
It is now no time to think of Nunneries.
Be ruled then, and love somebody; if you have
Promised my Lord, I say make good that promise,
If not, the Prince is worth considering.
The Gentleman will make you a round Jointure.
If thou be free, love him, to vex thy Sister,
Who may upon submission be received
To Grace, and rise in time a Madam Nurse
To your heir apparent. I have done my duty.
But this is no great honesty, to cheat
My Lord. I see the greatest men are flesh
And blood, our souls are much upon a making;
All men that are in love deal with the Devil,
Only with this difference, he that dotes
Upon a Woman is absolutely possessed;
And he that loves the least is haunted
With a Familiar.
Old Fabio Sir your Tenant, with much business
In's face, desires to speak with you, I could hardly
Keep him from pressing in, his Wife he says
Is Lunatic.
We shall all be mad shortly,
Where is the Knave?
I dare do Sir as much to show my duty
As any Maid alive; I dare dye for you.
And yet you dare not love.
Not in that sense
You invite me to.
My Courtship carries
No stain to fright you, what I have propounded
Is worth the Ambition of a greater Lady;
Though you profess so liberally, I find
Your cunning, and because I have so much
Descended from my Title, you assume
This unbecomming Nicety, take heed,
I can be angry.
As you are a Man
That passion may come near you Sir; and as
You are my Prince, you may command my death
To follow and Appease it, but you said you loved me.
I doe, if you can wisely entertain it
Then you must love my honour,
A Virgins wealth, for every honest Man
Or Woman has an honour, and that has
Engaged my heart already by a Contract;
This tie dissolved with justice, I should kneel
To ask your Princely favour.
I am answered.
Who waits? call my Lord Contarini hither.
Sir.
You might have mocked another person,
And not have made me a ridiculous story
To your Mistress Sir.
I understand you not.
Engage me to mediation for her love,
With a pretence how much my act should honour
Your faint hopes, when you are conscious of a
Contract, already past between you.
Contract Sir?
She never yet gave me any language
Did promise hope, she still concluded me
With going to a Cloister.
How's this fair one?
It is most sure I am contracted.
To whom?
Vergerio your Lordships Agent.
That boy betray me?
In whom I took delight, made him my friend,
He play the Traitor? I'll be revenged upon
His heart.
Contain your passion Contarini,
Her beauty had apower above my friendship,
It well might shake his faith, and yet it is strange.
Call in Vergerio.
I have heard all,
And come to meet my sentence. You're a Prince
Against whom I dare not lift a thought; I see
What storm is rising, yet let this, great Sir,
Invite your mercy to me, I have made
No breach against your love, and that which was
My fault to his, may be excused, by what
He felt himself love, not to be resisted.
This Virgin I lay claim to, and her vows
No Subject must compel me to resign;
But if the Prince think me unfit, and call
This treasure from my bosom, and can place
His love, where I so chastely have delighted,
I will not keep a thought that shall rapine,
When I am miserable in her absence,
But give my interest cheerfully; to you,
My Lord, I answer, I have made no trespass,
And shall, so please your highness to be Judge,
Make it appear.
Was ever such an impudence?
This presence does protect him, I should else
Write treason on his heart; But Angellina
I pity thy undoing, how can thou
Expect a truth from him, betrays his Master?
My Lord, you have been faulty sure, and this
(not worthy to be called a loss of me)
Was meant by Providence to wake your faith,
That's owing to another.
Possible?
The Vice-roy of Sicilies Daughter? Pulcheria.
Pulcheria here?
Here Contarini.
Ha. proved a Woman, oh my shame and folly!
Pardon my too much love, that made me fear
You had forgot Pulcheria, though you left
Your vows and me at Sicily, when you were
Ambassador from the Prince.
Whence embarked
Thou brought'st me news Pulcheria was dround,
And thou for her sake entertained my servant,
Welcome, at once receive me and forgive me.
I had your promise, were this contract void
In honour, nor will take from my own merit
To think when your considerate thoughts come home,
You can pretend excuse to your own happiness,
Which lest you may suspect, let us in state
Visit Pauline, and unmask that counterfeit
Which hath usurped our name.
Sir we attend you,
This blessing must require a spacious soul,
Mine is too narrow to receive.
I am not yet created honourable.
Sir, things must have their time, but will his highnos
Remove so suddenly, and carry my Lady
To the Court with him? tic a most sweet young Prince.
Order was given to pack up her plate,
Her gold and Jewels, for he means to have
Tiltings and triumphs when he comes to Parma.
There it is fit we should expect our honours.
I will attend the Prince.
Signior Luio.
Your good Lordship.
Pray tell my Lady, I would kiss her hand,
And shall present news will secure their welcome.
I come from the Prince.
The Prince my Lord?
He is within
A small march off the Castle, and commanded
Me to prepare her, that he comes to be
Her guest.
My Lord, I will acquaint some of the bed-chamber,
but,
When did your Lordship see his Highness?
I left him at the Park gate.
This is the nearest way unless his highness
Have leaped a window, or can walk invisible.
Your Lordship may have some conceit. I'll go Sir.
What is the meaning that ther's such a guard
Upon our Castle? it is besieged, and no man
Suffered go forth; this is some Lord or other
By his straddling.
From the Prince? that he?
It is as I tell you Sir, ther's a little army,
Surrounds the Castle.
They have no order from his highness.
We are betrayed again.
Sir, would you speak with the Prince?
Why have you such a thing within the Castle?
Who dares be so much Traitor to usurp
That title? Wher's that Puppet, Gentlemen?
That is his Secretary.
The rest are Lords and Privy Counsellors.
We are undone.
Tic he, the very he, I dare not look on him;
Oh for an impudence worth a Chronicle,
To outface him now, it were a possible thing,
If People would believe
I'll tell my Lady, they are vanished; hum,
I do not like that face.
Come hither fellow, whom do you serve?
I know not Sir.
What Prince have you within?
The prince of Darkness.
What is this fellow?
a Knight of the Post, the Pestle is too honourable.
Where is your Excellent Lady?
I have a guess
If things go on, as I suspect, she will be
Where?
At her wits end very shortly.
An ingenious fellow?
I have conversed a little with the Mathematics,
Sir, Who is that Gentlewoman, not that I am ignorant,
But to satisfy a doubt?
She is one that may be
The Prince of Parma's Lady, when the Priest
Hath done his Office.
If I be not mistaken
Here comes the Princess, that is Angellina
The younger Sister.
It is my wonder you that have the face
And garb of Gentlemen, should dare to be
So insolent, to affront our person,
And his, to whom your hearts and knees owe reverence.
Command the Impostor forth,
Seize on the Traitors.
His Grace will be here presently, fear not Madam,
I would venture a Neck-breaking at some window,
And be content to crawl away a Cripple;
But there's no hope to scope the Multitude
That will be scrambling for my limbs. Great Sir,
I challenge the privilege of the last Bando,
He that can bring Frapolo the chief Bandit,
Beside what was proclaimed other reward,
Shall have free pardon for all past-offences;
To that Grace I appeal, and here produce
Frapolo.
This amazes me.
Can you stand
The dazzling Sun so long, and not be struck
Blind for this bold affront? what wildness brought you
In multitudes to fright my happy peace,
And this good Ladies, my most virtuous Consort?
He bears up still!
Have all my cares and watchings to preserve
Your lives, and dearest liberties, deserved
This strange return, and at a time when most
Your happiness is concerned, since by our Marriage
With this sweet Lady, full of grace and beauty,
You may expect an Heir to bless your Country.
Will you suffer him?
It is time your Prince were dead, and when I am
Companion to my Fathers dust, these tumults
Fomented by seditious men, that are
Weary of Plenty, and delights of Peace,
Shall not approach to interrupt the calm
Good Princes after Death enjoy. Go home,
I pray depart, I rather will submit
To be deposed, than wear a power or title
That shall not all be dedicate to serve you;
My life is but the gift of heaven, to wast it
For your dear sakes, my People are my Children,
Whom I am bound in Nature and Religion
To cherish and protect. Perhaps you have
Some grievance to present, you shall have justice
Against the proudest here; I look not on
Nobility of Birth. Office, or Fortunes,
The poorest subject has a Native Charter
And a Birth-right to the Laws, and Common wealth,
Which with an equal, and impartial stream,
Shall flow to every bosom.
Pious Prince!
I am at a loss to hear him; sure I am
Farnese, if I be not lost by the way.
Stand off Gentlemen,let me seewhich?
Hum! thisno, the other. Hum! send for a Lion
And turn him loose, he wo'not hurt the true Prince.
Do not you know me Sir?
Yes, I know you too well, but it stands not
With my honour; what composition?
Who am I? Gentlemen, how dare ye suffer
This thing to talk? if I be your Farnese.
I say I am the Prince,
Prince of what?
Of Rogues, and please thy Excellence.
How?
You must excuse, I can hold out no longer
These were my Subjects Sir, and if they find
Your Mercy, I'm but one, whose head removed,
Or noosed, this Lady will be soon a Widow,
Whom I have not deceived, it was her Ambition
To go no less than Prince, and now you have one,
During this Gentleman's pleasure.
What scorn shall I become?
Let him be guarded, and all his puppet. Lords.
News, news, excellent news; I shall leap
Out of my flesh for joy. Sir I have undertook
For your pardon to this reverend couple,
They heard my Niece was to be married
To the Prince, and thought it treason to conceal
What?
Pauline is not my Niece, no blood of mine;
Where is this Lady and her Pageant Prince?
The truth is, she is not Pauline, but their
Own Daughter.
Possible? then we are both cheated.
Whom she obtruded on our Family
When our Pauline died an Infant, with her,
A Nurse to both; Does your Grace apprehend?
We do beseech your pardon.
Now Angellina thou art heir to all.
By all this Circumstance you are but my Sister!
The Prince is proved a Prince of Thieves.
Why ther's a Baggage and a Thief well met then.
I knew she was a Bastard, or a Changeling.
Where shall I hide my shame? O cursed Ambition!
Give you joy Sir, my most illustrious Nephew,
Joy to thy invisible Grace.
Thanks to our loving Uncle:
Take hence the Traitors.
Sir I beseech a pardon to their lives.
Let nothing of my story be remembered
With such a Tragedy, it is my first Petition.
I must not deny thee; all thank her Virtue;
Live you, and love that Gentlewoman; But
It were a sin to innocence, and our honour
Would encourage Treason by example,
If they should scope all Justice, take 'em to Custody:
Frapalo, we confine you to this Castle,
Where If she please your Bride may accompany you
Till we determine otherwise.
It is some mercy; but
I shall be getting Children, and two nothings
Wo'not maintain a Family, it were as good
To hang me out of the way, here Charge come on,
Or take away my tools, I shall be working.
Provision shall be made you shall not starve
Nor surfeit Sir.
Because I called her Sister,
I will contribute something to their fortune.
What thy own goodness will direct; and now
Remove the Scene to Court, to perfect there
My own, and Parma's happiness; pride has
Met with severe reward, and that high justice
(That Governs all) though envy break with her
Own Poison, calls the Amazed World to see
What blessings wait upon Humility.
GEntlemen, do not say you see me; I have made an
escape from the Prince and Pauline; his graces word
is but mortal, and not security enough for me; for all
this Sun-shine he may hang me, when I come to Parma,
for an example, and therefore I have chosen, rather to
trust to my legs, than a reconciled State-Enemy.
Two'not be worth your glory to betray
A man distressed, whom your own mercy may
Preserve to better service; rather then
Go back I'll stand your Justice Gentlemen.
I've plaid the thief, but you, as the case stands,
May save or kill, my lif's now in your hands.

THe Prince of Portugal, Don Antonio
He courts our Infant close.
And may deserve her.
Your Grace
It is none of min, Don Manual.
Will your Highness walk?
Observe you that?
The Prince seemed not well pleased.
What doth the Princess mean?
I saw it fall from her.
My eyes are witness,
Noble Don Manual.
My Lords, your servant.
How do you like the Spanish Court? Although
My Lord your father were a native, yet
Your birth and education were abroad;
Compelled by your father's destiny.
My unhappiness!
I have heard him say, some policies prevailed
To make him leave this Kingdom, and his fortunes,
To try his fate at sea, till he found means
To plant himself in Portugal, from whence
He was but Iate reduced by the good Prince,
With promise of a pardon; and his honour
Is full security for us.
The Prince
Can do becoming things, and knows good acts
Are in themselves rewards; but the report
Was here, that fifteen thousand Ducats
Were offered Roderigo our Kings brother,
By your father Lord Piracquo, to assure
His reconcilement here, for trespasses
He did at sea.
But not accepted.
I know not which will be his more vexation,
To know the Prince's act, restore Piracquo,
Or so much money lost.
The Prince.
Don Manual,
You are become a man of mighty business,
Or I have lost some interest, I had
Since I left Portugal; but I'll not chide.
Where is the King?
In his Bed chamber, Sir,
With Duke Mendoza.
I'll not intterrupt 'em.
You may redeem your error, and we both
Converse again.
You infinitely honour,
And with it bind the obedience of your creature.
Now he is going to his Mistress.
To Clara
The Duke Mendoza's Daughter.
Mistress? do you forget, my Lord, the treaty,
And his own personal contract, the kiss warm
On Isabella's lip, and strengthened by the hope
And expectation of another Marriage,
Betwixt Anthonio and Maria his Sister?
We are used
To freedom here, with as much innocence
I may, perhaps, hereafter say, the Princess
Maria meant you honour, when she dropped
A Jewel; Sir, it cannot be much blemish
For you to own her service.
'T were an insolence
(Beyond her mercy to forgive) in me,
To think she meant it grace, or I apply it
At such a distance of my blood and fortune.
This in a whisper, but conveyed through Court,
Would forfeit me for ever: As you're honourable,
Preserve me in my humbler thoughts.
Be confident.
And pardon my expression; Sir, your servant.
I have observed the Princess scatter beams
Upon me, and talk language with her eyes
Sometime, such as I dare not apprehend
With safety, or Religion; for I find
My heart another conquest. But the Prince!
Why should he move my jealousy? I know
His amorous thoughts, already placed upon
Fair Isabella, must inhabit there,
And meet their just reward; he cannot be
So carelesless of his honour.
Can you direct me, Sir, to Don Piracquo,
Your noble father? I bring affairs concern him.
You wait upon the Duke Mendoza, Sir?
I was in the first number of those attended
His Duchess, while she lived; his Grace doth now
Acknowledge me a waiting movable
Within his family; my name is Pedro,
A poor kinsman of yours, if you be, Sir,
My Lord Piracquo's son, and might have been
His heir, had not you Mother been more fruitful
At sea, before she died, who left you an infant;
It was something to my prejudice, but your Father
Is in the privy Garden, Sir.
Your servant.
What means this fellow to survey me? ha! Clara!
And her Father Duke Mendoza! I
Must wish a time without his presence, to
Confirm, how much I honour her: Loud fame
Speaks him a noble Gentleman, but of late
(By what misfortune it is not known) he hath
Some garbs, that show not a clear spirit in him.
But that his Lady's dead, men would interpret
His starts proceed from jealousy: I'll leave 'em.
And wait some private opportunity.
I must confess, Prince Carlo, Sir, hath courted me,
But with a noble flame.
Flame me no flame, unless you mean to turn our family
And name to ashes in the Kings displeasure.
Thou dost not know the Prince, as I doe, Clara.
Sure you have known me, Sir, I have expected
Some time, when you would own me
Your name's Pedro
You thought me of your blood, Sir, when you promised
I should be your heir; I did a service for it
Deserves your memory, not contempt, my Lord.
Oh, thou did well, and though as I then stood
Proscribed, I wished it otherwise, I now thank
Thy witty cozenage, and allow thy faith
Religious to thy Prince; be honest still.
Honest? you are mistaken, I have been
Honest to none but you, Sir.
Be to thy self.
I know not what you mean by witty cozenage;
But to my danger, I may say, I did
The feat as you desired; you know I did,
And it is my wonder, what we both projected
To make your own conditions for your pardon,
And safe return, afcer proscription,
Hath not been worth your use so many years;
Where is the Prince?
The Prince? you are witty, Kinsman.
Nay if you slight me, Sir, and pay my service
With this neglect, I can undo my self
To make you find repentance
Come nearer
Therefore upon my blessing, if thou hast
Such an ambitious thought I charge thee leave it.
Sir, you may spare these preeepts, I have not
Given away my freedom, or by promise
Of more than may become my duty, offered
The Prince an expectation; I am
Not ignorant he is designed a Bridegroom
To the fair Isabella, and it were
Saucy injustice to distract a blessing
Now hovering o'er two Kingdoms
Thou art wise;
Preserve this duty. Ha! is not that Pedro?
I doe not like their whisper
You look pale, Sir.
Can this be truth? was it Prince Carlo, then
Without imposture was delivered me?
Did thou not cousin me?
If I be mortal, Sir,
It was my Ladies art, for her own safety,
To put this trick upon the Court, which she
Kept me from my Lord, until upon her death-bed
She made him overseer of the Secret.
Did he not name a Secret?
You are troubled.
I? thou art deceived.
Ha! it is thy Lord Mendoza.
He may take
Some jealousy, if he observe our whisper.
Add, Pedro, but to this, thy future secrecy,
Till I mature some act, my thoughts now fix upon,
And choose thy place within my heart; meet me
Enough, you seal the mystery again.
Pedro, come hither; What did you whisper?
Duke Roderigo, my Lord, desires
Your conference in the garden.
I'll attend him.
He is my Kinsman, Sir, and did salute me
I would thou were his Cousin ten removes
(Pedro) as far as the two Poles are distant.
My father need not fear Prince Carlo now;
I find another guest here, it is Don Manual
Holds chief intelligence with my thoughts.
Well Pedro,
Take heed, my life is in thy lips
I know my duty, Sir, if you suspect,
Command me to be dumb; Sir, you must trust me.
I know not how to help it, wait upon
My daughter.
I would my Lady had lived, or died without
Bequeathing me this Legacy on her death-bed,
A Secret to consume me; this servant, whom
I dare not muh displease, is all the witness
Survives, sworn with the rest to secrecy,
And though I have small argument to suspect him,
After so long a silence, yet I am
Not safe to be at his devotion:
I could soon purge him with a Fig, but that's
Not honest: Was it ever known, a man
So innocent, should have so many Agues
In's onscience? I am weary of the Court;
I must have some device
Duke Roderigo,
And Don Piracquo? they are whispering too;
This jealousy will take my brains apiece.
I have said, &amp; now expect, my Lord, your answer.
I must acknowledge from your Grace, a favour,
That you have been so clear, and free with me;
I might have thought my self secure in the dark,
And ignorant of this expectation,
Incurred your Graces jealousy.
I had always
A firm opinion of your Lordships gratitude.
But for the sum, he fitie thousand Ducats,
I must acknowledge, if your Grace had mediated
My pardon then with the good King, your brother,
It had obliged my payment; but my cause
Not worth your Graces agitation,
Or breath, was like a vessel struck upon
Some shelf, without all hope ' have sayl'd again,
Had not the Prince's mercy, when he came
To Portugal, relieved it with a gal,
And set my bark afloat.
The Prince?
Why? doth your Lordship think I had no part
In the work of your repair? the power, and office
I hold at Court, is not asleep, my Lord,
When any act of grace is done by the King.
I dare not do so much injustice to
The Prince's bounty, to divide and ow
But half the benefit to his Grace; I not
Extenuate your prevalence at Court, but
His Highnes did compassionate my exile,
And I am returned by his commands, my Lord,
I am his creature for it, and shall sooner
Lose what he hath preserved, my life and peace here,
Than doubt his honour, or dispute his power
In my behalf.
Sir, you are not safe yet,
There has past no seal, I take it, for your pardon.
You hang in the air, not fixed to the roof of heaven,
As when you shined a star; take heed you prove
No Comet, a prodigious thing snatched up
To blaze, and be let fall again, upon
Their eyes, that so mistook the region
Where you were placed.
I know, my Lord, your greatness,
And hold it not becoming, to contest
In language wi'ee; but I am confident
Of what?
And will wager, if your Grace please,
The to either fifty thousand Ducats, Sir,
That I'll not pay you a Marvedie; if I may
On other honourable terms possess
Your favour, I shall meet your just commands,
But if you set such price upon your smile,
After the Prince's honour to secure me,
I know my self, my fortune, and upon
What strength I must depend.
I shall, my Lord,
Send you to sea again.
I made a shift, and may again, my Lord,
Amongst the Merchants.
Pirate
It is confessed,
I was so, but your Grace may be informed
I was not born to the trade, I had a soul
Above my fortune, and a toy I took
To lose what was beneath my birth and titles,
Or purchase an estate fit to sustain 'em;
The sea was my Exchequer; for I thrived,
I thank my watery Destinies, and commanded
Many a tall ship, won with so much horror,
As possibly would have made your Lordship (had you
But in a cloud, or airy scaffold stood
Spectator of our fight) sweat out your soul
Like a thin vapour with the fright, and after
Drop your forsaken body on our deck,
To increase the number of the dead.
But we
May deal with you at land again.
With reverence to your blood as it is the Kings, withal my age,
My wounds upon me, and that innocence,
The Prince's word hath new created in me,
I do not fear
Whom?
The Devil.
I shall conjure down the spirit.
Hell hath not art to keep it down.
So brave?
So just.
Thou talking fool, dost think I have no stings?
I know you are a Statesman, Sir, but he
That fears with his own innocence about him,
Deserves not a protection
Piracquo,
Stay, I now see thou hast a gallant spirit,
Let me embrace thee, and with this confirm
An honourable friendship; I have not
A thought so base to injure thee.
I have
An easy faith my Lord
Farewell
Noble Piracquo, I have tried and found thee.
I wo 'not trust you for all this; I know
The Devil's excellent at the hug; your Servant.
The Princess.
I doe not like his Courtship there.
So gracious with my Niece? I'll make him curse
Those smiles
All is not well within me, and the Princess
Was never so unwelcome; they confer
With much delight, or else my fears abuse me.
What hath she in the greatness of her birth,
That I should be so passive? Heaven look on
Our hearts, and if my love want a degree
Of noble heat, when they are both compared,
Let what I carry be the Funeral pile,
And my own flame consume it. Ha, the Prince
I shall betray my self too soon I fear.
My sweetest Clara!
Either there were no Ladies that could love
In that Court, or you could not want a Mistress.
They are not born with incapacity
Of loving, where they find a worth t'invite:
The fault was in my undesert, that could
Attract no Ladies grace to own me there,
So inconsiderable a servant Madam.
There is some hope, you will not be thought here
Unworthy of a nobler Character;
I doe not think but Clara hath a better
Opinion of your merit.
You cannot be so cruel; what could in
My absence interpose, to make your heart
Unkind to those desires at my return?
My justice, and the care of both our honours,
I have not lost; nor can Time make me forfeit,
(What Nature, and the Laws of Heaven and Earth
Command me to preserve) my duty Sir.
What is above, would taste ambitious.
This was not wont.
If any of your smiles,
Or favours Sir before, have led my tongue
To unbecoming boldness, you have mercy:
Some things of error are exalted by
Our bold belief, when Princes make themselves
But merry with their servants, who are apt
To antedate their honour, and expound,
In their own flattery, the text of Princes.
But is all this in earnest?
Is not that
Don Manual with the Princess? Observe Sir.
They are pleasant.
Dare he presume?
Vexation!
While I have
The memory of what you are, a Prince,
And dare believe what is as true, as talked of,
Your Contract made in Portugal to the Princess
Isabella
No Contract Madam; I confess,
To please my Father, who engaged me to
The travel, I did seem to court the Princess,
And with some shadows of a promise, might
Advance her expectation; but here
I left my heart, and dare appeal to thine.
Madam
Your Graces pardon but a minute.
Sir
Nay then I shall repent I asked your pardon.
I have done, and will attend your Graces pleasure.
I am now at your commands.
Clara his Mistress?
Possible! was not that Prince Antonio, Uncle?
Yes Sir, and gone displeased,
He hath been affronted by that Gentleman.
He dares not be so rude.
He dares be insolent, and court your Sister.
How? my Sister? be less ambitious, Manual.
Your favours have exalted him too much.
But I can change my brow.
It does become you.
The Prince did frown upon me, Madam, you
Are wise, as well as fair, can you resolve
The Prince's riddle?
Sir, I have no art
To decipher mysteries, but if I err not,
He named his Sister.
Ha!
With caution you should be less ambitious.
It is so, he's jealous of my courtship there,
It can be nothing else, can it, sweet Madam?
I dare make you the judge of all my thoughts,
Unbosom every counsel, and divest
My soul of this thin garment that it wears,
To let your eye examine it; if you find
Within that great diaphanal an atom
Look black, as guilty of the Prince's anger,
Let him doom me to death, or if that be
Not punishment enough, be you more cruel,
And frown upon me too.
If I were judge,
Without such narrow, and severe dissection,
Don Manual, of your heart, I should declare
Boldly your innocence, and rather than
A frown of mine should rob your thought of quiet,
I would deprive mine eyes of what they honour,
By a more cruel absence. Ma. But to be
Assured of so much charity I could wish
My self in some degrees a guilty person,
And stand the Prince's anger; but if I
Be cleared in your opinion, I dread not
The malice of accusers; yet if you had
Wav'd my integrity, I had an argument
To have convinced you, Madam, that Maria,
Though sacred in her person, was to me
No more inflaming than a piece of Alabaster,
Which some great Master's hand had shaped a Virgin;
For if you dare believe me, you have won
By your virtue here so much dominion,
There is no room to entertain a guest,
Much less a competition. Oh Madam,
I took so strange a charm in at my eyes
When first your presence made 'em happy, that
To say I only loved you, were profane,
And would detract from that religious honour,
My heart in that first minute promised you.
I know not in what language, Sir, to dress
My answer, but in that small skill I have,
Sir, of my self, I am not guilty of
Unkind rewards, where I can understand
A fair respect invite 'em; yet if you
But flatter, for it is hard to say, when men
Dissemble not at Court
The curse of Virgins, and
What else can make a Lover miserable
Feed on my heart, that minute I betray
Your faith by any treason of my tongue:
I must not live with your suspicion on me;
Why doe you obscure your face?
I doe but hide
Sir an unruly blush that's stolen into
My cheek; I fear a Spy, that hath discovered,
And would tell what complexion my heart has.
Pray leave me.
That command
Received but faint commission from your heart,
From whence those amorous spies your blushes came;
It had a sound like Virgins, when they teach
A way to be denied. Pardon sweet Madam,
If I presume to interpret my own happiness;
Your eyes are not so kind to obscure themselves
Behind that cloud, they may behold me kiss
Your hands with this devotion, and not
Repent to be a witness. Did you not
Feel a chaste trembling on my lip? with such
A fear doe Pilgrims salute holy Shrines,
And touch the flesh of Martyrs: but this circumstance
Is but the pomp, no essence of affection.
Say, can you love me, Madam? if your tongue
Not used to such a dialect, refuse
Articulate consent, a smile will make
No noise, speak that way; I will keep this hand
Both a white pledge, and prisoner, till your eye
Or welcome accent doe redeem it from me;
Or if you still be silent, I'll secure
My fate, and teach your hand without a voice
To chant a Song to Hymen.
What help of tongue need they require,
Or use of other art,
Whose hands thus speak their chaste desire,
And grasp each others heart?
Weak is that chain that's made of air,
Our tongues but chafe our breath,
When Palms thus meet, there's no despair
To make a double wreath.
Give but a sigh, a speaking look,
I care not for more noise,
Or let me kiss your hand, the Book,
And I have made my choice.
Weeping? I'll kiss those drops away.
Away
That echo was not sweet, yet being thine
I am too much thine.
There's no place for fears;
Love is the purest, when it is washed in tears.
DAres he be so insolent already? we
Shall humble him.
He durst affront me Sir;
And when I urged the folly of his pride,
Tell me, he knew himself, and on what strength
He must depend; words of a dangerous consequence.
My Son hath been too forward.
He affects him strangely.
Whose undertaking must not bind beyond
The rule of our own greatness.
Your Son is full
Of honourable thoughts, but being young,
May meet with subtle natures, whose oblique
And partial ends want no dissembled forms
Of duty to betray him. This Piracquo
In his experience of the world, hath art,
And can from every accident extract
A cunning use of time, and dispositions;
And it is not to be doubted but the man
Practised in storms, and rapine (by which he
Hath drawn a wealth above your treasury)
May find a minute apt for his revenge
Upon your justice
He that is a Pirate
In the first act of spoil he makes, doth open
His conscience at sea, and throws the key
Into the waves.
He hath acquired a mighty wealth.
But who can number their undoings and wet eyes
That have been robed? how many lives and fortunes
Of your own subjects have increased the pile
Of his estate and cruelty? think of that:
And if you can bring nearer thoughts, and look
Upon your self, your present sums are lean,
Compared to what did swell your treasury;
Your customs are less numerous for his thefts,
And your great debts and charge upon your crown,
Are called upon, but drowsy with their weight,
They make no answer to the kingdoms clamour.
Some King, to whom the waves had sent a wrack
So great upon his shore, would both secure,
And call the timely benefit, a providence.
It is not too late.
Wise Princes that have law &amp; strength about 'em,
Must take all forfeits; he that is too tame
In Sovereignty, makes treason his own judge,
And gives a patent to be disobeyed.
Let him be sent for straight.
To hear him plead?
What Traitor did want reasons of defence?
Command him safe first, see his wealth sealed up
Against the confiscation; Kings must act,
And not dispute their maxims; I could much
Amaze you, Sir, with other argument
To prove Piracquo's insolence; his son
(And it is to be believed, in things of consequence
Their counsels often meet) Don Manual,
Hath been ambitious to court Maria,
Your daughter, Sir.
Unsufferable impudence!
Antonio too suspects him, and what honour
You can maintain with the Prince, &amp; what danger
It may produce; if this resented, and
Proclaimed, beget a War upon your country
For Treaties are the immunities of Kings,
Subjects adulterate the Prince's coin,
Not without high injustice, but he that
Doth play the wanton with his royal promise,
Defaces his own stamp, and teaches, by
His violation, others not to trust him.
Treason!
Be fearless, Sir, I am provoked
Beyond the sufferings of a Gentleman.
Where is the guard? no mischief the result
Of such a skirmish?
I was not made for servitude, nor must I
Have patience, when the greatest man is in Spain,
Whose title cannot challenge my subjection,
Throws infamy upon me.
Do the Kings
Of Spain allow this saucy privilege
Against a Prince.
Not we: To prison with him.
You shall be judge your self, and set the punishment
Upon his insolent act; away with him.
Not hear me? this is tyranny.
Away, do ye make a cipher of the King?
May we
Entreat to know the circumstance?
I must
Acknowledge, Sir, I had suspicion
Of some attempts by him against my honour,
Which made me first provoke him.
Dare he hope
To keep a thought unpunished?
Sir, I met
My Son by your command lead prisoner hence,
It will not unbosom your royal justice,
To let me know his crime, I am no father
To any sin he dares commit against
Your Laws, or person.
You came in good time.
Another guard for him.
A guard? for what?
You shall know that hereafter.
I shall beseech, my cause against Don Manual
May not involve his innocence; my Lord
Piracquo is full of honour.
The Duke's gone.
Nay he is right, at the wrong end of a cause still
If they be crimes against your state, I am not
To prescribe your Justice, Sir.
Away with him.
To me? I have seen this character.
Return him at my peril, Sir.
What do you think of my Lord Piracquo?
I think he's gone to prison; yet I think
He's here again, if that be he; for we are
Not sure of any thing at Court. Now, my Lord
Do any of you know, my Lords, wherefore
I am under guard?
Not we.
I could not satisfy the Prince's question.
Your sons offence was an affront to the Prince
Antonio.
That was not well; it was
Some high provocation made him lose his temper.
They were at it with their swords.
No hurt, I hope?
The Prince's feather discomposed, or so.
This was not my fault, Gentlemen.
Proclaim to the world I'm not your son, take off
Mine and your peoples expectation,
And then it is no dishonour; for to be
Believed the Prince at the same time, and one
That dares betray a Gentleman from his Sanctuary,
To be a sacrifice at home, are things
Of inconsistent nature, and destructive.
Charge him with new committed crimes, since I
Gave him my word and honour to secure him,
And there he stands, without an Altar to
Protect him; but far be it from the King,
To make it a new treason to be rich;
It will be thought your avarice to his wealth,
And read in story to your shame for ever,
Piracquo died to pay your debts.
The Prince
Solicits hard; the King inclines.
I know
This doth not, Sir, proceed from your own soul,
But some malignant nature, that hath dropped,
And would infect your ear with wicked counsel;
It was some malicious enemy to me,
And to your fame (as well as Don Piracquo
His life and fortune) hath conspired to make
Me less than Prince, and you unfit to be
A King, when once men catch at your inconstancy.
For I must pray you to remember, Sir,
I had your royal promise to confirm
My undertaking for his facts at sea,
And give me leave to say, Sir, this dishonourable
Retreat will stagger all your peoples faith:
A King to break his sacred word, will teach
The great men to be safe without your service;
Who will believe your smiles are snares to catch
Their fortunes; and when once the crowd takes sent
Of this, you leave your self no oath to swear by.
The Prince bestirs himself bravely in your cause.
I may do something to reward it, one day.
Sir, shall I speak? not in my own defence;
For since I came to Spain, I have not been
Guilty in thought of any breach of duty;
Nor for my son, if youth or ignorance
Have made him err, my humble knees beseech
My cause may take no royal beam from him,
That now is pleased to be my Advocate,
Your son; in whom there's such an active heat
Of honour, better all my blood was scattered
Than you should frown upon him. But I know
If I had paid the Duke your brother, Sir,
But fifteen thousand Ducats
Ha? what then?
I had bought my peace, and been commended by
His Grace to your full pardon.
Boldly urged.
Was it his act?
We restore thee,
Piracquo, to thy self, and us; and let
Our largest pardon for all past offences
Be ready for our signature; my brother,
I'll promise reconciled too: Carlo, thou
Hast but confirmed our hope, nor did we purpose
This other than a trial of thy temper,
Thy gratitude, and jealousy of thy honour:
Preserve them still thus, Carlo, nothing wants
To fix our Kingdoms joy, but the completing
Thy marriage with the Princess Isabella,
Which shall be done by Proxy, when Antonio
Hath made his courtship perfect with thy Sister.
Who saw the Duke Mendoza? send for him;
He doth too much absent himself.
By Proxy?
The Duke Mendoza's counsel is too busy
To advance that, and Clara is grown cold,
Or seems so, in her cunning to provoke
My flame; but I must teach her how to meet it.
My father may be wrought to a consent
When things are done; forgive me, Isabella,
My first thoughts cannot on thy beauty wait,
I am not master of my love, or fate.
Things are not now so desperate, whilst my Lord
Piracquo keeps possession; but if I were
Worthy to advise his Lordship, he should not lose
Much time to settle things, secrets do burn
His grace; now for a fit of jealousy
I'll be here
He's troublesome in my eye, and yet I cannot
Endure him from my sight.
That's I.
Methinks he hath every day a more discovering look,
There's Scaffolds in his face; I shall prevent him,
And send him far enough, with the next Fleet
He goes, the Sea may roar, and crack the Cabins,
Or he may meet the Calenture; I have heard
Of Hericanoes that have torn up Mountains,
One boisterous enough would strike his Ship
Clean through, a'tother side to the Antipodes,
And that would cure me; all my Art must be
To win him to the Voyage, and not stir
His jealousy; the Knave is apprehensive.
Are you good at that?
I doe not like his business with Piracquo,
It is for no good, I'll break their correspondence;
Piracquo has been honourable, yet
I doe not much confide in himhe's here;
Come hither Pedro.
Your Graces Pleasure?
What consult
Have you with Don Piracquo?
Please your Grace,
He hath been fishing, some or other have
Infused a scruple, I'll engage my life:
But though he be my Kinsman and a Lord
I honour, and from whom I have received
The promise of a Fortune, and a great one,
Yet, I have said little
Hast said any thing?
How could I choose Sir? he did squeeze me subtly,
But I was wise, and faithful to your trust,
He knows no more than I, or you
Ha?
Would wish him Sir, let me alone to be cautious.
The art honest Pedro, and I have been studying
How to encourage and reward thy service,
And I have thought of a preferment for thee.
Your Grace was ever bountiful.
A place
Of honour and command.
That will do well Sir;
And shall I come in as your Churchmen do?
No first-fruits to be paid twice in a year,
No buying of a Jewel at the rate
Of fifteen hundred times the value Sir?
Remove that care.
That care is well removed.
I have considered, that to live at home
My Servant, is to dark thy abilities,
That will abroad shine, and doe services
Worth Spain's acknowledgement.
Abroad? why, must I travel?
By any means.
Whither, an't please your Grace?
But to the Indies.
No farther? Columbus did it in 7 years,
And less.
In the next Fleet thou shalt have an employmeant
Shall speak my care of thee, and interest
ith his Catholic Majesty; he shall deny
Me hard, but I'll prevail to make thee of
 Council there, and the State Secretary.
This is a mighty honour.
We may hold
Correspondence still by Letters, thou art wise;
The King shall knight thee too of Calatrava;
How will it joy my heart to write to thee,
Al Signor illustrissimo Don Pedro.
Sir, the King hath sent for you?
For me?
Yes, Sir, I could have told your Grace
His Majesty commanded your attendance.
For what?
I know not that, but I suspect
There hath been some intelligence, however
Go, Sir, it may do worse, and argue guilt,
To be commanded twice.
Intelligence?
It will be worth my safety to confess.
By no means, Sir, that simplicity
Would rather become me.
Why? wo't thou confess?
Not, unless you begin; go Sir, an't be
But to prepare his Majesty, for me
To wear the order of the Caletrava;
You have put me, Sir, into the gang of going
This Indian voyage.
Well, I must to the King.
Shall I attend you?
Yesnodo what thou wilt; yet now I think on it
Twill be as well to goyet do not neither.
Be cheerful, Sir, why doth your head shake so?
My head?
It trembles like the Needle of a Sun-dial, do ye not feel it?
Ha? yes it is here; but do not breath upon me;
I feel the very wind of thy words blow it
To and again like a Weather-cock; but I must go.
I will prepare my self for this voyage.
Forget not the Calatrava.
I would thou were shipped
And sunk.
It shall go hard but I'll requite your Lordship.
A prisoner say?
It is a confirmed report.
I fear Prince Carlo's jealousy is cause
Of this; poor Manual, it will not be
Safe, or seem honourable for me to visit him:
But since I cannot suffer with him, he
Shall hear I dare confine my self to sorrow.
Madam, the Princess
Maria is coming up the stairs.
I must dissemble now my grief, and meet her, yet
I may entreat her Graces mediation
To the King for his enlarge.
Let us be private.
If ever thou lov'dst me, Clara, now express it.
I have an humble suit to your Highness, which
In hope to prosper, will direct my faith,
And services to what you can prescribe me.
Speak your commands.
Don Manual stands committed by the King,
And I would have thy counsel, how I should
Best work his liberty.
That, Madam, is
All my petition to your Grace.
I know my least desire let fall to the Prince
Antonio, were enough to engage, and make him
The Orator to effect it, but in honour
I would not contrive him the means, and instrument
To advance his Rival's liberty.
Rival, Madam?
For I must tell thee, Clara, and with it
Give up the secret of my soul, I love
Don Manual, I fear, better than my self.
You do not mock me, I hope, Madam?
No,
By all that Ladies once in love do pray for,
By him thou love, who ever he be, and this
Kiss (that I rather wish on Manuel's lip,
Would modesty and honour give it privilege
And durst entrust thy faith to carry it to him,
In my experience of thy virtue, Clara)
I speak no fable.
It becomes my truth
To answer yours, though not so cheerfully;
I should not much repent, to carry, Madam,
Your kiss to Manual, but I fear, I should
Forget who sent it. If you have a plot
To raise mirth from my weakness, when you know
How much my heart is his, I yield my self
Your triumph, Madam, but the glories of
Your blood, and title are not price enough
To buy him from my thoughts, could you invest
My name with their possession.
Doth she love him?
I have destroyed my own hope then; alas
Poor Clara, I must pity thee, and for that
Love that hath been between us, I'll apply
To cure thy wound; for mine is not so desperate,
Though I bleed inwards, I confess, since he,
Whom I esteem best, suffers for Maria.
Suffer for you? pray Madam, clear this mystery.
It is poor Manuel's fortune to affect
Me with a passion great; as mine, and love,
That like a rebel forrageth our soul,
And can obey no law, but what it likes,
Impatient that Antonio loved me too,
Made him forget the Prince, and gave the affront,
For which he suffers in the Kings displeasure.
No repetition of this story, Madam,
Lest you destroy all my belief in virtue;
It cannot be, you may as soon persuade
That snow, the innocent fleece of heaven, that's born
Upon the fleet wings of some sportive wind,
Is Ethiop's wool, as call this truth.
This will be rudeness, Clara, if you do not
Convince, and with more reason, and with temper.
And it is no little wonder, that when I
Have fairly thus disclosed my thoughts of Manual,
You should retain a murmuring thought, and dare
Pretend rivality with me.
The law
You gave to love, that stoops to no prerogative
Of birth, or name (mine only a degree
Beneath your own) will answer your disdain,
And justify my passion; and if reason
And temper (which in vain you think are lost
In me) be assigned judges, I dare more
Than say I love, I can deserve him
Better?
Fate bring it to a trial.
So just are my affections, I dare make
A Saint my judge.
That Judge you make, is not
A friend to so much pride.
You are but my accuser, Madam.
This affront I must
Remember, Clara, and find time to teach
You know me better.
Madam, as you are
The Princess, I can fall thus low, to kiss
Your hand, and pay all duties that become me,
Or your command; but if you think by being
Great, I must own no passion, but in what
Degree you are pleased to fix it, nor compare
My soul born with its freedom to affection,
With yours, because one shaft hath wounded both,
I rise my own defender.
Thy own ruin
For this presumption.
I'll not bribe your mercy,
When you can love as I doe, we may both
Deserve him equally: Oh Manual!
Though I defend thy honour to the Princess,
Yet he hath scattered seeds of jealousy
About my heart, if this ground fertile prove,
I wo'not curse his faith, but my own love.
Why should we murmur to be circumscribed,
As if it were a new thing to wear fetters?
When the whole World was meant but to confine us;
Wherein who walks from one Clime to another,
Hath but a greater freedom of the Prison;
Our Soul was the first Captive, born to inherit
But her own Chains, nor can it be discharged
Till Nature tire with its own weight, and then
We are but more undone to be at liberty.
The Prince, he brings a storm, I see it rising
As Seamen doe, the wind far off.
Don Manual,
You have named a suffering man, but one that holds
His life and death at such an even rate,
No matter which is first employed with honour.
I dare submit me to your justice Sir.
Your Cause would droop to trust to that, my love
Willing to justify the choice it made
In thee, hath pleaded better, and prevailed
With me to bring thee counsel to redeem
Thy self becomingly.
Your goodness flows still,
It was not the Prince that frowned.
Submit your self to Prince Antonio.
Submit my self?
Ask him forgiveness.
I must be guilty first of an offence,
Ere my tongue be so base, and ask a pardon.
Then I must chide you Manual; deny
This trivial satisfaction? your crime
Will upon second thoughts be much enlarged,
Nor will the Prince be ever thought to merit
His birth and name, unless he kill thee for it,
It is an affront of so supreme a nature.
Hath it no name Sir?
Dost not shake to ask it?
Are you Sir a fit Rival for the Prince?
Abstract that she's my Sister, which considered,
Carries so vast a guilt against the Kings,
Mine, and Maria's honour, all thy blood
Mixed with repentance cannot purge; you are
Instructed Sir.
Not yet, to know my self
Conscious of any action should contract
The Prince's brow, or yours, much less deserve
The horrid name of guilt against the Kings,
Yours, and Maria's honour.
Did not you Sir court my Sister?
Never Sir.
Doe not you love her?
Heaven in that word includes all that we owe
His precept; It is my justice, Sir, to love her;
But with a greater distance, than she is
From me removed by birth; and if her smile
Meant the reward of my attendance, Sir,
At any time have met with false observers,
Their tongues, and no audacious thought of mine,
Or application, are in fault; I have,
Beside the lesson of my birth, been taught
A piety from your favours, Sir, to know
My self their creature, and with humble thoughts
To show my gratitude, not proudly assume
(Could she descend) a Courtship to Maria,
Who by the King, &amp; every good mans vote,
Is meant a sacred pledge to Portugal,
To chain two kingdoms.
If this, Manual,
Be truth
Without condition of my liberty,
Or dread of what Antonio shall attempt
In his revenge, my soul dare with ith an oath
Confirm it at the Altar.
This doth please me.
Possess thy first place in my friendship, Manual;
Antonio shall embrace thee too, his ear
And mine have been abused.
There was
A providence upon our Swords, that meant
Less fatal than his passion showed, when we
Last met, against whose weapon threatening me first,
The safety of my fame, more than my life,
Called up my just defence.
I do believe thee;
To what a loss of virtue, and of blood
Credulity engages? this shall be
No more thy dwelling; Prince Antonio
Shall for thy honour make it his own act,
Who yet believes thy interest in Maria
Hath made his Courtship vain, and will I fear,
Not presently admit thy innocence
Into his quiet faith, but I'll convince him.
If he but knew my heart, he should not need
Much argument; no man can love with honour,
And let his thoughts divide upon two Mistresses.
I have contracted love
With whom? may Time,
When this World fails, and Nature grows decrepit;
Present it to Eternity.
This prayer opens my heart, and all the wealth within it,
Commands me draw the Curtain from her name,
That you may read my Clara,
And I shall beseech your Graces smile
Your Clara? what
The Duke Mendoza's Daughter?
You have named her.
No, I am in the dark still, speak again,
Or rather say, thou hast mistook, it is
Some other Clara, and not the Lady
I understand.
Life cannot bribe me with another wealth,
Or death with all his horrors make me desert
That name.
What a strange Sea-breach has
This little storm of breath made here already?
I was taking pains to unconcern the jealousy
Of Antonio, and find him my own Rival;
Thou had been kinder to have loved Maria
My Sister, though Antonio had sworn
Thy death, and the Kings anger with my own
Had met thee like a torrent, than presumed
This interest in Clara.
I see no
Such mighty danger in it.
I'll tell thee, Manual,
Thou hast invaded all my joys, I love her.
Honour forbid it, Sir.
Honor's a dream,
And a cold everlasting sleep must chain
My soul up; for if once it wake, and know
What thou hast torn from it, it will vex it self
Into a flame, and turn thee into ashes.
Never till now unhappy, with my weight
I see my self now bearing down before me,
A rotten part of some prodigious mountain
Into the sea, with which I shall soon mingle.
Collect thy self betimes, and give her back
Unsullied with thy claim, release thy own,
And with her, every thought as much a virgin
As her soul was, when first I courted her,
Or thou art lost
With greater justice, Sir,
Command to uncreate my self, as call
My faith or heart again.
How?
Sir, my life,
The cement that doth hold this frame together,
You have power to melt, or but command my exile,
And I may live far off, and be forgotten
By all, but Clara; bu to ask that back,
Which with the full consent of heaven I gave her
(And in exchange received her equal vow)
I dare not, or if I had will, to be
So false to honour, it is within my heart
So riveted, I may with as much innocence
Commit a rape, or murder, as attempt it.
You have no doubt a valour too, that dare
Love with so fierce a resolution.
When I am master of my sword, I dare
Not draw it against you; but he that lives
Beneath you, may have little time to wish
Himself unmade that would divorce us.
Leave me, leave me
How many lones are shaken with one tempest?
And if one suffer, ruined all? I know
The faith he bears me, and the reverence
He gives my blood, will never be provoked
To fight against my person; but I must not
By tameness give my self a public wound;
He shall be master of his sword and freedom,
And then let fate determine; Clara must
Be mine, or make a Bridegroom of his dust.
PRince Carlo's not come yet.
My Lord Piracquo
And his son Manual are expected too.
I wonder at this hasty reconcilement;
We did imagine it as possible
The two Poles should have met, as they together
Friends at a Banquet.
In my opinion, peace, and wine, and music,
Are more convenient for the natural body,
Than swords or guns.
And for the politic too,
If men were but so wise to like, and cherish
Their own estates: If I had all the Plate
In the Indies, I'd not give a silver spoon
To have my head cut off.
Why is not the great Duke Roderigo here?
Who, the Kings Evil Genius? he was
Invited, but excused himself.
Why, there's
A Statesman, that can side with every faction,
And yet most subtly can untwist himself
When he hath wrought the business up to danger.
He lives within a labyrinth, some think
He deals with the devil, and he looks like one,
With a more Holiday face.
But he hath so behaved himself,
That no man now dare much confide in him.
They are come.
Don Manual, the Prince hath made me know
My error, and your worth.
He has too much honoured me,
And you have reason to command for this
The service of my life.
You are not pleasant, Sir
My Lord Piracquo.
Your Highness humble servant.
All is not
Reconciled here, I but suppress a flame,
To give it vent more dangerous.
A free welcome to all;
Sit, and some wine; this Music is not
Sprightly enough: To his Majesty of Spain
He that doth pledge the Kings health with a murmur
May his next thirst inflame him to drink poison.
The King hath a true servant in Piracquo.
He that is not, had never sense of honour;
And may he perish all but soul, that dares
Harbour a thought disloyal. To your Highness
Give me another:
This wine looks cheerful as my heart, to drink
The Princess fair Maria's health.
My turn
Will come, Sir, to be grateful.
Here my Lord.
May swift time perfect by your sacred Loves,
The happiness of both kingdoms.
May that day,
That seals your glorious Hymen, Sir, be ever
Holy within our Calendar, and beget
A faith, that all things then begun, may prosper.
I thank thee, Manual.
Sir, you may
Believe Don Manuel's language, and his heart
Are twins, they bear one date of time, &amp; sense.
You must now give me leave, Sir, to requite
You in part; A health to the King of Portugal;
Let it move this way, Manual.
It shall
With humble thoughts be entertainedyou honour me.
It is but Justice Manual; for when Spain
Would not acknowledge, nor allow us being,
Our lives were welcome there, till better stars
Sent him, to whose bounty we ow all that's left us.
No more o'that my Lord, I am very confident,
In any honourable cause, you dare
Express your faith to me; and for your son,
We two have been companions, I dare say,
Our hearts are touched by one Magnetic virtue,
And such a sympathy, I cannot wish
What's dearest to me, but he flies to embrace it.
I like not this
Manual, begin a health:
We have had my Sisters and the Kings already,
Name your own Mistress for the next.
I should conclude her worthy of remembrance,
If one were first preferred. Will your Grace please Sir,
To let me have the honour
Come, to me.
To the white hand of fairest Isabella.
Would she were
Present to thank you Manual.
It is an affront, as Clara were his own
Already; ha! civility and honour
Prescribe me patience, dares he insult?
When this hath had the ceremony, Manual,
'T shall be my office to remember Clara;
I must have time to quit the favour, Sir,
You've done my Mistress; in your ear; though I
Was pleased to reconcile you to the Prince,
And order your enlargement, Clara must
Be mine, or one of us be nothing; you
May think on it yet.
I have Sir, and to show
How much I can obey, and that I have not
Intruded like a thief upon your treasure,
And filched her heart away, it is now within
Her choice again, if you prevail upon
Her kinder thoughts, I can sit down despised.
Thou art my best friend now. Antonio
Me-thinks we are not pleasantif she should
Be a little obstinate, it would become,
And speak the bravery of thy soul, and service,
To use some language for me, wo't thou Manual?
Thou dost not know the sufferings of my soul
For Clara.
But I pity 'em.
It is new balsam
Into my wounds; where is the health, Piracquo?
I feel new spirits dancing in my blood,
The health begun to Clara languishes,
Why should I want it, Gentlemen?
It was named
By Manual to my Sister Isabella;
Prince Carlo, you forget.
To Isabella?
Your Graces pardon, I confess my error,
I forgot her indeed, but could your wishes
Translate that Princess hither, she should be
A witness of my honourable thoughts.
What Magick's this? do any know that face?
It is very like the Princess Isabella.
I would she were a Ghost; Antonio,
Ha you got enchantments?
You may stay, Sir.
I love not to converse with spirits.
Sir,
This is no shadow.
It is to me, Sir.
Meet me at Clara's, or be lost to honour.
It was your Counsel brother, that reserved me
For this first entertainment. My good Lord
Piracquo, and Don Manual, you seem not
So much affrighted, as the Prince.
A devil
In such a shape could never fright me, Madam;
But persons of your quality shift not so
Much air without a noise; the motion
Of Princes has much rumour to attend it.
I chose to come so private, I arrived
The City but last evening.
You have much
Honoured Madrid.
Why, how now brother, are
You frighted too?
Yes, and do sweat at soul,
To see our selves neglected.
Some are not fortified against a sudden accident;
In my desert, and innocence, I can
Interpret nothing yet in my dishonour,
Since joys have ecstasies sometimes, and with
Their rapture may transport our senses from us,
As soon as any other passion.
Besides, I heard him wish me here a witness
Of honourable thoughts, he has but now
Removed his person, to acquaint the King,
With greater preparation to receive
A Guest so unexpected.
But I like not the Prince's humour, you
Had whisperings Manual I observed.
I shall
Keep nothing Sir in Clouds from you.
Thou shall it direct me Isabella, we'll to Court
My Lord Piracquo, Manual.
How ere
I put a valiant brow on his neglect,
And seem to make a gloss in his defence,
My soul is sick with fear.
Come Isabella.
We both attend your grace.
My engines want success, Piracquo is
Restored to his full being, and his Son
At large, and reconciled by Carlo's act.
My Nephew had been better to have waked
A sleeping Dragon, than have crossed my aims;
He has rescued them, but drawn upon his bosom
As many wounds as policy and my
Revenge can make. I was too tame, to strike
At useless Shrubs, that hinder not my prospect;
My thoughts should have no study but a Kingdom;
It is my Heaven, and this young Cedar spread
Betwixt my eyes, and it; I have already
Betrayed his love to Clara, and the King
That hath made up an Idol to himself
Of honour, is inflamed to my own wishes;
I know the Prince will be impatient
To hear his Mistress tossed by the Kings anger,
And he may leap into some disobedience,
That may be worth my second charge to sink him;
And then Piracquo, Manual, and the Kingdom
Shall stoop to my devotion; yet I carry
A smiling brow to all, and please the King,
To think I am reconciled.
My Nephew
Where is the King?
Where I left him displeased, and was now coming
To Prince Antonio's Lodgings to acquaint you.
With what?
Have you contracted love with Duke Mendoza's
Daughter, the Lady Clara?
What officious
Tongue hath been bold to mention her?
He has
Had some intelligence, and is almost grown
Wild with the strange resentment, I not knowing
What to object against his passion, thus
Surprised, you may believe applied what lenitives
My understanding could collect of the sudden,
With confidence, when you came to give account,
The accusation would fall off, and he
Appear too credulous against your honour.
It were no treason to Castle, my Lord,
If I confessed this mighty fact.
It is justice
If you de love her honourably, to avow it.
Isabella is no Angel.
Nor is Clara
Of an extraction to digrace a Prince.
Though he be my Father, he did not
Beget my Soul; who's with him?
I left the Duke Mendoza.
Has he made
Complaint o'me? it is well; let me preserve
Good Uncle still your loving thoughts; it is
n vain to move my Father now.
There is
I way, if you could but dissemble, Sir,
To set your wishes right, and Letters may
e so contrived to Portugal.
The Princess
Is here already Uncle.
Isabella?
Now with Antonio, and I am lost.
Would thou were never to be found again.
I must doe something.
The Princess thus
Affronted may be worth my own ambition.
Calm thoughts attend you Sir.
I'm glad I came so well off from the King,
His anger made me tremble, I was jealous
Of more discovery, when he named the Prince:
This Treason is a kind of a quotidian,
It leaves a man no interval; I durst
Not mention Pedro at all, for fear
The King had skill in Cabala; I'm afraid
There's something in the very name, that may
With a small key be opened to my danger.
You are well met my Lord, doe you know me?
Know you Sir? yes I know you for
For what?
The Prince, I hope; now I'm betrayed for certain,
Yet if he know it, he will not be so furious.
Are you so much an enemy to your self,
To tell the King?
I tell the King? alas
I dare not tell it to my Ghostly Father,
I have more regard to you, and my own life,
My Family's undone by it.
By what Sir?
Nay if you know not, I know not neither, Sir;
What doe you mean?
Am not I worthy in your opinion
Your Daughter Clara's love?
Oh, is that all?
But you must dote, and tell the King on it.
I? I disclaim it, by my life and honour.
I thought you had loved me Sir.
He is a Traitor
That dares accuse me; now I may speak boldly;
My Blood and Fortune have a little name
In the World, to which make an addition of
My Life, my Daughter Clara too, were these
In balance against you, they would be light,
And their whole loss repaird, to see you happy:
If this be false, a Whirlwind snatch me Sir,
And let me hang in some prodigious Cloud
Twixt Earth and Heaven.
This is a bold expression.
But I must tell you Sir, for your own sake,
I would not have you love my Daughter Clara,
Were she in beauty, person, and all ornaments,
Fortune and Nature could bestow, more excellent
Than Isabella.
Why an't please your Wisdom?
Sir in my love to you, and Isabella,
My duty to your Father, and the Kingdom,
Nay for my Daughter's sake, and all my hope
Of after-joyes, and for one other reason
Above all these, which I conceal; yet I
Complained not to the King.
Excluding me,
Your Grace can be content, Don Manual
Should have your Daughter.
Rather than your Highness,
I know a reason for it.
I must so too.
Your Grace shall pardon me at this time.
I wo'not Sir.
If you'll needs have it, I have made a vow
I wo'not ask my Daughter blessing Sir;
If you two meet, and marry, she may live
To be a Queen, and then I'll kneel to her,
Which is not in the Oath of my Allegiance.
The old man raves.
The King.
He shall not see me
Till I know all my fate.
How doe you like the Prince Antonio?
Sir, if you allow me freedom
You enjoy it.
His Person, Blood, and expectations, are
High as the wishes of a Queen, and I
With pious gratitude acknowledge all
My duty, and my prayers a just return
To your great care; but give me Sir your pardon,
If I prefer some thoughts that prompt me to
A better choice.
A better choice? look back
Upon that character your breath but now
Delivered in his honour.
I confirm it;
But when you hear me humbly beg I may
Perform religious duties Sir to Heaven,
You will think nature hath a place beneath 'em:
If I could find any consent to marriage,
Antonio would prefer himself the first
To my election: but if you were pleased
You would be a Nun?
That hath expressed my wishes.
So I should
Affront the Prince: how long Maria has
This fit of your Religion held you? ha!
No more, least I suspect this a pretence
To hide your love placed otherwise unfitly,
If I find where your heart is wandering
It knows obedience better, and your name,
Than to choose any path leads not to honour.
I must direct it then to love Antonio.
My Children are turned rebel.
Sir I hope
My offer with your leave, to dedcate
My life to prayer, and Virgin-thoughts, will merit
A better name.
Your brother Carlo too
Will find himself at loss, if he collect not
Himself, and make our Royal Promise good
To Isabella; while my studies are
To make the Kingdom firm by our alliance
With Portugal, be courts the Lady Clara.
I would she were his Bride, so I had Manual.
And you at the same time, and height of both
The Kingdoms expectations, would take a Cloister,
Is this to pay obedience to a Father,
Whose cares have kept him wake to make you happy?
Goodness forbid, that Carlo or Maria
Should move me to just anger.
This is virtue.
He is passionate, and Love that makes all Ladies
Apt and ingenious to contrive, cannot
Inspire or help me with an heart to advance
A little hope.
It cannot be! Maria,
We are surprised, the Princess Isabella
Is privately arrived, and come to Court:
Where is our Son? all should prepare to meet her.
You may believe I trifle not.
The Princess Isabella come?
Now if but Clara think I honour her,
And instantly accept what I am willing
In presence of the Priest and Heaven to give her,
The Ceremony waits to make all perfect.
I dare not Sir.
Say but you love, and that will teach you valour;
I bring not only proof of my own loyalty,
Which if examined must invite thy faith,
But thy security, a Release from Manual;
His soul is on my side, and comes to render
In pity of thy wound, a balm into
Thy breath; be gentle Clara.
A Release? of what?
Of all, thy Promise hath made mine;
Observe me wisely Clara, and distinguish,
As far as honour will permit, how long,
And with what bleeding thoughts the Prince affects thee;
For I have looked into his soul, and back
Upon the feeble merits of my self,
And therefore giving thy own Vows again,
I dis-engage their strength to bind thee Clara,
And to that sweetness thy first bosom had,
Remit thy quiet thoughts.
You are just.
Pray give
Me leave to understand this mystery,
To give me back all those assurances
Of Love my Promise made, I'll not dispute
For what unworthiness I am neglected.
I dare not be so impious.
Then here I take
My liberty again.
You have it.
Now I with safety of my honour, may
Choose where I please.
You may.
And you desire it;
You have power I must confess to give me from you
Into my own possession, but no title
Now to direct my heart, then though I meet
My own despair, here I give Clara back,
And with new Vows as strong as my Religion,
And Love can make, contract my self again
To Death, or Manual.
A Conspiracy!
I have resigned no interest in him,
And by new choiceam not my own again.
So, so, it is as possible in our destinies
We should enjoy her both, as live together,
When Clara is thy Bride.
That sound was tragical;
Oh call those fatal words again, and think
That if with safety of my faith I cannot
Meet your desires already, you will force
My soul to greater distance, by destroying
What most I love; I know you doe but fright me.
If I be marked for your revenge, I dare not
Think you will stain your honour, to contrive
My death ignobly.
What was that he mentioned?
Sir, by your name and blood I charge you hear me,
By these (your rage compels) a Virgins tears,
I can kneel too, take your revenge on me,
It is I that have offended, for your sake
He did return the interest I gave him,
But it was not in his power to revoke
Himself made mine, nor dare I quit possession.
I have but tried thy virtue, Manual
And I are friends.
That was a heavenly language.
Our swords shall serve to nobler uses, Clara,
I'll not disturb the progress of your Marriage;
And since I see you're fixed so gloriously,
Proceed to your own Hymen, I'll attend you,
And witness all your holy rites.
Blessed change!
What prayers and duty can reward his goodness?
I hope you'll not deny for my past service,
Madam, your smile upon me, which shall be
A triumph after all my wounds received,
And boast a glory next to be your husband;
For I consider now I am unfit.
Farewell, we may salute. Remember, Manual,
The time and place.
What was it the Prince whispered?
Nothing, Madam,
To fright your cheek to paleness.
I do tremble.
Were all this reconcilement a disguise,
And that he meant revenge, should time and place
Fit his inteuts, and I should meet his anger,
t this secure thy peace, his honour will
Not let him wound me basely, and when I
Lift up a sword against him, fate let me dye.
My Lord is coming to my chamber, he
Has been with the King, I see my self already
Knight of the order of the Calatrava,
And my Commission signed for the State Secretary.
I am not the first servant of the Court
Has kept his Lord in awe; these Secrets are
An excellent curb to ride a Statesman with,
That is not come to the art of poisoning.
I know he wishes heartily I were hanged;
I tried him once for the wars; to find his pulse,
And I was listed Captain, before some
The General knew had been seven years in service
(As Ushers to right honourable Ladies)
There was his Graces commendations
To a Field-officer, that should drill me out,
The first to dye, with honour on some on-slaught;
So quited that preferment.
He is come; I'll take no notice.
If he lived at the t'other end of the world,
He might betray me in the next packet: Ha!
Item I bequeath
What art thou doing?
Only making up my Will, Sir; and my self
eddy for the Indies; it is a loneage,
And therefore I would settle every thing
Before I go; if your Grace please to honour me,
I would make you my Executor.
But when,
Will you dye Pedro? ha?
Sir, there be storms,
Abroad, and who does know how soon the waves
May roar, and crack the cabins?
Ha!
There may be Calentures, my Lord, and twenty
Devices to be met at sea, beside
The land diseases; there be Hericanoes
Are boisterous enough to tear up mountains,
And strike a ship clean through o't'other side
To the Antipodes.
He deals with the devil, and knows my thoughts.
There's no hast to make your will, I have
Considered of the business, and truth is,
I cannot find my heart willing to part with thee,
So far thou hast been faithful; we will live
And dye together.
By no means, my Lord:
I am resolved I will not live in Spain
A month, for as much plate as the next Fleet
Brings home; no, I beseech your Grace excuse me.
Why Pedro?
If your Grace please I shall be Knighted,
Or have the Office you have promised, do it,
And do it betime, it will be worse for both else.
You do not threaten to reveal the business?
'Lass, there be other matters, Sir, as dangerou
And if you love your self, or honour, finish
I cannot help it.
I am all a bath!
Pedro, why dost thou fright me so? if thou
Be honest, ther's no mortal ean betray us.
Worse, worse than that; let me go travel, Sir,
And far enough; it is not possible
That I should stay, and you preserve your wits.
The reason?
It will make you mad to hear it, Sir,
But it is my desperate fate, the stars command it;
Would I had never seen
What?
A face that I could name.
If it concerns not
The other mystery, let me hear it, Pedro,
I will be armed.
Why then you'll cut my throat;
You cannot hold your hand; pray let me go,
And you may save all yet.
Thou dost torment me.
And yet it is no fault of mine, directly,
We are all flesh and bloodoh Sir.
Out with it.
You'll curse me when you know it.
I would your Grace would guess, but it is impossible;
It is working to get out, I am
Well said.
Oh Sir, I amI amin lovenow it is out.
That all?
All? a Pistol to a Maravide you 
Your Rapier presently upon me, and
If I name but the party, will not have
The patience to foin, but tilt it at me.
Sir, do not know it; what will become of me?
It will be safer, Sir, to hoist sails yet,
No matter whither, So I never come
Again; for if I see one face too often,
Both you, and I, and she's undone: I have
Beaten my self already, fasted, prayed,
Been drunk, and prayed again, nothing will kill
Concupiscenceoh Sir.
Why, this is raving.
I, you may call it what you please, but here
She lies a cross that must, or doe the deed,
Or make poor Pedro miserable.
How he sweats?
Pedro do not despair, this fever may
Be cured, it may.
Indeed you can do much;
For to say truth, your Grace is both acquainted,
And has no small command upon the party.
Nay then be confidentwho is it?
It isshall I name her?
By my honour I will beat thee else.
Why so then;
The pretty soul, I will confess to you,
Whom, if I stay, I must
Enjoy; this such a business?
IsisClara, your Graces one, &amp; only daughter.
Ha!
I told you this before, but do not do it, Sir, now,
I rather look for it in the next salad,
Or in my mornings draught; there's spice in your closet;
Or we have Spanish figs.
Thou most unheard-of impudence! how can't hope
I should not cut thy head off? sirrah, rascal.
To these things humane nature has been prone;
But if you kill e, Sir, there is a schedule,
A Secret in a bag of writings, left
In a friends handnay I did look for this,
There is an Inventory of Goods were stolen;
The Anno Domini, with Aetatis sue
Set down, the day of the month, and place remembered,
If these do not revenge my death
Why so; a pox upon theeyet come hither,
And let me cut thy tongue out.
I confess
I am not fit to marry, Sir, a Lady of
Her Princely birth and fortune, all considered;
Alas, I know I am a wrethbut
Thou would have her to be thy whore, &amp; me
Thy pander to speak for theerogue, devil,
I must kill thee, there is no remedy.
Hold, you mistake me, Sir, 'is no such business.
What would thou have then?
I would go beyond sea, I, to the Indies, ir,
Or turn a Haddock by the way; send me
To the new Islands, or Iapan.
From whence you may send Letters to the King;
No sirrah, I'll not trust you.
It is a hard case, my Lord, I have dangerous sailing
Betwixt your Graces Scylla and her Caribdis.
I dare not kill him; why do I not kill my self ten?
No, I wo'not, I will talk reason to him;
Come hither sir, my tormentor.
I Sir
If your hot blood must have a cooler, will
None serve your rogues turn, but my daughter Clara?
Say thou art mad
I have too many senses.
Or if your wantonness must be confined
Within my walls
The more my sorrowbut I'll try my Lord,
If you will give me leave, for your sake, Sir,
Among her Gentlewomen, what I can do
To conjure down my devil, I will take
Some physic too, Sir, every thing will help;
Would I were whipped, my Lord
Whipped with a vengeance?
But I am grieved
For your vexation, and my scurvy fortune;
But if there be a wench, a witch, a medicine
Above ground, that can give me any charm,
Your Grace shall hear no more on itSo, your pardon.
And now my Lord, let your unworthy servant
Have leave to ask one question; does not your Grace
Suspect me monstrously? nay do ye not think
I do presume too much upon your fears?
And that the knowledge of this Secret makes
Me bold and saucy, my good Lord?
It is all too true, but it is not in my brain
To helped, unless I take some course to kill thee.
How?
I fear I shall be driven to it; one fit
Like this will work my impatience up: look to it.
Why, then I'll tel your Grace an easy way
To remove all your jealousy, and never
Trouble your brain with study how to kill me,
A most compendious way.
I would I knew it.
It is but my going to the Court, my Lord,
And if you be not cured within an hour
After I have told the King a story, how
Your wife the Duchess lostI have done
Fear nothing.
Is not Prince Carlo here?
Not here, my Lord.
It is the Kings pleasure you attend him presently,
Your daughters presence is expected too
Among the Ladies, for the entertainment
Of Princess Isabella, new arrived the Court.
We humbly wait to kiss his hand.
Shall I attend?
I am resolved now not to sleep without thee,
And in the day, I'll look upon thee, Pedro,
As thou were my great Seal, and I thy keepr.
Yet I may give you a slip.
We'll to Clara:
The Princess Isabella come so private, ha! Pedro?
I am here, my Lord.
This is the place by his commands to meet in;
It has a sad and fatal invitation.
A Hermit that forsakes the world for prayer,
And solitude, would be timoos to live here.
There's not a spray for birds to perch upon;
For every tree that over-looks the vale,
Carries the mark of lightning, and is blasted.
The day which smiled as I came forth, and spread
Fair beams about, has taken a deep melancholy,
That fits more ominos in her face than night;
All darkness i less horrid than half light.
Never was such a scene for death presented,
And there's a ragged mountain peeping over
With many heads, seeming to crowd themselves
Spectators of some Tragedy; but I'll
Prevent 'em all; though my obedience
Instructed me to wait here, it shall not
Be bribed to draw my sword against the Prince;
And in his honour I am safe, how ever
This sense of Clara's loss transport him, it is not
Within his nature to be impious.
And if  gain his friendship, I return
With triumph to my Clara.
Oh help, Don Manual, help for heavens sake.
Celio the Princes page? where is the Prince?
Oh Sir, I fear he's slain.
By whom?
The Devil, or one not very much unlike him,
A More, that basely set upon him, sure
He has dispatcht the Prince, he pursues me,
And if he have, Death shall be welcome to me,
For I am not fit to live, and lose my Master.
He's here, and his sword bloody.
Villain! were all thy blood rivers of balm,
Or such a flood as would restore a life
To the departed World, it should be all
A sacrifice to Carlo.
Hold, hold Don Manual.
Can thou be merciful to the Princes Murderer
Curse on my Duty to obey so far.
My Lord, the Prince is slain, you are wounded too.
The Prince!
Don Manual, I forgive thee.
Pray Heaven this be a Dream; for if my hand
Have been so much a Traitor, it shall call
No other aid in your revenge: Are you
Prince Carlo?
I was.
That voice shall be my sentence.
Hold, I charge thee by thy honour, Manual.
Why did you wear this black upon you Sir?
Or how could art of man contrive a Cloud
Which this Soul had no eyes to penetrate?
I knew thou would not fight against me knowingly,
And if I fell, I meant it to secure
Thy act from punishment, when in this darkness
I took my leave of the World, only that boy,
Whom I compelled to feign me wounded, so
To make thee draw thy sword; but with my blood
I feel my spirits vanish, if I have
ut breath enough, I send by thee a kiss
To thy own Clara now.
Oh, help good boy!
For it is no time to curse thee now, my horse
Is not far off, this scarf may stay his bleeding
Until we meet with better Surgery.
Now Heaven reprieve my strength but to convey him
To some good place, and I resign my self
To all the justice you will call me to.
You're all but my tormentors; whore's Piraecquo?
His son is absent too.
Have comfort Sir.
Our neglect is lost in the General Cause,
What doe you think my Lord Mendoza?
This no news of the Prince is not so comfortable.
The news you bring?
Unless he had left the Kingdom
Be dumband he had left the World
Your cares might have pursued him; if he
Return not, you have murdered him.
My Stars are now
At work in Heaven, their influence is powerful,
I will adore the Sun if it dissolve not
This mit in which the Prince is lost; I am
Content thou be a Constellation Carlo,
In any Sphere but this.
To me? it is Manuel's character.
Unless we hear some good news of the Prince,
I fear we lose the King too.
It is strange none should attend him but his Page.
I fear some plot is practised against his life,
But dare not speak.
That's it distracts the King,
Whose fears are helped by a sad dream he had
Last night.
My Lord Piracquo's son is missing too.
Comfort your self till my return,
I'll find 'em, or ne'er see your face again.
Well said Piracquo, all my prayers go with thee.
Pedro.
My Lord.
I know not what to say, but stand
Before, they may not see me weep.
Sir, I must confess
Ha! Confess?
You are still suspicious, have a true heart,
And let your conscience look less abroad Sir,
If he be dead, your trouble's over Sir;
We must all dye, Death has his several ways
And times to take us off, some expire humbly
In the Cradle, some dismissed upon a Scaffold
Come hither, doe not name a Scaffold, I
Was innocent thou know, the plot was all
My Ladies, and not one survives the Secret,
But we two.
Keep your own counsel Sir,
This Fatherly affection may doe harm,
He could not dye in better time,
Madam, can you,
Whose honour seems to suffer by this absence,
Have so much charity to comfort me?
He is not desperate, while we have hope.
My Lord Piracquo's son may wait upon him.
Don Manual.
Hast brought news of my Son?
I can inform you a sad story Sir.
Where is the Prince?
Not dead I hope.
Hast thou a jealousy will concern that fear?
My soul has been a Prophet: what misfortune?
If you have strength to hear a truth
So sad, he has been wounded.
By what Traitor? look to the Princess.
I had not with such boldness undertook
The Tragic Story, if I had not brought
The great Offender.
Oh, welcome Manualwhore's the Body?
Where it doth want no Surgery, but my Father
Is gone with all the wings his fear and duty
Can aid him with, at his return to acquaint you
With Carlo's life, or death.
Would I were his Surgeon.
Thou hast not named the Villain yet, he may
Escape.
I have took order for his stay,
Until your anger and the Laws conclude him.
Thou hast done us service.
And it will sink by slow degrees into
Your faith, that he, who gave him all his wounds,
Was one that loved him faithfully.
Loved him?
Above his own life.
Torments oretake the Traitor.
It is not well said, with pardon of the King;
When I shall bring you to the weeping heart
Of this poor man, some may allow his penitence,
So great, it may invite a mercy to him;
Alas, he was betrayed to the black deed,
Both sword and soul compelled to it.
Here's a prodigy!
Are you acquainted with the guilty person,
That you dare thus extenuate his fact?
I am, and dare produce himhere he stands,
So far from wishes to out-live the Prince,
He begs to wait upon his Shade.
Does he not bleed?
Apprehend his person.
They are but churlish drops,
And know not their own happiness; this wound
Was made by Carlo, yet how slow it weeps
To answer his effusion? could I reach
Their orifice, I'd kiss the crimson lips,
For his dear name that made 'em.
Did he kill him?
Justice Sir, Justice I beg for Justice
Upon this Murderer.
Now it works.
You? by what nearer interest in Carlo
Should you imagine we are slow to punish him?
It was a black hour when Carlo saw thee first,
Rewarded now for all his love; to prison with him,
And let him see no day.
I kiss your Sentence.
This circumstance is strange, I am not satisfied.
How is the Princess?
Sir she is alive,
And would be glad to hear the Prince were so.
We cannot promise, Clara. Roderigo,
We should be satisfied where his Body is,
or'tis without a Soul, I fear, by this time.
I could instruct the Surgeon a way
To make that sure.
And Manual hath confessed himself the Murderer.
This change was unexpected.
Is he gone to Prison then?
Go home, by that time thou
Hast wept out all thy tears, I'll come, and tell thee
A little sad tale Clara, that shall make
An end, and we will break our hearts together.
Mendoza?
Sir.
Why does thy grief appear
So rude to out-swell mine? he was my Son.
My tears are anger Sir, as well as grief,
That he that did commit this Parricide,
Should be so impudent to say he loved him.
That amazes me.
But Traitors have their Gloss,
And dare expound their disobedient acts,
A branch of their allegiance: precious juggling
Treason would be too ugly to appear
With his own face, but Duty and Religion
Are handsome visors to abuse weak sight,
That cannot penetrate beyond the bark,
And false complexion of things; I hope
You wo'not think a single death sufficient,
If Iulio dye.
Carlo thou meanst
I, I, the Prince, I know not what I say Sir,
Things make me wild
Take heed Sir what you say.
Piracquo is returned.
My son confess the deed, and sent to Prison? so.
Now Sir.
How is the Prince, my Lord?
This was an act of his last strength, as when
A short-lived Taper makes a blaze, it has
Direction to your Sister Sir, and I
His last commands I fear
For the conveyance,
Trust that to megive this Sir to my Sister.
Then he is dead, Piracquo?
Not yet Sir,
But he hath such a wound will not allow
Him many minutes life, it is mortal Sir,
They say, and wo'not pain him past next dressing.
How things succeed to my AmbitionSir
I care not for my head, now let him take it,
It is but for keeping counsel.
It is apparent this misfurtune grew
From both their loves to Clara.
Thy son, Piracquo, dyes.
Great Sir, hear me.
Manual affirms he did not know the Prince
In the habit of a More, and that his Page
By the command of Carlo told him, that
His Master had been wounded by that More,
To engage their fight.
All this the Prince acknowledged.
These are devices to paint Manuel's Treason.
I sooner dare believe one accent from
The Prince's breath, when his just soul was parting,
Than all your Commentaries; I am bold;
Nor can the Law, and all your anger weigh
So heavy as my curse, upon his head
That durst lift up a Sword to wound the Prince:
But let not passion take away your justice,
It is that I kneel for.
Against whom Piracquo?
against him that's guilty of the Prince's loss,
You may incline to think poor Manual innocent.
What riddle's this?
Has not your son, Piracquo,
Confessed himself the Murderer?
Manuel's fortune
Distracts the old man.
Pardon my love of truth, I here accuse
Mendoza, that hath slept so long in Treason.
HaPePedro.
If he deny, I have proof to make him blush,
And sink him with dishonour; Pedro can
Relate a Story will be worth your wonder.
Nay then it is come about, I see,
I cannot Sir confess in better time.
Don Manual has accused himself unjustly
For Carlo's death, that Prince, if I may trust
A Wife upon her death-bed
Roderigo
Give us account from their examination,
And guide us in this Labyrinth. Piracquo
Return to the Prince, what Death hath left of him
Command may be attended hither.
Sir, if you please, I have a great desire
To take a sad leave of the Prince, and kiss
His pale hand, ere his Body be embalmed,
And sear-cloths hide him from us.
It will but
Enlarge your grief.
I will attend my Sister; my Lord Piracquo
You can best direct us.
Convey 'em with a strong guard.
What think you of an Indian voyage now Sir?
My joys are firm at root, Don Manual,
Sir, is not guilty of the Prince's death,
Yet stained with blood to merit execution.
He that is slain did but usurp your blessing,
And was by the art of Duke Mendoza's Lady,
Then Governess to the Prince, after the loss
Of Carlo, that was stolen away an infant,
Put in his place; the Court has been long cozened.
This story will want faith.
The circumstance will make all clear.
Expound the riddle as we walk, there's no
Condition more exposed to care than Princes.
Private men meet the force of common stings,
But none can feel the weight of Kings, but Kings.
A Very goodly pile; a hansom prison!
It has been graced with persons of some honour,
They had but little grace, as well as I,
That came to be your Tenants for all that.
Signior, where is my quondam servant?
My fellow prisoner, Pedro.
He is singing, Sir.
What?
Catches.
He has a fine time on it.
He need not clear his throat for a confession,
He has done that already, and I too;
That trouble's over; and yet call him hither;
But I'll not sing. Poor Iulio, thou art gone,
nd with thy eyes all my delights are closed,
y senses vanish too apaceI was
oo hasty when my Duchess lay a dying
o visit her; had I but stayed one hour,
he had been speechless, and I had been happy
ithout the reach of this unlucky Secret.
Does the house fill, Sir? these are active times,
nd if all men had their deserts, the State
Must be at charge to build new tenements
or Traitors.
The times are busy, Sir.
They are indeed,
Good for al squires of the delinquent body
And sable Twig.
You are very pleasant, Sir.
You would not smile, I think, so much, if Justice
Should take a toy and turn about, it is
Within the hand of fate to fetch a compass,
With your own rod, &amp; whip, you know what follows.
Is this a time and place convenient, Pedro,
To sing your catches?
Yes, and please your Grace.
And cause my songs are set for three parts, Sir,
If it will please your Grace to take the Tenor,
And get the Prince's Page, newly committed,
To sing the Treble, for the Base, let me alone.
You can sing that part at first sight.
I can reach double ef-fa-uth: Shall the boy come?
Yes, yes, why should I grieve?
Why now you are right;
Let men that have no hope to get their freedom
Be fullen, whine like whelps, and break ther sleep,
We must be jolly, and drink sack, and sing.
We? why we? is any thing in our condition
Can promise hope to be enlarged before
The rest? our state, if you consider, Pedro,
Exceeds, in being desperate, other men's,
As we out-sin them in the fact.
Why, there's your error, we are in for Treason, Sir,
That's to our comfort.
Comfort? can there be
A greater charge?
Oh our discharge the nearer;
Poor things, whose highest thoughts are pilfering,
Lye by it, and languish Sessions after Sessions,
Till they have worn away their clothes, and skins too,
And often are reprieved, when he that's sent
Hitherfor Treason, quickly comes to th'bar,
Pleads his not guilty, and is hanged compendiously.
Yet some, with reverence to your observations,
Are not dispatcht.
Then, doubt their causes mainly;
Your Grace, I hope, shall not complain for want
Of timely execution; I am thinking
What Speech is best to please the people at it.
I shall have cause to name your treachery.
Why so, there's more argument by that
To stuff out your confession.
Tell me, and tell me truly,
How long since you discovered this Court Secret
To Don Piracquo?
I was tender hearted, Sir,
And knew that I had but a weak memory,
Therefore the first time that I saw his Lordship,
After he came from Portugal, I told him
The punctual story, lest I should forget, Sir;
What should a man dissemble, &amp; lose time for?
I did it for your good.
It does appear.
It was no foul of mine, you came no sooner
To this preferment.
It might have saved my Iulio's life indeed,
And then though I had dyed
Yet you were against it still;
These jealousies and fears do seldom prosper;
I knew by instinct it were better, but as it is
It is well, your death will be more pitied,
And remarkable.
But what have you got by betraying me?
The credit to be hanged for treason, as
I told your Grace, besides the benefit
Of being read in Chronicles with Lords,
And men of worship, I have prepared a business,
For the present, a provision, Sir,
Will serve any turn.
What's that?
A ballad, Sir,
Before I dye, to let the people know
How I behaved my self upon the scaffold;
With other passages, that will delight
The people, when I take my leave of the world,
Made to a Pavin tune,
Will you hear it?
Away you knave.
Sir, your Daughter.
She comes to condole.
I'll see you another time; your Graces servant.
Sir, I beseech you tell me, for I dare not
Believe the busy noise, they say you have
Confessed strange things, and he that was received
These many years, Prince Carlo, and so lately
Slain, is my brother Iulio.
Sad truth, Clara.
I have heard my Mother say, he dyed an infant.
And I believed it too, but at her death
She told me another story, Clara, that
Prince Carlo by some Pirats had been stolen
An infant from our Castle, on which loss,
She sent me word to Court, my son dyed suddenly;
At which the King fearing some danger might
Follow to the Prince her charge, commanded him
To court, instead of whom, she sent thy brother,
Who was believed the Kingdoms heir, until
Pedro, who waited then nearest thy Mother,
And knew the imposture, brake his oath, and told
Piracquo all the Secret, by whose charge
My death and shame must make up the full Tragedy.
Manual killed my brother then?
He has don't;
And if thou hast a Sister's soul, thou must
Join with thy father, to pull curses on him.
That will not call poor Iulio back again;
They say that Charity will open Heaven.
Charity? will you not curse your brother's murderer?
Upon my blessing I command thee curse him.
That would but wound us more, &amp; not reach him;
Beside, it were an entrenchment upon heaven,
So boldly to prescribe our own revenge,
It were a sin might draw another punishment,
Great as the loss of you.
You are a baggage;
But if thou hast a thought to wish him live,
Here I disclame thee; if thou were a son,
I would pronounce thee bastard, if thou did not
Kill himself thy self, but as it is, I sha'not
Be satisfied, since my own hands are bound,
If thou attempt not something in his danger.
Good Sir, you speak, as you were to expect
No killing sentence from the offended Law.
I'll study some revenge my self.
He's lost;
And in this storm like a distracted passenger,
Whose bark has struck upon some sand, I look
rome the forsaken deck upon the seas,
 find my own despair, which every wave
Swells high, and bids me die for fear of drowning.
May I not see Don Manual your prisoner?
Yes Madam, if you expect until
Princess Maria, who is come to visit him
My affairs concern 'em both,
Direct me with more hast.
Then this way, Madam.
Madam, I ow to your charity this light,
And yet this little Taper may be useless,
I fear the King will lose part of his sentence
When you go hence, for such a full light waits
About you, when you take away your person,
t will be some day still, as I foresee
As you appeared some dawning of the morning.
I would I could bring comfort to thee, Manual
What comfort can you wish me?
Life and liberty;
With these my self, if fate, and thy consent
Were to allow the gift.
It is not well,
Unless you doubted, Madam, my repentance,
To afflict me with these mockeries.
When will you rather perfect what your own
Revenge must prompt you to, my death for Carlo,
Your Princely Brother, Madam? I confess
This hand robed him of life.
Yet in my heart
I dare pronounce thy pardon, Manual.
It is not possible.
Is not that Clara?
That's come to take her leave, before I print
My everlasting farewell on her lip?
Which I shall hardly find, if this rain last,
To drown these lovely meadows; thou shalt be
A Judge between the Princess and poor Manual,
To enable thee for sentence, take upon thee
Her person, Clara; Be the Princess, wo't?
And hear me plead against my sell fand her,
Till she repent her love, and leave me to
A quiet death. I know not how to think
(Maria) you can mean this love to me,
Or that your voice, when it does chime the sweetest,
Is more than preface to my dirge; say that
You have a heart less penetrable than
The scale of Dragons, and as many stings
When they make war, and I'll give faith to you;
For such an enemy as I, must not
Be looked on, but with all your wrath upon me;
Me-thinks I hear your brother call you, Madam,
And hovering, as he scorned to touch the earth
Sustains his Murderer, is pointing to
The wounds I made, whose fountains are still weeping.
I feel a purple dew descend upon me,
And I am all a bloody rock already;
Are not you stiff with wonder yet? if once
You had when I appeared a man, fair thoughts
Of me; it is too much to love me now,
You must convert them into curses, Madam,
And I will call it justice.
I came not
To hear this Comment on my brother's story,
Whom you have killed.
Observe her act your person,
And speak now, as if the sorrow were her own,
And she had lost a brother.
Indeed,
I have wept before, and came not now to learn
A grief for him that was so near my blood:
But I've considered too, the ties of nature
Should have no force against the rules of Justice;
Although it be a sorrow, to remember
He took his great misfortune from your sword,
You did not murder him, nay you did not kill him,
You fought in his revenge, and while he came
Hid in the name and person of a Traitor,
It was your virtue made him bleed, and yet
He was my brother, Sir.
Your brother? more,
He was your Prince too, Madam, think o'that,
The full blown expectation of the Kingdom,
One that redeemed my life from banishment,
And yet I killed him, can you forgive me?
You cannot, must not, Madam.
Yes, and dare
Say, I still love you.
She will punish me,
For giving up my interest to Carlo,
If she encourage thus Maria, Madam,
Do you consider how few sands are left
In my poor glass of time, I cannot promise
Three minutes here, Law and the Kings deree
Have turned two parts of me to dust already;
I feel the third unsettle, and make fit
To be dissolved, but could fate give my life
The period to be wished (remember whom
I speak to Clara) and I need no more
Accuse my self, my heart was long since given
Away, and you as soon may reconcile
Time and Eternity to one growth, and age,
As hope my love and yours should ever meet.
Then it is time to dye.
Madam, she faints,
Oh help, she has forgot her part, this was
Not meant to Clara.
Madam, Madam.
Clara, so, so, she returns,
I should have quickly followed else.
I see
Your loves are sacred, and it is sin to attempt
Your separation; though I loved thee Manual,
I can resign to Clara, whom I hoped
Her Brothers death might have provoked to leave thee.
Her Brothers? let me hear Clara speak; her Brotheirs death?
Having so little time to stay with thee
Alive, why did thou make such hast?
Did not
You Sir pronounce it was impossible
That our two loves should meet?
Thou did not
Represent Clara then, thou were the Princess.
I know not, but your last profession
That our two hearts should never grow together,
Followed so close my Brother's death, I thought
The meaning looked on me.
Thy Brothers death?
You have not slain the Prince my Brother, Manual,
But Clara's, this may yet appear a mystery.
It is too true.
But stay; and can my Clara then forgive me?
No man despair to find Mercy in Heaven,
There is so great a Charity upon Earth.
But doe not leave me lost in the wonder, Madam,
Although it would be happiness to know
The Prince not dead, I cannot hear without
A wound next his, that I have killed thy Brother;
It cannot be, although thou would forgive me,
I cannot be so miserable.
How
Their Souls agree? it were tyranny to part 'em.
Clara, I envied, now allow thy happiness,
And will have no more thoughts upon your loves,
But what shall be employed in hearty wishes
That Manual may live still to reward it;
Thou hast deserved him better than I have
Antonio.
If my death may speak
Addition to the love I owe thee; it is
In my resolution, at that minute
Thy Soul takes leave, my own shall wait upon it,
And take a journey through the Clouds together:
Who knows but they may fill one Star? Farewell,
Till we begin that progress.
Doe not make
Death horrid to me Clara, for to think,
When this unworthy Frame must fall to pieces,
Thy Soul, a fairer Tenant to this building,
Should wander in pursuit of mine
No more;
Let me advise your griefs, I have tears for both,
Divide at distance, you may kiss in heart.
With such a groan souls from their body part
How, an Impostor! though the Peoples tongues,
That catch at every noise, and wave their duty,
As they are prescribed by Faction, or lewd Pamphlets,
Doe talk this loud
Upon my honour, Madam.
I hope your Lordship has another knowledge,
And faith, than to disgrace your blood, the Prince
I say he is no Prince, and we are sorry
A Lady of your greatness should in the height
Of such a glorious expectation, lose
What did invite your person hither.
Ha!
Then I am lost, that Letter has undone me,
Which full of love and satisfaction, made
Me hasty to destroy my self.
It is yet
Within your choice to lose no honour, Madam,
And in my sense of what you else might suffer,
I come to tender reparation,
Both to your love and greatness.
It is not possible.
If you can find within your heart a will
To entertain my love, I'm no Impostor,
The King will call me Brother, be kind Madam,
And what is past shall vanish like a dream.
Secure me with a smile.
My Lord, I thank you;
But there will still remain some characters
By which the world may guess at my sad story.
There cannot.
Yes, I find some printed here,
For I did love the person, I confess,
Of him you call the Impostor: did he know
Himself a Counterfeit?
Let me be just,
And quit him from that Treason.
That is something
To plead his innocence to me; I dare not
Yet ask his name, when I remember what
My tongue consented to before the Priest
So late; yet twill be known; if he be not
The Prince we thought, tel me his other name;
Say, is he basely born?
He is the Duke
Mendoza's son.
That is a comfort yet,
And in the confidence of this truth, my Lord,
I am well again, I thank you.
If this please you,
Doe you remember Madam, he hath wounds
Fatal upon him, that already may
Exclude him from the living?
It would be impious,
While there is any life remaining Sir,
To make another promise; when you say
He's dead, I may with modest freedom hear
What you too early now prepare me for.
You honour me enough.
I find her judgement
Already meet what I propound, he cannot,
He sha'not live to cross me.
It is Piracquo,
He can assure me; you look sad my Lord,
As if with Iulio's giving up the ghost,
Your sons life now were forfeit.
It is too true.
I'll follow, and acquaint her; yet it is safer
She take it from another.
All my hopes
Are in your Grace, the King is coming hither,
If you will bind an old mans prayers, and service,
Second my feeble breath, and mediate
His mercy to my boy, you may be satisfied
In conscience, he had no thoughts to kill him;
The Prince's death will not engage you now
To be poor Manuel's enemy; good my Lord,
Forgive what past in my rash language.
Does not
Your Lordship call to mind there was a sum
Of fifty thousand Ducats?
They shall be sent to your Grace's Secretary, nay
I'll make 'em fifty thousand more, and think
It cheap to save his life, now you are merciful
The bargain would doe well, but you are cozen'd,
I will not take a Maravide, not I,
If upon other honourable terms
I may possess you favour, I shall meet
Your just commands; have you forgot my Lord?
Some men doe keep Records, but I am charitable,
And will not rack your patience
You're gracious.
Ten millions of Ducats shall not ransom
Your Darling from the Scaffold: you observe?
You know your self, your fortune, and upon
What strength you must depend, now I have said
Will your Grace hear?
My son shall live then, and not lose one hair,
If you would pawn your soul to have it otherwise.
I have said too.
So peremptory?
Your Grace must pardon me the truth, I have
A scurvy sullen humour where I meet
A worse, and cannot hold, though I should hang for it,
And so God bu'y to your Grace, we are alone
Be merry with your head ontime may come
I would take boldness, once more, to entreat
That the young man may live till the next Spring,
And then your Grace may purge
So Sir,
I shall find ways to stay your vomiting
The King.
Good Sir be comforted.
Good Sir give me reasons;
I had a son till now, yet long since lost him.
Now you may take revenge.
Tic well remembered.
Mendoza is the Traitor, he shall bleed
For Carlo's loss.
And he deserves, that would
Have cozened the whole Kingdom.
Send for him;
I'll ask him in what wilderness the boy
Has hid himself, command him hither presently,
And if he give me not a satisfaction,
It will be justice then to send his soul
About the world, to find him out.
The Prince Antonio, Sir.
If at a time, when sorrow
Hath exercised his sting, you can admit
To hear me happy in Maria's love,
Let me begin to call you father, and
Till Carlo find your blessing, think you have
One to supply his duty.
It is some
Allay to Carlo's loss, Maria has
Not left her father.
I shall ever live
Within your precept to express a daughter
As unto him a wife.
Both to my heart!
Sit down, where is your sister Isabella?
She not despairs
To be a Bride to one, that may repair
My Nephews loss; and if she smile on me,
It will not draw I hope your frown upon it.
Is not that Isabella?
And this he,
Who, if you call me Sister, must be worth
Your noblest Friendship, and embrace.
Alive?
Your pardon Sir, they knew me innocent,
Made me usurp Prince Carlo's name for Iulio's.
Confusion!
I appeal Sir to your justice, and have brought
My son, to hear your breath pronounce his pardon.
Thus all meet happiness but I; receive
Him free Piracquo, only I must mourn
The loss of mine.
I am no Prince, Don Manual, my fate
Has been unriddled.
My Brother living? we are all safe.
Ha my Iulio?
Your blessing now.
Take it, and with it all my tears, I scorn
To shed one other drop, my joys are mighty,
My heart is all one bonefire
Plead no more,
Mendoza dies, the sentence is irrevocable.
There is a cooler Sir after your bonefire.
Sister, I'll kiss these sorrows off.
You cannot while my Father's doomed to death.
Why does Mendoza live?
Because he must not dye yet. Pedro
My Lord.
I'll give thee Clara first, here take her Manual,
I see she loves thee, lose no tears for me,
My Taper has burnt dim this many years.
Antonio! Maria! Isabella!
Mendoza! witness allproceed Piracquo
I was that Pirate Sir, that stole your son,
And being desperate meant by this surprise
To make my peace
I was in the Confederacy,
And must affirm this truth.
But just when I had fitted my design,
And did expect to have brought Don Carlo home,
I heard he was at Court, no loss deplored,
For by the Duchess of Mendoza's art
Iulio supplied the Princes name, and person.
And sent me word to Court my Son was dead? ha!
This made me think my Kinsman had deceived me,
And then resolved my stay in Portugal,
Where, as my own, I bred, and called him Manual;
Till after many years your Grace redeemed us,
And I at my return confirmed in the story
By Pedro, hitherto protracted time,
With hope to serve Don Iulio for our freedom.
I have your pardon Sir for all.
Thou hast.
I am included, trust me with a Secret Sir
Another time, I knew it would come to this
At last, and with some justice did but punish
Your fears and jealousies; is not this better
Than sending me to the Wars, or shipping me
For t'other World before my time?
You are my best Servant.
And my heir again.
Depose me from this glorious title, Sir,
Unless my Clara may divide the honour.
Providence meant her thine, both call me father.
There is no remedy, Nephew, welcome home,
And Niece, we shall be kindred now Mendoza,
Piracquo we are friends too, and I'll try,
How I can love you heartily.
I hear
The Altar call, make hast, the triumph will
Attend too long, the clouds are chased away,
Night ne'er was mother to so bright a day.

I Say the Court is but a narrow circuit,
Though something elevate about the common;
A kind of Ants nest in the great wilde field,
Orecharg'd with multitudes of quick inhabitants,
Who still are miserably busied, get in,
What the loose foot of prodigality,
As fast doth throw abroad.
Good.
A most eternal place of low affronts,
And then as low submissions.
Right.
High cowards in Revenges amongst themselves,
And only valiant, when they mischief others,
Stars, that would have no name,
But for the ills they threaten in conjunction:
A race of hallow, and unskillfull Pilots,
Which doe misguide the ship, even in the calm,
And in great storms, serve but as weight
To sink it,
More, prithee more.
Tic musique to my melancholy.
My Lord; a cloud of dust and men
The sentinels from the East gate discover,
And as they guess, the storm bends this way.
Let it be.
My Lord.
Let it be,
I will not fight to day,
Bid Strathman draw to the Trenches,
On, prithee on.
The King employs a company of formal Leards,
Men who have no other other proof of their
Long life, but that they are old.
Right, and if they are wise,
Tic for themselves, not others,
As old men ever are.
Colonel, Colonel,
The enemy's at hand, kills all the Centuries,
Young Alermin leads them on again.
Let him lead them off again then,
Colonel.
Be gone,
If th'a'rt afraid, go hide thy self,
What a devil ails hee?
This Almerin's the ague of the Camp,
He shakes it once a day.
It is the ill conscience rather,
He never lets it rest,
Would I were at home again,
S'foot we lye here in the ranches, as if it were
For a wind to carry us in the other
World, every hour we expect,
I'll no more on it;
Prithee.
Not I by heaven.
What man, the worst is but fair death.
And what will that amount to?
Fair Epitaph, a fine account,
Isle home I swear:
Arm, arm, my Lord,
And show your self, ell's lost else.
Why so?
The Rebels, like an unruly flood,
Roll o'er the Trenches, and throw down
All before them.
Ha.
Wee cannot make a stand.
He would out-rivall us in honour too
As well as love, but that he must not doe;
Help me Stratheman; (puts on Armour,
The danger now grows worthy of our swords,
And O Doran, would heaven there were
No other storm, then this worst Tempest here.
There:
The Sun's the nearest surgeon I know,
And the honestest, if thou recover, why so?
If not, the cure's paid; they have mauld us.
A curse light on this powder,
It spoils valour ever it is half way it's journey,
What a disadvantage fight we upon in this age?
He that did well heretofore,
Had the broad fair day to show it in,
Witnesses enough; we must believe one another,
It is night when we begin.
Smalke, by this hand I can bear with you
No longer, how now? dead as I live;
Stolen away just as he used to a wench,
Well go thy ways for a quiet drinker and dyer,
I shall never know thy fellow; (searches his pockets.
These trifles too about thee.
There was never an honester poor wretch
Borne, I thinks, hum Marrinell (she spies Marrinell,
Who's that?
Tic I, Hem how goes matters?
Scurvily enough;
Yet since our Colonel came, they've got no ground
Of us, a weak Sculler against wind and Tide,
Would have done as much, hark,
This way the Torrent bears.
The villains all have left us.
Would they had left their fears,
Behind them with the enemy,
But come, since we must.
Hoe Stratheman,
Skirt on the left hand with the horse;
And get betwixt these and that body:
They are rallied up for rescue.
They are our.
Charge through.
What shout is that?
They've taken Almerin my Lord.
Almerin, the devil thank them for it,
When I had hunted hard all day,
And now at length unhearded the proud dear,
The curs have snatched him up, sound a retreat.
Ther's nothing now behind; who saw Doran?
Shall we bring Almerin in my Lord?
No, Gazing is low Triumph,
Convey him fairly to the King,
Hee fought it fairly.
What youth was that whom you bestride my Lord,
And saved from all our Swords to day,
Was he not of the enemy?
It may be so.
The Governors son Fresolin his mistresses brothere
in Dorancare.
No matter whom.
Pity the rough hand of war, should early
Courages destroy, before they bud,
Or show themselves in the heate of action.
I threw my Lord a youth upon a bank
Which seeking after the retreat I found
Dead, and a Woman the pretty daughter
Of the Forester, Lucillia.
See, see, Doran, a sad experiment,
Woman's the cowardliest and coldest thing
The world brings forth,
Yet love as fire works water,
Makes it boil over, and doe things contrary
To its proper nature,
I should shed a tear could I tell how:
Poor Lucillia, thou did for me what did
As ill become thee, see her gently buried:
Boy, send the surgeon to the tent; I bleed:
What lousy cottages they'ave given our souls?
Each petty storm shakes them into disorder,
And costs more pain to patch them up again
Then they are worth by much:
I'm weary of the tenement.
Villanor, welcome, welcome, when came thou?
Look, I wear the Kings high way still on my boots
A pretty riding phrase, and how, and how,
Ladies cheap.
Faith reasonable.
Those toys were never dear thou know;
A little time and industry they'll cost.
But in good faith, not much, some few there are,
That set themselves at mighty rates.
Which we of the wise pass by,
As things are valued in the market;
I'st not so?
You have said Sir.
Your friend the Rival's married,
Has obtained the long loved Lady,
And is such an ass after.
Hum. Tic ever so,
The motions of married people are as of other natural violent
Gentlemen to the place and calm in it.
We know this so, and yet we must be fooling.
Faith, women are the baggage of life,
They are troublesome, and hinder us
In the great March; and yet we cannot be without 'em:
You speak very well, and Soldier-like.
What thou art a wit too I warrant
In our absence.
Hum. No, no, a poor pretender,
A Candidate, or so, against the next Sessions,
Wit enough to laugh at you here.
Like enough, valour's a crime,
The wise have still approached unto the valiant,
And the fools too.
Raillery apart Granivert,
What accommodation shall we find here?
Clean straw sweet heart, and meat,
When thou can get it.
Hum-straw.
Yes.
Tha's all will be betwixt Incest,
You and your mother Earth must Iye together
Prithee let's be serious, will this last?
How goes affairs?
Well;
But well
Faith it is now upon the turning of the balance,
A most equal business t'wixt Rebellion and Loyalty.
What dost mean?
Why which shall be the virtue, and which shall
be the vice?
How the devil can that be?
O success is a rare point, hides all the ugliness!
Prithee what's the quarrel?
Nay, for that excuse us,
Ask the children of peace,
They have the leisure to study it:
We know nothing of it, Liberty they say:
S'foot Let the King make an act,
That any man may be unmarried again;
The's liberty for them, a race of
Half wetted fellows quarrel about freedom,
And all that while allow the bonds of matrimony.
You speak very well Sir;
Soft, the King and Council.
Look, they follow after like tired spaniels,
Quest sometimes for company, that is, concur,
And that's their business.
They are as weary of this sport,
As a young unthrift of his land.
Any bargain to be rid on it.
Can you blame them, who's that?
Brennoralt, our brave Colonel,
A discontent, but what of that, who is not?
His face speaks him one,
You are in the right!
He looks still as if he were saying to
Fortune, huswife, go about your business,
Come let's retire to Burrutheus Tent,
Taste a bottle, and speak bold truths,
That's our way now.
Think not of pardon Sir,
Rigour and mercy used in states
Incertainly and in ill times,
Look not like theffects of virtue,
But necessity, nor will they thank
Your goodness, but your fears.
My Lord Revenge in Princes
Should be still imperfect, it is the handsomest,
The King comes to reduce, not ruin.
Who puts but on the face of punishing,
And only gently acts, but prunes Rebellion,
He makes that flourish, which hee would destroy
Who would not be a rebel? when the hopes
Are vast, the fears but small.
I would not, nor you my L. nor any here,
Fear keeps low spirits in, the brave
Doe get above it, when they doe resolve,
Such punishments in infancy of war,
Makes men more desperate, not more yielding:
The common people are a kind of flies,
Are caught with honey, not with wormwood,
Severity exasperates the stirred up humour,
And state distempers turns into diseases.
The Gods deend great Poland state should bee
Such, as it dares not to take right Physic,
Quarters to rebels Sir.
When you give that to them,
Give that to me which they deserve,
I would not live to see it.
Turn o'er your own
And other Chronicles, &amp; you shall find (great)
That nothing makes a civil war long lived, (Sir
But ransom returning back the brands,
Which unextinct kindled still fiercer fires.
Mercy bestowed on those dispute with Swords,
Does loose the Angel face it has,
And is not mercy Sir, but policy,
With a weak vizard on.
You've not my thoughts, My Lords,
Nor will it need larger debates to morrow,
In the sight of the besiged, the rebel dyes,
Miessa, tic your care the mercy
Of high heaven may be offended so,
That it cannot forgive mortals, much more
Which is not infinite, My Lords.
O Almerin,
Would we had never known the ruffle of the world,
But were again by golden banks in solitude,
Where thou and I, shepherd, and sheapherdesse,
So oft by turns, as often still have wished,
That we as easily could have changed our Sex
As Cloths, but all those innocent joys,
Like glorious morning are retired into
Dark sullen clouds, before we know
To value what we had.
Fame, and victory are light huswies.
That throw themselves into the arms
Not of the valiant, but the fortunate
To be taken thus:
Almerin.
Nipped in the bud of honour.
My Lord.
Foiled, and by the man,
That doth pretend unto Francelia.
What is it you doe my Almerin?
Sit still and quarrel with the winds
Because there is a shipwreck towards,
And never think of saving of the Barqe.
The Bark, what should we doe with that?
When the rich freight is lost, my name in arms.
Who knows what prizes are behind,
If you attend, and wait a second voyage.
Never, never,
There are no second voyages in this,
The wounds of honour doe admit no cure.
Those slight ones which misfortune gives must needs,
Else why should mortals value it at all?
For who would toil to treasure up a wealth,
Which weak inconstancy did keep,
Or might dispose of?
O my Lord, what news?
As ll as your own fears could give you,
The Counsel has decreed him sudden death,
And all the ways to mercy are blocked up.
My Iphigine,
This was a misbecomming piece of love,
Women would manage a disaster better,
Again thou art unkind;
Thy goodness is so great, it makes thee faulty;
For whilst thou think to take the trouble from me
Thou give me more, by giving me thine too.
Alas, I am indeed, a useless trifle,
A dull, dull thing, for could I now doe any thing
But grieve and pity, I might help;
My thoughts labour to find a way,
But like to birds in cages,
Though they never rest,
They are but where they did set out at first.
My Lord your pardon,
The prisoner must retire,
I have received an order from the King,
Denies access to any.
He cannot be so great a Tyrant.
I thank him, nor can he use me ill enough;
I only grieve that I must dye in debt,
A bankrupt, such thy love has made me;
My dearest Iphigene, farewell,
It is no time for ceremony,
Show me which way I must,
Grief strove with such disorder to get ot,
It stopped the passage, sent back my words,
That were already on the place.
Stay, there is yet a way.
O speak it.
But there is danger in it Iphigene,
To thee high danger.
Fight children in the dark with that,
And let me know it,
Ther's no such thing in nature if Almerin be lost.
Thus then,
You must be taken prisoner too,
And by that exchange save Almerin.
How can that be?
Whystudies.
Step in and pray him set his hand
About this distance, his seal too.
My Lord, I know not what that is.
Settling of money business fool betwixt us.
If it be no more.
Tell him Iphigene and I desire it:
I'll send by Strathocles his servant
A letter to Morat, thus signed, and sealed,
That shall inform the sudden execution,
Command him as the only means,
To save his life, to sally out this night
Upon the Quarters and endeavour prisoners,
Name you as most secure, and slightliest guarded,
Best pledge of safety; but charge him
That he kill not any, if it be avoidable,
Lest it should enrage the King yet more
And make his death more certain.
He understands it not,
He says, but he hath sent it.
But should Morat mistrust now,
Or this miscarry.
Come leave it to me,
Isle take the Pilots part
And reach the port, or perish in the art.
Sleep is as nice as woman,
The more I court it, the more it flies me.
Thy elder brother will be kinder yet;
Unsent for death will come to morrow.
Well, what can to morrow doe?
Twill cure the sense of honour lost;
I and my discontents, shall rest together:
What hurt is there in this?
But death against the will,
Is but a slovingly kind of potion;
And though prescribed by Heaven,
It goes against men's stomachs,
So does it at fourscore too, when the soul's
Mewed up in narrow darkness,
Neither sees, nor hears,
Pish, tic mere fondness in our nature,
A cetaine clownish cowardice, that still
Would stay at home, and dares not venture
Into forragne Countries, the better then
Its ownha, what Countries? for we receive
Description of the world from our Divines,
 As blind men take relations of this from us,
My thoughts lead me into the dark,
And there they leave me; Isle no more on it.
He knocks within there; some papers &amp; a light;
Isle write to the King,
Defy him, and provoke a quick dispatch,
I would not hold this lingering doubtful state,
So long again for all that hope can give.
That Sword doth tempt me strangely
VVer't in my hands, it were worth the other two
But then the guard, it sleeps
And drinks, may be to contrive,
If so, that I could not pass,
Why if I fall in it, tic better yet then pageantry,
A Scaffold or spectators, more Soldier like.
Uncivil villain read my letter?
Not I, not I, my Lord.
Deny it too,
Murder, murder,
Arm, arm.
Isle follow, give the Alarm within,
Tic lest suspicious, arm, arm, arm.
The enemy, the enemy.
Let them come Let them come, let them come.
I hear fresh noise,
The Camp's in great disorder, where am I now?
It is strangely dark, goddess without eyes
Be thou my guide, for blindness, and sight,
Are equal sense, and equal use this night.
Trouble not thy self, child of discontent,
Twill take no hurt I warrant thee,
The state is but a little dunke,
And when't has spud up that, that made it so,
Twill be well again, ther's my opinion in short.
You are in the right,
The state's a pretty forehanded state,
And will doe reason hereafter,
Let's drink, and talk no more on it.
A good motion, a good motion, lets drink.
I, I, lets drink.
Come, to a mistress.
Agreed, name, name.
Any body, Vermillia.
Away with it.
Shees pretty to walk with,
And witty to talk with,
And pleasant to think on,
But the best use of all
Is, her health is a stawle
And hell sus, to make us drink on.
Excellent.
Gentlemen, if you say the word,
VVee'l vant credit, and affect high pleasure,
Shall we?
I, I Let's doe that.
What think you of the sacrifice now?
Cme, we'll have it,
For trickling tears are vain.
The sacrifice, what's that?
Child of ignorance, it is a camp health,
An Alamode one, Granivert begin it.
Come give it me.
Let me see,
Which of them this Rose will serve, hum, hum, hum,
Bright Star of the lower Orb twinkling inviter
Which draw (as well as eyes) but sets men righter.
For who at thee begins, comes to the place
Sooner then he, that sets out at the face:
Eyes are seducing lights, that the good women know
And hang out these a nearer way to show.
Fine, and pathetic, come Villanor.
Whats the matter?
Come your liquor, and your stanzons,
Lines, lines.
Of what.
Why of any thing your Mistress has given you.
Gentlemen, she never gave me any thing but a box
Of the ear, for offering to kiss her once;
Of that box then.
I, I, of that box, of that box.
Since it must be, give me the poison then
That Box fair Mistress, which thou give me and spits.
Inhumane guess, is like to cost me three,
Three cups of wine, and veres six,
The Rime will down, but verse for Rime still sticks,
By which you all will easily, Gentles know
I am better drink then a Po
La you there now.
Doran, Doran.
A Hall, a Hall.
To welcome our friend.
Some liquor he
A newer fresh face,
Must not alter our pace,
But make us still drnik the quicker hoe
Wine, Wine
O tic Divine;
Come let us unto our brother.
What's at the tongues end
It forth doth send
And will not a syllable smother.
Then,
It unlockes the breast,
And throws out the rest,
And learns us to know each other.
Mad lads, have ye been here ever since?
Yes faith, thou see the worst of us.
We debauch in discipline,
Four and twenty hours is the time
Burrutheus had the watch to night,
To morrow twill be at my tent
Good and dee know what has fallen out to night?
Yes, Granivert and my Lieutenant Colonel,
But they are friends again.
Pish, pish, the young Palatine of Florence
And his grave guardian surprised to night,
Carried by the enemy out of his quarters.
As a Chicken by a Kite out of a back-side,
Was it not so?
Is that all?
Yes, my colonel did not love him,
He eats sweet meates upon a march too.
Well, hark ye,
VVorse yet, Almerin's gone,
Forced the Court of Guard where he was prisoner
And has made an escape.
So pale and frightlesse a wretch,
Drew Priams Curtain in the dead of night,
And told him, half Troy was burned,
He was of my mind, I would have done so my self
Well, there's high suspicions abroad.
Ye shall see strange discovery
In the counsel of war.
VVha counsel speaks?
One called this morning,
You're all sent to.
I'll put on clean linen and speak wisely.
Soote weal have a round first.
By all means sir.
Come let the State stay,
And drink away,
There is no businsse above it.
It warmes the cold brain,
It makes us speak in high rain,
Hoe's a fool that does not approve it.
The Macedon youth
Left behind him this truth,
That nothing is done with much thinking,
He drunk and sought
Till he had what he sought,
The world was his own by good drinking.
As your friend my Lord, he has the privilege of ours,
And may enjoy a liberty we would deny
To enemies.
I thank your Excellence,
O Iphigene he does not know
That thou the nobler part of friendship hold,
And dost oblige whilst I can but acknowledge.
Opportunity to states men is as the just degree
Of heat to Chemists, it peracts all the work,
And in this prisoner tic offered.
We now are there where men should still begin
To treat upon advantages.
Te Patine of Trock ad Minse,
With Almerin shall to the King.
Petition shall be drawn.
Humble  form, but of that matter
As the bold Macedonan youths would send
To men they did despise for luxury,
The first begets opinion in the world;
Which looks not far, but on the outside dwells,
To either enforces courage in our own;
For bold demands, must boldly be maintained.
Let al go on still in the public name,
But keep an ear open to particular offer,
Liberty and public good
Are like great Oleos,
Must have the upper end still of our tables,
Tho they are but for show.
Would I had never seen that shape
'Thas poison in it
Yet where dwells good, if il inhabit there?
Press much Religion,
For tho we dress the scruples for the multitude
And for our selves reserve the advantages
(It being much pretext) yet it is necessary
For things of faith are so abstruse and no
They will admit dispute continually,
So howsoever other demands appear,
These never can be proved unseasonable
The subject being of so fine a nature,
If not submits himself to sense, but scopes
The trials, which concludes al common doubts.
My Lord, you use me, as il painters paint,
Who while they labour to make faces fair,
Neglect to make them like.
Madam, there is no ship-wrack of your
Virtues near, that you should throw away
Any of al your excellencies
To save the dearest modesty.
If they proceed with us, we can retreat
Unto expositions, and the peoples votes,
If they refuse us wholly then we plead
The King's besieged, blocked up so straightly
By some few, that relief can find no way
To enter to the King, or yet out to us,
Exclaim against it loud,
Till the Polonians think it high injustice,
And with us better yet:
Then easily doe we rise unto our ends,
And will become their envy through their pity
At worst you may confirm our party there,
Increase it too, there is one Brennoralt
Men call him gallant, but a discontent,
My Cozen, the King has used him ill,
Him a handsome whisper will draw,
The afternoon shall perfect
What we have loosely now resolved.
If in discourse of beauty,
So large an Empire, I doe wander,
It will become your goodness Madam
To set me right;
And in a Cuntry where your self is Queen,
Not suffer foreigners to loose themselves,
What making revenges Palatine,
And taking prisoners fair Ladies hearts.
Yes my Lord,
And have no better fortune in this war
Then in the other, for while I think to take
I am surprised my self.
Dissembler, would thou we't.
You are a Courtier my Lord,
The Palatine of Pocean
Will grace the Hymenalls
And that they may be whilst his stay is here,
I'll Court my Lord in absence.
Take of you the little strangeness
Virgins must wear at first.
Look to the Palatine.
How is it my dearest Iphigene.
Not well, I would retire.
A qualm.
His colour stole away, sunk down,
As water in a weather-glasse
Pressed by a warm hand.
A Cordial of kind looks from the King,
Let us withdraw and hear him.
Yet to be married?
What? are you mute now?
Thou came too hastily upon me,
Putst too close the colours to my eye,
I could not  is impossible.
Impossible!
It were impossible it should be otherwise;
What can you imagine there of constancy?
Where it is so much their nature to love change,
That when they say, but what they are,
They excuse themselves for what they doe.
She hardly knows him yet in such an instant.
O you know not how fire flies,
When it doth catch light matter, woman.
No more of that,
Shoe's yet the pretiousest thing in al my thoughts,
I if it be so, I am a lost thing in the world, Doran.
How.
Thou wilt in vain persuade me to be other,
Life which to others is a good that they enjoy,
To me will be an evil I shall suffer.
Look on another face, that's present remedy
How ill thou dost conclude,
Cause there are pestilent aires which kill men suddenly
In health; must there be sovereign
As suddenly to cure in sickness?
It never was in nature.
I was a oole to think
Death only kept the doors of ill paid Lone,
When or disdain, or spite
Could let me out as well.
Right, were I as you
It should trouble me no more
To free my selle of Love,
Then to spit out that which made me sick.
I'll tell her so, that she may laugh at me,
As at a prisoner threatening his Guard,
He will break loose, and so is made the Faster,
She has charms Doran,
Can fetch in a rebellious heart,
Even while it is conspiring liberty,
O, she has all the virtues of her sex
And not the vices,
Chaste and unsullied,
As first opening Lilies
Or untouched buds.
Chaste, why do ye honour me
Because I throw my self not off a precipice?
Tic her ruin to be otherwise,
Tho we blame those that kill themselves,
We praise not him, that keeps himself alive
That deserves nothing.
And tic the least,
She triumphs when she does not appear
I have as many rivals as beholders.
All that increases but our jealousies,
If you have now such qualms for that you have not;
What will you have, for that you shall possess?
Dull Heretic, know I have these
Because I have not her,
When I have her, I shall have these no more
Her fancy now; Her virtue then will govern,
And as I watch with doubtful eye
The wavering needle in the best sundial
Till it has settled, then the troubles ore,
Because I know when it is fixed, its true,
So hre my doubts are al aore me
Sure Doran, crowned conquerors are
But the types of Lovers, which enjoy and really possess
What tother have in dreams.
I'll send a challenge to him.
Doe and be thought a mad-man,
To what purpose?
If she Love him, she will but hate you more,
Lovers in favour Brennoral are gamesters,
In good fortune, the more you set them,
The more they get.
Isle see her then this night,
By heaven I will.
Where! in the citedll.
Know what, and why?
He raves: Bennoralt.
Let me alno,
I conjure thee by the discretion
Left betwixt us; that's thine,
For mine's divorc't by injury of fortune
Leave me to my self.
I have done.
Is there such a passage
As thou hast told me of into the Castle?
There is my Lord.
And dare thou let me in;
If you my Lord dare venture.
There are no centuries near it.
None.
How to the Chamber afterwards?
Her woman.
VVha'ts she?
A wicket to my Ladies secrets,
One that stands up to marriage with me.
There, upon thy life be secret. flings him a purse,
Else all punishments due to ingratitude.
Enough:
I am a storm within, till I am there,
O Doran,
That that, which is so pleasant to bahlt,
Should be such pain within.
Poor Brennoralt;
Thou art still he Mrtyr of a thousand Tyrants
Love, honour, and ambition, reign by turns,
And show eir power upon thee.
Why let them; I am still Brennoralt,
Even Kings themselves are by their
Servants ruled sometimes,
Let their own slaves govern at od hours,
Yet not subject their person or their powers.
WHat have I got by changing place,
But as a wretch which ventures to the wars,
Seeking the misery with pain abroad,
He found, but wisely thought,
And had left at homeweeps,
Fortune thou hast no Tyranny,
Beyond this usage,
Would I had never hoped,
O had betimes despaired,
Let never in the gentle thief,
Or kept him but a guest,
Not made him Lord at all.
Thus as my storms of grief,
Carry my tears which should relieve my heart,
Have hurried to the thankless Ocean clouds,
Ad showers which needed not at all the courtesy
When the poor plains have languished,
For the want and almost burst asunder,
Isle have this statues place, and undertake,
At my own charge, to keep the water ull.
These fond impressions grow too strong upon me;
They were at first without design or end
Like the first Elements, that knows not what,
And why they act, &amp; yet produce strange things,
Poor innocent desires, journeying they know
Not whither, but now they promise to themselves
Strange things, grow insolent, threaten no rest,
Till they be satisfied.
What difference was between these Lords?
The one made love as if he by assault,
Would take my heart, so forced it to defence,
While t'other blew it up with secret mines,
And left no place for it, here he is;
Teaes steal too from his eyes,
As if, not daring to be known,
To pass that way, make it good cunning grief;
Thou knew thou coldest not dress thy self,
In any other looks, to make thee lovely.
Francelia, If through the ignorance of places,
I have intruded on your privacies,
Found out forbidden paths,
It is fit you pardon Madam.
For it is my melancholy, not I offends.
So great a melancholy would well become.
Mischances, such as time cannot repair,
Those of the war, are but the petty
Cures, of every coming hour.
Why should I not now tell her all since tic in her,
To save my life, who knows but she may be
Gallant so far, as to undo her self,
To make another happy?
Madam, the accidents of war,
Contribute least to my sad thoughts,
If any such I have;
Imprisonment can never be
Where the place holds what we more love,
And yet,
My Lord.
In this imprisonment.
Proceed my Lord.
I dare not Madam.
I see I do disturb you, and enter upon your secrets,
Which when I know, I cannot serve you in.
Oh, most of any,
You are the cause of all,
I my Lord.
You Madam, you alone,
Alas, that it is too, soon to understand,
Must not you marry Almerin?
They tell me, it is designed,
If he have you, I am for ever lost.
Lost? the heavens forbid they should design so ill.
Or when they shall, that I should be the cause.
Ha, her eyes are strangely kind,
She prompts me excellently,
Stars be propitious, and I am sfer,
Away: Isle not expect it.
His passion labours for vent.
Is there a hope you will not give your self,
To Almerin?
My Lord this ayre is common,
The walks within are pleasanter.
Invitation. God of desire be kind,
And fill me now with languages,
Such as thou lend'st thy favourites,
When thou would give them easy victory,
And I forgive thee all thy cruelties.
Consider too.
That those who are so necessitated to use violence,
Have first been violent by necessity,
But still you judge not right of the prerogative,
For oft it stands with power and law,
As with our faith and reason;
It is not still against, that is above my Lord.
You had of all least reason,
For would the King be unjust he cannot,
Where ther's so little to be ha.
Where there is least, there's liberty my Lord;
And tic more injury to pull hairs
From the bald, then from the bushy heads.
Brennoralt, a word,
My Lord the world has cast i'ts eye upon you,
And mak't you out one of the foremost men.
You've buied Fame the earliest of any,
And send her still on errands;
Much of the bravery of the Nation,
Has taken up i'ts lodging in you,
And gallant men but copy from you.
is goodly language this; what would it mean?
The Lithuanians wish you well, and wonder,
So much desert should be so ill rewarded.
Good.
While all the gifts the crown is master of
Are placed upon the Empire.
Still I take you not.
Then to be plain,
Our Army would be proud of you,
Pay the neglected scores of merit double,
All that you hold here of command, and what,
Your fortune in this Sigismond has suffered,
Repaired, and make it fairer then it was at first.
How?
That nothing Lord trifle below ill language,
How came it in thy heart to tempt my honour?
My Lord.
Dost think cause I am angry,
With the King and state sometimes,
I am fallen out with virtue and my self,
Draw, draw or by goodness.
What means your Lord-ship?
Draw, I say,
He that would think me villain is one
And I doe wear this toy to purge the world
Of such, they've saved thee,
Were it thou good natured thou would
Love a King the better during life,
If they be just.
They call for gracious answers,
Speedy how ere we promise,
Long live great ,
The  Sir, are of the wilder sort of creatures,
Must be rid with harsh curbs, and since the war
Can only make them tried, what can be used but
Swords? where men have alne,
From not respecting Royalty,
Unto a liberty of offending it;
What tho their numbers equals your Sir?
And now or'd by necessity,
Like cuts in narrow rooms,
They fly upon your face:
Think you rebellion and loyalty,
Are empty names, and that in subjects hearts,
They give not both and take away the courage;
Shall we believe there is no difference,
In good, and bad? no punishment,
Nor no protection? forbid it heaven,
If when great  honour, safety too
Hanges in disute, we should not draw our swords,
Why were we ever taught to wear them Sir?
This late commotion in your kingdoms Sir,
Is like a growing  upon the face,
Which as we cannot look on without trouble
So ak't away we cannot, without danger,
War there has ouiest face, and I
Must fear it, where the pretext is fairest.
Religion, and Liberty,
Most specious names,
Which like the bills of ubtle Mountebanks,
Filled with great promises of Curing all;
Tho by the wie passed by unread, as common couenage,
Yet by th'unknowing multitude,
They are  admired and flocked to
I there no way to diabuse them?
A E's now too late,
the vulgar in religion are
Like unknown land,
And those that first possess them, have them.
Then (Sir) consider, justness of cause is nothing,
When things is risen to the point they are?
It is either not examined or believed
Amongst the world.
The better cause the Gracious hd of old,
Yet were the Gods themselves divided in it,
And the foul Ravisher found as good protection,
As the much injured husband
Nor are you (Sir) assured of all behind you,
For tho your per in the subjects hearts,
Stands highly honoured and belo'd
Yet are there certain Acts of state,
Which men call grievances abroad.
And tho they bore them in the times of peace,
Yet will they now perchance think to be free,
And throw them off for Sir
The Common people are much like the Sea,
Which suffers things to fall,
And sink unto the bottom in a calm,
Which in a storm,
Stirred and enraged it lifts, and doth keep up.
Then time,
Distempers cures, more safely (Sir) then physic,
Or instant letting blood Religion now
Is a young mistress there, for which each man will ight
And dye at least; Let it alone a while,
And t'will become a kind of married wife,
People will be content to live with it,
In quietness, if that at least may be,
My voice is therefore (Sir) for peace.
Were Sir the question simply war or peace,
It were no more then shortly to be asked,
Whether we would be well or ill,
Since war, the sickness of a kingdom is,
And peace the Health:
But here I doe conceive,
Twill rather be, whether we had not better
Endure sharpe sickness for a , enjoy
A perfect strength, then have it languish on us;
For peace and war, is an incestuous line,
Have still begot each other;
Those men that highly now have broke all laws,
(The great one only is t'wixt man and man,
What safety can they promise? tho they give it
Will they not still suspect, and justly too,
That all those bonds should be
Broken again to them; so being still in fears,
And jealousies themselves they mut infect
The people, for in such a case,
The private safety is a public trouble,
Nor will they ever want pretext,
Since he that will
Maintain it with his Sword hoe's injured,
May say it at any time:
Then (Sr) as terrible  war appears,
My vote is for it, nor shall I ever care,
How ugly my Physicians shall be,
So he can doe the cure,
In entering Phyi,
I think Sir none so much considers
The Doctors face, as his own body,
To keep on foot the war, with all the wants,
Is to let blod, and  rong potions,
In dangerous sickness.
I see a wonder not to find my Lords,
This difference in opinion, the subject's large,
Nor can we there too much dispute, where, when
We err tic at a kingdoms charge,
Peace and  are in themseles indifferent,
And time doth stamp them, either good or bad,
But here the place, is much considerable,
War in our own.
Is like to heat within, it makes the body ,
When in another country tic but exercise,
Conveys that heat abroad, and gives it health,
To that I bend my thoughts,
But leave it to our greater counsels,
Which we now assemble:
Mean time exchange of prisoners only we assent to,
Nothing of Truces Sir.
No:
We will not take up quiet at interest,
Perfect peace or nothing,
Cessations for short times in war,
Are like small fits of health,
In dangerous sickness,
Which while the instant pain seems to abate,
Flatters us in debauch and worse estate.
I have not left my self a fair retreat,
And must be now either the blessed object,
Of your love, or subject of your scorn.
I fear some treachery,
And that my eyes have given intelligence;
Unless you know there would be weak defence,
You durst not think of taking in a heart,
As soon as you sit down before it.
Condemn my love, not of such fond ambition,
It aims not at a conquest, but Francelia.
They are very great in this short time.
Tic ever so.
Young and handsome,
Have made acquaintance in nature,
So when they meet, they have the less to doe,
It is for age or ugliness to make approaches,
Or keep a distance.
When I shall see, other perfection,
Which at the best will be but other vanity not more,
I shall not love it.
Tic still one step, not to despair my Lord.
Dost think he would fight?
Troth it may be not,
Nature in those fine pieces doth as painters.
Hangs out a pleasant excellence
That takes the eye, which is indeed
But a course canvis in the naked truth,
Or some slight tuffe.
I have a great mind to taste him.
Fie a prisoner.
By this hand, if I thought he courted my
Colonels Mistress in earnest.
My Lord, my Lord,
My Lady thinks the jasmine walks
Will be finer, the freshness
Of the morning takes off the strength
Of the heate she says.
Tic well.
Mew, does it so? I suspect wildly,
We'll follow him, and see it he be
So far qualified towards a Soldier
As to drink ain's Chamber.
Where are those Keys?
Hark ye, I dare not doo'.
How!
My Lady will find.
Scruples.
Are my hopes your fears?
There was no other way I should be any thing
In this loud worldand now,
S'foot I know she longs to see him too.
Does she?
Dos't think he would deire it else.
I but.
Why let me secure it al,
I'll say I found the Keys, or stole them, come.
Well if you ruin al now,
Here, These enter the garden from the works,
That the privy walks, and that the back-stalres,
Then you know my Chamber.
Yes I know your Chamber.
He comes not,
One wise thought more, and I return,
I cannot in this art separate the foolish
From the bold so far, but still it tastes
Of the rash.
Why let it taste tastes of love too,
And to all actions't gives a pretty relish that.
My Lord.
Oh here!
S'foot you're upon our centuries
More on this hand.
Why are there here no guard?
There needs none,
You presently must psse a place
VVhereon's an amy in defence,
It is o steep and strait.
Tic well.
These are the steps of danger,
Look to your way my Lord.
I doe not find such difficulties,
Wait me thereabouts.
So misers look upon their Gold,
Which while they joy to see, they fear to loose
The pleasure of the sight scarce equalling
The jealousy of being dispossessed by others,
Her face is like the milky way in the Sky,
A meeting of gentle lights without name,
Heavens, shall this fresh ornament of the world
This precious Loveliness,
Pass with other common things
Among the wastes of time?
What pity it were!
Bless me,
It is a vision, or Brennoralt.
Brennoralt, Lady.
Brennoralt, ignorance guard me
What first you've done my Lord?
Alas, I were but in too good estate,
If I knew what I did.
But why ask you Madam?
It much amazes me to think,
How you came hither
Ad what could bring you too in danger thus,
My honour, and your own life
Nothing but saving of my brother.
Could make me now preserve you.
Reproach me not, the follies you your self
Make me commit,
I am reduced to such extremity
That love himself, high tyrant as he is,
If he could see, would pity me.
I understand you not.
Would Heaven you did, for tic a pain to tel you.
I come to accuse you of injustice Madam,
You first begot my passion,
And was content (at least you seem so)
That it should live,
Yet since never would contribute unto it
Nor look upon it: as if you had desired
I's being for no other end,
But for the pleasure of its ruin.
Why doe you labour that to make me guilty of
An injury to you, which when it is one,
Al mankind is alike engaged,
And must have quarrel to me.
I have done il, you chide me justly Madam,
I'll lay it not on you, but on my wretched self.
For I am taught that Heavenly bodies
Are not malicious in their influence,
But by the disposition of the subject.
They tel me you must marry Almeri,
Sure such excellence ought to be
The recompense of virtue
Not the sacrifice of parents wisdom,
Should it not Madam?
It would injure me,
Were it thought otherwise.
And shall he have you then
That knew you yesterday?
Is there in Martyrdom no juster way
But this, that holds a finger in the fire
A little time? should the Crown from them
That have endured the flame with constancy
If the discovery will ease your thoughts my Lord,
Know Elmrin is the man I never saw.
You doe not marry then, condemned man
Thus hear, and thus receive reprieves.
One question more, and I am gone.
Is there to Latitude of eternity
A hope for Brennoralt.
My Lord.
Have I place at al when you doe think of men?
My Lord, a high one,
I must be fingular: did I not value you?
The world doth set great rates upon you,
And you have first deserved them
Is this al?
All.
O be less kind or kinder,
Give me more pity, or more cruelty Francelia,
I cannot live without this, nor die.
I fear my Lord,
You must not hope beyond it.
Not hope?
This is not sure the body to this soul,
It was mistaken shuffled, in through hast:
Why else should that have so much love,
And this want love lines to make that Love
ReceivedI will raise honour to a point
It never was,
Doe things of such a victorious greatness:
She shall love me, she shall.
I will deserve her, tho I have her not,
The's something yet in that.
Madam wilt please you pardon my offence,
Oh fates that I must cal thus my affection.
I will doe any thing, so you will think of me
And of your self my Lord, and how your stay
Endangers both.
Alas your pardon is more necessary to my self
Then life's to me, but I am gone
Blessing such as my wishes for you in
Their ecstasies could never reach, fall on you,
May every thing contribute to preserve
Your excellence (my destruction)
Great as the torments I have in it.
WHy so it is well: fortune I think thee still,
I dare not cal thee villain neither,
It was plotted from the first:
That's certain, it looks that way:
Hum caught in a trap
Heir's something yet to trust to
This was the entry, these the stairs,
But whither afterword?
He that is sure to perish on the Land
May quit the nicety of card and compass,
And safe to his discretion put to Sea,
He shall have my hand .
Look, by this light tic day.
Not by this, by tother it is indeed.
Thou art such another piece of temptation.
My Lord raves by this time.
An hundred to one the Sentinels will discover
Us too, then doe I pay for night-watch.
Fie upon thee, thou art as fearful as a
Young Colt, boylest at every thing, fool, as
If Lovers considered hours, i'll peep in.
I am as weary of this wench
As if I were married to her,
She hangs upon me like an ape upon a Horse,
Shoe's as common too, as a Barbers Glae,
Conscienst like a Dy-dapper.
Raguelin, there is no body within
My Lady sleeps this hour at least.
Good, the Devils even with me,
Not be an honest man neither,
What course now?
Nay sir we shall order you.
Dogs.
What tumult's this? ha Brennoralt,
Tic he in spite of his disguise,
What makes he here?
Hoe's lost for ever if he discovered:
How now companions, why doe you use
My friend thus
Your friend my Lord, if he be your friend,
H'has used us as il,
H'has plaid the devil among us,
Six of our men has Surgeons work this month,
We found him climbing of the wall.
He had no word neither,
Nor any Language but a blow.
You will be doing these wild things my Lord.
Good faith you're too blame, if you'd desired
To view the walls or trenches, it was but
Speaking, we are not nice,
I would my self had waited on you.
They are the new out-works you would see perchance,
My Lord, we'll take the nearer way, and
Privater, here through the sally port.
What the devil's this sure I dream?
Nay you're so officious.
Death, could I guess he was a friend?
It was ever to be thought so,
How could he come there else?
Friend, or no friend he might have
Left us something to pay the Surgeon with.
Grant me that, or 'le beat you to him.
Brennoralt, start not,
I pay thee back a life I owe thee,
And bless my stars they gave me power to doe,
The debt lay heavy on me,
A Horse waits you there, a trumpet too
Which you may keep lest he should prate,
No ceremony, tic dangerous.
Thou hast astonished me.
Thy youth has triumphed in one single act
Of eal the age can boast, and  will stay
To tell thee so, were they now firing
All their Cannons on me,
Farewell gallant Fresolin
And may reward great as thy virtue crown thee.
A peace will come,
And then thou must be gone,
And whither? when you are once got upon the wing
Y will not stoop to what shall rise
Before ye, fly to some lure
With more temptation garnished.
Can you have doubts, and I have not my fears?
By this the readiest, &amp; the sweetest oath I swear,
I cannot so secure my self of you,
But in my absence, I shall be in pain,
I have cast up what it will be to stand
The Governorsnurse anger, and which is more hard,
The love  Almerin.
I hold thee now, but by thy own free grant,
A slight security; alas it may fall out
Giving thy self, not knowing thine own worth,
Or want of mine, thou may like one deceived
Resume the gift on better knowledge back.
If I so easily change, I was
Not worth your love,
And by that loss you'll gain.
But when you're irrecoverably gone,
Twill be slight comfort to persuade my self
You had a fault, when all that fault must be,
But want of love to me, and that again,
Find in my much defect, so much excuse,
That it will have no worse name
Then indiscretion, if I inconcern'd doe
Cast it up.I must have more assurance.
You have too much already,
And sure my Lord, you wonder while I blush
At such a growth in young perfections.
Why should I wonder Madam?
Love that from two breasts sucks,
Must of a child quickly.
Dunces in love stay at the Alphabet,
The inspired know all before,
And doe begin still higher.
Madam, Almerin returned has sent to kiss
Your hand; I told him you were busy.
Must I my Lord be busy?
I may be civil, tho not kind,
Tell him I waite him in the gallery.
May I not kiss your hands this night?
The world is full of jealous eyes my Lord,
And were they all locked up, you are a spy,
Once entered in my chamber at strange hours.
The virtue of Francelia is too safe,
To need this little art of preservation,
Thus to divide our selves, is to distract our selves,
A Cherbin dispatches not on earth.
The affairs of heaven, with greater innocence,
Then I will visit; tic but to take a leave
I beg.
When you are going my Lord.
Pish, thou least, thou least.
I know he plays with womankind,
Not loves it, thou art impertinent.
Tic the Camp talk my Lord.
The camp's an ass; let me hear no more on it.
And shall we have peace?
I am no sooner, but the state's so too.
If it be, they will a truce for a month only;
I long to refresh my eye by this hand,
They have been so tired, with looking upon faces,
Of this Country.
And shall not the Donnazella,
To whom we doe wish well a,
Look babies again in our eyes.
Ah a sprightly girl about fifteen,
That melts, when man but takes her by the hand,
Eyes full and quick, with breath
Sweet as double Violet,
And wholesome as dying straw-berries,
Thick silken eyebrows high upon the forehead,
And cheeks mingled with pale streakes of red,
Such as the blushing morning never wore.
O my chops, my chops:
With narrow mouth, small teeth,
And lips swelling as if she powed.
Hold, hold, hold.
Hair coloured and curling like buds of
Part tied in negligence,
Part loosely flowing.
Tyrant, tyrant, tyrant.
In pink colour taffeta petty-coat,
Laced smock sleeves dangling,
This vision stolen from her own ed,
And rustling in ones chamber.
Oh good Granivert, good Granivert.
With a wax Candle in her hand
Looking as if she had los her way,
At twelve at night.
Oh, any hour, any hour.
Now I think on it by this hand,
le marry, and be long lived.
Long lived, how?
Oh he that has a wife, eats with an appetite,
Has a very good stomach to first,
This living at large is destructive,
Variety is like rare sauces,
Provokes too far, and draws on surfeits,
Then the other.
So, Is this a time to fool in?
VVhat's the matter.
Draw out your choice men, and away to
Your Colonel immediately, there's work
Towards my boys, there's work.
Ar't in earnest.
By this light.
There's something in that yet.
This Moity were
Twilight.
Neither night nor day,
Pox upon it.
A storm is worth a thousand
Of your alm,
There's more ariety in it.
Madam, that shows the greatness of my passion.
The Imperfections rather,
Iealousi's no better sign of love
My Lord, then fevers are of life;
These show there is a being,
Tho impaired and perihinge,
And that affection but sick and in disorder.
I like it not? Your Servant.
So short, and sour.
The change is visible.
Dear Almerin Welcome,
You have been absent long.
Not very long.
To me it has appeared so.
What soy's our camp, am I not blamed there?
They wonder.
Whilst we smile.
How have you found the King inclining?
Well; the treaty is not broken, now holds it.
Things are where they were,
Thas a kind of face of peace.
You my Lord may when you please return.
I, Almerin.
Yes my Lord, Isle give you an escape.
It is least to my desires.
Hum:
Such prisons are beyond all liberty.
I'st possible?
Seems it strange to you?
No, not at all?
What, you find the Ladies kind?
Civil
You make love well too, they say my Lord.
Pass my time.
Address unto Francelia.
Visit her.
Do ye know 
Ha.
Dee know she is my mistress?
I have been told so.
And doe you court her then?
Why; If I saw the enemy first,
Would you not charge?
He does allow it too, by heaven;
Laughs at me too, Thou filcher of a heart,
False as thy title to Francelia;
Thy friendship with this I doe throw by
What doe you mean?
I see the cunning now of all my love.
Why thou came so tamely kind,
Suffering surprise; draw.
I will not draw, kill me,
And I shall have no trouble in my death,
Knowing it is your pleasure,
As I shall have no pleasure in my life,
Knowing it is your pleasure.
Oh poor, I lookt' for this,
I knew thou would find 'tas easier to doe
A wrong, then justify it, but.
I will not, first hear me.
If I love you not, more then I love her,
If I love her more then for your sake,
Heaven strangely punish me.
Take heed how thou dost play with heaven.
By all that's just, and fair, and good,
By all that you hold dear, and I hold great,
I never had lascivious thought, or ever
Did action that might call in doubt,
My love to Almerin.
That tongue can charm me into any thing.
I doe believe it, prithee be wiser then,
Give me no farther cause of jealousies,
Hurt not my Honour more, and I am well.
But well: of all our passions,
How came it nature made the worst,
Foul jealousy her favourite,
And if it be not so,
Why took she care that every thing,
Should give the monster nourishment,
And left us nothing to destroy it with?
Prithee no more; thou pleadst it cunningly
I fear I shall be made the guilty,
And need my pardon
If you could read my heart, you would:
I will be gone too morrow, if that will satisfy,
Indeed I shall not rest until my innocence,
Be made as plain as objects to the sense.
Come, you shall nor go, Isle think upon it no more,
Distrust ruins not friendship,
But builds it fairer then it was before.
No more but ten from every company,
For hands are thieves, and rob the glory,
While they take the share,
How goes the night.
Half spent my Lord,
We shall have straight,
The moon's weaker light.
It is time you call in the Officers
Friends; If ye were men that must be talked
Into a courage, I had not chosen you.
Danger with its vizard of before this time,
You've looked upon, and have out faced it too.
We are to doe the trick again, that's all,
And yet we will not swear,
For he that shrinks in such an action;
Is damned without the help of perjury.
if from the virgin tower
Thou spiest a flame, such a the East wind sends,
Forth about the time the day shall break,
Tell the King I hold the Castle for him,
Bid him come on with all his force,
And he shall find victory so cheap,
Twill loose it's value,
If I fall, the world has lost a thing,
It used not well, and a thing that cared not
For that world
Lead on Colonel,
If we doe not fight like.
No like,
We'll be our selves similitude.
And time shall say, when it would tell
That men did well they fought like us.
WHat made the stop?
One in's falling sickness had a fit,
Which choked the passages, but ell's well,
Softly, we are near the place.
What noise is here to night?
Something on fire, What ho,
Send to the Virgin Tower, there is disorder,
Thereabouts.
Ell's lost, ell's lost,
The enemy's upon the place of Arms,
And is by this time Master of that
And of the Tower.
Thou least.
Save your self my Lord,
And haste unto the Camp,
Ruin gets in on every side.
There's something in it when this fellow
Fies.
Isle see what devil reigns.
Look, the day breaks.
You think Isle be so kind, as swear,
It does not now, indeed I will not.
Will you not send me neither
Your picture when v'are gone?
That when my eye is famished for a look,
It may have where to feed,
And to the painted feast inite my heart.
, take the Virgin  of my hair,
And if like other men thou shalt hereafter,
Throw it with negligence,
Amongst the Records of the weak female conquest,
Laugh at the kind words, and mystical contrivement.
If such a time shall come,
Know I am ighing then thy absence Iphigene,
And weeping o'er thy false, but pleasing Image.
Francelia Frclia,
Rise, rise and save thy self, the enemy,
That doth not know thy worth, may else destroy it.
Ha; mine eyes grow sick.
A plague has through them stolen into my hey,
And I grow dizzy,  lead me off again,
Without the knowledge of my body,
I shall act, I know not what else.
How came he in?
Dear Iphigene, wee are betrayed,
Let's raise the Castle, lest he should return.
That were to make all public,
Fear not, Isle satisfy his anger,
I can doe it.
Yes with some quarrel,
And bring my honour, and my love in danger
Loke he returns. And wreckes of fury,
Like hurried clouds over the face of heaven,
Before a tempest, in his looks appear.
If they would question
What our rage doth act, and make it sin,
They would not thus provoke men.
I am too tame.
Here I denounce a war to al the world,
And thus begin it.
What hast thou done?
Ah me, help, help
Hold.
It is too late.
Rather then she shall suffer,
My fond deceits involve th'innocent,
I will discover al.
Ha, what will he discover?
That which shall make thee curse the blindness
Of thy rage, I am a woman.
Ha, ha, ha, brave and bold.
Because thy perjury deceived me once
And saved thy life, thou think to scope again,
Imposture thus thou shalt.
Oh hold, I have enough,
Had I hope of life,
Thou should not have this secret.
What will it be now?
My Father having long desired
A son to heir his great possessions,
And in six births successively deceived,
Made a rash vow, and O rash vows are punished,
That if the brthen my mother went with
Proved not a male, he ne'er would know her more,
Then was unhappy Iphigene brought forth,
And by the women's kindness made a boy,
And since so bred,
A cruel pity as it has fallen out,
If now thou findst that which thou thoughtst
A friendship in me, love forget it,
It was my joy and death.
For curiosity i'll save thee if I can,
Know the end, if it be but loss of blood,
Breasts; by all that's good, a woman.
Iphigene.
I thank thee,
For I was fallen asleep before I had dispatcht,
Sweetest of al thy Sex, Francelia
Forgive me now, my love unto this man
And fear to lose him, taught me a fatal cunning,
Made me court you, and my own destruction.
I am amazed.
Can it be! O mockery of Heaven,
To let me see what my soul often wished,
And maked my punishment,
A punishment that were I old in sins,
Were yet too great.
Would you have loved me then?
Pray you say would,
For I like teasty sickmen at their death
Would know no news but health
From the physician.
Can thou doubt that?
That hast so often seen me ectasied
When thou were it dressed like woman,
Unwilling ever to believe thee man.
I have enough.
Heavens.
What thing shall I appear unto the world?
Here my ignorance might have some excuse,
But there, I was distract.
None but a man enraged with anger
To a savageness, would ever have drawn
A sword upon such gentle softness,
Be kind, and kill me, one of you:
Kill me, if it be but to preserve my wits,
Dearest Iphigene take thy revenge.
It will not misbecome thy sex at all,
Tic act of pity, not of cruelty,
To dispatch a miserable man.
And thou would be more miserable yet,
While like a bird made prisoner by it self,
Thou beatst thy self against every thing,
And vexed, pass by that, which should let thee out.
Is it my fault, or Heavens!
For time while she would play upon me,
Like ill musicians wound me up so high,
That I must crack sooner then move in tune.
Still you rave, while we
Foe want of present help may perish.
Right, a Surgeon, i'll find one instantly,
The enemies at hand too I had forgot,
Oh what fatality governed this night!
How like an unthrifts case will mine be now?
For al the wealth he looses,
Shifts but the place, and still the world
Enjoys it, so will it you
Sweet Iphigene, tho I possess you not.
What excellence of nature's this?
Have you so perfectly forgiven already,
As to consider me a loss;
I am in doubt what sex I should
Be happier in: climates of friendship
Are not less pleasant, cause they are
Less scorching with those of Love;
And under them we'll Live,
Such precious links of that shall tie
Our souls together, that the chains of tother
Shall be gross fetters to it.
I fear I cannot stay the making,
Oh, would you had never undeceived me,
For I had died with pleasure,
Believing I had bin your Martyr now
She looks pale, Francelia.
I cannot stay,
A hasty summons hurries me away
And gives.no(dies)
Shoe's gon, shoe's gon, life like a dials hand
Stole from the fair figure ere it was perceived,
What will become of me?
Too too late you're come,
You may persuade wild bird that wing the air
Into a cage, as soon as cal her
Wandering spirits back, Ha these strange faces
Horror is in them, if I stay
I shall be taken for the murderer,
Oh in what straits they move,
That wander twixt the fears of death, and hopes of Love.
Forbear upon your lives the place,
There dwells Divinity in it, al else
The Castle holds is lawful prize
Your valours wages, this I claim as mine,
Guard you the door.
Colonel, shall you use al the women your self?
Away it is unreasonable.
Awake fair Saint, and bless thy poor iolatour,
Ha, pale, and cold, dead!
The sueest guest fled, murdered by Heaven,
The purple streams not dry yet.
Some villain has broke in before me,
Robed al my hopes, but I will find him out,
And kick his soul to hell ile do it
What should I say?
Speak, or by al.
Alas, I doe confess my self the unfortunate cause.
O doe you so,
Had thou been cause of all the plagues
That vex mankind, th'adst been an innocent
To what thou ar't, thou shalt not think repentance.
O thou were too sudden, andDyes.
Was I so?
The lustful youth would sure have spoiled
Her honour, which finding highly guarded
Rage or fear to be reveled, counselled
This villain, is there no more of them?
Not Enter,
Yes dog through thee, ha a course laid out
Instead of Iphigene, Francelia dead too,
Where shall I begin to curse?
Here if he were thy friend.
Brennoralt.
A gallant sword could never have come in better time
I have a good one for thee
If that will serve thy turn.
I long to try it.
That fight doth make me desperate,
Sick of my selle, and of the world.
Did value him?
A greater villain did I never kill.
Kill. Bren. Yes. Elm. Are 't sure of it?
May be I doe not wake.
Tha'st taen then a guilt off from me,
Would have weighed down my sword,
Weakened me to love resistance,
I shoud have made no sport,
Had thou concealed it,
Know Brennoralt thy Sword is stained in
Excellence, great, as the world can boast.
Ha, ha, how thart abused,
Look there, there lies the excellence
Thou speak of, murdered by him too,
He did confess he was the cause.
O inocence il understood, and much swore used,
She was alas by accident, but I,
I was the cause indeed.
I will believe thee too, and kill thee,
Destroy all causes till I make a stop
In nature.
Bravely then:
The title of a Kingdom is a tifle
To our quarrel, sir know by sad mistake
I killed thy Mistress Brennoralt, and thou kil'dst mine.
hen?
Yes that Iphigene
Tho shown as man unto the world,
Was woman, excelent woman.
I understand no riddles guard thee.
O could they now look down,
And see how we two strive,
Which first should give revenge,
They would forgive us something of the crime.
Hold prithee give me leave,
To satisfy a curiosity,
I never kissed my Iphigene as woman.
Thou motionst well, nor have I taken leave
Rising it keeps a sweetness yet,
As stills from Roses when the flowers are gone.
So have two fainting pilgrims scorched with heat
Unto some neighbour fountain steps aside.
Kneel fist, then laid their warm lips
To the Nymph, and from her coldness
Took fresh life again, as we do now.
Lets on our journey if thou art refreshed.
Come, and if there be a place reserved
For heightened spirits better then other,
May that which wearies first of ours have it.
If I weary, laugh at me, that's all.
Brave souls above
Which will be sure inquisitive
For news from earth, shall yet no other,
But that you are brave.
To preserve some Ladies as we guest.
Still gallant.
Brennoralt, thy word not sheathed yet;
Busy still?
Revenging Sir,
The foulest murder ever blasted ares,
Committed here by Almerin, and Iphigene,
False, false.
The first created purity was not
More innocent then Iphigene.
Lives he again?
Stay thou much wearied guest,
Tll I have thrown amongst them,
We shall look black else to posterity.
What says hee?
Something concerning this he labours to discover.
Know it was I, who kilt Franclia, I alone.
O Barbarous return of my civilities,
Was it thy hand?
Hear and forgive me Minse.
Entering this morning hastily
With resolution to preserve,
The fair Francelia, I found a thief,
Stealing the treasure which I thought
Belonged o me, wilde in my mind,
And ruined in my honour in much mistaken rage
I wounded both, then O too late I found.
My error: foed Iphigene a woman,
Acting stolen love, to make my own safe.
And all my jealousies impossible,
Whilst I run out to bring them cure.
Francelia dies, and Iphigene found here,
I can no more
More strange, and intricate,
Iphigene a woman.
With this story I am guiltily acquainted,
The first concealments since her love,
And all the ways to it I have been trusted with.
But sir my grief joined with the instant business,
Begs a deferment.
I am amazed till I doe hear it out,
But in the mean time.
Lest in these mists. merit should lose it self,
Those forfeitures of Trock and Minse,
Brennoralt are thine.
Tic princely gift, but Sir it comes too late,
Like Sun-beames on the blasted blossoms,
Your fvours fall; you should have given
Me this, when't might have raised,
Me in men's thoughts, and made me equal,
To Francelias love; I have no end,
Since shoe's not: Back to my private life.
I will return.
This melancholy June mst cure.
Come take the bodies up, and lead the pisoners on
Triumph and Funeral must walk together.
Cyprus, and Laurel turned make up one chaplet,
For wee have got the day.
But bought it at so dear a rate,
hat victory it selfe's unfortunate.

