SOme Prologues wish their Audience joyful mirth,
Some with Appeals strive to Paint the birth,
Of their inventions; others not only true,
But pleasing to the kind spectators view;
Such would our Author to, had not his Muse,
A mournful subject whom this age abuse;
Nor can his Novice genius dive unto,
The depth of what hee fine would tender you,
Lirenda's Misery, who can forbear,
The Scene once past from a relenting tear,
When blustering storms of murder, fire and sword
Are the chief Emblems hee can best afford,
Your true compassive fancy, look not then for,
A Poets lofty dazzling Meteor,
That to the vulgar eye might seem more strange
Then fertile Luna, in his often change:
Kind Natives of this poor afflicted Isle,
To your oppressions we address the style
Of this our tragic pen, who in effect,
Are the supporters, of that Architect,
Devised by him that never writ before,
Yet honours you, your miseries adore,
Your faithful service, resolution and
The most accomplished virtues of this land,
Sometime styled Insula Sanctorum,
Now the true touchstone, or decorum,
Of Heroical minds, whom envies dire intent
Endeavoured to subvert with discontent:
This Noble, worthy, Auditors the scope
Of what wee are resolved to show, in hope,
Your frequent goodness with attentive ear,
Our more imperfect lines will mildly bear,
For which the Muses humbly we desire,
Some heavenly rapture may your thoughts inspire.
Must not a Creature pass?
No, that's the the scope
of our Commission: Stand; who comes there?
A friend.
The Word;
Marry Sirs, God bless us all;
well spoken, yet you must not pass,
Not pass?
then if you be good fellows, let us chat
a while▪ prithee what means this sudden tumult?
The matter seems so strange to me as yet,
we can reurne no other answer, but
the state on pain of death commands all men,
(thus ready armed) to stand upon their guard;
You may be sure there's some rank plot in hand,
or would the State at these unusual hours
sit in a private Council else:
'Twish a fable;
it is but some drunken quarrel thus disturbs
our rest: or the field appointed by some
hot furious gallant, whereto the State
will not give way.
Be it the same, we'll not
remove from hence, nor you in duty ought
to slight the matter thus, as if your worships
wisdom were so ripe to apprehend the cause;
You cannot give more likelier reasons for it:
You're mistaken friend, the common report's
abroad far different from your conceit;
raised to the highest point of a distracted
mutiny, wee wot not what to think or speak,
such is the horrid treachery intended.
Good Lord forbid; against whom?
This City Castle;
and by a few of Romish Recusants
think to subvert the true reformed Gospel:
How? our own fast friends, that were a jest indeed
past my belief;
Be not incredulous:
How can I choose,
but frame my thoughts like a confused Chaos;
to think, these men who by exterior signs
and loving conversations, threw their hearts
into our arms, nay more I might express:
but that I see▪ all proves a fained friendship,
and our joint love's turned to a mortal hate;
It is much, much feared, we'll find it so ever long,
written in Characters of blood.
Silence:
the Lords themselves doe come, to give their best
advice;
Wee called you hither, to make known
the danger, that now, even now is revealed,
wherefore so true we conceive you be, that
with all speed you go unto each port, and see
them strongly guarded, with strict command that
none on pain of death shall issue forth, until
a true &amp; perfect search be made throughout
this City, for as we credibly are informed,
Guyrva with all his rude conspirators,
are at this instant in a doubtful fear
to be discovered; the guilt of such a heinous
fact doubtless betrays them; Worthy friends, then
slake not your endeavours; the hast which this
great business now requires, admits no leisure
to stir your willingness with th'effectuall
speech of our just cause; that touches not your
persons only; but aims at the Crown of
our dread Sovereign; and to imbase this
Kingdoms glory, beneath the hollow concave
of their Popish faction; this wee thought fit
to add unto your now intended care,
not doubting yours, nor these your brethrens love
to him, this weighty matter most concerns:
Sir, we really intend; (far from vain glory
be it spoken) to uphold this Cities
ancient fame, that hitherto hath nobly
borne, the title of a pure unspotted town;
when treason came as no to cut you off,
our fidelity did then expulse your foes
and with the trophies of their bloody spoil
returned victorious, this we did, and are
as willing yet to manifest the same
so far as heart and life can show the duty
of allegiance:
Them Noble acts renders
you famous to posterity; nor did
th'Angolean princes prove ungrateful
for that service, as your fair City charter
can approve,
It is acknowledged their royal
bounty, wherefore we that doe live will strive
to give as great a lustre to the Angolean
nation, as our renowned ancestors
have done, in this we rest, O Lord decree
our willing powers may curb this treachery.
Now kind brother your grave experience
must direct, what is most needful to be done;
The chiefest care whereto our watchful eye
should bar from future mischief, this strong fort
by heavens protection is secured, therein disabling
our insulting foes hence forward to proceed:
Then are our fears extinct?
Not so, dear Sir,
the tempest threatens our ruin still; for
it is a maxim warlike leaders use, not
to despise the weakness of their foes, which
else might give advantage to their design
as many woeful presidents there are
within the limits of my youthful days:
(too tedious now to nominate,) for sixty
odd years past, since first I practised arms, in
the Hiberean wars, when Tyrona led on by
some vain prophecy or other, did strive
by dint of sword to assure himself the Northern
Crown, with much expense of blood at length
t'h Angolean forces cooled his pride, and made his
haughty courage stoop unto a base ignoble
flight, yet now me thinks the terror of this
sudden hell-bred news, strikes near my heart, then
all the legions of his furious train, could
at that instant when Black-water-Fort, proved
fatal to the most and best of ours:
We then like prudent Statesmen must observe,
some fit occasion may endear the Palans
to side with us, until our powers increase
with new supplies from the grand Parliament
Your advice is good,
but we are the valiant stout Osirus here,
we then could best proceed; yet fearing least
the pilfring Mountaniers doe fire the suburbs,
it were not amiss, if we employed that warlike
Leader brave Carole, Cola, with whom five
hundred of our best and ablest men to front
the foe at home; Now friend; from whence thy news?
From Adrohna▪
How fares the Governor?
In health, an please your Lordship.
Is the noble Lord Tigranes in safety?
The same my Lord:
It must not be deferred a minute longer;
go hast thee to the governor again,
and tell him six hundred men completely
armed shall forthwith march to strengthen him,
and further bid him be of comfort, he
shall not want, what's needful;
I will not fail
to return your Lordships answer,
Brother,
we must withdraw to hasten what is promised
we should incur a lasting scandal else:
Now that our army is advanch'd thus far,
within the confines of our trembling foes
whilst yet their scattered troupes lye all dismayed,
we'll pitch a field in view of yon proud town,
and stoutly summon them Within to yield,
or train them forth, moved which a bold defiance,
wherein wee may express an ardent zeal
to right our natives slavery, and stop
the current of their puritan design
intended for our total ruin;
Brave man at arms, thy invincible spirit
adds more fury to the justness of our cause,
then when I recollect a memory
of Guyrva's sad misfortune, through some prodigious
star, ominus to poor Lirenda still,
yet if undaunted resolution may
advance the drooping state, of this our native
Clime, let him not prosper will not prosecute
that base, perfidious, Puritanical
faction, enemies to God, our mild
and gracious Sovereign:
I will not boast what
my intentions are, nor derive an active
power from my own self conceit, No Noble
friends and fellow peers in arms, my ambition's
fixed on them powers above, from whence I
have a heart both true and loyal, consecrated
to the service of this pious war, in
proof whereof, (vouchsafe me but that honour)
i'll be the first shall scale those feeble walls
and raze yon lofty turrets to the ground,
or dye in the adventure,
Forbear Aretas
promise no more then thousands will beside
we are departed from our home, under
the conduct of a happy leader, to whom
as to the public good we owe the tender
of life, estate and fortune, for royal Carole
his just prerogatives, wrested from him
by an elected crew of shameless Round-heads;
wherefore lets once again confirm our vow
in his defence, that is most dear unto us;
The motions good, join hands &amp; hearts together
Now God defend this kingdom by our powers
whilst we are for our gracious king, and yours:
Omnes Craned this, O Lord Amen, Amen, O Lord.
The squadrons now must quarter in due order,
Dora take you the charge thereof, my self,
Mineus, and Aretas will see if threats
or promises will best prevail, th'obdurate
Neuters to side with us:
Arm Sirs, arm, arm,
an army of well appointed Angoleans
march directly hither;
Never more joyful news,
come my hearts cheer up; hearken this welcome 
sound, invites your valour, be not found dismayed
although your foes be armed, the most of ours
all naked men, ne'er trained to any seemly
posture
What troops will you appoint to give
the charge?
Lentimos, and you Theodorike must lead
a party forth, we'll follow after
with them we shall conceive expedient
Shine happy stars, propitious fate direct us,
Come, lets away, heaven will I hope protect us
Whither shall we fly, Captain Albinus
make hast away, or we are lost for ever,
our ranks are broken by the bloody foe
that like so many cruel Tigers rage
and slaughter all they meet, with ruth full groans
of dying men the air is filled, and death
in triumph waits upon our vanquished forces.
I scorn to flinch, or leave my harmless men
a prey to them whose cruelty extends
beyond the bounds of human nature;
of my estate they have deprived me else,
so most of those we have now seen lye dead
then to revenge that wrong I led them forth,
and to that end isle stay; my life's no more
but lost a•gments the sum of their large score:
Our Sergeant Major hath forsook the field,
More Coward he;
Shall we submit or yield;
Neither; you may in that your pleasure doe.
As you resolve so I will stand to it to;
See where Albinus stands, as if he meant
to conquer all.
Come on Traitor.
Thou lie.
base slave, that proud word shall cost thee dearly.
An equal match come, man to man;
Fall back good Sir,
doe you pursue the rest that flies amain: 
have at you Sirs.
pack hence thou wretched soul, go down to styx,
there learn of Tantalus what is it to strive,
against the stream, for which he starves alive.
When first this unexpected news was brought us
we little thought it would clime to that height,
or that there were such tyranny intended,
against the miserable Northern Subjects
but since we doe (unto our griefs) behold
the sad disaster of our dearest friends
Expect no better measure at their hands
if their imperious pride be not abated;
twill come too late I fear,
'twish a fable,
let damned Medaea raise her spiteful charms,
from the depth of the infernal sooty caves,
or from grim Pluto's court conjure a number
of armed furies, this horrid crew, were
they more strong then hell is deep, our just cause,
cries at th'impartiall throne of God for aide,
to affront and keep in awe, these bold usurpers
of our Soveraigne's power;
Most nobly spoken:
To think otherwise we should wrong our selves,
had we not lost our expectations
for some private guilt, against the deity
my cause of knowledge being sad and heavy,
for the late army we sent forth they say,
received a fatal overthrow,
Be not dismayed, think not the dismal sight
of our defeated troupes, shall strike us silent
or rent our fortunes with an odious term
of Coward fear, it is a base deformed object▪
a scandal for posterity to blot
our fame, No my Lord, as yet my hopes hath life,
by the same president in other stout
commanders, witness Bellona's darling,
invincible Caesar (whose fame and valour
did spread over the girdled orb, unto
the Antipodes) Darius, Priam, the
Macedonian King, with infinite others
impertinent to nominate these potent
conquerors I say, were subject to the like
misfortunes, yet notwithstanding afterwards
have been victorious; And why not wee?
Our case, my Lord, is weak and desperate;
For shame cast off them looks of sad despair,
it ill beseems your calling, time, or place
an occasion seldom less needful,
without a further consultation: come,
let's go immediately clasp on our coats
of steel, and dare the traitors to their face,
whilst I doe animate and lead up the rest
of our decayed forces: Courage as then,
a little spark may lighten all again:
Since your undaunted spirit must needs forward,
then be as prosperous as Hannibal
when he conveyed his army o'er the mounting
Alps, or like the son of Jove, when Giants
impudence did invade the heavens
My hearts,
as good as theirs, had I equal power, id
tear the fabric of this world asunder,
my fury like Ioves violent thunder
should blast the earth far worse then Phaeton
in his heedles course, what would I not have done,
what Kingdoms ransacked till I had my will
of these on whom I ground my hatred still:
To satisfy the nice conceit of those
who judge our actions as their fancies are,
our taking arms shall to the world appear
a just and natural defence in us
when to His Majesty, ther's not the least
conceit of any harm once meant, either
in's Royal person Crown or dignity;
So far we still express our selves my Lord,
for in this protection is laid forth
the motives whereon wee chiefly ground this war
next with a tender care we doe reserve
all that concerns our sovereigns right, to
the Lirendean Crown, therein excluding
all foreign power, all Princes whatsoever:
If such a Covenant we had not made;
No Caesar, Scipio, Hanniball, nor that
worlds conqueror proud Macedon, were their
expired dates renewed again, could not,
nay should not subdue the gentry of Lirenda
from their obedience to the Angolean King,
most firm and true since mighty Cheapstow did
conduct us hither;
Nor doe we now intend a base revolt
had Rome's majestique throne command it so
my humble answer saith
give Caesars due, to God thy heart and faith;
That was indeed the chief occasion first
that moved us join with them.
And will maintain it
whilst life breathes in this corps of mine,
And mine,
We are resolved to live and die together.
May it please your Lordships, one Theodorike
desires admittance to your Lordships presence:
Go give him entrance, good man his pains, are
great to draw the Commons forth.
Such friends as him we need.
The more his praise.
Welcome Theodorich.
Then know my Lords, with pains unspeakable
I've drawn together, of mine my near allies
their servants, friends and tenants, a thousand
able men, at Rufus quarters, in a fit
readiness to doe you service, when further
know, our scouts for certain doe report, that
fifteen hundred desperate bloody rogues
under the command of Sir Daretas, at
Medra haven are landed, beside one
Colonel Crambich, (a branch of the cursed
tribe in Pickland) is trusted with the leading
of a thousand chosen men, all Citizens,
with whom, by true intelligence, Sir Carole
intends t'expulse us from our native dwellings,
with such a savage spleen, men, women, infants
on their mothers pape, are vowed to be kilt;
That project crushes all, Notwithstanding
cousin, and Colonel (a title not worth
the least of thy applauded merits,)
return, with such small forces as you have
give Cola a manful skirmish, and we
shall speedily unto your aide.
To my
grief I speak it, the camp hath scarce a dozen
pound of powder.
Heaven will strengthen thee.
Here take this sword, and use't against our foes.
Upon their carcasses isle spare no blows,
farewell my Lords, Theodorike will go,
expose his fate against your powerful foe;
Yonder they are Madam.
My thinks they lack
them pleasant smiles of mirth, that like so many
radiant beams of Sol, gave comfort to
the gloomy shade of our disquiet thoughts.
Why therefore we doe now presume this visit
hoping we may at least disperse them cares
that we suspect doth seize them unawares
Behold my Lords, who comes?
We are discovered;
health to your Lorships.
Welcome fair Ladies all.
Must we demand your licence to intrude.
It were needless; your beauties are sufficient
to claim a greater favour.
Sir you know,
it is the desire of love, fond women doe
so much regard, that overcome with joy,
you men esteems it as a needless toy,
and may perhaps our kindness now express
in the harsh language of ungratfulnesse:
Your will my dear,
Is only to be merry this new year,
for Christmas being now well near expired
without the comfort of your usual mirth,
what joy have we, what sorrows can prevent
when in your looks the map of discontent:
It lies beyond the reach of female wit,
to sound the cause that doth occasion it,
Howsoever some short time we'll borrow,
to curb the mischief of a sudden sorrow;
Our music hath of late unto them given,
a song, penned by a friend that doth protest
he loves this Nation dearly, in whose breast
such deep affection by their kindness came
that he doth honour and respect the name;
This makes you to affect it so.
Love binds us to it.
Will you be pleased to hear it then?
Yes, and with thanks to.
Come away, O come away,
Courageous youths, O doe not stay,
Now's the time, brave Mars will prove
More powerful then the god of love.
Cast your Venus sports away,
Valour brooks not long delay,
Gods themselves are up in arms
To protect you from all harms.
He that honour thinks to gain,
Fears no danger, woe or pain,
Death's grim look or bloody scarre,
makes the mind more noble far.
Then make hast O doe not stay,
Dally not the time away,
If you mean for to persevere,
Now's the time, O now, or never.
How like you this?
A perfect good one, Lady;
Seeing the Poets fancy hath pleased you thus,
wee crave the like respect, which granted us,
shall not divert you long from them affairs
whereto wee see you are inclined to most
how like you of a dance my Lords.
Fairest beauty,
none dares deny, when you express the law
that keeps offending lovers most in awe.
It merits not this complement, your love,
in this, is that which we desire to prove,
some music there.
believe me this was neatly done,
And gave us much contentment.
Ladies a banquet.
after this to entertain our Noble friends.
If that small worth you think will please your friend,
lead on the way my Lords and we'll attend.
Go, go spend the remnant of your happy days,
whilst I with silent grief doe vent my thoughts,
thoughts able to dismay a mind most resolute
if what a maidens brain conceives will take
effect, our woeful hours are posting on;
we may be confident Angolias fury,
armed with a mortal hatreds ready bent
to mischiefs, void of pity, with pretence,
this cruel rage is in their own defence,
least we who have been still as slaves to them
should now endeavour to regain our own
religion, laws, and liberty, this, O this
it fears me will produce more inhuman
acts, then ever brutish Narrow did invent:
oh, oh, silly, heart, why doest thou figure forth
so strange a form? silence no more, no more,
let not the air be private to thy grief,
fearing some fatal star, approves thy speech
prophetical; and make these thoughts in fact
a mournful Chorus to the following act:
This day (dear friends and kinsmen) we must behave
our selves like brave courageous Lirendeans,
not regarding the politic stratagems
of Cola, wherein he thinks to find us,
in a foul disorder, his Machavillian
plots ne'er so privately contrived, but heaven
you see, doth send us timely notice, wherefore
we'll expect him with spirits altogether
void of fear; what though wee are not so well
armed as he, nor furnished with that plenty
of ammunition, the justness of our cause
will shield us from the spiteful fury of his
invading power; be sensible of your wrongs;
the infamous disgrace without respect
of birth or person, how odious the name
of Catholic, hath ever been unto them?
a hatred there's by inheritance, the loss
of your estates by a thousand damned inventions;
beside innumerable edicts against Religion:
These torments were not held sufficient
in respect we somewhat yet possess of this
our native soil; wherefore they have contrived
the last and worst of evils; to raze us from
the world, No, nor leave so much as one alive,
to increase the memory of us hereafter;
(a grudge suitable to hells black purposes.)
Reflect I pray, how near it doth concern
us then, to venture our lives and fortunes
in a noble virtuous way; that truly tends,
to the safety of your wives, children and friends:
Admit gentlemen of the worst may happen,
what an they break on ours; it is no dishonour
neither our reputations blemished in it
when th'advantage of arms and numbers theirs,
May not fortune as well grace our desires
when all her motions are uncertain, should wee
defeat them now the world would speak our praise:
Come, let's resolve to doe them more annoy,
then Agamemnon, in the wars of Troy:
The grave and learned eloquence of Roman
Orators (noble Colonel) could not
more perfect a description give, off those
insufferable injuries, which captivated
our hearts in chains of ice, that must again
(perforce) dissolve in flames of just revenge:
Our enemies too near approach, else we could
enlarge the subject of this conference
with as many material circumstances,
which for the present we abreviate to prosecute
our right: lead on Sir, bravely guide the way
heaven will, I hope, grant this our happy day:
Was ever seen or heard, such bold, audacious
rogues that dares upbraid my fury, have not I▪
to their confused shame and loss, caused many
towns and villages to be destroyed in
dreadful flames, themselves like dismal fugitives
compelled to fly, and yet they dare affront me still!
O impudence! that with extracted villainy
deserves a total ruin, thy harm I seek,
and lunge to glory in so good an action▪
motives sufficient doth induce me to it,
to hang, to rack, to kill, to burn, to spoil,
until I make this land a barren soil.
Fly Cousin fly, ther's no hope of safety else,
notwithstanding a stout resistance, our men
(affrighted with the unusual sight of blood
and slaughter) are foully broken on, routed
by a number crueler then famished
lions in th'Arabian desert, Cola
like a demi-divell or Cannibal, cries
out kill, kill, spare neither man, woman, child
regard not age or sex, down, down with them all
For Christ his passion, doe you once more oppose
his fury, make good the trench whilst I persuade
our timorous men to face about.
Stand traitor,
perfidious traitor, stand.
Thy foe,
a loyal subject, and prove it so; on your guard Sir:
Tibernus charge, Crambich post unto the bridge
where the most number of the villens are
in strife to pass, let not a mothers child
escape, but see due execution on them all:
Your will shall be observed effectually
What stout Celar killed? O damned bowitching fate:
Bear hence this body, then after take the
pillage of the town for your good service.
Now as I live its like to prove a mad world,
a desperate time with our Citizens;
and it continue thus, where they did break
by dozens heretofore, we shall have hundreds
now at a light rate i'faith; such pretty
shifts and sleights are so cunningly contrived
these days, under pretence of safety, as
shutting shops, packing up goods and sent, the
Lord knows whither; Coin, Jewels, plate, household-stuff,
every thing vanishes like superfluous
clouds, to the vast center of the hollow earth;
my countrymen are styled, to discontented
gentlemen, well, if ever I did intend
to make a fortune, now's the time to stir
my self, a fitter opportunity
will never offer my acceptance, ha,
the mischiefs ont, I shall be reputed so,
a prime promoter: tush a blast of breath
no sooner blown then gone, honesty canoe•
thrive at all times, the proverb says, he must
needs dye a beggar that is known too just:
wherefore I will scrue up my wits, to the
full height of knavery, whereby I may
demurely insinuate my self, with the
good liking of Sir Carole; whom no sooner's
made acquainted with my faculty, but
heaps of honour will fall on me straight, with
good Sir, sweet Sir, as I doe pass them by,
help me says one I am condemned to dye,
there's twenty pieces; another calls kind Sir,
remember my petition you prefer
here's expedition for it; thus twixt em all,
I'm sure to rise, whosoever chance to fall:
here comes the only man in credit with
Sir Carole; prosperity waite on
your noble self Tibernus:
Thanks honest friend:
I have been since these wars desirous Sir,
to doe the governor some special service,
but since could not the happiness to impart
what I am sure will please and profit him.
Relate thy mind to me, and thou shalt have
a fit reward.
To place my low fortunes
on the pyramid of his bounty, were
a praise befitting the worthy motions
of a generous soul: This did induce
my zealous love to show, the subtle pranks
of some penurious Citizens, that lately
closed up in a wall, at least a thousand
pound in plate and cash.
There's some strong hopes in this;
I'll bring you likewise to each papist house,
where privately are kept, trunks wholly laden
of rich apparel, coin, jewels, rings bracelets
patents of the rebels lands.
That especially:
What can you think or name best needful for
your use, but I will straight discover?
Surely
thou can not miss a brave preferment;
Under pretence of being bred a Papist,
I shall without the least thought of suspicion
conduct your guard where Priests in secret are
locked up at Mass, or in the night as they
abroad doe creeping pass the street, moreover
Sir, if the army be in want, or that
of force you ask assistance from the townsmen
where some may better spare more gold then others,
let me alone to search the difference
of those men's fidelity, how able, willing,
really affected, Papist above Protestant
I am expert in all
Graceless villen
that cares not to betray his dearest friends
to them wotes not after he were hanged: 
I must dissemble with the knave a while
for my own end; Now trusty friend make good
what thou hast said, and bless this hour for ever:
Your constant servant I will still persevere.
Brother Athenio:
What says our dear brother?
Have you not hard of the late proclamation?
Yes Noble Brother, I perused it over,
the treacherous model of a rude invention,
Pitho would thousands give for all our heads
No, there's a milder since, full of Clemency,
a general pardon,
To whom?
Them will submit to the Lords Justices
On what conditions?
Perverse cruelty?
Perpetual slavery?
And mortal hatred?
Very true: these are the glorious titles
every faint hearted native will revolt
shall have, which from my heart I wish it him,
but to explain my own particular
intention, may to the wise perhaps seem
needles; yet he that loves his Country, or
will profess the Characters of Catholiquo
in's heart take notice oft, our quarrel is
religious, in maintenance whereof we
are already sworn without equivocation,
and ever I violate that sacred oath,
a thousand deaths shall one by one invade me,
if floods of misery, i'll wade them o'er
and from its raging streams regain the shoe••
of blessed fidelity.
May all the world
example take by this Lord's goodness;
Under favour:
it were a folly, a most profound madness
to seek our certain ruin by denial
of a benefit, so conveniently
proffered; when our wants at the most extreme:
both night and day I posted hence the kingdom
over, all parts my wandering thoughts conceived
might best supply our wants, did I return
ought but the fruitless labour of a needful
journey; can Stelern now your foes▪ increase
make up two thousand complete arms in field;
your Lordships knows this is no fable:
Good Sir forbeate, the matter's past dispute.
An please your excellence, several gentlemen
of the County, are newly come in post,
with some strange news, it's feared by their sad looks.
Direct'em hither; some straggling troupers
that for pillage scout abroad, makes false
alaruins to affright the Country thus:
Your news? What, sad upon it?
Osirus,
with a powerful army gathered from all parts
at least consisting of eight thousand foot,
and horse, march hitherward; burning of towns,
destroying Castles fair, all to the sword goes
that his army meets, and doth intend (the which
good God forbid) to make a fatal conquest
of this land.
What strange, dishonest, base device
is this, to publish to the world, a general
pardon, before which time appointed is expired,
poor harmless subjects killed, the kingdom fired,
O faithless wicked Cruelty!
Shift for your selves in hast,
for here will soon arrive more sullen spies,
then Mercury did charm in Argo's eyes;
good my Lords dispatch, one minutes stay too long
may yield you prisoners to untimely ends:
Dear friends, we now resemble one at point
of death, that must perforce forsake, what he
most dearly loved, life, wealth, fair possessions,
pleasures content exchanged to sad expressions,
wife laments, children their parents moan,
each hath occasion then to sigh and groan;
so we, distressed we, must oft among,
their doleful ditties tune a mournful song.
Let them whose will stand out, I will submit
to great Osirus cause its held most sit.
Now through the power and help of heaven we are,
in safe possession of their strongest holts,
the foe not able to withstand our warlike
troupes are fled, like men full of despair, grief,
regardless fury that we are thus strong;
themselves pursued with terror of the times,
and fearful shadows of base acted crimes,
wherefore we must then cheerfully advance,
not doubting but we truly shall ever long,
revenge sufficiently the Angoleans wrong.
You speak Sir, like your self, full of maturity,
the hopeful line, that guides my confidence
from the most intricate labyrinth of despair
when Adrohna was at point to perish,
and placed the issue of a far event
on more then mortal comfort: that proposes
to the wicked, vice, mischiefs, pains unspeakable,
joined with the grim aspect of blood and terror,
more deserving plagues then wilful Egypt
felt, when her miseries were at the height
of all extremes
It needs must follow so,
for in all parts they are environed with
severe Commanders, famous for their valour,
your Excellence in Stelern, and for the
adjacent Provinces, men of known integrity:
It is our chiefest comfort they go on
as prosperous as fair Bellona's darlings
when the gods were threatened by a multitude
of foolish mortals.
But none with that Celerity
like yours, which far transcend theirs went before
as Sol doth Luna's spangled Orb, or some
bright star, when sable clouds doth veil the sky.
It is the noblest of your thoughts are pleased my Lord
to speak our commendations greater then
desert can warrant so much goodness:
It cannot be denied; your prosperous fate, fame
hath divulged it to the spacious world, with doubled
Echoes of immortal praise; which makes Angolia
to esteem your actions the glory of her
Northern Clime.
Believe me gentlemen,
this will impair your ripe judgement much, what
tidings brings you from the Camp my friend?
To know your Lordships pleasure concerning a
prisoner that immediately is taken:
How, a gentleman of quality?
He names
himself Lieutenant Colonel Rufus
a Scot by birth, a Papist by profession.
Let him be forthwith sent to the Lords Justices,
Behold my Lord, here comes another Post,
Now friend, thy news?
That Lord Sileus, Bathillus, one Cephalon
and Sisenna, with many other prime
gentlemen are jointly come to the Camp,
in hope of a free pardon
A gibbet
fits them better: good my Lord;
Patience kind Sir, when time and place will serve
each one may justly have what he deserve
till then remit your censure.
How will your Lordship have them be disposed of?
With a strong Convey, guard them presently
unto the Castle:
It shall be duly done.
Now we may say, Heaven favours us.
Nothing
more certain Sir, yet I must ask a boon:
It is granted, were it my estate Tigranes:
No more then two full Regiments of foot,
a troop or so of horse to augment my former
forces, with whom I mean to wast the Kingdom
over: chiefly the Northern quarter, where
most my indignations bent, until I pull
from those bold conspirators unsanctified brows
the wreath of honour, and force them to repent,
cry, curse the hour, that ever they urged Angolias
warlike power.
There needs no language to excite
thy valour, nor distrust, but thou moist soon
accomplish, that pleasing service both to
God and man, come then make choice thy self of
them resolved hearts fit to waite on so brave a leader:
Then you for Vlstrand, we Stelern, clasp hands,
when Martial men thus knit, their party stands:
They call for quarter, and will yield the Castle
if we grant it them.
Go, say they shall have it,
promise what ever they will demand, until
we gain this place of strength, our loss is much
already; when that is done, gentlemen,
and brother soldiers, their lives shall be at
each of your disposals, as our poor countrymen
hath been at theirs.
We'll brush the•r guts i'faith,
You were but fools and cowards else to think
the contrary, when heaven cries vengeance on
their sinful heads, nature binds you effect it;
were there no more provoking motions, but
the slaughter of your follow soldiers here:
He speaks like a true zealous Protestant:
His words inflames my heart.
Z'blood mine's so too:
And mine is full resolved with this stiff blade,
to gore the traitors throats;
My sword likewise:
Mine shall not sleep when yours is dravvn.
This is as quickly drawn to;
But this did pretty well, and shall again,
augment the number of our foes that's slain.
I must of force be absent now they yield:
least your pretence of being ignorant
I granted quarter, might spoil the jest: you
know your charge?
You need not doubt, we doe: stand;
where would these traitors go?
Where God will guide us best.
Where the devil shall your wretched souls molest?
Hold we had quarter promised us.
Believe
him not he lies, kill, kill, let not a bastards 
brat of that unhappy brood, escape your hands.
Look, yonder runs a score, lets follow, follow.
Heaven grant they perish in the world to come,
that were foul actors of this brutish Tragedy:
dear friends and Countrymen, blame not my love,
if I bestow the attribute of Martirs on ye,
Martyrs, O Martyrs truly with good reason too,
since for your faith, you suffered thus; live then
blessed souls securely in eternal rest,
whilst we lament your too untimely loss;
Oh that my wishes could an army raise
for this poor kingdoms safety; whereby such
cruelty might be no more extended,
but oh, oh, these, these wishes are in vain
when fire and sword beyond control doth reign
Lirenda, poor Lirenda now farewell,
farewell thy former pomp; ell's turned to grief
attired in crimson robes of bloody death
that none but heavens compassive motions can
subdue: cease then, O cease impatient grief,
when God is pleased, we may expect relief,
mean time these breathless corps me thinks doe crave
that tribute which we all bring to the grave.
Plague choke him for a graceless villen, not
a minutes ease my restless fancy had,
since first I understood my dismal fate,
ha, is this your prophecy, good man halter?
is this my fortune? Sir, you will be lost 
in this war, by the hands of one you least
suspect, before you shall return again:
Must my labour, my zealous labour be,
requited with a death I most abhor,
not that I fear grim death base conjurer,
but that a Lirendean slave should vanquish
me, and glory in my overthrow, O, O,
O, damned devils incarnate, if die I must
my life shall cost ten thousand lives accursed
There's at least a score of arch-traitors sent to
town, whereof one Cephalon.
Ha, Brukil• I hope,
The very same;
God's blessing on thy heart,
for this good news; a very rogue in grain.
There is another old Commander, whom
they call Lieutenant-Collonell Rufus, one
can disclose more then a hundred more,
I'll scrue
it out of his old bones i'faith: good Tibernus
fetch them hither.
Them all?
No, none but that pair
of cunning rogues: desire the Constable
to yoke the rest, they cannot be secure, 
enough, but these shall to the rack without redemption.
Clear the way there, for the prisoners, ho,
Are you there Sirs? have you brought Magna Charta,
to reprive you from the gollowes? ha
No,
His Majesty's more gracious.
What, what, to
pardon a rabble of disloyal Cut-throates,
a nimble actor of this bold Commotion?
I never was.
I say thou lie traitor▪
and sate in chief commission.
Never in my life.
Better confess.
What I did not?
The rack shall force thee then.
Mercy great Sir supports his royal throne
from whence your glories are derived, and is
the admired Emblem of heroical virtue
dispersed throughout the world, wherein his highness
like a prince composed of goodness, would not
his subjects ruin, but rather have his
mercy eminent, as himself is good
Rugh cures, now y' are glad to fawn, when hitherto
it was lofty brags ye stood on, a treachery
I'll trample into dust, and make you know,
before we part, what homage you doe owe:
Sir, for my self thus much I will confess,
not that I fear thy rack or tortures Cola,
for why they shall no more then what I freely
speak, I was indeed employed by the stat•
of Lirenda, poor discontented Lirenda;
to make known their woeful grievance to his
Sacred Majesty, which had he known, doubtless
his royal soul would grieve to hear th'unheard of
cruelty; thy squadrons exercise:
I tell thee doting traitor they are justly
served.
How, traitor?
I traitor to thy face I speak it.
Even to thy self I doe return the same.
How captious they thwart me with insulting
language; lead them to execution straight.
First use the rack.
He dyes.
Let me beseech you Sir.
At thy request it shall be so.
The rack sirs, ho:
Before that engine of inveterate
malice comes, vouchsafe me hearing; I claim
a double privilege; first the benefit
of your late printed Proclamation
Osirus promise next I should have quarter,
such as became a martial man to have,
which now we humbly offer your acceptance.
Dissembling Crocodile, thy hidden spleen
shall not corrupt justice by invective
flattery, no vipers no, a world of
tortures are more requisite.
Let Mercy
mitigate your rage.
Presume to speak again,
and by my sovereigns hand you both shall hang.
That were an act like thy self.
Come sirs you must unloose with expedition
Is that the recompense of our submission,
will neither honour, faith, nor pity move thee.
He stirs my choler, will none obey my will
I'll tear each limb my self asunder, unless
with speed he suffer?
Doe not provoke him Sir.
Heaven grant us patience then.
A standish Sirs:
take now the examination as he speaks it;
Hold, hold, for Christs sake hold; the torment's great.
Did not thou conspire to surprise the Castle?
Yes, yes, I did.
And went to several parts
of the kingdom for powder?
I did, I did.
Wast not thou private to their consultations?
Very true.
Did not you then intend, to
extirpate all the Angolean Protestants,
to disposesse our Sovereign of his Crown,
to usurp the government of Lirenda?
My conscience cannot accuse them so▪
It is false thou say:
O no, no, no:
Rack up the villen higher yet, till he
confess, confess I bid thee.
Torments force me,
to acknowledge that was never done.
How, how?
I doe confess what you demand is true.
Write that Tibernus, when thy rebellious
kinsmen and thy self, would carouse and feast,
you wished my head among you there,
We did,
For which thou shalt a twist up higher yet.
Then as you hope for mercy Sir forbear,
my pains intolerable; oh I die.
Now take him off, your turn comes next.
In vain
you seek to force me Sir, since what I speak
shall be through fear not truth: nor will refuse
to answer the least syllable you ask.
Expect no favour it is denied thee:
Such
favour may thou at thy last judgment find: 
O cruel tyrant, will no remorse of
conscience enter thy black soul to see,
my aged limbs thus rent with tyranny?
Better confess, then languish on the rack,
I can no more then what unto the Council
else I did.
Higher with him: confess in hast,
or by great Jove i'll rack thy life away,
Take it, O take my wretched life away,
so it appease thy fury, no tongue can tell
what torments I endure?
He faintes an please you.
Let him faint and hang to, no great matter,
a doting proud obdurate fool, will not
confess, go take them hence unto the jail;
Your pleasure shall be done.
Zlid, search their pockets.
twill make us swill boys, swill boys merrily
Thank me for that, good man dunse, or it should
walk to the Constable again.
His shallow Coxcomb,
had not the wit to think on it.
However anon
we'll be as jovial lads, as cup and can.
The rest shall be used with like severity.
It were wisely done of you.
Who have you there?
Two rogues with each a bag of salt we took,
going to supply their wants abroad,
You have done well,
to intercept the knaves:
go bid the Provost Marshall execute
them presently:
Come away, come and be hanged.
Where master?
To be hanged that's plain English,
I trow no, for what Agra?
The gallows will
instruct you better, come and be hanged, come.
Behold your chief spy is returned Sir Carole.
your Argos, your pretty tell tale Mercury,
First, arm your grave thoughts with attentive patience,
least what I speak might prove offensive to you,
your foes doe daily expect from Spain, France
and the Low-Conntreyes, plenty of all fit
ornaments of war, as powder, bullet, match,
muskets, petternalls, and such like, moreover
many valiant brave Commanders.
Hell take them first,
abrood of most disloyal vipers, ha,
what peremptory slave durst tell this fable?
Them who invoke your happy fates, for certain
did approve it upon oath, and further said,
one Dictus went for that expected aid:
What is he gone to Sea?
Yes gone to Sea.
A blister build on thy tongue foul serpent
Tibernus thou love me,
My heart and life is yours.
Speed after good Tibernus in all post,
send forth a power to watch at every coast,
perhaps he lurks in hollow caves abroad,
till wind and tide doth serve, whilst this base rascal,
(corrupted with a golden bribe,) will not
reveal his private haunt.
Sir, if I have
offended pardon me:
By heavens I will not,
put him into the Provost Marshalls custody,
till further order comes from us; Tibernus
charge Amphilus on his life to scour the Seas,
and let the harvest be destroyed.
It shall.
What Hercules can remove this mountain
of enraged passions from my heart? O now
it nothing fits my care to speak but thunder
or take into my throat the trump of Heaven,
with whose determinate blasts the wind shall
burst, that blew his sails aloft, and the enraged
Seas consume their foamy waves, that will not
let his vessel sink, whereby my care might
be dispersed, void of suspicion, ascending
from, this wicked plot unseen, a poisoned
plot sufficient to infect the world; when
they doe show themselves the worst of men:
Stay harlot stay, or by the heavens above,
I'll neither spare thee for reward nor love:
Pity oh pity friend my woeful case,
my parents are by thee already slain,
what would my loathsome life avail thee then,
kind heart relent, relent if any spark
of civil grace be in thee.
Z'blood and wounds,
unless thou yields me freely thy virginity
I'll pierce thy breast with this remorseless steel;
I scorn thy hellish motion: hands of rude devil
or I'll convince thee with a chaste denial
like virtues darling fair Suzanne.
Here's needless
fustian trow mistress twitle, twatle, what now?
nay frisk about the sinquapace, ell's one;
thou strive in vain to hinder my desires,
yield, yield speedily.
Never whilst I live:
help, help,
I come to help away your
maiden-head, if it be not lost already.
More furies yet,
And more, if need require,
O beastly filthy lewdness,
will no compassion move you? O kill me
kill me sooner then bereave me of a
modest fame, see these eyes dim with distilling,
tears, that never knew to weep till this sad
hour, yet would some pity crave from your hard
hearts, oh honest friends hearken to my griefs,
let not your better sense be deaf unto
the woeful plaints of a distressed maiden
Who hath a nimble tongue, and prattles strangely,
And as strong as a witch.
Help, help in time,
some help from heaven, help me ye powers divine.
Me thinks I hard not very far from hence
some woeful Creatures to lament and greeve,
crying a loud for help, as it were,
Help, help;
Some ravished virgin did implore my aide,
I'll therefore search this silent desert thorough
until I find from whence proceeds, this heavy
doleful cry:
It is shame to use a maiden thus.
Zwounds jade talk not of shame to us,
Stab the queen;
Z'life that's the way this pettish harlot will,
affront us else.
Oh stay thy murdering hand:
murder, murder:
A she devil by God: can not kill her trow:
Direct me heaven, O that in time I may
bestow my help: ha, what base inhuman fray
is this? I did suppose as much, when first,
her shrill laments did pierce the air, and sent
into my soul a deep conceit of pity,
ha, two to one weak creature drench in tears,
trust me, the odds is much, and marvel she
held out so long; well name of God, i'll forward,
fly shameless villens fly, if not, by heavens
I'll force your flight, &amp; thus revenge her wrong:
Rascal thou shalt dearly repent that blow.
Release that Lady first, I claim her mine,
if not, be sure this blade's as sharpe as thine.
We mean not Sir at your request to flinch
as if we feared thy lofty threats, no, no
proud loitering scab, get thee away in time,
or thou shalt rue the hour, and curse the day,
in seeking to deprive us of our pray.
Untie her speedily base pilfring rogues,
or by them powers above, you'll soon repent,
the wrong you doe this harmless innocent:
Rescue, O rescue Noble Sir, a virgin,
ready to be deprived of such a treasure,
once lost, the world cannot repair again.
Fair beauty be of comfort, I'll fight for thee:
Come ruffians come, come quench your bloody thirst,
my heart's the fountain drink, drink till you're burst,
if your insatiate lust be not yet cool,
I'll soon extinguish that in human flame,
why gape you thus, whilst valour may be had,
charge both at once.
Z'life sure the fellows mad,
Let him go to, we'll cure his frenzy fits,
or make him be more lunatike in's wits.
Quarter, quarter, good Sir give me quarter,
The very same that all thy bloody tribe
doth give my Countrymen, when they submit
their fainting lives upon a faithless promise:
go, meet thy brothers soul poor naked rogue,
where greedy Charon waits to waft him ore,
unto great Belzibubs infernal shore;
Now be at liberty: give thanks to God therefore.
His Majesty I'll praise for evermore,
and you for this excessive kindness thanks,
O thanks kind heart, ten thousand thanks I give thee,
wishing that heavens may shower perpetual
blessings on thee:
Dear heart relate the legend
of thy misfortune.
Sir, my griefs would rent
a heart of marble, were it sensible of
them gross abuses done (perhaps) unto
your own dear friends as well as mine: oh Cola,
that monster tyrant Cola, his barbarous
command, no civil thought but must lament
to think ont, a Turk could not more brutish
villain then he, and to a kingdom
(good God,) that raised both him and his from nothing,
my aged Father, Mother, Brother, Sisters all,
all my dear friends were basely murdered by him,
when having notice of there bloody ends,
fear lead me hither, supposing I was
free from danger, but oh it almost proved
a theater of rape and murder, had
not your valour ransomed my hard fate;
To these I did a shower of liquid tears
present in lieu of what they sought, but would not doe:
when my chief comfort was the gods, oh they,
would then transform me like to Niobes,
my griefs Id most happy had I been,
then Metamorphosed like that mournful queen;
Fair beauty doe not wast them Crystal streams,
that to a lovers mind more precious is
then Mite's wealth?
Persuade me not,
I will:
Reason enjoins me to obey your will,
with all them dutiful respects I owe,
your most accomplished virtue.
Then you reward
my small endeavours highly: come my fair
prisoner, wherein more freedom we may
dispense with fullen, grief a while, prithee
letts to the next adjacent garrison
and as (without self spraise) I late did shield
thee from the fury of these slaves, so under God
I'll be thy safeguard thither, whence may proceed,
some kind refreshment to poor souls in need.
Come along brother Soldiers, the round, the round.
Zlid Sirs, where is the best pillage found?
At hangmans lane end, where market-folks
with store of belliware, of force must pass,
Zlid my teeth waters else, there, let's go there boys,
Mass alls but need never so paid in our days,
with mouldy scraps of cheese, and butter, with
as many colours as the rainbow in it:
well my heart's in hope we shall feast merrily
anon, let's be jovial, a fit of our
own mirth, thento the work my lads,
What shall we have?
What but Lord Pitho's song?
Your voice is best, begin.
Pitho is doting, we care not who knows it,
The Worst is but thee pence a day if we loose it;
For were he not from God knows whom descended,
He had on poor soldiers more freely expended,
Let us not then boys expect from such men
Any favour whose honour was got with the pen.
Cast away care boys, trouble not your mind,
For we shall be paid, when the devil is blind.
It is too well known sirs such men to get pelf
With strange devices rob the common-wealth,
By a colloging crafty kind of stealing
They are made great ones; O fie on false dealing,
Then let us pray boys, for them will thus palter
May justly be served in their kind with a halter.
Cast away cares boys, &amp;c.
No marvel then sirs, wee seek after pillage,
In City, suburbs, town, or Country village,
When our grave statesman conceives it good pay,
A soldiers allowance but three pence a day,
Then help your selves boys, O it were a bravado
If wee, could but see Pitho, in the strapado:
Cast away care boys, &amp;c.
Silence gentlemen, stand clear, yonder comes
a traveller.
I'll dive into his pocket straight;
His cloak is mine already,
And if his felt
be worth the taking, from whence come you Sir?
Who gives authority to question me,
Poverty bids us to examine you,
can lend us money friend?
Not a penny.
Wilt thou bestow some on us then?
Forbear, forbear;
Wee must change cloaks,
Your felt is good I see,
You will not deal thus shamefully I trow?
Get thee gone, begone, or I will make thee go.
With a light purse, and a heavy heart,
See, see, it is weighty, silver O my conscience
well, we'll share anon, good luck attend us.
Who comes next?
A maid with something in her lap.
Stir not a foot, she comes directly this way▪
What hast thou here sweet heart?
Nothing for you.
What need you be so coy? it is ne'er the worse
wee see it.
Nor much the better neither: lo
it is bread and meat my mistress sent me for
unto the market.
Your mistress put not
a crum of this into her chappes by God.
Thou lousy, filching rogue, let go my meat,
or I will to thy captain presently
complain: cannot folks pass the streets for you?
There's thy napkin, we scorn baseness.
Baseness.
base rogues, what are you else?
Dost call us rogues.
Your actions speaks it so.
Z'life trull begone
or I will kick thee home: an angry spider
to grumble for a little victuals thus:
Get home scold, get home.
A prize, a prize:
Stand close, for if he spies us he will drop in
some house or other: Save you Sir.
And you likewise;
Kind Sir, regard a Soldiers want, something
to drink, your bounty Sir,
There's twelve pence for ye;
In earnest of a greater sum, your leave Sir;
Keep off, you are too forward Sirs;
Draw if you dare,
an thou love thy life stir not:
I am a Protestant.
Be what you will, ell's one to us sweet Sir:
Restore my purse, and I'll part with it freely;
An'if we doe the King shall know it; ha, ha.
I must share with mine own,
You look to be beaten.
I see that, go to the Council complain,
tell Pitho an himself were here I'd doe as much.
There's no contesting with these desperate knaves.
Ha ha brother, am not I a nimble lad?
Fackings and that thou art,
Grammercy bully,
how has learned the trick ant?
Ah to plunge into
a well lined pocket, no art
beyond it.
Or to whip off a hat or a cloak
and a wey-wit: but say what occupation
likes thee best?
Warr's but a peddling fegary,
with a number of lousy customers,
knocks, hunger, cold, thirst, the captain's-pay, a
disease that sore torment us, it is a most
unchristian purgation, some vermin too,
la, they creep, bite, and keeps a damnable quarter
on my shoulders, an'I could shrug them off,
I'd ne'er desire'em on again.
No better
barrel better hearing on us all, we can
sing the same song, to the tune of Lachrimae,
but to the purpose.
Faith mine jumps right with
thine Bullie, it is a neat kind of trade, we only
borrow from those can spare it: yet I say
it is more gentile far then three pence a day,
Has hit the nail in the head, come shake hands,
this day we thrive lads, to morrow again
boys, a short life and a merry Sirs, follow
your leader.
Omnes O brave Timothy, Orare Timothy.
If ere I did conspire with Cornet Brinfort,
or knew of his departure, before I was
inform,d he went; O let me ne'er behold,
Sun, Moon, Stars, or any Celestial power,
that keeps due motion in their proper spheres
Perjured slut, thy accomplices are yet extant,
whose own confessions doe approve thy crime;
Produce my accusers,
Them gentlemen
that now are in restraint for the same fact
speaks thy accomplished willingness,
O no.
doe not cast that foul aspersion on them,
so far I doe presume their worth is such,
that death cannot urge them express as much,
This falsehood shall in thy blood appear,
Noble Sir:
my fault as you have censured it, never
deserved the least of this God knows: if innocence
may plead my cause, no soul more wronged then I;
Them tears resemble Synons treachery
against old Priams Troy, wherefore it is said,
vice doth her just hate never more provoke,
then when she veils it under virtues cloak:
discover Brinsforts plot immediately
or as I live I'll spare no tortures on thee:
Enjoin my sin some other penance, if truth
must not appear t'acquit me from so foul
a scandal, hide, O hide, my loathed face, in some
nasty gloomy dungeon; or hang in chains
until I eat the flesh, that ne'er offended,
here then my naked breast, ready to receive
what you will scribe thereon; my blood will serve
in stead of ink, where if you please record,
how willingly I suffered for my Lord
and maker Christ.
For lustful treason rather,
until thou dost confess, il'e write in wounds
fit characters to thy rightful sufferance.
O kill me, kill me, doe but grant that favour,
be no more crueler then death, feel, O feel,
your heart's transformed to stone, let my heart's blood
dissolve your self again, else you'll become
the lively portraiture of tyranny;
Thus I express me yet,
And yet I live:
All the torments hell can boast of shall be
inflicted on thee; not suddenly no,
but with a fretting pain vex thy desire,
Thy cruel thoughts to hell's dark plagues aspire,
Iesu Redeemer of my soul, to thee
I must address my pitiful complaint,
when men rakes less remorse on contrite tears
then Tigers doe, thou know, O Lord; whither
my thoughts were ever guilty of that crime
deserving this unheard of cruelty, but, O
eternal wisdom my grief cries at thy
watchful ear for every, vouchsafe it may,
abate them torments that will last for aye.
How resolute these pettish Papists are, 
she'd sooner let her fingers burn to th'bone,
then once reveal a rebels base intention,
Who was her sweet heart, and loved him dearly,
Mas lad an seems so;
Speak huswife, speak,
What would you have me speak,
What Brinforts plot was in departing hence
Ask me no more, I am a stranger in it:
Did ever man behold such impudence?
I know thou lie;
O be not thus incredulous,
Jaws, Turks, Infidels, yes Heathens to, all
nations doe commiserate the doleful
pains of them like me, nor will not urge them
further, once the fires exposed, but your beliefs
more strange then theirs.
Confess, thou foolish wench confess,
or I will cause new match to be applied:
Doe what you please, my God I trust will strengthen
me against thy hellish fury.
It is a folly.
to compel this slut I see, go, take her off.
until some evidence comes in against her.
O fearful news, news that doth rent my heart
to hear it.
Why noble father? you have
received as desperate tidings oft before,
yet made your thoughts contemn the worst might follow,
and when occasion offered, as bravely did
perform it, rebuke this passion then Sir.
Good father doe,
our joys in your contentment.
Fond youths your yet unripned years, brookes not
the lowering gesture of deserved sorrows,
(how near soever it concerns you,) why
your spring o'retops the Autumn of my years,
your griefs a weather-cocke, subject to change
at every blast of youthful pleasure;
but when dame nature dyes your flaxen curls
a reverend gray, experience will confute
that fond deluding folly: this is no
common toy (like yours) to grieve at, no, no,
peruse them mournful lines, where if you find
not cause of lamentation, blame me then:
Ha, Lirenda at point to be destroyed!
O brother see, that country whence we are
descend, calls for some timely succour:
nature must work a true compassion in us:
Father, O Father, by all that is most
Dear unto you, regard this sad complaint:
Now be your selves the judge whether we ought not
pity them, or prefer their safety sooner
then all the fortunes mighty Spain will give us,
value the difference pray: here we be indeed
accommodated with respect and honour,
wealth sufficient for our betters, with the
grace of Spaine's Imperial Monarch,
what doe we lack? nothing, but yet compared
to the affection of our Country, not worth
the speaking.
Weed' rather forfeit what we have,
then stay a minute once our friends doe crave:
That's each of your firm resolution,
We humbly yield to your mature direction,
Go haste to your mother and prevail with her
for I must yet a while consult alone:
See where a second Mars lies, Abner named,
fair Nymphs respect him, or you'll be all blamed
of too, too, coy demeanour; Music, some Solemn music.
music or harmonious sphere descend,
descend whilst we his virtues doe commend
Fair Queen the gods are pleased you know we should
appear unto this mortal, to unfold
their divine pleasure and most sacred will,
in heaven decreed; wherefore we must fulfil
the promises of their superior powers
above; and as we doe esteem him ours,
thus I declare his fortune, in respect
of warlike graces none shall more direct
then his mature command: his valour to,
shall make his adversaries blush to know,
that from, an infant heaven did him elect,
to be victorious still against their Sect:
Opinion Mistress says, a silent tongue,
consents to every thought, then I should wrong,
his happiness, if I did not relate,
what I am sure will much augment his fate,
heroic valour, virtue a pregnant wit,
are them deportments we conceive best fit,
to crown his future actions; this wee give,
for an assurance that his fame shall live,
Grave Matron, from you I must needs borrow
leave to speak in's praise, before to morrow
visits the world, this discontented couch
whereon hoe's stretch, 'tshall witness and avouch
these promised happiness.
You're all content
wee see, to raise his fame:
The gods themselves doth honour Abner's name,
Let each of you in Sonnets sound his joy,
mixed with a dance or some conceited toy
to pleasure him withal; whilst sleeping thus
he may receive a happy fate from us.
Morpheus wee conjure thee hence,
Go to them gloomy shades from whence
All sorts of lurking mischiefs flow
Beneath the infernal depths below▪
Go to styx Aver, or whither,
Tell the gods exiled thee thither:
Let no sad thought then molest him
VVee from sadness dispossessed him
But contrive for him fit praise
With length of many happy days
So loud fame his worth may sound
Through the universal round,
Them bloody troupes that doth destroy
His native Isle, like wretched Troy,
In sad laments shall grieve to see
Henceforward them victorious bee,
O thy remorseless rage in vain,
Lirenda flourished again.
See where the stately Queen of fortune sitts
like Ci•hearse daughter unto Jove,
to her we must address our best salutes,
all hail fair Queen:
Welcome dear sister,
Fair Empress we hard your solemn notes ascend
up to the highest point of heavens great arch,
from whence we come to fill an empty sphere
with comfort, the discontented Lirendeans.
The gods and goddesses are wholly bent
to vanquish all their former discontent
though hitherto they seemed not to regard 'em,
yet notwithstanding they are now resolved
henceforth to let their sorrows be dissolved;
Wee knew as much good Mercury, and doe
applaud that act, which argues them just gods,
it is fit we publish then, what they decreed:
Brother Mars, you must furnish them with arms,
and Polo's wisedome' against intestine harms,
our self and you Bellona, in the field,
will make the bloody adverse party yield
to the stout Lirendeans, oft pursued
by them unjustly almost were subdued;
Their Sol thus long eclipsed again must shine,
to show the lustre of them lamps divine
that best predominate their happy fates,
we mean them stars, which on that Island smile,
to see they shoo'd retain their light a while
by a dark cloudy mist that now is spent
and forced to vapour in the Orient.
Therefore resolve as we long time did since
with your immortal powers for to convince
as many armed furies as will dare
rapine at Abners deeds, or seek to share
in them adventures wee are pleased to give,
a good success unto; his fame shall live,
that once it might be said, dame fortunes wheel,
became soon steadfast, when it most did reel.
By Iupiter agreed.
Dear sister come, take 
your seat whilst my chaste Nymphs, graced with these
gods doe dance.
Now your free bounties are bestowed wee see▪
in each respect as we desired shoo'd be,
such thank fullness that to your deities due,
fortunes great queen doth tender each of you,
Now gently, gently, wake him as we go,
up to our spheres, thence view his deeds below:
Hence flattering Somnus get away
With thy drowsy leaden mace,
That which makes the brightest day:
Blacker then a Negro's face,
Here's no biding for thee go,
Once the Gods command it so.
Rise from his tempting couch, O rise
Courageous Abner doe not stay,
Lirenda calls aloud and cries
Brave Abner come, O come away,
Him Victoria guards still,
Can best assuage our present ill.
Is it in a dream I saw this heavenly vision,
or is it vain fancies dazzling on mine eyes,
sure I slept sound indeed, but ne'er with so much
blessed content before, a dream it cannot be,
a blessed inspiration rather; that yet
possess my thoughts, with a most sweet delightful
comfort; well, in few words I am resolved,
propitious heaven, now I implore thy aid,
him thou'lt assist, needs not to be dismayed.
It is more then time wee look to right our selves
on that foul wretch and tyrant Cola,
least suddenly we forfeit for our slakenes
the loss of all our heads, (if taken by him)
for having lost all goodness, and of late
grown desperate mad, through turbulent
passions of a distempered soul; cannot
reclaim his wickedness, like one too far
engaged, ever to return to honesty
again:
Honesty my Lord's a stranger to him,
and minds no more civility, then Cannibals
or Tartars doe, being puffed up with pride
of them vain praises falsely given him, by
a multitude as basely minded as himself.
How they doe glory in his bloody deeds,
and styles him truly valiant whom the world
reputes no better, then a monster clothed
in human form.
Unheard of madness to
betray so many innocents, that but
for him and his damned shameless retinue
had not be en executed so;
How shall we
then advise to rid us of so dangerous
an enemy.
Heaven will, I hope, contrive,
his overthrow, in this our expedition
though he securely now abides in garrison
guarded with five hundred expert Soldiers
thinks Heaven nor Hell, cannot molest him there,
or that we dare not march within a league
of his sterne countenance, such is the foppery
of his vain glorious humour,
Then name of God,
This night we will advance our forces where
the besotted tyrant now remains, if
we but kill his sentry then, we may more
boldly enter and surprise him napping
in his bed asleep:
That were the safest
way indeed to venture on him, or preserve
our troupes entire, until our Noble Cousin
Abner be arrived
Hoe's long expected,
But will be shortly here,
Who when he comes,
comes well appointed to support this pious
war, our wants with his renowned fame beyond Sea.
Let's march directly thither, come loose no time,
that in necessities a wilful Crime:
Furies and plagues torments my restless thoughts
with gashly visions of deformed hags,
infernal monsters to my thinking would
perforce deprive me of my vital breath,
O that this horrid night were past away,
a thousand millions for one glimpse of day.
Ah, ah, they are come again; it thunders,
whither shall I go hide me from the bolts 
dreadful crack: Tibernus, Morton, why Tibernus
will none defend me from these ugly shapes,
O how they press on me, give bake rude furies
or by the hand of Proserpine your Queen
I'll force you hence unto the stygian greene
I am Revenge roused from my silent cave
by justice that revenge on thee will have,
for thy base murdering of man, woman, child,
wives, widows, nurses, virgins defiled,
all that a tyrant could invent or doe,
thou most inhumanly did put them to,
wherefore Revenge, revenge from hell is sent
to lead thee to eternal punishment;
I am the soul of him an thou wilt know
that in thy pistol once did force me blow,
gave fire and shot me dead; hell is thy due,
for which revenge, revenge doth thee pursue;
Wee are them two poor harmless country swains,
to get an honest living spared no pains,
we to thy quarters went, and would from thence
bring salt abroad just worth some eighteen pence,
thy soldiers took us, stripped us, shrewdly banged us,
then after to the gibbet and there hanged us
by thy command; wherefore we doe implore
Revenge may take, revenge on thee therefore:
This bloody sword, and flaming torch are them
true Emblems of thy furious stratagem
invented chiefly to depopulate
destroy, consume, and wast the regal state
of this brave kingdom, or what therein's found,
either above or underneath the ground,
such was thy wicked malice, spleen and might
for which wee seek a just revenge this night,
This was a plot of some conjuring Papist
to vex me with these filthy strange affrightments,
O that I could with mighty Jove rain down
a shower of maledictions on them, cursed
wretches they; the name it self doth vex me more,
then all them dismal shapes i've seen before.
What come again, life then adieu? Now Tibernus
what makes this loud alarm?
That you may arm
your self in hast, the rebels march into
the town:
He was a traitor did command
the guard this night: go hye thee Tibernus, call
the troupes together, cry but a Cola, Cola,
I warrant thee they'll fly.
Sa, sa, they break
I faith, Cola, Cola, cry out a Cola;
Sir Carole Cola slain, O execrable slaughter!
Heaven curse the rascal that was author on it:
bear in the body to be embalmed with tears,
that when his mournful obsequies are ended
this Epitaph may on his tomb be engraven,
Angolea's glory, Pickland's wonder,
Lirenda's terror lies here under.
Is it the counsels pleasure I shoot be removed
from hence; prithee whither?
Unto the Castle:
It were as good I dyed, as to be laid in such
a loathsome place, where surely Mumferret
must be my keeper: good friend, desire thy master
may return his writ, I'm sickly, and not
in case to be removed, if they conceive
me not secure enough, or fears escape,
set double locks on, bar your windows treble
over, any thing but departure, so
kind each one of you have been unto me,
that my imprisonment's a pleasure rather:
My master's willing to afford your Lordship
all the favour lies in him, but that he may not,
Why friend? twill be no prejudice to him,
only his labour to inform the Court,
whom I hope are not so void of reason,
but will admit a prisoner (my inferior,)
this poor request:
He dares not doe it, once
the Judge and Councell's bent against you, for
it was their express charge to the Sheriffs thus,
beware, your prisoner Caspilona hath not
more freedom given him, then you may answer,
at a thousand poundle piece.
Say thou so Roger?
well; if there be no remedy, but needs 
I must depart: there's for thy dutiful 
attendance.
Now heavens protect your Lordship,
as I live it pities me, this generous 
noble Lord, they are much to blame, wrongs so good
a soul:
Honest Roger, I am disposed
to rest, if any kind friend comes to visit
me, desire they would repair another time
Your will I shall observe my Lord.
Thou art
always honest Roger, trusty Roger,
this is the course of fickle fortunes wheel,
last week reputed for a loyal subject,
now in close prison as a traitor kept,
whose thoughts in that respect, is full as pure
as new fallen snow on mount Libanius; but
this corrupted age, declares my dearest friends
to be my prime accusers; well, thou God
of justice, whose bright impartial eye,
views the worlds guilty crimes, see an innocent
exposed unto a sad disastrous fate,
if thy great mercy helps me not? O then
I suffer shall with other harmless men:
Cast off that drooping sadness Earl,
Be not dismayed take heart of grace,
Behold a true Ellizean girl
Pities thy distressed case,
One that will a mortal shape
Take on her for thy escape.
Some voice my thought did whisper in mine ear,
a sweet melodious note that said, fear not
thou shalt escape: Alas it is but my fancies
Wish it had been so; No that cannot be,
for yet my soul retains an inward joy,
the motion is divine, and makes me happy
beyond measure; bright Angel of Celestial
Paradise, to whom the safeguard of my life
deputed is, help me, O help me to
get from, this labyrinth of care, otherwise
I never shall perfect that enterprise.
My Lord General of Stelern welcome
welcome to Lirenda, thou fair son of Mars.
My Lord Caspilona, we gratulate
your safe escape,
Most hearty thanks,
Now we may boldly coape with our insulting
domineering foes, whose arrogant pride
contemned this nation with an infamous
report of cowardice; base rascals, they
shall know we have undaunted spirits left
to quell their treacherous malignant power;
their breach of public faith, granting quarter
then after falsely murdering them,
Is it possible,
that men who knows the Law of Arms, should be
so absurd, so profane,
The universe
cannot parallel like bloody massakers
odious to God and man,
Believe me twill
end shamefully, such actions cannot thrive,
Ought we not deal with theirs we vanquish so▪
We scorn to imitate their baseness, what
we doe shall be in a nobler honest way,
true Martial discipline,
Which they will ne'er observe, 
what means this 〈◊〉 of the trumpet sound.
Some news is posting hither,
What tidings Lentimos?
Arm good, my Lord, with speed Marquis Osirus,
with a powerful Army, march hitherward,
and hath already been at Motilin
where his rude, boy sterous followers, put
men, women, children to the sword, for certain
it is reported, they bend their forces thence to Fosse,
Where they, God willing, shall have a bloody
banquet, Come cheerfully, my Lords meet those
that came so far to seek your manful blows,
Though we come short in our design of Fosse,
or must retreat from that unlukie town,
it is not the bruit of Abners hasty march
with the whole strength of Stelern, shoo'd make us
stir a foo••, did his numbers equal great
Xerxes army, that drank up rivers dry,
the world shall testify our willingness
to meet him when, and where he list;
But not
with more hast then good speed sweet Sir 
I think we have been pretty well beaten else,
for all good tokens, a witch, a whore, gave me
such a damnable thumpe of a stone, my
shoulders feels the weight out yet,
Curse ont for me:
it was a plague skirmish, they fought like devils
within, and ye be wise not a word O fighting
more
We need not urge them to an open field
for so it might prove dangerous, our men
you see are not themselves, much weakened by
this far and toilsome journey?
Wonder invades me,
you should think our forces lost both courage
and experience, as if they had been
light brained weakelings, guided by misfortune
where no resistance could secure their lives
wast ever known they went a step to shun
their foes, No, nor will not now I hope begin
whilst these undaunted squadrons are reputed
Soldiers fit to serve any Prince on earth,
men that regards not toil, travail, penury
or sickness, nothing can divert them from
a glorious conquest, the aim a valorous
intention levels at:
I would you knew
the proudest Monarch of the western globe,
hath been as circumspect as valorous,
least some strange accident might drown their greatness
in Lethaes flowing streams, then why not we,
since our auspicious stars, hath made our actions
shine like theirs, in equal glory, then I pray;
ought we not be as circumspect as they?
You speak as if you stood in fear of them,
Come leave this different discourse, the question
is, whether Marquis Osirus will towards
home, or fall on the next garrisons?
With my consent, there should not be a Castle
left unlevell'd with the ground,
Soft and fair:
you have gotten guns and powder, will make us
smoke in faith;
Dickens take them now of late,
they are grown mighty valiant,
Stout fellows,
An I could to my granam once again
I'd ne'er come look for land in Stelern more,
Them wood for me I wish might die a pander,
And with less wit then either goose, or gander.
What serious conference is this between
you gentlemen, are you grown faint of late
see the multitude of your increasing foes
how earnest they like venomed spiders hast
to take us in a tangled web of woe,
and here you stand aloof, like men dismayed,
as if it nought concerned to hear or see,
the subject of Lirendas Tragedy?
Wee only waite your honours chief command,
For shame speed to your several troops, let not
your warm blood freeze in them active veins, whilst
such a noble blessed occasions offered.
Come then courageously, and the day's yours
in spite of hell, and all malignant powers.
All, ell's lost, our troupes are broken basely;
O that I had a pair of Dedalus wings,
or mounted on swift Pegassus to pass
from hence invisible, my thoughts foretold
this heavy dismal day, I would begone
but that I know not whither, and want a guide,
a guide, a guide, a thousand pound for a guide,
fear makes them deaf, they cannot hear the golden
offers of great Lestrell's son, well then I will
proclaim it once again; five thousand pound,
ten thousand for a guide, my whole estate
to him will be my guide.
Vive le Roy; advance the artillery is ours.
Not so fast bold Traitor stand:
Traitor Sir,
as loyal to my Sovereign as thy self,
and to thy face I vouch it now proud Marquis
Yield sir yield, you are my lawful prisoner:
Thine? let him perish yields to any of
thy faction.
Rescue the generall's in danger;
They cannot boast our reputations blemished
in the loss of this late victory so
fair lye ours, No the chance of war's uncertain,
and no man ought to grudge at what is past,
since them we did encounter last, are fled,
laden with the luggage of your heavy blows
and glad to scope so to; but least some carping
Momu's falsely might, attribute to our actions,
what destiny, brings on the stoutest he
that lives; were not the gods constrained to hide
themselves in hollow caves of Egypt, when
fierce Typheus, did pursue their deities;
and mighty Caesar to was glad to fly
from stout Lord Nennius in the Britons war,
then wounded with his own infected weapon:
how many like examples could I mention
of powerful armies overthrown by fate;
witness Xerxes, Hanniball, Darius, the
Grecian Troupes at Troy, Troyans themselves,
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, men whose
aspiring thoughts mounted above the clouds,
yet were brought low, and raised again, as wavering
fortune went, which best becomes a Soldier,
and proves him truly valiant, that will slight,
the frowning chekes of proud Bellona's height:
since nothing can be more commendable,
then an undaunted generous spirit,
(the square true warlike virtues measured by,)
I dare assure the meanest of this nation
will maintain it, that posterity may have
a pattern sit for them to imitate,
briefly, let's bravely forward that we may,
regain more then is lost another day;
In days of yore, not long before
The last wars here were ended
with maid and wife, a Soldiers life
was most of all commended:
For why they fought, not then for nought,
Not one among thrice twenty,
But had good drink, with store of chink,
Their pockets seldom empty:
But now adays, that ioviall praise,
Is turned topsy turvie,
To sweat to dirt, to a lousy shirt
To scratching itch, or scurvy,
Nay one thing more, doth grieve us sore,
Ways me that I can say,
Sir reverence, without offence,
Tic called the Captains pay,
Which Lord forbid, if our foes did,
Crave vengeance come with quickness
They never could, no if they would,
Wish a more hellish sickness,
If pilliage wood, doe us some good,
Commanders, are the boulder,
That plundering Dicke, hath taught the trick
You must not this good Soldier;
Thus we are served, and almost starved,
Twixt one disease or other,
The best of us, can well sing thus
Shake hands with me kind brother:
hang melancholy, a pound of sorrow
will not pay an ounce of debt, so mad cap so:
Zlid I have sown all my wild oats already:
Wild as a buck, or tame as a duck,
Or sillier then a coxcomb,
No land, no wealth, no thanks, 〈◊〉 health,
And is it not therefore ell's one?
This riming humour likes me well:
News, news,
And what's thy news good-man fool,
Brave news.
our general Sir Vavasiro:
And what of him?
Says we shall have old cutting throats anon,
and pillage boys, pillage till ye sweat again,
The Castle is not yielded yet,
Within an hour
it will at farthest, where if we doe not
dance attendance quickly, others will play
at sweep stakes all.
Very true, an honest lad;
A very, very arrant—honest lad
You see this doleful object gentlemen
and perceive what need our friends have of some
swift assistance, that peradventure might
redeem more then is held expedient,
we are not therefore come to loose time in
a tedious consultation, seeing
your worth and valours known already,
then name of God charge home: lets hast away,
Heaven will assuredly grant this our day,
Wee thought Angolean sparks could not tell how
to run before; proud Vavasiro dyes:
O spare my life victorious Caspilona,
and I will faithful submit thy contrite
prisoner.
That but immediately did bucher
those, without remorse or pity, go learn
to be a penitent, and know we use
mercy to them, doth ours more oft abuse.
Now he perceives his mischievous intention,
will not take, makes him the more adventurous
or rather desperate, that no advice
(from his best friends) can persuade him once to
slake, what lies in him to execute, though
it sink him deeper then the worst of evils,
or that he may be disappointed, yet
will not seem to know it, so far, a bloody
passion doth transport him, that he reflects
on nothing but revenge; whom to surprise
or murder, (though innocent,) he makes no
scruple on it more then Cola did before he fell
under the weight of his own vices:
A Tiger,
truly by name and nature, a slave too,
that torments himself worse then he can doe us,
how good a face soever he puts on,
or that rude multitude doth follow him:
we are become their betters in the field
heaven favouring us with good success, that
now their malice shows not half the violence
that hitherto it did, though no good will
be wanting to effect it, if they could,
wherefore it is certain then, he that will steer
black envies bark, in a warm Sea of blood,
must justly perish in that fatal flood
To witness this let me present unto
Your memory a few in Stelern only,
that like a torrent of impetuous fury
went raging down the steep descent of death:
and lost themselves therein; Albinus, Celar,
Daretas, Philanax, with their Robe,
ringleader, Sir Carole Cola, (for whose
dear sake they yet lament, whereby it is palpable,
heaven grieves at our reproach.
We could rehearse
as many more sufficient to amaze
the most obdurates Round-head of them all,
but to express; that we regard Tygranes
forces less, then may be spoken of, whilst
we can wield these arms, such cutting weapons
that can soon decide, the best of eiders right
Behold Lentimos with some sad news it's feared
It shall not work in us the worst may follow,
Now Cousin, how goes squares abroad?
That Lord Tigranes
with his army doth commit all kind of
cruelties, and march directly hither:
What strength can you discover him to be?
About five thousand, horse and foot,
Were he ten thousand strong it matters not
we'll expect him at Lectern passage, go
take a hundred musketeers along with you,
and make it good before his van arrives:
we'll follow after in all convenient 
speed: Wee are not ignorant, noble kinsmen,
how insolent, bold, and audacious
these forlorn wretches doe contest with us▪
for what's our birth-right and inheritance,
that in defence of that, or what is dearest
to us, wee are to expose our selves to death,
the wrong done our poor harmless people, all
the most studied torments was inflicted
on them, for which wee chiefly move, attired
in arms to rouse their stupid conscience that
will strictly answer for it; whilst now each goodness
doth forsake them; it cannot pass so currant
but wee may give an end to their vain hopes,
heaven yielding us that privilege, though not
worthy yet wee need not doubt it; Then let us
arm, as well interior, as exteriorly,
to be in a fit posture against he comes.
let trumpets sound, strike up our Martial drums:
Where lies their Camp?
At Lectern passage some some three
miles distant hence,
Are they strongly fortified.
Impregnable,
and hardly can be forced, without great loss
of ours,
Have they artillery think you,
Yes some small piece they have,
Which shall be mine,
or mine theirs ere bright Titans rays decline,
go, bid the officers be ready, for
intend to march against them presently 
a Curse on his life for me, that will not break
on them, or use the most extremity he
can devise, a storm of tortures, until
the mountain of their vicious will
are brought to nothing; O that it lay within
my power to cut off root and branch together,
if not, be sure, I'll doe my best endeavour.
All will not doe, some horrible wicked
destiny befriends them, our men drop down
on every side, whereat they seem to scoff,
and flout, not giving ground an inch, well,
well, Tigranes shall not be affronted thus
I'll sooner die, and fight it out to the
last man, death shall not hold me.
Remove your standing Sir,
I doe beseech you Sir withdraw your person
to some other place: for hence I can descry
a piece right levelled to give fire at you;
That man is cursed in his mothers womb, will
shun a Canon shot * ah, I am wounded, wounded, 
beyond recovery, Now, O now I feel
the painful seizures of untimely death,
on the remainder of my vital breath,
vain world adieu, farewell brave Soldiers all
be not dismayed, at Lord Tigrane's fall;
Heaven's blessed messenger, receive thy soul.
But is he dead indeed?
As cold as stone;
Wee that have loved him when he lived, &amp; found
his open heart, a Magazine of bounty,
must (if nature be not too ungrateful,)
shed brinish tears,
That were effeminate,
and indiscretion too, Now hoe's lost, if in
the view of our adversaries we seem
to grieve, it may occasion greater evils,
having the advantage of our general loss;
then silence best becomes you, for the present
all that is requisite must be to bear
his body hence unto his tent; so sadly on,
that when true sorrow's in the hearts of all
his Corps may have a noble funeral:
Thus through the help, and furtherance of heaven
our most malignant enemy's overcome
glad to play least in sight, went sneking home,
who not long since, for oaths, and threatenings might
terrify the gods, or subdue the world,
that neither Heaven nor Hell was thought on once,
or what was spoken of them were but fictions
which lead them to the gulf of desperation.
We must pursue this blessed victory,
making our withered hopes, bud forth in blossoms
of never fading honour:
It adds unto
our comfort Noble friends, that Caspilona
goes on bravely to,
Yes, and God willing
we intend so to, until we purge the
Kingdom of these drones, them viperous Locusts;
Come follow me,
But stay my Lord, here comes
a Post with letters to your Lordship;
How letters? let me see;
had they deferred it but one fortnight longer,
What news doe them import?
A proclamation,
for one whole twelve month and a day's Cessation,
This works in us a greater admiration
that being in the full height of our conquest
as prosperous as might be expected
brave Abner's shining virtues like the Sun
out of a new Horizon, all the graces
delightful Mars could give, or we deserve,
must through this needles fond cessation, rest
on the drowsy Couch of dark Oblivion;
it is a pill few Soldiers can digest;
Which best approves our loyalty,
But you.
and we must yield obedience to it,
though not so well contented; howsoever
your forces must unto their garrisons,
And if our wrongs be not repaired thereby
we will again, renew this Tragedy.
Peace to this bright resplendent sphere
Blessings numberless be there,
Endless joys that doth abide,
In Elizeum too, beside
Nothing present may defile
This victorious sacred Isle.
Come ye Gods and Goddesses,
That affects Peaceful bliss,
Help Victoria to disperse,
Each blessing on this Universe,
That dissentious broils and jars,
May end with these uncivil wars.
Haste, O haste delightful Queen,
With your Laurels fresh and greene,
Grace this nation with a Crown,
Of perpetual renown,
Since their warlike merits are,
Past the limits of Compare.
LEast any worthy here misliks this play,
Our Author for himself desired me say,
That wilful error made him not ascend
PARNASSVS or mount IDA, to offend
Or give the least distaste; his thoughts are free
And void of such a gross impurity,
Desire of your contentment was the cause,
If he did violate the Muses Laws:
But such a Noble, worthy Audience
In their grave judgments will I hope dispense
With such, if any be, since true affection
Submits before it traverse a correction:
All wee request then, as the case thus stands,
In token you are pleased, doe but clap hands.

WEre I worthy to counsel the Duke, he should know this removing of Gene∣rals breeds ill blood, and disaffects the Soldiers; whose kindness at this time is of more importance then his security will give faith to.
That Cosmo was made General, though it seemed strange at first; yet those that know Julia's power with the old Duke, he be∣ing her Son, wonder not at it. But how he comes now to be dis∣graced, and yet she and Martino hold their Interest in Court, makes me suspect some foul play, some further, designs then their Craft will let us discover.
He has won strangely upon the Soldiers by his Courage and Affability; for those that are his Enemies will yet allow Prince Cosmo a gallant and stout Soldier, else he would have found the hatred they bear his Mother would have clouded all his parts; his first Reception was so cold, we thought he looked dejected, as if he were ashamed to own his Mother.
Prithee talk no more of her; she is an evil the Nation ought to arm against; The sword (and that speedily bent against her) can only prevent the ruin she and Martino threaten this State with. Prayers find too slow Remedies for such mischiefs as their power daily contrives.
Heaven had many Crimes to punish in Millain, when she and Martino were sent our scourges; Her own Subjects despised and scorned her, and deriding her victory, say, we fought for their diseases only.
I wonder how Prince Sforza brooks this Familiarity of hers with Martino; for it is said, he passionately affects the Princess Fidelia, a Virgin of unquestioned Virtue, and yet her Daughter.
She has indeed an unspotted Fame; and when I consider it, Jam amazed to think Nature should send such Sovereign Fruit from so poisonous a Root; yet they say Prince Sforza but ill di∣gested
his Fathers Marriage with the Mother, for all his Passion for the Daughter.
Can you blame him? Is it not a hard Condition to find his Enemy and his Captive become his Mother? Supplanting him in all the power and trust of his Father? yet his Piety makes him obedient, even to her weakness; and civil, even to his Fathers faults.
O it is a matchless Gallantry inhabits in him; his Princely breast is all composed of Honour; whether Enemy or Friend, he conquers still; so faithful in his Promise, mild in Command, and gentle in Dispute, Constant and Resolute in dangers, never absent to himself, never transported when he overcomes, nor losing himself in disorder, nor amazed when he is worsted; I have seen him win and lose a battle, but with that evenness of Soul, as fair Game∣sters use to meet their fortunes with.
Yet I heard him say, he thought it had been better for Millain to have lost the battle, then won Pavia; since his Fathers weakness had so far betrayed him as to marry Julia.
See if we were not fallen into the discourse of her again, that Curse; and our miseries are so large a Theme we cannot shun it, though we warn each other.
To divert you from that discourse, pray let me know your intention; are you for Millain, with the General, or will you stay here? I mean to wait upon him, and, by that Title, till I see some worthier then himself receive his Command, which they will scarce find in Millain.
Prithee, Ferdinando, think better of me, then to believe I will serve under any Man that Clouds Prince Cosmo; let us go find him at his Lodging.
He is gone abroad, I saw him and Antonio upon the works; This way we shall meet them, see where they come.—
They need not be so hasty in repeating their Injuries from Millain; Cosmo has not so ill a Memory to forget the first, that they need not prompt him with a second;—These are to Command you to quit the Army, and to attend us at Millain, to know our further  pleasure. Alphonso the Duke may command, and it is just that I obey; And it is as great a truth, his Command ought to be just. What if I will not quit the Army? it is not this paper can force me, Carlo?
Force! who dares think they can force hence the Loom∣bard General, or, atleast, publish that thought? Death! do not go, Sir; say to us, you are wronged, and you will have justice ere you stir; we will send a Messenger shall make Millain know she has her power from hence.
I thank you for your hearty affection; but I must not let you be faulty to serve me; my Lord, you may return, and say, I
shall obey; My innocence dares go and meet the author of this in∣jury, and then play Cosmo's part.
Sir, I am sorry it was my misfortune to bring this unwel∣come news; and it was one part of their design that wrought this mischief, to have me employed; that it might wither my hopes in your Highness favour; but this Letter, Sir, I hope, will acquit me; it is from your Princely Mother. 
Giovanni, that is one of Julia's familiars; would thou or I had the opening of his heart; what a nest of Villains we should discover!
Women's counsels are like their actions; let her practise her patience still; though she can digest affronts and scorns, they shall find Cosmo will not; I must be patient and suffer an affront, because Prince Sforza is to succeed in my Command.
So it was reported, Sir; but it was the wonder of all, why he of late should so labour your remove; nor could we learn who were the means he wrought by, till the Duchess suspecting your Si∣ster Fidelia intercepted some of her Letters, by which she found the Prince and your Sister hold intelligence; and it was her com∣mand, and Count Martino counselled, that your Highness should not build too much upon the seeming friendship of the Prince; who but ill brooks the love and trust your Highness has in Millain; and those that will strike at your honour thus, she says, would strike at Prince Cosmo, if they durst attempt him.
Did not I tell you, that is a Villain.
I find him, and her practice too, fond Girl.
Ha! it is Prince Sforza then that succeeds our General.
What if it be Prince Sforza? what is that to me; who has heard me question his merits? or wish one glory from his grow∣ing greatness? why then should he look with envious eyes on mine? are honours so scarce in the Court of Millain, that they must rob a stranger, ere they can pay their Debts to their Prince? let them build him Trophies of their Love, till his envied fame grows great as his mind; I shall not rapine at it, so I be not injured; who ever heard Cosmo repeat the ruin he suffered in the war be∣twixt Millain and Pavia, because I was then their enemy? and though I lost my Country, I kept my honour. But when they will call me friend, and injure me; smile in my face, and stab me; wish health to Cosmo, and put poison in his cup; the world must par∣don me, if then my passion grows untame; when I see they aim to make me the basis to build another greatness on; which ere I will suffer, I'll raise a storm shall shake the proudest in their proudest thoughts. Antonio, follow me.
This I looked not for; I must find him.
This mischief I foresaw; it is easy to read Julia's craft; the malice of a bloody and an ambitious woman is clearly to be disco∣veered. Oh, Giovanni, the ruin that threatens this State must have sudden, honest, and bold remedies; and we must wear our swords ready for all occasions.
It is apparent her design is to break the friendship between the
two Princes; and I am confident, Sforza has no hand in this inju∣rye done to our General; therefore let us haste to Pavia, and ac∣quaint Prince Sforza with what has past, whither I believe Cosmo is gone; his nature is too fiery to sleep upon such a conceived injury.
Agreed: But let us pass by Millain, and observe what face the Court wears towards the Soldiers; that will instruct us how to proceed; for my fears apprehend some sudden mischief.
The Duke speechless, no sign of life, but warmth?
The Physician bad me tell you, that he apprehends this relapse will be mortal.
If he should die, it would cross all our designs; Carlo is ab∣sent too: this chance distracts me; saw you the Duchess?
No, Sir, but one was dispatched to call her.
Haste to the Physician, and the Guards; command them strictly to admit no visits, till I come.
O Martino, we are lost, for ever lost, if suddenly we attempt not some brave rescue; and the plot we have so gloried in (our breaking the friendship betwixt my Son and Sforza) as it was then the way to compass our ends, if the Duke dies, it will be our utter ruin.
What says your Messenger, how did he leave him?
The Impostume brake, and he was almost strangled ere they found it; and he left him speechless, and void of reason; and he must find sudden ease, or death.
But why this distraction, Madam? think you I have not thought of all the remedies that either our power or craft can propose? thinks your Highness that Martino is so dull, as to sleep in this storm where you and Cosmo are threatened? No, Madam, I am too proud and kind to quit the Helm, which thus long your fa∣four hath put in my hands.
What then do's thy soul prompt thee to? is there a hope left we may gain Sforza to our party?
No, no; that thought is vain and desperate; Sforza is not to be wrought upon; were he a coward I would fright him from the Throne; or were he a fool, I would flatter him till his heart were tame, and then rock him asleep, and insensibly rob him of a Crown. But these charms have no power upon him, his sullen nature's proof against them and lust: yet if Fidelia would join, that bait might engage his soul,; for I know he loves her; and if she would be wise enough to listen to her own good, I would not doubt our success. Did you move it to her?
Yes, yes; But hell upon her, she's too cold, she was change∣ed, sure, in the Cradle; No child of mine could be so unseasona∣bly
virtuous; when I urged it to her with all the kindness and in∣terest of a Mother; Showed her that all her past glories, present honours and safety depended upon her consent; she urged consci∣ence and the Gods, and a thousand strange examples of their judge∣mints upon such actions. In short, I fear she is honest; and there∣fore neither to be trusted, nor tempted longer.
Hell take her and her froward conscience; let her live and dye a fool, and slave to Sforza, since she prefers a Maiden∣head before a Crown. Secret is honesty enough for any woman; and since there is no other remedy, they both must dye; I have or∣dered to admit no visits; and if he dye, we must conceal it till Sforza be dead, which is the only counsel our extremity admits. 
That was spoke like a friend to Julia; now I find my youth did not err in her choice; nor do I grudge that bounty or love that purchased Martino's friendship,—Sforza must dye, was it not so thou said?
Yes, Madam, he must dye, it is the only remedy; if he get the Crown, we are short lived.
Sforza get the Crown? has Jul. quited all her peace, all her honour, and her God, to make her Cosmo great; and after that, shall she see him stoop to Sforza; I had rather those limbs were torn by a Hang-man.
Put off your fears, and calm this passion; it is resolved, Sforza shall dye, and your Highness laugh at his Tragedy, whose thoughts are big with hopes of our misery.
These words have given life to my dying hopes; and could I hear thee say Sforza was dead, Julia were then Mistress of all her wishes; and till I do hear that music in thy voice, the fear that he should live master of Cosmo and thee, makes my joy faint; for know, I have set up my rest; and we will stand the greatest, or fall the wicked'st in Millain. O Martino, can thou call to thy mind that sad day, when I kneeled a petitioner at great Matthia's feet (thy dead Lord and mine) the private estate I then mourned, ga∣ther'd from his first looks ambitious hopes, which with such art I managed, that ere I had my story told with tears and youth, so cunningly I pleaded, that he left to be Caesar, and rather obeyed, then granted what I sought; but Love was my aid then, Love mo∣ved in these eyes; and so powerful were those tears, his heart was struck with the sad object; but these eyes had fire in them then, Martino, Fire, such as that misery could not cloud, such as those tears could not quench; But to his bed they lighted Julia, Pavia's Duke I ruled, and upon a cruel Brother took a deep Revenge; High was the Fame of Julia's Beauty then, when all bowed to Julia, and observed her rising, as if the day had broke from these Eyes to whose power all stooped; Yet then, Martino, my Martino, in midst of all these glories commanded Julia.
Why do you repeat this, Madam? Do you believe your Servant wants spurs? Are not our Interests equal? Is there any thing can attempt me to be ungrateful?
No, Martino, not that I fear thy gratitude, but to call to
thy Memory thy dead friends; That I was handsome is but a weak Argument; and if thou should prove forgetful, Julia would not frown upon thee, because she knows it is vain and idle; frowns  and anger from decayed Beauty beget no terror in Men; it is like Caesar in his Marble, which to none terror bears.
Take heed how you encourage me to be false; Men, when they fear no punishment, are seldom faithful for Honours sake; and if I should be false, what would you do? 
Mourn, and conjure thee to thy faith again, by all those past pleasures, by all those joys which I have brought thee, by our stolen sweets, and those envied embraces which we so often have expired in, and beg of thee not to add to the miseries of time;  Then would I show thee that Heaven thou hast so often sworn by; These stars too, which furnished thee with new matter for thy vows; And at last, sighing, name Julia, as thou wast wont to do; when thou would swear by what in Heaven and Earth thou lovd'st and feard'st most, Julia would then fall from thy Tongue, and tears from thy Eyes; And, if in those days my kindness obliged a gallant man, thou would again return to thy friend.
No more, Fate and Martino shall change together; I am still your Highnesses; command me and prove my faith, though it be to fix this Poniard in Sforza's heart.
No, no, Martino, I will bear a part in all; I require no single danger from you, but only to join with me: For thou art one my thoughts labour to preserve rather then to hazard; and when we can gain our ends safely, then I again conjure you to join with me to make our Cosmo great; for to me he is dearer then all that the Earth shows, or the Sea hides; Because he is the fruit of our Love; it is for my dear Cosmo, thy Cosmo, it is for him I plead; And by thy part of that pleasing sin, by that beloved fault which Cosmo is; By that dear crime, which I cannot, nay will not repent, because it was thine, let us resolve to pursue our design: That we may leave our Cosmo great as our Loves, lest envious lookers on, in these days, should scorn our past greatness, and laughing say, Julia and Mart∣no's glory was as mortal as her beauty, which is the common Fate of Women.
No more, Julia, By this—and this, my Julia is to me still all Pleasure, all Beauty, all sweetness; O thou excellently  faithful to a broken Faith, and diligent maintainer of thine own Laws.
Love and Ambition know no Laws; a Mistress and a Crown have no certain way; Election, Birth, Sword, all are good. Nothing was ever called Treason, when the Traitors stood; Laws are fit to bind the people, Princes are above them, and the wisest make them their servants; The sacrifice was the peoples expiation, and so sacred, they might not touch what they offered, yet what they offered was to the Priest but food.
Thou hast fired my Soul, and I long to see Sforza Earth. Baptist shall suddenly put in execution the plot we resolved on; he'll this Evening be at my Lodging, and all things agree to make
it hit; For Sforza is this day to set out from Pavia, which will give an occasion fit for our design; our doubt was, where to at∣tempt him; it was my opinion in the wood, when he is past the Ri∣ver; But Count Baptist believes twill be safer, when he passes the Ferry; I have whetted him on with repeating of his Injuries; and Carlo hath so confirmed him, that his banishment was procured by Sforza (who is now his Rival in Fidelia's Love) that he is ready for any mischief, so she may be his reward, which we assured him, with a Restitution to all his Possessions when Cosmo reigned, which must be performed.
Yes, if there be no way to remove him when the work is done; for he is of too bold a Nature to be trusted with such a secret.
That is a danger not ill foreseen; for such men, if not re∣warded as they desire, still cry, They gave the Crown, and think they are never paid till they have the gift again.
Sure I am greater then I was; this Faith in my Friend has renewed my years; if not in me, yet it has in thee, faithful, kind Martino, who now appear'st lovely, as Bacchus in his Wine; when the well-natur'd God looked kindly on the faults of the false Theseus; and I could wish all the forsaken Beauty of Ariadne, to add to what time has withered here, and thou that Gods desire, blown by his own fire, that Julia might meet thee again, and again overflow thy heart with Joy.
What news begets this haste? whore's Cosmo?
He left the Camp enraged at the Letters, and threatens a Revenge against Sforza; and if not prevented, I fear, in his own Person he will attempt it; there is no body but Antonio with him.
Watch his coming to Court, and give me notice, that I may lay my command upon him, not to venture himself in such a danger.
That thought is vain; Pray take no notice of his intenti∣on, nor seem to intend his prevention, lest he suspect it and steal privately away; Leave the care to me, I will have the guard rea∣die; and as soon as he enters the Court, we will seize him in the Dukes name, and make him a Prisoner at my Chamber, till Sforza be gone his long Journey.
You must lose no time in that design neither; for it is certain, Sforza sets out this day; have you resolved where we shall set upon him?
Either in the Wood, or as he passes the Poe.
You know, it was the Count Baptista's opinion, the River was best; for the Act once done, it was but sinking the Boat, and the waters being high, they may have time to escape to Pavia.
Prithee call him, he is now at my Chamber, and we will resolve.
No, Sir, Pray let him not be seen in this public place; his disguise is not proper for you to hold discourse with, it may beget
suspicion; within he shall attend you.
I will to the Duke, to keep all visits from him but death, who could never have come unwelcome till now; had he waited on Sforza first, we might then have lighted at his Funeral my Martino's Hymeneal Torch.
Spoke like my great Mistress; and it is my glory that I serve such a Soul: But lose no time; let Baptist be instructed, that is the hinge on which all this glorious work must move, and Crown Prince Cosmo; which will make Divine-formed Julia great in Story.
Away Carlo, call Baptist to the Duchess Cabinet, where we will expect you.
HAteful Habit! loathed form! scorned fortune! wretched Baptist, disgraced, banished, and despised by her I Love! O Heaven! Is there no way to conquest but through the miseries of the Innocent? My crime to this State was my faith to my dead prince and kinsman; which too well Martino and false Julia know; if they had any gratitude for his memory, they might long since have dispersed this cloud, having absolute power in Millain; But they are false as Cowards bred in blood and Lust together; Yet now their dangers begin to approach they fawn upon Baptist; and to gain their ends, promise more then Passengers in storms, or a prodigal to his Whore, when Beauty and high rough Seas plead in their Lusts and fears. And now I will dissemble too; and be as blind as the Scene requires; neither see nor hear ought but what they show or tell; Not that I will believe thee Martino; but I have my ends too in Sforza's death; It was that proud Boy eclipsed all my glories, and left me thus a naked shrub; it was he that like untimely frosts killed all my forward hopes in dear Fide∣lia; for whose sake, Fate spins no thread so fine but I dare cut it; and for her sake he shall die.—See where she comes; This is all the joy I have, this sight makes me endure my misery.
This disgrace of Cosmo's amazes me; Prince Sforza too, is called home; and the Duke fallen into a relapse; When I con∣cider these accidents, I am able to give my self so little satisfaction, that I cannot but fear there is some foul play intended; for I know Martino cannot but apprehend the Prince in both, Oh! this thought has fears which Heaven protect the Prince from.
All blessings of mind and Fortune fall upon the Excellent Fidelia, till the abundance equal that Excess of beauty that strikes the world, for being so charitable to her daily Beads-man.
I am not uncharitable—yet my heart affects not that fellow; Heaven pardon me, if I judge amiss; But me-thinks he de∣serves his Curse; nor did I ever yet give him a willing Alms; Yet Maria, give him something. What said he? 
I know not, Madam.
O sister, send off thy Maid, till I relate my fears; Martino is a Villain, a bloody and a subtle Traitor; and if not ptevented, will ruin all that is virtuous in this Court.
Oh my divining soul! whence spring thy fears, Gentle Victoria?
Passing through the Privy Gallery to my Fathers Cham∣ber, which you know joins upon your Mothers Cabinet, I heard some laugh, which made me curious to listen; where I heard such light airy things as suit not with these times, nor our distracted for∣tunes; and one (I will not name) with wicked mirth made men∣tion of those dangers that now besiege my fathers life; At which my anger made me look, to see who they were; more amazed at the sight, then at the sound of those words: For the old beggar (we use to give our Alms to) was with them; He stood upright, no age nor wrinkles in his Face, nor silver hair on head or beard; he whispered something to the Duchess, at which she laughed; and I could hear the Villain say, by to morrow Sun-set she should see no air of Sforza; and to his horrid wish bloody Martino said, Amen. But that which most cuts my soul, was, to find the Duchess of this Council.
Oh! Madam: That Villain I have long trembled at, fearing his counsel would at last tend to some horrid mischief; she is my mother, I shall therefore neither Judge nor revile her; though my heart weeps for her; let heaven speak to her, and tell her what Duty she owes to them, and give me piety enough to pay mine to her.
Dear sister, do not weep; I came not to afflict you, but to Counsel, with you, how I might save the Innocent.
Oh Madam! to what misery was I reserved? when your noble Brother saved us, and gave his Charity to those that armed a∣against him; would I had died with my Father, with that peace and Innocence I then enjoyed; I shall live now till none will pity me; None will mourn when I die, nor shed a tear for poor Fidelia; In that day Millain will burn fires of joy; no Funeral-torch shall light the sad mourners from my Obsequies.
Your griefs are now unseasonable, pray defer them, and consider what is to be done to save my brother from their Malice; Your commands are more powerful far then mine, I will not doubt a sisters Interest; Let us write our fears, and assure him that there is a Plot laid for his life, and acquaint him with the relapse, and sudden danger that my father is fallen into; he will then know how necessary his presence must be here; but counsel him to come pri∣vately in some disguise, and we will expect him at your Chamber; while you write this, I will call Phillipine, to whose care we will give it.
I shall; and it is one joy, I am not so lost in your Opinion but that your highness dares trust me with your fears, though my Mother be part of them; If I keep that value with the Prince too, I shall not be so miserable as my fears would persuade me.
It was she, and the Princess Victoria; I will observe till she goes to her own Chamber. I dare not see the Princess; my love has too much folly and softness; When I be∣hold her she calls to my mind, it is her brother that has injured me; and that thought distracts me; Yet I must not tamely bear this Injury, nor rudely dispute it with her I love; But for Fide∣lia, a Sister that I have loved above my Eyes; that she should join in my disgrace, is a Return I could not have feared from any thing that I have valued like Fidelia—She comes, I will not be seen.
Till night, Madam, I will take my leave, lest our being together beget suspicion.
Fidelia, Sister. 
Brother? well-come, What Accident calls you to Millain?
My Injuries, which I hear you are no stranger to, Fidelia.
What was it you said, Sir?
I am told you are no stranger to the affront that brings me hither; for it is said, you love Prince Sforza, sister.
I heard you, Sir, at first; But was loath to understand you; and it is said, you hate Prince Sforza, brother.
Hate him? Nay I scorn to hate him; When I am angry I dare be revenged; Nor will Cosmo think this anger away; That I hate him is false.
And why may not I be scandal'd too?
If it were false, why do you hold Correspondence with him has wronged your brother?
I know he has not Injured you, and therefore I hold correspondence with him.
I know, he has: poorly, and by Whispers, wrought my disgrace in my absence; and by detraction robbed me of that Faith his Father gave me; It is Sforza has made me suspected: But I shall prove my self honester then he dares be.
Honester then he? I would thou could.
Yes, then he, or any that dares avow this disgrace done to Cosmo, and to their teeth tell them so; and they dare as soon beard a Lyon, naked, as maintain their Injury.
He is the gallanter man; Dare you maintain an Injury?
I dare, as much as he.
And more; for he dares not use a Sister thus; Go tell
him what you dare do; you will find him your equal in Honour, and in Arms.
He is not.
Come, he is. Remember Pavia, and the life he gave you; Remember me, and my honour, which he saved, When neither your sword nor passion could protect it.
You are angry, Sister.
No, Sir; I never yet met that man so rude, nor Injury so wild, could raise my Anger; Yet I confess, I have so much share in Cosmo's faults, that they wound me; Thou art abused, and when it is too late thou wilt find it; and if my words had faith with Cosmo, I would tell thee thy Courage and all that is Gallant and Honourable in thee (Those strengths given to defend thee) are by the malice and Craft of those Traitors whom thou trust, armed against thee; And because they durst not attempt thee, they have raised Cosmo against himself, and this Civil-war will ruin thee.
I understand not this complement; are you with me, or against me?
In the Princes cause against the world; for I know he is Innocent; and if you were your self, I could clear all these doubts.
My self? what disorders are there in my words or actions, that makes your partial eyes find the Mad-man in a Brother?
Unmanly ones, such as in Prince Sforza I should hate, but in Cosmo I pity them.
You are my Sister that says this.
Dost thou not blush to say so, with that cloudy brow? would any gallant man look upon a Sister so, with such a storm in his Fore-head, and Eyes full of Anger? Would any man show this Rage to a Sister, whose Sex can scarce modestly be angry? But that, and all the Injuries thou can do me, I can pardon; because I know there is a Tempest in thy Heart, craftily raised by those that hate thee.
Oh Fidelia! I am wronged, disgraced, my Country lost, and all the Credit I had with the Duke blasted; my Com∣mand is taken from me by Prince Sforza and his Party.
Thou art deceived, Cosmo: Yet I know you are wrong∣ed, and my Heart has bled for it; But why you should punish me  for it, why accuse wretched Fidelia, that had no Joy left but in her Innocence, and Cosmo's Love; Why pursue me, that never in thought wronged you or any man; Me, a Virgin and a Sister, oppressed with miseries, and rudely thus throw your wild words at me; And your self (a Brother) become the Author of a scandal that thy Hon∣our should have engaged thee to tear from a strangers Heart! But now since you have defamed me, who shall fear to blot Fidelia's Name, when Cosmo a Brother shall be known to revile her? They say, you are in Love with Prince Sforza. Oh Cosmo! when thou said it, thy Eyes were red, and thy Heart called me Whore; And had not you expressed a want of value for your Sister, who durst have ventured the defaming of Fidelia so: The man was no∣ver born durst venture to tell me Cosmo was a Coward; And had
mine honour been as precious to thee, thou would have killed that poisoner of my fame; yet, I here declare, the only glory of my heart, is, the friendship she has gained from Prince Sforza.
Oh, Fidelia, Fidelia! pardon thy unfortunate Brother, and let my distracted mind plead my peace with thee; though the injuries I have received would force an Anchorite from his Cell, and with broken vows break all Laws of Gods or Men, rather then not find a revenge: Read that Letter, and be your self the Judge. 
If this Letter find your faith, We are lost; it is Martino's falsehood. Oh, that Serpent, which but now begins to throw his venom out! the Prince sue for your Command? (did you desire the Government of Pavia?)
Fidelia, I ask your counsel; I am not now fit for your mirth.
Do you know this hand? pray read it. 
I work underhand, to gain the Government of Pavia, as I did the Army of Millain? it is false, false as Hell, both; and through the earth I will hunt him with my sword, till I have taken revenge of him that dares accuse me of one treacherous thought.
Do you now perceive the mischief they aim at, that have made this remove in your Commands? Martino and Carlo cannot gain their ends, while the Prince and you are friends. You have both too much honour, while you love each other, to listen to their mischiefs: but being once blinded with anger, their false pretences may find a faith, which you and all may live to repent. The Prince is as great a stranger to his being General, as you are to the Government of Pavia; yet when it was laboured to make him believe you were the cause of his remove; his friend∣ship would neither believe, nor suffer such a scandal to be laid on Cosmo.
Is this truth, Fidelia? or feigned, only to keep me from ta∣king my revenge where you have a friendship?
No, Cosmo; I will call no man friend that dares do a trea∣cherous act, or fears to justify his own innocence; and if you think otherwise, Go to Pavia, find the Prince, and satisfy your doubts; only thus much I beg; for my sake be not hasty, nor injurious in your words, but clearly tell your griefs; Courage and Reason should tread the same paths; else you may lose your way, though justice guide you.
I shall obey your counsel; for I know him valiant, and full of honour; and though we both love him, if he wrong me, I must not bear it, Fidelia.
Alas, Sir, I am none of that fond kind of women, that would save a Brother ingloriously; nor have I said this, to bid thee not fight with any man that wrongs thee. For I know my Brother fortunate in fight; nor do I fear, or doubt his sword against any sin∣glee enemy; and though I would bet upon his arm against the world; yet I would counsel him to let honour guide him, and no∣ver to detract from any enemy: For it lessens thy triumph when thou art victor; but if overcome, then a scorn follows the loss.—See who comes here; can that softness calm your heart, or will it
swell against her too?
She staggers all my resolution; I must not stay: I hope your Highness does not believe me guilty of the injuries I stand accused of to Prince Sforza.
I am so far, Sir, from believing, I am to blush for those my Brother is taxed for; but I hope you see from whence that malice takes its root; Martino is a villain.
It is visible I am injured; and when I thought Prince Sforza did it, my anger then was just. But Fidelia has made me lay by that anger, till I have spoken with his Highness: And I know the Prince is so gallant, he will not love me the less for seeing me sen∣sible of an affront; For nothing can confirm him better that I will do no injuries, then to see that I will take none; for to ap∣pear worthy of such a friendship, is, to let him know I am not afraid to be his enemy.
Why was he so harsh to me?—
Sir, this is but civil anger; and I must not go till you pro∣mise me, not to be an enemy to my Brother.
By your self, I swear (to Cosmo of all Oaths that binds most powerful) never to be an enemy to Prince Sforza till he injures me; and then to be patient is neither the way to honour nor safety.
I am satisfied, so you will let some other, and not your own passion, be judge of those injuries.
Be your Highness always judge of them and me.
I Fear Argentin is not so full of honour as my wife should be: A drunken Thedes-key, one of those wandering Tra∣montanes, whose business in the world is Wine Whores and Horse∣flesh; one of these, at first sight, called her by her name, and talk∣ed of old stories, such as would make a jealous man smell of the horn; if she be one of those that cannot say no, what a Trade shall I drive, that have the carrying over mine own horns, by Boat∣loads; but if I find her trading, By St. John, I'll spade her;
That's a sly Rogue too; I durst not go to gather boughs for my  Boats, for fear he should be plucking her forbidden fruit at home.
I, now you cog; but I have not forgot that you gave Moretta the shirt the Dutch-man left behind him.
Will this jealous humour never wear out? Come, and if you be true steel, Mistress, let us in, and strike fire; and I  will promise you a bundle of Dutch-mens shirts, the next that pass.
So, so; this will come to somewhat, shortly; I shall pre∣fer you, Bertolin, the French-way; I shall; which is, fleay you, and
send you to serve the Grand Duke, Sirrah; I shall, if I catch you in this saucy fit again, of playing with my wife.
Alas, Sir, we were but talking of the Dutch-men, that knew my Mistress when she was a brave Girl; he that drank a pound of Candles to her health.
And whither is she gone now? to find that fine Dutch∣man.
No, Sir, she's gone to the wood,
I know her mind now; and if I would consent to her Roguery, I might gain my own ends the better; it were but giving her an occasion, and taking an opportunity my self, for Moretta is as willing as I am, and see where she comes,—Dispatch, and get the boughs ready.
I shall, Sir, and it shall go hard but I will make a Rod for your Tail, out of them.
My Mistress is so jealous of her Bauble, and so covetous of another, that poor Moretta starves for a little of either; yet the Master or the Man are willing to relieve my hunger; she is a wo∣man would fain change, and keep her own too. Yonder is my Master, how handsome he appears, now there is none but he! (thus brown bread is good when one has a stomach) she is va∣nished, and Bertolin gone; now for a charm to try him.
Moretta.
Sir.
Quickly, and softly, a kiss, Wench.
O dear, Master, take ten, and ask them afterwards, eve∣rye word would make a dozen.
Let us look where the old spy is.
She is gone to gather boughs.
Come Wench, a kiss, and in, lest we lose this minute.
WE are the strangest unlucky, every body is willing, and yet none can meet; we know each others minds too well; now for a minute, I have a job of work here, a minute would do it, and a design in my pate to cure all their jealousies, by giving them full satisfaction of their doubts. Here comes my Mi∣stress, I must be kind to her; and she comes on as easy as my old slippers.
There he stands, and we are alone; if he should offer, how shall I do for a where withal to deny him?
Mistress, there is an old suit depending; I am poor Berto∣lin still, but a most sufficient able Lover, that has—
You staid for me here now.—I, I, dissemble, dissemble; where is your Master? 
He is gone home.
And what do you hanker for? I saw the boughs at the door; Prince Sforza will be past before you have trimmed or made clean the Boat.
I would that you would but step in with me, and help to set up the boughs; I have a trick, if you would but join, Mistress, would tickle you till you laugh again. 
I thought it was such trick; why so, is this a time to fool away in tricks and kissing?
Say you so? I would we were but on t'other side the wa∣la; if you will go, we will put the Boat a drift; and when the work is done we will call for help.
I am willing to do thee a kindness, but I dare not be long absent; for I fear my husband should come home in the mean time, and fall aboard Moretta.
That is a Whore in her heart; let me alone to watch her; we will be back before them.
THere is no safety here, it is my Mistress that watches us.
Whither shall we go then, to be private?
Send my Mistress to the wood, for boughs; and when Bertolin comes home, make him stay for his break-fast; step you to the Boat, and lie privately, I will come to you.
Thou wilt not fail.
This in earnest. Farewell, make haste, and send home Bertolin; see where he comes with his boughs.
Whither are you going?
To the Boat with these boughs.
Where is your Mistress?
In the wood, gathering more boughs.
More boughs, what to do? unless you were certain the Prince would come.
A Gallant told me so, that knew my Mistress before you.
A pox of his knowledge, and memory too; there is neither of them honest.
Pray, let me go; and if you were as well laden as I am, you'd have little lust to talk under such a burden; I have more upon my back then you are aware of.
Lay them down, and go break your fast, and then call home your Mistress; there is boughs enough, one would think.
Boughs enough? why, it is none of your pains, to ga∣there them; can't you let one make the Boat handsome when the Prince is to pass?
You are always thus troublesome.
Let me carry these aboard, and then I will call home my Mistress.
Leave your prating, and lay down your Boughs, and go now and call her home; for if I lace your Coat twill be less easier then your plain one.
I will not go alone, where she is; you will be in your old jealous humour, and mistrust something, as you did t'other night.
Away, you are a fool; give me the Boughs, and make haste.
I will not quit my Boughs; you do things so by halfes still.
Your Break-fast is ready; why do you dispute thus with him, you know it is a wilful fool, let him go, you lose time.
Well, Sirrah, make haste, and come down to Breakfast.
Mistress, Mistress, don't you stink for fear? I assure you I do.
Bertolin, dear Bertolin, quick, quick, quick, unbind, unbind, dispatch that I may run home, I would not endure such another fright for all the wealth in Pavia.
Yes, and then you will be gone and laugh at Bertolin; no faith, you must even be patient, Mistress; I will not lose my labour and my longing too; it is an opportunity has cost me too dear to be thrown away.
Dear Bertolin, I can do nothing now; for the truth is, I am loose in my belly with the fright.
Are you gilt, Mistress?
Dear Bertolin, another time command me.
Courage, Mistress, it is a sign of good luck you know.
No, no, Bertolin, as thou love me let me go; unbind me or I will cry out.
Do, and proclaim it, one loud syllable more and I am gone; and here I will leave you like a Bird in a bush, twill be a credit for you, I need only swear I have not touched you, and vehemently swear we were honest; That is the new fashion way of telling, which the Gallants use of late.
I am undone, I am undone for ever.
Not, if you will be quiet; for I am as secret as any boat∣hook.
He is gone aboard, and when he comes back to Break∣fast, my Master and I will be merry in the Arbor.
If ever I trust you again, Bertolin.
You hope I will deceive you thus; why now you I am your faithful Bertolin, for being a gracious Mistress endears me;  we have nicked the jealous Rogue.
You had best tell him so; Prithee unbind, that I may get home; so, so, look out and see whether the coast be clear, for I am afraid Moretta and he should meet, for she is a Jade—Was not that her voice? 
Yes, by this hand.
Look out, quick.
It is she coming this way, quickly, let me tie the cord and lie still till she be gone.
A pox upon her for a crafty Whore, she suspects some∣thing.
Be quiet, and all will be well, I warrant you.
Why do you not come to Break-fast? my Master stays for you, what are you studying?
It is resolved I will do it, and then they are both at my devotion; they will fear me, and not dare accuse me, nor tell of each other.
Now I am alone with him, methinks, he is lovelier then my Master; Lord, how handsome any Man is, when a Woman is in my Case. 
Moretta, you understand me, else this occasion may prompt you; Prithee lay thy hand upon these Boughs.
Why should I be coy? Here is an opportunity, and it is good to be sure of one; and in this case to take the Man is Wisdom, when the Master is uncertain.
You are dumb now, there may be more Dutch-men, and more shirts; however, there are Trees and Ropes enough in Pavia to ease a Lovers Heart.
You do well to complain first, and judge by your self; Alas, I do not see my Mistress, I am blind.
Mistress? where?
Where? you know where, in your Heart, dissembler.
By this day, I had thought she had seen her. By this kiss, I am all thine, only I was angry and vexed to see thee cast Eyes upon my Master; But we will forgive each other, grow wise, from past follies take occasion by the lock, and laugh at the old Woman.
Till you are next alone, and then this Story shall enter∣tain her.
Dost thou take me for a Devil, false to my Love?
Hark, I hear my Masters voice.
Bertolin, Bertolin, she stays long; If the Rogue should
mow her to my hand, I have carried my business finely, to make my self his Baud; I have no patience, I will to the Door and call him.
So, you had best brag, and tell leather face, my Mistress, with her spiders breath, what I have done.—
Hark, I heard my Masters voice.
Be gone, I will follow you.
Farewell, little Rogue, till another time, but I will watch your water; how my Mistress storms: Now if my Master will take an opportunity, and employ Moretta upon the Boughs, what a Comfort twill be to my Mistress, 'till cure both their Jea∣louses—he comes, and I am gone.
Where is this idle Villain?
I know not, I found him talking in's sleep here to him∣self, laid all along upon the Boughs; But he is gone I think to call home my Mistress.
But is he gone? Peep Wench, be sure, lest the Enemy surprise us.
But look you keep your promise now; You shall not have my Maiden-head till you swear not to suffer my Mistress to beat me any more, nor dominere over me though she be jealous.
Beat thee? By this light, I will sew up her tail like young Kites for spoil, if she but lift her Tongue against thee.
Will she not come, think you?
No, no, hang her old Trot; Come Wench, whither shall we go?
Help me pull in the Boughs, and then I will talk with you; but you must be very civil.
It is done; lucky mischief as I could wish; O the knavery and the sport of this Jest, besides, my Revenge on all three: Now Bertolin is Master, and can have which he will. O for a fine familiar Devil to tell my Mistress thoughts; would I had so much money as she would give to be revenged, or as I would refuse, ra∣there then hold my tongue; I will steal off, and give them the Alarm. Cry only, my Mistress comes.
A Boy, or Girl, Wench, for a pair of Gloves.
Neither, for two pair, a pox on it; it is no marvel my Mi∣stress is so jealous; By this light, he would press twenty women to death, ere he made one Quick.
What say thou, am not I a young man still? and a bountiful Lover, for a man of my hair.
By my troth, Sir, if you took no more then you laid out I think there had been little spent to day.
A wag, a wag; But I shall see thy belly swell; if it prove a Boy, we will call him Trevallin the second.
These old men think the best of themselves, and they have reason; for if their faith were no stronger then their works they were damned.
A kiss, a kiss, Wench.—I am betrayed, undone, undone.
My Act, for my freedom, quickly, your Seal-Ring, and Reversion of the Ferry, all the ready money in the house, and Mo∣retta for my wife; Or all goes to the Inquisitor, and my Mistress, he cannot cuckold me; I have both their words for it.
I am undone.
Is it a Bargain? or I am gone.
Be ruled, Sir, all is undone, I will consent rather then be dishonoured; But if I be not revenged on him when I am married.
But will you be faithful, and secret, when this is done? and not tell my wife!
Ho! what house do you take me to be of? Is Bertolin of so little reputation in the world, as to proclaim my own horns my self? Hang her, Trot, she shall know nothing unless you tell her.
I tell her? the Devil I will.
Sure, it is as probable you may have the vanity to say, you made my wife a whore, as I to tell it.
Be but secret, and all is agreed.
Is it a match, Moretta?
Yes, by this kiss.
Make haste, and let us part before she comes, she will be so jealous else.
No, no, stay you two here, and stick up the Boughs; I told her you were making ready the Boat; fetch out the boughs Mo∣retta, and dispatch, I will return strait.
This slave will tell her yet.
What will he tell? am not I his wife? 
But shall not I be well-come still, when we can delude the old Woman.
Yes, but we must be secret, for he is a sullen Rogue, I cannot these boughs out, he has bound them so fast together, pray lend me your knife to cut the string.
There, let me help thee. 
Fetch me some more boughs.
Ha! what's here? my wife? 
Yes, impudence; Oh, that I were loose?
Did you call, Sir? my Mistress will be here presently.
I am abused, but I shall be revenged; This is your Vile∣lany, Sirrah.
Ha! my Mistress in the boughs! she can tell fine stories then.
Yes, you double Whore; oh, for a Rat to gnaw this Cord.
Seize them, and bind them; so, strip those Fellows, and bring their Clothes.
Alas, Sir; my skin will never hold dressing; if your worship has use of a skin, pray take my Masters; he is a notable thick-skin'd knave, and so tough with the yellow, it is almost tanned  to your hand, Sir.
Ho! What have we here, a bird in a bush? Away, gag them; and lay them in the hole, behind the Hermitage, and follow me.
NO more, Richardo.
Sir, it is my Love and Duty that makes me urge it.
I believe it; but no more, I know you are abused.
Sir, I have letters here second yours, and from your best Friends, such whose affection, Faith, nor duty, ought to be suspect∣ed; They are full of Amaze and Wonder, to find your Highness will so tamely consent to lose a Country that cost so much blood to purchase; Was not Cosmo born Prince of Pavia? how think you, Sir, a man of his Spirit, and Title to the Place, should consent to hold his birth-right for another? You are deceived, Sir; Nor were Cosmo fit for your Friendship, if his Spirit could grow so tame and degenerate, as to set a Slave upon his Fathers Throne; Come, Sir, it is Flattery and dissimulation, and they are all false; this is the open∣neon of your best Friends.
Take heed, Richardo; yet your love pleads in this ends∣creation; but do not presume; You know, I dare be angry, though it be long before a friend can find it; your faith shall privilege you to as much freedom as any Subject can pretend with his Prince; but impertinence and rudeness no discreet man will Commit. Had thou said, Julia, Carlo, and Martino had been false, thou had found my faith; for I know they have wrought my disgrace, and it is their business to break the Friendship betwixt Prince Cosmo and my self; and against those Traitors thy words would have raised a Tempest in my heart; For against that Villain Martino, (till my Revenge finds him) even my soul makes War; for I know him ungrateful, bloody, and all the several ills that make a Villain are met in that inhumane Wretch, and my very dreams arm against him; But when thou say all are false, including the Princess Fidelia; That Scan∣dall questions the truth of that guilt which the rest are condemned for; No, Richardo, she has no share in that Treachery, she is all
softness; piety and virtue are so natural to her that, for her sake, I can scarce be angry with the rest; For when her name but cross∣ses my thought's, I can do nothing with Passion, save love Fidelia; Oh, Friend, thou dos't not know that Noble mind; and when thou shalt be acquainted with her thou wilt confess; The Princess Fi∣delia's virtues were given her, as Cordials, to defend us against the Poison of her Family; and if thou love Sforza, Honour and serve the Princess.
Since your Highness is sure of her faith I shall not fail to pay that respect and honour that is due to her; for my displea∣sure was only grounded upon the thought she was ungrateful to your Highness; yet I see not how you can acquit Cosmo.
Prithee, peace, he is her Brother; and I know he has Courage and honour, and such are only guilty by chance; But suppose him as false as you believe him, I shall be more troubled that he can do an ill Action, (because I love him) then for any injury he dares do me; For I wear a sword, Richardo, which will heal all those injuries; and therefore let us not trouble our selves with much those lesser thoughts at Millain; we shall have time to inform our selves.
SO, dispatch; and some one look out, lest some call to pass; how the old whore beat the fellow?
She had reason; for the slave made her husband lie with the Maid upon her back.
Nay, he lay with her himself upon her back, after he had lain with his Mistress.
It was his trick, to get his Mistress into the boughs; and then the ill-natured Rogue left her, for her husband to find her.
What a dog it was? But she has punished him.
He will be dead ere night, for I have bound them together, and left her hands loose.
She will kill him then.
No matter, hang him Rogue; tell when his Mistress do's him a Courtesy? I would all that do so were so served.
That folly makes us pay dear; for, by this light, the fear of telling keeps more women honest, then fear of Purgatory; But it is time to be gone, I hear some body call.
Ferryman, is the Boat on this side?
Yes, Sir.
Ha! Phillipin? e Victoria's Page, what business has he at Pavia? I must know; Some intelligence upon my life. Sir, if you will walk to the Boat; we will follow you.
Make haste then; Is Prince Sforza past to day.
Not yet, but we Expect him. What, ho, where are these
fellows; Do you here.—seize that youth, and blind him, make  as if you would rob him, search his Pockets and his Clothes well, for Papers; if you find any give them me.
I warrant you, Sir, we will search him.
What can his business be? The Duke perhaps is dead; it must be that, or the discovery of our design; Why should they be so impatient else? for they Expect him within these two hours.
Nay, resist not, we must have money, Sir; we know the Courtiers want none.
And you will find so little twill scarce be worth your  pains.
What's that?
A Letter, directed to no body.
Open it, and see if there be never a token in it.
A pox on it, heir's nothing but black and white.
What says it?
For that you must execuse me, for I scorn to read, or write; search, search his Doublet, let his papers be hanged.
A Pox upon you, you would be cudgeld, Sirrah, for offer∣ing to wear such Clothes and carry no money in your Purse, only to cousin good fellows; here are three of us put fairly for the Gallows, for a Pistol.
Let us geld the slave, for hanging out such a bush, when he has no Wine in the Cellar.
Alas, Sir, I must wear what is given me; I am but a Servant.
We shall have you a prating too, when you are on to'ther side.
No truly; give me but my paper, and I will go about my business, and do you no injury at all, O here it is, I am glad the  Rogues could not read; This chance had like to have spoiled all.
Come, will you be gone, we will give you a Cast-ashoar, for your money; but we are no Ferry-men, my friend; only we farmed it, for an hour; and we shall leave you to take the possess∣on, if you please, for our work is done.
If we had lighted upon nothing but your lean purse, what a purchase we had had?
Dispatch, and away, the Prince is for certain coming; and if he find us here, we shall pay dear for this reckoning.
I must trust them, till I am over.
What miraculous accident was this! all our plot is disco∣veered; but I have handled it so, that the mischief shall fall upon their own heads; it was Fidelia's hand, it is certain she loves Sforza,
she could not else discover her mother and Family to him. No Bop∣tista, it is visible Sforza had ruined thee; But if he obey thy counsel, Fidelia, I shall quickly have an Opportunity to take a full Re∣avenge.
There is the Hermits Cell; now to find Baptist; hereabout is a path that leads to the Ferry, where I am to ex∣pect him.
So, lie close till they call; that Letter will bring him were death in the way.
That must be he. Baptist?
Carlo, what news?
Read that letter, and twill instruct you.
It is enough; but can you give me no directions how to know him, or guess when he will come, for we cannot long possess this place; The people that pass will miss the Ferry-man; But, for the other part of the Letter, there needs no Conjuration.
If they should meet, you know it must be fatal; They have both too much Courage to part without revenge; and if Cosmo should fall all our hopes must perish.
If he come, I shall not fail of my part, either to persuade or force him to stay; But Carlo, I tell thee, there has happened such a chance to day that makes me believe fortune will be kind to us; In short, all Our Resolutions and Designs are known.
It is not possible.
Deceive not your self, it is known; and yet shall not be prevented: Phillipine past this Instant with a Letter from Fidelia to Sforza; wherein she assures him of all our intentions, and by all that is dear to him conjures him to come privately, in some dis∣guise, this night, to her chamber; where she and his sister will expect him, and give him a full Relation.
And where is the Villain and his Letter?
Gone.
Gone?
Yes gon, and upon good grounds; for knowing Phillipine I made them blind him, and under the pretence of robbing him, Searched for Letters, and found that; which having read they pretended Ignorance, I threw it upon the ground; he not suspect∣ing the secret was discovered took it, and is gone in haste to Sforza. By which means we shall be sure to act our parts with more Conve∣nience; for I am confident he will come, and alone.
It was done like one that knows how to take revenge; Wicked and foolish Girl! unnatural Fidelia! Betray thy Mo∣there? This news will confirm thy hopes in her; for now the Duchess will give her you, were it but to vex her, and cross her
hopes in Sforza: Remember Julia, and as soon as you have di∣spatch'd; pray, give notice to the Count Martino, by some trusty  messenger, with this Ring.
I am instructed, farewell.
I Confess, Antonio, this is the greatest straight that ever cross Fate threw me upon; for I must now lose my value with Sforza, and the world, or else break with the Princess Victoria, whom I love above the world; and heaven and she know my soul has no other ambition but to deserve her favour: But that love must not make thy friend bear an injury that the world talks of, because she commands me to be silent; if I do, her reason will hate; and my honour will not suffer the world to whisper, Cos∣mo is a coward.
Sir, I find many Lovers complain of Love, and the heavy burdens he lays upon them; yet few or none make haste to dis∣charge themselves, but rather patiently lie down under their loads; your Highness now complains of two hard Masters, Love and Honour, and you make a difficulty of obeying either; Reason counsels you to prefer one, your Passion t'other; and to me no∣thing appears easier then your part in both; for your Idle thought of coward, Cosmon is know above it; and if the Princess be all your aim, if her favour be your ambitious hope, as you say, What need you thus hunt your own dangers, and pursue her Brother, and your Prince, upon a most unreasonable jealousy; unless you will give satisfaction to others, by disobliging her that you profess to love and value above the world.
Thou mistake, Antonio; it is Cosmo loves the Princess, it is not Victoria loves Cosmo; and obeying her now is but serving my self only; if she loved me, then for her sake would I put up this injury, because I would not hazard what she loves; but it is not so; no Antonio, it is Cosmo only that is a Lover; and Love in a Lover is no obligation nor tie on a Mistress; that is the great mistake which has so long misled the world; every Lover pretending a reward from his Mistress, because he loves her; which is most un∣reasonable; unless he can say, I will love such a woman, which is impossible and false; for know, Antonio, that Prince of the mind will not come when he is called, nor go when he is sent; Love is a blind and stubborn Boy, and his will is his Law; therefore no woman is obliged to any man for loving her. We owe the root no thanks, while it lies sleeping in the ground; but when by the spring awakened, it sends forth its Clusters, then we cherish and admire the Vine, hoping to taste the rich Elixir. Love is that Root, and Love may bear such Fruit as may oblige a Mistress, by being diligent, finding and taking all occasions to serve her; yet then the Lover but obeys his Master; and to a Lover such an Act
both makes and pays the debt; And this Consideration, Antonio, makes me pursue my first resolution; for since I can pretend no∣thing from the Princess but what is due to a person of honour, I must be careful to preserve that honour which is currant through the world; and till the Princess loves Cosmo, I must not let her kindness to a Brother make me unfit for the friendship or value of that Brother, by tamely suffering injuries.
Sir, I submit; but why should you go thus alone, more now then at other times? you have heretofore thought me worcester∣thy to take a part in your dangers; but it was when your Highness did not grudge me a part in the honour.
It is true, the honour I shall gain from Sforza I will share with none; yet let me tell thee, it is not that which makes me leave Antonio now; for you must stay here, and always keep in readiness those Soldiers I spoke with last night, to execute any design my revenge requires; for I am resolved to hunt the Au∣thors of this disgrace, though I find them privileged by a Sister, or a Mother.
Sir, I am not curious to know more, and so I may serve you, I am indifferent in the kind or place.
Farewell, Antonio; prithee keep a watch about the Princess, and observe what she and my Sister do; and though you see me through my disguise, at any time, yet take no notice of me publicly.
I shall observe, Sir.
REad there, Richardo, and blush for the ill opinion thou had of the most excellent Fidelia. 
Horrid villain! Sure the Duchess has a hand in this; but who it should be that dares undertake this black deed, I can∣not guess; the Duke being dangerously sick is the cause that makes them thus sudden in their mischief.
There is no dispute now; haste, and provide those habits I use to make the Round in; we will away this night, as she desires, only you and I; Oh Richardo, thou art yet a stranger to that excel∣lent Maid, whose faith is sent by heaven to guard us from those wounds that her Mother threatens this State with.
Pray, Sir, let Phillipine stay here, as if he expected your Highness answer to his Letters, twill keep them at a Bay still, and make them uncertain what to resolve; and if any of your own fa∣mily be their spy or traitor, his stay will deceive them.
And early to morrow I will take my time to follow your Highness.
What were those that robed you? are they at the Ferry still?
I believe not, Sir, they seem to be poor Rogues, some straggling Soldiers of the next Garrison.
Come, Richardo, let us away.
Sure I have lost my way; it is late, I will knock at this Her∣mitts Cell, and inform my self. 
A friend; pr•y, which is the way to the Ferry?
Pray, come in, and afford your Charity; and then I will guide you to the Ferry.
What Impious villains were those that could so rudely bind those holy hands?
Speak softly, Son, they were Thieves, that have all this day robbed at the Ferry; pray, come in, and let me shut the door, lest they espy us; it is late, and they cannot stay long, the people are already alarmed.
But that I have other vows to pay, I would know who they are that thus boldly justify their villainy.
For heavens sake, think not of going out, Son, it is late and dangerous.
It is late, and, I confess, I am hungry and weary.
Within I have some of yesterdays Charity left still, which I shall freely give you; Come, Son, and put off those weeds, and rest upon my poor bed, it knows no care of earthly things; and if you bring no troubles in your mind, you will find none there; I will watch, and call you early if the danger be removed; I am stiff with lying all day upon one side.
Let me help you in; Villains, to use an old Religious man thus!
It is late; the Sun is upon the hill already, we shall scarce reach Millain to night.
We must ride the faster, Sir; But once over the Ferry, the way is short.
Call the Ferry-man.
The Boat is upon this side, I saw it from the hill.
It is he, I know his voice, as soon as the Boat is upon the other shore, draw upon him, and speed him any way.
See, here is the Ferry-man. Honest friend, is the Boat on this side?
Yes, Sir.
What hour is it?
Late, Sir; does not the Prince pass? we looked for him to day.
Not till to morrow.
Our boughs will be withered by that time.
Ha! what noise is that? sure those villains have set up∣on some passengers.
How now Father, what noise is that?
It was the noise of swords, good Son, come in; those Ban∣dittos I told you of, I fear they are now robbing some body; For heavens sake, come in, and let them not see you.
Heaven forbid it should ever be said, I stood and listened to the danger that threatens innocence, and hid my self for fear.
Hark, they come; and they are so many you can but lose your self in that attempt, and bring no safety to them.
Who knows, since they are able to dispute it, but that my aid may save them?
See, it is they.
No matter,—Hold, villains, what do you mean?
Upon them, kill them both.
I am lost for ever; Hold your hand, till I tell you a story may save you from the malice of others, since heaven has preserved you thus miraculously against my designs.
Speak quickly.—Sir, I hope your charity has found no  sad accident, to make you repent this action; have you any wound that you apprehend dangerous?
No, Sir, they are but scratches; pray, let us know what he would say.
First, let me see my friend dressed that lies bleeding here,  is there no Surgeon near?
The Hermit is famous for his skill, and fortunate in what he undertakes; and see where he comes.
How fares my Son? is there any use of my skill, or is all desperate?
No, Father, heaven has been kind; and we must implore
your aid, for their mischief is fallen upon their own heads; this is he on whom you must practise your skill and charity.
Help me to bear him to my Cell, and then return.—
Defer not to hear what I would say, it concerns your safety; and I shall discover a treachery your honest heart will scarce give credit to.
What made thee attempt my life? thou see I am poor, no hope of gain cold tempt thee.
Hide not your self, Prince Sforza, from him that knows you, and the cause why you are thus disguised.
Ha! Prince Sforza?
Suppose I am Sforza, how came you by this knowledge?
From Phillipine, whom we pretended this day to rob; and in his Pocket found the Princess Fidelia's Letter, which gave you notice that your life was laid for; and this is one of those designs which heaven has prevented: In short (for I find I am going to my grave) your life, Sir, is sold to me and others; Julia and false Martino sold it; and Fidelia should have been my reward, for kill∣ling you.
Ye powers, what do I hear?—Sir, does he speak truth, in part, are you Prince Sforza?
From you I will not hide my self; for since you durst pro∣tect me, as a private man; I am confident, you will not quit me when you know I am your Prince.
To confirm you in the belief of what I say, turn this way, and look upon this Face.—Baptist pulls off his disguise, of a Beard and Periwig.
Baptist?
O heavens! it is he.
Yes, Baptist, whom you so many ways have ruined:—All which I could have forgot, all but my loss in the hopes of my divine Fidelia.
Knew she of this Plot?
She know of it? No, nor could any but a fool or a devil ask that question; would I had fought with thee, thou coldest never have overcome me that art master of so base a doubt.
Was Prince Cosmo at Court when you came thence, has he any knowledge of this design?
No, upon my soul, they are a pair of matchless virtues.
Then I am happy; for I confess, I could not but with pain of mind think Prince Cosmo less then I esteemed him. It is a gal∣lant and a faithful Prince; and when you know him you will ad∣mire him; there is nothing in him an enemy can accuse, or a friend wish a way, unless his choler may sometimes prevail: But that laid aside, he is Brother to Fidelia, which is all that can besaid of excellent.
I know the Prince, and was a Soldier under him; and I am glad to hear your Highness has this opinion of him; for we had a rumour in the Army, that your Highness wrought him out of his Command; believe me, Sir, he left the Camp, as we were told, up∣on it, highly unsatisfied with your Highness about it.
The Prince, when he shall know the better, will not be persuaded I could be guilty of so low or meama crime; and when I believe him not fit for such a charge or trust, I shall not fear to tell him so; for I yet never flattered a friend, nor injured my enemy; why then should I be so unreasonable as to wrong Prince Cosmo? yet their malice had like to have been prosperous in their design of breaking our friendship; for till this minute I suspected the Prince had (by his Mothers interest) procured my being called from my Government, here in Pavia; but I have now found their design; and their malice has but given a growth to that friendship they meant to have withered,—How do you, Sir?
Not well, I find I have lost more blood then I can spare.
Father, pray lend us your help here.— 
I would fain know upon what ground this Baptist ac∣cussed Count Martino and the Duchess.
Read that Letter, and twill satisfy your doubts.
It is Martino's hand.
It is so, and Carlo brought it this Evening.
Heaven! thy hand is visible. Read, Sir, for I dare trust you with the secret of my Life; What course shall I take to prevent their malice?
Haste, Sir, to Court, before the Fame of this attempt come to their knowledge, show this Letter to your Father, and seize Martino; But spare to name Julia, twill break the Prince's and Fidelia's Heart; for whose sake, if you love her, and her Noble Brother, you will hide her part of this fault: And Martino once removed, twill be easy to reclaim her Heart; for it is his am∣bitious Mind has wrought her easy Nature to this bloody design. Oh! I faint, and yet ere I die, as you have Charity, forgive Baptist; Then live and love at the rate I have adored the excellent Fidelia, and you will then deserve her Heart; Fidelia is all Angel, and Baptist too earthly to think so.—Oh Father, your Charity, pray; that I may confess a sad Soul to you, and end better then I lived.
Can you read that Letter?
Yes, Sir; but it is so sad a scene it makes my blood run backwards in my veins; lose no time, Sir, your Life is at stake; I will but dress these slight wounds and follow you.
I will leave a Horse for you.
Pray, Sir, quit not your disguise; it is better then a guard till you know whom you may trust.
You have reason, and it was my own design. Farewell, Sir; at my Lodging I will expect you.
That Villain, Martino, has ruined all our Family; but I will find him when his thoughts expects no such visit: I will in, and
discover my self to Baptist, and make him write a Letter to my Mother and Martino, wherein he shall only mention the Prince is escaped, and conceal his own Condition; He shall write to them that they should trust me with any design, as one he knows faith∣full and fit for their purpose. This recommendation will admit me to their Counsels; he shall tell them too, that he has seized me accord∣ing to their Order, and that I shall be private and safe in his custody till their Order require me; twill keep off the suspicion of who I am, or fear of my coming till they send for me. Thus I am resolved to return to Millain, in this Periwig and a Pilgrims Weed; and if that disguise can conceal me, I am resolved to undertake all their designs; by which means I may prevent their malice; But when the plot is ripe, if then I fall not with a sad Fate upon the wretch, till this fiery prompter has called to his despairing thoughts all those bloody designs his barbarous Soul has plotted, and with fatal wounds laid the Traitor at my feet a sacrifice to our injured Family, Heaven curse me strangely. But for thee, O Julia, my unfortunate Mother, though I will not lift a hand a∣against thee; yet I have words in store that shall wound thee deeper then a sword.
O Cosmo, Cosmo, cruel Brother! why hast thou robbed me of the Joy I had in thee? He has broke his Faith, Ma∣dam, and is gone to be calmly wicked upon second thoughts, in cold blood: cruel! What wilt thou do, unworthy youth? Good Gods, would I have given Faith to him that should have told me Cosmo would have dissembled with Fidelia, and wept to a Sister when blood and revenge were in his Heart; water in his Eyes, and Murder in his Mind?
Do not say so.
Do not defend him, Madam; he is not worth your Anger nor Pity, that could lie to you, you that he loved: And he that dares look his Mistress in the face, and tell a lie, neither Religion, Honour nor Virtue, can have any ties upon him.
For my sake, do not revile him; he has some new reason, (I know he has) else I am certain he would have stayed; for his Heart is full of Truth and Honour, and blessed with all that is glo∣rios in a Man; and though his Rage, sometimes, like a storm throws those Virtues into disorder, yet when he is collected, his calm Mind is all divine.
This Opinion makes me hate him, that he can be so faulty to you that are thus noble. Pray hate him, pray do, that I may learn to do it by your example; For Heaven knows, it is hard for me to leave loving him, though I chide till the day sets, for Cosmo is next to Sforza in my Heart. But this falsehood has staggered all my hopes, for his Love was that I built upon; The Ambitious,
Jealous, Angry, nay, the Lustful Man can Love, but the false dissembler can never be just to himself or others; and till I found him so, my patience bore the present miseries; my Heart still hop∣ing Cosmo's Virtue would one day redeem our Family.
So he will, my Soul prophesies he will. But oh, the War I have within me, when I think my Brother and Cosmo are Enemies! Should they meet, it would kill Victoria ere she can resolve who should be victor.
Unhappy Cosmol what would I have given to have saved thee Innocent, that it might not have been said, thy passion betrayed such a sweetness, whose Love is so far from being Angry, that she chides my Justice!
Pray be not thus passionate; when there is reason, I can be as angry as you.
Had you chid him I would not; and if you would have me defend him, let me see you angry; that may awaken the Sister in me, whose partial Mind may plead something for him; but now tic impossible while you are kind; had he been one that the world knew not, had he never given assurance of what he durst do; that bubble-vanity, and men's idol, honour, might have pleaded his ex∣cuse; but for him that has to sundry battles given a name, and won in War a glorious Fame, on whom the Sun yet never set ungloriously, for him to break his Faith and Friendship to quarrel with his Friend? That Friend that gave him his greatest Honour, by having once been his Enemy. Who but a vain Man would aspire higher in Honour and Arms, then to have been, first, Enemy, then Friend to Sforza; and after all, not unwelcome to the divine Victoria?
Nay, then I conjure you by what is dearest to you, leave this discourse; and unless you despise the secrets we so late blushed for, you will cease to revile him.
Madam, there is a Soldier without who desires to speak with you, his business speaks haste.
Admit him, my Heart fore-tells some sad accident.
My business is with the Princess Fidelia, yet your Highness may partake of it; but I shall beg some place more pri∣vate to deliver it in, for it is of consequence.
In my Chamber, if you please, Madam, we may be pri∣vate; follow us, Friend.
Heaven avert what my fears would prompt me to believe.
I Must be gone, my business calls me hence; but to your care, Father, I must leave my Friend; you must be private in what has past to day; you know what persons are concerned, Farewell. Your blessing, and be pleased to take this Charity to adorn your Altar.
I am counselled, Heaven bless the Prince, and guide my Son; My prayers shall wait upon you; and when your Friend is able to travel, he shall come to Court; In the mean time, I will carry him to the Ferry-mans house, who, in return of your boun∣tie to them, shall carefully attend him.
Pray let the Count Baptist be privately buried; for though he be of a Noble Family, it must not yet be known he is dead.—I could have wished he had lived; yet this Letter and this Ring will (I hope) be sufficient to compass my designs. 
WHat have I heard! My Mother accused of a Murder, and by Prince Sforza? Heaven sure has changed its course, he would not else have told me this. Fidelia, be thy self, and let not thy fond Affection tame thy Soul so, as to sit calmly down and bear this Injury.
It was my fear, Madam, that this truth would grieve your Heart; and had my Life been only at stake, I should have died in silence: But when yours, my Fathers, and all our Families are thrown into the scale, Piety and Honour bid me warn the Innocent, that they may fly the slaughter; while a wilful silence might make me not only lament the misery, but guilty of that crime too. Yet, witness Heaven, it is a secret to all the world be∣sides; And you can witness, when her Malice was most active and most prosperous, that she was Fidelia's Mother was all satisfy∣ction; for whose sake I have still had a Patience as great as her Injuries.
Thinks Prince Sforza I will justify her follies? why else do's he stab me with a repetition of them? Do's your Highness think to heal my wounded Mind by telling me you have forgiven my Mother? Do's that take away her faults? No, but shows her guilt, and his vanity greater, and urged but to upbraid me, and civilly tell me how much better he deserves then I. Yet, if I had not been mistaken, you would not have forgot, that I, to keep a spotless Friendship with Prince Sforza, have erred even against Nature, abandoning a Mothers and a Brothers Interest, in quitting all the world to justify the value I had of him above it; and had
he loved Fidelia with half that kindness, he would have hid this fault from me, as if it had been his own Crime; But all the world (Prince Sforza too) joins to make Fidelia miserable.
O ye Gods, then I am miserable. Come, Martino, I will now call thee Friend, if thou wilt finish what Baptist but be∣gun, since my Friend can thus mistake her servant.
Gentle, Sister, why this passion? what is there more in his words then you your self have feared? had you rather we should all perish, then hear your danger from a Friend? Had a third person told you, would not you have broke the glass that brought you poison? Good Heaven, I, without blushing, dare profess my self a Lover too, yet will not assume such a partial Dominion over his mind, as to prohibit him speaking what is just and honest; and if it be a truth, what he has said, me-thinks you are much to blame.
If it be not, By all my hopes, I vow my self a Widowed Virgin, in some Holy-house, and bid farewell to Sforza and his Friendship, that could thus rashly accuse my Mother; and if it be a truth, I am then unworthy of his thought or Love.
Why are you silent, Sir; Why do you not acquit your self?
Treason, war, or sickness, bring no wounds but I can bear; But the wounds of a friends unkindness strike the soul, it grows dumb, and the heart pale. But I have finished. Believe her Innocent, Madam; so that Error wounds none but me, you shall never find me busy to prevent a danger; nor had I spoke now, but for your sake, and to preserve the Princess Fidelia. Read that Letter.—Nay, then I have lived too long; That frown this E∣vining  had saved Baptist, and malice had been prosperous, O for those wounds I gave him; those would have cured this misery; for when Fidelia frowns, why should Sforza live? but I talk, and prevent what these would do—Bleed, and weep, Fidelia's lost.
Sforza, brother, hold; for Heavens sake, hold; Fidelia bids you hold, Sforza; O stay, what misery do you fly to? your friend calls, and bids you stay.
You wrong me, Madam; Those that can and will go, I scorn to hold.
But those that obey you ought not to tread upon; why did you refuse to read the Letter, which might have quit∣ted him?
Because I have miseries enough, and will not hunt that knowledge which will but distract my mind. I am now ready for my Grave, and will not go a step out of my way to avoid it, but here stand and well-come fate; for since I have lived to see Prince Sforza angry with me, for a word, when passion and misery had distracted me, why should I desire to live? it is folly, it is madness, since I cannot hope a remedy for my sick mind; when he, who forgave his Enemies a murder would not forgive Fidelia a passi∣onate word? O Madam, this Cruelty in your brother makes me invite malice and Murder. Come, both Baptist and Martino, come, come all that hate Fidelia, and see your selves revenged upon her, and behold her withered by her friend, see all she gloried in; Her
friendship, and her Faith in Sforza, like early blossoms, by untime∣lie storms, struck and blasted; but why do I hold this Infection—  Yet it is well-come, since it brings news of Fidelia's death; and lest nature should grow weak, and tempt me to save my self, thus to the fire I offer all my means of safety.
Their passions must have way; It is time, not Reason must prevail; Love, whose glory is built upon our misery, and our griefs his Triumph still, and our fears his food! Tyrant! whom none serves but slaves; Force, not affection, fills thy Train; who cares not to have his Servants splendid or great; The Pale, Lean, and desperate fill thy Court, which makes me fear, Reason, nor the gods come not there; But this is no time to dispute thy power. I will read this dangerous Letter.
KNow, the Duke was this day dangerous sick of his Imposthume, and he is yet without hopes of life; Sforza has notice of our de∣sign; and if you strike not in time, all our hopes are desperate; if he out∣live this day, and the Duke die, your hopes in Fidelia are lost; for we are certain, she and the prince hold Intelligence; The Duchess salutes you; Cosmo is past in a Disguise, to fight with Sforsa; if you meet him secure him, till you hear from us; for the Duchess will not ven∣ture him in such a Danger as a Duel against the Prince; upon whose success all our designs and Hopes depend. Farewell, and burn this Letter: C. is the Messenger, to whom you may impart how business stands.
The other name is blotted out, O heavens! what a plot was here, to ruin all our hopes? This Letter I will show my Father, whose recovery is miraculous; Heaven sure has lent him some few days, to preserve his name &amp; family; which if he had died must, in this mischief, have shrunk to nothing; sure, when he shall see this paper he will cease to give faith to cursed Martino.
This is his Chamber: Thus disguised he cannot know me, or if he do, nothing shall save him; nor is there such a thing as danger, when men are resolved to die, or Execute; Oh Fidelia, thus I will revenge thee on Sforza, and preserve thee against Mar∣tino,
I must not think of her, she puts womanish thoughts in my mind, I will knock.
Who is there?
One in haste that should speak with the Count Mar∣tino.
How now? your news.
Pray, my Lord, retire to some private place; I have something to say from Baptist.
Thou art wounded, is the party dead?
Yes, my Lord; but we had a hard bout on it.
Speak softly, and follow me.
WHere is the Duke?
He sleeps, Madam.
I must awake him.
By no means, if you love his health.
I must, His own, and the health of Millain depends up∣on my news; Sir, Father, Sir.
Who calls?
It is I, Sir? your Victoria.
Rise my dear Child, thou were with me in my dream too.
Oh, Sir!
Why weep thou?
Read that paper, Sir, and save your Son, and speedily, or all our hopes are lost; for Murder and Treason, if not prevent∣ed, will sweep your Family from the Earth, and Millain no more obey the name of Sforza.
Heaven forbid the Execution of this wicked Design.
It is not the heavens, Sir, must do it; their part is here in the discourse; you must act now, as their Minister here where Justice and Nature call for your Defence; and if you do not sud∣denly Seize Martino, who thus long has abused your trust, you will see this last Seen of your life set in the blood of your self, and family.
It is so horrid it scarce finds my faith.
If your goodness defer preventing this mischief till the guilt be visible, here, in few hours, you will see your Son, and my dear Brother, bleeding his own Testimony; and then your Ju∣stice can only punish, and not prevent the Traitor.
Good Heaven, it is certain; This is his hand, I know the Character; and her modest &amp; Innocent nature confirms it; She durst not else thus confidently, without pregnant proofs, accuse him: Who is there? Carlo, command a guard to attend my daughter; Go, Victoria, and seize the body of the Count; If he resist, force
him hither, if he yield, be civil; Carlo, where is Julia?
Wher'ever she be, she dares not appear in this cause.
Carlo, tell the Duchess I would speak with her.
I shall, Sir;—There is wonder and mystery in this disco∣very; how the Devil came she by that Letter? It is the same I gave Baptist; This day will be full of mischief; something bold and sudden, or all is lost; I will to the Duchess with this News; The difficulty will be, how to save Martino, they have his hand to wit∣nos against him.
By your favour, Sir; I would gladly speak with the Duchess.
Some begging Pilgrim; I am in haste friend.
If not with her, Sir, the Count Martino, or Seignior Carlo.
What is your business with him?
From a friend; and of importance.
I am the man, Sir?
Then you know this hand?
Yes, it is the Count Baptista's.
It is so, and he salutes you.
What news!
This Letter will speak.
Stay here, till I call the Duchess.
She is guilty; Lust and Murder have stained her soul; Mar∣tino and this Villain have betrayed her.
Escaped? Is Sforza escaped? Where is the Soldier that said he was dead? and my letter in the Dukes hand?
Yes, Madam; and the Princess Victoria is gone with a guard, to seize the Count Martino, with order to bring him, alive, or dead.
That is good news.
This Pilgrim will give you a more Exact Account.
I am full of distraction. Come you from Baptist, friend?
What says my Letter, Madam!
Oh, Carlo, we are lost; there is no safety for us, nor hopes of any, since Sforza is escaped; This is Fidelia's Act, it was she be∣tray'd us; but I'll be revenged on her ere I die; where is the poi∣son I prepared? this night shall her be last.
O horrid wickedness.
It is no time, Madam, to think of such poor Revenge; Let us provide for our own safety.
Villain, thou shalt fall with the earliest, or I will miss of my Aim.
What says Baptista's Letter?
Cosmo is his Prisoner; and he will detain him, tell we dis∣miss him.
Something may be built upon that yet.
Baptist himself sore wounded, Sforsa escaped, and I must live to see my Cosmo stoop to him, and be a subject to the Branch
of that Cedar, which my frowns have shaken, and my dear Mart∣no too, is lost for ever.
What said she? her dear Martino; O, that I had been born deaf, rather then have heard that fatal sound.
Madam, dare you trust me in this danger, when all is de∣sperate; no matter who guides the Helm, if you will consent; I can from this Letter propose something like safety, but twill look desperate; this Pilgrim too must join, under which habit, Baptist says, you will find a Soldier stout and faithful; Cosmo is in prison, this is the ground I will build on; haste presently to the Duke, fall on your knees before him, pretend your Son Cosmo is murdered; let this Pilgrim second you, and affirm he saw him dead; and, friend, you shall urge you received those wounds in his defence; be but faithful, and bold in this desperate occasion, and thou shalt find a reward beyond thy hopes, or thy wishes; and when he has confirmed it, then call for revenge and justice against the Count Martino, for the murder of your Son; say that he is fall∣len by his plot; and that you know Prince Sforza is marked for slaughter too; seem to know nothing of his escape, or any thing that is past concerning the Princess Victoria's complaint, nor hear what they would say, to inform you; but put on all your craft, and plead with passion; no matter how unreasonable, nor how excessive it appears; the more violent, the more Mother; the more unnatural your griefs appear, your sorrows will be the more taking and infectious; and seem to be distracted with the loss, call for justice, call for present and exemplary justice upon that tray∣tor, Count Martino, traitor to the Gods, and his friends.
Hold, villain, leave to spit thy venom and thy malice; is this thy gratitude to him that raised thee? and can thy narrow soul hope I should be brought to betray my Martino?
Come, Madam, you must lay by this womanish humour; it is no time to express a fondness when Crowns and Lives are at stake; if you will save him you must take my counsel; If you now appear his friend, it is his certain ruin, and your own; to defend him will blot all your credit with the Duke, for the Count is for∣feit in his opinion, beyond redemption; and will be lost before you can speak for him.
Let all perish, ere I have a hand in the ruin of my friend.
Hell of this foolish Love; that blind Boy misleads us more then Fortune or Ambition; is it better to have it said, you loved, or saved Martino? Be ruled, and I will save him, at least defer the mischief: thus we may redeem him from this certain ruin which threatens him, by discovery of that Letter; and by this means you may clear all doubts (which are not a few) that you had a share in this plot; and by this way you will move their pity, and turn their hate and fears into love of Julia; and thence will grow your power and our safety; in which cloud of tears and sadness Mart∣no vanishes; for being once a prisoner in the Citadel, which I com∣mand, we can through a private way release him when we have re∣solved together what to do; and while they are secure in their
minds, believing him a prisoner, we can with the less suspicion pur∣sue our first designs; for Sforza once dead, we shall quickly find life in our plot again. Friend, your Letter admits you to this trust, and you must again join in the business; and if you prove faithful you will find a grateful Patron.
When you have tried me, Sir, speak as you find.
Be private, and ready till occasion calls; and Carlo, see him rewarded for his former service: O Carlo, you must excuse my pas∣zion, for being unwilling to accuse my friend; but now I confess, it is reason that you urged, and the rest we will leave to Fortune.
Pray, lose no time; he is by this a prisoner.
This Lemon in mine eye, that I may weep, and down with my hair; so: now Fortune if ever thou were kind to Lovers, assist in this my last great action, that I may revenge and save a friend.
Go, and be prosperous; let Julia's fortune still attend you, whose tears have still been more powerful then the sword; away Soldier, follow, and observe your—Q.
To your grief, I shall; O heaven! what have I seen and heard?
SEnd in that Soldier, then haste and find Carlo, tell him I have business of consequence with him; this news has given some life to our design; The Duke desperately sick, and Sforza living, had been a black day to Martino. Now the Duke recovers, and Sforza's death will Crown the work;—Oh, you are welcome; so, shut the door, and tell me, how died Sforza, and how  fares Baptasta?
At the Ferry, Sir, we set upon him, where it cost us many a wound; for he had notice of our design.
For thy wounds, thou shalt not repent them; where is the Present thou spoke of, from Baptist?
Here villain, do you know this face? do you stare? is it 
 so horrid that it frights thy guilty soul? What will this sword do then, when justice draws it against a Traitor and a Murderer?
Nay, then Fortune is a Whore still; but, for thy sword it brings no terror; nor did I set Baptist on, because I doubted I could not kill thee my self; but to have it done, and the world not know how.
I am in haste; this is not all the work I have to do;—So  wary—There I was with you.
And you are mortal too, or that blood lies.
Then I am lost; Martino and all his hopes are withered; it is late, I find my shadow grows long, and night comes on apace.
How do you, Sir?
Too well, Ferdinando.
Call a Surgeon quickly; Dear Sforza, retire to your Chamber.
O dear Victoria, there is no end of Sforza's miseries; Hey∣ven wars against him, and Fidelia frowns.
Why do you say so? alas, she weeps, and will know no comfort, since Sforza is angry for a word when grief and passion had almost distracted her; pray, go to your Chamber.
To my grave, Victoria; death is welcomer far then this life; till Fidelia smiles my heart can know no peace.
I would our fortunes knew no other difficulties; how easy and how certain would our joys be then?
ANd did he hurt the Prince?
Yes, Sir, and they are both wounded.
Generous and noble Sforza; well, we must lose no time; Antonio away; remember my directions, get those Soldiers in readiness, and stay about the Princesses Chamber; you know my call, when you hear my whistle, be ready; this night must finish all our miseries: and Cosmo's love the innocent shall save, or mis∣sing find a grave.
SEE here, behold the Monster; ask these Lords if we did not surprise him in the act? executing his Treason upon my Brother, who now lies bleeding of those wounds this Traitor this minute gave him.
Villain, what moved thee to this bloody purpose?
Will you hear me with patience, Sir; if I be not inno∣cent punish me; be pleased to produce the Soldier, which now is Prince Sforza; by what reason urged, I know not, unless it be envy of your favour; who this morning, in disguise, pretended business, and being alone drew upon me; nature and honour bad me defend
my self, these wounds he gave me, and some I gave him; and when he could not himself destroy me, then he cries out, it is Sfor∣za the Prince; at which, Heaven (that only saw the action) wit∣noses how it struck my heart, till fear and amazement disarmed me, and at his feet I threw my self; in which posture his party found me; Come, Madam, it is neither honour nor virtue in your soft sex, to design or pursue this bloody purpose.
Where is the Duke?
What means this distraction?
O, Sir, if ever Julia were dear to Alphonso, now let her find his justice in all its horror fall in execution upon that bloody monster: O, let sad fates close those eyes that have smiled upon the blood and ruin of my child.
What means this? sure she has not heard Sforza is escaped.
Some new plot, I know; it is a subtle devil.
My Son Cosmo, all my joy, my deat Cosmo!
What of him?
He is dead, he is dead, fallen by murder.
Dead!
Oh! dead; and by that cursed monster, Martino; Hell upon thy black soul for it; O, Sir, let not the Traitor live to re∣pent it; why should he find such charity that showed no mercy to my Son? the ungrateful villain gave my dear Cosmo no warning of his grave which Martino dug; but sent him in haste to answer all his sins: Oh, let me see the villain struck into the earth with as little mercy as he showed his Prince; and if not suddenly prevent∣ed, Prince Sforza will meet the same fate; for the villain has writ his name too in the black book of death.
O strange daring! Heaven, dost thou see and suf∣fer this?
Cosmo dead? Oh heaven!—
There is more in this fury of hers then any man yet can judge of, unless all women-kind are damned.
O, Sir, I beg you'll let them hale the villain to a Dungeon.
Where heard you this sad news?
By this Pilgrim, who past by chance, and took Cosmo's part, in which he received these wounds.
Away to the Castle with the villain; come hither, friend; saw you Prince Cosmo fall?
I saw him they call Baptist fall; and he confessed a young man that was then wounded, and now they say is dead, was Prince Cosmo; and he then affirmed, in my hearing, a Hermit being by, who lives at the Ferry, that there came order from Count Martino to kill Prince Sforza too.
Villain, do's not thy soul grow pale at this?
It is not all your plots or malice shall make me quit my own innocence; and when you have murdered me by a formal process, let Alphonso look to his own life, he will find Martino was his guard; for me, I scorn to beg my life till it be forfeited; and when ever Martino dies, you shall see him do it with less fear then those live with that struck him.
Hale that bloody dog hence.—
O Antonio, the Princess Victoria's tears had so much kind∣nos in them; the Balsam has cured all my wounds, and this storm once over, I shall be the happiest of men; away, remember my directions.
I confess, Sir, such a silence as the Princess showed when she heard you were dead, speaks love more then all that whining passion Poets would express.
Dear Antonio, I cannot be so cruel as to let her heart be afflicted when kindness to Cosmo wounds it; and therefore find her and Fidelia, and assure them that I live; but conjure them to secrecy, and tell them my life depends upon the thought that I am dead.
I shall obey you.
Soldier, come away; the Duchess stays to speak with you.—This you must wear, it is the earnest of her bounty. 
It is an honour, Sir.
UPon my life and honour, Madam, he lives; but this se∣cret must not pass your breast, for some few days, if you love his life.
O, Madam, what a change is here? Antonio was ever ho∣nest, and his friend; and my heart in despite of all that grief and fear which then possessed it, believes and hopes in Cosmo.
My love to both of you divides my mind; I fear for Cosmo, and hope for Victoria, yet Antonio's word must not be doubted; dear Antonio, once again speak the truth; do not fear, because we are women, to tell the worst of Fates; for know, to deceive us, is twice to wound thy friends.
Madam, it has not been Antonio's practice, nor his trade to lie; and again, if Cosmo be not living some strange curse strike me; more I must not say, not can I longer stay, my business calls me hence; which, with your Highness pardon, I must obey.
Since hath changed this Scene, gentle Fidelia, let me beg
you will make it a perfect Jubilee; and since your Brother lives, why should mine dye? you saw I mourned yours, and will Fidelia kill mine? remember what he has been, and let not one mistake blot all his story.
No more, Madam; you shall find my Heart both kind and just to Sforza, though he were harsh to me; you have not seen him since he was hurt?
No, but I shall now go find him out; and if you will go with me, be certain of a welcome.
I shall not refuse to go, where Victoria and Honour lead.
THis Surgeon has a sovereign remedy to stop blood, it was his hand saved the Life of Ferdinando, when the rest gave him lost; and I doubt not but twill have a good effect upon your Highness.
Come, we must away; my Father stays, he has called a Council at his Chamber concerning Martino; The Villain shall now pay for all his Treachery; tell Victoria she must be there; bid Richardo and Ferdinando make haste, and let us meet there.
WEighing the sad cause of this Assembly, the Persons too concerned so near in blood and trust; I shall not need to urge you to a serious Consideration, how we may se∣cure our Peace and Person, punishing the past crimes by taking a just Revenge on the Murderer of my ever dear Cosmo.
I owe the world and your Highness many debts, but none that has greater ties upon me then this your kindness; which has still esteemed and used my Cosmo as your Son, whose loss now comes so near my Soul; I cannot mourn his Murder, nor rest in peace, till I know what your Justice will decree for my Revenge. Nor should I appear thus indecently without a mourning garment, but that I hope, my impatience will find a kind interpretation from these im∣partial Judges; Amongst whom, though Cosmo was born an En∣my, yet such was his Nature, that I dare say he has not left one behind him, but that ungrateful, ambitious, and treacherous Martino, whose Malice though it only struck my Cosmo, yet it ap∣pears by his Letters it was levelled at the root of the Family, my ever Honoured, and your dear Sforza; who, though he found the Gods more kind then Cosmo, yet I will not doubt his voice to the
Revenge of my Son; though some malicious people would have me believe (what my Heart abhors) that Sforza hated Cosmo. But I have done, because my Interest in this cause might be thought to sway me against the Justice of what may be pleaded in the defence of this villain; I will now be silent, and leave the Gods and this As∣sembly to decree their pleasures, in mine and my Sons Revenge.
Though I might urge his sword drawn upon me, when he knew me to be his Prince, and produce these wounds, yet I scorn to name them; and shall only desire that Letter I sent your  Highness, by my Sister, may be produced and read, and what that confesses under his hand, (whose Character is well known to all this Assembly) may, according to the Law in that case be judged; Twill be observable too, how crafty his Malice has been in ma∣king use of our Honoured Mothers Name, so to blind the world from having any design upon Prince Cosmo. But Heaven (juster then he hoped) sent that poor Pilgrim, whose honest Heart en∣gaged him by chance, by which means, he is fallen in his own practice; And though I will not pursue him upon my own Interest, yet as a Traitor, and Murderer of my Brother, I think speedy Ju∣stice ought to offer his blood a sacrifice to Cosmo.
And to me there is nothing more visible then his guilt, nor any thing so easy as to give sentence upon him; and he has my voice to die some lingering infamous death, to expiate the ingrate∣tude  he has showed his Prince and Friend; And since he could forget the favours and envied honours he has received from both Crowns, and thus, by a bloody Treachery cut from the Earth that hopeful Prince, let him fall despised and unpitied; for, sure, no honest Man can defend or intercede for him.
I am not satisfied with this name that is blotted out, it is some one that ought not to be concealed, I hate Treason both in the Root and Branch; no honest Man ought to have mercy on any that wishes it well; and I not only consent to this present sen∣tence upon Count Martino, but to all that had a hand in it; that they may share in the punishment as well as in the guilt, without exception of persons.
He that can be ungrateful will upon occasion be all that is ill; To avoid which opinion, I shall now endeavour to justify my self Loyal to my Prince, just to those Laws that must pre∣serve this State, and yet not forget to be grateful to my Friend. The many Obligations I owe to the Count Martino are well known both to your Highness and this Assembly. And that, I hope, will excuse me, notwithstanding the past vote, if I shall (as far as Ho∣nor and Justice shall authorize me) in this Assembly, defend the Honour of my Patron. First, I would gladly see a legal Con∣viction of the Count; let the Crime appear, and then the Judge∣meant; Let the dead body of Prince Cosmo be produced, upon which all this business depends: For who knows he is killed? who saw the Body? There appears to me only a report made by her Highness, who received the relation from a Pilgrim. It is granted, her condition and authority ought to find faith and pity.
Yet when Life and Honour are at stake, Justice cannot appear too circumspect; And though I will not deny he is dead, yet I will hope he lives, till I see some proof more visible; here is only a passenger reports it; her Highness (like a kind Mother) believes her fears; and I, like the faithful Servant of the unfortunate Count, will hope it is but her fears. And notwithstanding Count Ferdi∣nando's Passion, I shall believe this Action in me has much more Humanity then his sentence; I am sure, it is Charity, at least, to wish all men innocent; I know, Sir, the Count has many Enemies; your Highness trust and favour has made him fit for Malice; and who knows but this is an Arrow of her shooting? Nay, I know he has been threatened, and when there is occasion will produce to whom. But to the business; here is a Letter produced, and they say the Counts hand is to it, and another that subscribed put out: why may not those that put out one name, put in another? Baptist is the Counts Accuser, you all know he was his Enemy, and I know he had reason to be so; yet it was your Highness service that gave him that reason: For the Count being certain he had ambiti∣os designs, not fit for a Subject to arrive at, (rather then dis∣gust him, by telling him he was not worthy of what he aimed at) in Policy, to keep the State quiet, kept him banished. Never smile, my Lord, for this is truth, though the Camp knew it not; And Prince Sforza knows, Fidelia was their quarrel; for whom the Count Baptist has always born an ambitious Passion.
You know so much, Carlo, and are so ingenious, I shall hope, you will confess your knowledge of this Letter too.
Your Highness has too much Honour, to fear to speak what ever you know; and if Carlo be guilty, pray, Sir, accuse him;  if not, (though my Prince) I shall beg you will not throw a Doubt upon Me.—(I know he dares not speak, Fidelia is too much concerned.)
There will be a time when that may be fit too.
Till then, Sir, confident of the Justice before whom we plead, and strengthened by my own Innocence, I am still de∣serous there may be some testimony produced against the Count: God forbid Accusations should make Men guilty; if that were so, few were safe that Princes call to their Councils or their trusts.
To the point, Sir; what can you say, why this Traitor should not die a public example, to give a terror and warning to others?
When you, that have twice called him Traitor, can once prove him so, then let him die.
The proofs are evident; here is a gallant Prince mur∣ther'd, and another sold to slaughter; here is his hand to the bloody contract.
If your Highness thinks me fit to speak, if there be reason in what I have said, I shall proceed; if not, I have done.
Monster, with what impudence hast thou thus long dared to tempt the patience of thy Prince; And thus, in the Ears and Eyes of his Mother and his friends, excused the Murderer? Clear
thy self from being one in the plot, thou Idolater of that Monster; Martino, or both of you shall find a hangman to attend your funer∣alls. Traitors! thus to forget the kindness which I have showed you! Is this the return your bloody minds have made me, for keeping up your Interest with this generous prince? O Sir, let me now beg your Justice may make them as public Examples of your Justice as they once stood of your favour.
Be patient, Give him leave to speak; Reason and Ju∣stice dwell near together; and when they either call, or point, you shall find I both hear and see. Proceed, Carlo.
If it were for a private obscure person, Sir, one fled from the Law or Justice; If it were for a stranger I pleaded, I should not wonder at this immoderate haste, and impatience to do Justice, or if I were now to inform this Assembly who the Count Martino is; There might be something said against the impertinence of such a discourse; But when I only desire to know why, ere I consent to the death or dishonour of my Patron, one that two hours since all men honoured, one that this morning was trusted and reverenced by all, having had the faith of two Princes, and power of two Prin∣cipalities reposed in him; Why should it then seem strange, that I, his Creature, wish and believe him Innocent, That hath the Evi∣dence of so many Ages, and so many Princes favours, to plead for him? In whose name I only desire Justice; Prove his Crime, pro∣duce his Treason; show the Body, proceed Legally, and if Carlo be not as ready to pronounce his sentence, as any, then accuse me; But since no one here saw the Prince dead, or wounded, Give me leave, again, to say I hope he is living; and that hope is more kind to the prince, and has more Charity in it, my Lord, then all that furious desire of Revenge which your malice shows; And if you loved Prince Cosmo, or virtue, as you pretend, you had rather he were living, and the Count Martino Innocent, then to have a prince murdered, that your hate might then see your Enemy destroyed.
Proceed, I shall answer anon, and make it appear, I scorned, and not envied your Idol.
The Count, my Lord, had honour and parts would ra∣there deserve your envy, then your scorn; And by that time you have Commanded as many Armies, and governed as many Pro∣vinces, as he has done, with honour, I shall then Envy your Lord∣ship; prevail with your prince, and the world, to give you that esteem and trust he had two hours ago; show the wounds you have received for your Country, produce those Arguments, for a Prince to trust you; twill be nobler far, then to sit and bark at one, in his Age, whose youth you bowed to; and you will find, my Lord, the Count has virtue, even to bear this scandal; it is not the first misery he has suffered, his fortune has been used to storms; and yet I dare say, the unkindness of some friends (turned En∣mies this day,) has made his Imprisonment heavier then his first chains, at the loss of Pavia; Yet when malice has done her worst, he has the word of two Princes, that he is honest; which when your Lordship can produce, then you may laugh, as he and I do, at the
malice of the world, which still pursues the favourite till he is fit for Pity.
Did no body see his dead body; where is the Soldier that brought the news?
Let him be called, some one, that knows where he is, fetch him immediately; none stir? who saw him? whence came the Report? are you all silent? all accuse, and none know why?
Sir, my Lord Ferdinando knows, sure; His violent and earnest calling for Justice has some ground. My Lord, his Highness would see your Evidence.
It is visible enough in thy impudence; will your Highness be pleased to read your Letter, and behold those wounds upon your own flesh; the rest was a Fame I only met; here is the Traitors hand set to this blood, is that too little to convince a Traitor? Good God? how black and partial is this Court grown; when a few gilded words, (from a party in this mischief) should be able to divert Justice from her Course? and my honest heart must humbly beg pardon, if I take liberty at full to answer this Impu∣dence in his Creature; The first part of my wonder is, to find, even the best men are grown tame by Custom; slaved so by a favourite, that their minds are scarce left free; Even their thoughts are led in Chains, and either dare not, or will not see, blinded either by fear, or Interest, through the mist his greatness throws before their eyes, else We might have grown wise, by our Neighbours miseries, ra∣there then have cherished a Frozen Viper; And whereas he boast∣eth of his dead Masters Trust, Ask the deceased soul of Great Mat∣thias, whether Martino be not a false and a bloody Villain? Nay, ask this Assembly, whether he was not a Traitor to that Master? And since I am urged, I must say, I know Martino sold the Battle of Pavia; And he that would then sell his old Master, and his Coun∣trey, will not stick to betray the new one, when he finds a Chap∣man; But he has now no need of these low Arts to rise by. Here he finds his way prepared, and, by easy steps now gains his designs; Lust, Covetousness, and flattery, in others, make his way; Who finding he grows powerful in your Highness mind, there rests one∣lie, darkly to tell what he designs; And then let Signior Carlo, and his Emissaries, with all Arts and Diligence, strive who should first understand or serve his will, and procure that his ambitious desires may be offered ere he please to ask them; Nay, to such a height of Impudence his faction is grown, that here, even in the presence of your highness, where the Assembly is made up of the Royal Blood; One of them, and That, our Prince, calling for Justice; for those wounds which yet bleed in our Eyes, instead of punishing the Tray∣tor, Behold, with what impudence one of his Parasites dares de∣fend him, urging his honours, and his Trusts, so many Armies raised. Fool, those are so many Crimes only, so many stains, so many why's he should be torn in pieces, being lost, or sold; I speak my own knowledge, this is a secret of the camps, Sir, that help to buy one of them; since which my soul has abhorred the Traitors more for selling that gallant Prince, then him he has murd'red now.
aside, How came he by this knowledge?
Here we find the Count confesled Debtor to the State, even by his favourite; and instead of paying it, he would have Cre∣dit, to Cozen his Prince again; you confess, he has had his Evi∣dence of both Crowns; show, where he has done his duty; else you will find those Armies, those Provinces, those trusts you boast of, (if ill discharged) stand so many Evidences against him; and he so far from meriting the least grace or favour, for these, it is impu∣dence to name them. And I dare say, (in the days of liberty and freedom, ere his power awed this Table so, That both Princes and Council stooped to the Frowns of a Favourite and a Woman) Mar∣tino had died upon a Scaffold ere he had found a place above his Fellows.
Ferdinando, you are honest; But yet know the respect you owe this place; else you will find I can be angry.
Sir, I shall not dispute against your Highness; yet being called this day where my Honour and Conscience are both at stake, I shall claim the liberty of an honest man, that I may dis∣charge my duty both to my Prince and Country. What I have said, Sir, is truth; and if I make it not appear, let me answer it with my life; And the day has been, when your Highness would not have checked me for speaking truth; Nor this Table have let any one man grow so great, by his guilt, that we durst not accuse him; It is an ill President thus to encourage Traitors. Had Martino fall∣len under your Justice when he sold his first Master, it would not have been a crime, in me, to have accused him now. What makes Carlo defend him, but he finds he is grown so powerful? non dare speak their fears; And your Highness bounty has so changed his condition, and set such a stamp upon him, that he appears the greater part of your self; Nay, the honest part of the world sticks not to say you have forgot what he was. Take heed, Sir, his wickedness be not called yours too; for his Crimes are such, even the Women (you see) have lost their pity for him, and I pray Heaven, it be not too late for your Highness, or Justice it self, to take notice of him; So powerful he is, that the Law dares not speak to him; and he is now so guilty, that he is become Inno∣cent; for who is beyond the Laws reach, He is more guilty; And, if not prevented, we shall see him begin to give Laws both to your self and people; to prevent which, again, I beg your High∣nos would but read that letter; Behold these wounds, do they speak less then destruction to the name of Sforza? Grant Cosmo living, Is he Innocent? Behold these wounds given your own Bowels; Do Justice for these, and Justice is easy to all but the wicked; Mercy is first due to the Innocent, and from them, let the guilty beg, and find it; it is safer far, then to leave the Innocent to the mercy of a Traitor.
What can you say against Ferdinando's reason? His ho∣nest heart will excuse his passion; and grant Cosmo living; yet be∣hold his Prince wounded and designed for his grave, if this be Mar∣tino's Letter.
For the Princes wounds, I can say nothing, but mourn the unhappy accident; The Count made his own answer to that parti∣cular; and for the Letter, it ought to be punished with exquisite tor∣ture and death, if (as your Highness says) it be proved his; I know his hand, but cannot say, upon life and death, this is his, since the Count denies it; the Soldier would give some light in the busi∣nos, could your Highness prevail to have him produced; it is not well to conceal or dismiss him at this time, in a business thus im∣portent; for his evidence would sway much, either to the clear∣ing or convicting of the Count; Treason has that curse with her, she is never quite rooted out; nor justice cannot cut so even, but even truth and innocence it self may suffer.
Who brought this Letter?
It was I, Sir, gave it your Highness.
Where had you it?
That I would gladly know.
I gave it her.
O, then it was your Highness brought the first news of this to Court; then I have done, else—
What else, impudence? speak thy heart, without these abrupt and dark sayings, without your scandalous—else: Or, by my life, there is no place shall privilege you from being nailed at my foot, you Traitor.
Hold, and give good reason for this anger; lest I doubt the justice of your cause.
If your Highness fears had no more cause to put on your disguise to day, then you have to be angry now, I shall hope the Count innocent in the one cause, as I am in the other.
It is enough, Sir, you know there is a cause; and time shall tell it, in the mean time I will take my leave.
O stay, for heavens sake, stay; for honour and all our peace, stay; and if you know any thing can clear this business, speak it freely; and let not our souls be afflicted with the doubt; speak, Sir, and let the Traitors find the vengeance due to them only; now you afflict the innocent with your doubts and dark speeches.
Pray, Madam, let me go before murder has its will.
Why this answer? is this the return for all my kindness and love to Sforza?
O impudence!
Sir, it is but justice she and all the world desires; the Duke, Sir, would know where you had this Letter?
Villain, Traitor, Murderer, whose impudence has broke my resolution; dare thou call for justice that wertt he Mizzen∣ger of death? thou Traitor, impudent wretch, it was thou that gave this Letter to Baptist, and this Ring; let who dare own it,  and with it, a Murderer.—
It is sad to have my Prince my accuser; else the Law of Honour would do me justice, and the world find I wear a sword; it is hard, Sir, to be thus accused, and no witness dares appear.
Give me the Ring, and all leave the place but you Vi∣ctoria, and Ferdinando and; Giovanni bid Sforza come hither; and  you
Ferdinando command the Guard to watch this night upon my Chamber, and be you in person with them; this Ring I gave Julia; if she be false.
If?
If? Ferdinando, can you accuse her?
Will you have patience, Sir, till I prove what I say? if not you will yet see your whole name destroyed.
Speak, but remember I love Julia; yet if she can be guilty of this, the earth shall not redeem her; can Julia be false to me?
False as hell; it is her name is blotted out of the Letter; the Prince in pity of Fidelia did it, because he would not have her grieved with the infamy of her Mother.
But what could she hope by killing Cosmo?
O, Sir, that is a mischief which is yet a Riddle to the world; and secret to all but my self and Fidelia; Cosmo lives.
Live! Cosmo living!
I must not, cannot, dare not speak my knowledge, much less my fears; only, for certain, Cosmo lives, and Martino disho∣nurse you, and Julia's false; and now the villain is in hold we will make ready our proofs; and, for heavens sake, trust none of them till we have made it appear that they, or we, are faulty; this ac∣cussing Martino, and railing against Carlo in public, is too gross to blind any eye that has observed them as Victoria has done; Cosmo went hence in a disguise, to question my Brother about the Com∣mand of the Army, which is the true cause why Sforza came in disguise to Millain.
This is a knowledge your highness should have had sooner, but that we are resolved to accuse none till their treachery is visible; and pray be pleased to keep your old kindness to the Duchess, and continue your coldness in believing the Princesses accusation, for a day or two, till all things are ready; this night we will meet at your Highness Chamber, and there resolve in order to our busi∣nos; and, pray, let the Duchesses part be concealed, for the Prin∣cess Fidelia's sake.
'T will break her heart; the first news of her Brothers death had almost distracted her.
They are a pair of virtuous minds, and I am glad to find Victoria so kind to them; and since he•ven has preserved him from this storm, My Cosmo shall find I loved and valued him.
Let us retire, Madam, that we may get the Guard in arms; and then I will wait upon you in the Princes lodging; our stay may beget their jealousy, for guilt is still upon the Alarm.
The Gods bless my child; and, pray, tell Sforza, I want not any of that kindness a Father owes to a good Son, though I cry not my love in the streets; which he shall now find, in cutting from my breast what has long been dearest to me, even Julia, since she is false.
God forbid, though the tree be guilty, let the fruit plead; Fidelia has goodness enough to expiate any crime she can com∣mit with wishes, which is all the ill she is yet arrived to.
YOu are sad, Martino.
No, Madam; but my heart's awaked with this storm; and I am glad to find our mischief was so unsuccessful, since Julia could accuse me.
And coldest thou be so faulty as to think Julia false? Oh, my soul! had not I my master-piece to act; and though we have bravely gone through with it, it was a troubled sea we wrought through to gain this Harbour; and here shall still be Martino's safe∣tie, My Cosmo is safe; and while the Duke rests in doubt, we must dispatch Sforza, let me alone to settle all the rest; this was Carlo's plot; the honest Soldier (that is without) too did his part; whom they are now busy inquiring after; therefore, sor a day or two, till Sforza be dead, let him lie concealed here.
Sforza's death is a counsel I could wish you would aban∣don; for though it may serve in this our desperate disease, yet what the success must be those that know there are Gods may easily divine; to murder three such innocents, one of them your own too, it is black and terrible; and I fear will be so far from confirm∣ing Cosmo in the Throne you design him, twill rather make him odious to both Nations.
I know the price of those Jewels; but since the storm would not be resisted, rather then let our Bark sink we must throw over our richest goods.
Be patient till I am gone, and observe what effect that change will have; Cosmo has virtues enough, and needs none of those dark paths to lead him to a Crown; and though he be inno∣cent, yet I fear the Gods should punish our faults upon him; and we but make our selves monsters, and him miserable, only showing him that Crown which will be snatched from him, and given to some third pretender.
No matter; if Cosmo cannot keep a Crown when we have go∣ven it him, let him that wins it wear it; he is Julia's heir that can succeed her; the generous Conqueror is my child; and I shall hate my self for designing Cosmo so much honour, if he want cou∣rage to keep it; I am none of that sort of foolish women that love. their own fruit best though it be sower; it is thy interest, and the memory of those happy hours that makes Cosmo dear to me; I know not why dull custom should make us love a fool or coward, because got in Wedlock; a natural accident in Marriage, and the
cold effect of a dull thoughtless Act, which every Beast and Bird does as well as we; and before it should be said I love Cosmo for those Reasons, he should this night fill a grave, with those foolish souls we have condemned, while the brave, the daring and the fortunate were adopted; and I will still believe the Conqueror is our Son, who ere he be; and Cosmo changed in the Cradle, though the false Nurse deny it. No, Martino, thou hast taught me to know we are our own Gods; those thrive here that dare Fortune, she knows neither conscience nor prayer, she is a woman, young, nak∣ed and blind; they say, Youth and Courage binds her; and if Cos∣mo cannot force a naked woman, let him rest despised for Julia.—See where Carlo comes. Carlo, what news?
You have no time to spare; the Duke has all this while been in counsel with his Daughter and Ferdinando; and you may find by Victoria's briskness, she knows Prince Cosmo is safe; the Guard is in arms too, commanded by Ferdinando; and we must expect no∣thing but ruin.
And where is the Prince and Princess?
They are all safe, at the Princes Chamber, upon a visit; we have laid our design, I am now come for the Soldier: Come, friend, when we have plaid this part all is our own; when they are in the grave we will return, and call you; till then, pray be pri∣vate here.
IF it be possible I will find the Pilgrim, his testimony will confirm all; and then I will return with a guard to prevent the worst of malice.
Kind and faithful Ferdinando still; all good success attend thee.
Pray, Sir, retire to your lodging; small wounds neglected may bring a dangerous consequence; you know, Sir, there be many lives depend on Prince Sforza.
Fear not, Madam, since I have cured those wounds that grief and distraction gave by your displeasure, my heart can know no danger; when Fidelia smiles, Sforza is all joy and peace.
Heaven protect the Prince; and when I lose not his value, I care not who frowns; I had wounds too, and they bled as long as Sforza was angry; but we are now perfectly happy.
The Gods were kind to Victoria, that spared Sforza, and preserved Cosmo; Julia too is innocent, in spite of Treason, which false Martino would have betrayed her into; and time will heal all these wonnds that Love and Fortune have dealt among us.
What noise is that?
Resist not, Sir; these dye, if you resist.
Is Antonio false too? Heaven! is there nothing but trea∣cheri among men? this I foresaw in that feigned death of Cosmo.
Antonio false! perhaps Cosmo is dead too; if he be, let thy words stab Victoria to the heart.
If there be any honest thought left in thy mind, Antonio, lead me to the Princess Fidelia, that I may dye (what I could not live) her Sforza.
O, Sir, these men have added cruelty even to death! had I died yesterday when Sforza was angry, it would not have been half the grief; but to be reconciled to Sforza, and then snatched from his friendship, is beyond Murder, cruel. O, Sir, it is now too late to say that truth which my modest heart could never find yet strength enough to utter; yet, witness heaven, it is a truth my heart will break with; Prince Sforza was all the business of my mind, how I loved him I shall not live to tell; yet here up∣on his breast, with my last breath, I vow my first and most unspot∣ted faith.
This cold kiss on your fair hand shall be both our Epitha∣lamium and our Epitaph; O, gentle Fidelia! we were one in friend∣ship, and one in misery.
That the Gods should give to Beasts venom in their eyes, and death in their teeth, to destroy the innocent, and not afford us that power in an hour of misery, for a guard against Murder and Treason.
Away, where I appointed, and observe your Order.
THey have been long, but now I believe he comes; for now I hear a noise in the Vault.
It is they.
Carlo, is all ready?
Yes, they are seized and bound, and in the Cyprus Grove expect us, your horses too are ready, we shall have the sport to pass that way; and see them whine and dye, and then away.
But whither shall I go? that I may hold a correspondence, and advise you of my resolutions, as occasion presents.
You must find out my Son and Count Baptist; but you must not let the foolish Boy know of what is past; his passion makes him deaf to all our reasons.
Come, come dispatch, Sir, the time is precious.
Madam, this shadow goes, you see, forced hence by cruel stars; other joy I never knew then Julia's friendship, with whom I must leave this parting kiss. Farewell to all that is dear to Mar∣tino;
witness my Soul, I have no joys but in those Eyes, and till we meet again my sad heart will know no peace.
Farewell, Martino; Julia can yet say she found a friend that was faithful, and it is not in Fate to divide our hearts; How unwillingly shall I let my Eyes lose this object, witness all the kind∣nos that my life has showed thee; I should hate my self, if I thought I had words to express how much I have loved Martino. Farewell, I have too much Woman in my Eyes, I cannot suffer this separation without tears; Separation is death of Friendship, my Soul and I now part. This kiss to my dear Cosmo.
Ye Gods, what do I see and hear? O Villain, Villain.
Go before with the Lantern.—
Carlo, give me your hand.—
WHy dost thou delay thy bloody purpose? If it be Repentance holds thy hand, make it good; I will purchase it at any rate to save those Innocents; and I will die too, that thou moist have thy reward from those that hire thee.
O Sir, we hear them coming; now it is the time, farewell for ever.
Are they bound?
Yes, Sir.
It is they, wear your swords in readiness.
Where are they?
In the Arbor.
Let us dispatch them, Carlo, and away.
Ho! O Carlo we are betrayed.
What noise is that?
This way, Antonio.—Do you see this sight, Sir?
Yes, what is thy meaning? art thou false, or no? Why dost thou fright our hopes?
Upon them, and dispatch; you will find this no jesting matter.
Ha, Martino at liberty?
Martino loose? nay then we are lost for ever.
Why dost thou not kill them?
Or let me do it.
That is the Soldier brought news of my Brothers death.
And that face I have seen before.
I thought you had forgot it.
No, it was thou that savd'st me, when Baptist would have murdered me.
What says he?
Enough to satisfy me, we are all betrayed.
Sir, I saved you once.
And why should thou not again be honest? Threats are lost where they meet Minds resolved like ours; yet if thou dar∣est save these, they will pray so faithfully for thee, that thou moist kill me and be forgiven; All the horror thou can put into thy look I can despise; for the valiant man, in his first thought, digests the necessity of death; And since we cannot avoid that sight, I have long since Philosophyed upon my grave, as the second womb, and the certain way to the other world, as my Mothers led to this; and he that is honest only sees those dangers. The guilty trembling Coward, it is he that tastes the bitter cup, while his pale Soul labours and feels the throws of every apprehended Dart, whose anguish (Gentle Fidelia) is in leaving thee, and kind Victoria; Those that fear him suffer in every thought, and languish in ex∣pectation; For, dying, not death is the wound; and when death will appear, though in a Fever, Martino, Carlo, Treason and the Sword, are there.
O Sforza, talk of death, but not of parting; when we can die without that, these threatened wounds are welcome; Fever, Sword, nor Treason, I fear not, they are our slaves, and would be tame things if death and malice (Enemies to Nature and Fidelia) did not set them on to destroy Noble Sforza. O be still that good man, and let not these Villains prevail with thee to murder the Prince; Hell and curses are on their side, Innocence and Virtue on the Princes; if thou kil'st him, thou art damned; save him, and become an Angel.
Strike, fool, or she will talk thee to the Gallows; Dos't thou not know the intent in Treason, is as guilty and as mortal as the blow?
Thou art a fool, we are all betrayed; and now I see him thorough all his cloud; it is Cosmo, Carlo.
It is so, horrid Villain; what can thy Soul tell thee now, but death and misery attend thee?
Cosmo?
Cosmo?
It is my Brother.
Villain, can thou look upon this spectacle? Do's not thy Soul melt with horror? Dog, I will kill every limb of thee apart. Kill that Villain.
Oh! oh!
Sir, I beg your pardon for this fright, there was no safe∣tie
without it; I could not else have betrayed these Monsters from their security, but with the hope of such a bait; But now I will offer their hated limbs a sacrifice to all our fears.
O my Cosmo, joy of my life, unbind the Prince.
I have another business to dispatch first; I must be grate∣full as well as just; The sword, Antonio.—
Do you know it, Sir?
Yes, and what of it?
When I was down in the battle of Pavia, then thou be∣stridst me, and gave me this with a wish I might never lose when I drew it against my Enemy; Here, take this other, while I prove thy wish upon thee. Antonio, if I fall, let the Law proceed to Justice against this Villain, and secure the lives of these Princes.
Why do you arm the Traitor?
There is no danger in a known Traitor: it is the Trust that makes them dangerous; and Traitors in the field are but upon their way to Execution.
I will not hope to escape; yet I have known the day when I would have forced my safety thorough more stops then your Arm threatens; But I was innocent then, and yet the greatest of  my Crimes is Cosmo; and Heaven is just in making him my scourge.
I will hear no more.—That for Fideli•. 
For Martino, that.
For Sforza, that, and that, and that for Julia; let that name sink thee and thy Soul.—
I faint, O Cosmo! I have yet kindness enough in all this blood, to fear and pity what Fate attends thee that hast killed thy Father; a secret yet to Cosmo.
What said he?
No matter what.
How do you, Sir? has he hurt you?
Yes, but not much; Take up their Bodies, Antonio, and carry them to my Mothers Lodging; Madam, to prevent this danger, I was fain to break my word with your Highness; and that necessity, I hope, will plead your pardon.
I am glad, you had a reason for that fault.
The Story of this accident, how laid and how prevent∣ed, will ask an ages time to relate; but till the danger is past we must defer it; and I must beg, for an hour or two, you let me lie concealed, and in this disguise, till I have finished my work; I must now find my Mother; O Sister, she must be reclaimed with Tears, not Wounds; And I must beg your Highness company, to make her shame the greater. The horror of her designs I will present unto her as things executed; and when I have brought her to a repentance, and a despair of Peace, then, as a Mercy beyond her hopes or merit, she shall know how Heaven has miraculously preserved her innocence from all this blood; This way I hope to reclaim that unfortunate Woman, now the authors of her sins are gone.
Pray lead the way.
THis night is full of change; within this hour nothing but despair, yet now my heart has Joy again; and Sforza once dead, Victoria shall marry Cosmo; The fright Carlo will put her in, when she sees Fidelia die, will make her proud heart stoop to Cosmo, I know she loves him; This day her Passion appeared, at the report of his death; and though she pretends that she has vowed her self to a Monastery when her Father dies, yet I doubt not but she may be won to forsake that cold pretence for a warm Palace; Those Nuptials will crown all my thoughts; and then it was a happy loss of Pavia, if we gain Millain; both which will be the reward of my long travel. The Duke must die ere they can Wed; for since we are stepped in, we must now go thorough with the work: Lust and ambition know no bounds; and rather then we will see my Cosmo less then we design him, we will raise new diseases, scourges of the time, and Act what Age and sickness could not do. What noise is that?
Madam, the Count, and Carlo, kiss your hands.
Are they gone?
Yes, Madam.
And the rest? how? how?
Dead, all Dead.
And was not Sforza sad to depart with Fidelia, and the World?
They made a great Ceremony of it; and by my troth, it was sad; I did what I was not wont to do, I pitied him; for it was a gallant and a stout Gentleman; the Women too lamented so, it almost staggered my resolution; and I think, though your soul hates them, it would have grieved your heart to have seen them part; She that died, (Fidelia I think you called her) fell, ere we struck, upon the sight of Sforza's death.
Are you so pitiful? he will tell, if not prevented.
Madam, the Count bid me tell your Highness, he thinks it fit Carlo dies too; for he knows too much, and grows too sawey, upon the Trust you have given him.
We will think on it; let us talk no more at this time, it is late; is any body stirring in the Gallery?
No, Madam, all is whist.
Take this purse, and conceal thy self for a day or two, and then find Martino; for I would have thee always near him; thou hast a bold heart, and a ready hand; here, give him this Ring from me; you wear a privy Coat?
No, Madam.
The more fool you, in these dangerous Occasions; I will try.
Oh! hold, wretched Woman.
Thou art too pitiful a fool to trust a Crown to.
Hold, hold, it is Cosmo that thou hast murdered.
What said he? Cosmo?
O my Brother! poor Cosmo! unfortunate youth!
Cursed Woman, shame of thy Sex, what hast thou done?
Inhumane Act, O Julia, thy soul will ache for this; lift him up Antonio, and send for a Surgeon quickly, some one raise the Court; Try if there be any hope of life.
Sforza alive? and Fidelia too? Cosmo dead? and Martino Dead! O wretch, it is too sad a Truth; it is he, my dear Cosmo? Thou were my beloved sin, all my crimes were loves to Cosmo, and now my greatest sin is thy blood; all that I loved dead? And all  those I hated living? Hence foolish Woman, quickly be gone; what business hast thou now upon the Earth? despair, and die; I cannot talk, my grief is too great for words, and yet I could be angry with fate; But it is too late; Make room, Cosmo, for thy mother: I struck not thee with half so good a will; Thus I shall be Julia still, my story is of one piece now.
O! hold her desperate hand—
No, it is too late, Antonio; Julia was Julia's Fate; yet ere I die, you that live, forgive, and bring Fidelia hither. Fidelia, whom my life hated, but my death loves, forgive thy mother; and live still the thing she hated, the Religious, Chaste, and faithful Fidelia; and let thy name redeem the Honour I have lost, in story; does any know how Martino came by his death?
Yes, Madam; Cosmo, in Duel, killed him.
Cosmo kill Martino? Nay, then it was fate, not Julia, struck Cosmo; Unfortunate youth! wicked and guilty by chance; What fate guided him to Cosmo's sword? Heavens! None but a Son to spill a Fathers blood, and a Mother to revenge it!
What does she say?
Sir, I am loath to be the Author of such a scandal; yet I heard Martino, when he fell under Cosmo's sword, tell him he had killed his Father; your Highness knows their Friendship has been scandalous, though the world durst not speak of it.
Dead? heaven forbid.
Pray, Sir, retire the Scene is too sad; for a Fathers Eyes; The Story, Sir, will be fitter to be mourned then spoken of; the Gods have taken a severe vengeance upon those people, and we may lament, but not redeem, their faults; Come, Madam, when you can digest this grief you shall find Sforza is ready to pay all his vows to Love and Friendship.
No, Brother, Sister, Father, all that were guilty, in ma∣king me break my vows with Heaven, here I beg the dead Body
of my Cosmo may be interred in our Chapel, where again I vow to waste my days in Holy Orders, and with the Penance of my life redeem my past faults, and lament poor Cosmo.
Oh, Sir, let me retire too; Let not such a poisonous fruit be cherished in your breast, lest the displeased Gods take some farther vengeance on Our Family; and so distract my soul, to find Prince Sforza punished for Fidelia's sins.
This misery is so strange, and so infectious, that even my heart grows sick of Love, and fear; Heaven, if thou hast decreed more affliction for this gentle maid, let them not fall till I am earth. O Fidelia, nothing but death shall divide me from thee.
Take up their Bodies, and let all Funeral Rites be go∣ven to these unfortunate people: and since they have born the pu∣nishment of their Crimes, let their faults have no more memory, but, with them, lie buried in their Grave; And let their Example teach us; Impious men may play with Heaven, but they can hope no better fate to Win. Dry thy Eyes, Fidelia, Heaven forbid, thy Innocence should suffer for the Crimes of others; To whom there is a reward due, as a punishment to these; And if Sforza do not pay his Debts to Fidelia, he will neither have Heavens nor my blessing; and when Our griefs have given place, I shall only wish, that my last Scene in this world may wait on thy Hymens; for I am quite tyred with the Affliction of this World, and will only refresh my soul with seeing Fidelia and Sforza happy; And then I care not how soon Nature and Death decide their dispute; That I might make an Exit from this Theatre where misfortune hath made me Act a Part in so sad a Tragedy.

A Bottle, a Bottle!
I am out of wind. So, so, are we all here? good men and true stand together, and hear your charge. Hum, hum.
Bottle has something in him. I knew him of a little one.
A very sucking Bottle.
Peace Scrip and Hobbinoll, Toadstool draw a little nearer,—you all know—
What doe you know?
Silence neighbour Crab,—which of you all is so wise, as to know what I would say now?
why there's it, &amp; yet you will be prating ignorant Pup∣pies and a man should knock your brains out— You all know, I say—
I say again, we know not. Bottle you forget your self, you called us all ignorant Puppies. But now, and now again you say we all know.—
—The Prince excuse me, you all know Paris the Prince of Troy.
We know him now, but it was a mystery for many years.
Our young Lord and Master?
Why very good then, and yet I must bee cor∣rupted? No, no, Bottle is a dry coxcomb, an empty fool. Bo'y to; make the Prince merry your selves.
Nay Bottle, sweet Bottle, sweet Bottle; you will never leave this peevish humour Crab; come, he is sorry.
Well, I am sorry; but will you not give a man leave to speak?
Speak? yes, but then you must not talk and bolt such peremptory questions, when I mis-call you for your own good. What is it to me, and the Prince shall take a convenient twig, or drown himself in one of his melancholy fits: I can live, when you have all betaken your selves to Hemp, I can. Only I prefer the public good before all the world, and and the Prince before that, and my self before the Prince, and my wife before my self, and your wife neighbour before her: I know what's what. But what's all this? unless we be reconciled and perfect∣lie divided among our selves. I know you all love me.
I love Bottle with my heart.
But the Prince is another manner of man, though I say it, and every day falls away with a hue∣more of melancholy; if we shall join our Panniers, to make him merry with some rare and pleasant de∣vice —why; your old friend and Bottle, and so forth. Now let every man speak his opinion freely, as his own want of discretion shall direct him.
Some new device? there be a thousand new devices, and a man could but remember one on 'em.
Stay some strange shapes Bottle.—Silence, what doe you think and wee should all be Fishes?
He says well for silence, this must consist of Mutes.
I can play a Mute rarely.
You the Mute? as if no-body could speak but you: you the Mute?
And the river hard by, will serve us rarely to act in.
And when we dance under water, no body can see our footing. And you love me, let me be a Whale: oh I can foot it curiously; and I can drink like a Fish.
No. I doe not like these Water-works. I was in a fair election to be drowned at the last sheep-shearing; and the Cramp is a thing to be considered. No Water-works.
What doe you say to Birds: a Device of Birds?
Birds? You'll be an Owl too.
I have been taken for one in a tree a hundred times.
No, I have thought of a conceit—dee hear? we scorn fishes, they are dull, phlegmatic things, and your Birds at best are melancholy matters. What doe you think of—
Beasts then: let us all be Beasts Bottle.
Be all Asses will you not? Bou'y tee again. Play the fools your selves, doe, and see how the Prince will like it, if Bottle be out. I am a puppy, I? no, no.
Nay, nay, honest Bottle: did you not bid e∣very man speak according to his discretion?
I grant you; but is there discretion in a Beast? Let us all play the Beasts quoth? Oh, I could bee as musty as the Prince now; but I am of too sweet a nature to fly out: which makes you presume. Well, now or never, will you be ruled yet?
Now, and never too, Bottle?
A Bottle, a Bottle. Silence, break Si∣lence.
Why then, I'll make you all Princes or Lords, or something else that shall bee little better: and be∣cause we are all Shepherds, we'll doe a thing pro∣per to our callings.
That, that Bottle.
What doe you say? if we act the Tragedy of the golden Fleece?
How? a Tragedy to make the Prince merry?
There's the conceit: if he doe not laugh at e∣very man of us, Isle lose my part of the next posit, neighbour.
He cannot choose.
You all remember the story of Jason, that sailed to Colchos, with Hercules, and a Company of Blades, where he killed the Brazen-footed Bulls, and the fiery Dragons.
Let me see, how many Actors are wee?— The number will serve, well let me see, first, who shall doe Hercules in the Lions belly?
Belly?
Why in the Lions skin, it is all one.
Isle doe Hercules.
Let Shrub doe Hercules, he has plaid before.
I have a Club already, and I know where a terrible Lion is, if any man will but flea off his skin for me: Let me alone.
A Shrub a Hercules.
Who shall do Lady Medea the Kings daugh∣la, that fell in love with Jason, and bewitched the Dragon?
I'll doe the Lady, and the Kings daughter, and for a Witch I am right by the mothers side.
His very voice will conjure.
Who plays Jason my sweet-heart?
Is Jason a man or a woman?
Jason is a Kings son, and Captain of a ship called Ergo.
For a Prince or an Emperor, I know where a choice might be made. But I have no heart to the Captain.
Your reason neighbour Crab.
I know not which limb I can best spare, and Carpenters makes but scurvy legs. At Foot∣ball, or Fifty-Cuffes, I fear no Prince under the Moon.
You fight against no body but Bulls, and fiery Dragons.
Doe I not?
And they must bee all fast asleep when you kill 'em; Nay, Hercules himself must take your part too.
Nay then let me alone.
Now my Masters, who shall doe the Dragon?
Is it a he, or a she Dragon?
No matter which.
What doe you think of my wife? she'll do it. She does the Dragon at home, 'twod do a mans heart good to be out of the house; no body is able to endure her; she is a flying Dragon, and will fit yon rarely—
We wo'not be troubled with women; and you'll do it your self; well and good.
Rather then the play shall not go forward my wife shall teach me my part.
Doe you mean I shall have no part? Shall Hobbinoll play nothing? Clout has no part neither.
You shall be Medeas Brother, Absirtus, a little child.
I shall bee too tall.
You must be cut a pieces, and have your limbs thrown about the waves.
And when your legs, and your head are
cut off, you will be no bigger then a child: we'll take a course to make you little enough. And Clout, doe you see? you shall be the ship, hung all round about with Flags, and fine things, we cannot come to Colchos without you.
Shall I play the Ship? let me alone to carry my body swimming.
Have a care you doe not leake before the Prince; and bee sure to carry a good wind in your Poop-Clout. But stay, all this while, who shall doe the golden Fleece? Bottle, you forget that?
The chief part in the Play, and one that must wear the best clothes too.
Why let some body else doe Jason, and Isle doe the golden Fleece.
Or I.
Or I.
Or any body—Or what if we left out the golden Fleece?
What if you left out the play? the golden Fleece out? why it is the name, and the only rich thing in the Play.
Why then leave out the Ship.
Yes, and go by land to Colchos. May not some∣body doe two parts. Let Scrip doe the Dragon and the Kings daughter.
Or leave out the little boy; he has but a small part.
Isle be cut in pieces a hundred times first, leave out Hercules and you will, or Jason: if I doe not fit you Crab.
Why Hercules, left out, good-man Hobbinoll?
No mutiny Shrub, neighbour Crab.
So so, we shall have a Tragedy indeed; have a care of the Kings daughter among you. Hold, they'll tear Clout all to pieces, Have a care of the Ship.
Sink or swim, I care not.
Oh my Ribs!
He that gives the next blow shall lose his share, if he be not turned out of the Company. What my Masters, you shall not fall out about this golden Fleece: I kept that part for my self I warrant you; you shall not fall out about sharing: I am resolved the golden Fleece is mine, as I am the best Actor, and Master of the Company.
Bottle indeed had no part before: So, so, then we are all friends, and fitted.
When shall we have out parts? oh Bottle how I thirst! when our parts?
Part? why you must doe it instantly, the Prince stays for it.
How? the Lion is to be killed, whose skin I must wear when I play Hercules.
Doe you think, I can doe the ship, and have not half my •acklings about me?
And I have not practised to spit fire yet.
I knew what a company of sots you would be. You'll be Hercules, and you'll be a Whale, and you'll be a Ship, and you'll be a Dragon, and you will be a Lady. You Actors? you Animals, to undertake a Play, and ask when you shall have your parts; Oh I am ashamed! but there is no remedy, with
such dull capacities: do you remember the Antic Dance, I taught you last? that shall serve for this time. The Prince Keeps his old walk: be sure to be within reach of my voice, when I call you. Get be∣hind the trees; I spy him. 
What is it to be sprung of Kingly race,
Or have the blood of Priam in my veins,
Yet dare not call him Father? he was cruel,
Thus for a dream to banish me his sight,
And my dear mothers arms.
 So ho, ho, ho.
This busy shepherd will afflict me still
With his unseasonable mirth; I am
Only in love with Melancholy; Pleasures
Are tedious to my soul; Must I be ever
Confined to woods? are Beasts or men more wilde
Than they, companions for a Prince? are these
Fit ornaments of State? is this a Palace?
 So ho, ho, ho.
Again? would I could hide me from the world;
I will go seek my dwelling in some rock
Where never day shall be acquainted with me;
The Sun whose beams cheer all the world beside,
Shines like a Comet o'er my head.
So ho, ho, ho.
I thought we had lost you: why how now? still in
this humour? will your highness never be a Change∣ling? De'e hear Sir; I met your your Nurse at the bottom of the Hill.
What Nurse?
The charitable Bear that gave you suck; for though you be a Prince borne, your Parents would not be at the charge to bring you up at Court; Mistress Ursula, and I, have have been the best friends to your blood Royal.
I prithee leave me.
Leave my young Prince in a wood? A word to the wise—are not you in love?
In love? with what?
Nay, I doe not know what wilde beast hath entangled you: but I have a shrewd suspicion; for thus simply did I look by all report, when I was in love too, it had almost undone me, for it infected me with Poetry; and I grew witty to the admiration of all the Owls in Ida.
You shall hear my Verses.
Heigh-ho, what shall a Shepherd doe,
That is love, and cannot woe?
By sad experience now I find,
That Love is dumb as well as blind.
Her hair is bright, her forehead high,
Then am I taken with her eye:
Her cheeks I must commend for gay,
But then her nose hangs in my way.
Her lips I like, but then steps in
Her white and pretty dimpled chin.
But then her neck I doe behold,
Fit to be hanged in chains of gold.
Her breast is soft as any Down,
Beneath which lies her Maiden-towne,
So strong and fortified within,
There is no hope to take it in.
And so forth. But I thank my dutiful father, hee cured me with a Flail, and most learnedly thresh'd blind Cupped out of my sides. I had been no Bottle of this world else.
If thou dost love me, doe not interrupt me, I would be private.
I would be loath to be unmannerly, and hen∣der a Princely recreation: but I see no temptations, nothing in the likeness of a Petticoat. What would you be private for?
I have some serious thoughts to examine, if thou wilt use thy diligence to keep off those that rudely would disturb my present retirement: trust me, Isle reward thy care with my best weather.
Weather? You are wise; doe you think, Sir, I have so little honesty, to be Sir Pandarus to your Melancholy. Illo, ho.—
What, art thou mad?
You are little better: if you can get their consent.
Whose consent?
Hobinoll, Crab, Toadstool,— Illo ho, boys. Some friends of yours, that sent me to hunt out your Highness, your humble Subjects and Play-fellowes, that have a mind to be merry.—To tell you true, we have taken notice of your sullen disposition; and therefore half a dozen, have penned a dance to
revile your spirits. Simple as I appear, my head had a hand in it. If you doe hear an Oration over and above, by way of a preparative to the Physic we intend, so. I name no body: all the Shepherds wit is not a wool-gathering. Therefore stir not my dear Prince, as you will answer the contempt of our ado∣rity at your peril. 
What a strange rudeness am I forced to obey?
Unhappy Paris! thy ungentle stars,
Not only have decreed thy cruel Exile,
From those delights thy blood and birth should chal∣lenge,
But by their fatal doom vouchsafe thee not
To enjoy a quiet misery.
Hold thou unlearned Bag-pipe: for now I am to act a Speech unto the son of Priam. Hum, hum.
Most noble Prince!
Most noble Prince! behold thy Bottle here,
Thy well-beloved Bottle does appear,
With many more that shall be seen hereafter,
To tickle thy kind spleen into a laughter:
With fear and wit, or without fear and wit,
We come, as it becomes, to frisk a bit,
In a ridiculous round: and therefore lye
Thee down and laugh, 
Thee down and laugh, for we doe mean, whereby
It may be said in a well-written dance
To show thee sport, our heals for to advance.
Which is an excellent thing. Banish thy fears,
Oh lovely Prince, bred up amongst the Bears,
And bear with us.
What mist doth dwell about my eyes? I feel
Their heavy curtains fall; welcome soft sleep,
The cure of all unrest. help to repair
The broken silence of my brain, distill
Thy Balm into my wounded thoughts; oh see
I doe obey, and throw my cares on thee. 
Cease warring thoughts, and let his brain
No more discord entertain,
But be smooth and calm again.
Ye Crystal Rivers that are nigh,
As your streams are passing by,
Teach your murmurs harmony.
Ye winds that wait upon the spring,
And perfumes to flowers do bring:
Let your amorous whispers here
Breath soft Music to his ear.
Ye warbling Nightingales repair
From every wood, to charm this air,
And with the wonders of your breast,
Each striving to excel the rest.
When it is time to wake him, close your parts,
And drop down from the trees with broken hearts
Young Priam's son, and darling of the gods,
I Mercury, winged Messenger of Jove,
By his command have lest his spangled Court,
And through the silver Orbs descend to tell thee,
That he hath chosen thee to be the Judge
Between three Deities, which shall best deserve
This golden Ball: Juno his Queen of heaven,
Pallas the goddess of fair Arts, and Arms,
And Citherea, Queen of Love and Beauty.
Shake off thy clouds of sleep, and freed from all
Distractions, prepare to hear them plead
Their glories here. Imperial Juno drawn
Be her proud Birds, is stooping from her Coach.
The Jove-borne maid already hath dismounted
The Paphian Queen with her young Archer drawn
By Swans more white than Rodopcian snow,
Is now descending from her Chariot,
And on the green Plush of this Ida hill
They all move to thee with celestial pace.
Paris awake, Jove doth his Herald call,
To the most worthy give this golden Ball.
What have I seen? what strange
But heavenly dream hath Paris had:
Yet this presents more then an empty shadow,
I'm sure it grew not here; there are no trees
That bear such fruit in Ida; such as these
Grew in the Orchard of Hesperides,
And ever guarded by a watchful Dragon.
Then Jove hath gathered it and sent it me.
What's here inscribed? This to the best deserver!
I am not then deluded; it is fit
I should observe with all obedience
Great Joves command.
What sacred change is this?
Such harmony must needs speak the approach
Of the Celestial powers.
Jove sent thee Paris; what is mine,
be safely bold;
And for that trifle I resign
 a wreath of gold.
Obey then and command, thou can not be
Just to thy self, if not to me.
Twice happy in thy choice: be wise,
 ere thou dispense
This Treasure, give thy Reason eyes,
 and blind thy sense,
Thus Arms and Arts thy humble name shall raise,
Alike to Wreathes of Oaks and Baize.
She, whom all suppliants else implore 
is here made thine,
And will for this a gift restore,
 no less divine.
The best of pleasures thus enjoy, and try,
Where Beantie Courts who can deny.
Examine Princely Shepherd
 here the Offerings which we send thee,
How for that narrow golden sphere,
 Wealth, Fame and love attend thee.
And judge by this, how large these honours be,
None to each other yield, yet all to thee.
Put off thy wonder Paris, and collect
Thy scattered senses in our Temples, we
Expect those hummble adorations
And sacrifice from Mortals, that doe bring
Petitions to our Altars. We are come
Juno, Minerva, and the Sea-borne Queen,
From our bright Palaces, to sue to thee:
(Think it no stain to our Celestial nature)
That golden Ball, sent thee by Jove, to be
Her prize, whose merits can obtain it from
Thy equal sentence of us three, hath brought
Our competition hither; be just Paris,
And live for ever happy.
How shall Paris,
Whose years are green, &amp; too unripe for judgment,
Decide the worth of three such Deities.
Which not a counsel of the gods themselves,
Hath wisdom to determine?
We will plead
Our own deserts before thee, to which give
Thy fixed attention, and hear Juno first
Court thy election.
Humbly I attend.
Isle not insist, that I am with the vote
Of all the gods first both in place and title:
The Olimpian Empress, Joves wife and sister,
These are but names and shadows of my greatness,
And which doe rather fright, than win from mortals,
Whose sense must let in objects to the soul:
Know Paris, with that Sceptre I control,
Not skies alone, but all this under world:
Kingdoms and Crowns are mine, all wealth contained
In Neptunes watery circle, or the veins
Of earth as subject to my gift and largess.
With favour of great Junoes Empire,
She that disposes golden Mines at pleasure,
(It is strange) should hold contention for a Ball.
I doe, and will reward it with more Treasure
Then his ambition knows how to ask:
Not that I prize that poor and narrow globe,
But that I hate, Pallas should be competitor,
Or any with Saturnia; give it me,
And I will furnish thee with the same mettle,
To build thy self a Palace, about which,
The yellow Tagus, and Iberus streams,
Asian Pactolus, and the Indian Ganges,
Shall flow with golden sands: let thy Birth Paris,
Put thee in mind what it is to be a Monarch.
I will adorn thy Temples with a wreath,
Whose flame shall dim bright Ariadnes Crown,
Embellished with the glorious Lamps of heaven:
Name but the bounds and limits of thy Empire;
Asia shall bow, and all her stubborn Princes,
Like petty homagers shall kneel before thee,
And lay their shining Scepters at thy feet;
Europe shall prostrate all her Provinces,
And glory in her servitude, incline
To me, and India shall send thee Pearls,
As tribute to bestow upon thy Queens;
The precious Ermines shall without pursuit
Present thee with her skins: and the cold climes
Bring home rich Furs, and Sables to adorn thee.
The servile rooms within thy Palace, shall
Have Babylonian hangings, and rich shapes,
Wrought by the needle of Semyramis.
The fish shall bring thee purple to the shore.
Panchaia send thee Spice, and wealthy Gummes,
Such as the Assyrian Bird doth fill her nest with,
When she prepares for sacrifice. The spoils
Of Silk-worms shall make proud thy meanest grooms.
What shall I say, present that Ball to me,
And in exchange Isle give the world to thee.
Juno hath said; and were not Pallas here,
Might tempt thee Paris to forget thy self:
Her promises are vast, and full of State,
But weighed with what Minerva can bestow,
They shrink to air, and thou Ixion-like,
Embracing Juno dost but grasp a cloud.
Nay, if thou dost examine well her gifts,
How here their flattering sound affect thy ear,
Or their possession court thy eye with show,
And specious glories, thou shalt find within,
They have disguised a poison, that doth lurk
To infect thy mind, and kill with their corruption
Thy intellectual Beauties, by soft ease
A sordid avarice, coward thoughts, and all
The train of Lust and Lethargies that hang
Upon a Masculine soul; where thy acceptance
Of what is in my power, shall make thee scorn
These things of care and golden slavery,
That fool and flinty consciences adore,
And grasped, like thieving sands steal through our fin∣gers.
Isle give thee Wisdom Paris, in which name
I comprehend all harmony of earth,
And heaven, and make thee kinse-man to the gods.
Nature shall open her dark bosom to thee,
And give thee leave to rifle all her wonders:
The Virgin Arts shall court thee to be called
Their Oracle, and whatsoever the extent
Of that wide Orb contains, whose bounds shut up
The universal creature, shall unveil
Their beauties, and be proud to enrich thy knowledge.
Juno and Pallas promise gallantly.
Yet this concludes not, what Minerva can
Bestow upon her Paris; if the Arts
Inflame thee not, or doe appear less active,
And glorious to meet thy fierce Ambition.
Fame shall want breath to tell the world what tri∣umphs
Shall Crown thy name in war, if Pallas arm
Thy breast with courage, which my bounty throws
To thy acceptance; if that Ball be mine,
Isle give thee a spirit Trojan, and such conquests
By thy own valour, as at once shall fright,
And please the hearers faith: Nations shall tremble
To mention thy great Acts, whose memory
Shall out-live all Egyptian Pyramids,
And bloom when Winters have defaced the world,
And feeble time shall droop and halt with age:
Trophies shall fall in duty to thy sword,
And Captive Princes wait upon thy Chariot.
Some shall build Statues, others invent games,
Some Temples to thy name, while holy Priests
And Virgin Quires shall make it their Religion,
To pay thee songs, and Crown thy images
With ever-springing Garlands. Be wife, Paris,
Resolve to make that golden Circle mine,
Both Arts and Arms shall make their glories thine.
What words? what argument to move thee Paris
Is left for Cytherea? Mighty Juno
Woes thy ambition with State and Kingdoms,
Courting thy Genius in a shower of gold:
Pallas not only will inspire thy soul,
With valour, on which victory shall waite,
And Crown thy head with her immortal Laurels,
But make thee rich in Science, and uncloud
The sacred beauties of all Art and Nature.
These bounties seem to have left Venus nothing;
But when my power and gifts come to the Balance,
Paris shall see their glories, thin and light,
Fly into air: I am the Queen of love:
Think but how poor are Pallas victories,
When I have made her greatest soldiers tame,
Forced 'em look pale, and tremble, sigh and weep,
Ready to give their ghost up at a frown,
And think my smile or kiss their only heaven.
Her Oracles of Wisdom and Philosophy
Have been my fools, &amp; all their strength of learning,
But able to express great Loves supremacy,
And my dominions boundless. What doe I
Boast the extent of my command on earth?
When under my Diviner Ensigns march
Ethereal Troops? my power confessed by Jove
To sway in heaven: and what are all the treasures
And gifts of Juno, Kingdoms piled on Kingdoms?
Which at the best but multiply thy cares
To keep, if Love be not propitious to thee?
Who can discharge a thousand stings upon
Thy heart, and make it prisoner when I please.
The goddess of vexation we allow thee.
But these are not the motives to incline
Thy thoughts young Prince to me; thus fear, not love
Should plead for me, although the torments are
High and consuming, where I fix displeasure,
The joys I pour upon my favourites
Shall be my Orators, whose endless charms
Are above counter-magick, and shall tie
Thy soul in everlasting chains of love.
Poets have feigned Elysium after death,
Which thou shalt here possess; and all the pleasure
Of those blessed shades, they talk of in their songs,
Shall spread themselves before thee, which thou shalt
Possess as Lord, not Tenant to the Groves.
It shall be ever spring, and ever Summer,
Where Paris shall inhabit, all rude aires,
The killing dews, tempest, and lightning, shall
Be strangers to thy walks, which the West wind
Shall with their soft and gentle gales perfume.
The Laurel and the Myrtle shall compose
Thy Arbours, inter-woven with the Rose,
And honey-dropping Woodbine; on the ground
The flowers ambitiously shall crowd themselves
Into Love-knots, and Coronets, to entangle
Thy feet, that they may kiss them, as they tread,
And keep them prisoners in their amorous stalks.
The Violet shall weep when thou remov'st,
And the pale Lily deck her innocent cheek
With Pearls to Court thy stay; the Hyacinth,
When thou art passing by her, shall disclose
Her Purple bosom to thee, proud to be
Saluted by thy eye, and being left,
Blush, droop, and wither, like a Love-sick Virgin.
Doth Paris thirst? Rivers of Nectar flow
In every crystal channel: would thou feed,
The trees shall bow under their heavenly fruit,
And offer their Ambrosia to thy gathering.
Nor shalt thou be alone, a thousand Nymphs,
Fairer then ever thy eyes gazed upon,
Shall wait upon my darling, and with sport
Make thy delight immortal: these at last
To crown thy joys shall lead thee to a Mistress,
Compared to whom, their beauties have no name;
In whose least part more wonders shall invite
Thy amazed eye▪ than all the Queens of earth
Can boast together▪ and this beauties heaven
Will I bestow on Paris, in whose love
He shall possess more raptures, than are sands
In all the glass of time.
Fine aerie Blessings;
A small Art will distinguish twixt us three
Who can deserve thee best.
I am transported,
And first my humble gratitude presented
For this, an honour above all, that has
A name in story, lent to grace a mortal,
And give me patience you diviner natures,
If it distract, and fright my weaker counsels.
It is not safe to think, what language then
Shall have the confidence to express those thoughts
That merit to be stifled? I must tremble
To be my self, and speak: Yet if I dream not,
I am commanded to resign this Ball,
Not mine, but hers, of you three best deserving:
Is it not a sin to name one best? oh pardon!
That I had leave to whisper in the ear
Of Jove two minutes.
It was meant by him,
You should declare your self to us.
Be confident,
And wisdom guide the sentence.
It is expected,
Be therefore bold and wise.
I feel new courage
Infused; there's something spreads through every part,
And chides my timorous youth into resolve
Of something that must be.
It must be welcome,
We are prepared.
Great Juno, I not dare
To question your vast power, the world and you
Shut all up with one circle, wealth and kingdoms
Are able to strike blind with their temptation;
The eyes of young ambition, and my birth
Had sure those seeds of glory; but my fate
Has stifled 'em, and made them so familiar
With shades and humble thoughts, I cannot find,
My soul now fit for those desires.
Despise
My gifts? perish in wants unpitied.
Nay stay, and hear one more concluded Juno.
The Ball is not bestowed.
It is some unhappiness,
I look not with that admiration
Upon M•nerve's gifts. Philosophy
That teaches to contemplate heaven and nature,
Carries some trouble with it: and for Arms,
There are enough will bleed to be triumphant,
A Limb to me is better than a Laurel
Purchased with wounds; your pardon, if I think
The Queen of Love to be preferred, accept
The Ball bright Citherea, and with it
The humble heart of Paris.
Am I thus
Neglected by a Boy? how I despise him.
I pity the fond youth. 
They are both gone.
Displeased.
Their anger frights not me,
So I be welcome here.
Be confidentt 
Love shall confirm it: see my son appears.
Cupped, I thought thou had been lost.
Though blind,
I never lose my way to Beauty: Mother,
I all this while but hovered in the air,
To hear how Paris would determine, and
Rejoice in Beauties triumph, and thy justice
Let Juno fret, and Pallas frown,
Nature to all succeeding times shall prove,
Wealth, Arts, &amp; Arms must yield to conquering Love.
That name belongs to me.
Venus and Cupped will no doubt agree.
Love dwells with Beauty, they together move;
There is no Beauty where there is not love.
For this choice, young Paris know,
While powerful Cupped hath a Bow,
A golden shaft, or skilful hand,
All shall move at thy command.
You both make Paris happy.
But where are
Our train of Graces, and the pleasant Hours,
To entertain our Darling? Where is Hymen?
Where is Delight?
Mother they both appear.
Come ye Graces come away.
Ye pleasant Hours why doe you stay?
Upon your Mistress wait.
See where in state
The Queen of Love and Beauty is.
On such a solemn night as this,
Sacred to kissing:
What bold Nymph dare be missing?
They come, they come, behold
The modest Graces.
For loves sake mend your paces,
And blush not to be bold.
The Hours have lost their wings, I fear,
No, they appear.
And Ida green
Is now the Court of Paphos Queen:
Where every one doth welcome sing
To Venus, and their new made King.
All these wait
On me, and I command them to attend
On lovely Paris.
Let me dwell ever
With Citherea, Ida is turned heaven.
Now let us dance, these pleasures are not active.
How dully all your joys doe move,
Delight is crippled here.
Your motion should be like to that above,
This is too thick a sphere.
The feather-footed hours are fled away,
Ashamed to stay:
Then follow, fly, oh come,
You must make haste,
If you will taste
Loves new Elysium.
We want some of our Nymphs Eunomia,
Fair Dich, and Irene, are they gone?
Although we did entreat them stay,
The pleasant hours are stolen away.
Which way.
That way,
To the Elision Bowers.
We'll fly, and overtake the happy hours.

