SIr, you're the very friend I wished to meet with,
I have a large discourse invites your ear
To be an Auditor.
And what concerns it?
The sadly thriving progress of the loves
Between my Lord the Prince, and that great Lady,
Whose in•olencie, and never-yet-match'd pride,
Can by no Character be well expressed,
But in her only name, the proved Erota.
Alas Melitus, I should guess, the best
Success your Prince could find from her, to be
As harsh as the event doth prove: but now
It is not a time to pity passionate griefs,
When a whole Kingdom in a manner lies
Upon its death-bed bleeding.
Who can tell
Whether or no, these many plagues at once
Hang over this unhappy Land, for her sake,
That is a monster in it.
Here's the misery
Of having a child our Prince: else I presume
The bold Venecians had not dared to attempt
So bloody an Invasion.
Yet I wonder
Why, Master Secretary, still the Senate
So almost superstitiously adores,
Gonzalo the Venetian Lord, considering
The outrage of his Countrymen—
The Senate
Is wise, and therein just, for this Gonzalo,
Upon a Massacre performed at Sea
By the Admiral of Venice, on a Merchant
Of Candy, when the cause was to be heard
Before the Senate there, in open Court
Professed, that the cruelty the Admiral
Had showed, deserved not only fine, but death:
For Candy then, and Venice were at peace:
Since when upon a motion in the Senate,
For conquest of our Land, it is known for certain,
That only this Gonzalo dared to oppose it,
His reason was, because it too much savoured
Of Lawless, and unjust ambition.
The wars were scarce begun, but he (in fear
Of quarrels against his life) fled from his Country,
And hither came, where (to confirm his truth)
I know (Melitus) he, out of his own store,
Hath monied Cassilanes the General.
What, without other pledges then Cassilanes
Bare promise of payment?
No, it may be
He has some petty Lordship to retire to:
But this he hath done; now it is fit Melitus,
The Senate should be thankful, otherwise,
They should annihilate one of those Laws,
For which this Kingdom is throughout the world
Unfollowed, and admired.
What Laws are these? sir,
Let me so much importune you.
You shall,
And they be worth your knowledge; briefly thus:
Who ere he be that can detect apparently
Another of ingratitude, for any
Received benefit, the Plaintiff may
Require the offenders life; unless he please
Freely, and willingly to grant remission.
By which strict Law the Senate is in danger,
Should they neglect Gonzalo.
Right; the Law
Permits a like equality to Aliens,
As to a home-borne Patriot.
Pray sir the other?
Know Melitus,
The elder Cretins flourished many years,
In War, in Peace, unparalleled, and they
(To spur heroic spirits on to virtue)
Enacted that what man so ere he were,
Did noblest in the field against his enemy,
So by the general voice approved, and known,
Might at his home-returne, make his demand
For satisfaction, and reward.
They are
Both famous Laws indeed. 
Master Secretary,
The Senate is about to sit, and crave
Your presence.
What, so suddenly?
These Letters
Will show the causes why.
Heaven thou art great,
And worthy to be thanked▪
Your countenance sir
Doth promise some good tidings.
O the best
And happiest for this land, that ever was told!
All the Venetian Forces are defeated.
How Sir?
And what doth add some delight more,
There is amongst the Soldiers a contention
Who shall be the triumpher and it stands
Doubtful between a Father and his Son,
Old Cassilanes, and young Antinous.
Why may not both demand it?
The Law denies it:
But where the Soldiers do not all consent,
The parties in contention, are referred
To plead before the Senate; and from them,
Upon an open Audience, to be judged
The Chief, and then to make demands.
You ravish me
With wonder and delight,
Come: as we walk,
I shall more fully inform you. 
Admit no Soldier near us, till the Senate
Have took their places.
You are obeyed, my Lord.
Decius, fall off.
I shall.
Give leave Arcanes:
Young-man come nearer to me: who am I?
It were a sin against the piety
Of filial duty, If I should forget
The debt I owe my father on my knee;
Your pleasure?
What, so low? can thou find joints,
Yet be an Elephant? Antinous, rise:
Thou wilt belie opinion, and rebate
The ambition of thy gallantry, that they
Whose confidence thou hast bewitched, should see
Their little God of War, kneel to his father,
Though in my hand I did grasp Thunder.
Sir,
For proof that I acknowledge you the Author
Of giving me my birth, I have discharged
A part of my obedience. But if now
You should (as cruel fathers do) proclaim
Your right, and Tyrant like usurp the glory
Of my peculiar honours, not derived
From successary, but purchased with my blood,
Then I must stand first Champion for my self,
Against all interposers.
Boldly urged,
And proudly, I could love thee, did not anger
Consult with just disdain, in open language
To call thee most ungrateful. Say freely,
Wilt thou resign the flatteries, whereon
The reeling pillars of a popular breath,
Have raised thy Giant-like conceit; to add
A suffrage to thy fathers merit, speak?
Sir, hear me: were there not a Chronicle
Well pend by all their tongues, who can report
What they have seen you do; or had you not
Best in your own performance writ yourself,
And been your own Text, I would undertake
Alone, without the help of Art, or Character,
But only to recount you deeds in Arms,
And you should ever then be famed a president
Of living victory: But as you are
Great, and well worthy to be stiled great,
It would betray a poverty of spirit
In me to obstruct my fortunes, or descent,
If I should coward-like surrender up
The interest, which the inheritance of your virtue,
And mine own thrifty fate can claim in honour:
My Lord, of all the mass of fame, which any
That wears a sword, and hath but seen me fight,
Gives me, I will not share, nor yield one jot,
One tittle.
Not to me?
You are my father,
Yet not to you.
Ambitious boy, how dare thou
To tell me, that thou wilt contend?
Had I
Been slothful, and not followed you in all
The straights of death, you might have justly then
Reputed me a bastard; it is a cruelty,
More then to murder Innocents, to take
The life of my yet Infant-honour from me.
Antinous, look upon this badge of age,
Thy fathers gray-hair'd beard: full fifty years,
(And more then half of this, ere thou were borne)
I have been known a Soldier, in which time
I found no difference twixt War and Peace,
For War was peace to me, and Peace was war;
Antinous, mark me well; there hath not lived
These fifty years, a man whom Create preferred
Before thy father; let me boldly boast,
Thy father, both for Discipline, and Action,
Hath so long been the first of all his Nation;
Now can thou think it honest, charitable,
Nay humane, being so young, my son, my child,
Begot, bred, taught by me, by me thy father,
For one days service, and that on thy first,
To rob me of a glory which I fought for
A half of hundred years.
My case observes
Both equity, and presidents; for sir,
That very day whereon you got your fame,
You took it from some other, who was then
Chief in repute, as you are now; and had been
Perhaps as many years deserving that,
Which you gained in a day, as I have mine.
But he was not my father then Antinous.
Thou leave out that.
Sir had he been your father,
He had been then immortal: for a father
Heightens his reputation, where his son
Inherits it, as when you give us life,
Your life is not diminished, but renewed
In us, when you are dead, and we are still
Your living Images.
So be thou cursed
In thy posterity, as I in thee,
Dishonourable boy: O shall that Sun,
Which not a year yet since, beheld me mounted
Upon a fiery steed, waving my sword,
And teaching this young-man to manage Arms,
That was a raw, fresh novice in the feats
Of Chivalry, shall that same sun be witness
Against this brat, of his ingratitude?
Who to eclipse the light of my renown,
Can no way hope to get a Noble name,
But by the treading on his fathers greatness;
Thou wilt not yield? 
My life, but not the prize
My Sword hath purchased.
The Senate
My Lord are here at hand; and all the soldiers
Begin to throng about them.
Now Arcanes the—
What sir?
Trifles will affront us: that
Fine fighting Stripling,
Let him have the shame on it:
Please you withdraw on this side.
My great heart
Was never quaild before.
My Lord be confident,
Let not your father dant you.
Decius, whether
Must I withdraw?
On this side.—See the Soldiers
Attend your pleasure—courage sir; the Senate.
Way for the Senate.
My good Lords I know not
What tax of arrogance I may incur,
Should I presume, though courted by your favours,
To take a place amongst you: I had rather
Give proof of my unfeigned humility
By force, though mean, yet more becoming place,
Then run the hazard of a doubtful censure.
My Lord, your wisdom is both known &amp; tried;
We cannot rank ye in a nobler friendship,
Then your great service to the state deserves.
Will it please you sit? 
What here my Lord Porphicio?
It must not be.
My Lord you are too modest.
It is no season to be troublesome,
Else—But I have done: Your Lordships are observed.
Is the demandant ready?
He is ready.
Produce him then.
Before this sacred presence,
I, by a general consent, am made
The Soldiers voice, and to your gracious wisdoms,
Present as chief in Arms, his Countries Champion,
Cassilanes.
Most reverend Lords, you hear the lesser number
Of those who have been Guardians to this Country,
Approve this Champion; I in all their names
Who fought for Candy, here present before you
The mightiest man in Arms, Antinous.
Speak fellow soldiers.
Antinous, Antinous.
Stand by all, save the two competitors.
My Lords, how much your Country owes you both,
The due reward of your desertfull glories
Must to posterity remain: But yet
Since, by our Law, one only can make claim
To the proposed honours which you both
(It seems) have truly merited, take leave
Freely to plead your rights: we shall attend you.
Wherein priority of voice is granted
Lord Cassilanes to you: for that your rare
And long experience in the course of war,
As well doth challenge it, as the best privilege
Of Order and civility, for that
You are your brave opponents worthy father.
Say Countrymen, are you content?
I, I.
Right grave, right gracious fathers; how unfit
It is for me, that all my life time have
Been practised in the school of blood, and slaughter,
To bandy words now in my lifes last farewell,
Your wisdoms will consider; were there pitched
Another, and another field, like that
Which not yet three days since, this arm hath scattered,
Defeated, and made nothing, then the man
That had a heart to think he could but follow,
(For equal me he should not) through the lanes
Of danger and amazement, might in that,
That only of but following me, be happy,
Reputed worthy to be made my rival:
For it is not Lords, unknown to those about me,
(My fellow soldiers) first with what a confidence
I led them on to fight, went on still, and
And as if I could have been a second Nature,
As well in heartening them by my example,
As by my exhortation, I gave life
To quicken courage, to inflame revenge,
To heighten resolution; in a word,
To out-doe action: It boots not to discover,
How that young man, who was not sledged nor skil'd
In Martial play, was even as ignorant
As childish: But I list not to disparage
His non ability: The signal given
Of Battle, when our enemies came on,
(Directed more by fuerie, then warrant
Of Policy and Stratagem) I met them,
I in the fore-front of the Armies met them;
And as if this old weather-beaten body
Had been composed of Cannon-proof, I stood
The volleys of their shot. I, I my self
Was he that first dis-rankt their woods of Pikes:
But when we came to handy-stroaks, as often
As I lent blows, so often I gave wounds,
And every wound a death. I may be bold
To justify a truth, this very sword
Of mine slew more then any twain besides:
And, which is not the least of all my glory,
When he, this young man, hand to hand in fight,
Was by the General of the Venetians,
And such as were his retinue, unhorsed,
I stepped between, and rescued him my self,
Or horses hoofs had trampled him to dirt;
And whilst he was re-mounting, I maintained
The combat with the gallant General,
Till having taken breath, he thronged hefore me,
Renewed the fight, and with a fatal blow,
Stole both that honour from me, and his life
From him, whom I before my self alone,
Had more then full three quarters killed: A man
Well worthy only by this hand to have died,
Not by a Boys weak push: I talk too much,
But it is a fault of Age: If to bring home
Long peace, long victory, even to your Capitol;
If to secure your Kingdom, Wives, and Children,
Your lives and liberties; if to renown
Your honours through the world, to fix your names,
Like Blazing stars, admired, and feared by all,
That have but heard of Candy, or a Cretin,
Be to deserve the approvement of my man-hood,
Then thus much have I done: what more, examine
The Annals of my life; and then consider
What I have been, and am. Lords I have said.
With reverence to the Senate, is it lawful,
Without your Customs breach, to say a word?
Say on my Lord Gonzalo.
I have heard,
And with no little wonder, such high deeds
Of Chivalry discoursed, that I confess,
I doe not think the Worthies while they lived
All nine, deserved as much applause, or memory,
As this one: But who can doe ought to gain
The Crown of honour from him, must be somewhat
More then a man; you tread a dangerous path,
Yet I shall hear you gladly: for believe me,
Thus much let me profess, in honours cause,
I would not to my father, nor my King,
(My Countries father) yield: if you transcend
What we have heard, I can but only say,
That miracles are yet in use. I fear
I have offended.
You have spoken nobly.
Antinous use your privilege.
Princely fathers.
Ever I begin, one suit I have to make,
It is just, and honourable.
Poss. Speak, and have it.
That you would please the soldiers might all stand
Together by their General.
It is granted.
All fall to yonder side: Go on, Antinous.
I shall be brief and plain: All what my father
(This Countries Patron) hath discoursed, is true.
Fellows in Arms: speak you is it true?
True, true.
It follows, that the blaze of my performance
Took light from what I saw him doe; and thus
A City (though the flame be much more dreadful)
May from a little spark be set on fire;
Of all what I have done, I shall give instance
Only in three maine proofs of my desert.
First I sought out (but through how many dangers
My Lords judge ye) the chief, the great Commander,
The head of that huge body, whose proud weight
Our Land shrunk under, him I found and fought with,
Fought with, and slew. Fellows in Arms, speak you,
Is it true or not?
True, true.
When he was fallen,
The hearts of all our adversaries
Began to quail, till young Fernando, son
To the last Duke of Venice gathered head,
And soon renewed the field, by whose example
The bold Venetians doubling strength and courage
Had got the better of the day, our men
Supposing that their adversaries grew
Like Hydra's head, recoil, and 'gan to sly:
I followed them; and what I said, they know;
The sum on it is; I called them back, new ranked them;
Lead on, they followed, shrunk not till the end:
Fellows in Arms is it true, or no.
True, true.
Lastly, to finish all, there was but one,
The only great exploit; which was to take
Fernando prisoner, and that hand to hand
In single fight I did: my self without
The help of any arm, save the arm of heaven.
Speak soldiers, is it true, or no?
Antinous, Antinous.
Behold my prisoner, Fathers.
This one man
Ruined our Army, and hath glorified
Create in her robes of mightiness and conquest.
We need not use long circumstance of words,
Antinous thou art conqueror: the Senate,
The soldiers, and thy valour have pronounced it.
Antinous, Antinous.
Make thy demand.
Please ye (my Lord) give leave
That I may part.
No Cassilanes, the Court
Should therein be dishonoured, doe not imagine
We prize your presence at so slight a rate.
Demand Antinous.
Thus (my Lords) to witness
How far I am from arrogance, or thinking
I am more valiant, though more favoured
Then my most matchless father, my demand is,
That for a lasting memory of his name,
His deeds, his real, nay his royal worth,
You set up in your Capitol in Brass
My fathers Statue, there to stand for ever
A Monument and Trophy of his victories,
With this Inscription to succeeding ages,
Great Cassilanes, Patron of Candy's Peace,
Perpetual Triumpher.
It is granted. What more?
No more.
How boy?
Thou art immortal,
Both for thy Son-like piety, and beauties
Of an unconquered mind.
My Prisoner (Lords)
To your more sacred wisdoms I surrender:
Fit you his ransom; half whereof I give
For largess to the Soldiers: the other half
To the erection of this monument.
Ambitious villain.
Thou art all un-immitable.
My Lords to work a certain peace for Candy
With Venice, use Fernando like a Prince;
His ransom Isle disburse what ever it be:
Yet you may stay him with you, till conditions
Of amity shall be concluded on:
Are ye content?
We are, and ever rest
Both friends add debtors to your nobleness.
Soldiers attend me in the Market-place,
Isle thither send your largess.
Antinous, Antinous. 
I have a suit too, Lords.
Propose it, it is yours, if fit and just.
Let not my services,
My being forty years a drudge, a pack-horse
To you, and to the State, be branded now
With Ignominy ne'er to be forgotten:
Rear me no Monument, unless you mean
To have me famed a Coward, and be stamped so.
We understand you not.
Proud boy, thou dost,
And Tyrant-like insult'st upon my shame.
Sir, heaven can tell, and my integrity,
What I did, was but only to enforce
The Senates gratitude. I now acknowledge it.
Observe it Fathers, how this haughty boy
Grows cunning in his envy of mine honours:
He knows no mention can of me be made,
But that it ever likewise must be told,
How I by him was mastered; and for surety
That all succeeding times may so report it,
He would have my dishonour, and his Triumphs
Engraved in Brass: hence, hence proceeds the falsehood
Of his insinuating piety.
Thou art no child of mine: thee and thy blood,
Here in the Capitol, before the Senate,
I utterly renounce: So thrift and fate
Confirm me; henceforth never see my face,
Be, as thou art, a villain to thy father.
Lords I must crave your leaves: come, come 
Here's a strange high-borne spirit.
Tic but heat
Of sudden present rage; I dare assure
Antinous of his favour.
I not doubt it,
He is both a good man, and a good father.
I shall attend your Lordships.
Doe Antinous.
Yes: feast thy Triumphs,
With applause and pleasures.
Poss. Lead on. 
I utterly renounce—It was so?
Was it not, my Decius?
Pish, you know my Lord,
Old men are choleric.
And lastly parted
With, never henceforth see my face: O me,
How have I lost a Father? Such a father?
Such a one Decius! I am miserable,
Beyond expression.
Fie, how unbecomming
This shows upon your day of fame?
O mischief:
I must no more come near him; that I know,
And am assured on it.
Say you doe not?
True:
Put case I doe not: what is Candy then
To lost Antinous? Malta, I resolve
To end my days in thee.
How's that?
Isle try
All humble means of being reconciled,
Which if denied, then I may justly say,
This day has proved my worst: Decius my worst. 
NOw to what you have heard; as no man can
Better then I, give you her Character;
For I have been both nursed, and trained up to
Her petulant humours, and been glad to bear them,
Her brother, my late Master, did no less:
Strong apprehensions of her beauty hath
Made her believe that she is more then woman:
And as there did not want those flatterers
About the worlds Conqueror, to make him think,
And did persuade him that he was a god;
So there be those base flies, that will not stick
To buzz into her ears she is an Angel,
And that the food she feeds on is Ambrosia.
She should not touch it then, it is Poets fare.
I may take leave to say, she may as well
Determine of her self to be a goddess,
With lesser flattery then he a god:
For she does conquer more, although not farther.
Every one looks on her dyes in despair,
And would be glad to doe it actually,
To have the next age tell how worthily,
And what good cause he had to perish so:
Her beauty is superlative, she knows it,
And knowing it, thinks no man can deserve,
But ought to perish, and to dye for her:
Many great Princes for her love have languished,
And given themselves a willing sacrifice,
Proud to have ended so: And now there is
A Prince so manded in his own passions,
That he forgets the Royalty he was borne to,
And deems it happiness to be her slave.
You talk as if you meant to wind me in,
And make me of the number.
Sir, mistake me not, the service that I owe ye
Shall plead for me: I tell you what she is,
What she expects, and what she will effect,
Unless you be the miracle of men,
That come with a purpose to behold,
And go away your self.
I thank you, I will doe it: But pray resolve me,
How is the stored with wit?
As with beauty,
Infinite, and more to be admired at,
Then meddled with.
And walks her tongue the same gate with her feet?
Much beyond: what ere her heart thinks, she utters:
And so bold, so readily, as you would judge
It penned and studied.
She comes. 
I must leave you then,
But my best wishes shall remain with you.
Still I must thank you.
This is the most passionate,
Most pitiful Prince,
Who in the Cauldron of affections,
Looks as he had been par-boyl'd.
If I offend with too much loving you,
It is a fault that I must still commit,
To make your mercy shine the more on me.
You are the selfsame creature you condemn,
Or else you durst not follow me with hope
That I can pity you, who am so far
From granting any comfort in this kind,
That you and all men else shall perish first:
I will live free and single, till I find
Something above a man to equal me;
Put all your brave Heroes into one,
Your Kings and Emperors, and let him come
In person, of a man, and I should scorn him:
Must, and will scorn him.
The god of Love himself hath lost his eyes,
His Bow and Torch extinguished, and the Poets
That made him first a god, have lost their fire
Since I appeared, and from my eyes must steal it.
This I dare speak; and let me see the man,
Now I have spoke it, that doth, dare deny;
Nay, not believe it.
He is mad that does not.
Have not all the nations of the earth heard of me?
Most come to see me, and seeing me, returned
Full of my praises? teaching there Chroniclers
To make their Stories perfect? for where the name,
Merely the word of fair Erota stands,
It is a lasting History to time,
Begetting admiration in the men,
And in my own Sex envy; which glorie's lost,
When I shall stick my beauty in a cloud,
And clearly shine through it.
This Woman's in the altitudes, and he must be
A good Astrologer shall know her Zodiac.
For any man to think
Himself an able purchaser of you,
But in the bargain there must be declared
Infinite bounty: otherwise I vow,
By all thats excellent and gracious in you,
I would untenant every hope lodged in me,
And yield my self up Loves, or your own Martyr.
So you shall please us.
O you cannot be
So heavenly, and so absolute in all things,
And yet retain such cruel tyranny.
I can, I doe, I will.
She is in her
Moods, and her Tenses: Isle Gramer with you,
And make a trial how I can decline you:
By your leave (great Lady.)
What are you?
A man, a good man, that's a wealthy;
A Proper man, and a proud man too; one
That understands himself, and knows, unless
It be your self, no woman on the Universe deserves him.
Nay, Lady, I must tell you too withal.
I may make doubt of that, unless you paint
With better judgement next day then on this;
For (plain I must be with you) it is a dull Fucus.
Knows any one here what this fellow is?
He is of Venice (Madam) a great Magnifico,
And gracious with the Senate.
Let him keep then among them; what makes he here?
Here is state enough where I am: here's a doe—
You, tell him, if he have ought with us, let him
Look lower, and give it in Petition.
Mighty Magnifico, my Mistress bid me tell you,
If you have ought with her, you must look lower,
And yield it in Petition.
Here is for thee a Ducats.
You say well sir, take your own course.
I will not grace you
(Lady) so much as take you by the hand;
But when I shall vouchsafe to touch your lip,
It shall be through your Court a holy-day
Proclaimed for so high favour.
This is some
Great mans Jester: Sirrah, begone, here is
No place to fool in.
Where are the fools you talk of?
I doe keep two.
No question of it: for
In your self you doe maintain an hundred.
And besides them I keep a noble train,
Statists, and men of action: my purse is large and deep,
Beyond the reach of riot to draw dry:
Fortune did vie with Nature, to bestow
(When I was borne) her bounty equally:
Tic not amiss you turn your eyes from me;
For should you stand and gaze me in the face,
You perish would, like Simile by Iolus:
In Venice at this instant there do lye
No less then threescore Ladies in their graves,
And in their Beds five hundred for my love.
You lie more then they; yet it becomes him bravely;
Would I could walk and talk so? Isle endeavour it.
Sir, doe you know me?
Yes, you were sister to the late Prince of Candy,
Aunt to this young one: And I in Venice,
I am borne a Lord; equal to you in fortunes,
In shape; Isle say no more, but view.
There needs no more be said, were I a woman—
O he does rarely: in shape; Isle say no more,
But view: Who could say more, who better?
Man is no man, nor woman woman is,
Unless they have a pride like one of these.
How poor the Prince of Cyprus shows to him?
How poor another Lady unto her:
Carriage and State makes us seem demi-gods,
Humility, like beasts, worms of the earth.
Royal Lady, I kiss your hand.
Sir, I know you not.
O my noble Brother, welcome from the wars.
Dear sister.
Where is my father, that you come without him?
We have news of your success: he has his health I hope?
Yes sister, he has his health, but is not well.
How not well? what Riddles do you utter?
Isle tell you more in private.
Noble sir,
I cannot be unmindful of your merit,
Since I last heard it: you are a hopeful youth,
And (indeed) the soul of Candy.
I must speak my thoughts.
The Prince of Cyprus Brother, Good Decius.
I am his servant.
You are the Patron of your Country, sir,
So your unimitable deeds proclaim you,
It is no language of my own, but all men's.
Your Enemies must needs acknowledge it:
Then doe not think it flattery in your friends,
For if they had a heart, they could not want a tongue.
Is this your brother Annophill?
Yes Madam.
Your name's Antinous?
I am (Lady) that most unfortunate man.
How unfortunate? are you not the soldier,
The Captain of those Captains, that did bring
Conquest and victory home along with you?
I had some share in it; but was the least
Of the least worthy.
O sir, in your modesty youl'd make
A double Conquest: I was an eare-witnesse
When this young man spoke lesser then he acted,
And had the soldiers voice to help him out:
But that the Law compelled him for his honour,
To enforce him make a claim for his reward,
I well perceive he would have stood the man
That he does now, buried his worth in silence.
Sir, I hearken not to him, but look on you,
And find more in you then he can relate?
You shall attend on me.
Madam, your pardon.
Deny it not sir, for it is more honour
Then you have gotten in the field: for know you shall,
Upon Erota's asking, serve Erota.
I may want answers, Lady,
But never want a will to doe you service.
I came here to my sister, to take leave,
Having enjoined my self to banishment,
For some cause that hereafter you may hear,
And wish with me I had not the occasion.
There shall be no occasion to divide us:
Dear Madam for my sake use your power,
Even for the service that he ought to owe,
Must, and does owe to you, his friends, and country.
Upon your Loyalty to the state and me,
I doe command you Sir, not depart Candy:
Am I not your Princess?
You are a great Lady.
Then show your self a Servant and a Subject.
I am your vassal.
You are a Coward; I that dare not fight,
Scorn to be vassal to any Prince in Europe:
Great is my heart with pride, which Isle increase
When they are gone, with practise on my Vassailes.
The noble Cassilane is come to see you Madam,
There's comfort in those words, Antinous:
For here is the place, and persons that have power,
To reconcile you to his love again.
That were a fortunate meeting.
Greatness still wait you Lady.
Good Cassilane, we doe maintain our greatness,
Through your valour.
My prayers pull daily blessings on thy head,
My un-offending child, my Annophill.
Good Prince, worthy Gonzalo! ha? art thou here
Before me? in every action art thou ambitious?
My duty (Lady) first offered here,
And love to thee (my child) though he out-strip me;
Thus in the wars he got the start on me,
By being forward, but performing less;
All the endeavours of my life are lost,
And thrown upon that evil of mine own
Cursed begetting, whom I shame to father.
O that the heat thou robd'st me off, had burnt
Within my Entrails, and begot a fever,
Or some worse sickness, for thou art a disease
Sharper then any physic gives a name to.
Why doe you say so?
O Annophill; there is good cause my girl:
He has plaid the thief with me, and filched away
The richest jewel of my life, my honour,
Wearing it publicly with that applause,
As if he justly did inherit it.
Would I had in my Infancy been laid
Within my grave, covered with you blessings,
Then grown up to a man, to meet your curses.
O that thou had.
Then I had been the father of a child,
Dearer then thou were even unto me,
When hope persuaded me I had begot
Another self in thee: Out of mine eyes,
As far as I have thrown thee from my heart,
That I may live and dye forgetting thee.
How has he deserved this untamed anger,
That when he might have asked for his reward
Some honour for himself, or mass of pelf,
He only did request to have erected
Your Statue in the Capitol, with Titles
Engraved upon it, The Patron of his Country?
That, that's the poison in the gilded cup,
The Serpent in the flowers, that stings my honour,
And leaves me dead in fame: Gods doe a justice,
And rip his bosom up, that men may see,
Seeing, believe the subtle practises
Written within his heart: But I am heated,
And doe forget this presence, and my self.
Your pardon, Lady.
You should not ask, 'lesse you knew how to give.
For my sake Cassilane, cast out of your thoughts
All ill conceptions of your worthy son,
That (questionless) has ignorantly offended,
Declared in his penitence.
Bid me dye (Lady) for your sake Isle doe it;
But that you'll say is nothing, for a man
That has outlived his honour: But command me
In any thing save that, and Cassilane
Shall ever be your servant. Come Annophill,
(My joy in this world) thou shalt live with me,
Retired in some solitary nook,)
The comfort of my age; my days are short,
And ought to be well spent: and I desire
No other witness of them but thy self,
And good Arcanes.
I shall obey you sir.
Noble sir:
If you taste any want of worldly means
Let not that discontent you: know me your friend,
That hath, and can supply you.
Sir, I am too much bound to you already,
And it is not of my cares the least, to give you
Fair satisfaction.
You may imagine I doe speak to that end,
But trust me, it is to make you bolder with me.
Sir, I thank you, and may make trial of you,
Mean time my service.
Brother be comforted; so long as I continue
Within my fathers love, you cannot long
Stand out an Exile: I must go live with him,
And I will prove so good an Orator
In your behalf, that you again shall gain him,
Or I will stir in him another anger,
And be lost with you.
Better I were neglected: for he is hasty,
And through the Choler that abounds in him,
(Which for the time divides from him his judgement)
He may cast you off, and with you his life;
For grief will strait surprise him, and that way
Must be his death: the sword has tried too often,
And all the deadly Instruments of war
Have aimed at his great heart, but ne'er could touch it:
Yet not a limb about him wants a scarre.
Madam my duty—
Will you he gone?
I must (Lady) but I shall be ready,
When you are pleased command me, for your service.
Excellent Prince—To all my hearty love,
And a good farewell.
Thanks honest Cassilane.
Come Annophill.
Shall I not wait upon you sir?
From hence you shall not stir a foot:
Loving Gonzalo, it must be all my study
To requite you.
I may be so fortunate to deserve
The name of friend from you, I have enough.
You are so, and you have made your self so.
I will then preserve it.
Antinous you are my servant, are you not?
It hath pleased you so to grace me.
Why are you then dejected? you will say,
You have lost a father; but you have found a Mistress
Doubles that loss: be master of your spirit;
You have a cause for it.: which is my favour,
And mine.
Will no man ease me of this fool?
Your fellow.
Antinous wait upon us.
I shall Madam.
Nay but Lady, Lady.
Sir, you are rude: and if you be the Master
Of such means as you doe talk of, you should
Learn good manners.
O Lady, you can find a fault in me,
But not perceive it in your self; you must, shall hear me:
I love you for your pride, it is the best virtue
In you.
I could hang this fellow now: by whom
Are you supported, that you dare doe this?
Have you not example here in a Prince
Transcending you in all things, yet bears himself
As doth become a man had seen my beauty?
Back to your Country, and your Courtesans,
Where you may be admired for your wealth,
Which being consumed, may be a means to gain you
The opinion of some wit. Here's nothing
To be got but scorn, and loss of time.
Which are things I delight in.
Antinous follow me. 
She is vexed to the soul.
Let her be vexed, it is fit she should be so:
Give me thy hand Gonzalo, thou art in our favour,
For we doe love to cherish lofty spirits,
Such as percusteere the earrh, and bound
With an erected countenance to the clouds.
'S-foot, what thing is this?
I doe love fire-works, because they mount:
An Exhalation I profess to adore,
Beyond a fixed star, it is more illustrious,
As every thing raised out of smoke is so:
Their virtue is in action: what doe you think of me?
Troth sir,
You are beyond my guess, I know you not.
Doe you know your self?
Yes sir.
Why you and I are one: I am proud, and
Very proud too, that I must tell you; I saw
It did become you, cousin Gonzalo, prithee
Let it be so.
Let it be so good cousin.
I am no great ones fool.
I hope so, for alliance sake.
Yet I do serve the Mighty, Monstrous, and Magnanimous
Invincible Erota.
O good cousin, now I have you: Isle meet you in your Coat.
Coat? I have my horse-mans coat I must confess
Lined through with Velvet, and a Scarlet out-side;
If you'll meet me in it, Isle send fort;
And cousin you shall see me with much comfort,
For it is both a new one, and a right one,
It did not come collateral.
Adieu good cousin; at this present I have some business.
Farewell (excellent cousin.)
CAndy, I say, is lost already.
Yes,
If to be conqueror be to be lost.
You have it; one days conquest hath undone them,
And sold them to their vassalage; for what
Have I else toiled my brains, profusely emptied
My monies, but to make them slaves to Venice,
That so in case the sword did lose his edge,
Then Art might sharpen hers?
Gonzalo how?
Fernando thus: you see how through this Land,
Both of the best and basest I am honoured;
I only gave the State of Venice notice,
When, where, and how to land, or you had found
A better entertainment: I was he
Encouraged young Antinous to affront
The devil his father: for the devil I think
Dares not doe more in battle.
But why did ye?
I find no such great policy in that.
Indeed Fernando, thou can fight, not plot:
Had they continued one, they two alone
Were of sufficient courage and performance
To beat an Army.
Now by all my hopes,
I rather shall admire, then envy virtue.
Why then by all your hopes you'll rather have
Your Brains knocked out, then learn how to be wise;
You States-man? Well sir, I did more then this,
When Cassilane craved from the common treasure
Pay for his Soldiers, I struck home, and lent him
An hundred thousand Ducats,
Marry sir,
The policy was little, the love less,
And honesty least of all.
How say ye by that?
Go fight, I say go fight, Isle talk no more with you,
You are insensible.
Well, I shall observe ye,
Why look you sir, by this means have I got
The greatest part of Cassilanes estate
Into my hands, which he can ne'er redeem,
But must of force sink: do you conceive me now?
So:
But why have you importuned the Senate,
For me to sojourn with them?
There's the quintessence,
The soul, and grand elixir of my wit:
For he (according to his noble nature)
Will not be known to want, though he do want,
And will be bankrupted so much the sooner,
And made the subject of our scorn and laughter.
Here's a perfect plotted stratagem.
Why? could you
Imagine, that I did not hate in heart
My Countries enemies? yes, yes, Fernando,
And I will be the man that shall undo them.
Ye are in a ready way.
I was never out on it.
Peace,
Here comes a wise Coxcomb, a tame Coward.
Now worthy Gaspero, what,
You come (I know) to be my Lord Fernando's
Conductor to old Cassilane?
To wait upon him.
And my Lords the Senators sent you?
My noble Lord they did.
My Lord Fernando,
This gentleman (as humble as you see him)
Is even this Kingdoms treasure; In a word,
It is his chief glory that he is not wiser
Then honest, nor more honest then approved
In truth and faith.
My Lord.
You may be bold
To trust him with your bosom, he'll not deceive,
If you rely upon him once.
Your name is Gaspero?
Your servant.
Go commend me
(Right honest Gaspero) commend me heartily
To noble Cassilane, tell him my love
Is vowed to him.
I shall.
I know you will.
My Lord I cannot long be absent from you.
Sir, you are now my guide. 
Thus my designs
Run uncontrolled; yet Venice though I be
Intelligencer to thee, in my brain
Are other large Projects: for if proud Erota
Bend to my lure, I will be Candy's King,
And Duke of Venice too. Ha? Venice too?
O it was prettily shov'd in: why not? Erota
May in her love seal all sure: if she swallow
The bait, I am Lord of both; if not, yet Candy
Despite of all her power shall be ruined.
Urge me no farther Annophill.
My Lord.
Thy fathers poverty has made thee happy;
For though it is true, this solitary life
Suits not with youth and beauty, O my child,
Yet it is the sweetest Guardian to protect
Chaste names from Court-aspersions; there a Lady.
Tender and delicate in years and graces,
That dotes upon the charms of ease and pleasure,
Is shipwrecked on the shore; for it is much safer
To trust the Ocean in a leaking ship,
Then follow greatness in the wanton rites
Of luxury and sloth.
My wishes sir,
Have never soared a higher flight, then truly
To find occasion wherein I might witness
My duty and obedience.
It is well said,
Can thou forbear to laugh Arcanes?
Why sir?
To look upon my beggary, to look upon
My patience in my beggary: Tell me,
Does it show handsome? bravely?
Handsome? thou wilt flatter me,
And swear that I am miserable.
Nothing
More glorifies the noble, and the valiant,
Then to despise contempt: if you continue
But to enjoy your self, you in your self
Enjoy all store besides.
An excellent change:
I that some seven Apprentice-ships commanded
A hundred Ministers, that waited on
My nod, and sometimes twenty thousand soldiers,
Am now retired, attended in my age
By one poor maid, followed by one old man.
Sir, you are lower in your own repute
Then you have reason for.
The Roman Captains,
I mean the best, such as with their bloods
Purchased their Countries peace, the Empires glory,
Were glad at last to get them to some Farms,
Off-from the clamours of the ungrateful great ones,
And the unsteady multitude, to live
As I doe now, and it was their blessing too,
Let it be ours Arcanes.
I cannot but
Applaud your scorn of injuries.
Of injuries?
Arcanes, Annophill, lend both your hands
So, what say ye now?
Why now my Lord—
I swear
By all my past prosperities; thus standing
Between you two, I think my self as great,
As mighty, as if in the Capitol
I stood amidst the Senators, with all
The Cretin subjects prostrate at my feet.
Sir, you are here more safe.
And more beloved:
Why look ye sirs, I can forget the weakness
Of the traduced soldiers, the neglect
Of the faire-spoken Senate, the impiety
Of him, the villain, whom (to my dishonour)
The World miscalls my son.
But by the—
Sir, remember that you promised no occasion
Should move your patience.
Thou dost chide me friendly,
He shall not have the honour to be thought upon
Amongst us. 
Now? the news?
The Secretary,
With the Venetian prisoner, desire
Admittance to your Lordship.
How? to me?
What mystery is this? Arcanes can they
Think thou, mean any good?
My Lord, they dare not
Intend ought else but good.
Tic true, they dare not;
Arcanes welcome them: Come hither Annophill,
Stand close to me, we'll change our affability
Into a form of State: and they shall know
Our heart is still our own.
My Lord—
Arcanes,
I know them both: Fernando, as you are
A man of greatness, I should under-value
The right my sword hath fought for, to observe
Low-fawning complements, but as you are
A Captive and a stranger, I can love you,
And must be kind. You are welcome.
It is the all
Of my ambition.
And for proof how much
He truly honours your heroic virtues,
The Senate on his importunity,
Commend him to your Lordships guard.
For what?
During the time of his abode in Candy.
To be your household guest.
Wherein my Lord,
You shall more make me debtor to your nobleness,
Then if you had returned me without ransom.
Are you in earnest Sir?
My suit to the Senate
Shall best resolve you that.
Come hither Secretary,
Look that this be no trick now put upon me:
For if it be—Sirrah.—
As I have troth
(My Lord) it only is a favour granted
Upon Fernando's motion from himself:
Your Lordship must conceive, I'd not partake
Ought, but what should concern your honour; who
Has been the prop, our Countries shield, and safety,
But the renowned Cassilane?
Applause?
Is Gaspero—puff—nothing—why, young Lord,
Would you so much be sequestered from those
That are the blazing Comets of the time,
To live a solitary life with me?
A man forsaken? all my hospitality
Is now contracted to a few; these two,
This tempest wearied soldier, and this Virgin;
We cannot feast your eyes with Masques and Revels,
Or Courtly Antics: the sad sports we riot in,
Are Tales of foughten fields, of Martial scars,
And things done long ago, when men of courage
Were held the best, not those well-spoken youths,
Who only carry conquest in their tongues;
Now stories of this nature are unseasonable
To entertain a great Dukes son with.
Herein
Shall my Captivity be made my happiness,
Since what I lose in freedom, I regain
(With interest) by conversing with a Soldier
So much less for experience, as great Cassilane.
Pray sir admit me.
If you come to mock me,
I shall be angry.
By the love I bear
To goodness, my intents are honourable.
Then in a word, my Lord, your visitations
Shall find all due respect: But I am now
Grown old, and have forgot to be an host;
Come when you please you are welcome.
Sir, I thank you.
Good sir be not too urgent; for my father
Will soon be moved: yet in a noble way
Of curtsy he is as easily conquered.
Lady, your words are like your beauty, powerful;
I shall not strive more how to doe him service,
Then how to be your servant.
Shoe's my daughter,
And does command this house.
I so conceive her.
Doe you hear?
My honoured Lord.
Commend me to them.
Tell 'em I thank them.
Whom my Lord?
The Senate:
Why now come you so dull? O they are gracious,
And in〈8 letters〉 g•atefull  _____  Thou art eloquent,
Speak modestly in mentioning my services:
And if ought fall out in the By, that must
Of mere necessity touch any act
Of my deserving praises, blush when you talk on it,
Twill make them blush to hear on it.
Why my Lord—
Nay, nay, you are too wise now; good, observe me,
I doe not rail against the hopeful Springall,
That builds up monuments in Brass; reares Trophies
With Mottoes and Inscriptions, quaint devices
Of Poetry and fiction; let's be quiet.
You must not cross him.
Not for Candys wealth.
You shall for ever make me yours.
It were pity to double your captivity.
Who's here, Decius? 
Ha! Decius? who named Decius?
My duty to your Lordship: I am bold,
Presuming on your noble and known goodness
To.—
What?
Present you with this—
Letter?
Yes my honoured Lord.
From whom?
Please you peruse
The in-side, you shall find a name subscribed,
In such humility, in such obedience,
That you your self will judge it tyranny
Not to receive it favourably.
Hey-day.
Good words my Masters; this is Court-infection,
And none but Cowards ply them: Tell me, Decius,
Without more circumstance, who is the sender?
Your much grieved son Antinous.
On my life
A challenge; speak, as thou art worthy speak:
Isle answer't.
Honoured Sir.
No honoured Sirs—
Fool your young Idol with such pompous Attributes.
Say briefly, what contains it?
It is a lowly
Petition for your favour.
Rash young man,
But that thou art under my own roof, and know
I dare not any way infringe the Laws
Of hospitality, thou should repent
Thy bold and rude intrusion. But presume not
Again to show thy Letter, for thy life;
Decius, not for thy life.
Nay then (my Lord)
I can with-hold no longer: you are too rough,
And wrestle against nature, with a violence
More then becomes a father: wherein would ye
Come nearer to the likeness of God,
Then in your being entreated? Let not thirst
Of honour, make you quite forget you are
A man, and what makes perfect man-hoods, comforts
A father.
If a memory remain
Of my departed mother; if the purity
Of her unblemished faith deserve to live
In your remembrance, let me yet by these
Awake your love to my uncomforted Brother.
I am a stranger: but so much I tender
Your sons desertfull virtues, that I vow
His Sword ne'er conquered me so absolutely,
As shall your courtesy, if you vouchsafe
At 〈◊〉 our instances, to new receive him,
Into your wonted favour.
Sir, you cannot
Require more low submission.
Am I not
Grown vile yet in your eyes? then by the name
Of father, let me once more sue for him,
Who is the only now remaining-branch
With me, of that most ancient root, whose body
You are, dear sir.
It is well: an host of furies
Could not have baited me, more torturingly,
More rudely, or more most unnaturally?
Decius, I say, let me no more hear from him;
For this time go thou hence, and know from me
Thou art beholding to me that I have not
Killed thee already, look to it next, look to it.
Arcanes fie, fie Annophil, 
He's gone.
Chafed beyond sufferance: we must follow him.
Lady, this letter is to you.
Come with me,
For we must speak in private: please you sir,
To see what entertainment our sad house
Can yield? 
I shall attend you Lady.
How do ye like
To sojourn here, my Lord?
More then to feast
With all the Princes of the earth besides;
Gonzalo told me that thou were honest.
Yes sir.
And you shall find it.
Shall I?
All my follies
Be else recorded to my shame.
Enough,
My heart is here for ever lodged.
The Lady.
The place admits no time to utter all,
But Gaspero if thou wilt prove my friend,
I'll say thou art—
Your servant: I conceive ye,
We'll choose some fitter leisure.
Never man
Was (in a moment) or more blessed, or wretched. 
Leave us.
I shall. 
Antinous sit down.
Madam:
I say sit down: I do command you sit;
For look what honour thou did gain by me,
I can•ot lose by it: happy Antinous,
The graces, and the higher Deities
Smiled at thy birth, and still continue it:
Th•n think that I (who scorn lesser examples)
Must doe the like: such as do taste my power,
And talk of it, with fear and reverence,
Shall do the same unto the man I favour.
I tel thee youth, thou hast a conquest won,
Since thou came home, greater then that last,
Which dignified thy same; greater then if
Thou should go out again, and conquer farther;
For I am not ashamed to acknowledge
My self subdued by thee.
Great Lady—
Sit still, I will not hear thee else: now speak,
And speak like my Antinous, like my Soldier,
Whom Cupped, and not Mars, hath sent to Battle.
I must (I see) be silent.
So thou moist:
There's greater Action in it than in clamour,
A look, (if it be gracious) will begin the War,
A word conclude it: then prove no Coward,
Since thou hast such a friendly enemy,
That teaches thee to conquer.
You do amaze me Madam,
I have no skill, no practice in this War,
And whether you be serious, or please
To make your sport on a dejected man,
I cannot rightly guess: but be it as it will,
It ir a like unhappiness to me:
My discontents bear those conditions in them, 
And lay me out so wretched, no designs
(How ever truly promising a good)
Can make me relish ought, but a sweet-bitter,
Voluntary Exile. 
Why an Exile?
What comfort can there be in those companions 
Which sad thoughts bring along with?
Madam.
Whence comes this well-tun'd sound?
I know not Madam.
Listen wench:
What ever friendly hands they are that send it 
Let 'em play on; they are Masters of their faculty.
Doth it please you sir?
According to the time.
Go to 'em wench,
And tell 'em, we shall thank 'em; for they have kept
As good time to our disposition, as to their instruments;
Unless Antinous shall say he loves, 
There never can be sweeter accents uttered.
Let then the heart, that did employ those hands,
Receive some small share of your thanks with them,
It is happiness enough that you did like it;
A fortune unto me, that I should send it
In such a lucky minute; but to obtain
So gracious welcome, did exceed my hopes.
Good Prince, I thank you for it.
O Madam, pour not (to fast) joys on me,
But sprinkle 'em so gently, I may stand 'em▪
It is enough at first, you have laid aside
Those cruel angry looks out of your eyes,
With which (as with your lovely) you did strike
All your beholders in an Ecstasy.
Philander, you have long professed to love me,
Have I but professed it Madam?
Nay, but hear me?
More attentively, then to an Oracle.
And I will speak more truly, if more can be:
Nor shall my language be wrapped up in Riddles,
But plain as truth it self: I love this Gentleman,
Whose griefs has made him so incapable
Of Love, he will not hear, at least not understand it.
I that have looked with scornful eyes on thee,
And other Princes mighty in their states,
And in their friends as fortunate, have now prayed,
In a petitionary kind almost,
This man, this well deserving man, (that I must say)
To look upon this beauty, yet you see
He casts his eyes rather upon the ground,
Then he will turn 'em this way; Philander
You look pale; I'll talk no more.
Pray go forward: I would be your Martyr,
To dye thus, were immortally to live.
Will you go to him then, and speak for me?
You have loved longer, but not ferventer,
Know how to speak, for you have done it like
An Orator, even for your self: then how will you for me
Whom you profess to love above your self.
The curses of dissemblers follow me
Unto my grave, and if I do not so.
You may (as all men do) speak boldlier, better
In their friends cause still, then in your own;
But speak your utmost, yet you cannot seigne,
I will stand by, and blush to witness it.
Tell him since I beheld him, I have lost
The happiness of this life, food, and rest;
A quiet bosom, and the state I went with.
Tell him how he has humbled the proud,
And made the living but a dead Erota.
Tell him withal, that she is better pleased
With thinking on him, then enjoying these.
Tell him—Philander, Prince; I talk in vain
To you, you do not mark me.
Indeed, I do.
But thou dost look so pale,
As thou wilt spoil the story in relating.
Not, if I can but live to tell it.
It may be you have not the heart.
I have a will I am sure, how ever my heart
May play the coward, but if you please, I'll try.
If a kiss will strengthen thee, I give you leave
To challenge it, nay, I will give it you.
O that a man should taste such heavenly bliss!
And be enjoined to beg it for another.
Alas, it is a misery I grieve
To put you to, and I will suffer rather
In his tyranny, than thou in mine.
Nay Madam, since I cannot have your love,
I will endeavour to deserve your pity:
For I had rather have within the grave
Your love, then you should want it upon earth.
But how can I hope, with a feeble tongue
To instruct him in the rudiments of love,
When your most powerful beauty cannot work it?
Do what thou wilt (Philander) the request
Is so unreasonable, that I quit thee of it.
I desire now no more, but the true patience,
And fortitude of Lovers, with those helps
Of sighs and tears, which I think is all the Physic—
O if he did but hear you, it were enough;
And I will wake him from his Appoplexie.
Antinous.
My Lord?
Nay pray,
No courtesy to me, you are my Lord,
(Indeed you are) for you command her heart,
That commands mine: nor can you want to know it.
For look you she that told it you in words,
Explains it now more passionately in tears;
Either thou hast no heart, or a marble one,
If those drops cannot melt it; prithee look up,
And see how sorrow sits within her eyes,
And love the grief she goes with (if not her)
Of which thou art the parent: and never yet
Was there (by nature) that thing made so stony,
But it would love what ever it begot.
He that begot me, did beget these cares
Which are good issues, though happily by him
Esteemed monsters: nay, the ill-judging world
Is likely enough to give them those Characters.
What's this to love, and to love, and to the Lady? he's old,
Wrathful, perverse, selfe-will'd, and full of anger,
Which are his faults; but let them not be thine;
He thrusts you from his love, she pulls thee on,
He doubts your virtues, she doth double them:
O either use thy own eyes, or take mine,
And with them, my heart, then thou wilt love her,
Nay, dote upon her, more then on thy duty,
And men will praise thee equally for it;
Neglecting her, condemn thee, as a man
Unworthy such a fortune: O Antinous,
It is not the friendship that I bear to thee,
But her command, that makes me utter this:
And when I have prevailed, let her but say,
Philander, you must dye or this is nothing,
It shall be done together with a breath,
With the same willingness, I live to serve her.
No more Philander.
All I have done, is little yet to purpose,
But ere I leave him, I will perceive him blush;
And make him feel the passions that I do,
And every true lover will assist me in it,
And lend me their sad sighs to blow it home,
For Cupped wants a dart to wound this bosom.
No more, no more Philander, I can endure no more,
Pray let him go; go good Antinous, make peace
With your own mind, no matter though I perish. 
I Cannot help it.
Nor do I require it,
The malady needs no Physician,
Help hospital people.
I am glad to hear
You are so valiant.
Valiant?
Can any man be proud that is not valiant;
Foolish woman, what would thou say? thou—
I know not what to call thee.
I can you,
For I can call you Coxcome, Ass, and Puppy.
You do do it, I thank you.
That you'll lose a fortune,
Which a Cobbler better deserves, then thou dost.
Do not provoke my magnanimity,
For when I am insens'd, I am insensible;
Go tell thy Lady, that hath sent me word
She will discard me, that I discard her,
And throw a scorn upon her, which I would not,
But that she does me wrong.
Do you not glory in your conquest more,
To take some great man prisoner, then to kill him?
And shall a Lady find less mercy from you,
That yields her self your Captive, and for her Ransom,
Will give the jewel of her life, her heart,
Which she hath locked from all men but thy self:
For shame (Antinous) throw this dullness off,
Art thou a man no where but in the field?
He must here Drums, and Trumpets ere he sleeps,
And at this instant dreams he's in his Armour:
These Iron-hearted Soldiers are so cold,
Till they be beaten to a women's arms,
And then they love 'em better then their own;
No Fort can hold them out.
What pity is it (Madam) that your self,
Who are all excellence, should become so wretched,
To think on such a wretch as grief hath made me?
Seldom despairing men look up to heaven,
Although it still speak to 'em in its glories;
For when sad thoughts perplex the mind of man,
There is a plumit in the heart, that weighs,
And pulls us (living) to the dust we came from;
Did you but see the miseries you pursue,
(As I the happiness that I avoid
That doubles my afflictions) you would fly
Unto some wilderness, or to your grave,
And there find better comforts then in me,
For love, and cares can never dwell together.
They should,
If thou had but my love, and I thy cares.
What wild beast in the Desert, but would be
Taught by this Tongue to leave his cruelty,
Though all the beauties of the face were veiled!
But I am savager than any beast,
And shall be so till Decius do arrive,
Whom with so much submission I have sent
Under my hand, that if he do not bring
His Benediction back, he must to me
Be much more crueler, then I to you.
Is it but your fathers pardon you desire?
With his love, &amp; then nothing next that, like yours.
Decius is come. 
O welcome friend; If I apprehend not
Too much of joy, there's comfort in thy looks.
There is indeed: I prithee Decius speak it.
How? prithee Decius? this woman's strangely altered.
Why dost not speak (good friend) and tell me how
The reverent blessing of my life, received
My humble lines; wept he for joy?
No, ther's a letter will inform you more:
Yet I can tell you, what I think will grieve you,
The old man is in want, and angry still,
And poverty is the bellows to the Coal,
More then distaste from you as I imagine.
What's here? how's this? It cannot be: now sure
My griefs delude my senses.
In his looks,
I read a world of changes: Decius mark
With what a sad amazement he surveys
The news: can thou guess what it is?
None good I fear.
I fear so too: and then—
It is her hand.
Are you not well?
Too well: if I were ought
But Rock, this Letter would conclude my miseries,
Peruse it (Lady) and resolve me then,
In what a case I stand.
Sir, the worst is,
Your fathers lowness, and distaste.
No Decius,
My sister writes, Fernando has made suite
For love to her: and to express sincerely
His constant truth, hath like a noble Gentleman,
Discovered plots of treachery; contrived
By false Gonzalo, not intending more
The utter ruin of our house, then generally
Candies confusion.
It is a generous part
Of young Fernando.
It is, and I could wish
All thrift to his affections Decius.
You find the sum on it Madam.
Yes, I do.
And can you now yet think a heart oppressed
With such a throng of cares, can entertain
An amorous thought? love frees all toils but one,
Calamity and it can ill agree.
Will it please ye speak my doom?
Alas great Lady,
Why will you slatter thus a desperate man,
That is quite cast away? O had you not
Procured the Senates warrant to enforce
My stay, I had not heard of these sad news.
What would you have me do?
Love me, or kill me,
One word shall sentence either: for as truth
Is just, if you refuse me, I am resolute
Not to out-live my thraldom.
Gentle Lady.
Say, must I live, or dye?
My Lord, how can you
Be so inexorable: here's occasion
Of succouring your father in his wants,
Securely proffered: pray sir, entertain it.
What is my sentence?
What you please to have it?
As thou art Gentle, speak those words again.
Madam, you have prevailed; yet give me leave
Without offence, ere I resign the interest
Your heart hath in my heart, to prove your secrecy.
Antinous, it is the greatest Argument
Of thy affections to me.
Madam, thus then,
My father stands for certain sums engaged
To treacherous Gonzalo; and has more gaged
The greatest part of his estate to him:
If you receive this mortgage, and procure
Acquitance from Gonzalo to my father,
I am what you would have me be.
You'll love me then?
Provided (Madam) that my father know not
I am an Agent for him.
If I fail
In this, I am unworthy to be loved.
Then (with your favour) thus I seal my truth,
To day, and Decius witness how unchangingly
I shall still love Erota.
Thou hast quickened
A dying heart Antinous.
This is well:
Much happiness to both. 
The Lord Gonzalo
Attends you Madam.
Comes as we could wish,
Withdraw Antinous, here's a Closet, where
You may partake his errand; let him enter. 
Madam you must be wary. 
Fear it not,
I will be ready for him; to entertain him
With smiling welcome: Noble sir, you take
Advantage of the time; it had been fit
Some notice of your presence, might have fashioned
A more prepared state.
Do ye mock me Madam?
Trust me, you wrong your judgement, to repute
My gratitude a fault: I have examined
Your portly carriage, and will now confess
It hath not slightly won me.
The wind's turned;
I thought it would come to this: it pleased us Madam,
At our last interview, to mention love,
Have you considered on it?
With more then common
Content: but sir, if what you spake, you meant,
(As I have cause to doubt) then—
What, (sweet Lady?)
Methinks me should lay by this form of stateliness.
Loves courtship is familiar, and for instance,
See what a change it hath begot in me,
I could talk humbly now, as Lovers use.
And I: and I: we meet in one selfe-center,
Of blessed consent.
I hope my weakness sir,
Shall not deserve neglect: but if it prove so,
I am not the first Lady has been ruined
By being too credulous: you will smart for it one day.
Angell-like-Lady, let me be held it villain,
If I love not sincerely.
Would I knew it?
Make proof by any fit command.
What, do ye mean to many me?
How? mean? nay more, I mean
To make you Empress of my earthly fortunes,
Regent of my desires, for did ye covet
To be a real Queen, I could advance you.
Now I perceive you slight me, and would make me
More simple then my sexes frailety warrants.
But say your mind, and you shall be a Queen.
On those conditions, call me yours.
Enough,
But are we safe?
Assuredly.
In short,
Yet Lady first be plain: would you not choose
Much rather to prefer your own Sun-rising,
Then any's else though ne'er so near entitled
By blood, or right of birth?
Tic a question
Needs not a resolution.
Good: what if
I set the Crown of Candy on your head?
I were a Queen indeed then.
Madam, know
There's but a boy twixt you, and it suppose him
Transhap'd into an Angel.
Wise Gonzalo,
I cannot but admire thee.
It is worth thinking on:
Besides your husband shall be Duke of Venice.
Gonzalo, Duke of Venice?
Ye are mine ye say.
Pish: you but dally with me; and would lull me
In a rich golden dream.
You are too much distrustful of my truth.
Then you must give me leave to apprehend
The means, and manner how.
Why thus—
You shall not,
We may be over-heard; Affairs and counsels
Of such high nature, are not to be trusted
Not to the Air it self, you shall in writing,
Draw out the full design; which if effected,
I am as I profess.
O I applaud
Your ready care, and secrecy.
Gonzalo,
There is a bar yet, twixt our hopes and us,
And that must be removed.
What is it?
Old Cassilane.
He? fear not him: I build upon his ruins
Already.
I would find a smoother course
To shift him off.
As how?
We'll talk in private,
I have a ready plot.
I shall adore you. 
Madam, although I hate unnoble practices,
And therefore have performed no more then what
I ought, for honours safety: yet Annophil,
Thy love hath been the spur, to urge me forward
For speedier diligence.
Sir your own fame
And memory will best reward themselves.
All gain is loss (sweet beauty) if I miss
My comforts here: The brother and the sister
Have double conquered me, but thou moist triumph.
Good sir, I have a father.
Yes, a brave one;
Coldest thou obscure thy Beauty, yet the happiness
Of being but his daughter, were a dowre
Fit for a Prince: what say ye?
You have deserved
As much as I should grant.
By this fair hand
I take possession.
What in words I dare not,
Imagine in my silence.
Thou art all virtue.
I'll tell thee how: Baldwin the Emperor,
Pretending title, more through tyranny,
Then right of conquest, or descent, usurped
The stile of Lord o'er all the Grecian Islands,
And under colour of an amity
With Cre•t, preferred the Marquess Mountferato
To be our Governor; the Creations vexed
By the ambitious Turks, in hope of aide
From the Emperor, received for General,
This Mountferato; he (the wars appeased)
Plots with the state of Venice, and takes money
Of them for Candy: they paid well, he steals
Away in secret; since which time, that right
The state of Venice claims o'er Candy, is
By purchase, not inheritance, or Conquest:
And hence grows all our quarrel.
So a usurer
Or Lumbard-Jew, might with some bags of trash,
Buy half the Western world.
Money Arcanes
Is now a God on earth: it cracks virginities,
And turns a Christian, Turk;
Bribes justice, cut-throats honour, does what not?
Not captives Candy.
Nor makes thee dishonest,
Nor me a Coward—Now sir, here is homely,
But friendly entertainment.
Sir, I find it.
And like it, do ye not?
My repair speaks for me.
Fernando we were speaking off—how this?
Your friend, and servant.
Creditors, my Lord,
Are Masters and no Servants: as the world goes,
Debtors are very slaves to those to whom
They have been beholding to; in which respect,
I should fear you Gonzalo.
Me my Lord?
You owe me nothing.
What nor love, nor money?
Yes, love, I hope not money.
All this bravery,
Will scarcely make that good.
It is done already:
See sir, your Mortgage which I only took,
In case you and your son had in the wars
Miscarried: I yield it up again: it is yours.
Are ye so conscionable?
It is your own.
Pish, pish, I'll not receive what is not mine,
That were a dangerous business.
Sir, I am paid for it,
The sums you borrowed, are returned; The bonds
Cancelled, and your acquittance formerly sealed:
Look here sir, Gaspero is witness to it.
My honoured Lord, I am.
My Lord Fernando,
Arcanes and the rest, you all shall testify,
That I acquit Lord Cassilane for ever,
Of any debts to me.
It is plain and ample:
Fortune will once again smile on us fairly.
But hark ye, hark ye, if you be in earnest,
Whence comes this bounty? or whose is it?
In short,
The great Erota, by this Secretary,
Returned me my full due.
Erota? why
Should she do this?
You must ask her the cause,
She knows it best.
So ho; Arcanes, none
But women pity us? soft-hearted women,
I am become a brave fellow now, Arcanes,
Am I not?
Why sir, if the gracious Princess
Have took more special notice of your services,
And means to be more thankful than some others,
It were an injury to gratitude,
To disesteem her favours.
Sir she ever
For your sake most respectively loved me.
The Senate, and the body of this Kingdom,
Are herein (let me speak it without arrogance)
Beholding to her: I will thank her for it;
And if she have reserved a means whereby
I may repay this bounty with some service,
She shall be then my Patronise: come sirs,
We'll taste a cup of wine together now.
I must speak with you in secret.
You shall—Now Gaspero, ell's well.
There's news
You must be acquainted with.
Come, there is no master-peece in Art, like Policy. 
T The Senate is informed at full.
Gonzalo.
Dreams not of my arrival yet.
Nor thinks
It is possible his plots can be discovered:
He fats himself with hopes of Crowns, and Kingdoms,
And laughs securely, to imagine how
He means to gull all but himself: when truly,
None is so grossly gulled as he.
There was never
A more arch villain.
Peace, the Senate comes.
How closely, Treason cloaks it self in forms
Of Civil honesty?
And yet how palpably
Does heaven reveal it?
Gracious Lords.
The Ambassador,
Lord Paulo Michael, Advocate
To the great Duke of Venice.
You are most welcome,
Your Master is a just and noble Prince.
My Lords, he bad me say; that you may know
How much he scorns, and (as good Princes ought)
Daisies base indirect, and godless treacheries;
To your more Sacred wisdoms he refers
The punishment due to the false Gonzalo,
Or else to send him home to Venice.
Herein
The Duke is royal: Gaspero the Prince
Of Cyprus answered he would come.
My Lords,
He will not long be absent 
You Fernando,
Have made the State your debtor: worthy Prince,
We shall be suitors to you for your presence,
In hearing, and determining of matters
Greatly concerning Candy.
Fathers, I am
A stranger.
Why, the cause (my Lord) concerns
A stranger: please you seat your self.
How ever
Unfit, since you will have it so (my Lords)
You shall command me.
You my Lord Fernando,
With the Ambassador, withdraw a while.
My Lords, we shall. 
Melitus, and the Secretary,
Give notice to Gonzalo, that the Senate
Requires his presence. 
What concerns the business? 
Thus noble Prince—
Let me alone, thou trouble me,
I will be heard.
You know not what you doe.
Forbear: who's he that is so rude? whats he that dares
To interrupt our counsels?
One that has guarded,
Those Purple robes from Cankers worse then Moods,
One that hath kept your fleeces on your backs,
That would have been snatched from you: but I see
It is better now to be a dog, a Spaniel
In times of Peace, then boast the bruised scars,
Purchased with loss of blood in noble wars:
My Lords, I speak to you.
Lord Cassilane,
We know not what you mean.
Yes, you are set
Upon a bench of justice; and a day
Will come (hear this, and quake ye potent great ones)
When you your selves shall stand before a judge,
Who in a pair of scales will weigh your actions,
Without abatement of one grain: as then
You would be found full weight, I charge ye fathers
Let me have justice now.
Lord Cassilane,
What strange distemperature provokes distrust
Of our impartiality? be sure
We'll flatter no mans injuries.
It is well;
You have a Law (Lords) that without remorse
Dooms such as are belcapred with the curse
Of foul ingratitude unto death.
We have.
Then do me justice.
Mad-man, whether run'st thou?
Peace Decius, I am deaf.
Will you forget
Your greatness and your modesty?
Hyparcha leave, I will not hear,
Lady; great, gentle, Lady.
Prithee young-man forbear to interrupt me,
Triumph not in thy fortunes; I will speak.
More uproars yet; who are they that disturb us?
The viper's come; his fears have drawn him hither,
And now (My Lords) be Chronicled for ever,
And give me justice against this vile Monster,
This bastard of my blood.
It is justice fathers,
I sue for too: and though I might command it,
(If you remember Lords, whose child I was)
Yet I will humbly beg it; this old wretch
'Has forfeited his life to me.
Tricks, tricks;
Complots, devices, twixt these pair of young-ones,
To blunt the edge of your well tempered Swords,
Wherewith you strike offenders, (Lords) but I
Am not a baby to be feared with bug-beares,
It is justice I require.
And I.
You speak too tenderly; and too much, like your self
To mean a cruelty; which would make monstrous
Your Sex: yet for the loves sake, which you once
Pleased to pretend, give my grieved father leave
To urge his own revenge; you have no cause
For yours: keep peace about ye.
Will you hear me?
Here's some strange novelty.
Sure we are mocked,
Speak one at once: say wherein hath your Son
Transgressed the Law?
O the gross mists of dullness;
Are you this Kingdoms Oracles, yet can be
So ignorant? first hear, and then consider,
That I begot him, gave him birth and life,
And education, were I must confess,
But duties of a father: I did more;
I taught him how to manage Arms, to dare
An Enemy; to court both death and dangers;
Yet these were but additions to complete
A well accomplished Soldier: I did more yet.
I made him chief Commander in the field
Next to my self, and gave him the full prospect
Of honour, and preferment; trained him up
In all perfections of a martiallist:
But he unmindful of his gratitude,
You know with what contempt of my deserts,
First kicked against mine honour, scorned all
My services; then got the palm of glory
Unto himself: yet not content with this,
He (lastly) hath conspired my death, and sought
Means to engage me to this Lady's debt,
Whose bounty, all my whole estate could never
Give satisfaction too: now honoured fathers,
For this cause only, if your Law be law,
And you the Ministers of justice; then
Think of this strange ingratitude in him.
Can this be so Antinous?
It is all true,
Nor hath my much wronged father limned my faults
In colours half so black, as in themselves,
My guilt hath dyed them: were there mercy left,
Yet mine own shame would be my Executioner:
Lords, I am guilty.
Thou belie Antinous,
Thine innocence: alas (my lords) hoe's desperate,
And talks he knows not what: you must not credit
His lunacy; I can my self disprove
This accusation: Cassilane, be yet
More merciful; I beg it.
Time, nor fate,
The world, or what is in it, shall not alter
My resolution; he shall dye.
The Sonnets
Prayers; or weeping Lovers, shall not alter
My resolution: thou shalt dye.
Why Madam,
Are ye all Marble?
Leave your shifts Antinous,
What plead you to your fathers accusation?
Most fully guilty.
You have doomed your self,
We cannot quit you now.
A burdened conscience
Will never need a hang-man: had thou dared
To have denied it, then this Sword of mine
Should on thy head have proved thy tongue a liar.
Thy sword? wretched old man, thou hast lived too long
To carry peace or comfort to thy grave;
Thou art a man condemned: my Lords this tyrant
Had perished but for me, I still supplied
His miserable wants; I sent his daughter
Money to buy him food; the bread he eat,
Was from my purse: when he (vaingloriously)
To dive into the peoples hearts, had pawned
His birth-right, I redeemed it, sent it to him,
And for requital, only made my suite,
That he would please to new receive his son
Into his favour, for whose love I told him
I had been still so friendly: But then he
As void of gratitude, as all good nature,
Distracted like a mad man, posted hither
To pull this vengeance on himself, and us;
For why, (my Lords) since by the Law, all means
Is blotted out of your commission,
As this hard hearted father hath accused
Noble Antinous, his unblemished Son,
So I accuse this father, and crave judgement.
All this is but deceit, mere trifles forged
By combination to defeat the process
Of Justice, I will have Antinous life.
Sir, what do ye mean?
I will have Cassilane's.
Cunning and cruel Lady, runs the stream
Of your affections this way? have you not
Conquest enough by treading on my grave?
Unless you send me thither in a shroud
Steeped in my fathers blood? as you are woman,
As the protests of love you vowed were honest;
Be gentler to my father.
Cassilane,
Thou hast a heart of flint: let my entreats,
My tears, the Sacrifice of griefs unfeigned,
Melt it: yet be a father to thy son,
Unmask thy long besotted judgement, see
A low obedience kneeling at the feet
Of nature: I beseech you.
Pish you cousin
Your hopes: your plots are idle: I am resolute.
Antinous, urge no further.
Hence thou Sorcery
Of a beguiling softness, I will stand,
Like the earths Center, unmoved; Lords your breath
Must finish these divisions: I confess
Civility doth teach I should not speak
Against a Lady of her birth, so high
As great Erota, but her injuries
And thankless wrongs to me, urge me to cry
Aloud for justice, Fathers.
Whether run you?
For (honoured fathers) that you all may know
That I alone am not unmatchable
In crimes of this condition, lest perhaps
You might conceive, as yet the case appears,
That this foul stain, and guilt runs in a blood;
Before this presence, I accuse this Lady
Of as much vile ingratitude to me.
Impudent Traitor!
Her? O spare Antinous;
The world reputes thee valiant, do not soil
All thy past nobleness with such a cowardice,
As murdering innocent Ladies will stamp on thee?
Brave Prince, with what unwillingness I force
Her follies, and in those her sin, be witness,
All these about me: she is bloody minded.
And turns the justice of the Law to rigour:
It is her cruelties, not I accuse her:
Shall I have Audience?
Let him speak my Lords.
Your memory will rot.
Cast all your eyes
On this, what shall I call her? truthlesse woman,
When often in my discontents, the sway
Of her unruly blood, her untamed passion,
(Or name it as you list) had hour by hour
Solicited my love, she vowed at last
She could not, would not live unless I granted
What she long sued for: I in tender pity,
To save a Lady of her birth, from ruin
Gave her her life, and promised to be hers:
Nor urged I ought from her, but secrecy,
And then enjoined her to supply such wants
As I perceived my fathers late engagements
Had made him subject to; what, shall I heap up
Long repetitions? she to quit my pity,
Not only hath discovered to my father
What she had promised to conceal, but also
Hath drawn my life into this fatal forfeit;
For which, since I must dye, crave a like
Equality of justice against her;
Not that I covet blood, but that she may not
Practice this art of falsehood on some other,
Perhaps more worthy of her love hereafter.
If this be true—
My Lords, be as the Law is,
Indifferent, upright, I do plead guilty:
Now sir, what glory have you got by this?
Alas man, I meant not to outlive thy doom;
Shall we be friends in death?
Hear me, the villain
Scandals her, honoured Lords.
Leave off to dote,
And dye a wise man▪
I am over-reach'd,
And mastered in my own resolution.
Will ye be wilful Madam? here's the curse
Of loves disdain.
Why sit you like dumb Statues?
Demur no longer.
Cassilane, Erota,
Antinous, death ye ask; and it is your dooms,
You in your follies lived, dye in your follies.
I am revenged, and thank you for it.
Yes, and I: Antinous hath been gracious.
Sir, may I presume to crave a blessing from you
Before we part.
Yes, such a one as Parents
Bestow on cursed sons now, now, I laugh
To see how those poor younglings are both cheated
Of life and comfort: look ye, lookye, Lords,
I go but some ten minutes (more or less)
Before my time, but they have fiuely coz'nd
Themselves of many, many hopeful years
Amidst their prime of youth and glory; now 
My vengeance is made full. Welcome my joy,
Thou come to take a seasonable blessing
From thy half buried fathers hand; I am dead
Already girl, and so is she and he,
We all are wormes-meat now.
I have heard all;
Nor shall you dye alone: Lords on my knees
I beg for justice too.
Against whom, for what?
First let me be resolved; does the Law favour
None, be they ne'er so mighty?
Not the greatest.
Then justly I accuse of foul ingratitude
(My Lords) you of the Senate all, not one
Excepted.
Porp. Us?
Annophill—
You are the Authors
Of this unthrifty bloud-shed; when your enemies
Came marching to your gates, your children sucked not
Safe at their mothers breasts, your very Cloisters
Were not secure, your starting-holes of refuge
Not free from danger, nor your lives your own:
In this most desperate Ecstasy, my father,
This aged man, not only undertook
To guard your lives, but did so; and beat off
The daring foe; for you he pawned his lands,
To pay your soldiers, who without their pay
Refused to strike a blow: but (Lords) when peace
Was purchased for you, and victory brought home;
Where was your gratitude, who in your Coffers
Hoarded the rusty treasure which was due
To my unminded father? he was glad
To live retired in want, in penury,
Whilst you made feasts of surfeit, and forgot
Your debts to him: The sum of all is this,
You have been unthankful to him; and I crave
The rigour of the Law against you all.
My Royal spirited daughter!
Annophill.
Thou art a worthy wench; let me embrace thee.
Lords, why doe ye keep your seats? they are no places
For such as are offenders.
Though our ignorance
Of Cassilanes engagements might assuage
Severity of justice, yet to show
How no excuse should smooth a breach of Law,
I yield me to the trial of it.
So must I:
Great Prince of Cyprus, you are left
The only Moderator in this difference;
And as you are a Prince be a Protector
To woeful Candy.
What a Scene of misery
Hath thine obdurate frowardness (old man)
Drawn on thy Countries bosom? and for that
Thy proud ambition could not mount so high
As to be styled thy Countries only Patron,
Thy malice hath descended to the depth
Of hell, to be renowned in the Title
Of the destroyer? dost thou yet perceive
What curses all posterity will brand
Thy grave with? that at once hast robed this kingdom
Of honour and of safety.
Children yet unborn
Will stop their ears when thou art named.
The world will be too little to contain
The memory of this detested deed;
The Furies will abhor it.
What the sword
Could not enforce, your peevish thirst of honour
(A brave, cold, weak, imaginary fame)
Hath brought on Candy: Candy groans, not these
That are to die.
It is happiness enough
For them, that they shall not survive to see
The wounds wherewith thou stab the land that gave
Thee life and name.
It is Candy's wrack shall feel—
The mischief of your folly.
Pos. Annophill—
I will not be entreated.
Prithee Annophill.
Why would ye urge me to a mercy which
You in your self allow not?
It is the Law,
That if the party who complains, remit
The offender, he is freed: is it not so Lords?
Pos. It is so.
Antinous, By my shame observe
What a close witch-craft popular applause is:
I am awaked, and with clear eyes behold
The Lethargy wherein my reason long
Hath been be-charm'd: Live, live, my matchless son,
Blessed in thy fathers blessing; much more blessed
In thine own virtues: let me dew thy cheeks
With my unmanly tears: Rise, I forgive thee:
And good Antinous, if I shall be thy father
Forgive me: I can speak no more.
Dear Sir,
You new beget me now—Madam your pardon,
I heartily remit you.
I as freely
Discharge thee Cassilane.
My gracious Lords,
Repute me not a blemish to my Sex,
In that I strove to cure a desperate evil
With a more violent remedy: your lives,
Your honours are your own.
Then with consent
Be reconciled on all sides: Please you fathers
To take your places.
Let us again ascend,
With joy and thankfulness to heaven: And now
To other business Lords.
Two hours and more Sir,
The Senate hath been set.
And I not know it?
Who sits with them?
My Lord, the Prince of Cyprus.
Gaspero,
Why how comes that to pass?
Some weighty cause
I warrant you.
Now Lords the business? ha?
VVho's here, Erota?
Secretary doe your charge
Upon that Traitor.
Traitor?
Yes, Gonzalo, Traitor,
Of treason to the peace and state of Candy,
I doe arrest thee.
Me? thou dog?
With License
From this grave Senate, I arrest thee likewise
Of Treason to the State of Venice.
Ha?
Is Michael here? nay then I see
I am undone.
I shall not be your Queen,
Your Duchess, or your Empress.
Dull, dull brain.
O I am fooled?
Look Sir, do you know this hand?
Do you know this Seal? First (Lords) he writes to Venice,
To make a perfect league, during which time
He would in private keep some Troops in pay,
Bribe all the Sentinels throughout this kindom,
Corrupt the Captains; at a Banquet poison
The Prince, and greatest Peers, and in conclusion
Yield Candy slave to Venice.
Next, he contracted
With the Illustrious Princess, the Lady Erota,
In hope of marriage with her, to deliver
All the Venetian gallantry, and strength,
Upon their first arrival, to the mercy
Of her and Candy.
This is true Gonzalo.
Let it be true: what then?
My Lord Ambassador,
What's your demand?
As likes the State of Candy,
Either to sentence him as he deserves
Here, or to send him like a slave to Venice.
We shall advise upon it.
O the devils,
That had not thrust this trick into my pate—
A Politician fool? destruction, plague
Candy and Venice both.
Porp. Away with him.
Come sir, Isle see you safe. 
Lords, ever you part
Be witness to another change of wonder;
Antinous, now be bold, before this presence,
Freely to speak, whether or no I used
The humblest means affection could contrive,
To gain thy love.
Madam, I must confess it,
And ever am your servant.
Yes Antinous,
My servant, for my Lord thou shalt be never:
I here disclaim the interest thou had once
In my too passionate thoughts. Most noble Prince,
If yet a relic of thy wonted flames
Live warm within thy bosom, then I blush not
To offer up the assurance of my faith,
To thee that hast deserved it best.
O Madam,
You play with my calamity.
Let heaven
Record my truth for ever.
With more joy
Then I have words to utter, I accept it.
I also pawn you mine.
The man that in requital
Of noble and un-sought affection
Grows cruel, never loved, nor did Antinous.
Yet herein (Prince) ye are beholding to him;
For his neglect of me humbled a pride,
Which to a virtuous wife had been a Monster.
For which Isle rank him my deserving friend.
Much comfort dwell with you, as I could wish
To him I honour most.
O my Antinous,
My own, my own good son.
One suit I have to make.
To whom Fernando?
Lord Cassilane to you.
To me?
This Lady
Hath promised to be mine.
Your blessing sir;
Brother your love.
You cannot sir bestow her
On a more noble gentleman.
Say thou so?
Antinous I confirm it. Here Fernando,
Live both as one; she is thine.
And herein sister,
I honour you for your wise settled love.
This is a day of Triumph, all Contentions
Are happily accorded: Candy's peace
Secured, and Venice vowed a worthy friend. 

BEfore I speak, me thinks, I hear some say,
What can there be, to furnish out a Play,
In such a Home-spun Title?—In a Plain
Poor Country Girl? Such, yields no lofty strain;
No sinewy stuff, extracted from a Mine▪
Of deep, and Abstruse reading; no strong line,
No such a strain, and this poor Title, suite
Like old Pan's Bagpipe, and Apollo's Lute.
What must we look for then? A desperate wit?
Scoenes, full of veins, where, without a Hit
No man escapes, comes near it? This indeed
Were to some purpose; and the way to speed.
But this too's from this Title.—None of these?
Alas poor Girl, whore's then, thy hope to please?
What can she sing? and, like the Northern Lass▪
(That brave blithe Girl) hope to procure a pass?
Or, can she fight?—If so so stout, so bold
A brave Virago, like the Girl, worth Gold.
Or is she one; that once a Country Maid,
Cracked in the carriage, is come to Trade,
And set up some new Leaguer? Or suppose
Our Girl, a virtuous Copy, and so close
This inquisition of her,—She is—what?
Her own presentment, best can tell you that,
Which be but pleased to grace, with love and favour,
You make the poor Girl rich, and Crown our labour.
Believe me Sir, I have told you what your worship may most certainly trust to.
May I not speak with her?
You know my place.
There's no more hope from the deep pit of grief
To raise in her any conceit of love,
Then there's to raise her husband up again
From the cold bed he sleeps in: from the Grave.
Take this for all: My Lady Sir, has vowed
To live▪ and die a Widow.—So I leave you.—
Is it possible, that such a one as she;
So young, so beautiful; so full of blood;
Such lusty blood, as shoe's? for such a loss,
Should lose that youth; that Beauty, that quick blood
In such a cold retirement?—Well, I know not!
But if she have made such a vow, and keep it!
To find out such another, and a Phoenix,
Is but an equal labour.
Save you Sir Oliver; save you, sweet Sir Oliver.
As much to you Sir; kind M. Rash.
You have bin with the Widow; this melancholy Lady already. Give you much joy of your fair hopes Sir Oliver.
As much to your self; to your self Sir, kind M. Rash.
Isle hope as much as I can, though you be a Knight; and I but an honest Citizen. A Mercer, is a Merchant, and
will look for good Ware, for his Money.
If he should enter now?—Isle see the issue.
You know my coming: to speak with your Lady, M. William.
But shoe's not at leisure to hear you.
I hope you doe but jest.
Believe me Sir, in earnest.
But, I'll not take it in earnest.
But you must.—Then you'll be Rash indeed Sir.
Though you be a Citizen, you are not free of this Hall,
And therefore must have no admittance.
Give you much joy of your fair hopes.
Another?
Save you Gentlemen: how is it M. Rash?
As well as we may, M. Plush.
You have got the start of me, I see that Gentlemen. A Suit, brought me home this morning, made me lye so much the longer: but, my Taylors long Bill, like a Woodcock, as hee is, shall be so much the longer a paying.—You have been within?
In our time Sir.
I mean, this morning.
But—the Lady means no such thing Sir.
We heard of your Worships new Suit, and would not go in before it.
I'll lead the way then.
M. William? good morrow good morrow sweet M. William.
That sweet, to your sweetest self Sir.
And whore's thy Lady?—You see, we come, to come to her.—
By your favour Sir, you are too hasty.
Why, is not thy Lady up yet?
Why, doe you mean to take her down Sir?—Buy Sir.
This Fellow's saucy.
Minds not your Worships new Suit Sir.—But we must be content.
We may be patient Sir, but not content; for no∣thing contents me, but the Lady.
Nor me, but that beautiful Lady.
Who have wee here? Sweet and soft, M. Plush. M. Rash!—I dare be so bold as embrace you too.—But my Noble Sir. My Sir, of a thousand per annum.
Why, I can be a Knight, an I lust Sir.
An I can be a Knight, an I lust Sir.
Dubbed, with the City Dagger.—Then Rash, would be rash indeed. You come to see my Sister?
With all our hearts we would Sir.
Alas good hearts.
Me thinks the Gates should of themselves fly op,
To such brave men as you are.
You have the old heart, still Sir.
The young heart still Sir Oliver;—the mad heart,—the merry heart; the light heart, with the candle of conceit, burning in it, as bright as Lucifer, Hesper, Vesper.
You have not bin within? I will make out this pair of Aces,
And then you shall see my Sister.
I perceive by your melancholy looks,
My melancholy, pettish, peevish Sister,
Is not at this time to be spoke withal.
It is such a foolish thing;—She knows not worth,
Nor how to entertain't: suffice it Gentlemen,
I doe;—And shall not go behind her back
To let her know your merit.
Will you Sir?
And in a just proportion to that merit,
That Mass of Merit, you shall find her favour:
So M. Plush, and worthy M. Rash,
I shall desire you leave us.
You'll remember.
Shall I remember (Gentlemen) to eat?
To drink? to sleep?—Then Isle remember you.
Then?—When Sir Robert?
When I am asleep.—Awake, I shall never
mind i'm. For their Worship are hardly worth it.
Yet in a just proportion, to their merit.
Yes, that's just nothing:—Hang i'm gloworms, hang i'm.
Here's another rub in our Ally Sir.
A Tenants son of mine.—And how does my honest Abr'am.
The better your good Worship is well Sir. I was to seek your good Worship, at your Right Worshipful house Sir: but, missing you there, I rejoice I have met with you here.
Why, what's the matter Abr'am, what's the matter?
In the way of love, as they say: from my father, and my suster; and my tother suster too;—You know who I mean, Sir Robert.
Thy scolding sister. Abr. You are in the right, Sir Robert.
And how does Margaret, my pretty Tenant?
That pretty one, is prettily well Sir.
Remember me to her by this.—A Ring.
Within these two or three days, at the furthest, I should breath a Gelding; It may be, that ways, and visit my pret∣tie Tenant.
Long may your Worships Gelding breathe, and your Worshipful self also.
I am in hast Sir Robert.
Take your own time good Abram.
Thank your good Worship Sir Robert.
I have done your patience wrong; indeed I have;
But, in the best, that lies in me to right it 
You shall command me Sir: Now to my Sister.
Now, whore's my Sister?
Shoe's within Sir Robert.
Come then, let's to her.
You must pardon me.
Shoe's so retired to solitude; and set
So deep in grief, that till her sighs, and tears,
Will give her leave to give that entertain
That shall become such worthy Visitants,
(Which yet, they will not) tic her strict command
That no man enter.
Not my self?
Your self,
Sir, if you would not swell her grief too big
For her faint breast to carry, give her way.
A little time may change her.
Tic enough.—You see Sir Oliver.
Your Love, Sir Robert.
But, as her Gentleman discreetly said,
A little time may change her: We must still
In such a kind humour a women's will.
But, she's thine own, be bold on it.—
Come, thou make such a Matter, of Nothing.
Nothing, doe you call it, Master William? I know not, but I am sure, I feel it something—Tic almost, kicking ripe already.
Almost, kicking ripe already,—Come, come, thou art, A Chamber-maid still;—And I prithee, whats this, but a work that belongs to the Chamber? Kicking ripe already, This is not the first time, that thou hast been kicked with an urchin. Once, Twice,—this is the third time of kicking.
Well, you wo'not, marry me?
And hazard my place, wo my Lady?—and yet, Now I think on it.—I will—
Marry me?
To some of my old acquaintance. There be a hun∣dred in the City, that have swallowed worse bits then thou art. Hist.
I know, my danger, and shall have a care, according.
Beseech you. Let the love you seem to show
In these persuasions, be expressed in words,
That better suit with such a robe as this,
And my immutable resolve.
Immutable?—then we persuade, in vain.
I am bound to say
You have lost a worthy Gentleman;—My self,
A noble Master;—one that was a Man
Worth your best memory: the multitude
Of sighs you have sent after him, worth all
The expense of tears, you have bestowed upon him.
But when we look into his Tomb and there
See him locked up in Marble;—in the still,
And sad imagined language of the Grave,
We are instructed, Nay, commanded Lady,
To period our vain grievings.
He has told you the naked truth on it.
It is but in vain to grieve;—For, is it not sed
The quick must live byth' quick, and not byth' dead?
He's gone,—Heaven be with him;—He was a Gentleman;
An honest man;—and, which is more;—a proper Gentleman:
But, when Gentility,—Honesty,—and proportion,
Lye in the Grave once, I have done with 'em.
Thy tongue's my ceaslesse torment.
Let me tell you,
That infinite of love you seem to have fixed,
Upon the heart of your departed Husband,
Loses no scruple, of the worth it has,
Placed on a second Husband.
Mark you that now?
Nay, I dare tell you, that in a second Match,
You love him more; more love, more honour him,
Then, in your mourning Widowhood.
Mark you that now?
Isle make it open to you: whilst you keep
Encompassed, with this solitude▪ a Widow,
You seem, to voice, to the ill censuring world,
Some imperfection in your self; some stain
Makes you unworthy of a second Match:
At lest, unworthy, of a worthy Husband,
And in the opinion, (which is easily raised)
Question your Husbands judgement.—Or, it may be,
The estate he left you Lady;—pulling so
Upon the Name, you strive to dignify,
Disgrace, defames, and scandal.
Mark you that now?
If you so loved him living, love him dead,
As I advise you Lady.
I, I, doe.
It is the best Tomb-stone you can lay upon him;
The noblest Monument, you can erect;
And to that Monument, an Epitaph,
Shall make him live for ever.
Law you there now!—Shall make him live for ever!
You are not dumb trow?—are you?
Would thou we•…'t.
Or I had lost my hearing.—I can wish
Nothing more adverse to me, then your tongues:
And therefore, if your visits bring with them
Nothing, but these persuasions.
Keep away.
Nay, as good speak't as think it.—Here's a coil for a Husband, I have had for mine own part,—1.—2.—3.—4. And yet if the fifth come up handsomely to me,—I know what I know, I warrant you.
How five?
Fifteen, an the Destinies so have decreed it.
Madame, there be Suitors below would see you: M. Rash, the Mercer;—one Plush, a humorous Gallant;—and a spick and span new Suitor, a Country Gentleman,—one, M. Gregory Dwindle.
Spruce M. Rash I know.
And I M. Plush, a notable humorous Coxcomb. But what's that Gregory?
Unknown to me: but believe me, together, They make up, a delicate motion.—Is your Ladyship pleased to see 'em?
Present your Motion some-where else, our griefs give way to no such lightness.
Very good.—I'll tell i'm what you say:
Pray stay a little.
I know these Suitors are but empty things;
Not worth one serious entertain; yet Sister,
I wo'd not have you beat i'm back, at door:
Pray let i'm enter; Let i'm look upon you.
Still your desire's, my anguish.
Come, come, pray.—You are so melancholy.
Why, their mirth—will be a means to cure you.
Kill me rather.
Go, prithee bid i'm come.
Bid i'm be gone.
Nay, then, you're too too cruel.—Prithee stay.
Nay, an you know no other merriment,
Then what you raise from my vexation, take it;
I will not hinder your desires; pray take it.
You will not leave us, will you?
Leave this room.
And go mew your self up in your Chamber?
An you will needs:—Let me entreat one favour.
Well, what is it?
That, in your absence you'd be pleased to let
Your waiting Gentlewoman, Mistress Barberry,
Appear in your apparel: Tic but slipping off
This upper garment; and this mourning Veil,
And shees my Lady.
How?—My Bab, my Lady!
It will be sport to us; and to your self
A rare advantage Sister: for this trick
Keeps all your foolish Suitors at that distance,
Their trouble shall ne'er touch you.—Will you?
Will you?
Though pleasure, be no pleasure to this bosom,
Since you propose th'acquittance of that trouble,
Your desire's granted.
But be speedy then
With your directions for her carriage in it, 
And we shall fit 'em neatly.—Call i'm in.
Did you ever see such a self-will'd thing as this is?—a widow these two months, and yet not hear of a Suitor.
The Gentlemen, an't please you.
Yes indeed, an't please you.
Master Rash.
Your servant, good deed law, Gentlewoman.
Master Plush.
My name is Plush; Master my Title, and Sir, a Title, that may be.
And my name is Gregory—
Fop: thy sound is out of season.—But whore's the Lady?
I, whore's the Lady?
Wee would see the Lady.
I hope she has done mourning now,—has she not?
Why, dos the Lady morn?
Indeed she dos.
Tic a delicate thing to morn.—Well, an my Fa∣there would but dye once!
Would we could see this Lady.
You have your wish already.
Beauteous Lady!
Most beauteous Lady!
Most beautiful Lady, that may be: for yet, I see no such matter.
Thine eyes are veil▪d with ignorance, or else,
Through this thin veil, thou might, as we,—behold
Matter of admiration!—You'll vouchsafe;—
Not yet.
Alas:—upon their Captive heart,
My sorrows yet have set too strong a Guard
For such delights to enter.
I could wish▪
That Conqueror of thy heart, and all his Guard
Were visible, that I might challenge them.
I marry sir; that we•…e a challenge indeed.
Me thinks I could—doe—
What, doe you think you could doe Sir?
O—my most delicate Lady!
Doe,—his—most delicate Lady.—A la∣rible doe, indeed law.
Well Lady; if this be the man shall have you,
You shall have a man, I can tell you.
If I be the man that shall have her,
She shall have a man, I can tell you.
But, hoe's a fighting man.
A fighting man?—Let him play at the ancient wea∣pone, an he were a Fencing man, I'll have a Bout with him.
The ancient weapon?—What weapon's that?
Why this?
As wise, as valiant! it is the ancientst weapon in∣deed Sir.
And why not this?
I am better acquainted with this.
Well, wee shall meet?
And meet again:—Tell me of fighting Lady!
I see you are valiant Sir;—and you are happy
In having so much valour as you see
Attend your beauty.
I must confess them, worthy Gentlemen;
But they must pardon me:—the worth I have lost,
With my dead husband, is so full, and fresh,
Upon my understanding, that all else
Have •…et but homely entertain:—And yet,
You're welcome Gentlemen.—
For that, we thank you.
We must hope still.
Well, an my Father would but dye once!
I live in hope too Lady.
You see their valour Sir:—and what's your wea∣pone?
I am no man of the sword;—I have no weapon.
How Sir?—No weapon!—
What should
you do in Cupids fencing School, And have no weapon?
There was a time,—I could have crossed a eudgell.
And that you Sir?
Good sooth sometimes I can tell you:—yet, if any man strike me, I have a weapon too Sir.
The coldest flint, has fire I see: What weapon?
One, that is indeed,—All weapons.—Long-Sword; Sword and Dagger;—Sword and Buck∣ler; Single Rapier, Rapier and Dagger; Case of Rapiers; Halberd, Halfe-Pike; Quarter-Staffe; Short-Sword and Gauntlet; and that terrible Fly-flap, the Fashion.
All these in on•…?—
Or one that's worth all these;—and that,—in a word, is the Law Sir.
A terrible weapon indeed Sir.
There, let me firk 'em, and jerk 'em: There, Let me stand upon Terms;—There, Let me play the Ma∣ster, and M. Atturny, my Usher, and then,—with all the weapons in that School, have at 'em.
This goes beyond your Rapier; or your ancient weapon, the Fist.
Body of me, my husband, and Sir Oliver.
What's to be done?
Doe, as thou hast done Wench.
Play the Lady, a little longer.
Handsomely Bab, and I'll promise thee, it shall cost me a Chamble•… Petticoat.
I'll do it as well as I can then.
Come, come, we will speak, and speed too, my Knight, of a thousand per annum whore's this mourning La∣die?—What, my Madonna?—and my Lady Littleworth. Hoyday? This Covy of Coxcombs too!
Sir Robert.
One.—
Kind Sir Robert.
Two.—
Worthy Sir Robert.—
Three, yet never a wise word amongst 'em.—What, still in Du•…bs, and dolors?—An ye were as heavy as Lead, it was but a light trick of you to deny Access to such a brave man as this is, and allow't to such Mimics as these are.—Death, •… could kick i'm out of the room. And you, though you bee my wives sister, for lodging such baseness within you.
Why, you are not out of your wits?
You have no wit to be out of. Gentlemen, you are all—Hobbyhorses. An it please you, to leave the house now; and come again,—when you are sent for,—you shall be—heartily glad, to be welcome.
You see his humour Gentlemen; pray leave us.
There's no resisting of him; for he has Rapier, fist, the law, and all, for any man, that shall thwart him.
Why, but I hope—
Not one word more, an you love me.
Off, ere the flame grow higher.
Come, take my counsel, and forget him.
Never.
Still looking downward, to your husbands grave?
To those that wear so sad a suit as this,
The Grave's the glass they use to deck i'm by.
Pray give me leave.
She dos it to a hair.
Prithee look up a little;—I can show thee
A Glass, shall show thee better things;—a Glass,
That shall reflect, no such affrighting shadows—
Nor shadows (beauteous Lady) but the same
True, and essential comforts.
O.—O.—O.
Excellent, mourning Lady.
The Nuptial knot, binds loving Pairs together,
Only for term of life, has no extent
O'er the divorce of Death.
Pray, pray no more.
That only binds the living to the living,
And not the living to the dead.
That flesh that has a soul within it, the endow∣mints,
And excellencies, bounteous Heaven bestows,
To that, has nothing but the frightful shape,
And key-cold figure of a man.
Yet this,
While thus, you dote upon your husbands dust,
You doe sweet Lady; and this beauty bind
To stenches, and corruption; so imposing
Upon your self Mezentius cruelty.
You have my resolution; so, pray leave me.
An you be buried in your Husbands grave,
I see my suit must dye too.
Yes, and let it
For ever, Let it die to her, and live
To one that better shall deserve it: come,
I'll bring thee, though she be mine own Madona's Sister,
My Knight, of a thousand per annum, to her betters:—one that is younger, fairer, richer, and it may be,—Honester too Sir.
How Sir Robert? Honester.
Honester?
An she prostrate her self to a set of Morris∣dancers;—and neglect such a Caesar as this is.—Come Sir Oliver, come, let's away.
Nay, but hark you, hark you Sir Robert; and worthy Sir Oliver; that you may see this Lady,
Is not the woman that you take her for;
Look, doe you know this Lady?
How, Mistress Bab?
My Ladies Chambermaid!
A trick of mirth they put upon these Coxcombs.
Were you my Lady?
So, your Lady would have it, Sir Robert.
Why, god-a-mercie faith.
There's all the comfort they are like to have.
This cloud's like Iuno; the poor shadow Sir.
The substance, we'll court for you.
My Lady Bab.—How like you this Sir Oliver?
This change, has put some life into me Sir.
And I must tell you, bettered my opinion
Both of the Ladies wisdom, and her goodness.
But hark you wife, may we not see my Sister?
•…aith, yet her temper is not as Weed have it:
But we shall win her by degrees, and turn
Her melancholy to a sprightly humour.
A day, or two days passage.
Come Sir Oliver.
Mean time we'll see what mirth my house can yield
To entertain you with.—A ha, my Girl!
Why such a Wench is worth her weight in Pearl.
Well, thou hast played my Lady, like a Lady.
I have a trick from this conceit, to doe,
Shall make us sport, and help thy swelling too.
Sir, I have spoke my danger.
A dangerous case believe me.
And yet, me thinks, there's no great danger neither.
For, say a man offer to blow thee up with Love-powder,
If his train lie so open, you may see it, you have the wit I hope to shun it;—h'an't you.
I have done hitherto.
And doest thou fear,—thou shalt hold out no longer?
Sir, I doe not.
For, all the policies, and power he has,
Can ne'er prevail to conquest.—No, tho fear
Be to our Sex a common attribute;
In such a fight as this, my resolution
Has that Heroic temper, I dare meet
My death, ever my dishonour:—my dishonour!
For virtue's virtue, in what breast soar,
And her great splendour, equal.
Splint?—Heyday!
But to the point, what is he?—Do I know him?
Yes, if you know Sir Robert Malory, Your Landlord Father.
How Sir Robert?
He.—Sometimes,—(tho clouded in a course disguise)
He lays temptations to mine ear himself:
Sometimes by deputy; sometimes by Letters;
And sometimes by rich gifts.—As if that Gem
(Once gone) can never be bought back again,
Were to be fold so basely.—Here's my sore,
Assist me in the remedy.
Sir Robert!
He aim against thy chastity? Alas.
Has he bestowed upon thine Infancy,
That care, and cost, that he has done?—Maintained thee
Among his own?—Fed thee among his own?
Apparelled thee, as he has clothed his own?
In the same School, in the same qualities,
Had thee instructed with his own?—Has he
So beautified thy mind?—So graced thy body!
So many years in his own house!—And now—
(So close his favours follow thee)—does he
Maintain thee here?—Here in this homely Roof,
A star to that poor glimmering candle light,
My poverty could afford thee!—And for this,
Is this the best you can return him?
No—Father, for these should I forget to pay,
The most obsequious duties I can tender,
It were just in heaven I should forget my self.
Had this been spoke of any other man.
I might have lent an ear to it:—but, Sir Robert!
Noble Sir Robert!—that brave man, Sir Robert!
Our bounteous Benefactor!—Say he have
Scattered some words in the way of merriment,
Some pleasant, idle,—wanton,—what d' ye call it?
Sprinkled a little Bawdry in his speech?
(As Courtiers may, and ne'er be questioned for it)
That cuts not off a May denhead.—Nay, perchance
The merriment, that you in erpret lust,
Was his mere love to virtue.
Virtue!
Yes.—Tic my conceit, that all his talk,—his
Letters, and all the gifts he sent thee, were employed,
〈◊〉' way of trial:—Not to make thee nought;
But, so to sound thy goodness.
Sound my goodness!
Not to overcome thy chastity; but to try
If any other should assail the Fort,
How stoutly thoud'st maintain it.
Think you so?
I'll think so too then Father:—Let him try me.
But jest, or earnest, he shall ne'er come ny me.
Why, this is fine, you have the golden time on it.
What golden time?—You'll still be scolding.
Scolding!—Mary come up Mistress Jinnie-•…inn; We cannot speak to you, but we scold.—Well, I say little.
Nothing at all were better.
But I'll say something; Has a woman a tongue to say nothing?
Prithee be patient Sister.
Yes I waun't you. I must wash, and scour; And Brew, and Bake, and doe this thing,—and doe that thing; and doe every thing; while such a beautiful Blowse as you are, must sit still of your tail, and doe nothing.
Why, doest thou not see her at her work?
At wo•…k!—A geate peyce o work, a deed law!—Prick, prick, prick.—As if she had nothing in the world to mind—but Prick, Prick, Prick.—But it is no matter,—tic but my hard fortune; I am a fool indeed, and so you make me.
What, what, a shower after this peal of thunder?—Na•…, doe not cry good Gillian.
O, Father, Father.
Now Boy, what news with you now?
Brave news Father,—News of the brave Sir To∣bert
Pursue me still?—Good Father give me leave,
While hoe's come in, and gone again.—
What leave?
To abc•…ned my self;—but in some neighbours house:
I have a trick to pass him—You may tell him,
I'm gone to London.
When I have told him already, you are here in the Parlour a sewing.
Come, you're a Baggage; you're a foolish Baggage,
To injure with such frivolous suspi•…ions,
A Gentleman of his repute, and goodness!
Come, let me hear no more on it.
Sister Gillian,—I have the rarest news for you!
For me▪tic well;▪ And what news have you got for me Sir?
Skipping news, lipping news, tripping news.
How, Dancing brother Abr'am?—Dancing!
Prancing, advancing, dancing!
Nay, it is a Match;—a Match upon a Wager.
A Match.—Who be they?
Why, all the Maids of our Town Edmonton,
And all the mad Wenches of Waltam.
A Match, and leave me out?—When, when is it Brother?
Mary, •…even this morning;—they are now going to it, halter skelter.
And leave me out? —Where brother Abram? where?
Why there, Sister Gillian; there.—At our own door almost: O•… the Greene there, close by the May-pole. Hark, you may hear them hither.
Ta la la la leero, ta la, la leero—&amp;c.
An I be not one.—
Thou't never be two, I think;—For on my con∣science, there is no man that knows her, has valour enough, to come near her▪
Why, well said Girl, keep but that resolution, 
And let his purposes, be what they can,
They cannot hurt thee.—Look, hoe's come already.
Good morrow Tenant;—good morrow beautiful Tenant.
As much to my worthy Landlord.
As much to my worthy Landlord.
My Tenant Abra'm!—God-a-mercy good
Tenant Abra'm.
I want your welcome fair one.
Sir, you are welcome.
Had this bi•… spoke, with smiles upon thy cheek,
I durst have sworn the Syllables had been
The Language of thy heart; thy heart, sweet Peggy.
What, still so adverse to my pleasure?—Tenant—
And my young Tenant;—shall I crave the Room?
I have something to deliver from my Lady,
That she would have a secret to the Ear
Of any, But fair Margaret.
The Room?
Our poverty possesses nothing Sir,
But what is yours; you may command it.—Come.
I smell my Landlord; but,—no words but mum.
Still, still this cloud upon thy brow sweet Peg?
You know my mind.
And you know mine Sir Robert.
I mean, I love thee, my sweet Peggy.
Doe you?—Not half so well as I love you.
Love me!
Then there's some hope again.—Why, god-a-mercy,
Let's see how handsomely thou't give thy body
To my embraces Girl.—How, fly i'm Peg?
Not kiss me neither?—such a thing denied,
How can thou say thou love me?
Yes Sir Robert:
I love you in your Name: your Reputation;
The dignity you carry in your years;
The goodness should go with i'm;—In your Lady;
I love you Sir, in the fair Benevolence
You owe her virtues.
Hoyday;—Love me q•…ha!—Nay, come, come.
I love you in your vows.
Those Nuptial vows, that whilst you live should live
Unstained between you:—In a word Sir Robert,
I love you in that purity,—that shall,
When death shall threaten your last minute to you,
Make you look boldly on him; smile upon him;
And in conclusion, seal you, one of those,
That, from this veyle of trouble, he conveys
To the purity of Angels:—Thus, I love you.
This is not that I look for: hark you Margaret;
Your Father is my Tenant.
Sir, he is.
Nay, since you urge it, let me tell you Minion,
He's not my Tenant, neither; but my Beadsman.
And like an humble Beadsman, in his Prayers
Remembers all your Charity.
He does:—But you forget it fair one.
Then let heaven,
Whence we Petition, the Reward it merits,
Forget me too.
Is it not forgetfulness
When all the love,—the tender cares, and cost,
That from thy Infancy, to this Ripe grows,
I have bestowed upon you, cannot gain me
Such a request as this is!
This? Alas.
Your greatest gaine's in losing.—Nay, I'll tell you,
The love, the care,—that cost, that Noble breeding,
That seems to you a winning Argument,
Is my best Argument against you.
How?
Why Sir, the Education;—that fair breeding
You have bestowed upon my poverty,
Has made me what I am:—So copiously
Furnished my soul, with all that best adorns her,
That whatsoere's in opposition to it,
Has no admittance to her;—Near her;—No,—
But,—most deservedly, doe rank themselves
With things, that most displease her.—Such a thing,—is—
What?—My Love?
No, but your lust Sir Robert.—I am bold,
But I can kneel to beg your mercy for it.
What, she imagines water to my flame,
Is oil t'encreas't: the more she puts me off,
The more she pulls me to her.—Come, come rise,
Though you be so unkind;—Come, prithee kiss me. 
Why, God a mercy Peg;—again, again;
Why, this is somewhat yet: Wee must not look
At once, to have so great a happiness
As that we aim at. We must use degrees.
Lock me, once more, in thy embrace, and bus me,
And then.—
What then?
For this time Peg I'll leave thee.—
What, leave thee, and leave nothing with thee Wench?
Nay, that were foul play Peggy: there,—Nay, take it.
Indeed you shall.
Indeed, indeed I wonot:
For any service, I can doe you Sir,
Your favour's price sufficient.—No, not yet?
I see, mine eye's a Remora:—I have it.
How I forget my duty?—Here so long,
And ne'er a Chair to ease you?—Abra'm,—Brother.
Pray pardon me Sir Robert.
How, a Chair?—Kinder, and kinder still.
Come, come, a Chair there for Sir Robert.
She pities your standing Sir Robert.—But I have a Chair,
Almost at my fingers end.—Look you Sir,
Will it please you. Bum this Cushion?
How, Bum it •…ennant?
Yes, Bum it Landlord:—Look you Sir, of this fashion.
Come, you'll be foolish still.—You know my mind. Go, bring •…▪m in.
An I bring i'm not in, let Sir Rob. kick me out.
Lord, how forgetful I have been Sir Robert? But, I beseech your pardon.
Pardon thee?
And seal't upon thy lip;—Come prithee sit. 
Nay, nay, sit by me;—Ne'er a stool?—Sit here then.
Be fairly civil Sir;—Nay, good Sir Robert.
How now,—what's that?
Music Sir Robert.
Music?—Rot on their fiddle, and their fiddle strings,
Thou art my Music.—Hoyday, here's a Morris.
You see we sweat to make your Worship merry.
How doe you like our pastime?
I like it so well, I could wish you were further off with it.
Have we this for our kindness Sir Robert?
Mary, come up Sir Robert.
Nay, there's no talking to i'm.
Come, in the heat, and height, of all her kindness!
Shall I entreat you, Leave the Room?
The Room!
So she sed: but I know she means no such mat∣la,—only a trick:
Tell her, you wonnot go.
Pray leave the Room.
We wonnot.
Wonnot?
No.
Wee were sent for in; and wee wonot go out a∣gen yet.
An your Knighthood were—
—A 1000 pounds purchase.
Hoyday, they'll bait me,—and they wonot I must.
Out?—Marry gip there, ne'er a good inch of a thousand.—Fiddler, strike.
I strike you else;—and cut your begging bowstrings.
I must be gone I see: these miserably impudent stallions—Do but remember me, as I shall thee;—and—Nothing greeves me,—but—
But what Sir Robert?
That,—we cannot kiss at parting—
Come,—we'll even have the tother •…out,—and then.—
Nay, we'll no more at this time •…here's enough.
For you:—But it is not enough for me then:
You shall command us, shall you?
Nay, be not angry Sister:
It is no command, but my entreat:—Good Sister.
Well, since you entreat me, and seem to know your betters,—you shall have your will, for once.—Fid. lead the way;—and Wenches follow your Leader.
Leader.—An scolding were fighting, what a Leader would thou be Gillian?—Thoudst bring 'em on, with a powder. O Father, Father.
Ne'er a wise word, for a wager.—Sir Robert's gone I see.
Yes Sir, he is.
And how dost find him Girl? I doe not think
The man, that thy suspicion seemed to make him.
You have a good opinion of him Father,
And, I'll not stand to cross it.
Nay, nay, come;
In plain terms, tell me▪ how did find him?—ha?
As good conceal't, and languish, as reveal't,
And find no comfort.
You are a pertish thing:
And—I'm afraid, have been distasteful to him:
I'm half afraid on it Girl:—we must be wise;
By's •…own we fall Wench; by his favours rise.
Distilling still, salt water to deface
That Master-peece of Nature?—Can the heart
Thus feast it self, upon the Bain of hearts?
For such is grief sweet Lady.
Good enough▪
To make this flesh as my dead Husbands is,
A banquet to corruption.
Still that Note?
Touch only that dull string of death?
When life
Would willingly exchange it self with Death,
What Music sweeter?
I must tell you Lady,
I thought the Music of your Husbands end,
Those heavenly Notes he entertained it with,
Taught him by Angels, had instructed you,
To look upon that Being that he has,
As hoe's a glorious Chorister with them!
And not upon that Burden of the flesh
Left in the Grave behind him.—Or at least,
Not so, to look upon your Husband dead,
As thus, to dye your self. For what is it, while
Of Lifes best hopes, you shall your Life deprive,
But what I tell you?—to be dead, alive.
Sir, as I am, pray leave me.
Only so?—Out-ryvald by the dead.
To me hee lives:
And in so vive a figure, every houre's
Presented to me, that I feel no less
Command o▪re my •…ffections in that shape;
Nor less Attraction of my duty to it,
Then when he had that hear, gave all those parts,
That now lie•… useless, their peculiar motion.
Nay, so that shape▪s impressed upon my soul,
That he appears so really mine own,
As, all the embraces of a second March
Would •…ec upon me, like the leprous staines
Of Lust, and base Adultry. In a word▪
That figure 〈◊〉 his bosom:—And in this
Pray understand the vainenesse of your suit,
And so▪ conclude it.
This command upon it,
It dies, though I dye with it.—Yet thus much Lady,
I have not, in this eagerness of Suit,
Pu•…sued, what's yours, But you.—The gifts of Fortune;
The state your birth allowed you▪ or th'addition,
By your lost husband, left you; But the endowments
Of your fair soul,—your virtues,—And of those
The ample•…st Dower, (I cannot slatter here)
Beauty was ever blessed withal! These Lady
Have been the object of my Love.
A Love,
That, could I love, I should ee'n dote upon;
And in a Title, far beneath your own,
Prefer•…t, above all Title; though it came
Robe•…d in the state of Princes.—But—
No more.
I have my answer, and am married.
Married!
As you are Madam; never to be married:
Be that the witness of my Love.
Admired!
I should not be a woman, should I not
Love such a Love as this is!
Doe you Lady?
Then, I revoke that Vow, and dare embrace you.
But understand me Sir▪ I love your Love:
And—as your self, have pleased to speak of me
Those singular Virtues, it is built upon▪
That, I am fixed on; with that estimate,
That, next the memory of my dead husband,
I•… shall be my best comfort.—Thus I love you;
But, must not marry.
I have done.—Yet Lady
In this;—this purest, Imateriall things
There may be made a contract; and the assurance
Of such a Love, as this is, Interchanged
And fairly sealed between vs.
Sir, how mean you?
Fairest, you have vowed your widowhood to the grave,
At least, you have so protested: yet because
Our hearts, and purposes, are not our own;
And, that no Bosom has that Constancy,
But Heavens may alter, the resolve it has,
And make it follow, what it fled;—it may.
My Love Petitions, that if ere hereafter,
You find that alteration, in your soul,
And again Fancy Wedlock,—I—your servant,
May—for that second happiness to heaven,
Stand fairest in your Election.
Pray no more.
Give my request an answer:—If you doe.
A fruitless promise: and suppose it made,
This would but—
What?—I understand you Lady.
It shall not make me bolder, in my suite;
Nor prompt my love, in any treacherous way
To gain, what it so follows.—No; I know
The man, would basely, compass such a Joy,
Like him that fishes with a poisoned Bait,
Infects the meat should feed him.—fairest, I wo'not;
Nor vex you with one syllable; but Live,
Vowed, like your self, till such a change shall be
To amorou•… Language, silent.—Is it granted?
If my b•…st thoughts merit but this, express it
That satisfaction take.—If ere I Marry
It shall be you; so help me heaven.
To which
I am rapt in this sweet tone.—If ere I know
The sweets of Hymen, I must find'em here;
So help me heaven!—So, we are married now:
And in this Joy I leave you.
What Sir Oliver? going
As we are entering?
Does your Lady, drive you hence with a frown?
My smiles may tell you, here has bin no frowning.
Shoe's fair and noble; and in these sweet hopes, 
That she has given me, I am pleased.
'•…is well.
A vengeance of all morris dancers▪
I am sure, they h'a mared, my dancing: that delicate dance
That I should have had with my tenant.
All Joy be with you Ladies; I must leave you,
Here's a •…ub in your way a while, my brave
Knight, of a 1000. per Annum.
And how dost find her?—is she coming? ha?
You see my hop•…s set smiles upon my cheek,
Let them resolve you sir.
I understand you:
Why? god a mercy sister: when's the day?
Nay, question that no farther, we shall talk on it.
When a things done, it is done.
You'd fine be doing to then.
Wo'd I not?
Do you think I am all dead flesh?—I warrant you.
Now Mr. William?—what good tidings now sir?
My news is, worthy sir, that Mullinex
That stout sea Captain, is returned from sea:
Is come to London, and that yesterday▪
He was upon the Exchange.
George Mullinex?
That Gentleman:—and but this morning Lady,
He wa•… seen at the Phoenix, in fleeet-street.
Body o'me I should have told you so—but, I
Have su•…h a Memory—!
How •…'st?—ha?—you lose colour 〈◊〉.
Lady.
Sister
Beshrew the name, and owner of that name
That has disturbed you.—whats that name to you?
Sir, nothing but my trouble.
A troublesome Captain indeed sir,
A suitor once, in her virgin days
And Rival to her husband, Sir Iames Mosely.
But, missed the mark he aimed at—he shot saire▪
But Mosely fairer.—upon which, Sir Oliver
He went to sea; where having bin three years,
And now Returning, hearing, (as it seems)
That she's a widow, he would renew his suite,
Give her a broad-side sir, and board her! Nay
Yave a hot Rival, I can tell you that:
One that will Quarrel;—fight—and—by my fey—
I'm half afraid of danger.
If he be not,
All valour, and no judgement, I fear none;
And yet, that heate, that has not judgement with it,
Cannot be counted valour, but a rash
Unknowing will•…ness,—which I wo'not think
Him guilty of;—But, whatsoever he be,
I'll be, but what becomes me.
Leave the Room.
Good truth now, but you shall not.
Leave the Room?—What fear you Lady?
I have cause enough,
For he will but trouble me with that, heaven knows
I have no mind to hear of.
If he have
No power upon you Lady by some promise,
Formerly past between you—
I had never,
That unprepar'dnesse in me, to doe that
In cause of such a Consequence as this,
And break it sir.
Such Beauty, and untruth
Were ne'er comoanions: it is believed.
Come, come,
It may be, some new Beauty has him now:
Some Foreign Mistress.
Or, it may be sister,
This time of service in the wars, had made him
Only in love, with fighting.
More vexation?
This Mountain, bring forth a Mouse▪
Have we talked all this while of a Captain,
And now, must be troubled, with Coxcombs?
The gods, protect you Lady.
Thank you sir.
I spoke to that sweet Beauty.
But I must speak to you sir; for you see she has other employment,
Pray, stand aside a little.
If I must—I shall attend her leisure.
You must attend her too sir:—doe you not see, shoe's busy?
I would not interrupt her.
I would not interrupt her?—Is that the resolution of a Lover?
Let me come to her.
But, you shall not sir.
Why? if I shall not sir,—I wo'not sir.
Is that the resolution of a Lover?
A man can do, no more then a can do,
But, an my father would but dye once!
Make nice to me of entrance?
Whore's the Widow?
For so I hear shoe's now: what mourning still?
I'm a bold gamester:—Save you all at once.
All suitors Gentlemen?
Yes indeed sir; we are all suitors.
You're a little too rash in that sir; I am none.
And, what, are you sir?
Why sir,—I am,—a Citizen, and a Mercer.
A Citizen, and a Mercer,—Cheapside?
No Captain;—but he's perfect in his Pater noster.
One of that row?—I know it sir.
Not very far from it:—In Creed sir.
Does he believe? that's seldom found in a Broker.
How sir,—a Broker?
I know you by this wheel.—you have a great many Bags, and a great many buildings to sir.—But, dare you for all that, presume in the way of Matrimony, to look so high as a Lady?
He that can purchase a Lordship—
Thinks, he may purchase a Ladyship:—you my Rival? Can you fight sir?
It may be I, it may be no sir.
Then I'll try, whether you can or no sir. 
Not a word, as you love your Coxcomb•….
Nay, let him alone; let him alone, I beseech you,
For hitherto he has done but Justice.
Are you a Suitor too sir?
Too sir?
You're an Ass sir:—Can you fight?
Fight? in a Ladies chamber?
Why, where would you fight sir?
Why, the truth on it is;—I would—fight,—no where.
Why, I thought as much;—and therefore,—I will kick you—any where; good master outside of a Gentle∣man; follow your valiant Leader.
You will not kill him, will you?
Have you so much Tongue, and nev'r a good Tooth, Madam Fumble!
Fumble, fumble!—you're a most—
Peace, an you love your old Carcass,—peace.
You bind me to a patience—
Nay, good Sister:—He does you a great deal a right,
And saves me a great deal of labour.
For I should have don't, if he had not.
One post support another?—What are you sir?
Why,—I am—a Gentleman.—
Will your Arms bear you out in the Title?
My Legs, shall bear me out sir.
Then—you wo'not be beat out—as they were?
—Beat, I should be very loath to be beaten?
—good truth, I think you would sir.
Doe I look like one that would be beaten?
An you stay, you must.
Why therefore,—I mean,—to be gone sir.—But—If my father,—would but dye once.—
You see his rudeness:—to prevent the danger,
It threatens, and may execute,—pray leave us.
I will not add to his too prodigal heate.
Nor be so cold to fear it.
It is my Love—
And mine to tarry,—not offending you
In the humble contradiction.
Are these your suitors Lady?
A little in jest;—but you have paid 'em in earnest.
I did but speak, in the way of compassion &amp; pit∣tie,—and your Lordship called me,—Madam fumble, fumble, fumble ▪
Did I ever fumble wo'you sir?
Be wise in being silent,
I hear you have lost a Husb•…nd:—How is it Widow?
You'll quarrel with her too, will you?
You are so nice:
I cannot Complement, kiss your white hand,
And fleare upon •…ou.—I can kiss thy lip.
Hug thee, and tell thee, I must lie with thee.
There may be those of your acquaintance Captain,
To whom this language would be musique:—But
To let you know how ill't appears to me,
I'll change my room sir.
But you shall not Madam.
You lay too rude a violence, upon
The tenderness of Ladies.
Doe I so sir?
I thank your kind remembrance,—you the man?
This Ladies only man sir?
My desire's,—you would not be uncivil.
What so ere
My will produces, I shall justify.
That power maintains offence, is weakness sir,
And has no taste of breeding, or of manhood.
I'll make you taste of something.
But you sha'not 
Have we no servants near us?
Save him, help.
O, you're a wicked Captain.
What? naked weapons in a Ladies chamber?
Take her in,—poor Lady, 
How she's frighted?
My Noble Knight and Master.
We have done sir.
An you have done, there's nothing to doe;—If no∣thing to do,—the less to care for;—the less to care for,—the •…ounder we sleep:—and asleep, we think no body hurt sir.—And so—having done, I have done.
You have the advantage of me.
I must tell you,
This rudeness, better would become the field
Then such a place as this.
That you may know,
I know as much, as you instruct me to,
Meet me to morrow.—You conceive me.
Where?
Where?—as your self have most discreetly said,
My valour would show better:—in the field sir.
I understand you;—understand withal,
A life, a thing too precious, to be put
On such a desperate hazard.
Desperate hazard?
You have not moved me to that heat, shall give you
One mis-beseeming syllable:—much less
Provoke, to what you urge.
You wo'not?
No.
As good h'a said you dare not.
Dare not?—What?
Not be a man.
You better might have sed
I dare not, dare my Maker;—and un-make
My self, or you rash Captain,—'t may be both;
It is to be thought on, if we meet.
It is
Pretty Apology; All Cowards, use it.
How, Cowards?
Coward.
How his lunacy
Has shot it self into my Blood?—a Coward!
Proclaim me, what you call me, if I be
You'll meet me then?
I will.
Where thou, or I.
Nay,—if you break so violently out 
I shall suspect, 't is to prevent our meeting:
For Manhood covers such intents as these
Under a friendly seeming:—thus.—
Enough.
I marry Gentlemen, I like this close.
Believe me, I was jealous of worse matters.
And I, ne'er trust me else.
Of what, Sir Robert?
I thought you had made some Quarrel.
Quarrel? no—this is no quarrelling Posture.
Nay, nay, Gentlemen; so fight and spare not.
I'll so fight and spare not.
You know the place, and time sir.
You shall find I'll forget neither.
You see my length.
Which I shall equal.
So.—
Now, Beauteous widow:—Is she gone?
I have no Courtship to pursue her with,
Nor will I offer it:—but, Let me tell you,
He that best hopes her Favour, if he have it;
He must bid fairer for it then this sword,
And so I leave you.
A good riddance of you
How is it sir?—your eye speaks trouble still.
Sir, if it doe, it is only what it has,
From your fair sisters trouble,—I must leave you
Till better hours invite me to return,
My Love and service to you.
Nay sir Oliver,
Our ways,—a Little way, Lye both together;
And so far, we'll be so
I'st possible?
Be sure, you raise not this suspicion si•…
From your own fancy, Look the ground be good;
The matter's weighty;—Look it be, you're best.
I tell you, but the voice in Edmonton.—which is
That Mistress Margaret, is his modicum.
His sweet-meat;▪ his recreation; and the only Instrument,
He loves to play upon.
Indeed sir Robert?
Whether she, like wax
Have t'ane the impression of his seal, or no,
I know not
That he is often at her Fathers house
That he allows his poverty some means:
That he maintains the wench, as one that sometimes
His charity, had taken to protection
I am not ignorant:—Nor has it bin
More then has gone with my Consent, and passed
Without suspicion of the smallest spark
Of Lust in old sir Robert.
Nay I know not
I will not to be too easy, to believe,
Nor yet too confident. I know there's fire
In such a wenches eye;—and old dry wood
Will soon be kindled:—If I find h•… be,
I'll find a way to cool him: coole'em both 
We'll all, or nothing, for half shares we Loath.
sir Robert's hand?—ar't sure on it?
I am too sure,
And sent to thee last night?
I, by this day, was it father▪—I know it to be his hand
What doe you think of this now?
I know not what to think.
You see the picture of a lustful heart
Drawn to the life;—and with it, what a number
Of foul temptations, he has mustered up,
To dim, the star-like purity of mine:
But all, no more, against my Constancy,
Then storms of hail, against a tower;—or waves
Against a rock, that beating are beat back
As they begin t'assaile 'em.
I believe thee▪—y•…t old sir Robert.
Yes, even old sir Robert.
Who have we here? a Beggar?
An she desire any thing here,
I'll desire her to be gone, with a vengeance.
Who would you speak withal?—Hum.
A poor old woman; be not offended sir.
And what would'•…t thou have, poor old woman?
My business, is to you.
To me? what i'st.
I would delyver't to your self
My self?
What ere it be, doe not fear to speak it,
I cannot fear to hear it.
What i'st woman?
Indeed my charge is mistress, to delyver't
To your own hearing.
This is strange.
—what is it?
Though I may speak it; since you fall into
Causeless suspicions of me—either hear me,
As I am willing to present it to you,
Or—as I am, I'll leave you.
Leave us?—Hoydeye—Mary come up goody tatters▪
Your tongue must still be running.—Hark you woman.
I must be Brief.
You are very tedious me thinks.
Take your own course we will leave you.—Nay, nay, come.
We shall know all anon.—thoud'st fine be scolding.
On, or I'll set you forward.
Now to this private business: what is it?
That happiness that to a beauty, set
In a degree, no fairer then your own
Should be exceeding welcome.
Ha, What i'st?
I bring you love: and to assure you it is
A love that's worth, the Entertain it seeks
And fit to find repose upon the heart
Of such a Matchless beauty▪ as your own, 
Have brought this witness.—it is a fair one.
Tic—If no foul end attend it.
come, be wise:
What my poor Artless tongue shall fail in, let
This never failing orator supply,
And with his golden tongue, inform you, (fair one)
That he that sends it,—for the End he seeks,
Shall tender to you, whatsoever can fall
Within the compass, of your wish.
Good heaven!
A lusty offer for that short delight
The gentleman would purchase.
It is indeed; a very bounteous offer.
Take it then.
You have not named the sender.
It is, sir Robert.
Sir Robert Mallory!
That Gentleman.
I might renew your memory
His bounties to your Father:—and, that bounty
Not dealt by fits,—leaving between his doles,
Interims of want, and anguish; but the whole,
And total stock he lives on.—I might too,
Since you so much forge•…tt your self—
I doe not:
Indeed, I doe not; gratitude, ne'er kept,
A •…ruer Register of benefits
Then you may find within this bosom
No?—come then express it; maked appear,
In what?
Nay, an you mince it so.—you know my mind! He loves you fair one.
Are you sure he does?
Against so large a testimony of it,
As that you have received, and this is, (fair one)
How can you make that question?
Doe his years,
Equal the number, of my years?—does his
Estate, and mine, lye level? wears sir Robert,
The snow-white livery, of a single life
Vnsoild, as I doe?—can his heart, and mine,
With heavens applause be made, one heart?—partake
(As hearts, divinly brought together, doe)
One happiness, one sorrow?—can the hand
Of any man, under yon golden roof
Untie a nuptial gordian?—loose the knot
Has tied the souls, of him, and his chaste lady
So fast together?—make but this appear,
And I'll believe thee:—I'll then say, the Heate
Hi•… bosom carries, is a Holy fire:
A flame, as pure a•… those, are sent to heaven,
From our Religious Altars.—But till then,
Let him desist, to Robe so foul a sin
In so divine a garment.—Love?—it is lust,
A sulphurous flame; which, tell him, I shall shu•…,
As those dark flames beneath us.
Has he this
For all the cost, that for thy Beauties sake
He has bestowed upon thee?
Help me goodness,
I thought 't had been for heaven sake?—That some Angel
Had led his Bounty;—that it had been done
To make his own soul white,—and not to make
My white soul black, and ugly.
Look upon it;—it is a rich prize.
It is;—yet as much too poor,
Were it ten times trebled, to effect his wish,
As Bribe an Angel to impurity?
So bear them back again,—and tell thy Master,
(The lustful Knight that sent thee) when we rate
Our chastity, above our life, we wo'not
Sel't, for such toys as those are.
How?—such Toys?—are gold and jewels coun∣ted toys?
Compared—with that rich jewel he would have for 'em.
So.
Might the exchange pass currant.
Be advised;
I dare be bold to tell—you,—in this Act,
You doe not only lose this golden offer,
With' fruitfulness, that you enjoy already,
•…the shine of his rich favours,—but, you sink
Into that misery, that to the living
Is, as the Grave is to the Dead: A depth,
No beam of Fortune looks on; for his •…rowne,
Dead all your happiness.
Yet more vexation.
I will not call thee woman; for a woman
Could never labour thus, to infect the Name
With such a sin as this is.
Beauteous Maid.
Foul, and detested Hag, can breath upon me
Those golden Epithets, and with' same breath
Endeavour thus to blast it—Father, Sister,
For heavens sake help me:—Father, Brother, Sister.
How now Girl?—why what's the matter?—ha?
Examine her.
But she perchance, may tell you, what she does
Is but her duty;—may be tell you too,
It is not so much her duty to the great one
That has employed her, as our love to us.
Her pity to our poverty;—and that
To make our poor and barren fortunes fruitful.
She comes, to water't with a golden shower. Nay, she can do it.
A golden shower!
O rare!—and thou can doe that old woman,
Long majesty thou reign, I beseech it.
Thus, she may tell you father, —but, —I can tell you that she is—
What is she?
A Bawd.
A Bawd!
Nay, though the brow of such a one be brass,
She dares not contradict it:—shoe's no less,
And her employment from Sir Robert.
How?—Come, come, take heed.
And what should she take heed of?—an she be a Bawd,
She is a Bawd.
That's certain,
Were her Bawdship employed among Ladies,
But, she shall ride in Triumph▪
Such gravity, and such a reverend show,
Guild such a sin as this is?
A Bawd?—Now Tobacco, and Aquavitae burn thee.
Now the stinking sweat upon thee, &amp; thy painted jour∣ney-women.
How many Noses do you think have bin lost
In your Bawdships service?
How many Coaches have you Bawdified?
How long ha'you run on in this sin?—the Coachman wo'you,
And the horses bin whipped, for your pleasure?
was this Sir Roberts bounty?—I am poor,
And poorer must be; for his frown commands,
All that I have to nothing,—But this sore
Shall not be cured with such a sin.—B•…se woman;
But we'll reward your labour,—shall we not?
You lose a daughter o'me else.
And an Abra'm o'me, I can tell you.
I'll go get •…n Officer; Abram, provide a Cart.
And let me alone for a Basin.
Has Love and Bounty this reward?
Such Love,
And such a Bounty, and the best it merits.
These be good Angels, I can tell you.—Look,
Thy Angels are all Devils;—and such gold,
But golden Fetters,—In whose powerful tie,
Rather then I'll lie Captivated, bound
To the hot embraces of a lustful man,
I'll suffer any wretchedness.—Away,
Thou art a devil, like a woman.—
Thou—an Angel-like a Woman.
Now I have found thy goodness, know me better.
My ever-worthy Lady.
Come, no more.
Thou see the purpose of that poor disguise.
Now beauteous Maid, fear nothing:—thou shalt flourish,
And the more Spring, the more his angry storm
Shall beat against thee.—Here.—Nay you must take it:
That, seemed to be the hire of lust, shall now
Be the reward of virtue.—But, you must
Imploy't as I direct you.
But direct.—If I shall fail in any thing enjoynd,
Let your displeasures (my worst Enemy)
Punish the fault, severely.
This is all:
Against my Husbands coming,—as I'm sure
He will not long be from thee,—I would have thee,
With this,—and more, that I'll supply thee with,
Deck up this homely Cottage;—and withal
Add to this Beauty beauteous Trimmings, such
As beautify Court beauties.
How?
Nay Margaret,
If you shall stop, at my fair purpose now,
I shall suspect your goodness,—it is my pleasure.
'T must then be mine to serve it.
Prithee doe,
I'll have thee brave indeed! How Brave, conceive
From these directions:—Think thy self at least,
The Heir of old Sir Robert;—nay, above it;
The Heir of one, owes greater Title;—and
To such a greatness suite thee.—Then—Attend me,
They are returned already:—the Remains—
Receive in private.
I have told you, what she is master Constable.
A Bawd.
All over,—we'll not bate you an inch Mr. Constable,
And therefore have a care you doe justice.
I have bin among Bawds before now, and whores too:
And I think, I have tickled 'em soundly.
I think so, a Constable?
What whore dares deny him entrance?
For what belongs to this staff—Let me alone.
Let me alone for the Cart.
And me alone for the Basin.
Come, whore's this same Bawd here? where is she?
My worthy lady.
My most worthy lady!
Come, wheres this bawd here?—my most worthy Land-Lady!
What have I to doe wo' Ladies?—it is the bawd
That my authority is to cope withal.
The outside, made this virtue seem that sin
Lies there that garment.
How? that garment,
Virtuous
most virtuous Lady!
Constable, you may make a hobby-horse, of your pain∣ted staff, and
Ride home again. —whip, lie thou there,
And what say you, to your basin?
I say, ti's a base one, and the barbarly knave that owes it,
They say his wife had a tooth drawn above, while he was a
Trimming below▪ let him keep it for her now, an he will
For we have nothing to doe with it.
Times earnest with me, to be gone:—farewell:
You know my mind, perform it.—
With that care—I labour, my best happiness.
Good Lady—well well sir Robert
Hoe's a naughty man.
I am enjoynd a task; and to effect it,
Look, she has given vs all this gold.
this Gold!
This is that golden shower I told you off:
But falls to better purpose, then, I then
Imagind, father.—how to be employed,
Lys yet within this bosom:—but ere long,
The virtuous secret, here involved I'll show.
From such pure fountains, such pure rivers flow
Heigho! good truth this little practice of my Lady
To stand between her, and her foolish suitors
So to prevent their fopperies, has lulled me
Into so sweet a fancy!—Mr. William
If all the time I have bin thus accoutred
I have not thought my self a very Lady,
I would I were, a very—
Maid again:—would thou not Bab?
Well,—an I be not, I may thank you for it.
What, thank me for it and cry? come come conceal't
A little longer, and I'll warrant thee▪
Weell find thee out, a daddy.
Look you doe.
Rash, Plush, Gregory! what says thou to a Citizen?
Then thou hast 2. strings to thy bow.
Two strings to my bow.—what do you mean by that •…roe?
Why 2. trades Bab, two Trades.
Why what trade, have I, I pray sir?
Why, the old trade. —thy husbands custom will get thee
Custom; and thine, thy husband, so one helps another,
And then, theres some hope of thryving.—Let me see 1. 2. 3.
After so many falls this is thy third time of rising
A great piece of matter, i'st not?—Come, thou shalt cry,
What lack you, show thy ware, Cu•… Privilegio; and
Befriend, thy friend, in a corner 
Body of me, one, of the fopps already
Come to your state, and off.
Mr. William, hist doe you hear. I have the worst luck
At women. But I'll to her.
What Mr. Gregory!
The very same sir.—your Ladies new gone in
May a man, be so bold, as go see her?
Faith, not yet.
But, theres hope, you may see her anon sir,
I had a glimpse of her:—I cannot tell well
An my father, would but die once!
I mary M. Gregory, his passing Bell were music.
The man should ring it, should not sweat for nothing.
A hap•…e day Mr. William: and as much (though my rival)
To the sweet, Mr. Gregory Dwindle.
Thanks, sweet, Mr. Timothy Lining
Howe's that sir?—lining!
A conceit he has, witness your worships cloak sir
It is lined with plush indeed:
But may lyne a Ladies petty-coate,
When such a simple Gregory as thou 
Shall Dwindle,—but—to hear on it.
The diwindle in disgrace.
Tell me of lining!
Why Gentlemen, you come to see my Lady;
Which if you kill one another,
You'll hardly doe, believe me.
You have said very right, Mr. William.—
Had it not bin for that 
You have spoke to the point Mr. William
Had it, not bin for that!—
A terrible bout, believe me.—
Nay I knew my hat would part'em.
You are valiant Mr. Plush; and you Mr. Gregory Dwindle
Well;—an—my father, would, but by once!
Gentlemen all,—good day.
May we not, In, to the Lady?
In to the Lady? —you are somewhat to rash indeed sir.
Enter the house I mean sir▪
She is now, going forth sir: —the truth is —to dinner
But here into the next street, to her brother, sir Robert Maloryes.
What favours, she may bestow, as she passes, I know not,—
But —be not too tedious, I beseech you, —
I am to attend her thither.
Well, this melancholy Lady, is a hard piece of matter to Compass
Somewhat, strait laced Mr. Rash.
An I could but come, to unlace her! I should make her.
Forget, her mourning.
We all, aim, at one mark;—
Which only, one must hit—I hope well▪
An I hope, as well, as you sir.
And I, as well as you sir.
Then happy man, by his dole sir.
Well, an my father, would but die once!
Have a care, you know my directions.
But, one at once, I beseech you— 
Mr. Plush has the start of you Gentlemen.
We cannot help it, worthy Mr. William.
Hope well, and have well.—
The motto of mine Arms, if ever I lyve, to
Be Knighted—which, If, my father,—would but die once.
You would be a Knight in foolio.
She shakes her head;—What does she mean by that?
To hear him talk, so like, a humorous Coxcomb!
She has shook him off, already.
I'll try my entertainment
Doe▪ sir,—to her.
Well, I shall have my Turn, I hope anon▪
It were a very ill turn, an you should not.
No, there's the man;—see how she smiles upon him!
No, h•…res the man;—
See how she points, at you sir.
She points at me indeed: but oh those smiles!
That smiles a laugh;—
A scorn, a mere derision. 
Do you note his coming off sir.—To her, to her.
None sir, what news?
Nay I say nothing; —what, —it was —it was.
And what say you sir?
What, she said,—she said.
To please you sir, I would she had sung it.
That clapping of her hand, upon her breast, I do not like: —
She has given Me good words; but —that's a tough bit,—
Of my stomach.
•…'ll help you down with that; —her words, were these
It is very true; you are, a civil gentleman.
And one, above the fortunes, that you seek:
I must protest you are sir. —but when the heart is promised, and the
Aff•…ctions, formerly settled, there's no calling back. —These were
Her words believe me▪ —
Did she not shake her head as who should say,
You are the man, must have her?
It is enough.
You are must'd up in melancholy to sir—
She gave me comfortable words; —but that embrace,
And thus, her hand, meeting her heart so oft
Moves m•…, a little.
Then, you'll be moved with nothing.
I'll tell you, what she said; beseech you mark me, Sir—you are
A good man; a Citizen;—Rich,—and wise—though—these three
Go seldom together;—
But,—when they doe—it is an Aldermans pace,—
I assure you—Sometimes in a Livery gown; but—that's but—
On Festival days.—The May den-head,—is your Aims,—
In your Arms,—believe me, I wish one, for—my widowhood is
Otherwise promised.—These were her words;—
You are the man must have her—Did she smile upon you?
that she did.
Why, why, should you be moved then? Look, he's off,
She beckons one of you.
Me, me, I hope, and I'll to her.
You shall not go alone sir
Now, What's the happiness?
My happiness —but, what she said; —she said.
You have had, a long; and a very gracious hearing.
I have I •…hank her;—
A very gracious •…earing, Ha?— 
Why, does she laugh so loud? ti's not at me, I hope
At you? —at them.—laugh, at a civil Citizen?
I could tell, what she says for a need sir
I should be glad to hear it:
Then, I will make you glad sir. —beseech you mark me▪
You are a proper gentleman;—
Smooth, and soft,—you have not,
Your name, for nothing.—I have heard,—
You are vallian•…; fear no man,
But —the m•…n, that frights, any man, that —villainous thing, called
Sergeant, yet you have made some of them,
Run too, two or three at once
Sometimes, and glad, they •…old overtake you.
This was a Ieere worth laughing at indeed
Now for Mr. Gregory, —the country Gentleman.
(Good harmless thing) little or nothing to him,—
Only tells him, his fathers old trunks
With a codpeice; —and his breech, were not both, of a piece:
That hardly worth hal•… a piece; —this almost, worth half a peck
A half peck, you mean, Mr. William
A bushel of wit believe me. ▪ I ha told you, what she (laughed at:)
You are the man, must have her.
I hope I shall.
Did she not point upon you thus. (making horns) — 
My Lady beckons me. —your pleasure, madam.
I cannot tell; —If shaking of the head;
And serious shaking of the head, may be
A gracious figne of love; —I am the man.
O smile; —sweet smile—full of splendidious rays;
Such,—as the Sun, at dinner time displays—If I do not tickle her.
In figure, —Let—me be counted a Cipher.
Well,—an my father would but dye once;—
I am the man must have her.
But —ô that Hand, —her hand so white and soft,
In sweet Protests,—thus —kissed her breast, so oft,
I could compose me thinks!—the sweetest!—Well,
I am the man must have her.
Your will shall be instantly done, sweet Lady.—
Gentlemen —it is my Ladies pleasure, you leave her at this time:—
Nay, nay, keep off I besecch you.—Mr. Plush,—
You are the man: —away.
Most beauteous Lady.—
Mr. Gregory, ▪ I have sent him off, with a flea in his ear•…
My Lady, is your Lady,—go.
Well,—an my father would but dye once,—then
Farewell, most Beauteous Lady.
Mr. Rash▪ —I have given him a Box, to put his pepper in.
You are the m•…n shall have her.
In good deed sir?
You'd hear as much from my Lady?
O▪ •…ight I be so happy.
Why, you shall sir;
I have told the Gentleman, your mind, sweet Lady,
And hoe's delighted with it:—But, to hear
Your love delivered, by your own sweet lip
would make his light heart caper.
Master Rash,
Though it scarce suit with modesty,—my blush—
Veiled with this mourning habit, take your wish,
You are the man shall have me.
May I build—
With Brick, according to the Statute sir.
I mean upon this promise.
O, you mean
Upon the Lady sir: you hear you may,
The foundation is laid to your hands,
And the edifice half up already.
With this, I take my leave.—
Dear Master Rash.
You'll make a rash Bargain of this sir:
Who have we here?—Rawhead and Bloody-bones?
Good madam Bab, walk off,—what master Cut!
I am Cut:—but doe not you play upon my Cut,
Lest I play upon—your pate, and cut you, as deep sir.
What me?—your friends?
No matter, whether you be or no sir: No Hercules country duos.
Had you two upon you at once sir?
An there were ten upon me at once,—
I did not desire you to help me.
I was not there to help thee.
A pox o'your prating sheeps-head;—
I tell you, I did not desire it.
Nay,—prithee Cut be patient.
I may choose whether I will or no sir:—
Six,—like six of the Constables guard,
That a man may beat with a broome-staffe,—yet
For three p•…nce a night they venture.
What, Sir Olivers Hugh?—in hast.
N•… great hast, for in hast, we run:—An we run, we may fall
An we f•…ll, we may catch a hurt;—
An •…a •…rt will not easily be healed.
An you talk of mine; you're Coxcomb.
Nay, I prithee Hugh say nothing.
〈◊〉 a man say, and say nothing?—Of nothing, comes nothing,
And he that out of nothing, can get something, does something,
More then I can.
You doe not, Some-thing, nothing me sir: doe you?
Nay, here's no place▪ to quarrel.
An we quarrel, we must draw,—an we draw
We must strike; an we strike,—we shall cut; an we cut, wee
Shall bleed; an we bleed, we must to the Surgeons.
An you p•…te, I shall knock;—an I knock,
You must cry;—and you cry, I must kick;—An I kick—
I shall kick you again sir,—
If I kick you age•…,—you shall feel it;
If you feel it, ▪ you have as good as you bring;
If you have as good as you
bring, —why th•…n sir, I owe you nothing;
And so master Cu•…bert have at you.
Death, are you mad-men? hold, hold, hold, I say.—
Prithee put up.
While he may put up in my belly.
He that does so is a Coward;—He that's a coward's a rogue,
And he that's a Rogue must be whipped;—
And would I might be whipped an I doe so.
Give me thy hand; you are a man▪
He, that says I am not a man,—I may chance.
To make him, a boy sir.
A couple of touchy Coxcombs. But come, this sign,
Of the Hand in Hand is handsome—Gentlemen,
I have a pretty Project in my pate,
Will you assist me in it?
Name it.
Hark,—no more but so:—your Hands.
And our hearts to boot, Master VVilliam.
Nay, there's no parting yet,—At Buttry-hatch,
In Boules,—thus deep,—we'll health it to the Match.
Now Knight, I see, you love a Noble promise
Too well, to Break it:—you're a Gentleman.
Sir, should I find, that I had lost my self
In any Thing, that should proclaim me less,
I should not hate mine enemy so much,
As such a heady Action.
I am ready.
I see you are: But ere our weapons meet,
Tell me, what seconds have you Captain•…?
Seconds?—A strange demand. —How mean you?
Why a man,
That may assist you if you fail.
A Second?—were any such appointed?—I have none.
How Captain?—None.
I have not sir: have you?
Believe it, I have;—I should not else have met
So great a danger Mullynex.
A Second!
Is this the Nobleness you Boast?—A Knight!
A servile Foot-boy, —his master ere
Give but one Copy of a noble soul
Would have disdained this cowardice—a second▪
Nay you may term it, what you please: —no matter,
It is my advantage Captain
Ha? where is he
You may as well demand of more, then one
For I have more, stout Captain.
More?
Yes more.
To keep, what lost can ne'er be found again,
We cannot be too Cautelous
A man?
Ensnare me thus?: where be they? If they be
As base as thou art, be they ten to one
I shall not fear the incoun•…er.
Think you so sir?
A minutes patience I shall name 'em to you.
And let you see your danger.
Name 'em.
Yes,
The first bold Second, that attends my Sword,
Is thine own Rash, and inconsiderate fury;
For then that foe within a man,—without
We cannot meet that enemy, that can
Present us with more danger: There's the first,
The next my undertaking, in defence
Of such a stock of goodness in that Ladŷ,
As Envy, ne'er durst look on: which who knows not,
So fair, and just, the ever-watchfull eye,
That mid-night Actions are apparent to
Cannot but see, nor that great Ens behold,
But be assistant to it;—A third (Rash man)
The contumelious, and un▪manly darings,
That, to enforce me from the Peacefulness,
Ere lived in my calm Bosom, you have most
Uncivilly cast upon me,—Smile thou?
Yes.—Are these your Seconds?
Mullinex they are.
Dare thou unarmed?—Indeed a naked man▪
(For he that fights in such a Cause as thine,
With nothing in it, but an impetuous will,
Is little better—) venture all thy blood
Against such a great Advantage?
What I dare,
My Sword shall tell thee Bellingham.
So sudden?
You see, till now my weapon has been used
Merely defensively;—To guard my self;
Nor point, nor edge, offering their violence
Against thy bosom.—Were I sure, I could
Put by thy fury, till it has spent it self,
Or tired thy body past the danger of it,
The Fighting part should only be thine own:
Mine only, mine own Buckler.
Slighted?—death
I'll put your Fence-play to it a little better.
I must not dally then▪
Come Bellingham.
Hold Captain, hold,—you bleed.
As you must doe,
Or all my blood's at hazard—Have I touched you?
You have stout Captain,
Shall we part upon the equality of our hurts?
How, part sir?
Yes, our manhoods, standing in this equal point,
We may do it fairly; slight applyments yet
May make us whole again.
Shall a scratch part us?
How fatal sir another close may be—we know not,
No, nor doe we fear it: Come
Then Mullynex, what following hurts you have,
Call not the work of my unwilling hands,
But thine own frenzy:—witness heaven they are— 
Captain you faint.
Take your advantage then.
Advantage sir, How mean you?
Of my wound:
My weakness Bellingham,—you see there's now,
No interposed resistance, 'tween my heart 
And thy bold weapon—Come.
I rather wish
That all thy blood were in thy veins again:
Had all the fire, and livelihood it had,
Though with that strength, new courage, and the malice
That but two minutes past, pursued my life,
You should again pursu't, and put it to
Another dangerous hazard.
Thou mai'st wish it;
For 't were no hazard, against the muniment,
And strong defences that Heaven plants about,
A soul so pure as thine is.
How? is this
The language of a wounded man, to him
That made them Mullynex?
What language fitter?
Thou art a noble enemy:—And now
My troubled understanding's calm again,
I see my self worthy the wounds I have,
And all their Anguish trebled.—Thou art just.
I am to unmindful, of what most I mind
Thy smarting faintness:—But, my cares shall now
Only attend thy safety.
Mind thine own:—fly Bellingham.
Let all my best desires
Be fruitless then.—Come Mullynex, Let me
Support thy fainting body.
Worthy sir,—you've a Noble second▪
Sir I have, And whosoe're dares be a Duellist
Should have the like;
Should build his Hopes, rather upon his cause,
Then on his strength,—his skill,—and hood winck'd fury,
For these are nothing.
You have made me see▪
That Braves and Boastings in bad Causes, are
The Dolphins wanton dallying on the waves:
That sore-runs Tempests; This untimely Graves.—
You know my mind, fail not in any thing
That lies in my direction.
Fear not me;—you have made me brave,
And I'll doe my business as bravely.
And so, for your Son and Daughter.
Nay, for my Son, since he put on his Bravery,
For the part of a gallant in jest,—He will not be persuaded,
But that hoe's a gallant in earnest; Scorns to think of Canvas,
Course Freeze,—or a sheep-skin Doublet;
Or to talk but of Lords, and Ladies.—And as for my Daughters!
Your part.—
Is a Justice of Peace:—And you are sweet Lady,—my Lady▪
Hark, hoe's come already.
That's his hum indeed;—In good Lady,
In,—when your part comes in,
I'll give you your Qu. to enter.— 
An I can but hit, the state of a Justice
Handsomely. He comes, and I go to my station.
Well Edmonton; thou that holdst her, that holds me,
In this strong meshd Net of affection, I am once again come to see thee.
How, in the imagination of this sport,
My old heart capers?—Well? this little house,
This little Cottage, while it holds my Peg,
Is my best house,—my Castle;— Nay, my Palace,
My delicate Palace of Pleasure.
You are welcome honest Gentleman; what would you?
Ha▪—what would you sir?
By his face old Thrashard my tenant:
But, by the reverend outside that he wears,
I know not, with what stile to salute him.
Would you ought, with me or mine, sir?
I would speak with' good man of this house sir.
The Right worsh•…pfull, Master of this house, you speak to.
This house?
This house.
What may▪ I call your name sir?
My name, in common, is Thrashard.—
But with the Gentile Addition, Oliver Thrashard Esquire,—
Justice of Peace and Quorum.
Justice of Peace and Quorum.—
Doe not you know me, Master Oliver?
By this Chain, not I sir.
Not me, Master Oliver Thrashard?
Not you,—Master▪ what shall I call thee,—Belike,
We shall know you, whether we will know you, or no sir.
Has not your worship a son, that men call,—
Master—Abra'm Thrashard.
May a man sir, desire to see him?
He is not afraid to be seen sir,—Son Abram, Ent. Abram▪
Master Abra'm, come—here's a Gentleman
Desires to see you.
To see me, my Right worshipful Father?—
An he be a Gentleman, we are to be seen, and spoke to.—
Your business to me sir? Hum!
Does your worship know me, Master Abraham?
My worship does know many Gentlemen,—some Lords,
And some Ladies too sir.
But me,—your old Land-lord, Sir Robert?
Land-lord?—to one in Satin?
Your Worship, remembers me sure sir.
My worship remembers you not sir: does not,—
Must not,—shall not. Land-lord, to one in Satin!—
Did you hear him right worshipful Father?
I hear him, my worshipful son:
Just thus he talked to me too.
Land-lord, to one in Satin?
They talk of a wonderful year;—
But here's a most wonderful Minute, worshipful sir;—
Have not you a Sister, called Gillian?
Called mistress Gillian, I have;—
And you shall know that I have,
Sister, mistress Gillian, Sister.
Now, what's the good news wo' you now?
there's a Gentleman,—would speak with one Gillian:
No more but so, plain Gillian.
You might have remembered the M. sir.
Which of the Ms—Madonna,—Mistress, or Maukin?
Right worshipful Father;
Shall our greatness endure the Maukin?
I confess forgetfulness:—your pardon, —your pardon
Sweet Mistress Gillian.
Tic well, you have changed your note sir▪—had you not,—
By this Chain;—I know, what I know, I doe sir.
Did not the Civility of Gentility, stand up, as it were,
Between us, with-holding these two,—doe you see sir?
It is well sir, you doe not feel 'em.
Doe not you know me, Mistress Gillian?
For, a sau•…ie companion, I doe sir.
Why this is admirable,
What Brokers wardrobe have they met withal,
To meet with me thus?—Let me not mistake,
And charge a kindness,—with unkindness though:
For ought I know, this may be some conceit,
That in the close, shall to my entertain
Add more delight and lustre.—Worthy sir,
May but my boldness, progress to the sight
Of your fair Daughter Margaret I have done,
And rest indebted to your right worshipful self,
With your worshipful, Son, and Daughters.
Son Abram,—Call in thy worshipful Sister
Now you talk like one of us,—
A Gentle-man, a Gentle-woman
Shall talk with the gentleman, —And so,—as the Proverb is, tic
Merry, when Gentle folks, meet 
Sister Mistress Margaret Sister
Your business brother.
Ask our right worshipful father.
I theres the star, brighter, then Lucifer,
That ushers in my happiness
With me sir?
My beauteous Margaret: how ere ot'h sudden
changed into these rich ornaments, —I hope,
You know me, better, then your father does;
Your brother, or your sister?
Know you sir.
I hope you doe
Sooth, but I doe not sir▪
Not know me?
No;—nor to be brief; and plain,
Doe I desire, to know you,
Not my Peg
Not mine own Pegy know me?—beauteous Peg,
I am sir Robert Malory
Away.
Now in good deed law;—in good sooth I am.
sir Robert Mallory?-I doe not know him:
But I have heard of such a one:—a knight,
A City knight;—A peyce of old dry stuff
That's good for nothing but.—
Peg,beauty, Peg.
And yet, they say,—in his libidinous heate,
As Rank a Lecher, —a Baboon, —a Goat
Peg, beauteous Pegy.
A cock sparrow;—one
As lustful, as a Satire! out up on him.
Wrong his good lady?—such a beauteous lady;
Nay such a virtuous lady?▪out upon him.
Has her brave suite, made her forget me to.
They say, his lust most eagrely pursues
His tenants daughter: A poor Country wench:
A silly Girl heaven knows;—yet wise enough,
To make the lecher lose his longing,
Ha? this the delight I▪ looked for,
It is reported,
He's done her good;—settled a poor estate
Upon her aged father;—and of goodness,
Must the reward be Sin?—must she for this,
Become his whore? his strumpet?
Peg,—sweet Peg.
Were I as she is, what so ere she be,
I should so fit his Knight ship; ▪ and so firk
That satire, —Monkey, —that Baboon, —that Goat—
Some Conjuration, witchcraft
How he sweats.
Sister, pray call our mother.
Lady Mother.
How now what's the matter?
How's this? her mother? why, this is my
Lady;▪or, —the devil in
My Ladies likeness.—l'me sure sheel know me.
Desire to speak with me sir?
You forsooth? —will not she know me.
I cannot stand to talk sir.
Not with me?
With you sir? —no sir; what are you sir?
Ha?—doe not you know me Lady?
Know you sir?
How? —when? —where? —why? —for what sir!
How? —when? —where? —why?—for what sir? why heere's
The finest mad fit; —the most worshipful Piece of Lunacy, that
A man shall desire to look on.
Why, are not you my wife?
Thy wife?
My wife.
I hope —my right worshipful Husband —you will not
Seem Ieerd And derided.—
He challenges me, —for his Wife!
My Lady, your wife? By this chain; an you play
The mad Alderman here, —you were better have don't in bedlam
Your wife?
Go to;—no more but so; —go to.
Our right worshippfull mother, your wife? —
By this Satin go to; —no more but so, —go to
My mother, your wife sir? —mary come up▪ for a wife sir;
Were it not, as it is; —that Gentility holds my hands-!
Me thinks, in such a gentleman, as you are,
Such sport, —so old; ▪ and such a Reverend man;
This wildness shows not handsome.
Handsome▪ quoth!
My wife, my spouse •…any me! death they kiss:
An I be mad, —I'll play the mad mans part
A little longer —hark you gentlewoman;
Are not you my wife? —are not you my Tenant? —
Are not you Abram Ninne? you Gillian
Of Braineford? —you pretty Peg of Edmonton?
And this Little house here, mine own sir; —death, they Ieere me
Is your merry devil —that cheated the devil; come again to make
Merry amongst you? —well, I see, how the case stands: this is
A trick of my Ladies, to Rack, —to deride, —and shame me:
She has found me out▪ and there's no holding out any longer,
Peg, —wife —Peg: —I confess sweet Peg, there stands the Peg,
That I had a desire, to have played at mumble de Peg with all
But —dost thou hear me? —lady ▪ madam, Peg
The old mans mad.
I were mad indeed,—an I should not know mine own
Lady! Prithee torment me no longer, —good Love, good Honey,
Good Pigs•…e, I was wanton; —I was wanton, —I confess it,—
But hear what I'll tell thee, in private
When, we walk thus abroad how our once familiar
Acquaintance will Bow and Adore our Satin. —
But, we know the worshipful Nod; —for a word, —
We shall hardly Afford 'em.
May I believe all this?
Believe it Peg? —if ere, I be troubled,
With this foolish vagary again;
If there be, to be spied, the least touch of this, Itch about me,
Let those worthy men, with whom I sit, set me beside my seat
And devise, some new Torment, to tame me. —Nay let my frailty
Be put in Print, —and sung▪ that the City, may Ring on it!
You have protested well; and I believe you:
This fault, is pardoned —
You must Seal it then — 
How like, the right worshipful, this now?
By this chain, —exceeding well sir.
I protest, by this satin, it is sir.
Please your worships,
May I possess her now? —doe ye know me now?
Our worthy, —and right worshipful landlord.
Will your satin, submit to that sir? —Peg, —I love the.
Not for thy beauty, —but thy virtues Girl.
The testimony of it, shall be this: —your states
Shall be as great, as they appear to be,
I have spare bags, will do it wench. —Come, we must
Give Virtue now —what we decreed to lust. —
You have done, to my directions gentlemen.
Have we not, bully Will?
Have we not sir?
I have placed Mr. Rash, —where he expects his lady,
With a heart, as light, as a bubble.
And I, Mr. Timothy Plush.
And I, Mr. Gregory Dwindle.
Mine like one, that had six pence a day, for his labour,
Stands here at the upper end of Lymestreete.
mine, in the Middle
And mine, at the lower end on it.
But all unseen, —till they see their times to discover.
Most amiable Lady, cries mine!
Most splendidious Beauty, mine
Odriferous Mistress, mine.
Proceed we now to our purpose, Away to your stands;
And stand to your tacklings tightly. 
Now, must I back, for my imagined lady; 
Whose amiable Presence, is infinitely wished
And expected —
Sweet Mr. William
Well, the minutes coming,
That is, as it were, the crown of all the hours;
Of all the days▪ the weeks, of all the months:
Nay, in a word,—of all those many years
That have fore-run it.—Lady, Lady, come
Sweetest, of all sweet women, come, come quickly.
Come, as you hope to be translated from a fry Cham∣ber-maid,
That is,—a Maid, &amp; no Maid (for so are the most of your function)
To a civil Citizens wife,—Carry thy self,—like a woman
Of note and carriage.—That blows in jest should swell thus!
But, this loose-bodyed black conceals it
Master Rash.
Master William.
Sweet master Rash, your servant.
Lady,—you shower upon my head all happiness.
Something she may in good time sir.—
A word in private Lady.
It would grieve a man, for one so white as she is to attend
To the middle in snow;—Nor for one so red as she, to wade to
The chin in blood:—for her white is whiter then snow, ▪ and
Her red then the blush of Roses.
It is my Ladies pleasure, that you turn up that corner, —
And so go through Allgate to the Tower;—where—she,
Having dispatched a little business with a Gentlewoman
A little below here, will instantly be pleased to meet you,
To finish the thing you wot of.
Our happy Nuptials sir?
Your happy Nuptials.
The Tower?
The Tower—Her care has made all things ready.
I shall attend you Lady.—
Is not this handsome, Bab?
It will be anon, Mr▪ William.
Stand fast master Plush, I beseech you,
While I go look out for the Lady.
Honest Cut Hough-man!—you know your part.
And shall act it to the life, never fear it.
You are perfect too, I doubt not.
To a Syllable,—sweet Master william.
We must not word off time thus:—Now shoe's mine
Doe you stand aside, and observe us.—
So, all the state you can think on.
Sweet master Plush.
Honest Cut, let me be cut into steakes, if I make not thee
A great man, for this piece of service.
I know you a man, of a most magnanimous soul sir.
Thou fairest the Sun ere darted ray upon;
Thou Non-parallel,—thou jem, thou Paragon,
What shall I call thee?—Call thee what I can,
I shall but praise thee,—like a mortal man,
Thou more then mortal woman!—O, me thinks,
I could so tickle thee in phrase and flash,
Beauty was ne'er so tickled! Let me embrace thee.—So!
And kiss thee,—so!—Nectar, Nectar▪ Nectar.
He said he would Tickle her, but she has tickled him,
I am sure on it.
Depart so soon, sweet beauty?
You know my heart, and have it: —I have business,—
But here hard by sir, for an hour, or so;
Which done I shall return.
But will you?
Will I?—what else doe you think I came for?
Queen of beauty.
And then.—
And then,—I shall attend you Lady!
But to your stand, —you must be private, —so sir, 
How think you of this Master William?
O, rarely, rarely!
Then Skulk a little longer, and we'll have it rarer yet sir.
Stand fast master Dwindle, I beseech you. 
Whilst I go look out for the Lady
Cut?—And how first, Madonna Barbara?—She is now
My charge—Go,—back to the stand, you came from, tell
Spruce master Plush, that the Lady is now at her business; and
That you'll bear him company, till her La•…iships time of returning.
T•…ou hast counselled me right rarely.—
So,—as your lesson is;
With all the Pride a women's heart can think on —Mr. Dwindle▪
Honest Hugh, —well, 
I shall think upon thee.
Think?—Can you think me, a new suit?—
Think me a new Sword? —Think me a new Belt?—
Think me a new Beaver▪?—or think me a Pouch full of pieces▪
I think,—you think,—no such matter.
I think thou think right honest Hughkin.
Why then,—I think what I think,▪and
There's an end of our thinking.
Well, an my Father would but dye once.
Your Father dye?
Hoe's threescore years old and upward,
Is it not time he should now, go downward?
And time, that you should go Westward.
How I love you Lady,—you may see by my eyes:—
Which have nothing else to do, were the day as long as a dozen,
But to gaze up •…n thee,—and thy Beauty,
O•…- by my heart,—sweet Lady.—By that lip I doe—
By those two lips;▪which I take for a Book,—with two leaves—
And thus—I take,—my oath upon it.
But hark you,—doe you hear?—master Dwindle.
Slight, there's an oath indeed.
I swear but seldom,▪but then I doe swear to purpose.
I see,—you like her;▪ that liking her, you love her;—
And that loving her, you will lye with her,▪and that lying with
H•… you will—
Wh•…t sir.
What sir,—an you know not what sir, you may turn
〈◊〉 over to me sir: An•… lye with her, and doe not something;
Wh•… th•… let her say, I have—Nothing.
B•… gone sweet Lady? Why I thought you had come▪
To go to Church with me to be married.
You know my heart, and have it: only sir,
I have a little business, —here hard by;
An hour, or such a thing;▪ which overpassed,—I shall Return.
But will you?
By this kiss.
A most sweet oath, I take it.
Betake you to your Stand then, and stand close.
Being so near the place I am to go to,
Till I return, pray keep him company.—
Well, an my Father would but dye once.▪
Mistress Barberry, I could praise thee a whole day together,
But, we must follow, what follows.—
Me thinks— 
This hour, is a very long hour, Master Cutbert,
A lovers hour, in the presence of his Mistress, is a minute▪—
But, in her absence,—he thinks every minute an hour sir.
Well, she is a wondrous sweet one.
You doe not smell her hither, I hope sir?
I mean in her Aspect;—her countenance.
How blessed shall you be in this Lady?
I thank the Fates▪ I shall:▪ &amp; thou shalt not be unthought of.
I doubt not your worships bounty.—
Beseech you a word in private.—
You are the most impatient Lover, that beautiful eye ever
Looked on, why half her hour is not out yet.
Well,—it is the longest hour.
But, as you were about to say,
Concerning the choice of a wife sir.
Why, thus I do say, honest Hughkin,-I would have my wife,—
Like Alexanders—Horse.
How's that?—Your wife like a Horse sir?
Like Alexanders horse, I would sir.
And why,—like Alexanders Horse Master Gregory?
Why, as that Horse,—would let no man ride him, but Alexander?
So, I would have my wife, let no man ride her, but- Gregory.
Good truth, you say right;—In right there's no wrong;▪
No wrong, there's no hurt;—no hurt, there's no danger,—
No fear,—and▪ no fear,—why so much for that sir.
Byr'lady, as you say, she stays somewhat long indeed sir.—
Pray heaven, your Rival Master Gregory Dwindle have not
Met with her.
Dwindle?
He,—I do half suspect it—He has been later with her▪
Then you imagine, he has sir.
The next time I meet him,—I will kill him.
I would not have you die sir:—But—
That Butt, will I Run full Butt at, and broach him.
I doe but tell you, what I think, Master Gregory.
That Plush has met her?
I have seen somewhat more then I'll speak of.
Well,—an my Father would but dye once.
I talk sir of Plush, your Rival;—you must fight.
Well, an I must, I must;—I'll examine my Sword,
And see, how he will stand to the Business.
Your Rival sir, your Rival,—
With his Sword stark naked already▪
My Sword can go naked too sir.
Your Rival sir,—turn, and defend your self;
You're a dead man else.
Dwindle, thou hast wronged me.
Plush,—thou hast wronged me.
Thou hast stolen away my Lady from me.
Thou hast stolen away my Lady from me.
For which▪—though I be loath—
For which, though I be loath—
Pox o'you both, for Coxcombs.—
As You're a Gentleman, strike him.
As you're a Gentleman strike him. 
An they hurt one another;—hang me.
Hold, hold, hold, 
You are gul'd Gentlemen, you are gulled:
Look there's the Lady you fight for.
Mr. Rash the Mercer.
And the Parson, that Joined together.
Revenge, revenge.
Blood, and Revenge, assist me.
Why gentlemen?—what mean you, Gentlemen?
Mr. Plush,- Mr. Gregory Dwindle.
Mr. Dwindle; Mr. Timothy Plush.
This-Lady, is for you.
Your Beauty Lady.
Lady, me no Ladies; for I'll be a Lady no Longer, I am,
My Ladies Chamber-mayd; doe you know me?
My Ladies Chamber maid?
An you know her not yet, you may know her hereafter,—by this.
By that sir?—what sir? Villainy, Villainy, Villainy!
No matter for that; I'll be honest enough to you sir.
Villainy, villainy, villainy▪
You cannot fly so fast; but I can follow—
I'll-follow too, —and use▪ my best skill to Attone'em▪
My Ladies Chamber-mayde?
The Lady her self, is a dish,—for your self, to feast on.
I'st possible?
As to doe thus.
O rare.
Gull him with the maid,—to help me to the bed of the Mistress?
You see my Love sir.—foolish Remnant Seller;
A Citizen:—you are a Gentleman!
Well; an my Father, would but dye once!
That time, will come.
I would it were gone, honest Hughkin.
So much, I know my Ladies Bosom sir.
That what I speak, I'll Justify.—Shoe's yours.
I think, I have said enough sir.
I shall have her.
Shall I talk?—shall I walk? shall I eat? shall I drink?
Shall I sleep?—shall I live?—shall I dye sir?
But, you must tread the path, I put you in;
An you straye, but a foot, you loose her.
But,—as I have told you, Mr. Gregory Dwindle,
You must not miss a half of my directions.
Honest Cut•…,—I am for this thing,—any thing,—all things,
To compass the Bed of the Lady.
An I do not do as I should do▪ —may I never come to doe,—
What I wooed doe.
You have said enough:—And go I'll direct you better.
Do this, shoe's yours:—As we go Isle direct you better.
Have tender hands upon him. —so, now Leave us.
Your goodness mixing with those thing•… you apply,
Doubles their virtue, and to all you do
Sets a most wished Conclusion.
See who knocks.—
I make no question, I shall find you such▪
Concerning the concealment of my friend,
That worthy Gentleman, Sir Oliver,
As I desire, to find you.
All I am,—is at your service, Captain.—Now sir.
Sir, here's the mourning Lady so much talked of▪
Sir Robert Mallory, and his Lady sir,
That good, good Lady.
Trust me, y'•…re to blame.
They were not entered with you?—Prithee step
And do it with thy best duty:—Nay, I knew
The Rumour of our unsuspected Quarrel
So spread, as I have cause it to be spread,
They would not long be from me, 
They are come,—you know my thoughts.
Fear not my care; I doe sir,
Ladies,—and kind Sir Robert,—you are welcome.
I'st well, to see men Ill sir; —How I'st Captain?
Faith a weak man Sir Robert.
Nay, nay sister;
Then I shall chide you, weeping? Come come dry
Thou hast wept too much, already.
Had I thought
To come, had bin to meet this new occasion
Of grief, and anguish, I must tell you plainly
You had come alone, for me.
Come, wipe your eyes.
You may as well forbid the Bigswoln Cloud
By the Suns Ardor melted into Drops,
To fall upon the Bosom of the earth;
As my swollen grief (Resolved into these tears)
To fall from their full Fountains. —Half the Number,
Is for thy wounds (rash Captain) t'other Half,
For that sad gentleman, (where ere he be)
Whose hard hap it was to make 'em: And, in them,
To make me Author of this Bloody work
And his perpetual Exile
it was my frenzy,
I, wretched I, was Author.
Interchange
Embraces, congees; —and, to our Belief,
The Language of two Brothers; —And all this
But merely show? —false colours, —a fair Masque
Ore the stern; —Rough, and Formidable Face
Of such a Mortal Envy? —you were cunning
But, to our purpose sir:—our coming was,
Hearing that worthy Gentleman, Sir Oliver▪
Upon this Bloody Accident, was fled.
(For nothing else, is on the voice of Rumour)
To learn, the certainty of you.
Hee, fled.
To stop his flight, (though for his safeties sake
He hid himself in some obscure disguise)
I gave him, what encouragement, I could;
Told him, my wounds were nothing: made their depth
Appear, but shallow scratches; —That the loss.
Of twice the Blood went from 'em, could not leave
My heart so Pale, as to Recoil against
The worst they threatened: —Have proclaimed the hand
Of Noble Bellingham from all this Blood,
As white as Innocence.
How?
I have,
And tan the purple stain upon my self;
For it was my self wounded my self; —not He.
Your self?
You call me, to a strict account.
For he that's lost in such a storm of fury,
Cannot be said, to be himself.
You have spoke
A noble way to acquit him.
But, it may be
Imagining, we know the Place to which
He has betane him to conceal himself,
You speak all this, in hope we'll name the place,
And so Discover him, to what revenge
Your spleen shall seek upon him.
To revenge?
To any, but your self this harsh Suspicion
Should have as harsh an answer: But to you
I'll thus acquit me: doe you see this Ring?
Your Tears, will hardly let you see it: —yet Lady
Pray look upon it. —Can▪ you call to mind
A former sight on it?
I have seen it sure.—Sir Oliver, I take it.
Lady it was.
Now I look better on it, it was indeed.
Thou know it too.
I doe sir: —what of this?
What comfort yields the sight on it?
I have shown
This, to acquit me of those treacherous thought•…
That you suspected in me, against the life
Of noble Bellingham;—Who—as he parted,
(To take a Journey in uncertain paths,)
Left this Ring with me.
You have charmed us now,—from all our harsh suspicions.
Till he gave me
This cause to hate him, I ne'er loved him: Now,
I doe not grieve so much, this loss of Blood,
Nor all the smart goes with it, as by this
I have lost the sight and the society
Of such a fair example of all Goodness,
As I shall ne'er more look on.—I could tell you
How much (beyond the sufferings of a Man)
I dared him to the field:—How meeting there,
He did not look upon me as a Foe;
Or, one that thirsted a Revenge,—but one
That only met to show he durst,—and then,
Seemed—in the language of his look—at once
To speak the Dreyrie issue of a fight,
And—to advise to shun it.—Till he saw
My weapon out,—His slept within his Scabbard.
Both equally prepared,—my weapon only
Laboured for blood;—His, only his own guard
Without desire to touch me. In a word,
What you see done,—I made him doe;—and done,
His heart wept blood to think on it.—When another
(Seeing his state thus dangerous) would have fled;
I could not counsel him to it,—but in this,
As all his Actions, valuing noble things
Above his life—he took into's embraces
My wounded body;—Brought me from the field;
And to the diligence, and well known skill
Of thy•… good man has left me: Leaving with him,
(I almost blush, to doe him right in that)
His ample satisfaction for my Cure,
Or whatsoever may be demanded.
Sir ya've given him a fair Character,
He were
Baser then Envy would not. —and all this
He did in the Honour of your Beauty Lady.
Lady.
dear sister.—
Lady.
He loved you dearly: Can his Praises▪ then offend your ear?
No every syllable
Of his commends is musique. —But to think,
That, for my sake this much Commended worth,
(Yet much above, the great commends it has)
Should thus be lost O, I could weep my self,
Into my senseless Statue! —Bellingham!
O Noble, noble Bellingham!
Sister.
Lady:
If his Commends be music in your ear,
Be patient, and hear more on it. —once again.
To this:—It was his; —and (as I said before)
He left it as he parted: But, not mine,
But thine, —thou best of women:—his desire,
You'd wear it for him:—when, you look upon it,
You'd think upon him; thinking, that you'd give
His wandering steps fair wishes.
As I would
My soul, departing, on her Journey hence
To her eternal dwelling.
Pray observe,
How in this ring, he has emblem'd all the world,
And all her painted glories. —look you Madam▪
A bed of Roses-wither'd. —And the word,
Caelestia non sic! —tic not thus in heaven!
There's no decay; no failing, All things there
Their Innate Beauties doe for ever wear:
For ever, their full flourish:—Here below,
Our best Joys wither; All things Ebb and Flow. —Indeed—
He was not master of that thing, from which
He did not draw, (as out of this small compass,
Sweet and Celestial uses!—was a man,
As heaven had only made a man to make
By his example, multitudes of men,
Such as it self would have 'em. —you weep still.
No hope, again, to see him?
Doe you wish it?
As life, as health, as Heaven!
You will not then deny one kindness to me?
what i'st Captain?
Now you have left your love-suite sir; —and seem
To be a spoakes-man, for young Bellingham
She can deny you nothing:—what i'st Captain?
Faith only this Sir Robert. —I would Beg
Since She desires to see him, that, for that
She would Let me wear this Diamond but till I find
Fit time to send it to him.
Send it?
Yes—No strict enquiries of me: I have spoke
If you dare trust me—
But direct me sir—I'll Bear't my self.
You know my Bosom Lady;
If you will send it.
Take it.
Take it Captain,—but—
I conceive all that you can urge me to,
And will perform to your own wish.—My wounds
Call for your help sir.—I must now desire
You would be pleased to leave me.
Weed be loath
To be a hindrance to the happiness
That we all wish for.
Farewell noble Captain.
Come, shall I look upon your wounds?
No, no:
I feigned my self much fainter then I am,
To hasten them to leave me.
Thanks to your Art; —and you great Master of it.
I feel my legs sturdy supporters now, 
And for a need could travel.—Bellingham.
You have observed these passages?
I have;
Unseen I have seen, and overheard 'em.
Then—I hope you have seen, that I have played the part
Of a just Advocate.
Sir, you've done
For me,—the most unworthy—such a Love
As I shall ne'er make even with.
No more;
The Exchange is made, Sir Oliver:—there, —take it, 
She dreams not sir, you have it so suddenly:
But, what's to follow—I must change my seat,
For this has tired me sir.—We'll take more hours
Sufficiently to think on.
Noble Captain.—
Will these foolish Suitors be troublesome still?
And still live in hope of my Lady?
Hang 'em Puttocks; you shall hear more of them hereafter.
But how is it with Rash, and his piece of Rash, Mistress Barberry?
Faith, he's not so rash as he was, with some supple persuasions
Of mine;—her hanging the head,—beating the breast, wringing
The hands,—wiping the nays, —and lamentably breathing some
Hundred and fifty Heigh'os; he was won in the end to bus her, to
Embrace her,—to bus her again.—He buss'd, —and she buss'd, —and they
Both buss'd so long, —till at last,—overcome in this conflict of kisses;
He yielded himself her Captive, and has vowed
Till his death to love her as dear as his life.
How now? what Musick's this?
It is applied to my Ladies melancholy,
But I fear me to little purpose,—peace, a Song.
Now, Master William,
How fares my Sister, and your Lady?—ha?
Shoe's a sad Lady;—and so sad, Sir Robert,
That no delights, that her most loving friends
Present unto her Senses, from her breast
Can take one minutes anguish.
Well, I fear me,
She'll pine her self into her winding-sheet.
Now Peg, how is it?—how does our sister? ha?
Can smile, and tell me, there's as clear a sky
Upon her beauty? No, that down-cast look
I fear me's her sad picture.
It is indeed:
But the occasion of her grieving's changed.
What's the sad matter now then?
Only now,—young Bellingham's sad absence.
Bellingham?
For which, with many sighs, with many tears,
Many abrupted syllables, extolling
His noble worth and goodness;—she accuses
Her wretched self;—making her self the cause
Of that sad fight, and this lamented Issue.
It grieves me thus to see her;—and as much
To leave her in it,—I must in again:
Come, will you in, Sir Robert?
Go, I'll follow.
Heaven never pity me, but for the weight 
Of sorrow, lies upon her tender heart,
My heart's as full of anguish.
My brave Captain,
Doe you so much compassionate the tears
Of my poor sister, as thus weak and ill,
To come to see, and comfort her?
Sir Robert,
I thank my great Restorer, I am well:
But, were I at the weak'st, hearing her grief,
I should forget mine own, and tender that
My best respects, and service.
You are Noble.
Still grieving her lost Husband?
Questionless,
There's some remains of that:—but with it sir,
Sh'as now th'addition of your blood: with that
The flight of him, that yours commends,—and his
Better considered worthiness, has made
So noble to her, Noble Bellingham,
For whom, as one by her occasion lost,
Her conscience seems to check her:—and retired
Into her melancholy chamber, sits
As in a Cell:—whence all the loving means
That can be used, have not the power to move her.
In her Chamber?
And this strong Passion for young Bellingham?
Pray call a servant.
Some within there. 
Bear this to your sad Lady sir, and tell her
The man she grieves for, will not long be from her;
And that the bringer of it does desire
She would be pleased, that he might see her here.
Here, tell her here:—go, fetch her.
Nay, if that
Be her disease, this is the cure or nothing.
Why, is young Bellingham returned?
You see
The Ring she sent him is returned: from that,
Let me alone to cure her.
Now my Peg,
What comfort brings thy coming?
That my tongue
Were furnished with those words that might delight you:
I know, there's in this wish, and the sad signs
It is delivered with, answer enough
Touching your worthy Sisters heaviness,
To make your hearts as heavy.—But my charge,
Is from my Lady, to entreat you would
Be pleased to come and see her.
See her wench?
Prithee go in again, and tell thy Lady,
We hope she'll leave her solitary Cell,—and come to us.
To you sir?
Nay, nay, go,—and tell her what I bid thee.
Pray sir Robert,
What Beauty's this?
A pretty beauty sir.
But that her wearings are so fair and costly,
I should—from Fems rich pencilling a Virgin,
That was your foster daughter, take that piece,
And this to be one beauty.
So to take,
Is not to take amiss sir; this is she:
This is that Girl, believe me.
Still a Virgin!
As from her Mother, Captain.
And her heart—her own sir, and unpromis'd.
Yet believe me,
Dost like her, noble Captain?
To enjoy her,
As the sole mistress of my purest desires,
Is the greatest happiness that I can aim at.
You know her Birth.
It is noble in her virtues.
If virtue be the best Nobility,
It is so indeed.—Go, thou shalt have her Captain.
And howsoever, set lightly by, till now,
Sh'as now some weight;—five hundred Pieces Captain,
Five hundred golden Pieces.
Your Lady Sister's coming sir.
Please you,
I'll in, and try my fortunes with her sir.
What follows of the Ring I sent,—this Doctor
Can as well finish, as my self were here,
I'll not be long about it.
Say you so sir?
Here, take this Ring, twill help you.—Never not fear her:
Go in and woo her; win her, and then wear her, 
I see that Ring has brought her:
How is it Sister?
Revived a little by the sight of this,
But let me see the man I sent it to,
And then that cure upon my grief,—you wished▪
Is to your wish effected.
Master Doctor.
Where is he?—speak, who brought it?
I did Lady.
You?—What are you sir?
My Profession Lady,
My habit shows you: I am he that cured
The Captain that he wounded.
Mullynex?
That Captain Ladies.
Is he well?
He is.
As meat can make him; and his flesh as whole as a fish,
Take my word for that Lady sister.
Ha?—where? where is he?
Faith, somewhere here about the house he is,
And see, he appears in his likeness. 
You're as good as your word;—you have got her.
Not with child yet, but I hope I shall doe-ere long:
Now heaven give us joy, and ell's done sir.
Heaven give you joy;—I'll give you the gold I promised you.
You see the Captain is well Sister.
Why then returns not Bellingham?—or does he,
(Hearing his goodness has inthrald my heart)
Neglect me now, because I neglected him,
When my fresh griefs enforced me?—If he doe,
I must confess it but a just revenge:
And so (as long as grief shall give me leave)
Shall patiently endure it.
But you shall not,
You have endured beyond a women's strength,
And shall endure no longer.—Master Doctor,
You are the man must cure her.
Beauteous Lady,
It was your command, I should not trouble you
With any tedious Love-suit;—and you see
I have done, what you have enjoined me:—Now I hope
I have your voluntary grant.
I am now,
What Noble Bellingham shall please to make me.
No doubt he'll make much of the Sister,—wilt thou not Knight?
My brave sir, of a thousand per Annum?
Shoe's now mine own; and in this union sir,
The best delights that her desires would have,
Are mine, mine own;—and I shall so pursue 'em.
And what say you master Captain?
To my Pig▪
I say (as he has said)—that shoe's my self,
As you have said;—that shoe's my Girl;—my Pearl;
Her voice, I will hang in my ear:—Her face in mine eye;
Her pretty little waste in mine arms;
And being in arms, let the Soldier alone to come on sir.
Why god•… mercy Captain.—Now to Church, 
Nay, we'll not lose a minute.
Beseech you stay a little, there's that mirth in your way 
I dare promise will be worth your beholding:
See, see it appears.
Who's this?—Master Rash?
The very same, an't please you.
Your suit continued still sir?
I have turned up another suit now sir.
Your Wife!
Even so sir.
Verily so sir.—Doe not you know me Lady?
Truth not I.
Nor you, nor you, nor you?
We know thee not.
What art thou?
This it is, to put off our vain &amp; superfluous colours, and to walk
As becomes the zealously metamorphosed. I was your
Creature Lady.
How? my creature?
In the phrase of the world it was so. —But I am now,—mine own,
Yet,—verily —I doe err,—for —no wife, —is her own disposer.
Verily none:—for we —to affirm sincerely, are but members
Of our Head, the man; —our Spouse, —and our Superior.
How Bab!
That Barberry Button, believe me.
How comes she to speak in the nose so?
The tone of the Brethren, and the Sisters;
But, what doe you think of this Member?
Though begot,—and conceived in vanity:—being borne in the
State of Matrimony, the offence,—may no doubt be remitted, and the
Innocent, in time, may prove a most,—zealous member.
And what think you sir?
I think, as my wife thinks,—for man and wife are one.
Verily, you have said, &amp; said like a zealous husband.
Give way there Gentlemen.
Why, what's the matter?
Your shadow Lady;—and your Rival sir:
The prettiest fancy; the most dainty Dream!
Beseech you Madam, stand aside a little, 
Much joy betide your worship.
Godamercy;
Having this Beauty, I have all the joys
My Auspicious Stars could give me. Honest Cut;
This service shall not be unthought of Cut.
Well Master Gregory,—an you doe hang your self.
Why, an he does, he does,—we cannot help it.
Yet it would grieve a man.—
Grieve a pudding: —And it grieve not him to do it, it shall never
Grieve me to hear on it.—We are now man and wife.
For better, for worse sir.
Then, for better, for worse, I will keep her.—
Why, there's another Rival o'mine,—Sir Oliver,—
Say he should take the same journey, and go to
Heaven in a Halter after him; can I help it?
I confess, you cannot:—thank you master Plush.
I did but say,—an —an you should sir.
No, though the loss be somewhat grievous to me▪
The sorrow shall not go so deep:—she's yours.
As sure as the Church can make her.
What must be, must be sir; —much joy betide you.
Thank you.
Now Lady,
In spite of all my Rivals, you are mine.
I am sir.
I know thou art, and thereupon—.
Not a kiss, till you come to your Chamber,—then
Shoe's your own all over.
It is enough: Now, an my father would but dye once.
When Plush shall hear of this,—he will hang himself.
An he do—to make a wry mouth at the match,
I cannot help it; I should not doe so by him though.—
Save you gentlemen. We have the Lady Gentlemen.
We have the Lady-gentlemen.
Is my Sister divided between you?
You cannot both have the Lady.
Alas poor Gregory!
Alas poor Plush!
Alas poor coxcombs! here's a coil indeed
About a worthless shadow:—What am I sir?
Alas poor Plush!
Alas poor Gregory!
Why, who have I then?
Why, who doe you think you have sir?—
This is no Ivy bush, nor I an Owl.—
Do ye stare upon me? say?
Are yo' my wife?
I cannot tell,—how doe you think sir? ha?
Having got this Beauty from you, we got this Beauty for you.
You'll think upon me I hope sir.
The Gentlewoman is my Sister; —I tell you no more but so sir:
She loves no large protests:—Embrace and kiss,
And it is sufficient.—There's an end of this.
And what say you sir?
Why, I say—I —know not, —what to say,
She—is not —very old sir —is she?
In her Hood, —some—50—But in some Dressings she has,
She may pass for a thing of twenty.
Here be some Gutters;—Channels,—and Long lanes,
But being filled up,—with —a little Plaster of Paris —
Garden.
The Face, —may pass—
For a Paris-garden face:—it may sir.
Come, ne'er be melancholy,—you shall find a woman of me I warrant you.
Thou speak, —like a good old woman.—Well —
An my wife would but die once.
How Sweet-heart? —your Father.
I know what I said, I warrant you.
Nay, pree thee sweet-heart kiss me: —faith you shall —
There—Puh! Well, —an —my wife would but dye once!
Come, you are so melancholy:
Why here's a man suffers, as much as you;
Or you master Plush,—and yet you see hoe's patient.
I thought I had married a Lady too, —but —by lady,
There's no such matter.—We must be contented now though.
Well—here be three of us.
There be indeed;
Stand together, I beseech you, and be silent.
Come, let's to Church:—nay, we'll not lose a minute▪
Brother;—Son,
So, now I'll call thee Captain; having got
The inestimable Jewel, treasured up
In this rich Cabinet: —for such a Gem,
Is the dear heart of Peg my Girl;—my Pearl;
This beauteous, virtuous, Country Girl:—And such
The Prize your fortune, —or, your goodness rather,
Has drawn in this sweet Beauty.—Many joys,
Heaven send you both.
Many sweet Girls and Boys.
Why, godamercy my old Pig,—Away. 
In love, and war, no danger to delay.
COme, will you go Gentlemen?—
Nay you must be with us,
And ghosts at this Wedding dinner.
Must we?
By any means in the world sir.—
Their Cates will not relish without you.
A word or two first, to ease our stomachs here, and our▪
Stomachs shall be there in an instant.—Gentlemen,
You see how we have bin abused,—Basely abused and gulled.
I, with this —cracked Commodity.
I, with this—old Commodity.
And I,—with this—scolding Commodity.
How this crack,—
How this face—
How this tongue—
May be soldered,—
May be varnished,—
May be charmed.—
I,—any man can, let him tell us—no;—no man?
Not one word of comfort.
If not, for us, so cunningly betrayed
To these hard bargains;—for our Country Maid.
Our virtuous City Dame, be pleased to show▪
That you are pleased,—
Though we be hardly so,
These tricks thus put upon's.
And then, this—Crack.
This—withered Face—here.
and my Gillians clack.
I Soldered.
Varnished.
Charmed.
Here you may please
To understand, that what's set down, for these
Is spoke for All: that by this part we mean,
All the whole Bulk, and Body of the Scoene
We have Presented: —which—or Ebbes, or Flows,
Or stands, or falls,—withers, or sweetly grows
From the Aspects you give it:—Let them be,
But gracious, we are yours.
And wee.
And wee.

IF from old Fame, and peradventure not
Believed at all by you, or else forgot,
Of the Amorous Brook ye heard the wonder ever,
Which to pursue the coy and flying River
Of his beloved Arethusa, ran
(O force of Love!) piercing the Ocean,
And the earth's hidden bowels, to that Isle,
Where underneath the huge Etnean Pile▪
Upon his back the kicking Giant lies,
Spitting despiteful flames at hostile Skies,
And leaves it doubtful to the world that's under,
If heaven at him, or he at heaven thunder:
That Brook am I. Though what you have been told
Ye may, your eyes ye cannot doubt. Behold!
Leaving my loved Nymph, and thridding back
That well known way where I had made a track
Through the great waters, I in person rise
And view (with tears of gladness in mine eyes)
That ancient and that venerable earth
From whose cold entrails I received my birth,
Not thrall'd and plundered (as of late) but free
And beautiful as it was wont to be.
O my deer mother! O Arcadia, known
By me thy son, though so long absent! own
Thy deer, and (being improved by travel) now
Thy great ALFEO, and as famed as thou.
These be the streets once so renowned, these be
The woods where the old russet honesty
Did live and die: unto this only nook
Of the iron world, when she her flight had took
From sinful men, the golden age retired.
Here (that which elsewhere is in vain desired)
Freedom unstrain'd, and from suspicion free,
Flourished in peace and sweet security.
An unarmed people had for their defence
A wall of Virtue, and of Innocence,
Stronger then that whose living stones were laid
About great Thebes, whilst he that built it played.
For when tumultuous war flamed most in Greece
And other her more warlike Provinees
Arcadia armed, to this blessed part alone,
This Sanctuary, there was never known
The least Alarm, the least sound to come,
Or of a friends, or of an en'mies Drum.
And so much Corinth, Thebes, Mycene hoped
To triumph o'er their foes, as they were propped
By this good people, and their care were held,
Who were the Care of Heaven, whom heaven upheld.
A blessed mutual bulwark they did prove,
Those to these here, and these to those above:
Those fought with weapons, and these fought with Prayer.
Nor though each here a shepherds habit ware,
And bore the name; yet either in his men,
Or exercises, was the shepherd seen.
But some would place themselves as spies to pry▪
Into the Stars and Elements (the high
Secrets of Heaven and Nature) others here
Were wholly given to chase the fearful Deer:
Others, whom glory had inflamed more,
To encounter with a Bear, or tusked Bore.
Some swift in running, some were terrible
At Barriers, some in wrestling did excel;
One threw a dart, another drew a flight,
Both hit with cunning the intended white.
Some one thing, some another did affect,
(Each as his mind and fancy did direct)
The sacred Muses Most, Virgins of yore
In high esteem, though now despised and poor.
But how transported hither where the Po
Falls into Dora, is Arcadia now?
This is the cloister surely, this the cave
Of ancient Erycina, and that brave
Aspiring Temple yonder is the same
Was consecrated to great Cynthia's name:
How then removed? What new-come power can so
Transplant a Land, and all the People? O
Royal Infant, but a child in age,
Yet even already as a Matron sage!
The virtue of your Name, power of your Blood
Great Catherine (now it is understood)
Wrought this; from that great House descended, which
New Kingdoms daily, and new worlds enrich.
Those great effects which we as wonders view,
Are natural and usual things with you.
As by that Sun which from the East doth rise,
So many excellent varieties
Are brought into the world, herbs, flowers &amp; trees,
So many beasts, fowl, fish, in earth, air, seas:
So by the living Sun of your bright eyes
(which in the now more worshipped West did rise)
New Provinces from every Clime about,
New Realms, new Laurels, and new Trophies sprout.
Low as my bottom then I bow to you,
Majestic Daughter of that Monarch, who
Enjoys an Empire, so August, so great,
That Phoebus in it doth both rise and set:
And Wife of him, to whose breast, hand, and wit
Heaven did the walls of Italy commit.
But Alpian rocks are needed now no more,
Bulwarks, nor horrid cliffs to stand before
Fair Italy, securer in your guard
Then in those hills which have her entrance barred.
That bulwark so invincible in war,
You make soft Peace's Temple, where from far
Men come to worship her. Long live as one
Ye Royal pair; this fair Conjunction
Presages Christendom again shall boast
Those many Eastern Scepters she hath lost.
This is a field worthy of none but you
(Magnanimous CHARLES) and a field trodden toe
By your brave Ancestors. This Land is great,
Great are your names, great blood in you is met;
Great your designs, your minds, and your aspects,
Great off-spring too, and deeds the world expects.
But whilst I prophecy, and Fate prepares
Circles of gold to crown your silver hairs,
Disdain not (mighty Souls) this flowery wreath
Gatherd on Pindus by those Maids that breath
Life in dead men. Poor offering (I confess)
Yet such as, if Devotion it express,
Even Heaven it self disdains not: And if from
Your smiling heaven a fav'ring gale shall come,
This Lute which from its gentle warbling strings
Sending still Music to your ears, now sings
Soft Loves, and pleasing Hymeneal Rites,
Shall turn a Trumpet to proclaim your Fights.
GO you that lodged the Monster, as you're wont
Amongst the neighbouring sheepcoats, raise the Hunt.
Rouse eyes and hearts with your shrill voice and horn;
If ever in Arcadia there were born
A shepherd, who did follow Cynthia's Court
As a true lover of her rural sport,
Within whose Quarry-scorning mind had place
The pleasure or the glory of the Chase,
Now let him show that courage and that love,
By following me, where in a little grove
To Valour a large field doth open lye,
That dreadful Boar, I mean, that Prodigy
Of Nature and the Woods, that huge, that fell,
And noted'st Tyrant that did ever dwell
And reign in Erimanthus; the fields mower,
The mowers terror: Go you then before,
And do not only with your early horn
Anticipate, but wake the drowsy morn. —
We, Linco, will to prayers, this perilous Chase
(Heaven being our guide) we may more boldly trace.
" That work which is begun well is half done,
" And without Prayer no work is well begun.
Thy worshipping the Gods I well commend,
But not thy troubling them who do attend
The Gods: The Priests as yet are all asleep,
To whom day springs yet later, where the steep
Surrounding hills a short Horizon make.
To thee whose heart is hardly yet awake
The whole world sleeps.
O Silvio, Silvio,
Why did frank Nature upon thee bestow
Blossoms of Beauty in thy prime, so sweet
And fair, for thee to trample under feet?
Had I thy fresh and blooming cheek, Adieu
I'd say to beasts, and nobler game pursue.
The Summer I would spend in feasts and mirth
In the cool shade, the Winter by the hearth.
How's this? Thou art not Linco sure; for he
Such counsel never used to give to me.
" Counsel must change as the occasion doth:
If I were Silvio, so I'd do insooth.
And I, if I were Linco would do so,
But as I am, I'll do like Silvio.
Fond youth, for a wild Beast so far to roam,
Whom thou must hunt with danger, when at home
One's safely lodged!
Dost thou speak seriously?
How near is it?
As thou art now to me.
You are mad.
Thou art.
In what wood doth hee rest?
Silvio's the wood, and Cruelty the beast.
Mad I was sure!
To have a Nymph so fair,
(Rather a Goddess of perfections rare)
Fresher and sweeter then a Rose new blown,
Softer and whiter then an old Swans down,
For whom there lives not at this day a swain
So proud amongst us but sighs, and sighs in vain:
To have, I say, this matchless Paragon
By Gods and men reserved for thee, nay, thrown
Into thine arms without one sigh or tear,
And thou (unworthy!) to disvalue her?
Art thou not then a beast? a savage one?
Rather a senseless clod, a stock, a stone?
" If not to be in love be cruelty,
" Then cruelty's a Virtue: Nor do I
Repent, but boast, I lodge him in my breast
By whom I've conquered Love, the greater beast.
How could thou conquer (silly Idiot)
Whom thou ne'er try'dst?
In that I tried him not.
O had thou tried him Silvio, and once found
In mutual Lovers what true joys abound,
I know thou'ldst say, O Love, the sweetest guest,
Why hast thou been an alien to this breast?
Leave, leave the woods, leave following beasts, fond boy,
And follow Love..
Linco, I take more joy
In one beast caught by my Melampo, far,
Then in the love of all the Nymphs that are.
Keep they those joys unto themselves alone
That find a soul in them; for I find none.
No soul in LOVE (the world's great Soul)? But fool,
Too soon (believe it) thou'lt find he is all soul:
(Perchance too late;) for " he will be sure before
" We die, to make us all once feel his power.
And (take my word) " worse torment none can prove,
" Then in old limbs the youthful itch of love:
" All tampering then will but exasperate
" The sore. If Love a young man wound, he straight
" Balms him again, hope holds up sorrows head,
" And smiles revive him, if frowns strike him dead.
" But if an aged man those flames endure,
" Whose own defects his own repulse procure,
" Then, then the wound is unsupportable
" And mortal; then the anguish is a Hell:
" Then if he pity seek, it is a curse
" To go without it, and to gain't a worse.
" Ah! hasten not before the appointed day
" The curse of days; for if when thou art gray
" Thou learn to love, twill breed a double sense,
" Of thy youth's pride, and age's impotence.
Leave, leave the woods, leave following beasts, fond boy,
And follow Love.
As if there were no joy
But these Chimera's in a Lovers head,
Of strange Eliziums, by his fever bred!
Tell me if in this jolly month of May,
When earth is clad in all her best array,
In stead of bladed fields, brooks uncontrolled,
Green woods and painted meads, thou should behold
Bald fields and meads, brooks bound with Ice, the Pine,
The Beech, the Ash, the Oak, the Elm, the Vine,
And Poplar, like inverted Sceletones,
Stand desolate, rattling their naked bones;
Would thou not say, Nature is out of tune,
The world is sick, and like to dye in June?
Now the same horror which thou would receive
From such a monstrous novelty, conceive
At thine own self. " The all-disposing Heaven
" To every age hath proper Humours given:
" And as in old men love absurdly shows;
" So young men enemies to love oppose
" Nature and Heaven. Look Silvio round about,
Examine the whole Universe throughout:
All that is fair or good, here, or above,
Or is a Lover, or the work of Love.
The all-seeing Heaven, the fruitful Earth's a Lover,
The Sea with love is ready to boil over.
See thou yon Star of such excelling hew,
The Suns Postilion? That's a lover too:
Nor is exempted from her own son's laws,
But feels that passion which her beauties cause.
Perchance this very hour too she did part
From her stolen sweets, and Him that keeps her heart.
Mark what a wanton eye she has! In woods
Rough Bears, the crook-backt Dolphin loves in floods,
And sluggish Whales; That little bird which sings
So sweetly, and so nimbly plies the wings,
Flying from tree to tree, from Grove to Grove,
If he could speak, would say, I am in love.
But his heart says it, and his tongue doth say it
In language understood by his deer Mate:
And Silvio, hark how from that wilderness
His dear Mate answers, And I love no less.
The Cowes low in the valley; and what's this.
But an inviting unto amorous bliss?
The Lions roar in solitary Groves,
Not for their prey, but for their absent Loves.
All things that are, but Silvio, are in love,
The burden's that: Here, round us, and above,
No soul but Silvio is a foe to joy.
Leave, leave the woods, leave following beasts, fond boy,
And follow Love.
Had I my tender years
Committed to the care of thy gray hairs,
That thou should thus effeminate my heart
With love? Know thou who I am? who thou art?
Thou art a man (or should be one) and I
Another; what I teach Humanity.
And if thou scorn that name (which is my pride)
Take heed, in stead of being deified,
Thou turn not beast.
That monster-taming King,
From whom my lofty pedigree I bring,
Had never grown so valiant, nor so famed,
If first the monster Love he had not tamed.
See foolish youth, how idly thou talk now!
Had great Alcides been no Lover, how
Had thou been born? Rather, if he overcome
Monsters and men, to Love impute the same.
Know thou not yet, that to comply with fair
Omphales humour, he not only ware
(In stead of the fierce Lions rugged skin)
Women's soft robes, but taught those hands to spin,
And hold a feeble distaff, which did bear
The knotty Club? His interludes these were
Between his Acts; And when his ribs were beat
With dear-bought Conquests, he would then retreat
Into her lap (the bay of sweet delight)
As in Love's port to be new built for fight.
" His sighs from his past toils sweet breathings were,
" And spirits strengthening him new toils to bear.
" For as the iron, of it self too rough,
" And of a harsh unmalleable stuff,
" Softened with fire, and gentler metal, strength
" From weakness gathers, and becomes at length
" Fit for the noblest use: so hearts untamed,
" (Which their own stiffness often breaks) inflamed
" With generous Love, and with his sweets allayed,
" Are clearer, apter for great Actions made.
If you are ambitious then to imitate
Great Hercules, and not degenerate
From thy high strain, since woods thou dost affect,
Follow the woods, but do not Love neglect:
I mean so lawful and so worthy love
As that of Amarillis. I approve
(So far from blaming that as cruelty)
Thy shunning of Dorinda; For in thee
Who standst upon thy blood, it were double shame
To scorch thy breast with an unlawful flame,
For injuring thy Spouse.
What say thou man?
She is not yet my Spouse.
Was there not than
A promise solemnly received and given?
Take heed proud Boy, how thou provoke Heaven.
" Man's freedom is Heavens gift, which doth not take
" Us at our word when forced vows we make.
I, but (unless our hopes and judgements fail)
Heaven made this Match, and promised to entail
A thousand blessings on it.
It is like that there
Is nothing else to do; a proper care
To vex the calm rest of the gods above!
Linco, I like nor this, nor t'other Love.
I was a Huntsman, not a Lover bred;
Thou who art all for love, go back to bed.
Thou sprung from Heaven, harsh Boy? nor of divine
Can I suppose thee, nor of humane Line.
Alecto's poison thy cold limbs did fashion;
Sweet Venus had no hand in thy creation.
O Amarillis, Address of my flame,
(Within my mouth how sweet now is thy name!
But in my heart how bitter!) Amarillis,
Fairer and whiter then the whitest Lilies,
But crueler then cruel Adders far,
Which having stung (least they should pity) bar
Their ears, and fly: If then by speaking I
Offend thee, I will hold my peace and die.
I'll hold my peace, but what will that do good,
If hills and dales roar for me, and this wood
Which thy deer name can ne'er forget, from me
So often heard, and carved on every tree?
The winds shall sigh for me, the fountains shed:
Abundant tears, grief mourn, and pity plead.
Or could thou bribe whole Nature with a fee
To silence, lastly Death shall speak for me:
He will thunder 't out, and to the world proclaim,
I died a Martyr in my true Loves flame.
Mirtillo, " Love is a great pain at best,
" But more, by how much more it is suppressed.
" For as hot Steeds run faster at the check,
" Then if you laid the reins upon their neck:
" So love restrained augments, and fiercer grows
" In a close prison, then when loose he goes.
Why hidst thou thy flames cause so long from me,
When the effect could not concealed be?
Mirtillo burns: how often have I said?
But inward burns, and will not call for aid.
Courteous Ergasto, out of my respect
To her (alas) I did my self neglect:
Nor would my festring passion yet unfold,
But that necessity hath made me bold.
I hear a buzzing rumour every-where
(Which to my heart finds passage through my ear)
That Amarillis shortly weds; nor dare
Ask more, lest so I should my love declare,
Or prove my fear too true. Full well I know
(Nor hath Love struck me blind) that in my low
And slender fortunes, it were simple pride
To hope a Nymph so shaped, so qualified,
So raised in wealth, in spirit, and in blood,
Above all these, so gentle, and so good,
Can ere be mine: no, I have tan the height
Of my unhappy Star, my sullen fate
Made me for fuel only, born to smother
In fires I cannot kindle in another.
Yet since Fate's pleased I should affect death more
Then life, at least I'd have her know before,
That shoe's beholding to me for my death,
And deign when I sigh out my latest breath
To cast her fair eyes on me, and say, Dye.
This reasonable boon obtain would I,
That ere she go to make another blessed
In having her, shee'ld hear me speak at least,
But once, my deer Ergasto. Now if love
Or pity of me thy soft entrails move,
Procure me this, this physic only lend,
To make the passage easy to my end.
From one that loves, a just, from one that dies,
A small request: yet a hard enterprise.
Woe be to her, should her stern father hear
That to stolen prayr's she ere had lent an ear!
Or if some baser pick-thank should disclose
It to the Priest her father-in-law! Who knows
But out of these respects she may eschew
Thy company, and yet affect thee too?
 " For women are more prone to love then men;
" But to conceal't have more discretion then.
And if it were true that she did love thee, what
Could she do less then shun thee for all that?
" She that wants power to help listens in vain,
" And flies with pity, when her stay breeds pain;
" And I have heard it is still the wisest course
" To quit that soon which one must quit perforce.
O were this true, and could I think it so,
Sweet were my pain, and fortunate my woe!
But deer Ergasto (hide it not from me
So help thee Pan) who may this Bridegroom be
So loved of all the Stars?
Dost thou not know
(I'm sure thou dost) that famous Silvio,
Silvio the rich, the gallant and the fair,
The Priest Montano's only Son and Heir?
It is he.
O happy youth, whose joy appears
So ripe for harvest in his spring of years!
Pardon me gentle swain, I envy not
Thy happiness, but mourn my own hard lot.
Indeed there is no reason to envy,
Rather to pity him.
To pity? Why?
Because he loves her not.
And hath he wit?
Hath he a heart? Is he not blind? —And yet
When I consider with what full aspect
Her starry eyes their influence direct
Into my breast, she cannot have a dart
Left in her quiver for another heart.
But why do they a gem so precious throw
To one that knows it not, and scorns it so?
Because the Heavens did through this Marriage
Unto Arcadia long ago presage
Deliverance. Hast not thou heard that here
Is paid to the great Goddess every year
Of a Nymph's guiltless blood a cruel and
Unconscionable tribute by this Land?
It is news to me; nor let that strange appear,
Since I my self am but a stranger here,
And since I came (by Fate's decree and Love's)
Almost a constant Burgess of the Groves.
But what strange crime deserved so sharp a doom?
How could such monstrous cruelty find room
In a Celestial mind?
Of me then know
From the first head the torrent of our wo:
A Story that would tears of pity wrest
From heart of oak, much more from humane breast.
Whilst yet the Priesthood was not tied to age,
A youthful swain of noble Parentage,
Then Dean's Priest (Aminta was his name)
The Nymph Lucrina did with love inflame.
All creatures of her sex exceeded she
As much in beauty as inconstancy.
She long requited, or at least to sight
(If looks and eyes have tongues) she did requite
The pure affection of the Love-sick lad,
And fed his hopes whilst he no Rival had.
But when a rustic swain her favour sought,
(See now a perfect woman!) in a thought,
She left the former, with one sigh was shook,
With the faint battery of one amorous look:
Her hearts new guest now takes up all the room,
Dislodged Aminta ere he knew for whom.
Haplesse Aminta! who from that day forth
Was so abhorred, held of so little worth,
By that ungrate whom he did still adore,
That she would neither hear nor see him more.
If this unkindness cut the wretch to th'heart,
If he sighed, wept, and raved, to thee who art
Acquainted with Love's pangs, I leave to guess.
O, It was a torment no man can express!
When then his tears and prayers he had cast
After his heart, to Dian turned at last;
If ever with pure heart, Goddess (quoth he)
And guiltless hand I kindled flame to thee,
Revenge my faith, which a perfidious Maid
Under safe conduct of her smiles betrayed.
The Goddess (gentler then the Nymph was) hears
The faithful Lover's and her servant's tears
And prayr's: and pity kindling her just ire,
By opposition did augment the fire
Her powerful bow into her hand she took,
And in ARCADIA'S wretched bosom stuck
Arrows of death and catching Pestilence
Invisible, and therefore without fence.
Without remorse they execute her rage
Without respect on every sex and age.
Nor Antidotes nor Med'cines here availed,
Nor flying now; weak Art her Master failed:
And oft, whilst he the remedy applied,
Before the Patient the Physician died.
The only hope that's left is from the sky,
So to the nearest Oracle they fly,
Which soon returned an answer clear enough,
But above measure terrible and rough;
That Cynthia was incensed, but that the Land
Might be relieved, if by Aminta's hand
That faithless Nymph Lucrina, or some one
For her, of the Arcadian Nation
Were as an offering to Diana slain.
So she, when long she had prayed, long wept in vain,
And long expected her new Lovers aid,
To the holy Altars like a Bride arrayed,
And with what pomp Religion could devise,
Was led a miserable Sacrifice.
Where at those feet from which hers fled so fast,
(The feet of her Idolater) at last
Bending her trembling knees, she did attend
From the offended youth a cruel end.
The sacred knife he boldly did unsheathe,
Rage and revenge his nostrils seemed to breathe,
His eyes to sparkle; turning then to her,
Said with a sigh (death's hollow messenger,)
Whom thou hast left Lucrina, and whom took,
Learn by this blow: And with that word he struck
Himself, and plunged the knife in his own breast
To the haft: In one both Sacrifice and Priest
Fell bleeding at her feet, whilst she (amazed
To see that dire unlooked for object) gazed
As one twixt life and death, nor yet did know
If grief had stabbed her, or the threatened blow.
But when she found her tongue again, and knew
Distinctly what was acted there, O true,
O brave Aminta, (bathing in a flood
Of tears) she said! O Lover, understood▪
Too late! who by thy death dost give to me
Both life and death. If in forsaking thee
I sinned; lo, I redeem that sin of mine,
Wedding my soul eternally to thine.
This said, that knife fresh reeking with the gore
Of the now loved in death, and purpled ore,
She drew from his pale breast, and in her own
Sheathed it again; then willingly sunk down
Into Aminta's arms, who yet had breath,
And felt perchance that lightning before death.
Such was this pair of Lovers tragic fall,
Because he kept too much faith, she none at all.
O haplesse swain, yet happy in his Love,
Having so rich occasion to approve
His spotless faith, and dying to revive
That spark in her he could not being alive!
But what became then of the poor diseased?
Did the plague cease? was Cinthia's wrath appeased?
It did relent, but was not quite put out:
For the same month (the year being wheeled about)
It burst out with more fury, and did make
A dire relapse: This forced us to betake
Our selves unto the Oracle again;
Which utterd now a sadder doom; That then
And yearly, we to Nights offended Queen
A Maid or Wife should offer, past fifteen
And short of twenty; by which means the rage
Which swallowed thousands, one death should assuage.
Moreover a hard law, and weighing well
The nature of that sex, impossible
To keep; a law in bloody letters writ
On wretched women was imposed by it;
That whatsoever Maid or Wife should prove
In any sort a changeling in her love,
Unless some friend would pay the penalty
In stead of her, should without mercy die.
This dire, this national Calamity
The good old man hath hope to remedy
By means of this desired Match; because
The Oracle after some little pause
Being asked again, what end our woe should have,
To our demand this punctual answer gave;
Your woe shall end when two of Race Divine
Love shall combine:
And for a faithless Nymphs apostate state
A faithful Shepherd supererogate.
Now there are left in all Arcadia
Of heavenly Stock no other slips this day
But Silvio and Amarillis; She
From Pan descended, from Alcides He.
Nor had there ever (to our much regret)
Of those two Lines a Male and Female met,
As now there do: whence the believing Father
Great hopes of good not without cause doth gather.
For though the things foretold by the Oracle
Be not fulfilled yet in each particle,
This is the fundamental point; the rest
Is still reserved in Fates own secret breast,
And of the Marriage one day shall ensue.
And all this do Mirtillo to undo?
What a long swing is fetched! what armies band
Against one heart half murdered to their hand!
Is it not enough that cruel Love's my foe,
Unless Fate too conspire my overthrow?
Alas, Mirtillo! grieving does no good,
"Tears quench not Love, but are his milk and food.
'T shall scope me hard, but ere the Sun descend
This cruel one shall hear thee, Courage friend:
" These sighs refresh not (as thou dost suppose)
 " Thy burning heart; but rather are like those
" Impetuous winds, which in a Town on fire
" The bellows are to blow and fan it higher:
" Love's whirlwinds, bringing to poor Lovers ever
" Black clouds of grief, which showrs of tears deliver.
WHo ever saw, what heart did ever prove
So strange, fond, impotent a Passion? Love,
And cold Disdain (a miracle to me
Two contraries should in one subject be
Both in extremes!) I know not how, each other
Destroy, and generate; inflame, and smother.
When I behold Mirtillo's every grace,
From his neat foot to his bewitching face,
His unaffected carriage, sweet aspect,
Words, actions, looks, and manners, they eject
Such flames of love, that every passion
Besides seems to be conquered by this one.
But when I think how dotingly he prizes
Another woman, and for her despises
My almost peerless face (although I say it)
On which a thousand eyes for alms do wait,
Then do I scorn, abhor, and loath him more
Then ever I did value him before,
And scarce can think it possible that he
Had ever any interest in me.
O if my sweet Mirtillo were mine own,
So that I had him to my self alone!
(These are my thoughts sometimes) no mortal wight
More bliss could boast of then Corisca might!
And then I feel such kindly flames, so sweet
A vapour rise, that I could almost meet
His love half way; yea, follow him, adore
His very steps, and aid from him implore:
Nay, I do love him so, I could expire
His sacrifice in such a pleasing fire.
Then I'm my self again: And what (say I)
A proud disdainful boy! one that doth fly
From me, and love another! that can look
Upon this face of mine, and not be struck!
But guard himself so well as not to dye
For love! Shall I, that should behold him lye
Trembling and weeping at these feet of mine
(As many better men have done) incline
Trembling and weeping at his feet? O no!
And with this thought into such rage I grow
Against my self, and him, that sounding straight
Unto my eyes and fancy a retreat,
Mirtillo's name worser then death I seem
To hate, and mine own self for loving him;
Whom I would see the miserablest swain,
The most despised thing that doth remain
Upon the earth; and if I had my will,
With mine own hands I could the villain kill.
Thus like two seas encountering, Hate and Love,
Desire and Scorn in me dire battle move:
And I (the flame of thousand hearts, the rack
Of thousands souls) languish, and burn, and lack
That pity I denied to others. I
Who have in Cities oft been courted by
Gallants and wits, to whom great Lords have bent,
And yet withstood volleys of complement,
Squadrons of Lovers, jeered their idle fires,
And with false hopes deluded their desires;
And now enforced t'a rustic swain to yield
In single sight t'a fellow that's unskilled!
O thou most wretched of all womankind
Corisca! Where could thou diversion find
Had thou no other Lover? how assuage,
Or by what means deceive thy amorous rage?
Learn women all from me this housewifery,
Make you conserve of Lovers to keep by.
Had I no Sweet-heart but this sullen Boy,
Were I not well provided of a joy?
" To extreme want how likely to be hurled
" Is that ill housewife, who in all the world
" But one Love only, but one Servant hath?
Corisca will be no such fool. " What's faith?
" What's constancy? Tales which the jealous feign
" To awe fond girls: names as absurd as vain.
" Faith in a woman (if at least there be
Faith in a woman unrevealed to me)
" Is not a virtue, nor a heavenly grace,
" But the sad penance of a ruined face,
" That's pleased with one, cause it can please no more.
" A handsome woman sought unto by store
" Of gallant youths, if pleased with one alone
No woman is, or is a foolish one.
" What's beauty (tell me) if not viewed? or viewed,
" If not pursued? or if pursued, pursued
" By one alone? Where Lovers frequent are,
" It is a sign the party loved is rare,
 " Glorious and bright. A women's honour is
" To have many Servants: Courtly Dames know this,
Who live in Towns, and those most practise it
Who have most wealth, most beauty, and most wit.
It is clownishness (say they) to reject any,
And folly too, since that's performed by many,
One cannot do: One Officer to wait,
A second to present, a third to prate,
A fourth for somewhat else; so it doth fall
Out oft, that favours being general
No favours seem: or jealousy thus thrown
To whet them, all are easier kept then one.
This merry life is by great Ladies led
In Towns, and it was my fortune to be bred
with one of them; by whose example first,
Next by her rules, I in Loves art was nursed
Up from my childhood: she would often say,
" Corisca, thou must use another day
" Thy Lovers like thy garments, put on one,
" Have many, often shift, and wear out none.
" For daily conversation breeds distaste,
" Distaste contempt, and loathing at the last.
Then get the start, let not the servant say,
He has turned his Mistress, not she him, away.
And I have kept her rules: I've choice, and strive
To please them all: to this my hand I give,
And wink on him; the handsom'st I admit
Into my bosom; but not one shall get
Into my heart: and yet I know not how
(Ay me!) Mirtillo's crept too near it now.
He made me sigh, not sigh as heretofore
To give false fire, but true flames to deplore;
Robbing my limbs of rest, my eyes of sleep,
Even I can watch till the gray morning peep
(The discontented Lovers truce); even I
(Strange change!) to melancholy walks can fly;
And through the gloomy horrors of this grove
Trace the sweet footsteps of my hated Love.
What wilt thou do, Corisca? sue? my hate
Permits not this, nor stands it with my State.
Wilt thou then fly him? That would show more brains,
But Love says no to that: What then remains?
First I will try allurements, and discover
The love to him, but will conceal the Lover;
I'll use deceipts, if that avail me not;
And if those sail me too, my brain shall plot
A brave revenge: Mirtillo shall partake
Hate, if he spurn at Love; and I will make
His Amarillis rue, that she was ere
A Rival unto me, to him so deer.
Last I will teach you both what it is to move
A woman to abhor where she did love.
I Speak Montano what I know is true,
And speak to one who knows more then I do.
" Your Oracles are still obscurer far
" Then we imagine: and their answers are
" Like knives, which if they warily be caught
" By that safe part which for the hand was wrought,
" Are useful; but if rashly they be tan
" By th'edge or point, one may be hurt or slain.
That Amarillis (as thou argu'st) should
By Heaven be destined for the general good
And safety of Arcadia, who should rather
Desire and joy, then I who am her Father?
But when I mark the words of the Oracle,
Me thinks with those the signs agree not well.
If Love must join them, and the one doth fly,
How can that be? How can the strings which tie
The true-Love's knot be hatred and disdain?
" That cannot be opposed which Heavens ordain:
Since then we see such opposition here,
That Heavens did not ordain it, is most clear.
Had they been pleased that Silvio should have had
My Amarillis, they would him have made
A Lover, not a Huntsman.
Dost not see,
He's young, not yet seventeen? In time even he
Will feel the dart of Love.
A dog hath got
His love: I know not why a Nymph should not.
"Youths are inclined more to recreation.
" And is not love a nat'rall inclination?
" Before the time it is an unnat'rall thing.
" Love is a blossom which adorns our spring.
" Your forward blossoms seldom come to good.
" They seldom fail where frosts nip not the bud.
But came I hither to dispute with thee,
Montano? I nor can, nor fits it me.
Yet I 'm a Father too of a most deer
And only child; and (if Love do not blair
My eyes) a worthy one; such (under favour)
That many wooed me, and still do to have her.
Were not this Marriage made in heaven by Fate,
It is made in earth by Faith, to violate
Which (Titiro) were rashly to profane
The godhood of great Cynthia, in whose Fane
The solemn oath was taken. Now how ready
She is to wrath, and how incensed already
Against this Country, thou art not to learn.
But I profess, as far as I discern,
And a Priest's mind rapt up above the sky
Into the eternal counsels there can pry,
This knot by the hand of Destiny was knit,
And all those signs which should accompan' it
(Have thou but Faith) will fall out jump and right
In their due time. I'll tell thee more; this night
I in my dream a certain thing have viewed,
Which my old hopes hath more then ere renewed.
" Dreams are but dreams: but well, what did thou view?
Thou dost rememb••, I presume (for who
Amongst us all is such a stupid wight
As to forget?) that lamentable night
When swelling Ladon (weary of his yoke)
The banks with his rebellious waters broke;
So that where birds were wont to build their nests,
Usurping fishes swam, and men, and beasts,
And flocks, and herds promiscuously tan
The impartial deluge swept into the Main.
That very night (O bitter memory!)
I lost my heart, or rather that which I
More dearly prized, a child, a tender one
In swathing bands, and then my only son.
Both then and since (though he be dead) as deer
To me, as if my only son he were:
The cruel torrent ravished him away
Before the people of the house (who lay
In darkness, fear and sleep buried alive)
With any timely succour could arrive:
We could not find the empty cradle neither,
But (as I guess) that and the child together
Were swallowed by the flood.
What else can be
Supposed? I think I've heard (perchance from thee)
This loss of thine before, in very truth
A miserable one, and full of ruth;
And I may say, of thy two sons the Floods
Have swallowed one, the other's lost in the Woods.
Perhaps kind Heavens in the surviving brother
Will make me rich amends yet for the other:
" It is always good to hope. Now list me out:
It was at the dawning of the morn, about
That mongrel hour which gotten betwixt night
And day, is half an Ethiop and half white,
When having watched out all the night almost,
With various fancies of this Marriage tossed,
Quite overcome at length with weariness,
A gentle slumber did mine eyes oppress,
Which with it such a lively vision brought,
That though I slept, I was awake. Me thought,
On famed Alfeo's bank I angling sate
Under a shady Beech, there came up straight
A grave old man, down to the middle bare,
His chin all dropping, and his grisled hair;
Who with both hands, and countenance beni'ne
Put a naked weeping infant into mine,
Saying, Lo here thy Son, and take good heed
Thou kill him not; then dived into the reed.
With that, black clouds obscured the Heavens round,
And threatening me with a dire tempest, frowned.
I to my bosom clapped the babe for fear,
And cried, Shall then one hour both give and bear
Away my joy? Straight all the welkin turned
Serene, and thunderbolts to ashes burned
Fell hissing in the River, with bows broken
And shafts by thousands, signs which did betoken
Extinguished vengeance; then a shrill voice brake
From the riv'd Beech, which in his tongue thus spake,
Believe Montano, and thy hope still nourish,
Thy fair Arcadia once again shall flourish.
So ever since in my eyes, mind, and breast
The pleasing figure of this dream's impressed,
Standing before me still in every place;
But above all, the courteous men and face
Of that old man (me thinks I see him wet)
Which made me coming now, when thee I met,
Directly to the Temple, there with pure
And holy Sacrifice my Dream to insure.
" Truly Montano, Dreams are Histories
" Of what is past, rather then Prophecies
" Of what's to come: Mere fragments of some sight,
" Or thought of the past day, which prints at night
 " A vain reflection of it self, like those
" Which in a cloud the Sun opposed shows.
" Not always with the senses sleeps the soul:
" Rather when she is free from all control
" Of cozening forms, which do the senses blind,
" Whilst they're asleep, more wakeful is the mind.
In short: how Heavens have destined to dispose
Of our two children, neither of us knows.
But this is clear to both of us, thine flies,
And against Nature's law, doth Love's despise.
And mine (as 't proves) is tied; her self yet hath
No benefit of her engaged faith.
Nor do I know whether she love or no:
That she makes others love, full well I know;
And can I think it probable that she
Should others wound, and go her self still free?
Me thinks of late she's altered in her cheer,
Who used all Mirth and Jollity to appear.
" But to put Maids in mind of marrying,
" And then not marry them, is an ill thing.
" As in a curious garden a fair Rose,
 " Which (cloystred up in leaves) did late repose
 " Under the sable canopy of night
" Upon its mother-stalk, with the first light
" Raises its head, then ops its tender eye,
" Whence whispring Bees suck Nectar as they fly;
 " Then to the Sun which on its form doth gaze,
" Its purple and perfumed breast displays:
 " But if it be not gatherd then, and stay
" Till it be kissed by the Meridian Ray,
" Before the Sun to the other world be fled,
" Upon its mourning stalk it hangs the head;
" So pale, so shrunk, so without life it shows,
" That one can hardly say, This was a Rose.
 " So a young Virgin, whilst her Mothers care
" Shuts and preserves her from the blasting air,
" Shuts her own bosom too against desire:
" But if she find some amorous youth to eye her,
" And hears him sigh, she ops him straight her heart,
" And in her tender breast receives Love's dart.
" Then if by fear, or else by maiden shame,
 " She be withheld from showing of her flame,
" (Poor soul!) Concealment like a worm in the bud,
" Lies in her Damask cheek sucking the blood:
 " So all her beauty's gone, if that fire last,
" And all her Lovers when her Beauty's past.
Take courage Titiro; do not embase
Thy soul with mortal fears, but nobly place
Thy hopes above; " Heaven favours a strong faith,
" And a faint prayer ne'er clomb that arduous path.
" And if all men should pray to Heaven at need,
" And pray with hope, much more should Heavens own
Our childrens Pedigree it is Divine,
" And Heaven that shines on all, will surely shine
" On its own Progeny. Come Titiro,
Together to the Temple let us go,
Together offer, thou a hee-goat there,
To PAN, and I to HERCULES a Steer.
" The Gods who bless the herds, will bless no less
" Them, who the Gods do with those blessings bless.
Trusty Demotes go, and quickly cull
From my fair herd the best and gentlest Bull,
And bring him to me to the Temple straight;
Come by the hill, the nearest way is that.
And good Demotes, from my herd bring one
Of the best Goats.
Both shall with speed be done.
May the high Gods pleased in their goodness be
To bless (Montano) this thy Dream to thee,
Even to thy utmost wish: this memory
Of thy lost son is a good augury.
" AS frosts to Plants, to ripened Ears a storm,
" To Flours the mid-day sun, to Seed the worm,
" To Stags the toils, to Birds the lime-twig; so
" Is Love to man an everlasting Foe.
And he that called it fire pierced well into
Its treach'rous nature; for if fire thou view,
How bright and beautiful it is? Approached,
How warm and comfortable? But then touched,
O how it burns! The monster-bearing earth
Did never teem such a prodigious birth:
It cuts like razors, like wild beasts devours,
And through a wood like winged lightning scours.
Where-ere it fixes its imperious foot,
Cottage and Palace, all must yield unto 't:
So Love, if thou behold it in a pair
Of starry eyes, in a bright tress of hair,
How temptingly it looks! what kindly flames
It breathes! what peace, what pardons it proclaims!
But in thy bosom if thou do it keep,
So that it gather strength, and 'gin to creep,
No Tigress in Hircanian mountains nursed,
No Lybian Lioness is half so cursed,
Nor frozen Snake fostered with humane breath.
His flames are hot as hell, bonds strong as death;
He is Wrath's hangman, Pitie's enemy,
And to conclude, Love void of love. But why
Accuse I him? Is he the Author then
Of all those pranks which mortal wights, not when
They are in love, but out of their wits, do?
Women, perfidious women, it is to you
That I impute Love's rancour; all that's nought
In him from you is by infection caught.
He of himself is good, meek as the Dove
That draws the chariot of the Queen of Love:
But you have made him wild; for though ye joy
With your own hands to feed the winged Boy,
Yet do you shut each pore so of your breast,
That in your hearts He cannot build his nest.
And all your care, pride, pleasure ye do place
In the mere outside of a simpering face.
Nor is 't your study how to pay true love,
And wager whether shall more constant prove;
To bind two souls in one, and of one heart
To make the other but the counter-part;
But how your silver hair with gold to hatch,
Then purse it up into a net, to catch
Poor souls withal, and like gold valence let
Some curls hang dangling ore your brows of jet.
How much against my stomach doth it go
To see you paint your cheeks, to cover so
The faults of Time and Nature! How ye make
Pale Feulemort a pure Vermilion take,
Fill up the wrinkles, die black white, a spot
With a spot hide, where it is, make 't where it is not.
You tie a thread across, whereof one end
Held in your teeth, the other is sustained
By your left hand, whilst of the running knot
Your right hand makes a noose to op and shut
Like shaving tongs: This instrument you fit
To your rough downy forheads, and with it
Shave all the down, and the wild hairs which shoot▪
Above their fellows, pull up by the root;
And all the while such torment you are in,
That it is at once a penance and a sin.
Nor is this all; your qualities are much
After your faces, and your faith is such
As are your works. For what is there in you
That is not counterfeit and painted too?
Do your lips op? before ye speak ye lye;
And if ye sigh, ye lye most damnably.
False lights your eyes are, and false weights your ears;
Your hearts false measures, and false pearl your tears:
So talk, or look, or think, or laugh, or cry,
Seem or seem not, walk, stand, or sit, ye lye.
Nay, there's more yet, your cozening those
Most who on you do most repose;
Your loving most those who do least love you,
And choosing to die rather then be true;
These are the arts, these are the ways
That make Love hateful in our days.
All his faults then we may most justly lay
On you; or rather on our selves: for they
Sin that believe you. Then the fault's in me
(Perjured Corisca) who did credit thee;
Come hither only for my bane (I think)
From Argos wicked streets, of vice the sink.
Yet you are so fly, and play so well the Scout,
To keep thy deeds and thoughts from tracing out,
That amongst the chastest Dames thou jettst it now,
With honesty stamped on thy haughty brow:
What scorns have I received, what discontent
From this ungrateful woman! I repent,
Yea, blush I was so fond. Example take
By me, unskilful Lovers, how ye make
" An Idol of a face, and take it for granted,
" There's no such devil as a woman sainted.
" She thinks her wit and beauty without peer,
" And o'er thy slavish soul doth domineer
" Like some great Goddess, counting thou were born
" (As a thing mortal) only for her scorn;
" Takes all that praise as tribute of her merit.
" Which is the flattry of thy abject spirit.
Why so much serving? so much admirations?
Such sighs, such tears, such humble supplications?
These are the woman's arms: Let us express
Even in our Loves valour and manliness.
Time was when I (as lusty as I am)
Thought tears and sighs could women's heart inflame.
But now I find I erred; for if she bears
A stony heart, in vain are sighs and tears.
We must strike fire out of her breast by dint
Of steel: what fool used bellows to a flint?
Leave, leave thy tears and sighs, if thou would make
A conquest of thy Dame; and if thou bake
Indeed with unextinguishable fire,
In thy hearts center smother thy desire
The best thou can, and watch thy time to doe
That which both Love and Nature prompt thee to,
" For Modestie's the charter of the woman,
" Who will not have her privilege made common;
" Nor though she uses it her self with men,
" Would she have them to use't with her again•
" Being a virtue for the admiration
" Of them that court her, not their imitation.
This is the plain and natural way of Love,
Indeed the only one that I approve.
My coy Corisca shall not find of me
A bashful Lover (as I used to be)
But a bold Foe, and she shall feel I can
Assault her with the weapons of a man,
As well as with the women's arms. Twice now
I've caught this Eel, and yet I know not how
She hath slipped through my hands; but if she come
A third time near my boat, I'll strike so home
Through both her gels, that I shall mar her flight
Here she comes forth to Relief every night,
And I like a good hound snuff round about
To find her track: If I do sent her out,
Have at her coat; O how I mean to be
Revenged upon her! I will make her see
That Love sometimes (though he appear stark blind)
Can from his eyes the hand-kerchief unbind:
And that no woman (though she may a while)
Can glory long in perjury and guile.
O Powerful Law! which Heaven or Nature,
Writ in the Heart of every Creature.
Whose amiable violence,
And pleasing rapture of the sense
Doth bias all things to that good
Which we desire not understood.
Nor the exterior bark alone
Subject to the sense of every one,
Whose frail materials quickly must
Resolve again into their dust;
But the hid seeds and inward cause,
Whose substance is eternal, moves and draws.
And if the ever-teeming world bring forth
So many things of admirable worth,
If whatsoever Heaven's great eyes
The Sun and Moon, or his small spies
The Stars behold, doth own a soul
Whose active power informs the whole;
If thence all humane seed have birth,
All plants and Animals; if the earth
Be green, or on her wrinkled brow it snows,
From that immortal and pure Spring it flows.
Nor this alone: On mortal Crown
What-ever restless Spears roll down;
Whence all our actions guided are
By a happy or unhappy Star;
Whence our frail lives their Qu receive
This Stage to enter, and to leave.
What-ever thwarts, what-ever stils
Our froward, and our childish wills
(Which seeming to be Fortune's Play
To give, and take our things away,
The world ascribes to her) hath All
From that high virtue its original.
Soul of the World: if it were thou did say
Arcadia should have rest and peace one day,
And like a snake renew her youth,
What man dares question so divine a truth?
If what the famous Oracle
Of two whom Fate should couple did foretell,
It spake but as thy mouth, if fixed it be
In the eternal depth of thy Decree,
And if the Tripods do not falsehoods vent,
Ah! who retards thy wills accomplishment?
Behold, a scornful boy, a foe
To Love and Beauty: Hee (although
Extract from Heaven) with Heaven contends!
Behold another youth offends
In love as much, (in vain deserving
To be preferred for humbly serving)
And with his flame thwarts thy Decree!
And the less hope he hath to see
His service and his true loves hire,
The clearer burns his faith and fire;
And he now for that Beauty dyes,
Which t'other (whom it is kept for) doth despise.
Is Jove divided then about his doom?
Hath doubtful Fate twins struggling in her womb?
Or doth man's mountain-hope, unleveld yet,
New impious Giants in rebellion set
On both sides to assault the Towr of Jove,
By loving, and by shunning Love?
Have we such strength? and ore the Pours above
Shall two blind Pours triumph, Disdain, and Love?
But thou high Mover of the Orb, that rid'st
The Stars and Fate, and with thy Wisdom guid'st
Their course, look down upon our tottering State,
And reconcile Disdain and Love with Fate.
That ice, this flame, thaw, quench with heavenly dew,
Make one not fly, another not pursue.
Ah! let not two men's obstinacy stand
Betwixt thy promised mercy and a Land.
And yet who knows? what we imagine is
Our greatest cross, may prove our greatest bliss.
" If on the Sun no humane eye can gaze,
" Who then can pierce into Iove's hidden ways?
O What a walk have I had! At the Race,
The Mead, Hill, River, Fountain, wrestling Place
I've been to seek thee: Heaven be praised, at last
I've found thee here.
What news requires such haste?
Bring thou me life or death?
The list's a thing,
Which if I had for thee, I would not bring:
The former, though I have not for thee yet,
I hope to bring. But why art thou ore-set
With thy own sighs? If thou would overcome
Another, overcome thy self at home:
Breathe, and revy't again—. But to proceed
To that which made me seek thee with such speed;
The matter's this: Know thou (who doth not know?)
Ormino's Sister? rather tall then low
She is of stature, cherry-cheekt, her hair
Inclined to red, and of a sprightly air.
What is her name?
Corisca.
Yes, I do
Know her, and have conversed with her too.
Know then that she (see the good luck on it! What
hath been the means to work it I know not,
Or on whose score it comes) is grown of late
With Amarillis very intimate.
Which I perceiving, a relation made
Of thy affection unto her, and pried
Both her assistance and her secrecy
Therein, which she accorded readily.
O blessed a thousand thousand times and more
Then all (Mirtillo) that ere loved before,
If this be true: But prithee, did she say
Nothing at all unto thee of the way?
Nothing as yet, and I will tell thee why:
Corisca said, she could not certainly
Determine of the way till she might know
Some circumstances of thy love, that so
She might be better able to discern
The inclination of the Nymph, and learn
How to address her self, with subtlety,
Or with entreaties; what it were best to try,
Or what to leave: This was the cause made me
To come so hastily in search of thee.
Therefore from first to last thou shalt doe well
Thy Love's whole story unto me to tell.
I'll do it. But know Friend, to stir again
The bitter memory of Love in vain,
Is like the tossing of a torch about
One's head in the air, thinking to shake it out,
When agitation kindles it, and makes
The flame cling faster to the melting wax.
Or like the tugging of a deep-fixt dart,
By which the wound's made greater, and the smart.
Most true it is, I shall a tale relate
Which will demonstrate the unsure estate
Of Lovers hopes, and that how-ere the root
Of Love be sweet, it bears a bitter fruit.
In that fair season when Day's wheels out-run
The Night's (it was just a twelvemonth since) this Sun
Of Beauty, this fair Pilgrim came to bring
With her approach as it were a second Spring
To my then only rich and happy nest,
Elis and Pisa with her presence blessed;
Brought by her Mother in those solemn days
When Sacrifices and Olympic Plays
Through all the world so famous are kept there
In honour of the mighty Thunderer.
Shows worthy sure of those fair eyes; But those
Fair eyes themselves were far the worthier shows.
Whence I, who till that instant never knew
What flames of Love did mean, at the first view
Of those bright lamps, yielded, and never fought
One stroke against her; for I felt (me thought)
Two fiery balls fly whizzing through my liver
And Beauty (a bold thief) cried Stand, Deliver
Thy heart, Mirtillo.
O Love's piercing steel,
Which they alone can understand that feel!
But now to see what cunning Love suggests
Even to the youngest and the simplest breasts!
I made a deer young Sister of mine own
(Who was my cruel Nymph's companion
Whilst she in Elis and in Pisa staid)
Acquainted with my pain. This silly maid
Was all the council Love allotted me
For managing my amorous business: she
With her own garments decks me in great order,
And imps my short hair with a borrowed border,
Then braids it all with flours, hanging a bow
And Quiver by my side, and last doth show
How I should frame my words and countenance, where
No footsteps of a beard did then appear.
The hour approached, she conducted me
Where my Nymph used to play; and there found we
Some Noble Megarensian Maids, whom Blood
And Love linked to her, as I understood.
Amongst them was she like Royal Rose amongst low-
Born Violets: And when as they had so
For a good space without more pastime staid,
A Megarensian Virgin rose, and said;
What, at a time for Pastime so renowned
Shall we without our sports be idle found!
And have not (Sisters) we our weapons then
To make mock-fights withal as well as men?
By my advice we'll practice our arms now
Against our selves in jest, as we must do
In earnest one day against men: Let's kiss,
And wage a kissing war; and she that gi's
The best and sav'rest one, shall have for meed
This curious wreath. All laughed, and cried Agreed.
Forthwith, not staying for the word or sign,
These eager Amazons in battle join:
No ranks they kept, no colours knew, nor side,
But all confused, and each each defied.
The Megarensian this perceiving, straight
To the disordered Troops sounds a retreat;
And after saith; Let her deservedly
The Judge of all our kisses be
Whose mouth is fairest. With one voice
Of peerless Amarillis they made choice.
She sweetly bending her fair eyes,
Her cheeks in modest blushes dyes,
To show through her transparent skin
That she is no less fair within
Then shoe's without; or else her countenance
Envying the honour done her mouth perchance,
Puts on her scarlet robes, as who
Should say, And am not I fair too?
Blessed man to be transformed at such a time,
As if this accident thou could divine!
The fair Judge takes her seat, and now renews
The amorous fight, according to the use
Of war; by lots they march up one by one,
To try their mouths by hers (the Paragon
Of sweetness) or (as I may term it well)
Of orient pearls a perfumed Indian shell,
And the two lips a two-leav'd Coral door
With honeyed lock, to op and shut with more
Facility upon the pearly treasure.
O my Ergast' that I could tell the pleasure
Of those sweet kisses! But do thou hence guess it,
That mouth which tasted it, cannot express it.
Extract then all the sweetness which remains
In Hybla-combs, in Cyprian Sugar-canes,
It will be nothing to that world of blisses
I sucked from thence.
O happy theft! sweet kisses!
Sweet, but yet lame; the better half was missing,
The soul which gives perfection to kissing:
For though Love gave them, Love restored them not.
But had thou not some fear when it was thy lot
To kiss?
My heart (Ergasto) to say true,
Was at my mouth, and my soul shrunk into
A narrow volume; it was one kiss, whence all
My limbs stood tottering like an ill propped wall.
And when I came under the battery,
And within aim of her sure killing eye,
I feared the Majesty of that bright look,
Lest in the very act I should be took
Of theft and guile which I was then about.
But straight her countenance clearing me that doubt
By a serene and unsuspecting smile,
I ventured boldly on. Love stood the while
(Ergasto) like a Bee hid in the leaves
Of her lips Roses; and whilst she receives
The kisses of my mouth with hers unmoved
And passive, I the honey only proved.
But when she active likewise grows,
And thrusts out this and t'other rose,
(Whether her gaiety of heart it was,
Or my good luck, for it was not love alas)
When our two mouths snapped like a bone well set,
And like two tallies that are brothers met,
(O my deer sweet and numerous treasure!
Do I out live so great a pleasure?)
Then, then I felt the sharp sweet dart,
The amorous sting piercing my heart.
Which was (it seems) restored me then,
That I might have it hurt again.
I then, as soon as I had found
Her lips had given me my deaths wound,
Was ready, like some desperate gasping wight,
The weapon which had wounded me to bite:
When suddenly her sweet breath, like the blast
Of an inspiring Deity, did cast
An holy damp upon my saucy blood,
Which all immodest and wild heat withstood.
O Modesty, the block and Remora
Which ever lies in the true Lovers way!
Now all of them had had their turns, and come
With thoughts suspended to attend the doom,
When Amarillis judging mine t'exceed
All th'others kisses, placed the Victors meed
(That curious wreath) with her own snowy hand
Upon my head. But O! no Lybian sand
Beneath the Syrian dog ere broiled so much,
When he both barks and bites; his rage is such,
As my whole heart was then on fire
Betwixt fruition and desire.
And (being never conquered half so much
As when I was a Conqueror) such
My boldness was, that from my head
I reached the wreath to her, and sed,
This is thy due, for thee it is meet,
Who with thy mouth hast made my kisses sweet.
And she most courteously accepting it,
For her fair hair made it a Coronet,
And crowned mine with another, which before
Upon her own divine temples she wore:
Which is the same I now do bear, and shall
(Heaven willing) to my Funeral,
Withered as it is, to keep in memory
That happy day; but most to signify
My withered hopes.
Thy case doth pity, and not envy claim,
Mirtillo: or hereafter let thy name
" Be Tantalus, for he that jests with Love,
" Or plays with fire, shall pain in earnest prove.
Poor youth! thou took up transitory treasure
At too much use, and of thy theft the pleasure
And punishment together did receive.
But did she never the deceit perceive?
I know not that, Ergasto; this I do,
Whilst she thought Elis worthy of her view,
She was still bounteous to me of her eye,
And gracious smiles. But my hard destiny
Snatching her thence, unawares to me almost,
I straight came flying hither, where thou know
My Father, though he sojourned long abroad,
Yet still retains his wonted poor abode.
I came and saw (O sight!) my day begun
In such a fair and smiling morn, now run
To its long West. When I appeared in place
The lightning of disdain flashed in her face;
Then did she bend her eyes, and turned away,
These Meteors boad my death, then did I lay.
Mean while, that I should so by stealth depart,
My tender Father took deeply to heart;
And with the grief on it an infirmity
So terrible, that he was like to die.
This forced me back, which proved (alas) in one
Health to the Father, sickness to the Son.
For half a year of a Love-caused fever
I languished, and I think had languished ever,
If my indulgent Father had not sought
In time the Tripods Counsel; whence he brought
This Answer, That the Arcadian air alone
Could make me well again. I thereupon
Returned (Ergasto) to revisit her
(O fallacy of that grand Sophister,
The Oracle!) who made my body whole
To cause eternal sickness in my soul.
Thou hast related a strange tale in truth,
Mirtillo, a case worthy of much ruth
Without all doubt. " But oft a desperate state
 " Hath proved the cause that cures as desperate
" Have saved the sick. And now it is time I go
To tell Corisca what from thee I know;
Expect me at the Fountain, there will I
Ere long be with thee.
Go on prosperously:
And Heaven at need that pity show to thee
(Courteous Ergasto) which thou show to me.
Faithful and fortunate, delight and care
Of my fair Silvio, and as proud as fair.
Thrice fortunate Melampo, that I were
Unto thy cruel Master half so deer!
With that white hand with which he gripes my heart,
He strokes and he feeds thee. He doth not part
From thee by night, nor part from thee by day;
Whilst I that so much love him, in vain pray,
And sigh in vain. And that which worse I bear
Then all the rest, he gives to thee such deer
And lushious kisses, one of which would make
Me rich, and I too kiss thee for his sake
Happy Melamp'; O dog sent from above
To steer the erring footsteps of blind Love!
Lead on, sure guide, whither Affection me,
But Nature only, and Instinct draws thee.
But list a little, doth not a horn blow
In this near thicket?
Sogh Melampo, Sogh!
That is (if Love delude me not) the sound
Of Silvio's voice, who seems to call his hound
About these woods.
Melampo, Sogh, hogh, hogh.
It is the very voice of Silvio.
Happy Dorinda, to whom Heaven hath sent
The self same thing in search whereof I went!
I'll hide the dog; with that he holds so deer
I may chance buy his love. Lupino!
Here.
Go take this dog, and hide thee hereabout:
Conceiv'st thou me?
I do.
But come not out
Until I call.
I wo'n't.
Nay, quickly man.
And do thou quickly take some order than,
That if the dog should have a hungry fit,
He may not swallow me up at a bit.
A Coward? Hence.
O whither shall I steer
My wretched steps to follow thee my deer
Faithful Melampo? over hill and plain
Till I am tired and foundered I in vain
Have hunted for thee. Cursed be the Doe
Thou follow'dst. But behold, a Nymph may know
Some news of him! O vile encounter! This
Is she, who with her importunities
Torments me still: but there's no remedy
Save patience now. Fair Nymph, did thou see my
Faithful Melampo, whom I slipped while-ere
After a Doe?
I (Silvio) fair? I fair?
Why dost thou call me fair, if that I be
Not fair in thy eyes?
Fair or fowl, did see
My dog? Answer me that: if not, I go.
So harsh to her adores thee, Silvio?
Who would believe in that sweet shape could nest
So sour a soul? Thou follow a wild beast
That flies thee, over rocks; and for a cur
Vex thy body and thy mind: but her
That follows thee, and thy content doth prize
Above the world, thou fly'st and dost despise.
Ah! do not follow a wild flying Doe,
Let not a tame one (caught already) go.
Do not unbind her.
Nymph, I came in search
Of my Melampo, not to hear thee preach.
Adieu.
O fly not, cruel Silvio:
I'll tell thee news of thy Melampo.
Go,
Thou mockst, Dorinda▪
By that love I swear
That makes me Silvio's servant, I know where
He is. Thou say he did a Doe pursue?
He did: and straight I lost them both from view.
The Dog and Doe then at this present time
Are in my power.
In thy power?
Yes, in mine.
It was that I said: Dost thou think much that she
Should love thy Dog (ungrateful) who loves thee?
My deer Dorinda, give 'em to me straight,
Out Shuttlecock, I'm come to a fine state
When beasts endeer me to thee. But indeed
(My heart) thou get them not without some meed.
And reason good, I'll give thee; Let me see —
(I'll cousin her).
What wilt thou give to me?
Two fair Queen-apples I will give to thee,
Which my own fairer Mother gave to me
The other day.
For apples, I want none:
I could give thee two fairer of my own,
And sweeter too, but that thou care not
For what I give.
Then would thou have a goat?
Or Lambkin? (but my Father will not let
Me make so bold with what is his as yet.)
Nor Goat, nor Lambkin do I care to have:
Thee only, Silvio, and thy love I crave.
My love? No more?
No more.
I g'it thee: so,
Give me my Dog (deer Nymph) now, and my Doe.
Ah, that thou knew the worth of what thou art
So bounteous of, and spoke now from thy heart!
Nymph, mark my words: I find thou talk to me
Still of a thing called Love; what this should be
I know not: thou would have me love thee; and
I doe (as far as I can understand)
With all my heart: thou call me cruel; I
Am ignorant of what is cruelty.
How should I please thee?
In whom hop'st thou, poor
Dorinda? whence dost thou expect thy cure?
From such a Beauty as hath felt as yet
No spark of that which doth all Lovers set
On fire? Art thou my flame, and art not hot?
Dost thou breath Love, and what it is know not?
That gentle Goddess whom the Cyprians honour
Took a most beauteous humane shape upon her
To bring thee forth: Fire-brands thou hast and dart,
Witness my flaming and my bleeding heart.
Add wings, another Cupped thou wilt prove,
At least want nothing to be Love, but love.
What is this Love?
When I behold thy eyes,
It is the light of Paradise.
But mine own heart considered well,
It is the very fire of hell.
Nymph, what a prating is here with thee?
Give me my Dog and Doe, now prithee.
Give me the love first that I bargained for.
Have I not gi'n it thee? Fie, what a stir
There is to please this woman! Take it: do
What thou wilt with it. Who forbids thee? who
Withholds it? On what trifles dost thou stand?
Wretched Dorinda, thou dost sow the sand,
And fondly undertak'st labour in vain.
What dream thou of? why holdst thou me in pain?
When thy desire's once granted, thou wilt go
And leave me straight, perfidious Silvio.
No
Indeed, fair Nymph.
Give me a pawn then.
Name
The pawn.
Alas! I dare not.
Why?
For shame.
But how then can I give it thee?
I would
Fain without naming it be understood.
If you are ashamed to name it, thou moist be
Ashamed to take it.
Promise it to me,
And I will name it.
I do promise it:
But thou must name it first.
Can thou not hit
My thoughts then? I should have conceived thee
If thou had said but half so much to me.
Thou hast more wit then I, Dorinda.
I
Have more Love, Silvio, and less Cruelty.
Truth is, I am no witch: if you would have me
To understand thee, speak.
O misery!
That which I beg of thee is one of those
Things thy kind mother upon thee bestows.
A box of the ear?
To ones that loves thee so?
Those things my mother doth on me bestow.
Nay, that's not so: But doth not she give thee
A Kiss sometimes?
She neither kisses me,
Nor would have others kiss me. Is 't a Kiss
Thou dost desire of me? It is, it is:
Thy blush betrays thee. Come, I'll give it thee:
But first my Dog and Doe.
Dost promise me?
I promise thee.
And with me wilt thou stay?
Why dost thou vex me thus? Did I not say
I would?
Come forth Lupino, dost not hear?
Lupino.
Ogh! ogh! what a brawling's there?
Who calls me? O I am come. It was not I
That slept, it was the Dog slept verily.
Look Silvio, there's thy Dog, that might to thee
Have read a lecture of Humanity.
How over-joy'd am I?
Upon this breast
Which thou despisest so he came to rest.
(O my sweet true Melampo.)
Setting by
My sighs and kisses.
(I will certainly
Kiss thee a thousand times, poor Cur! But hast
Thou got no harm at all, thou ran so fast?)
Fortunate Dog, that I might change (alas!)
Estates with thee; I'm come to a fine pass
To envy a Dogs life. Bend thou thy gate
Homewards Lupino, I will follow straight.
Mistress, I go.
(IN fine, you have got no harm.) Now let me see
Where is this Doe which thou hast promised me.
Alive or dead woul'dst have her?
Strange demand!
Alive after the Dog hath killed her?
And
If the Dog kilt her not?
Alive is she?
Alive.
The dearer then the prey to me:
And had my deer Melampo so much art
As not to hurt her?
Only in the heart
She had a little prick.
Either you are mad,
Dorinda, or dost mock me. If she had
A prick in the heart, how can she live?
The Doe
I speak of, I am, cruel Silvio:
Hurt by thee, without being hunted; Take me,
I am alive; but dead, if thou forsake me.
Is this that Doe? that prey?
Even this: why now
Art thou so discontented? Dost not thou
Love a Nymph better then a beast?
My hate
Thou art, brute, liar, vile, importunate.
Is this the guerdon, cruel Silvio?
Is this the meed thou dost on me bestow,
Ungrateful youth? Take thy Melampo free,
And me and all, so thou come back to me:
The rest I do remit. Let me be placed
But in the sun-shine thy fair eyes do cast.
Truer then thy Melampo I will trace
Thy steps, and when you are wearied with the chase
I'll wipe thy sweating brow, and on this breast
(Which cannot rest for thee) thy head shall rest:
I'll bear thy arrows, and thy quiver bear
Through these rough woods; and if there want game there,
Shoot at Dorinda's bosom. At this white
Set thy good bow, when ere it shoots not right.
For I'll be both the prey (if thou think fit)
To keep in ur, and drudge to carry it;
Thy arrows, quiver, and their Butt to hit.
But to whom do I talk? Alas! to thee
That hear me not, and fly'st away from me?
But wherefoe're thou fly (cursed Silvio)
Dorinda will fly after thee: although
To hell it self, if any hell there be
Worse then my Love is, and thy Cruelty.
FOrtune beyond my wish hath favoured me:
"And fit it is that they should favoured be
" Who not with wishings only seek her favour.
" Powerful she is; and men with reason have her
" In reputation of a Goddess. But
" We must go meet her then, wait a foot
" To find her humours; and must use our own
" Judgement in playing of our game; a drone
" Seldom or never doth prove fortunate.
Had not my industry made me the Mate
Of her by whom under the name of friend
I have fit means and safe to work my end,
Where had I been? Some fool would now be shy,
And view her Rival with a jealous eye,
Bearing the open tokens of ill will
Writ in her forehead; and she would do ill:
" For open foes are easier to evade
" Then ambushes that are in friendship laid.
" Wise Mariners by rocks hid in the sea
" Are oft deceived: She knows not how to be
" An enemy, that knows not how to seem
" A friend. Corisca's skill shall now be seen
In both: Nor am I yet so simply dull
To think she doth not love. Well may she gull
Others with this, not me; who am gone out
A Mistress in the Art. A tender sprout
New peeped out of the bark, within whose breast
There's built for Love already a soft nest,
Long wooed, and wooed by so complete a Lover,
And (which is worst) kissed too over and over,
And yet hold tyte? Believe it (for me) that list.
But my good Genius doth me assist;
For look if Amarillis come not here
As sent? I'll walk as if I did not see her.
DEar happy Groves, and you ye solitary
And silent horrors where true peace doth tarry,
With how much joy do I review you? And
Had my stars pleased to give me the command
Over my self, that I might choose my lot,
And my own way of life, then would I not
For the Elisions groves, about which range
The happy shades, your happy shades exchange.
" For what we foolish mortals Goods do call
" If rightly understood, are Evils all.
" He that hath most of them, in truth hath least,
" Nor is so much possessor, as possessed;
" Not riches, no, but of our freedom snares.
" What boots it in the spring-time of one's years
" To have the Attributes of Fair and Good,
" In mortal veins to lock celestial blood,
" Graces of body and of mind, here fair
 " And laughing fields of corn, rich meadows there,
" In fruitful pasture-grounds more fruitful flocks,
" If with all these the heart contentment lacks?
Happy that shepherdess whom some course stuff
Obscurely clothes, yet clean and just enough!
Rich only in her self, and bravely dressed
With Nature's ornaments which are the best;
Who in sweet poverty no want doth know,
Nor the distractions which from riches grow:
Yet whatsoever may suffice the mind,
In that estate abundantly doth find:
Poor, but content! with Nature's gifts retrives
The gifts of Nature, Milk with milk revives,
And with the sweet which from the Bee she gets,
Seasons the honey of her native sweets:
One fountain is her looking glass, her drink
Her bath; and if she's pleased, what others think
It matters not; she heeds not blazing stars
That threaten mighty ones: wars or no wars,
It is all one to her; her battlement
And shield is that she's poor: Poor, but content!
One only care (it is a sweet care) doth keep
Her heart awake; she feeds her Masters sheep
With pearled grass, and with her lovely eyes
Some honest swain, that for her beauty dies:
Not such as men or Gods choose to her hand,
But such as Love did to her choice commend;
And in some favoured shady Myrtle grove
Desires, and is desired: Nor feels of Love
One spark which unto him she doth not show,
Nor shows one spark with which he doth not glow.
Poor, but content! True life! which till the breath
Forsakes the body, know not what is death.
Would Heaven had made me such a one! — But see,
Corisca! Sweet Corisca.
Who calls me?
My Amarillis? dearer then mine own
Eyes, or life to me, whither so alone?
No farther then thou see; nor anywhere
Could I be better, since I weet thee here.
Thou hast met her that never parts from thee,
Sweet Amarillis; and now, credit me,
Was thinking of thee, saying in my heart,
If I'm her soul, how can she live apart
From me? When straight I saw thee here:— but go,
Thou care not for Corisca now.
Why so?
Why? Dost thou ask the question? thou dost wed
To day.
I wed?
Yes: and thou keepst it hid
From me.
How can I tell thee that which I
Am ignorant my self of?
Do, deny,
And wear a mask to me.
Still jest with me Corisca.
I am jested with by thee.
But speak thou this for truth?
I'll swear it is so.
And know thou nothing of't indeed?
I know
I'm promised: but that I should be a wife
So soon, is news to me upon my life.
But from whom know it thou?
From my own Brother
Ormino: and he says, there is no other
Discourse abroad.—Thou seem perplexed: is this
News to perplex one?
O Corisca! It is
A hideous gulf: I've heard my mother say,
W'are then new born.
Most true: it is our birth day
To a better life, therefore rejoice. Dost fetch
A sigh? leave sighing to that wretch.
What wretch
Mirtillo: who was present casually
At what my brother told me, and was nigh
Struck dead with grief; and doubtless he had died,
If a good cordial I had not applied,
By promising to break this Match. Which though
I said, only to comfort him, I know
(If need were) how to do it.
Can thou tell
How to break this Match?
Yes very well.
I prithee how?
With ease, if thou were but
Consenting likewise, and assisting to it.
Could I suppose this possible, and thou
Would not reveal it, I would tell thee now
A secret that hath long burnt in my heart.
Who, I reveal it? Let the earth first part
And swallow me alive miraculously.
Know then Corisca, when I think that I
Must all my life be subject to a Boy
That hates and flies me, and doth take no joy
But in the woods, preferring hunting far
Before the love of all the Nymphs that are,
It makes me male content, and desperate
Indeed almost, although I dare not say 't,
Because my faith I have already given
Unto my Father, and (what's worse) to Heaven,
And break with them I neither will nor may.
But if thy industry can find a way
(Always provided, that my Honesty,
My Faith, my Life, and my Religion be
Preserved) t'untie this knot that galls me so,
To thee my life and safety I shall owe.
If this were it that cause thy sighing, thou
Had great cause for it Amarillis. How
Oft have I said? What pity it is to throw
So rich a thing to one that scorns it so!
A pearl to a swine! why speak not to thy Father?
Shame stops my mouth.
There's a disease! I'd rather
For my part have a Fistula, or Fever.
" But twill be cured; Overcome it once, twill never
" Return again.
That cannot be overcome
" That's natural: For if I drive it from
" My heart, it flies into my face.
Alas,
(My Amarillis) oft it comes to pass,
" She that through too much wisdom holds her tongue,
" Roars out at last like mad, being thoroughly stung.
Had thou before been willing to discover
Thy mind to me, this trouble had been over:
And now thou hast, Corisca's power this day
In all its colours shall it self display.
Into more skilful hands, more faithful then
Mine are, thou never could have fallen. But when
From an ill Husband thou art freed by me,
Shall not an honest Suitor welcome be?
We'll think of that at leisure.
That good youth
Mirtillo must not be forgot in sooth:
For parts, for spotless faith, for shape thou know
Of all men living hee deserves thee most:
And can thou let him dye? O cruelty!
Nor wilt so much as hear him say, I dye?
Hear him but once.
It were better he would rest
In peace, and root a love out of his breast
That's vain.
That comfort give him ere he dye.
'T would rather double his perplexity.
If it do so, the seeking is his own.
And what must I expect, should it be known?
How cowardly thou art?
And let me still
Be cowardly in any thing that's ill.
If thou may fail me in this small request,
Then may I fail thee likewise in the rest
Most justly, Amarillis. So God bu'y.
Nay, stay Corisca, hear.
Not a word I,
Unless thou promise me.
I promise thee
To hear him speak, provided this may be
For all.
It shall.
And that he may not know
I was acquainted with 't.
I'll make as though
Ye met by accident.
And that I may
At my own pleasure freely go away.
Thou shalt, when thou hast heard him.
And that hee
Shall briefly speak.
That too is granted thee.
Nor come within my darts length of me.
Fie,
What a stir 's here with thy simplicity!
To make it sure, he shall not doe thee wrong,
I'll tie up all his limbs except his tongue.
Would thou have more?
It is well.
And when wilt thou
Do this?
When ere thou wilt: Do but allow
Me so much time, as to go home to hear
More certain news about this Marriage there.
Go; but with caution, and before you're gone,
Hear a contrivance I have thought upon
As thou were speaking: In the afternoon
I would have thee without thy Nymphs to come
Into this shady walk, where I will be
Before for this occasion, and with me
Nerina, Phillis, Celia, Aglaura,
Eliza, Daphne, Silvia, and Laura;
All my no less discreet and witty, then
Faithful and secret Mates. There thou with them
Shalt play (as thou art wont) at Blind-man-buffe,
So that Mirtillo will with ease enough
Be made believe, that for thy own passe-time
Thou thither came, and not to meet with him.
I like it wondrous well. But dost thou hear?
I would not any of those Nymphs were there
The while Mirtillo speaks.
I doe conceive
It was thought upon with good discretion. Leave
The getting them away to my endeavour.
Go: and remember one thing, — to love ever
Thy faithfullest Corisca.
In her hand
Since I have put my heart, she may command
As much love as she pleases.
Is she not stiff? We must assault this rock
With greater force; though she resist my shock,
Against Mirtillo's she will find no fence
I'm sure: I know by self-experience
The power of Lovers prayers when they invade
The tender heart of an inclining maid.
If she do yield, I'll make her smart so for it,
That she shall find her sport was not in sport.
Through her dark'st words her heart shall be to me
As visible as in a 'natomie.
I'll ransack all her veins: that done, and I
Made Mistress of her secret, easily
I'll wind her so, and lead her by the nose
To what I'd have, that she shall ne'er suppose
(Much less shall others) that it was my skill
That drew her to it, but her unbridled will.
O I'm dead.
But I was quick.
There's a trick now for your trick.
My Amaerillis, I am caught.
O come back.
She hears thee not.
Twill now behove thee to be strong.
O me, my hair!
I have so long
Stood angling for thee in my boat,
At last the art struck. It is not thy coat,
It is thy hair (Sister) this.
To me
This usage (Satyr?)
Yes, to thee
Corisca, or I am mistaken:
That Mistress in the art of making
The fine-spun lies, that sells so deer
False words, false hopes, and a false leer?
She that so often hath betrayed me;
She that so many fools hath made me
At every turn: the sorceress,
The cheat Corisca?
I confess,
I am Corisca; but not she
Now, that was once so loved by thee,
My gentile Satyr.
Pray since when
Am I gentile? I was not then
When me for Coridon thou did change.
Thee for another?
See how strange
She makes it now! I warrant then
This is great news to thee; and when
Thou made me Silvia's Buskins steal,
The Bow of Lilla, Cloris Veil,
And Daphne's Gown, that were to be
The price of love, which promised me,
Thou give another: and when that
Fair wreathe I on thy head did plat,
Thou upon Niso did bestow;
And when thou made me (cold as snow)
Watch many a night out at the Fountain,
The Cave, Wood-side, and foot of the Mountain,
And for my pains did laugh at me,
Did I then seem gentile to thee?
Ah thief! But now as I am here,
I'll make thee pay thy whole arrear.
O me! Thou dragg'st me like a beast.
I drag thee like thy self then. Wrest
Thy neck out of the collar now;
Give me the slip if thou know how.
Fox, though thy craft the time before
Did save thee, it shall do it no more.
For this I'm sure thou can not scope,
Unless thou leave thy head in the trap.
Yet give me so much time I pray,
As for my self to answer.
Say.
How can I if thou hold me so?
It is likely I should let thee go.
I'll gage my faith not to go hence.
What faith? Hast thou the impudence
(Perfidious woman) to name faith
To me? I'll bear thee where there hath
No Sun, much less the feet of men
Approached, unto the horridest den
Of all this Mountain: there— (but I
Will act the rest) to mine own joy
And thy dishonour, I will kerve
Such vengeance as thy faults deserve.
Can thou then (cruel) to this hair (which has
Tied fast thy heart), unto this face (which was
Once thy delight), to this Corisca (then
More dear to thee then thine own life was when
Thou swore by that, that thou could find it sweet
On her behalf, even death it self to meet),
Can thou once think to offer injury,
I say, to her? O Heavens! O Destiny!
Whom have I hoped in? whom can I believe
Again?
Ah Siren! think thou to deceive
Me still? still rock me with thy flattering charms?
My sweet deer Satyr, do no harm
To her that loves thee. Thou art not a beast,
Nor hast a marble or a flinty breast:
Behold me at thy feet! O pardon me
If ever I (by chance) offended thee,
My Idol. By those sinewy and more
Then humane knees, which clasping I adore;
By that rough manly visage; by that dear
Affection which thou once to me did bear;
By the sweet influence of those eyes which thou
Were wont to call two stars (two fountains now;)
By these salt tears which trickle down so fast,
Pity me now, and let me go.
Thou hast
Moved me (I must confess) and I were gone,
If I should hearken to affection.
But to be short, I doe not credit thee;
Thou art too full of wiles and tricks for me,
And he that takes thy word, believes his snares:
Beneath this humble show, beneath these prayr's
There's hid Corisca: Thou can never be
Another. Sruggling still?
My head, O me!
Ah cruel! stay a little longer yet,
And grant me but one favour.
What is it?
Hear me a little more.
Thou hope now
With flatt'ries and squeezed tears to make me bow.
Ah courteous Satyr! wilt thou kerve in me
Such cruel vengeance?
Come, and thou shalt see.
And take no Pity of me?
None at all.
But art thou firm in this?
As a brasse-wall.
Is this charm ended?
O thou base, and not
To be exampled Rogue; half man, half goat,
And all a beast; thou carrion that doth stink,
By-blow and blush of nature; If thou think
Corisca loves thee not, thou think the truth.
What should she love in such a comely youth?
That fair Stags head? that chimney-sweepers broom?
Goats ears? that grave of rottenness and rheum
Which once had bones in it?
This to me,
Thou wicked varlet?
Even to thee.
To me, thou scold?
To thee, thou Goat.
And with these pincers pull I not
Thy barking tongue out?
Would thou durst
Come neer't, there's that will scour their rust.
A paltry woman, and in such
Condition (being in my clutch)
To injure me! and dare me too!
I will —
Base slave, what wilt thou do?
Eat thee alive I will.
Where be
The teeth to do it?
Heaven, dost thou see
And suffer this! But if I doe not
Chastise thee — Come along.
I wo' not.
Wo' not, my Mistress Malapert?
Wo' not in spite of thy foul heart.
That shall be seen; Come, or I swear,
This arm I'll from thy shoulder tear.
Tear my head off, I wo' not go
One foot.
Art thou resolved so?
Let's ne'er dispute then any longer,
But put to trial whether's stronger
And faster on, thy neck-piece, or
My arm. — Thy hands to help too? Nor
Are these (perverse one) enough guard.
That shall be tried.
It shall.
Pull hard.
Satyr adieu, Get thy neck set.
O me!
How I am shattered! O my head! my knee!
O my back-bone! my thigh! what a vile fall
Was here! to get upon my legs is all
I have the power to do. But can it be
That she should fly, and leave her head with me?
O marvellous! ye Nymphs and Shepherds run,
Flock hither to behold a wonder; one
That runs away without her head, by skill
In Magic. Ho! how light it is! how ill
Peopled with brains! How comes it that I see
None of the blood spirt forth? But stay; let me
Peruse it better. O thou stock! thou stone!
Thou hast no head, if thou think she hath none.
Was ever any man so fooled? See now
If she had not a trick to scope, when thou
Thoughtst her most sure! Thou all made up of wiles,
Was it not enough thy heart, thy face, thy smiles,
Thy looks and speeches falsified were,
But thou must likewise falsify thy hair?
The glowing Amber, and the flowing Gold,
Which you (mad Poets) so extol, behold!
Blush, blush now at your error, and recant
Your thred-bare theme; in stead whereof, go paint
The arts of a deformed and impious Witch
Breaking up Sepulchres by night, from which
She steals the hair that upon Death's head grows,
To imp her own, which she so neatly does,
That she hath made you praise what ye should more
Then dire Megara's snaky locks abhor.
These (Lovers) are your gives (I take it) too!
Look on 'em Idiots: and if (as you
Protest) your hearts are fastened to these hairs,
Now every one may without sighs or tears
Come by his own. But why do I forbear
To publish her disgrace? Surely that hair,
Which stuck with stars adorns the azure sky,—
Never so famous was as this; and she
Much more that wore it by my tongue shall be
Made infamous to all posterity. —
AH! It was a grievous fault in her (the Cause
Of all our sorrows) who, the sacred Laws
Of Love offending, by her breach of troth,
Kindled against this Land the mortal wrath
Of the immortal Gods, which not a Flood
Of general tears, nor so much guiltless blood
" Can quench yet or abate; so high a price
" Unspotted Faith (Expeller of all vice,
" And most undoubted Argument to prove
" A mind descended nobly) bears above.
" And such a care to plant love in his creature
" (By which we deify our humane Nature)
" Hath the eternal Lover. O those blind
Mistaken mortals, who addict their mind
To wealth, (for which affection's basely sold)
Watching the carcass of their coffined gold,
Like a pale ghost that walks about his grave!
Or why should beauty our free hearts enslave?
" These are dead loves; the living and divine
" Is where two souls by virtue do combine.
" No outward object can with reason move
" The heart to love it, because it cannot love:
" Only the soul, because that can love again,
" Deserves a Love, deserves a Lovers pain.
Well may that kiss be sweet that's given t'a sleek
And fragrant rose of a vermilion cheek;
And understanding tasters (as are true
And happy Lovers) will commend that too.
It is a dead kiss, say I, and must be poor,
Which the place kissed hath no means to restore.
But the sweet echoing, and the Dove-like billing
Of two encountering Mouths, when both are willing;
And when at once both Loves advance their bows,
Their shafts drawn home, at once sound at the loose,
(How sweet is such Revenge!) This is true kissing,
Where there is one for t'other without missing
A minute of the time, or taking more
Then that which in the taking they restore.
Where by an interchange of amorous blisses
At the same time they sow and gather kisses.
Kiss a red swelling lip, then kiss a wrist,
A breast, a forehead, or what else thou list,
No part of a fair Nymph so just will be,
Except the lip, to pay this kiss to thee.
Thither your souls come sallying forth, and they
Kiss too, and by the wandering powers convey
Life into smacking Rubies, and transfuse
Into the live and sprightly kiss their use
Of reason; so that ye discourse together
In kisses, which with little noise deliver
Much matter; and sweet secrets, which hee spells,
Who is a Lover; Gibberish to all else.
Like life, like mutual joy they feel, where Love
With equal flames as with two wings doth move.
" And as where lips kiss lips is the best Kiss:
" So where one's loved, to love, best loving is.
SPring, the years youth, fair Mother of new flours,
New leaves, new loves, drawn by the winged hours,
Thou art returned; but the felicity
Thou brought'st me last is not returned with thee.
Thou art returned, but nought returns with thee
Save my lost joys regretful memory.
Thou art the self same thing thou were before,
As fair and jocund: but I am no more
The thing I was, so gracious in her sight
Who is Heavens master-piece, and Earth's delight,
" O bitter-sweets of Love! Far worse it is
" To love then never to have tasted bliss.
" But O how sweet were Love, if it could not
" Be lost, or being lost could be forgot!
Though if my hopes (as mine are wont to be)
Are not of glass, or my love make me see
Them through a multiplying glass; If I
Be not deceived both by my self, and by
Another: Here I shall that Sun behold
Which I adore, impart her beams of gold
To my blessed sight, behold her flying feet
Stop at my sad notes; here upon the sweet
Food of that lovely face I shall suffice
After a tedious fast my greedy eyes.
Here, here behold that proud one on me turn
Her sparkling lamps, if not to light, to burn.
And if not fraught with amorous delight,
So kindly cruel as to kill outright.
Yet were it but just, that after so much pain
As I have hitherto endured in vain,
Thou Love at length should make the Sun appear
To this benighted earth serene and clear.
Hither Ergasto did direct me, where
Corisca and my Amarillis were
To play at Blindman-busse: but I can find
In this place nothing but my love that's blind,
And so deceived, mis-led by a false guide
To seek that light which is to me denied.
Pray Heaven my hard and envious fate beneath
This sugared Pill now have not hid my death.
This tedious stay afflicts me: " For those
" That go to meet their Loves, each moment shows
" An age. Perchance I have arrived too late,
And made for me too long Corisca wait:
Yet I made haste. Now woe is me! If I
Have done this fault, I will lie down and dye.
BEhold the Buff!
O sight!
Come on▪
O voice!
That makes my heart both tremble and rejoice.
What do you do? Lisetta, where art thou
That were so eager of this sport but now?
And thou Corisca, whither gone?
I find
Now it is true indeed, that Love is blind.
You there that are appointed for my guides
To hand and to support me on both sides,
Before the rest of our Companions come,
Out of these trees conduct me to field-room:
Then leaving me alone amidst the plain,
Amongst our other fellows herd again:
So joining all together, make a ring
About me round, and let the sport begin.
But what shall I do? Yet I cannot see
Of what advantage this should be to me
In my desires; nor see I my north-starre
Corisca: Succour me blessed Heaven!
O are
Ye come at last? ye wantons, did you mean
Only to bind my eyes? Begin now then.
Love, thou art not blind, I know,
" But dost only appear so
" To blind us: if thy sight's small,
 " Thou hast, I'm sure no faith at all.
Blind or not, thou try'st in vain
Me into thy net to train.
And to keep out of thy pound,
Off I get, and traverse ground.
Blind as thou art, thou could see more
Then Argus hundred eyes of yore.
Thou could see (blind as thou art)
Well enough to hit my heart.
But I were a fool indeed,
Should I trust thee now I'm freed.
Sport with thee henceforth that will;
It is a sport with thee to kill.
I, but with too much wariness you play:
Ye should strike first, and after get away.
Approach me, touch me, and ye shall not fly
Me then.
O ye high Gods! In heaven am I?
Or earth? O heavens! do your eternal rounds
Move in such order, warble such sweet sounds?
Well, blind Archer, since thou still
Vrgest me to play, I will.
Now I clap thy shoulder hard:
Now I fly unto my guard:
Strike, and run, and strike again,
And thou wheel'st about in vain.
Now I pinch thee, now remove:
And have at thee now blind Love.
Yet thou can not light on me;
Why? because my heart is free.
In faith Licorice, I had surely thought
T'ave caught thee there, and it was a tree I caught.
I, dost thou laugh?
Would I had been that tree.
But do I not Corisca hidden see
Amongst those brakes? and she makes signs as who
Should say, that something she would have me do.
"A free heart makes a nimble heel.
Ah traitor! dost thou tempt me still
With thy flattering false delight?
Thus then I renew the fight.
Slash, and fly, and turn, and shove;
And about again blind Love:
Yet thou can not light on me;
Why? because my heart is free.
Would thou were pulled up by the root, base tree:
That I should ever thus be catching thee!
Deceived by the dancing of a bough,
I did suppose I'd had Eliza now.
Corisca still is making signs to me,
And looks as she were angry: perhaps she
Would have me mix with those Nymphs.
Must I play
With nothing but with trees then all this day?
I must come forth and speak, or he will not stir —.
To her (white liver) and lay hold on her.
Why dost thou gape? to have her run into
Thy mouth? At least, if that thou dare not do,
Let her lay hold of thee. Come, give me here
This dart, and go to meet her fool.
How near
To impotence is strong desire! O Love!
That thou should make a man a coward prove!
Play but once more, for now I weary grow.
Troth, you're too blame for making me run so.
That triumphant God survey,
To whom amorous mortals pay
Impious tribute! See him snaffeld!
See him laughed at! See him baffeld!
As a hooded Hawk or Owl
With light blinded, when the foul
With their Armies flock about her,
Some to beat, and some to stout her;
She in vain doth rowze and peck
This and that way with her beak:
So we baffle and deride
Thee (blind Love) on every side.
One doth pinch thy elbow black;
T'other has thee by the back;
And thy baiting does no good,
Nor thy pecking through thy hood,
Nor thy stretching out thy claws.
" But sweet meats have sour sauce.
" Birds are caught by playing thus:
" So do Nymphs grow amorous.
In Faith, Aglaura, art thou caught at last?
You would fain be gone, but I will hold thee fast.
Surely, unless at unawares by main
Strength I had thrust him on her, I in vain
Had tired my self to make him thither go.
Thou wilt not speak now: Art thou she or no?
I lay his Dart here by him, and unto
My bush return, t'observe what will ensue.
Thou art Corisca, now it is most clear;
I know thee by thy tallness and short hair.
It was thee I wished to catch; that I might use thee
Just as I list, and thus, and thus abuse thee;
And thus, and thus. Not yet? But since it was thou
That boundst me, do thou too unbinde me now:
Quickly (my heart) and thou shalt have of me
The sweetest kiss that ere was given thee.
What dost thou stick at? thy hand trembles: what,
Art thou so weary? If thy nails will not,
Let thy teeth do it: come fumbler, let me see;
I can my self untangle without thee.
Fie, how with knots on knots it is perplexed?
The best on it is, thou must be blinded next.
So, now it is loosed: Ho! whom have we here?
Traitor avaunt. I am unspirited.
Dear
Soul, do not strive to go away.
Unhand
(Forcer of Nymphs) unhand me, I command.
Ay me! Aglaura and Eliza tarry,
Betrayers of my innocence, where are ye?—
Unhand me villain.
I obey.
This plot
Corisca laid: Now tell her what you have got.
O whither fly'st thou Cruel? ere thou go
Banquet thy eyes yet with my death: for lo,
I pierce my bosom with this dart.
Ay me!
What wilt thou do?
That which it troubles thee
Perchance (dire Nymph) that any should be sed
To have done, but thou.
(Ay me! I'm almost dead)
And if this action to thy hand be due,
Behold the weapon and the breast!
It is true,
Thou hast deserved it of me. What could move
Thy heart to such a high presumption?
Love.
"Love never causes rudeness.
Then conclude,
"I was in love, because I was not rude:
For if within thy arms thou caughtst me first,
I cannot well with rudeness be asperst,
Since with so fair an opportunity
To be audacious, and to use with thee
The Laws of Love, I had such power yet over
My self, I even forgot I was a Lover.
Upbraid me not with what I blind did doe.
I being in Love was blinder of the two.
" Prayer and sweet language discreet Lovers use
" To win their Loves; not theft and cheats, t'abuse.
As a wild beast enraged with want of food
Rushes on travellers out of the wood:
So I, that only live on thy fair eyes,
Since that loved food thy cruelty denies,
Or else my Fate, if like a ravenous Lover
Rushing to day upon thee from this Cover,
Where I had long been famished, I did prove
One stratagem to save my life (which Love
Prompted me to) then blame not, cruel Maid,
Me but thy self; for if (as thou hast said)
Prayer and sweet language only should be used
By discret Lovers, which thou hast refused
To hear from me; thou by thy cruelty,
Thou by thy flight made me I could not be
A discreet Lover.
If th'adst gi'n her over
That fled from thee, th'adst been a discreet Lover.
But know, thou persecutest me in vain;
What would thou have of me?
I'd have thee deign
Once'ere I die to hear me.
See! as soon
As thou hast asked, thou hast received the boon.
Now then be gone.
Ah Nymph! I've scarcely yet
Powered one small drop out to thee of the great
Sea of my tears. If not for Pitie's sake,
Yet for the Pleasure thou therein wilt take,
List' to a dying man's last accents.
Well,
To shun more trouble, and thy hopes to quell,
To hear thee I'm content. But this before;
Say little, quickly, part, and come no more.
Thou dost command me, cruellest Nymph, to bind
In volume too too small that unconfined
Desire, which scarcely humane thought (though it
Be as the soul that holds it, infinite)
Hath line to fathom.
That I do love thee more then I do love
My life (if thou doubt, Cruel) ask this Grove,
And that will tell thee; and with it each beast,
Each stupid stock there can the same attest;
Each stone of these high mountains, which so oft
I with the voice of my complaints made soft.
But what need I call any witness else
To prove my love, where so much beauty dwells?
Behold these flowers which make low earth so proud!
Those Stars which nail Heavens pavement! all these crowd
Into one ring: A beauty like that same
Is the high cause and forcer of my flame.
For as by nature Water doth descend,
The Fire unto the higher Regions tend
The Air obliquely spread it self, the Ground
Lie still, and heaven about all these turn round.
So naturally do I incline to thee,
As to my chiefest good; so naturally
To those loved beauties (as unto her sole)
With all her winged affections flies my soul.
And he that should imagine he had force
Her from her dearest object to divorce,
Might with as much facility command
The Air, the Fire, the Water and the Land,
The Heavens too from their accustomed track,
And make the Pillars of the world to crack.
But since thou bid me say but little, I
Shall say but little, saying that I dye:
And shall doe less in dying, since I see
How much my death is coveted by thee.
Yet I shall doe (alas) all that is left
For me to do, of hopes in love bereft.
But (cruel soul) when I am in my grave,
Some pity then upon my sufferings have.
Ah! fair and loved, and that were once the sweet
Cause of my life (whilst Heaven thought it meet)
Turn those bright lamps upon me, as beni'ne
And pitiful as ere I saw them shine,
Once ere I dye, that I may dye in peace.
Let those fair amiable eyes release
My life, now bitter, which once sweetened it;
And those bright Stars, which my loves torches li't,
Light too my Funeral tapers, and forerun,
As once my rising, now my setting Sun.
But thou more hard then ere thou were before,
Feel yet no spark of pity; but art more
Stiff with my prayers. Must I then talk alone?
Wretch that I am, discourse I to a stone?
Say Dye, at least, it nothing else thou'lt say;
And thou shalt see me dye. O Love! what way
Can thou not plague me? when this Nymph that's nursed
In cruelty, and for my blood did thirst,
Finding my death would now a favour be,
Even that sad favour doth deny to me?
Nor will reply a syllable, or deign
One stabbing word to put me out of pain?
To answer thee if I had promised,
As well as hear thee, this were justly sed.
Thou call me cruel, hoping, that to shun
That vice, into the contrary I'll run.
But know, my ears are not so tickeled
With that (by me so little merited)
And less desired) praise thou give to me
Of beauty, as to hear my self by thee
" Styled Cruel; which to be to any other
I grant were vice; it is virtue to a Lover:
And what thou harshness call and cruelty,
" Is in a woman perfect honesty.
But say, that even t'a Lover it were a sin;
Yet tell me, when hath Amarillis bin
Cruel to thee? was it then when justice bad
To use no pity; yet on thee I had
So much, that I from death delivered thee?
I mean, when amongst a noble company
Of modest Virgins mingled, thou did cover
With a Maid's habit a libidinous Lover:
And, our chaste sports polluting, did intrude
Amongst kisses feigned and innocent thy lewd
And wanton kisses (such an act, as yet
I blush as oft as I but think on it).
But at that time I knew thee not (Heaven knows)
And when I did, my indignation rose.
Thy wantonness I from my mind did keep,
And suffered not the amorous plague to creep
To my chaste heart: on my lips outer skin
The poison stuck, but none of it got in.
" A mouth that's kissed perforce,
" If it spit out the kiss, is ne'er the worse.
But what would thou by that bold theft have got,
If I had to those Nymphs discovered what
Thou were? the Thracian women never tore
And murdered Orpheus so on Hebrus shore,
As they had thee, unless her clemency
Whom thou call cruel now had rescued thee.
But she is not so cruel as she ought
To be: for if when she is cruel thought
Thy boldness is so great, what would it be
If she were judged pitiful by thee?
That honest pity which I could, I gave;
Other it is in vain for thee to crave,
Or hope: " for amorous pity she can ill
" Bestow, who gave it all to one that will
" Give her none back. If thou my Lover be,
Love my good name, my life, my honesty.
Thou seek impossibles; I am a ward
To Heaven, Earth watches me, and my reward
If I transgress, is death: but most of all,
Virtue defends me with a brazen wall.
" For she that is protected by her honour,
" Scorns there should be a safer guard upon her.
Look to thy safety then, and do not give
Battle to me, Mirtillo: fly, and live,
If thou be wise. " For out of sense of smart
" To abandon life, argues but a faint heart.
" And it is the part of virtue to abstain
" From what we love, if it will prove our bane.
" He that no longer can resist must yield.
" Where virtue is, all passions quit the field.
" Love triumphs over virtue.
Let that man
" That cannot what he will, will what he can.
" Necessity of loving hath no law.
" Love's wounds will heal, which salves of absence draw.
" We fly in vain what we about us carry.
" Love drives out love like following billows: Marry.
Strange levity in me thou dost presume.
" If all ways fail, time will thy love consume.
But first my love will have consumed me.
Is there no cure then for thy malady?
No cure at all but that which death affords.
Death? let me speak then; and be sure these words
Be as a charm unto thee: though I know
" When Lovers talk of dying, it doth show
" An amorous custom rather of the tongue,
" Then a resolve of mind (continuing long)
" To do it indeed: yet if thou ere should take
So strange a frenzy; know, when thou dost make
Away thy self, thou murtherst my fame too:
Live then (if thou dost love me) and adieu:
I shall esteem thee henceforth most discreet,
If thou take care we two may never meet.
Sad doom! without my life how can I live?
Or without death end to my torments give?
Mirtillo, It is high time thou went away,
Thou hast already made too long a stay:
Be gone; and take this cordial along,
" Of hopeless Lovers there's a numerous throng,
 " There is no wound but carries with it pain,
And there are others may of love complain.
I know I'm not the only man hath lost
His Love; but only wretched I am tossed
Twixt life and death; of whom it may be sed,
That I am neither living, nor yet dead.
Be gone, be gone.
O woeful parting! O
End of my days! from thee how can I go,
And yet not dye? The pangs of death I'm sure
I feel, and all that parting souls endure.
For mine, it is past into my griefs: Hence I
Have ceased to live, those live immortally.
MIrtillo, O Mirtillo! could thou see
That heart which thou condemn'st of cruelty,
(Soul of my soul) thou unto it would show
That pity which thou beg from it I know.
O ill starred Lovers! what avails it me
To have thy love? To have mine, what boots it thee?
Whom Love hath joined why dost thou separate,
Malicious Fate! And two divorced by Fate
Why join thou perverse Love? How blessed are you
Wild beasts, that are in loving tied unto
No laws but those of Love! whilst humane laws
Inhumanely condemn us for that cause.
" O why, if this be such a natural
" And powerful passion, was it capital!
" Nature too frail, that dost with Law contend!
" Law too severe, that Nature dost offend!
" But what? they love but little who death fear.
Ah, my Mirtillo! would to heaven that were
" The only penalty. Virtue, which art
" The bindingst Law to an ingenuous heart,
This inclination which in me I feel,
Lanced with the sharp point of thy holy steel,
To thee I sacrifice; and pardon (deer
Mirtillo) her, that's only cruel, where
She must not pity. Pardon thy fierce foe
In looks and words: but in her heart not so.
Or if addicted to revenge thou be,
What greater vengeance can thou take on me
Then thine own grief? for if thou be my heart.
(As in despite of Heaven and Earth thou art)
Thy sighs my vital spirits are, the flood
Of tears which follows is my vital blood,
And all these pangs, and all these groans of thine
Are not thy pangs, are not thy groans, but mine.
SIster, no more dissembling.
Woe is me!
I am discovered.
I heard all: now see,
Was I a Witch? I did believe (my Heart)
Thou were in love; now I am sure thou art.
And would thou keep't from me? thy closet? tush,
This is a common evil, never blush.
Corisca, I am conquered (I confess't)
No, now I know it, deny it thou were best.
" Alas! I knew a women's heart would prove
" Too small a vessel for o're-flowing love.
Cruel to thy Mirtillo! but unto
Thy self much more!
It is cruelty that grew
"From pity.
Poison ne'er was known to grow
" From wholesome root: What difference can thou show
Twixt such a cruelty as doth offend,
And such a pity as no help will lend?
Ay me, Corisca!
It is a vanity
(Sister) to sigh, an imbecility
Of mind, and tastes too much of woman.
Were it
Not crueler to nourish in his heart
A hopeless love? To fly him is a sign
I have compassion of his case and mine.
But why a hopeless love?
Dost thou not know
I am contracted unto Silvio?
Dost thou not know besides what the Law saith,
It is death in any woman that breaks faith?
O fool! and is this all stands in thy way?
Whether is ancienter with us (I pray)
" The Law of Dian, or of Love? this last
" Is born with us, and it grows up as fast
" As we do, Amarillis; it is not writ,
" Nor taught by Masters, Nature printed it
" In humane hearts with her own powerful hand:
" Both Gods and men are under Loves command.
But if that Law my life away should take,
Can this of Love a restitution make?
Thou art too nice; if women all were such,
And on these scruples should insist so much,
Good days adieu. I hold them simple souls
Will live obnoxious to such poor comptrolls.
" Laws are not for the wise: if to be kind
Should merit death, Jove help the cruel mind!
But if fools fall into those snares, it is fit
They be forbid to steal, who have not wit
" To hide their theft. For honesty is but
" An art, an honest gloss on vice to put.
Think others as they list; thus I conceive.
These rotten grounds, Corisca, will deceive.
" What I can't hold it is wisdom soon to quit.
" And who forbids thee fool? our life doth flit
" Too fast away to lose one jot of it;
" And men so squeamish and so curious grown,
" That two of our new Lovers make not one
" Of the old. We are no longer for their tooth
" (Believ't) then while w' are new. Bate us our youth,
" Bate us out beauty, and like hollow trees
" Which had been stuffed with honey by the bees,
" If that by licourish hands away be taken,
" Dry and despised trunks we shall remain.
Therefore let them have leave to babble what
They please, as those who know nor reckon not
What the poor woman Amarillis bears,
Our case alas is differing much from theirs.
" Men in perfection as in age increase,
" Wisdom supplies the loss of handsomeness:
" But when our Youth and Beauty (which alone
" Conquers the strength and wit of men) are gone,
" Ell's gone with us; nor can thou possibly
" Say a worse thing, or to be pardoned thee
" More hardly, then Old woman. Then before
Thou split on that unevitable shore,
Know thine own worth, and do not be so mad,
As when thou may live merry, to live sad.
What would the lion's strength boot him, or wit
Avail a man, unless he used it?
Our beauty is to us that which to men
Wit is, or strength unto the lion. Then
" Let us use it whilst wee may;
" Snatch those joys that haste away.
" Earth her winter-coat may cast,
" And renew her beauty past;
" But, our winter come, in vain
" We solicit spring again:
" And when our furrows snow shall cover,
" Love may return, but never Lover.
Thou say all this only to try me sure,
Not that thy thoughts are such. But rest secure,
Unless the way thou unto me shalt show
Be a plain way, and warrantable too
To break this Match; I am resolved to die
A thousand deaths, here stain my honesty.
More wilful woman I did never know.
But since thou art so resolved, be it so.
Tell me good Amarillis, seriously,
Dost thou suppose thy Silvio sets by
His faith as much as thou thy honesty?
Thou make me laugh at this: wherein should he
Express a faith, who is to love a foe?
Love's foe? O fool! thou know not Silvio.
He is the still sow, hee. O these coy souls!
Believe them not: the deep stream silent rolls.
" No theft in Love so subtle, so secure,
" As to hide sin by seeming to be pure.
In short, thy Silvio loves: but it is not thee
(Sister) he loves.
What Goddess may she be?
For certainly she is no mortal Dame
That could the heart of Silvio inflame.
Nor Goddess, nor yet Nymph.
What hast thou said?
Dost thou know my Lisetta?
Who? the Maid
That tends thy Flocks?
The same.
It cannot be
She, I am sure, Corisca?
Very she,
I can assure thee, she is all his joy.
A proper choice for one that was so coy.
But wilt thou know how he doth pine away
And languish for this Jewel? Every day
He feigns to go a hunting.
Every morn
Soon as it dawns I hear his cursed horn.
And just at noon, when others are in the heat
Of all the sport, he doth by stealth retreat
From his Companions, and comes all alone
Unto my garden by a way unknown:
Where underneath a haw-thorn hedges shade
(Which doth the garden fence about) the Maid
Hears his hot sighs, and amorous prayers, which she
Comes laughing afterwards and tells to me.
Now hear what I to serve thee've thought upon;
Or rather, what I have already done.
I think thou know, that the same Law which hath
Enjoined the woman to observe her faith
To her betrothed, likewise doth enact,
That if the woman catch him in the fact
Of falsehood, spite of friends she may deny
To have him, and without disloyalty
Marry another.
This I know full well;
And thereof some examples too could tell,
Of my own knowledge; Egle having found
Licotas false, remained her self unbound.
Armilla did from false Turingo so,
And Phillida from Ligurino go.
Now list' to me: My Maid (by me set on)
Hath bid her credulous Lover meet anon
In yonder cave with her; whence he remains
The most contented of all living swains,
And waits but th'hour: there thou shalt catch him; where
I too will be witness of all to bear:
(For without this our plot would be in vain.)
So without any hazard, or least stain
To thine, or to thy fathers honour, thou
Shalt free thy self from this distasteful vow.
I like it rarely: but the way, the way,
Corisca?
Marry thus (observe me pray)
In the middle of the cave (which narrow is
And very long) upon the right hand lies
Another lesser Grot (I know not whether
By nature, or by art, or both together
Made) in the hollow stone, whose slimy wall
Is hid with clinging Ivy, and a small
Hole in the roof lets light in from above,
(Fit receptacles for the thefts of Love,
Yet cheerful too enough) there thou shalt hide
Thy self, and hidden in that place abide
Till the two Lovers come; I mean to send
Lisetta first, and after her, her friend,
Following his steps my self aloof: And when
I shall perceive him stepped into the den,
Rush after him will I. But lest he should
Escape from me: when I have laid fast hold
Upon him, I will use Lisetta's aid,
And joining both (for so the plot is laid
Between us two) together we will make
A cry, at which thou too shalt come, and take
The penalty of the law against Silvio.
Then my Lisetta and we two will go
Before the Priest; and so thou shalt untie
The Nuptial knot.
Before his Father?
Why?
What matters that? Think thou Montano's blood
Will stand in balance with his Countries good?
Or that his sacred function he will neglect
For any carnal or profane respect?
Go to then (setting all disputes aside)
I wink, and follow thee my faithful guide.
Then linger not (my Heart) enter into
The Cave.
Unto the Temple first I'll go
" T'adore the gods: For unless Heaven give
" Success, no mortal enterprise can thrive.
"To devout hearts all places Temples are:
It will lose too much time.
" In using prayer
" To them that made time, time cannot be lost.
Go and return then quickly—. So almost
I'm past the bad way; only this delay
Gives me some cause of trouble; yet this may
Be of use too. Something there would be done
To abuse my honest Lover Coridon.
I'll say, I'll meet him in the Cave, and so
Will make him after Amarillis go.
This done, by a back way I'll thither send
The Priest of Dian her to apprehend:
Guilty she will be found, and sentenced
To death without all doubt. My Rival dead,
Mirtillo is mine own: His cruelty
To me being cause by's love to her. But see
The man! I'll sound him till she comes. Now rise,
Rise all my Love into my tongue and eyes.
HEar ye damned spirits that in hell lament,
Hear a new sort of pain and punishment.
See in a Turtles look a Tigers mind!
She, crueler then death, because she did find
One death would not suffice her bloody will,
And that to live was to be dying still,
Enjoyns me, not to make my self away,
That I might die a thousand times a day.
(I'll make as though I saw him not) I hear
A doleful voice pierce my relenting ear,
Who should it be? Mirtillo, is it thou?
I would it were my ghost.
Well, well: but how
(And tell me true) thy self now dost thou find,
Since to thy dearest Nymph thou brak'st thy mind?
As one who in a fever cast,
Forbidden liquor longed to taste,
If gotten, sets it to his mouth,
And quenches life, but cannot drouth:
So I, with amorous fever long
Consumed, from her eyes and tongue
Sweet poison sucked, which leaves me more
Inflamed then I was before.
" Love upon us no power can have
" But what our selves (Mirtillo) gave.
" As a Bear doth with her tongue
" Polish her misshapen young
" Which had else in vain been born:
" So an Am'rist giving form
" To a rude and faint desire
" That would otherwise expire,
" Hatches Love; which is at first
" Weak and raw, but when it is nursed,
" Fierce and cruel. Take it upon
" My word, an old affection
" Tyrannises in a breast,
" And grows a Master from a guest.
" For when the soul shall once be brought
" To be fettered to one thought,
" And that, not have the power to move
" A minute from its object, Love
" (Made for delight) will turn to sadness;
" And which is worse, to death or madness.
" Therefore my advice shall be, 
" To part thy love to two or three.
Let death or madness me betide,
Rather then my Flame divide.
Amarillis (though she be
Cruel and unkind to me)
Is my Life and Reason too,
And to her I will be true.
Foolish Swain! that can not tell
How to make a bargain well.
What? change love for hatred? I
Rather now then do it would dye.
" Cruelty doth faith refine,
" As the fire the golden mine:
" Where were the loyalty of Love,
" If women should not tyrants prove?
In my many sufferings this
All my joy and comfort is,
Sorrows, tortures, exile, gall,
Here's a cause will sweeten all.
Let me languish, let me burn,
Let me any thing but turn.
O brave Lover! valiant breast!
More impetuous then a beast!
And yet tamer then a rock
Which endures the Ocean's shock!
" In Lovers hearts there cannot be
" A worse disease then Constancy.
" O most unhappy those in whom
" This foolish I do I finds a room!
" Which shackles us, when we might prove
" The sweet variety of Love.
With this dull virtue Constancy,
Tell me (simple Lover) why
Amarillis? For her face?
Whom another must embrace?
Or dost thou affect her mind,
Which to thee is not inclined?
All then thou can dote upon
Is thine own destruction.
And wilt thou be still so mad
To covet that cannot be had?
Up Mirtillo, know thy parts:
Can thou want a thousand hearts?
Others I dare swear there be,
That would sue as much to thee.
To be Amarillis thrall
Is more then to command them all.
And if she my suit deny,
All that's pleasure I defy.
I to make another choice?
In another I rejoice?
Neither could I if I would,
Neither would I if I could:
But if possible to me
Such a will or power be,
Heaven and Love before that hour
Strip me of all will and power.
Thou art enchanted: otherwise
Could thou too thy self despise?
I must, when I'm despised by her
Come Mirtillo, ne'er
Deceive thy self: perhaps thou dost suppose
She loves thee in her heart, although she shows
An outward scorn. If thou but knew what she
Talks oftentimes to me concerning thee.
All these are trophies of my constant love,
With which I'll triumph o'er the Powers above,
And men below, my torments, and her hate,
O'er Fortune and the world, o'er Death and Fate.
(Wonder of Constancy! if this man knew
How much hoe's loved by her, what would hee do?)
Mirtillo, how it pities me to hear
These frantic speeches! Tell me, were thou here
In love before?
Fair Amarillis was
My first, and shall be my last Love.
Alas!
It should seem then that thou did never prove
Any but cruel, but disdainful Love.
O that 't had been thy chance but once to be
In love with one that's gentle, courteous, free!
Try that a little: try it, and thou'lt find
How sweet it is to meet with one that's kind,
That loves and honours thee as much as thou
Thy sour and cruel Amarillis; how
Delightful it is to have a joy as great
As is thy love, a happiness complete
As thy own wish: to have thy Mistress twine
About thy neck, and her sighs echo thine:
And after say, My Joy, all that I have,
All that I am, and thy desires can crave,
At thy devotion is: If I am fair,
For thee I'm fair; for thee I deck this hair,
This face, this bosom; from this breast of mine
I turned out my own heart to harbour thine.—
But this is a small river to that vast
Sweet sea of pleasure which love makes us taste,
And they alone that taste can well relate.
A thousand thousand times most fortunate
Is he that's born under so blessed a star!
Hear me Mirtillo: (here I was aware
I'd almost called him mine) a Nymph as fair
As the proud'st she that curls or spreads to the air
Her golden tresses, worthy of thy love
As thou of hers, the honour of this Grove,
Love of all hearts; by every worthier swain
In vain solicited, adored in vain,
Doth love thee only, and thee only prize
More then her life, and more then her own eyes.
Mirtillo, scorn her not, if wise thou be;
For as the shadow doth the body, she
Will follow thee through all the world: she will
At thy least word and beck be ready still
As thy obedient hand-maid: night and day
With thee she'll pass the tedious hours away.
Ah! do not wave (Mirtillo) do not wave
So rare a bliss; the perfect'st joys we have
Are those which neither sighs nor tears do cost,
Nor danger, and on which least time is lost.
Here thou hast passe-time at thy door, a feast
Upon the table always ready dressed
To please thy taste. Ay me! can thou receive
A greater gift then this? Mirtillo, Leave,
Leave this cold hunting after flying feet,
And her that runs to thy embraces, meet.
Nor do I feed thee with vain hopes; command
Her come, and she that loves thee is at hand,
Now, if thou say the word.
I prithee rest
Content, my palate is not for a feast.
Try but what joy is made of once, and then
Return unto thy wonted grief again,
That thou moist say, thou had a taste of both.
"Distempered palats all sweet things do loath.
Yet do it in pity unto her that dyes,
Unless she enjoy the fun of thy fair eyes.
Uncharitable youth, art not thou poor?
And can thou beat a beggar from thy door?
Ah! what thou would another should extend
To thee, do thou now to another lend.
What alms can beggars give? In short, I swore
Allegiance to that Nymph whom I adore,
Whether she tyrant proved, or merciful.
O truly blind, and most unhappy, dull
Mirtillo! who is it thou art constant to?
I am unwilling to add woe to woe;
But thou art too much wronged In faith, and I
That love thee am not able to stand by
And see thee so betrayed. If thou suppose
This cruelty of Amarillis grows
From zeal to virtue or Religion,
You are gulled: another doth possess the throne,
And thou (poor wretch!) whilst he doth laugh, must cry.
What, stricken dumb?
I'm in an ecstasy,
Twixt life and death suspended, till I know
Whether I should believe thee now or no.
Dost not believe me then?
If I did, I
Had not survived it sure: and I will dye
Yet, if it be a truth.
Live (Caitiff) live
To be revenged.
But I cannot believe
It is a truth.
Wilt thou not yet believe,
But force me to tell that which it will grieve
Thy soul to hear? Dost thou see yonder cave?
That is thy Mistress Faith's and Honour's grave:
There laughs sh'at thee, there makes of thy annoy
A poignant sauce to thy tired Rivals joy.
In short; there oft a base-born shepherd warms
Thy virtuous Amarillis in his arms.
Now go and sigh, and whine, and constant prove
Unto a Nymph that thus rewards thy love.
Ay me Corisca! dost thou tell me true?
And is it fit I should believe thee too?
The more thou search, twill the worser be.
But did thou see it Corisca? wo is me!
Truth is, I did not see it, but thou may,
And presently, for she her word hath past
To meet him there this very hour: But hide
Thy self beneath that shady hedges side,
And thou thy self shalt see her straight descend
Into the cave, and after her, her friend.
So quickly must I dye?
See! I have spied
Her coming down already by the side
Of the Temple: mark! how guiltily she moves!
Her stealing pace betraying their stolen loves.
To mark the sequel, do thou here remain,
And afterwards we two will meet again.
Since the discovery of the truth's so near,
With my belief I will my death defer.
" NO mortal work successfully is done
" Which with th'immortall gods is not begun.
Full of distractions, and with heavy heart
I did from hence unto the Temple part:
Whence (Heaven be praised) I come as light as air,
And strangely comforted: for at my prayer
Pure and devout, I felt from thence, (me thought)
Another soul into my body shot,
Which whispered, Fear not Amarillis, go
Securely on. I, and I will do so,
Heaven guiding. — Fair Mother of Love, befriend
Her that on thee for succour doth depend:
Thou that as Queen in the third Orb dost shine,
If ever thou felt thy Son's flames, pity mine.
Bring (courteous Goddess) by a secret path
Quickly that youth to whom I've pawned my faith.
And thou deer cave, till I have done my work,
Suffer this slave of Love in thee to lurk.
But Amarillis, all the coast is clear,
None nigh to see thee, and none nigh to hear;
Securely enter. O Mirtillo, O
Mirtillo, if thou dream'dst wherefore I go! —
I Wake, and see, what I could wish to have been
Born without eyes, that I might not have seen:
Or rather not to have been born. Cursed Fate!
Why hast thou thus prolonged my lifes date,
To bring me to this killing spectacle?
Mirtillo, more tormented then in hell
The blackest soul is, not to doubt thy grief?
Not to be able to suspend belief?
Thou, thou hast heard and seen't: thy Mistress is
Another man's. And (which is worse) not his
Whose by the world's Laws she was bound to be,
But by Love's Laws snatched both from him and thee.
O cruel Amarillis! to undo
This wretched man, and then to mock him too
With that inconstant mouth which once did meet,
And once did call Mirtillo's kisses sweet:
But now his loathed name (which happily rose
Like bitter drink that against the stomach goes)
Because it should not bitterness impart
To thy delight, hath spu'd out of thy heart?
Since therefore she who gave thee life, hath taken
That life away, and given it again
'T another: why dost thou thy life survive,
Wretched Mirtillo? Why art thou alive?
Dye, dye Mirtillo unto grief and smart,
As unto joy already dead thou art.
Dye, dead Mirtillo; since thy life is so,
Let thy pangs likewise be concluded. Go
Out of the anguish of this death, which still
Keeps thee alive, that it may longer kill.
But shall I dye then unrevenged? Sure
I'll slay him first that did my death procure.
I will dispense with my dire love of death
Till I have justly taken away his breath
Who slew my heart unjustly. Yield stout grief▪
To anger, death to life, till in my life
I have avenged my death.
Let not this steel be drunken with the flood
Of its own Master's unrevenged blood:
Nor this right hand be Pitie's, till it hath
First made it self the Minister of wrath.
Thou that enjoy'st my spoils (what ere thou be)
Since I must fall, I'll pull thee after me.
In the same brake I'll plant my self again;
And when I spy him coming to the den,
Will rush upon him with this piercing dart
At unawares, and strike him through the heart.
But is it not base to strike him out of sight?
It is: defy him then to single fight,
Where valour may my justice prove. But no:
This place is unto all so known, and so
Frequented, that some swains may interpose:
Or (which is worse) enquire of me whence grows
Our quarrel; which if I deny, it is nought
They'll think; if feign a cause, I may be caught
Then in a lie; if tell't, her name will be
Blasted with everlasting infamy:
In whom, although I never can approve
That which I see, yet I must ever love
That which I fancied, and did hope to have seen,
And that which ought (I'm sure) in her to have been.
Dye basely then the base Adulterer,
Who hath slain me, and hath dishonoured her.
I, but the blood may (if I kill him here)
The murder show, and that the Murderer?
What do I care? I, but the murth'rer known,
Bewrays the cause for which the murder's done.
So this ungrateful woman runs the same
Hazard this way of shipwrak in her fame.
Enter the cave then, and assault him there.
Good, good; tread softly, softly, lest she hear:
That she's at the other end her words implied.
Now (hid with branches) in the Rock's left side
There is a hollow at the steep stairs foot,
There without any noise, I'll wait to put
In execution my design. My foe
Dispatched, his bleeding carcass I will throw
To my she-foe, to be revenged on two
At once. The felf-same steel I'll then imbrue
In mine own blood: so three shall die in brief,
Two by my weapon, and the third of grief.
A sad and miserable tragedy
Of both her Lovers shall this Tigress see,
Of him she loves, and him she scorns. And this
Cave which was meant the chamber of their bliss,
To her and to her minion shall become
And (which I more desire) to her shame, a tomb.
But you dear footsteps (which I long have traced
In vain) unerring path, lead me at last
To where my Love is hid; To you I bow,
Your print I follow. O Corisca! now
I doe believe thee: now th'hast told me true.
DOes he believe Corisca? and pursue
Her steps to Erycina's Cave? a beast
Hath wit enough to apprehend the rest.
But if thou dost believe her, thou had need
Have from her good security indeed,
And hold her by a stronger tie then I
Had lately of her hair. But stronger tie
On her there cannot be then gifts. This bold
Strumpet her self to this young swain hath sold.
And here, by the false light now of this vaut
Delivers the bad ware which he hath bought.
Or rather, it is Heavens justice which hath sent
Her hither to receive her punishment
From my revenging hands. His words did seem
T'imply she made some promise unto him;
Which he believed: and by his spying here
Her print, that she is in the cave, it is clear.
Do a brave thing then: stop the mouth of the cave
With that great hanging stone, that they may have
No means of scoping; to the Priest then go,
And bring by the back-way (which few do know)
His ministers to apprehend, and by
The Law deservedly to make her dye.
For it is not unto me long since unknown,
That she contracted is to Coridon,
How-ever he (because he stands in fear
Of me) to lay his claim to her forbear.
But now I'll give him leave at once to be
Revenged on her both for him self and me.
But I lose time in talk. From this young Grove
I'll pull a tree up by the root, to move
The stone withal. So, this I think will do.
How heavy it is! The stone hath a root too.
What if I mined it with this trunk? and so,
As with a lever heaved it from below?
Good, good; now to the other side as much.
How fast it sticks? I did not think it such
A difficult attempt as it hath proved;
The Center of the earth were easier moved.
Nor strength, nor skill will do this work I, see:
Or do's that vigour which was once in me
Now fail me at my need? What do ye do
My perverse Stars? I will, (in spite of you)
I will remove it yet. The Devil haul
Corisca, (I had almost said) and all
The sex of them. O Pan Liceus, hear,
And to move this, be moved by my prayer!
Pan, thou that all things can, and all things art,
Thou once thy self did woe a stubborn heart,
Revenge on false Corisca now, thine own
And my despised Love. I move the stone
Thus by the virtue of thy sacred name;
Thus rolls it by the virtue of the same.
So, now the Fox is trapt, and finely shut
Where she had earthed her self. I'll now go put
Fire to the hole; where I could wish to find
The rest of women, to destroy the kind.
O Love! how potent and how great thou art!
Wonder of nature and the world! What heart
So dull, as not to feel thy power? What wit
So deep and piercing, as to fathom it?
Who knows thy hot lascivious fires; will say,
Infernal spirit, thou dost live and sway
In the corporeal part. But who so knows
How thou dost men to virtuous things dispose,
And how the dying flame of loose desires
Looks pale, and trembles at thy chaster fires;
Will say, Immortal God, in the soul alone
Thou hast established thy sacred Throne.
" Rare Monster! wonderfully got betwixt
" Desire and Reason; an affection mixed
" Of sense and intellect: With knowing wilde:
" With seeing blind: A God, and yet a child:
And (such) thou sway the Earth and Heaven too;
On which thou tread as we on t'other do.
Yet (by thy leave) a greater miracle,
A mightier thing then thou art I can tell.
For all thou dost (that may our wonder claim)
Thou dost by virtue of a women's name.
Woman! the gift of heaven; or of him rather
Who made thee fairer, being of both the Father,
Wherein is Heaven so beautiful as thou?
That rolls one goggle eye in its vast brow
(Like a grim Cyclop) not a lamp of light,
But cause of blindness and Cymerian night
To the bold gazer: if that s•e•k, it is
A thundering voice; and if it sigh, the hiss
Of earth-engendred winds. Thou, with the fair
Angel-like prospect of two Suns, which are
Serene and visible, doest still the winds
And calm the Billows of tempestuous minds;
And Sound, Light, Motion, Beauty, Majesty,
Make in thy face so sweet a harmony,
That heaven (I mean this outward heaven) must needs
Confess thy form the form of that exceeds:
Since beauty that is dead less noble is
Then that which lives, and is a place of bliss.
With reason therefore man (that gallant creature,
That lords it over all the works of Nature)
To thee as Lady Paramount pays duty,
Acknowleding in thine, thy Makers beauty.
And if hee Triumphs gain, and Thrones inherit,
It is not because thou hast less of merit;
But for thy glory: since a greater thing
It is to conquer, then to be a King.
But that thy conquering beauty doth subdue
Not only man, but even his Reason too,
If any doubt, hee in Mirtillo hath
A miracle that may constrain his faith.
This wanted (Woman) to thy power before
To make us love when we can hope no more.
MY heart and thoughts till now were so much set
To train that foolish Nymph into my net,
That may dear Hair (which by that Rogue was taken
From me) and how to get it back again
I quite forgot: O how it troubled me
To pay that ransom for my liberty!
But 't had been worse to have been a prisoner
To such a beast: Who though he doth not bear
A mouses heart, might have moused me: For I
Have (to say truth) fooled him sufficiently:
And like a Horse-leech did him suck and drain
As long as he had blood in any vein.
And now hoe's moved I love him not; and moved
He well might be, if him I ever had loved.
How can one love a creature that doth want
All that is lovely? As a stinking plant
Which the Physician gathered for the use
He had of it; when he hath strained the juice
And virtue out, is on the dunghill thrown;
So having squeezed him, I with him have done.
Now will I see if Coridon into
The cave's descended. Ho! what do I view?
Wake I? or sleep I? or am drunk? but now
This cave's mouth open was I'm sure; then how
Comes it now shut? and with a ponderous
And massy stone rolled down upon it thus?
Earth-quake I'm sure to unhinge it there was none.
Would I knew certainly that Coridon
And Amarillis were within; and then
I cared not how it came. Hoe's in the den,
If (as Lisetta said) he parted were
From home so long ago. Both may be there,
And by Mirtillo shut together. " Love,
" Pricked with disdain, hath strength enough to move
" The world, much more a stone. Should it be true,
Mirtillo could not have deviz'd to doe
Ought more according to my heart then this,
Though he Corisca had enthroned in his
In stead of Amarillis. I will go
The back way in, that I the truth may know.
BUt Linco, did not thou know me indeed?
Who could have known thee in this savage weed
For meek Dorinda? But if I had been
A ravenous hound (as I am Linco) then
I to thy cost had known thee for a beast.
What do I see? What do I see?
Thou see
A sad effect of Love; a sad and strange
Effect of loving (Linco.)
Wondrous change!
Thou a young Maid, so soft, so delicate,
That were (me thinks) an infant but of late,
Whom in mine arms I bore (as I may say)
A very little child but yesterday,
And steering thy weak steps, taught thee to name
(When I thy Father served) Daddy and Mam,
Who like a timorous Doe (before thy heart
Was made a prey to insulting Love) did start
At every thing that on the sudden stirred,
At every wind, at every little bird
That shook a bough, each Lizard that but ran
Out of a bush, made thee look pale and wan;
Now all alone o'er hills, through woods dost pass
Fearless of hounds or savage beasts.
Alas!
" She whom Love wounds no other wound doth fear.
Indeed fair Nymph, Love showed his godhood here,
From woman to a man transforming thee,
Or rather to a wolf.
If thou could see
Into my breast (O Linco!) then you would say,
A living wolf upon my heart doth prey
As on a harmless lamb.
Is Silvio
That wolf?
Alas, who else can be 't?
And so
▪Cause he's a wolf, thou a shee-wolf would be,
To try, since on thy humane visage he
Was not enamoured, if he would at least
Affect thee in the likeness of a beast,
As being of his kind. But prithee where
Gotst thou these robes?
I'll tell thee: I did hear
Silvio would chase to day the noble Bore
At Erimanthus foot; and there before
The morning peeped, was I from wood to wood
Hunting the Hunter; by a crystal flood
From which our flocks did climb the hills, I found
Melampo the most beauteous Silvio's hound,
Who having quenched his thirst there as I guess,
Lay to repose him on the neighbouring grass.
I, who love any thing that's Silvio's,
Even the very ground on which he goes,
And shadow which his beauteous limbs do cast;
Much more the dog on which his love is placed,
Stooping laid sudden hold on him, who came
Along with me as gently as a lamb.
And whilst t'was in my thoughts to lead him back
Unto his Lord and mine, hoping to make
A friend of him with what he held so deer,
He came himself to seek him, and stopped here.
Deer Linco, I'll not lose thee so much time,
As to tell all that's past twixt me and him;
This only, to be brief, After a long
Preface of oaths on one another strung,
And treach'rous promises, this cruel swain
Flung from me full of Anger and disdain,
Both with his own Melampo (to his Lord
So true) and with my deer and sweet reward.
O cruel Silvio! ruthless swain! But what
Did thou do then (Dorinda?) did thou not
Hate him for this?
Rather (as if the fire
Of his disdain Loves fire had been) his ire
Increased my former flame. His steps I trace,
And thus pursuing him towards the chase,
I met (hard by) with my Lupino, whom
Before a little I had parted from.
When straight it came into my head, that I
In his attire, and in the company
Of shepherds might be thought a shepherd too,
And undiscovered my fair Silvio view.
In a wolves likeness amongst hounds? and none
Bite thee? It is much (Dorinda) thou hast done.
This (Linco) was no miracle: for they
Durst not touch her who was their Masters prey.
There I, out of the tents, amidst the crew
Of neighbouring shepherds that were met to view
The famous passe-time, stood admiring more
To see the Huntsman, then the hunted Bore:
At every motion of the furious beast,
My cold heart shiv'red in my breast:
At every action of the brave young man
My soul with all her touched affections ran
In to his aid. But my extreme delight
Again was poisoned with the horrid sight
Of the fierce Bore, whose strength and vast
Proportion, all proportion past.
As an impetuous whirlwind in a great
And sudden storm, which all that it doth meet
(Houses, and trees, and stones) before it bears,
All it can get within its circle tears
To pieces in an instant: so the Bore
Wheeling about (his tusks all foam and gore)
Piled in one heap dogs slain, spears knapt, men wounded.
How oft did I desire to have compounded
For Silvio's life, with the enraged Swine!
And for his blood, to have given the Monster mine!
How oft was I about to run between,
And with my body his fair body screen!
Spare cruel Bore, (how often did I cry!)
Spare my fair Silvio's breast of Ivory;
Thus to my self I spake, and sighed, and prayed;
When his fierce dog (armed with a brest-plate made
Of hard and scaly barks of trees) he slipped
After the beast, now prouder, being dipped
Thoroughly in blood, and lifted from the ground
On slaughtered trunks. The valour of that hound
(Linco) exceeds belief: and Silvio
Not without reason surely loves him so.
As a chaft Lion, which now meets, now turns
From an untamed Bulls well brandished horns,
If once he come with his strong paw to seize
Upon his shoulder, masters him with ease:
So bold Melampo shunning with fine slights
The Bores short turns, and rapid motion, lights
At length upon his ear; which having bit
Quite through, and lugged him twice or thrice by it,
He with his teeth so naild him to the ground,
That at his vast bulk now a mortal wound
Might levelled be with greater certainty,
(Before but slghtly hurt) then suddenly
My lovely Silvio (calling on the name
Of Dian) Goddess do thou give me aim
(Quoth he) the horrid head is thine. This sed,
His golden Quiver's swiftest shaft to the head
He drew; which flying to that very point
Where the left shoulder knits with the neck joint,
There wounded the fierce Bore, so down he fell.
Then I took breath, seeing my Silvio well,
And out of danger. Happy beast! to die
So sweet a death, as by that hand, which I
Would beg my end from.
But what then became
Of the slain beast?
I know not; for I came
Away, for fear of being known; but, I
Suppose, the head to the Temple solemnly
They'll bear, according to my Silvio's vow.
But wilt thou not get out of these weeds now?
Yes: but my garments with my other gear
Lupino has, who promised to stay here
With them, but fails. Dear Linco, if thou love
Me, seek him for me up and down this grove:
Far off he cannot be; mean while I'll take
A little rest (dost see there?) in that Brake;
There I'll expect thee; for I am ore-come
With weariness and sleep, and will not home
Accoutred thus.
I go: but stir not then
Out of that place till I return again.
HAve ye heard Shepherds that our demigod
(Montano's and Alcides worthy blood)
This day hath freed us from that dreadful beast
Which all Arcadia lately did infest?
And that he is preparing himself now
l'th' Temple for it to perform his vow?
If for so great a benefit weed show
Our gratitude, to meet him let us go,
And join our tongues and hearts together there,
To honour him as our Deliverer.
" Which honour, though it be reward too small
" For such a fair and valiant soul; it is all
" Virtue can have on earth.
O sad disaster!
O bitter chance! O wound that hath no plaster!
O day to be for ever steeped in tears!
What doleful voice is this that strikes our ears?
Stars, that are enemies to man always,
Why do you mock our faith? why do you raise
Our hope on high, that when it falls again
The precipice may be with greater pain?
Ergasto by his voice; and it is hee.
But why do I acuse Heaven wrongfully?
Accuse thy self Ergasto: Thou alone,
Thou, thou against the steel did knock the stone;
Thou layd'st the match unto the tinder; whence
A flame unquenchable is kindled since.
But Heaven doth know, I for the best did do it,
And pity only did induce me to it.
O ill starred Lovers! wretched Titiro!
Poor Amarillis! childless Father! O
Mourning Montano! O Arcadia gone
In a consumption far! and we undone!
In short, most sad, all I have seen! or see!
Or speak! or hear! or think!
What may this be
(Alas!) that in one accident alone
Includes a general desolation?
This way hee bends his course, let us go meet
Him (swains).
Eternal Gods! is it not yet
Time to abate your wrath?
Unfold to us
(Courteous Ergasto) what afflicts thee thus.
What dost thou moan?
Your ruin and mine own:
The ruin of Arcadia I moan.
Alas! why so?
The very staff, the stay
Of all our hope is broke, is pulled away.
Speak plainer.
Titiro's daughter, that sole prop
Of her old House, and Father, the sole hope
Of our deliverance, promised here below,
Above decreed to marry Silvio,
As the only means that should Arcadia save;
That Heavenly Maid, so sober, and so grave,
That President of honour (crowned with Lilies
Of chastity) that peerless Amarillis;
She, she (alas! I have no heart, no breath
To tell it you).
Is dead?
Is near her death.
Alas! what have we heard?
Nothing as yet:
She dies a malefactresse: That, That's it.
A malefactresse Amarillis? how
Ergasto?
Caught with an Adult'rer now.
And, if ye stay a little longer here,
Led pinioned to the Temple ye shall see her.
" O female structures, glorious and most fair,
" But weak withal! O chastity, how rare
Art thou! and shall it then be truly taxed,
No woman's chaste but she that ne'er was akst?
Indeed, when she that's virtue's self doth fall,
We well may doubt the virtue of them all.
Pray, if it will not too much trouble be,
Tell the whole story to these swains and me.
I will: The Priest early to day (ye know)
Did with this wretched Nymph's sad Father go
Unto the sacred Temple; with one care
Both moved, to facilitate with prayer
Their childrens desired marriage. For this end
At once their incense did to heaven ascend,
At once their offerings bled, their sacrifice
At once was done with due solemnities,
And such glad auspice, that no entrails ever
Were fairer seen, no flame was more sincere,
And less eclipsed with smoke: moved with such signs,
Thus the blind prophet speaks, and thus divines;
This day (Montano) shall thy Silvio love:
Thy Daughter (Titiro) a wife shall prove:
Go and prepare the Marriage. O absurd,
And vain depending on an Augur's word!
And thou as blind in soul, as in thy eyes!
If thou had said, Prepare her Obsequies,
Then a true Prophet thou had proved indeed.
Yet all the standers by were comforted,
And the old Fathers wept for joy apace,
And Titiro was parted from the place.
When in the Temple suddenly were heard
Sinister omens, and dire signs appeared
Boding Heavens wrath. At which (alas!) if each
Stood there astonished and berest of speech
After so fair beginnings, Friends, judge you.
Mean while the Priests themselves alone withdrew
Into an inner room: and whilst they there
And we without intent in praying were,
Devout and weeping; puffing through the press
The curled Satyr (lo!) demands access
Unto the Priests. I (Porter of that place)
Admit him: Hee then (O he has a face
To bring ill news!) cried; Fathers, if your Prayer
Find not the Gods, your vows and incense are
Not acceptable, and your sacrifice;
If from your altars an impure flame rise,
Think it not strange, that likewise is impure
Which is committing now hard by your door,
In Ericina's cave: a false Nymph there
Is breaking with a base adulterer
Your laws, and her own faith. Send with me now
Your Ministers, and I will show them how
In the act to take 'em. Then (O humane mind,
When thy Fate's near, how dull thou art! how blind!)
The good Priests breat•'d: supposing it was no more
But remove them, and Heaven would as before
Look on their sacrifice beni'nely. There-
Upon they order their chief Minister
Nicandro presently to take that guide,
And bring both Lovers to the Temple tied:
With all his under-ministers he goes,
Pursuing that vile Satyr through a close
And crooked way into the cave. The Maid,
Struck with their torches sudden light, assayed
From where she was to run out of the door,
Which that base dog had stopped (it seems) before.
And what did he the while?
He went his ways
When he had led Nicandro to the place.
But (friends) I cannot tell the general
Astonishment that fell upon us all,
When it the Daughter proved of Titiro:
Who taken, in a trice (I do not know
Out of what place) forth bold Mirtillo flew,
And a sharp dart which he was armed with threw
Like lightning at Nicandro: which, if it
The place that it was aimed at had hit,
Had sent him to the shades: But (whether I
May call it Fortune, or agility)
At the same instant the one aimed his blow,
The other stepped a little backward; so
The mortal steel past by, leaving his breast
Untouched, and in his coat of skins did rest,
Into the which (I know not how) it was wove
So intricately, that Mirtillo strove
In vain to pull it out; and so he too
Was taken.
And with him what did they do?
He to the Temple by himself was brought.
For what?
To try if he'd discover ought
Touching the fact in question. Perhaps too
The affront he in their Minister did do
Unto the priestly majesty might some
Penance deserve. Would yet I might have come
To comfort my poor friend!
What hindered thee?
The waiters at the altar may not be
Admitted to delinquents: therefore I
Sequesterd from the other company,
Go by my self unto the Temple; where
With many a prayer and devouter tear
I'll beg of Heaven that it would chase away
This sullen storm that overclouds our day.
Deer Shepherds rest in peace, and join with ours
Your prayers, to batter the celestial towers.
We will, when we have paid to Silvio
That duty first we to his goodness owe.
O ye great Gods! now, now, if ever, prove
Your anger less eternal then your love.
Impale ye triumph-decking Laurel boughs,
Impale my glorious and victorious brows.
Into Love's lists (hedged round about with flame)
This day I came, I saw, I overcame:
This day hath Heaven and Earth, Nature and Art,
Fortune and Fate, Friend and Foe taken my part.
Even that base Satyr who abhors me so
Hath helped me too, as if he too did go
Some share with me. How much more happily
Did fortune bring Mirtillo in, then I
Contrived to have brought Coridon? to make
Her crime more show of likelihood to take?
And though Mirtillo's apprehended too,
That matters not; they soon will let him go:
The Adulteress only pays the penalty.
O famous triumph! Solemn victory!
If lying may deserve a trophy, I
Deserve a trophy for my amorous lye;
Which from this tongue and bosom hath done more
For me then Love with all his charms before.
But this is not a time to talk: Withdraw
Thy self Corisca, till the doom of Law
Fall on thy Rivals head, for fear that she
To excuse her self, should lay the blame on thee.
Or that the Priest himself should wish to know
What thou can say, before he give the blow.
" When a mine springs, it is good to stand aloof;
" A lying tongue requires a flying hoof.
I'll hide me in those woods, and there will make
Some stay, till it be time to come and take
Possession of my joys. O! it hath hit
Beyond all thought. Success hath crowned my wit.
A Heart of flint, or rather none had he
Nor humane sense, that could not pity thee,
Unhappy Nymph! and for thy sorrow grieve
The more, by how much less they can believe
This should befall thee, who have known thee best.
For were it but to see a Maid distressed
Of venerable countenance, and that showed
So virtuous and so excellently good;
One that for heavenly beauty merited
Temples and Sacrifices, to be led
Unto the Temple as a Sacrifice,
Who could behold it without melting eyes?
But he that should consider further, how,
And for what purpose thou were born; That thou
Art Daughter unto Titiro, and shoud
Have married been unto Montano's blood,
(Two the most loved and honoured shall I say
Shepherds, or Fathers of Arcadia?)
And that being such, so great, so famous, and
So beautiful a Nymph, and that did stand
By nature so remote from thy death's brink,
Thou should be now condemned. He that doth think
On this and weeps not, wails not thy mishap,
Is not a man, but wolf in humane shape.
If my mishap had come through mine own fault,
And the effect had been of an ill thought
As of a deed that seems ill, it had been
Less grievous to me to have death pay sin;
And very just it were I should have spilt
My blood to wash my impure soul from guilt,
To quench Heavens wrath; and since man too had wrong,
Pay what to human justice did belong:
So might I still a crying conscience,
And mortified with a due inward sense
Of deserved death, render my self more fit
To die, and through that purgatory get
Perchance to Paradise. But now in all
My pride of youth and fortune thus to fall,
Thus innocent, is a sad case, a sad—
Nicandro.
Nymph, would to Heaven men had
Sinned against thee, rather then thou against Heaven.
For satisfaction might be easier given
To thee for thy wronged Fame, then unto it
For its wronged Deities. Nor know I yet
Who wronged thee but thy self. Were thou not caught
Alone with the adult'rer in a vault?
To Silvio precontracted were not thou?
And so thy nuptial faith hast broken? How
Then innocent?
For all this have not I
Transgressed the Law: and innocently dye.
Not Natures law perchance, Love where thou wilt.
But that of Men and Heaven, Love without guilt.
Both men and Heaven (if all our fortune be
Derived from thence) transgressed have against me.
For what but an ill destiny could bid
That I should die for what another did?
What was that Nymph? bridle thy tongue (with high
Flown grief transported even to blasphemy).
" The else we suffer our own sins pull down:
" Heaven pardons many wrongs, but it doth none.
I blame in Heaven only my own star:
But one that hath deceived me, more by far.
Then blame thy self, thy self thou did deceive.
I did when I a coz'ner did believe.
"They who desire to be deceived, are not.
Dost think me nought?
Nay ask thy actions that.
"Actions are oft false comments on our hearts.
"Yet those we see, and not the inward parts.
"The heart may be seen too with the eyes of the mind.
"Whithout the senses help those eyes are blind.
"The senses must submit to reasons sway.
"Reason in point of fact must sense obey.
Well; I am sure an honest heart I have.
Prithee who brought thee then into the cave?
My folly and too much credulity.
Thou trustedst with a friend thy honesty?
I trusted a friends honesty.
Thy blood?
Was that the friend thou would have understood?
Ormino's Sister, who betrayed me thither.
"It is sweet when Lovers are betrayed together.
Mirtillo entered without my consent.
How enter'dst thou then? and for what intent?
Let this suffice, it was not for him I came.
It cannot, if no other cause thou name.
Examine him about my innocence.
Him? who hath been the cause of thy offence?
Call her to witness who betrayed me hath.
Why should we hear a witness without faith?
By chaste Diana's dreadful name I swear.
Thou by thy deeds art perjured unto her.
Nymph, I am plain, I cannot flatter thee
Into a hope which in extremity
Will leave thee more confounded; these are dreams.
" A troubled fountain cannot yield pure streams,
" Nor a bad heart good words. And where the deed
" Is evident, Defence offence doth breed.
What dost thou talk? thou should have guarded more
Then thy life now, thy chastity before.
Why dost thou cheat thy self?
O misery!
Must I then dye, Nicandro? must I dye?
None left to hear? none to defend me left?
Of all abandoned? of all hope bereft?
Only of such a mocking pity made
The wretched object as affords no aid?
Be patient Nymph, and give me cause to tell,
Though thou did ill, yet that thou suffredst well.
Look up to heaven, since thence thou drowsed thy birth;
" All good or ill we meet with upon earth
" From thence as from a fountain doth distill.
" And as no good is here unmixed with ill,
" So punishment, that's ill to flesh and blood,
" As to the account we must make there is good.
And if my words have cut thee, it is but like
A faithful Surgeon, who a vein doth strike,
Or thrusts his instrument into the wound
Where it is mortalest and most profound
(In being cruel, merciful). Then be
Content with what is writ in Heaven for thee.
O it is a cruel sentence, whether it
In heaven for me, or in earth be writ:
Yet writ in heaven I'm certain it is not:
For there my innocence is known. But what
Doth that avail me, if that dye I must?
That's the straight narrow passage! to be dust,
Nicandro, that's the bitter cup! But oh!
By that compassion thou to me dost show,
Lead me not to the Temple yet: stay, stay.
" Who fears to dye, dyes every hour of the day.
Why hang thou back? and draw a painful breath?
" Death hath no ill in it, but the fear of death.
" And he that dies when he hath heard his doom,
" Flies from his death.
Perchance some help may come.
Father, dear father, dost thou leave me too?
An only daughters father, wilt thou do
Nothing to save me? Yet before I die
A parting kiss to me do not deny.
Two bosoms shall be pierced with one blow:
And from thy daughter's wound thy blood must flow.
O father! (once so sweet and deer a name,
Which I was never wont to invoke in vain)
Thy beloved Daughter's Wedding call thou this?
To day a Bride; to day a Sacrifice.
Good Nymph no more: why dost thou bootlesly
Stay thus tormenting both thy self and me?
The time calls on: I must convey thee hence,
Nor with my duty longer may dispense.
Deer woods adieu then, my deer woods adieu:
Receive these sighs (my last ones) into you,
Till my cold shade, forced from her seat by dire
And unjust steel, to your loved shades retire.
(For sink to hell it can't, being innocent;
Nor soar to heaven, laden with discontent.)
Mirtillo, (O Mirtillo!) most accursed
The day I saw, the day I pleased thee first!
Since I, whom thou above thy life did love,
Became thy life, that thou my death might prove.
She dies condemned for kindness now to thee,
Whom thou hast still condemned of cruelty,
I might have broke my faith as cheap: Ay me!
Now without fault, or fruit I dye, or Thee
My deer Mirtill—
Alas! she dies indeed.
(Poor wretch!) Come hither shepherds with all speed,
Help me to hold her up. (O piteous case!)
She finished in Mirtillo's name her Race.
(Unhappy maid!) — she breathes yet, and I feel
Some signs of life pant in her bosom still.
To the next fountain let us carry her;
Perchance cold water may recover there
Her fleeting spirits.— Stay, will not relief
Be cruelty to her who dies of grief,
To prevent dying by the Axe? However,
Yet let not us our charity forbear.
" Men ought to lend their aid in present woe:
" What is to come, none but the Gods foreknow.
O Glorious youth! true child of Hercules;
That kilst so soon such monstrous beasts as these!
O glorious youth! by whom lies slain and quilt
This Erimanthian Monster, (living) held
Invincible! Behold the horrid head,
Which seems to breath death when it self is dead!
This is the famous Trophy, noble Toil
Of him whom we our Demigod do stile.
Extol his great name (Shepherds) and this day
Keep ever solemn, ever holy day.
O glorious youth &amp;c.
O glorious youth! that dost despise thine own
For others safeties. " Virtue climbs her Throne
" By these steep stairs: and the high Gods have set
" Before her Palace gates labour and sweat.
" He that would land at joy must wade through woes:
" Nor by unprofitable base repose
" Abhorring labour, but from gallant deeds
 " And virtuous labour true repose proceeds.
O glorious youth, &amp;c.
O glorious youth! by whom these Plains deprived
Of tillage, and of tillers long, retrieved
Their fruitful honours have. The plough-man now
Securely goes after the lazy plough,
Sows his plump seed, and from earth's pregnant womb
Expects the wished fruits when the season's come.
No more shall churlish tusk, or churlish foot
Trample them down, or tear them up by the root.
Nor shall they prosper so as to sustain
A beast, to be their own, and others bane.
O glorious youth! &amp;c.
O glorious youth! as if presaging thine,
The Have'n to day doth in full glory shine.
Such peradventure was that famous Boar
Alcides slew, yet so thy act is more;
It being (Silvio) thy first labour, as
Of thy great Ancestor the third it was.
But with wilde Beasts thy infant valour plays,
To kill more monsters in thy riper days.
O glorious youth! &amp;c.
O glorious youth! how well are joined in thee
Valour and piety! See Cynthia, see
Thy devout Silvio's vow! behold with white
And crooked tusk, (as if in thy despite)
The proud head armed on this side and on that,
Seeming thy silver horns to emulate!
If then (O powerful Goddess) thou did guide
The young mans shaft, he is in justice tide
To dedicate the Trophy unto thee
By whom he did obtain the victory.
O glorious youth, true child of Hercules,
That kill so soon such monstrous beasts as these!
I Have forborne till now to credit what
The Satyr told me of Corisca late,
Fearing it might be some malicious lye
Devised by him to shake my constancy.
For most improbable it seemed, that she
In the same place where she expected me
(Unless the message which Lisetta brought
To me from her were false) should straight be caught
With an adulterer. And yet (the truth
To say) here's a shrewd token, and it doth
Perplex me much, to see the mouth of the den
Just in that manner he related then
Shut and dammed up with such a massy stone.
Ah false Corisca! too well by mine own
Experience of thy ungracious deeds
I know thee now: stumbling so oft, thou needs
Must fall at last. So many frauds, so many
Lies, and vow-breaches might have warned any
(Whom folly or affection did not blair)
That some such fearful tumbling cast was near.
It was well for me I tarried by the way;
A happy chance my father made me stay:
Though then I did suppose him foolishly
To have been a tedious Remora. Had I
Come at Lisetta's hour, I might have seen
Something which poison to my eyes had been.
But what shall I do now? armed with disdain,
Shall I revenge and mischief entertain?
No: I have loved her, and this act doth crave
My pity, not my anger. Shall I have
Pity on one deceived me? Me! she hath
Deceived her self, leaving a man of faith,
To give her self a prey into the hand
Of an ignoble Swain, a stranger and
A vagabond, that will to morrow be
More wavering, more without faith then she.
Shall I take pains then to revenge a wrong
That carries with it the revenge along?
And quenches all my indignation so,
It is turned to pity? She hath scorned me though:
She has honoured me: for she who thus could choose,
Highly commends the man she doth refuse.
She scorned me, who the way did never know,
How she should love receive, or how bestow.
Who liked at random still, or had this curse,
If two were offered her, to take the worse.
But tell me Coridon, how can it be,
If scorn of being scorned move not thee
To take revenge; but that to have been crossed
By such a loss should do it? I have not lost
Her whom I never had: My self I have
Regained, whom I unto another gave.
Nor can't a loss be termed to remain
Without a woman so unsure and vain.
In fine, What have I lost? Beauty without
Virtue: A head with all the brains picked out:
A breast that hath no heart: A heart that hath
No soul in it: A soul that hath no faith.
A shade, a ghost, a carcass of affection,
Which will to morrow turn to putrefaction.
Is this a loss? I will be bold to say 't,
It is a great purchase and a fortunate.
Is there no woman in the world but she?
Can Coridon want Nymphs as fair as she,
And far more true? But she may well want one
Will love her with such faith as Coridon,
Whom she deserved not. Now if I should do
That which the Satyr did advise me to,
Accusing her of vow-breach, in my breath
I know it lies to have her put to death.
But I have not an heart so Aspen, I,
That with the wind of women's levity
It should be moved. Too great a happiness
And honour it were to their perfidiousness,
If with the trouble of a manly breast,
And breaking of the happy peace and rest
Of an ingenuous soul, I were to be
Revenged upon Corisca now. For me
Then let her live: or (to express it better)
By me not die, Live for my Rival let her.
Her life's revenge for me sufficient:
Live let her to dishonour; to repent:
I know not how to envy him, or loath
Her; but with all my heart do pity both.
O Goddess of the slothful, blind, and vain,
Who with foul hearts, Rites foolish and profane,
Altars and Temples hallow to thy name!
Temples? or Sanctuaries vile said I?
To protect Lewdness and impiety,
Under the robe of thy Divinity?
And thou base Goddess: that thy wickedness,
When others do as bad, may seem the less,
Give them the reins to all lasciviousness.
Rotor of soul and body, enemy
Of reason, plotter of sweet thee very,
The little and great World's calamity.
Reputed worthily the Ocean's daughter:
That treacherous monster, which with even water
First soothes, but ruffles into storms soon after.
Such winds of sighs, such Cataracts of tears,
Such breaking waves of hopes, such gulfs of fears,
Thou make in men, such rocks of cold despairs.
Tides of desire so head-strong, as would move
The world to change thy name, when thou shalt prove
Mother of Rage and Tempests, not of Love.
Behold what sorrow now and discontent
On a poor pair of Lovers thou hast sent!
Go thou, that vaunt'st thy self Omnipotent,
Go faithless Goddess, save that Nymph whom thou
Hast poisoned with thy sweets (if thou know how)
From her swift deaths pursuing footsteps now.
O what a happy day was that for me,
When my chaste soul I did devote to thee
Cynthia, my great and only Deity!
True Goddess! unto whose particular shrine
The fairest souls in all the Earth incline,
As thou in Heaven dost all the Stars out-shine.
How much more laudable and free from pain
The sports are which thy servants entertain,
Then those of faithless Ericina's train!
Wilde Boars are killed by thy Worshippers:
By wilde Boars miserably kilt are hers.
O Bow, my strength and joy! My conquerors
My Arrows! Let that bug-bear Love come try
And match with you his soft Artillery.
They whom you wound do in good earnest die.
But too much honour hence to thee would come,
Vile and unwarlike Boy, to chastise whom
(I speak't aloud) a rod's enough. Enough.
What art thou that reply'st? Echo? or Love?
That so doth imitate the same? The same.
Most wished! but tell me true; Art thou hee? Hee.
The son of her that for Atones once
So miserably pined away? Away.
Well: of that Goddess who was found in bed
With Mars, when the stars shot to see her shame,
And the chaste Moon blushed at her folly? O lie!
What madness it is to whistle to the wind!
Come (if thou dare) to the wide air, I dare.
And I defy thee. But art thou her son
Legitimate, or else a by-blow? I glow.
O! the Smith's son that's called a God. A God.
Of what? the follies of the world? The world.
The Bawd thou art. Art thou that terrible Boy
That take such sharp revenge upon those wights
Who thy absurd commands digest not? Jest not.
What punishments dost thou inflict on those
Who in rebellion persevere? Severe.
And how shall I be punished, whose hard heart
Hath always been at odds with Love? With Love.
When (Sot), if my chaste breast be to those flames
More opposite then night to day? To day.
So quickly shall I be in that straight? Straight.
What's she can bring me to adoring? Dorin.
Dorinda, is it not, my little child,
Thou would say in thy lithping gibberish? Each.
She whom I hate more then the Lamb the Wolf?
And who to this shall force my will? I will.
And how? and with what Arms? and with what bow?
Shall it be happily with thine? With thine.
Thou mean perchance, when by thy wantonness
It is unbent, and the nerve broken? Broken.
Shall my own bow, after it is broken too,
Make war on me? and who shall break't? thou? Thou.
It is plain now thou art drunk: go sleep. But say,
Where shall these miracles be wrought? here? Here.
O fool! and I am going now from hence.
See if thou hast not proved thy self to day
A prophet with the wine inspired. Inspired.
But stay, I see (unless I much mistake)
A grayish thing at couch in yonder Brake:
It is like a Wolf, and certainly it is one.
O what a huge one it is! how over-grown!
O day of prey to me! What favours are
These, courteous goddess? in one day a pair
Of such wilde beasts to triumph ore? But why
Do I delay this work, my Deity?
The swiftest and the keenest shaft that is
In all my Quiver (let me see,— it is this)
I do select: to thee I recommend it
(O Archeresse eternal) do thou send it
By Fortunes hand, and by thy power divine
Guide it into the beast. His skin is thine.
And in thy name I shoot. O lucky hit!
Just where the eye and hand designed it.
Would now I had my javelin here, to make
An end of him at once, before he take
The wood for shelter: but the place shall yield
Me weapons. Not a stone in all the field?
But why do I seek weapons, having these?
This second arrow lays him at his ease.
Alas! what do I see? what hast thou done,
Unhappy Silvio? what hast thou run
Thy self into? Thou hast a shepherd slain
In a wolfe's skin. O action to remain
For ever overwhelmed with grief! to lie
Under salt water everlastingly!
The wretch too I should know, and he that so
Doth lead and prop him up is Linco. O
Vile arrow! viler vow! but vilest Thou
That did direct that arrow, hear that vow!
I guilty of another blood? I kill
Another? I that was so free to spill
My blood for others, and my life to give?
Throw down thy weapons, and inglorious live,
Shooter of men, hunter of men. But lo
The wretched Swain! then thee less wretched though.
LEan, daughter, on my arm with all thy weight,
(Wretched Dorinda) do.
Dorinda's that?
I'm a dead man.
O Linco, Linco! O
My second Father!
It is Dorinda: woe,
Woe on thee Silvio!
Linco, thou were sure
Ordained by Fate to be a stay to poor
Dorinda. Thou received my first cry
When I was born: Thou wilt, now I'm to dye,
My latest groan: and these thy arms which were
My cradle then, shall now become my bier.
Ah daughter! (or more deer then if thou were
My daughter) speak now to thee for my heart
I can't, grief melts each word into a tear.
Not so fast Linco, if thou love me: deer
Linco, nor go, nor weep so fast; one rakes
My wound too bad, t'other a new wound makes.
(Poor Nymph! how ill have I repaid thy love!)
Be of good comfort daughter, this will prove
No mortal wound.
It may be so; but I
That am a Mortal, of this wound shall die.
Would I knew yet who hurt me!
Get thee sound,
And let that pass: "Revenge ne'er cured a wound.
(Why dost thou stay? what make thou in this place?
Would thou be seen by her? Hast thou the face?
Hast thou the heart t'indure it? Silvio, flee
From the sharp dart of her revenging eye:
Fly from her tongues just sword. I cannot go
From hence: and what it is I do not know,
But something holds me, and would make me run
To her whom I of all the world did shun.)
Must I then die and not my Murderer know?
It was Silvio.
How dost know it was Silvio?
I know his shaft.
Then welcome death, if I
Shall owe thee to so sweet an enemy!
Look where he stands! we need demand no further,
His posture and his face confess the murder
Alone. Now Heaven be praised Silvio,
Thy all-destroying Arrows and thy Bow
The hast plied so well about these woods, that now
The art gone out thy Arts-master. Tell me, thou
That dost like Silvio, not like Linco, who
Made this brave shoot, Linco or Silvio?
This it is for boys to be so overwise:
Would thou had taken this old fools advice!
Answer, thou wretch: What lingering misery,
What horror shalt thou live in if she die?
I know thou't say, thou err'dst, and though to strike:
A Wolf: as if'twere nothing (school-boy like)
To shoot at all adventures, and not see,
Nor care, whether a man or beast it be.
What Goat-herd, or what plough-man doth not go
Clad in such skins? O Silvio, Silvio!
"Soon ripe, soon rotten. If thou think (fond child)
This chance by chance befell thee, the art beguiled.
" These monstrous things without Divine decree
" Hap not to men. Dost thou not plainly see
How this thy unsupportable disdain
Of Love, the world, and all that is humane
Displeases Heaven? " High Gods cannot abide
" A Rival upon earth: and hate such pride,
" Although in virtue. Now you are mute, that were
Before this hap unsufferably pert.
Silvio, give Linco leave to talk: for hee
Knows not what power Love gave thee over me
Of life and death. If thou had struck my heart,
The had struck what's thine (mark proper for thy dart.)
Those hands to wound me thy fair eyes have taught.
See Silvio her thou hat'st so! see her brought
To that extremity where thou would see her!
Thou sought to wound her, see her wounded here!
To prey upon here, lo she is thy prey!
Thou sought her death, and lo she's dying! Say,
Would thou ought else of her? What further joy
Can poor Dorinda yield thee? Cruel Boy!
And void of Bowels! thou would ne'er believe
That wound which from thy eyes I did receive:
This which thy hands have given can thou deny?
Those crystal showrs which issued from my eye,
Thou could not be persuaded were my blood:
What dost thou think now of this crimson flood
Which my side weeps? But (if orewhelm'd with scorn
That bravery be not wherewith thou were born)
Deny me not (though cruel soul, yet brave)
Deny me not (it is all the boon I crave)
When I shall sigh into thee my last breath,
One sigh of thine. O happy, happy death!
If thou vouchsafe to sweeten it with these
Kind words and pious; Soul depart in peace.
Dorinda, my Dorinda, shall I say
(Alas!) when I must lose thee the same day
You are mine? now mine, when death to thee I give,
That were not mine when I could make thee live?
Yes mine I'll call thee: and thou mine shalt be
In spite of my opposing destiny.
For if thy death our meeting souls disjoin,
My death shall reunite us. All that's mine
Haste to revenge her: I have murdered thee
With these cursed arrows; with them murder me.
I have been cruel unto thee; and I
Desire from thee nothing but cruelty.
I scorned thee in my pride; look! with my knee
(Low louting to the earth) I worship thee,
And pardon of thee, but not life demand.
Take Shafts and Bow: But do not strike my hand
Or eye (bad ministers, it is true, yet still)
But ministers of an unguilty will:
Strike me this breast, this monster hence remove,
Sworn enemy of Pity, and of Love.
Strike me this heart, to thee so cruel. Lo,
My bared breast!
I strike it, Silvio?
I strike that breast? sure if thou did not mock,
Thou would not show it me naked. O white rock!
Already by the winds and briny main
Of my rough sighs and tears oft struck in vain!
But dost thou breath? nor art to pity barred?
Art thou a tender breast, or marble hard?
I would not idolise fair Alabaster,
(Led by the humane likeness) as thy Master
And mine, when on the outside he did look,
A harmless woman for a beast mistook.
I strike thee? strike thee Love. Nor can I wish
For my revenge a greater plague then this.
Yet must I bless the day that I took fire,
My tears and martyrdom. All I desire
Is that thou praise my faith, my zeal, but no
Revenging me. But courteous Silvio,
(That to thy servant kneel'st) why this to me?
Or if Dorinda must thy Mistress be,
Obey her then; the first command I give,
Is that thou rise; the second, that thou live.
Heavens Will be done with me: I shall survive
In thee, and cannot dye, whilst you're alive.
But if thou think unjust I should be found
Without all satisfaction for my wound,
Be that, which did it, punished. It was that Bow:
Let that be broke; I'm well revenged so.
(A very heavy doom).
Come then thou mad,
Thou bloody actor of a deed so sad:
That thou moist ne'er break thread of life again,
Thus do I break thee and thy thread in twain,
And send thee a useless trunk back to the wood.
Nor you (ill sanguined with an innocents blood!)
Which my deer Mistress side so rudely rent,
(Brothers in ill) shall scope your punishment.
Not shafts, nor flights, but sticks, since ye shall want
Those wings and heads which garnished you: Avaunt
Plumed and disarmed Arms. How well, O Love,
Did thou foretell me this from yonder grove
In a prophetic Echo! O thou high
Conqueror of Gods and men, once enemy,
Now lord of all my thoughts! if it is thy glory
To tame a heart that's proud and refractory,
Divert Death's impious shaft, which with one blow
Slaying Dorinda, will slay Silvio
(Now thine): so cruel death, if it remove
Her hence, will triumph over triumphant Love.
Now both are wounded: but the one in vain,
Unless the other's wound be healed again.
About it then.
Ah Linco! do not (pray)
Carry me home disguised in this array.
Why should Dorinda go to any house
But Silvio's? surely she shall be my Spouse
Here it be night, either alive, or dead.
And Silvio in life or death will wed
Dorinda.
Now she may become thy Wife,
Since Amarillis is to marriage, life,
And virtue lost. Blessed pair! Ye Gods (that doe
Wonders) with one cure now give life to two.
O Silvio! I shall faint, my wounded thigh
Feebly supporting me.
Good remedy
For that! take heart: you are mine and Linco's care,
And I and Linco thy two crutches are.
Linco, thy hand.
There it is.
Hold fast: a chair
Let's make for her of our two arms. Rest here
Dorinda, suffering thy right hand to embrace
The neck of Linco, thy left mine: Now place
Thy body tenderly, that the hurt part
May not be strained.
O cruel pricking dart!
Sit at more ease, my Love.
It is well now.
Deer Linco do not stagger.
Nor do thou
Swag with thine arm, but steady go and wary
It will concern thee. Ah! we do not carry
A Boars head now in triumph.
Say, my Deer,
How is it now?
In pain; but leaning here
(My Heart) to be in pain, is pleased to be;
To languish, health; to die, eternity.
FAir golden Age! when milk was the only food,
And cradle of the infant-world the wood
(Rocked by the winds); and the untouched flocks did bear
Their deer young for themselves! None yet did fear
The sword or poison: no black thoughts begun
To eclipse the light of the eternal Sun:
Nor wandering Pines unto a foreign shore
Or War, or Riches, (a worse mischief) bore.
That pompous sound, Idol of vanity,
Made up of Title, Pride, and Flattery,
Which they call Honour whom Ambition blinds,
Was not as yet the Tyrant of our minds.
But to buy real goods with honest toil
Amongst the woods and flocks, to use no guile,
Was honour to those sober souls that knew
No happiness but what from virtue grew.
Then sports and carols amongst Brooks and Plains
Kindled a lawful flame in Nymphs and Swains.
Their hearts and Tongues concurred, the kiss and joy
Which were most sweet, and yet which least did cloy
Hymen bestowed on them. To one alone
The lively Roses of delight were blown;
The thievish Lover found them shut on trial,
And fenced with prickles of a sharp denial.
Were it in Cave or Wood, or purling Spring,
Husband and Lover signified one thing.
Base present age, which dost with thy impure
Delights the beauty of the soul obscure:
Teaching to nurse a Dropsy in the veins:
Bridling the look, but give desire the reins.
Thus, like a net that spread and covered lies
With leaves and tempting flours, thou dost disguise
With coy and holy arts a wanton heart;
" Make life a Stage-play, virtue but a part:
" Nor think it any fault Love's sweets to steal,
" So from the world thou can the theft conceal.
But thou that art the King of Kings, create
In us true honour: Virtue's all the state
Great souls should keep. Unto these cells return
Which were thy Court, but now thy absence mourn:
From their dead sleep with thy sharp goad awake
Them who, to follow their base wills, forsake
Thee, and the glory of the ancient world.
" Let's hope: our ills have truce till we are hurled
" From that: Let's hope; the sun that's set may rise,
" And with new light salute our longing eyes.
" ALl places are our Country where w'are well:
Which to the wise is wheresoever they dwell.
It is most true Vranio: and no man
By proof can say it better then I can:
Who leaving long ago my Fathers house,
(Being very young, and then ambitious
Of something more then holding of the plough,
Or keeping sheep) travelled abroad: and now
To the same point where I began, return,
When my gilt locks are to the silver worn.
" Yet a sweet thing (it needs must be confessed)
" To any that hath sense, is his first nest.
" For Nature gave to all men at their birth
" Something of secret love unto that Earth
" Where they were born, which never old doth grow
" In us, but follows wheresoever we go.
" The Loadstone which the wary Mariner
" Doth as Directer of his travels bear
" Now to the rising Sun, now to his set,
" Doth never lose that hidden virtue yet,
" Which makes it to the North retort its look:
" So he that hath his native soil forsook,
" Though he may wander far, much compass take,
" I, and his nest in foreign Countries make;
" Yet that same natural love doth still retain
" Which makes him wish his native soil again.
O fair Arcadia! the sweetest part
Of all the world (at least to me thou art)
Which my feet trod on, but my thoughts adore!
Had I been landed blindfold on thy shore,
Yet then I should have known thee, such a flood
Of sudden joy runs races with my blood:
Such a Magnetic powerful sympathy,
And unaccustomed tenderness feel I.
Thou then, that my companion hast been
In travels and in sorrows, shalt be in
At my joys too: it is reason thou should go
My half in happiness, as well as woe.
Companion of thy travels I have been,
Not of the fruit thereof; for thou art in
Thy native soil, where thou repose moist find
For thy tired body, and more tired mind:
But I that am a stranger, and am come
So many leagues from my poor house, and from
My poorer and distressed Family,
Trailing my wearied limbs along with thee,
For my afflicted body well may find
Repose, but not for my afflicted mind:
Thinking what pledges do behind remain,
And how much rugged way I must again
Tread over ever I rest. Nor do I know
Who else could have prevailed with me to go
From Elis in my gray unwieldy age
(Not knowing why) so long a pilgrimage.
Thou know, my sweet Mirtillo (who was given
As a son to me by propitious Heaven)
Some two months since came hither to be well
(By my advice, or of the Oracle,
To speak more true, which said, The Arcadian air
Was the only means that could his health repair.)
Now I, that find it an exceeding pain
Without so deer a pledge long to remain,
Consulting the same Oracle, enquired
When he'd return whom I so much desired.
The Answer was the same I tell thee now;
Unto thy ancient Country return thou;
Where with thy sweet Mirtillo thou shalt be
Happy; for in that place (by Heaven) hee
Is marked out for great things: But till thou come
Into Arcadia, touching this be dumb.
Thou then, my faithfullest Companion,
My loved Vranio, who hast ever gone.
A share in all my fortunes hithertō,
Repose thy body, and thou shalt have too
Cause to repose thy mind: twixt me and thee
(If Heaven perform what it hath promised me)
All shall be common: no success can glad
Carino, if he see Vranio sad.
My deer Carino, what I do for thee,
Rewards it self, if it accepted be.
But what at first could make thee to forgo
Thy native Country, if thou love it so?
A love to Poetry, and to the loud
Music of Fame resounding in a crowd.
For I my self (greedy of foreign praise)
Disdained Arcadia only should my Lays
Hear and applaud: as if my native Soil
Were narrow limits to my growing Style.
I went to Elis, and to Pisa then,
(Famous themselves, and giving fame to men)
There saw I that loved Egon, first with Baize,
With Purple then, with Virtue decked always:
That he on earth Apollo's self did seem:
Therefore my heart and Harp I unto him
Did consecrate, devoted to his name.
And in his house (which was the house of Fame)
I should have set up my perpetual rest,
There to admire and imitate the best,
If as Heaven made me happy here below,
So it had gi'n me too the grace to know
And keep my happiness. How I forsook
Elis and Pisa after, and betook
My self to Argos and Micene, where
An earthly god I worshipped, with what there
I suffered in that hard captivity,
Would be too long for thee to hear, for me
Too sad to utter. Only thus much know,
I lost my labour, and in sand did sow:
I writ, wept, sung, hot and cold fits I had,
I rid, I stood, I bore, now sad, now glad,
Now high, now low, now in esteem, now scorned;
And as the Delphic iron, which is turned
Now to Heroic, now Mechanic use,
I feared no danger, did no pains refuse,
Was all things, and was nothing; changed my hair,
Condition, custom, thoughts, and life, but ne'er
Could change my fortune. Then I knew at last
And panted after my sweet freedom past.
So flying smoky Argos, and the great
Storms that attend on greatness, my retreat
I made to Pisa (my thoughts quiet port)
Where (praise be given to the Eternal for it)
Upon my deer Mirtillo I did light,
Which all past sorrows fully did requite.
" A thousand thousand times that man is blessed
" Can clip the wings of his aspiring breast!
" Nor for the shadow of great happiness
" Doth throw away the substance of the less!
But who'd have dreamt midst plenty to grow poor?
Or to be less by toiling to be more?
I thought by how much more in Princes Courts
Men did excel in Titles and Supports,
So much the more obliging they would be
(The best enamel of Nobility).
But now the contrary by proof I've seen:
Courtiers in name, and Courteous in their men
They are; but in their actions I could spy
Not the least-spark or drachma of Curtsy.
People in show smooth as the calmed waves:
Yet cruel as the Ocean when it raves.
Men in appearance only I did find,
Love in the face, but malice in the mind:
With a straight look a squinting heart; and least
Fidelity where greatest was professed.
That which elsewhere is virtue, is vice there:
Plain troth, square dealing, love unfeigned, sincere
Compassion, faith inviolable, and
An innocence both of the heart and hand,
They count the folly of a soul that's vile
And poor, a vanity worthy their smile.
To cheat, to lie, deceit and theft to use,
And under show of pity to abuse,
To rise upon the ruins of their Brothers,
And seek their own by robbing praise from others,
The virtues are of that perfidious race.
No worth, no valour, no respect of place,
Of Age, or Law, bridle of modesty,
No tie of love, or blood, nor memory
Of good received; no thing's so venerable,
Sacred or just, that is inviolable
By that vast thirst of Riches, and desire
Unquenchable of still ascending higher.
Now I (not fearing, since I meant not ill,
And in Court-craft not having any skill,
Wearing my thoughts caracterd in my brow,
And a glasse-window in my breast) judge thou
How open and how fair a mark my heart
Lay to their Envie's unsuspected dart.
" Who now can boast of earth's felicity,
" When Envy treads on virtues heels?
O my
Vranio, If since my Muse and I
From Elis past to Argos, I had found
Such cause to sing, as I had ample ground
To weep, perchance in such a lofty key
I'd sung my Master's glorious Arms, that hee
Should have no cause, for the felicity
Of his Meonian trumpet to envy
Achilles: and my Country (which doth bring
Such haplesse Poets forth as Swan-like sing
Their own sad fates) should by my means have now
A second Laurel to impale her brow.
But in this age (inhumane age the while!)
The art of Poetry is made too vile.
" Swans must have pleasant nests, high feeding, fair
" Weather to sing: and with a load of care
" Men cannot climb Parnassus cliff: for he
" Who is still wrangling with his Destiny
" And his malignant fortune, becomes hoarse,
" And loses both his singing and discourse.
— But now it is time to seek Mirtillo out:
Although I find the places hereabout
So changed and altered from their ancient wont,
I for Arcadia in Arcadia hunt.
But come Vranio gladly for all this;
A traveller with language cannot miss
His way: Or, since you are weary, thou were best
To stay at the next Inn to take some rest.
WHich first, my Daughter, shall I mourn in thee,
Thy loss of Life, or of thy Chastity?
I'll mourn thy Chastity: for thou were born
Of mortal parents, but not bad. I'll mourn
Not thy life lost, but mine preserved, to see
Thy loss of Life, and of thy Chastity.
Thou with thy Oracles mysterious cloud
(Wrongly conceived Montano,) and thy proud
Despiser both of love, and of my Daughter,
Unto this miserable end hast brought her.
Ay me! how much more certain at this time
My Oracles have showed themselves then thine!
" For honesty in a young heart doth prove
" But a weak sconce against assaulting love.
" And it is most true, a woman that's alone,
" Hath a most dangerous companion.
Were he not under ground, or flown through th'air,
I should have found him sure. But soft, he's there
(I think) where least I thought. You are met by me
Too late, old Father, but too soon for thee:
I've news.
What bring thou in thy mouth? the knife
That hath bereft my Daughter of her life?
Not that; yet little less. But how I pray
Got thou this news so soon another way?
Doth she then live?
She lives, and in her choice
It is to Live or Die.
Blessed be that voice!
Why is she then not safe, if she may give
Her no to death?
Because she will not live.
Will not? what madness makes her life despise?
Another death. And (if that thy advice
Remove her not) she is thereon so bent▪
That all the world cannot her death prevent.
Why stand we talking here then? Let us go.
Stay: yet the Temple's shut. Dost thou not know
That none but holy feet on holy earth
May tread, till from the vestry they bring forth
The destined Sacrifice in all it's trim?
But before that—
She's watched.
In the interim
Relate then all that's past, and to me show
The truth unveiled.
Thy wretched Daughter (Oh
Sad spectacle!) being brought before the Priest,
Did not alone from the beholders wrest
Salt tears; but (trust me) made the marble melt,
And the hard flint the dint of pity felt.
She was accused, convict, and sentence past
All in a trice.
(Poor girl!) and why such haste?
Because the evidence was clear as day:
Besides, a certain Nymph (who she did say
Could witness she was guiltless) was not there,
Nor could by any search be brought to appear.
Then the dire Omens of some threatened ill
And horrid visions which the Temple fill
Brook no delay, to us more frightful far,
By how much more unusual they are,
Nor ever seen, since the vexed Powers above
Revenged the wrong of scorned Aminta's Love.
(Who was their Priest whence all our woes had birth)
The Goddess sweats cold drops of blood, the Earth
Is Palsey-shook; the sacred Cavern howls
With such unwonted sounds as tortured souls
Send out of graves, and belches up a smell
From its fowl jaws, scarce to be matched in hell.
His sad Procession now the Priest began
To lead to a bloody death thy Daughter, when
Mirtillo seeing her, (behold a strange
Proof of Affection!) proffered to exchange
His life for hers; crying aloud, Her hands
Untie (Ah how unworthy of such bands!)
And in her stead (who is designed to be
A Sacrifice to Dian) offer me
A sacrifice to Amarillis.
There
Spake a true Lover, and above base fear!
The wonder follows: she that was afraid
Before of dying, on the sudden made
Now valiant by Mirtillo's words, replied,
Thus, with a heart at death unterrifi'd,
But dost thou think (Mirtillo) then to give
Life by thy death to her, who in thee doth live?
It cannot, must not be: Come Priests, away
With me to the Altar now without delay.
Ah! (cried the Swain) such love I did not lack:
Back cruel Amarillis, O come back:
Now thou art more unkind then ever thou were:
It is I should die. Quoth she, thou act'st my part.
And here between them grew so fierce a strife,
As if that life were death, and death were life.
O noble souls! O Pair eternally
To be renowned, whether ye live or die!
O glorious Lovers! if I had tongues more
Then Heaven hath eyes, or sands are on the shore,
Their voices would be drowned in the main-
Sea of your endless Praises, Glorious Dame,
Daughter of Jove (eternal as thy Father)
That Mortals deeds immortallizest, gather
Thou the fair story, and in diamond pages
With golden letters write to after ages
The bravery of both Lovers.
But who wan
The conquest in that strife of death?
The Man.
Strange war! which to the victor death did give,
And where the vanquished was condemned to live.
For thus unto thy daughter spake the Priest;
Nymph, let's alone, and set thy heart at rest;
Changed for another none can be again,
Who for another in exchange was taken.
This is our Law. Then a strict charge he gave,
Upon the Maid such careful watch to have,
As that she might not lay a violent hand
Upon her self through sorrow. Thus did stand
The state of matters, when in search of thee
Montano sent me.
It is most true I see,
" Well-water'd Meads may be without sweet flowers
" In Spring; without their verdant honour Bowers;
" And without chirping birds a pleasant Grove;
" Here a fair maid and young without her Love.
But if we loiter here, how shall we know
The hour when to the Temple we should go?
Here better then elsewhere: For here it is
The honest Swain must be a sacrifice.
And why not in the Temple?
Because in
The place it was done our law doth punish sin.
Then why not in the cave? The sin was there.
Because it must be in the open air.
By whom hast thou these mysteries been told?
By the chief Minister, and hee by old
Tirenio; who the false Lucrina knew
So sacrificed, and Aminta true.
But now it is time to go indeed; for see,
The sacred pomp descends the hill! yet wee
May for thy daughter to the Temple go
Before they come: "Devotion marches slow.
SOl's sister, Daughter of great Iupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!
Thou whose life-giving, and more temperate Ray
Thy Brother's burning fury doth allay;
Whence bounteous Nature here produces after
All her blessed off-springs, and Air, Earth, and Water
Enriches and augments with Vegetals,
With Creatures sensitive, with Rationals.
Ah, pity thy Arcadia, and that rage
Thou dost in others, in thy self assuage!
Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Iupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!
Now sacred Ministers the Altars dress:
You likewise Swains, that show your selves no less
Devout then they, your voices all unite,
And once again invoke the Queen of Night.
Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Iupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!
Now shepherds and my servants all,
Withdraw your selves, and come not till I call.
Valiant young man (who to bestow upon
Another, life, abandonest thine own)
Die with this comfort: For a puff of breath
(Which by the abject spirit is called death)
Thou buy'st Eternity: and when the tooth
Of envious Time (consuming the world's youth)
Millions of lesser names devoured hath,
Then thou shalt live the pattern of true faith.
But for the Law commands that thou should die
A silent Sacrifice, before thou ply
Thy knee to earth, if thou would ought deliver,
Speak; and hereafter hold thy peace for ever.
Father, (for though thou kill me, yet I must
Give thee that name) My body to the dust,
Whereof'twas made and kneaded up, I give;
My Soul to her in whom alone I live.
But if she die, (as she hath vowed) of me
What part (alas!) will then surviving be?
How sweet will death be unto me, if I
In mine own person, not in hers, may die!
And if he merit pity at his death
Who for mere pity now resigns his breath,
Take care (deer Father) of her life, that I
Winged with that hope, t'a better life may fly.
Let my Fate rest at my destruction,
Stop at my ruin; but when I am gone,
Let my divorced soul in her survive,
Although from her I was divorced alive.
(Scarcely can I refrain from weeping now:
O our mortality how frail art thou!)
Son be of comfort, for I promise thee
I will perform all thou desire of me:
Here's my hand on it, and solemnly I swear,
Even by this Metered head.
Then vanish fear.
And now for the most faithful soul make room,
For (Amarillis) unto thee I come.
With the sweet name of Amarillis I
Close up my mouth, and silent kneel to die.
Now sacred Ministers, the Rites begin;
With liquid odoriferous Gumms keep in
The flame, and strewing frank incense and myrrh,
Whole clouds of perfume to the Gods prefer.
Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Iupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!
DId ever man so many houses view,
And the inhabitants thereof so few?
But see the cause! If I mistake me not,
They're gotten all together here: O what
A troop! how rich! how solemn! It is sure
Some Sacrifice.
Give me the golden Ewre
With the red wine, Nicandro.
There.
So may
Soft pity in thy breast revive to day
By this unguilty blood (Goddess divine)
As by the sprinkling of these drops of wine
This pale and dying flame revives. Set up
The golden Ewre. Reach me the silver cup.
So may the burning wrath he quenched, which in
Thy breast was kindled by a false Maid's sin,
As with this water (powered out like our tears)
I quench this flame.
'T's a Sacrifice: but whore's
The offering?
Now ell's prepared, there lacks
Only the fatal stroke. Lend me the Axe.
I see a thing (unless my eyes mistake)
Like a man kneeling this way with his back.
Is he the offering? It is so: Ah wretch!
And o'er his head the Priest his hand doth stretch.
O my poor Country! after all these years
Is not Heavens wrath yet quenched with blood and tears?
Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Iupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!
Revengeful Goddess, who a private fault
With public rod dost punish: (Thou hast thought
Fit so to doe, and so in the Abyss
Of Providence eternal fixed it is)
Since faithless Lucrin's tainted blood was thought
For thy nice Justice too impure a draught:
Carouse the guiltless blood then of this Swain,
By me now at thy Altar to be slain
A willing Sacrifice, and to his Lass
As true a Lover as Aminta was.
Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Iupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!
Ah, how my breast with pity now relents!
What sudden numnesse fetters every sense!
I ne'er was so before; To lift this Axe
My hands lack strength, and my heart courage lacks.
I'll see the wretches face, and so be gone:
For such dire sights I cannot look upon.
Perhaps the Sun, though setting will not look
On humane Sacrifice, and I am struck
Therefore with horror. Shepherd, change thy place,
And to the Mountain turn thy dying face.
So, now it is well.
Alas, what gaze I at?
Is 't not my Son? Is 't not Mirtillo, that?)
Now I can do it.
It is he.)
And aim my blow—
Hold sacred Minister, what dost thou do?
Nay thou, profane rash man, how dare thou thus
Impose a sacrilegious hand on us?
O all my joy Mirtillo! I ne'er thought —
(Avaunt old man, that dot'st, or art distraught,)
To embrace thee in this sort.
Avaunt, I say
It is not lawful impure hands to lay
Upon things sacred to the gods.
It was they
That sent me to this place.
Nicandro, stay,
We will hear him, and then let him go his way.
Ah, courteous Minister! before thy hand
Upon the life of this young man descend,
Tell me but why he dyes. This I implore
By that Divinity thou dost adore.
By such a Goddess thou conjur'st me, that
I should be impious to deny. But what
Concerns it thee?
More then thou dost suppose.
Because to die he for another chose.
Then I will die for him: O, take in stead
Of his, this old already tottering head.
Thou rav'st friend.
Why am I denied that now
Which unto him was granted?
Because thou
A stranger art.
And if I should prove none,
What then?
Although thou should, it were all one;
Because he cannot be exchanged again
Who for another in exchange was taken.
But who art thou, if thou no stranger be?
Thy habit speaks thee not of Arcade.
Yet am I an Arcadian.
I did ne'er
See thee before (to my remembrance) here.
My name's Carino; I was born hard by:
(This wretche's Father who is now to die)
Hence, hence, lest through thy fond paternal love
Our Sacrifice should vain and fruitless prove.
O if thou were a Father!
I am one:
I, and the Father of an only Son.
A tender Father too; yet if this were
My Silvio's head (by Silvio's head I swear)
I would as forward be to do to his
What I must do to this. " For no man is
" Worthy this sacred Robe, but he that can
" For public good put off the private man.
Yet let me kiss him here he die.
Nor touch.
O mine own flesh and blood! art thou so much
A tyrant to me too, as to afford
To thy afflicted Parent not one word?
Dear Father, Peace.
Alas! we are all spoiled:
The sacrifice (O Heavens!) is defiled.)
That blood, that life which thou did give to me,
Spent for a better cause can never be.
Did I not say his vow of silence hee
Would break, when he his Fathers tears should see?
That such a gross mistake I should commit!
My vow of silence I did quite forget.
But Ministers, why do ye gazing stay?
Him to the Temple quickly reconvay.
There in the holy Cloister again take
The voluntary Oath of him: then back
Returning him with pomp along with you
For a new Sacrifice bring all things new,
New fire, and new water, and new wine.
Quickly: for Phoebus doth apace decline.
NOw thou old doting fool: thank Heaven thou art
His Father; for (by Heaven) unless thou were,
To day I'd make thee feel my fury, since
Thou hast so much abused my Patience.
Know thou who I am? Know thou that this wand
Doth both Divine and Humane things command?
" Let not the Priest of Heaven offended be
" For begging mercy.
I have suffered thee
Too long, and that hath made thee insolent.
Dost thou not know, " when anger wants vent
" In a just bosom, it is gathering strength
" Within and bursts out with more force at length?
" Anger was never in a noble mind
" A furious tempest: but a gentle wind
" Of Passion only, which but stirs the soul,
 " (Where Reason still doth keep her due control)
Lest it should grow a standing pool, unfit
For virtuous action. If I cannot get
Thee to extend that mercy which I crave,
Afford me justice; this I ought to have
From thee. " For they who laws to others give,
" Ought not themselves without all law to live.
" And he that is advanced to greater sway,
" Him that requires Justice must obey.
•nd (Witness) I require it now of thee;
•o't for thy self, if thou wilt not for me.
Thou art unjust if thou Mirtillo slay.
I prithee how?
To me did thou not say,
Thou might not offer here a strangers blood?
I did: and said what Heaven commanded.
Good:
This is a stranger then.
A stranger? what?
•he not then thy Son?
Ell's one for that.
Is it that thou got him in a foreign land?
The more thou seek, the less thou't understand.
It skils not here, where, but by whom hoe's got.
I call him stranger, cause I got him not.
Is hee thy Son then, and not got by thee?
I said he was my Son; not born of me.
Thy grief hath made thee mad.
I would it had!
• should not feel my grief, if I were mad.
Thou art or mad, or impious, choose thou whether.
For telling the truth to thee I am neither.
How can both these (son and not son) be true?
Son of my Love, not of my Loins.
Go to;
He is no stranger, if he be thy Son:
If he be not, to thee no harm is done.
So Father, or not Father, the art confuted.
"Truth is truth still: though it be ill disputed.
" That man that utters contradictions must
" Speak one untruth.
Thy action is unjust,
I say again.
Let all this action's guilt
Light on my head, and on my Son's.
Thou wilt
Repent it.
Thou shalt, if thou wilt not take
Thy hands from off me.
My appeal I make
To men and Gods.
To God, despised by thee?
And if thou wilt not hear, hearken to me
O Heaven and Earth! and thou great Goddess here
Adored! Mirtillo is a Foreigner,
No Son of mine: the holy Sacrifice
Thou dost profane.
Bless me good Heavens from this
Strange man! Say then, if he be not thy Son,
Who is his Father?
It is to me unknown.
Is he thy kinsman?
Neither.
Why dost thou then
Call him thy Son?
Because from the instant when
I had him first, I bred him as mine own
Still with a fatherly affection.
From
Did buy him? steal him? from whence had him?
Elis (the gift of a strange man).
From whom
Had that strange man him?
That strange man? why he
Had him of me before.
Thou move in me
At the same time both laughter and disdain:
What thou give him, did he give thee again?
I gave to him what was his own; then he
Returned it as his courteous gift to me.
And whence had thou (since thou wilt make me mad
For company) that which from thee he had?
Within a thicket of sweet Myrtle, I
Had newly found him accidentally,
Near to Alfeo's mouth, and called him thence
Mirtillo.
With what likely circumstance
Thou dost thy lye embroider? Are there any
Wild beasts within that Forest?
Very many.
Why did not they devour him?
A strong flood
Had carried him into that tuft of wood,
And left him in the lap of a small Isle
Defended round with water.
Thou dost file
One Lye upon another well. And was
The flood so pitiful to let him pass
Undrown'd? Such nurses in thy Country are
The Brooks, to foster infants with such care?
He lay within a cradle, which with mud
And other matter gathered by the flood
Calk't (to keep out the water) like a Boat
Had to that thicket carried him afloat.
Within a cradle lay he?
Yes.
A child
In swathing bands?
A sweet one; and it smiled.
How long ago might this be?
It is soon cast:
Since the great Flood some twenty years are past,
And then it was.
What horror do I feel
Creep thorough my veins!
He's silenced, and yet will
Be obstinate. " O the strange pride of those
" In place! who conquered, yield not: but suppose,
" Because that they have all the wealth, with it
" They must be Masters too of all the wit.
Sure hoe's convinced; and it doth vex him too,
As by his mutt'ring he doth plainly show:
And one may see some colour he would find
To hide the error of a haughty mind.
But that strange man of whom thou tel'st me, what
Was he unto the child? his father?
That
I do not know.
Nor did thou ever know
More of the man then thou hast told me?
No.
Why all these Questions?
If thou saw him now,
Should know him?
Yes; he had a beetle-brow,
A down-look, middle-stature, with black hair,
His beard and eye-browes did with bristles stare.
Shepherds &amp; servants mine, approach.
W'are here.
Which of these shepherds who do now appear,
To him thou talk of likest seems to thee?
Not only like him, but the same is hee
Whom thou talk with: and still the man doth show
The same he did some twenty years ago,
For he hath changed no hair, though I am gray.
Withdraw, and let Demote only stay.
Tell me, dost thou know him?
I think I doe:
But where, or how I know not.
I'll renew
Thy memory by tokens.
Let me talk
First with him if thou please, and do thou walk
Aside a while.
Most willingly what thou
Command I'll doe.
Tell me Demote now,
And do not lie.
O Gods, what storm comes here!)
When thou came back (it is since some twenty year)
From seeking of my child, which the swollen Brook
Away together with its cradle took,
Did thou not tell me thou had sought with pain
All that Alpheo bathes, and all in vain?
Why dost thou ask it me?
Answer me this:
Did thou not say thou could not find him?
Yes.
What was that little infant then which thou
In Elis give to him that knows thee now?
It was twenty years ago; and would thou have
An old man now remember what he gave?
Hee is old too, and yet remembers it.
Rather is come into his doting fit.
That we shall quickly see: Where art thou stranger?
Here.
Would thou were interred, &amp; I from danger!
Is this the Shepherd that bestowed on thee
The present, art thou sure?
I'm sure it is hee.
What present?
Dost thou not remember when
In Jove Olympicks Fane, thou having then
Newly received the Oracles reply,
And being just on thy departure, I
Encountered thee, and asking then of thee
The signs of what th'adst lost, thou toldst them me;
Then I did take thee to my house, and there
Showed thee thy child laid in a cradle; where
Thou give him me.
What is inferred from hence?
The child thou give me then, and whom I since
Have brought up, as a tender Father doth
An only Son, is this unhappy youth
Who on this Altar now is doomed to die
A Sacrifice:
O force of Destiny!
Art studying for more lies? Hath this man sed
The truth or not?
Would I were but as dead
As all is true!
That thou shalt quickly be
If the whole truth thou dost not tell to me.
Why did thou give unto another what
Was not thine own?
Dear Master, ask not that;
For Heav'n's sake do not: too much thou dost know
Already.
This makes me more eager grow.
Wilt not speak yet? Still keepst thou me in pain?
You are dead if I demand it once again.
Because the Oracle foretold me there,
That if the child then found returned ever
To his own home, he should be like to die
By's Father's hand.
It is true, my self was by.
Ay me! now all is clear: This act of mine
The Dream and Oracle did well Divine.
What would thou more? can ought behind remain?
Is it not plain enough?
It is but too plain.
I know, and thou hast said too much; I would
I had searched less, or thou less understood.
How (O) Carino, have I taken from thee
At once thy Son, and thy Calamity!
How are thy passions become mine! this is
My Son: O too unhappy Son, of this
Unhappy man! O Son preserved and kept
More cruelly, then thou from hence were swept
By the wild flood, to fall by thy Sires hand,
And stain the Altars of thy native Land!
Thou Father to Mirtillo? Wondrous! How
Did lose him?
By that horrid flood which thou
Hast mentioned. O deer pledge! thou were safe then
When thou were lost: And now I lose thee, when
I find thee.
O eternal Providence!
For what deep end have all these Accidents
Lain hid so long, and now break forth together?
Some mighty thing thou hast conceived, either
For good or evil: some unwonted birth
Thou art big with, which must be brought on earth.
This was the thing my Dream foretold me; too
Prophetic in the bad, but most untrue
In the good part: This it was which made me melt
So strangely; this, that horror which I felt
Creep through my bones, when I heaved up my hand.
For Nature's self seemed to recoil, or stand
Astonished, to see a Father go
To give that horrid and forbidden blow.
Thou art resolved then not to go on
With this dire Sacrifice?
No other man
May do it here.
Shall the Son then be slain
By his own Sire?
It is law: and who dare strain
His charity to save another man,
When true Aminta with himself began?
O my sad Fate! what am I brought to see?
Two Fathers over-acted Piety
Murder their son; Thine to Mirtillo; mine
To Heaven. Thou by denying he was thine,
Though to preserve him, and hast lost him; I
(Searching with too much curiosity)
Whilst I was to have sacrificed thy son
(As I supposed) find and must slay my own.
Behold the horrid Monster Fate hath teem'd!
O Cruel! O Mirtillo! more esteemed
By me then life: Was this it which to me
The Oracle foretold concerning thee?
Thus dost thou make me in my Country blessed?
O my deer Son, meanwhile the hope and rest,
But now the grief and bane of these gray hairs!
Prithee Carino lend to me those tears:
I weep for mine own blood. (Ah! why, if I
Must spill it, is it mine?) Poor son! but why
Did I beget thee? — (Why was I got rather?)
The pitying deluge saved thee, and thy Father
Will cruelly destroy thee. Holy Powers
Immortal (without some command of yours
Not the least wave stirs in the Sea, breath in
The Air, nor leaf on Earth) what monstrous sin
Hath been by me committed against your Law,
This heavy Judgement on my head to draw?
Or if I have transgressed so much; wherein
Sinned my Son so, ye will not pardon him?
And thou with one blast of thy Anger kill
Me, thundering Jove? But if thy bolts lie still,
My blade shall not: I will repeat the sad
Example of Aminta, and the Lad
Shall see his Father through his own heart run
His reeking blade, rather then kill his Son.
Dye then Montano; Age should lead the way:
And willingly I do it: Powers (shall I say
Of Heaven or Hell?) that do with anguish drive
Men to despair; Behold, I do conceive
(Since you will have it so) your fury! I
Desire no greater blessing then to dye.
A kind of dire love to my natural Gole
Doth lash me on, and hallow to my soul,
To death, To death.
Alas poor old man! in troth
I pity thee: for though we need it both,
Yet as by day the Stars forbear to shine,
My grief is nothing, if compared with thine.
MAke haste my Son; yet tread secure, that I
May without stumbling trace thee through this wry
And craggy way, with my old feet and blind.
Thou art their eyes, as I am to thy mind.
And when thou come where the Priest is, there
Arrest thy pace.
Ho! whom do I see here?
Is it not our Reverend Tirenio? hee
Whose eyes are seel'd up earthward, but heaven see?
Some great thing draws him from his sacred Cell,
Whence to behold him is a miracle.
May the good Gods pleased in their bounty be
To make his coming prosperous to thee.
Father Tirenio, what miracle
Is this? What make thou from thy holy Cell?
Whom dost thou seek? what news?
I come to speak
With thee: and news I bring, and news I seek.
But why comes not the holy Order back
With the purged offering, and what doth lack
Besides to the interrupted Sacrifice?
" O how much often doth the want of eyes
" Add to the inward sight! for then the soul
" ••••gadding forth, but recollected whole
" Into it self, is wont to recompense
" With the mind's eyes the blindness of the sense!
" It is not good to pass so slightly over
" Some great events unlooked for which discover
" In humane businesses an hand Divine,
" Which through a cloud of seeming chance doth shine.
" For Heaven with Earth will not familiar be,
" Nor face to face talk with Mortality.
" But those great wondrous things which us amaze,
" And on blind chance the more blind vulgar lays,
" Are but Heavens voice: the deathless Gods affect
" To speak to mortals in that Dialect.
" It is their language; mute unto our ears,
" But loud to him whose understanding hears.
(A thousand times most happy is that wight
That hath an understanding pitched so right).
The good Nicandro (as thou give command)
Was ready now to bring the sacred Band,
Whom I withheld by reason of a change
That fell out in the Temple. Which so strange
Event, comparing with what happened here
At the same time to thee, twixt hope and fear
I know not how, struck and amazed I stand:
Whereof by how much less I understand
The cause, so much the more I hope and fear
Some happiness, or some great danger near.
That which thou understand not, I do
Too well, and to my sorrow feel it too.
But is there ought in hidden Fate can shun
Thy all divining Spirit?
O my Son!
" If the Divine use of prophetic light
 " Were arbitrary, it would then be hight
" The gift of Nature, not of Heaven. I find
(Tic true) within my undigested mind
That there is something hidden in the deep
Bosom of Fate, which she from me doth keep,
And this hath moved me to come now to thee
To be informed more clearly who is he
That's found to be the Father of the youth
To dye now; if Nicandro told us truth.
Thou know him but too well, Tirenio:
How wilt thou wish anon that thou did know
Or love him less?
" I praise thee O my Son,
" For taking pity and compassion
" On the afflicted: it is humanity.
How-ere let me speak with him.
Now I see
Heaven hath suspended in thee all that skill
In Prophecy, which it was wont to instill.
That Father whom thou seek to speak withal,
Am I.
Art thou his Father, that should fall
To Dian now an Immolation?
The wretched Father of that wretched Son.
Of that same Faithful Shepherd, who to give
Life to another, would himself not live?
Of him who dies his Murthresse life to save,
And Murders me, who unto him life gave.
But is this true?
Behold the witness.
That
Which he hath told thee is most true.
And what
Art thou that speak?
Carino, thought to be
Till now the young mans Father.
Was that he
The Flood took from thee long ago?
Yes, yes,
Tirenio.
And dost thou stile for this
Thy self a wretched Father? " O how blind
" Is an unhallowed and terrestrial mind!
" In what thick mists of error, how profound
" A night of Ignorance are our souls drowned,
" Till thou enlighten them, from whom the Sun
" Receives his lustre, as from him the Moon!
Vain men, how can you boast of knowledge so?
" That part of us by which we see and know,
" Is not our virtue, but derived from Heaven,
" That gives it, and can take what it hath given.
O in thy mind, Montano, blinder far,
Then I am in mine eyes! What Juggler,
What dazzling Devil will not let thee see
That if this noble youth was born of thee,
Thou art the happiest Father and most deer
To the immortal Deities, that ever
Begot Son in the world? Behold the deep
Secret, which Fate did from my knowledge keep▪
Behold the happy day, with such a flood
Expected of our tears, and of our blood!
Behold the bessed end of all our pain!
Where art thou man? come to thy self again.
How is it that thou only dost forget
That famous happy Oracle that's writ
In all Arcadian hearts? How can it be
That with thy deer son's lightning upon thee
This day, thy sense is not prepared and clear
The thunder of that heavenly voice to hear;
Your Woe shall end when two of Race Divine
Love shall Combine: —
(Tears of delight in such abundance flow
Out of my heart, I cannot speak.) Your Woe —
Your Woe shall end when two of Race Divine
Love shall Combine:
And for a faithless Nymph's apostate state
A Faithful Shepherd supererogate.
Now tell me thou: This Shepherd here of whom
We speak, and that should dye, is he not come
Of Divine Race (Montano) if hoe's thine?
And Amarillis too of Race Divine?
Then who I pray but Love hath them combined?
Silvio by parents and by force was joined
To Amarillis, and is yet as far
From loving her, as Love and Hatred are.
Then scan the rest, and 't will be evident,
The fatal voice none but Mirtillo meant.
For who indeed, since slain Aminta, hath
Expressed such Love as he? such constant Faith?
Who but Mirtillo for his Mistress would
Since true Aminta, spend his dearest blood?
This is that work of Supererogation:
This is that faithful Shepherds expiation
For the Apostate false Lucrina's fact.
By this admired and most stupendous Act
More then with humane blood the wrath of heaven
Is pacifi'ed, and satisfaction given
Unto eternal Justice for the offence
Committed against it by a woman. Hence
It was, that he no sooner came to pay
Devotions in the Temple, but straightway
All monstrous omens ceased; No longer stood
The eternal Image in a sweat of blood,
The earth no longer shook, the holy Cave
No longer stank, and shrikes no longer gave;
But such sweet harmony and redolence
As Heaven affords (if Heaven affect the sense).
O Providence eternal! O ye Powers
That look upon us from yon azure Towers!
If all my words were souls, and every soul
Were sacrificed upon your Altars whole,
It were too poor a Hecatomb to pay
So great a blessing with: but as I may
(Behold!) I tender thanks, and with my knee
Touching the earth in all humility
Look up on you that sit in throned in heaven.
How much am I your debtor, that have given
Me leave to live till now! I have run o'er
Of my life's race a hundred years and more,
Yet never lived till now, could never deem
My life worth keeping till this instant time.
Now I begin my life, am born to day.
But why in words do I consume away
That time that should be spent in works? Help Son
To lift me up: Thou art the motion
Of my decayed limbs.
Tirenio,
I have a lightness in my bosom so
Locked in, and petrified with wonder, that
I find I'm glad, yet scarcely know at what.
My greedy soul unto her self alone
Keeps all her joy, and lets my sense have none.
O miracle of Heaven! far, far beyond
All we have seen, or ever did understand!
O unexampled Bounty! O the great
Great mercy of the Gods! O fortunate
Arcadia! O earth, of all that ever
The Sun beheld or warmed, most blessed, most deer
To Heaven! Thy weal's so deer to me, mine own
I cannot feel, nor think upon my Son
(Twice lost and found) nor of my self buoyed up
Out of the depth of sorrow, to the top
Of bliss, when I consider thee: but all
My private joy, set by the general,
Is like a little drop in a great stream
Shuffled and lost. O happy dream! (no dream,
But a Celestial vision.) Now again
Shall my Arcadia (as thou said) be in
A flourishing Estate: But why dost thou
Stay here, Montano? Heaven expects not now
More humane Sacrifice from us. No more
The are times of wrath and vengeance (as before)
But times of grace and love; glad nuptial bands,
Not horrid Sacrifices at our hands
Our Goddess now requires.
How long to night?
An hour, or little more.
We burn day-light:
Back to the holy Temple let us go;
There let the daughter of old Titiro
And thy Son interchange their Marriage vow
To become Man and Wife, of Lovers now.
Then let him bring her to his Father's straight,
Where it is Heavens pleasure, that these fortunate
Descendants of two Gods, should henceforth run
United in one stream.— Lead me back, Son:
And thou Montano, follow me.
But stay:
That faith which formerly she gave away
To Silvio, she cannot now withdraw
And give Mirtillo, without breach of Law.
It is Silvio still, Mirtillo was called so
At first (thy man told me) and Silvio
By me changed to Mirtillo, to which hee
Consented.
True: (now I remember me)
And the same name I gave unto the other,
To keep alive the memory of's Brother.
It was an important doubt. Follow me now.
Carino, to the temple too come thou.
Henceforth Mirtillo shall two Fathers own:
Thou hast a Brother found, and I a Son.
To thee a Brother in his love, a Father
To him, a Servant (in respect) to either
Carino will be always: And since I
Find thee to me so full of curtsy,
I will the boldness take to recommend
Unto thy love my second self, my friend.
Share me between you.
O eternal Gods,
" Between our prayers slow-winding paths, what odds
" There is (by which we climb to Heaven) and those
" Directer lines by which to us Heaven bows!
SO it seems, Linco, that coy Silvio
When least expected, did a Lover grow.
But what became of her?
We carried her
To Silvio's dwelling, where with many a tear
(Whether of joy or grief, I cannot tell)
His Mother welcomed her. It pleased her well
To see her Son now married, and a Lover;
But for the Nymph great grief she did discover.
Poor Mother-in-law! ill sped, though doubly sped:
One Daughter-in-law being hurt, the other dead.
Is Amarillis dead?
It is rumoured so:
That's now the cause I to the temple go,
To comfort old Montano with this news,
One Daughter-in-law he gains, if one he lose.
Is not Dorinda dead then?
Dead? would thou
Were half so live and jocund as Shoe's now!
Was it not a mortal wound?
Had she been slain,
With Silvio's pity she had lived again.
What Art so soon could cure her?
I will tell
Thee all the cure. Listen to a miracle.
With trembling hearts, and hands prepared to aid,
Women and men stood round the wounded Maid;
But she would suffer none to touch her save
Her Silvio; for the same hand which gave,
She said, should cure the wound. So all withdrew
Except my self, he, and his Mother: two
To advise, the third to act. Then Silvio
Removing first from her blood-dapled snow
Gently the cleaving garments, strove to pluck
The arrow out, which in her deep wound stuck.
But the false wood (forth coming) gave the slip
To the iron head, and left it in her Hip.
Here, here the lamentable cries began:
It was not possible by hand of man,
Or iron instrument, or ought beside
To get it out. Perchance to ave opened wide
The wound be a greater wound, and so have made
One iron dive after another, had
Effected the great cure. But Silvio's hand,
Too pitiful, too much with Love unmanned
The Surgeon was, so cruelly to heal.
Love searches not with instruments of steel
The wounds he makes. As for the love-sick Maid,
In Silvio's hands her wounds grew sweet, she said.
And Silvio said (not yet discouraged)
Thou shalt out too, thou shalt, cursed Arrow-head,
And with less pain then is believed: the same
Who thrust thee in, can pull thee out again.
By using hunting I have learned to cure
This mischief which my hunting did procure.
A plant there is much used by the wild Goat
When there's a shaft into her body shot:
She showed it us, and Nature showed it her:
(Remembered happily!) nor is it far
From hence. Straight went he to the neighbouring hill,
And there a flasket with this Plant did fill;
Then came again to us: thence squeezing out
The juice, and mingling it with Sentry root
And Plantain leaf, thereof a pultise made.
O wonderful! as soon as that was laid
Upon the sore, the blood was stanched straight,
And the pain ceased; and soon after that,
The iron coming without pain away,
Did the first summons of the hand obey:
The Maid was now as vigorous and sound,
As if she never had received the wound.
Nor mortal was it; for the arrow having flown
(As hoped) betwixt the muscles and the bone,
Pierced but the fleshy part.
Thou hast displayed
Much virtue in a plant, more in a Maid.
What afterwards between 'em happened
May better be imagined then sed:
This I am sure, Dorinda's well again,
And now can stir her body without pain:
Though thou believe, Corisca, I suppose
H' ath given her since more wounds then that: but those,
As they are made be a diffrent weapon, so
Themselves are of a diffrent nature too.
And such a trick this cruel Archer has,
Of hitting all he shoots at since he was
A Huntsman; that to show hoe's still the same,
Now hoe's a Lover too, he hits the Game.
Old Linco still!
Faith, my Corisca, still
If not in strength, I'm Linco in my will.
Nor yet, though my leafe's witherd, am I dead:
But all my sap into the root is fled.
My Rival thus dispatched, I'll now go see
If I can get my deer Mirtillo free.
O Day with wonders fraught! O day of mirth!
All Love! and blessings all! O happy earth!
O bounteous heaven!
But see! Ergasto's here:
How opportunely doth he now appear!
At such a time let every living thing,
Heaven, Earth, Air, Fire, the whole world laugh and sing.
To hell it self let our full joys extend,
And there the torments of the damned suspend.
What rapture's this!
Blessed woods! whose murmu∣ring voice
When we lamented did lament, rejoice
At our joys too, and wag as many tongues
As you have leaves now dancing to the songs
Of the pleased Birds, and music of the Air
Which rings with our delight. Sing of a pair
Of noble Lovers the felicity
Unparalleled.
He doth speak certainly
Of Silvio and Dorinda? Every thing
I see, would live. " How soon the shallow spring
" Of tears dries up with us! but the swollen river
" Of gladness tarries with the longer liver.
Of Amarillis, who is dead, there's now
No more discourse: the only care is how
" To laugh with them that laugh; and tic well done:
" Each man hath too much sorrow of his own.
Whither (so glad) Ergasto dost thou go?
Unto a Wedding happily?
I do
Indeed. Hast heard Corisca then, the wonder
Of the two blessed Lovers? was it not strange?
I under∣Stood it of Linco now with joy of heart,
Which my great grief doth mitigate in part
For the sad death of Amarillis.
How!
Whom dost thou speak of, or speak I think thou?
Why, of Dorinda, and of Silvio.
What Silvio? what Dorinda? Dost not know
Then what hath past? My joy its linage draws
From a more high, stupendous, noble Cause.
Of Amarillis and Mirtillo I
Discourse (the happiest Pair that this day fry
Under the torrid Zone of Love).
Is not
Then Amarillis dead, Ergasto?
What
Death? She's alive, glad, beauteous, and a Wife.
Thou mock me Shepherd.
No, upon my life.
Was she not then condemned?
She was, it is true:
But presently she was acquitted too.
Do I dream this? or dost thou dreams relate?
Stay here a little, thou shalt see her straight
Come with her faithful and most fortunate
Mirtillo, from the temple (where they 're now,
And interchanged have their Nuptial vow)
Towards Montano's: of the bitter root
Of their long Loves to gather the sweet fruit.
O had thou seen men's joys spring in their eyes!
If thou had heard the music of their cries!
The temple's still as full as it can hold
Of numbers numberless: Men, women, old,
Young, Prelates, Laymen, are confounded there
Together, and distracted cannot bear
Their joy. With wonder every one doth run
To see the happy couple, every one
Adores them, every one embraces them.
Their pity one extols, another theme
Their constant faith is, or those graces given
To them by Nature, or infused from Heaven.
The land, the dale, the mountain, and the plain
Resound the faithful Shepherd's glorious name,
O happy, happy Lover, to become
From a poor Swain, almost a God so soon;
From death to life (whilst I speak this) to pass,
And change a winding-sheet (which ready was)
For a remote despair'd-of Nuptial,
Though it be much, Corisca, is not all.
But to enjoy her, whom he seemed to enjoy
In dying for her, her who would destroy
Her self, not to excuse, but share his Fate,
(His Mate in life, and not in death his Mate!)
This is such joy, such ravishing joy is this
As doth exceed all we can fancy Bliss.
And dost not thou rejoice? and apprehend
A joy for Amarillis, that's thy Friend
As great as that which I doe for my true
Mirtillo?
Yes, dost thou not see I doe?
O! if thou had present been
Amarillis to have seen,
As the pledge of Faith when she
Gave her hand to him, and he
As the pledge of Love did either
Give or receive (I know not whether)
A sweet inestimable kiss,
Surely thou had died of bliss.
There was Scarlet, there were Roses,
All the colours, all the posies
Art or Nature ere did mix
Were excelled by her pure cheeks,
Covered with a waving shield
By her blushing Beauty held,
Stained with blood, which did provoke
From the striker a new stroke.
And she coy and nice in show,
Seemed to shun, that she might so
With more pleasure meet the blow,
Leaving it in doubt, if that
Kisses were ravished, or not.
With such admirable Art,
It was in part bestowed, in part
Snatched from her: And that disdain
Which she did so sweetly fain,
Was a willing No; an Act
Mixed of Conquest and Compact.
Such a coming in her flying
As showed yielding in denying.
Such sweet anger at the abuse
In forcing her, as forced him use
That force again; such art to crave
The thing she would not, yet would have,
As drew him the faster on
To snatch that which would be gone.
O heavenly kiss! Corisca, I
Can no longer hold; God bu'y.
" I'll marry too, The Powr's above
" Give no true joy to men, but Love.
If he (Corisca) have told truth, this day
Quite cures thy wits, or takes them quite away.
HOly Hymen hear our prayer
And our Song! The Earth hath not
A more happy loving pair:
Both of them Divinely got;
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.
Ay me! Ergasto told me true (I see)
This is the fruits (wretch) of thy vanity.
O thoughts! O wishes! as unjust, as vain
And fond. Would I an innocent have slain
To compass my unbridled will! So blind,
So cruel was I? Who doth now unbind
Mine eyes? Ah wretch! what do I see? my sin
With the mask off just as it is here within.
Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our song! The Earth hath not
A more happy loving Pair:
Both of them divinely got:
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.
See (thou Faithful Shepherd) where
After many a briny tear,
After many a stormy blast,
Thou art landed now at last!
Is not this (behold her!) she
Heaven and Earth denied to thee?
And thy cruel Destiny?
And her Icy Chastity?
And thy degree so far beneath?
And 〈◊〉 Contract? and thy Death?
Yet Mirtillo (lo!) shoe's thine.
That sweet face, those eyes divine,
Breast and hands, and all that thou
See and hear, and touch now,
And so often hast in vain
Sighed for, now thou dost obtain,
As thy constant Love's reward:
Yet thy lips hath silence barred?
Cannot speak: I do not know
Whether I'm alive or no.
Or if these things real be
Which I seem to hear and see.
Sweetest Amarillis mine,
(For my soul is lodged in thine)
I from thee would gladly know,
(Tell me Love) are these things so?
Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our song! The Earth hath not
A more happy loving Pair:
Both of them divinely got:
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.
But why do you, you still about me stay,
Arts to deceive the world, arts to betray?
(The body's robes, but the souls rags.) For one,
I'm sure shoe's cozened by you, and undone.
Pack hence: and as from worms ye had your birth,
Return to worms, and strew your grandam earth.
Once ye were weapons of lascivious Love:
But now the trophies of fair Virtue prove.
Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our Song! The Earth hath not
A more happy loving pair:
Both of them Divinely got;
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.
What stick thou at Corisca? it is a day
Of Pardons this: then ask without dismay.
What dost thou dread? no punishment what-ere
Can fall so heavy, as thy fault lies here.
Fair, and happy pair (the Love
Of us here, and those above)
If all earthly Power this day
To your conquering Fates give way,
Let her likewise Homage doe
To your conquering Fates, and you,
Who all earthly Power employed
To have made their Ord'nance void.
Amarillis (true it is)
He had mine, who had thy heart:
But thou only hast gained his,
Because thou only worthy art.
Thou enjoy'st the loyall'st Lad
Living; and Mirtillo thou
The best Nymph the world ere had
From the birth of Time till now:
I the touch-stone was to both,
Tried her chastity, his troth.
But thou (Courteous Nymph) before
Thou on me thy anger power,
Look but on thy Bridegrooms Face:
Something thou wilt spy therein
That will force thee to show grace,
As it forced me to sin.
For so sweet a Lovers sake
Upon love no vengeance take;
But since thou the flames dost prove,
Pardon thou the fault of Love.
I do not only pardon, but respect
Thee as my friend, regarding the effect,
And not the cause. " For poisons if they make
" Us well, the name of sovereign Med'cines take;
" And painful lancings for that cause are dear:
So whether friend or foe, or whatso ever
Thou were to me in purpose and intent;
Yet my Fate used thee as her instrument
To work my bliss, and that's enough: for me
It was a good Treason, a blessed Fallacy
I'm sure. And if thou please to grace our Feast,
And to rejoice with us, thou art my guest.
Thy pardon is to me a better feast:
A greater joy, my conscience now at rest.
And I all faults against me can pardon well,
But this long stop.
Joys on you both! Farewell.
Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our Song! The Earth hath not
A more happy loving Pair:
Both of them divinely got:
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.
AM I so wedded then to grief and anguish,
That in the midst of joy too I must languish?
Was not this tedious pomp enough delay,
But I must meet too my old Remora
Corisca?
Thou art wondrous hasty.
O
My treasure! yet I am not sure; but go
In fear of robbing still, till as my Spouse
I doe possess thee in my Fathers house.
To tell thee true, me thinks I fare like one
Who dreams of wealth, and ever and anon
Fears that his golden sleep will break, and he
Be waked a beggar. I would gladly be
Resolved by some more pregnant proof, that this
Sweet waking now is not a dream of bliss.
Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our Song! The earth hath not
A more happy loving pair:
Both of them divinely got:
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.
O Happy couple! that hath sown in Tears
And reaps in Comfort! What a foil your fears
Prove to your joys! Blind Mortals, learn from hence,
Learn (ye effeminate) the difference
Betwixt true goods and false. All is not joy
That tickles us: Nor is all that annoy
That goes down bitter. " True joy is a thing
" That springs from Virtue after suffering.

I That have lashed base Traitors to the bone,
Have whipped ambition, pride, and spared none;
Plaid the Man-Midwifes part, and with my pen
Have dug the eyes out of rebellions men:
And with my keen-edg'd Muse (gone thorough stitch)
Squeezed out the bowels of the Genevah Witch;
Have proved the monstrous children of the State
Ignobly born, and illegitimate,
Now fly, and higher pitch; and on the Stage
Present to view the Monsters of the Age,
These sons of Belial, you must only read;
And yet this Play was acted once indeed:
Whether I fall or rise, thus I conclude,
I shall be famed above the multitude.
WOe is me, where shall I seek for safety? the murmur∣ing Drums, and brazen Trumpets deaf my ears, no∣thing is heard but shrieks of murdered men, Bellona rides in triumph ore dead men, her horses wash their feet in humane blood, rebellious hands are every where employed to root out Loyalty: hark, me thinks I see them grapple hand to hand, and are now in the field,
Where Lightning raises it self to the Skies,
The earth shines round with Armour, sounds doe rise
By men forced under feet: wounded with noise
The hills to heaven reverberate their voice.
Into what nook or angle shall I fly to gain a little respite? Cursed be the traitors that cry out, no Peace, let Simpson's tai∣led messengers bear hence these fatal Fire-brands to some other soil, or let them make their way to their own houses, there consume, devast their houses, and their granaries; let all their sons run mad, and trace the streets like frantic Bacchanals, and while they there seek for refuge, be cut of by the all devouring sword. Let them be slaves and labour at the mill, and let their wives and daughters beg, let them be ravished first, then slain; Let baseness be intaild upon their name, too firm for all recovery: these are the Devils that do grin at Heaven, and jeer all Laws, both Moral and Divine. The red, and white Rose strove for Sovereignty, but these contest to set up Anarchy, confusion, and the worst of ills that Envy can imagine; thunder, great Jove, upon these traitors heads, that like cursed Lucifer, and his rebel troops, dare bid defiance to thy face,
While I into some hollow cave do run,
And curse the hell-hounds that this war begun.
Stand.
Give the word there.
Stand.
Thus far we are victorious my Cohorts, crown we our heads now with triumphant Baize, for England now is ours: Courageous Rupert, Hopton, Glemham and the rest, we have brought to the ground; we have not left a loyal Dog alive; ell's ours, ell's ours: those fools that say I am apostated from my first principles, know not what honour means, or what it is to be great:
Isle sell my King, my Country and my soul,
To be one of those rule without control.
And would the Sophies of the State not tremble? were but our breasts transparent, they might view their pictures stabbed with poniards, and each killing a Member in his heart: Can they imagine those that have rebelled against their Sove∣reign for ambitious ends will yield them homage: no, they were the stone that poshed K. Charles to pieces, and with the
 same we'll grind them unto powder. Me thinks I see them tottering on their seats, now that our hands are shrunk from their supportance: sink till you see hells bottom, while we rise high in honours compassed with pleasures. Who'd care to see the world burn round about him?
Which to effect, it were best we strengthened our design by entering into solemn covenant: here is Ca∣talines Effigy; if you intend to prosecute your wishes through blood and vengeance, &amp; to reach your glories maugre the fury of the world, swear by this sacred Relic.
Most religiously.
By the famed memory of this brave spirit, that once made Rome to tremble at his nod, who took the horrid Sacrament in blood to level her proud battlements, swear not to lay down arms till King Charles be sent to the invisible land, till all Laws are repealed and abrogated, meum and tuum on pain of death not me•tioned.
We swear.
So; now we may be open to each other, now Charles his Crown shall be ours, and we will share it: to attain which it were best to stir the people, those ravenous Kites will flock to any prey; we must make them our stilts on which we walk, and burn them in the end to warm us: we must propose them more immunities, tell them they hitherto have been abused base∣lie by Kings, but worse by their Trustees: a Declaration shall be framed forthwith, inciting them at once to join with us for ENGLANDS FREEDOM, &amp; the SOLDIERS RIGHTS.
The plot is laid as I would wish, this to effect, we will depose our General, he is not mad enough to be our Guide, we can create a new one with a word; John, Legislative John shall be our Captain. And because he famous John of Ley∣don imitates, we henceforth will him John of London call: but this we must not yet divulge, but let the choke pear hang till it be rip•r: he that doth fish for the rude multitude, must cast forth golden nets, some rare unwonted liberty, which we de∣clare to be our native Rights, and therefore are agreed and resolved to maintain them with our utmost possibilities, a∣against
 all oppositions whatsoever, being compelled thereto, not only by the example of our Ancestors, whose blood was often spent in vain, for the recovery of their freedoms, suffe∣ring themselves through fraudulent accommodations to be de∣luded of their victories, but also by our own woeful expire∣ence; who having long expected, and deeply earned the e∣establishment of those certain rules of government which wee propound, and yet are made to depend for their settle∣meant and freedom, upon him that intended our bondage, and brought a cruel war upon us.
You mean the King, whom we will now call to ac∣count, we cannot be secure while he doth live.
Of that we will debate when we next meet in Counsel, in the mean time, give it out, that we intend to give the people freedom, to Level the enclosures of Nobilty, Gen∣try and property, and make all even: now let the Genius that did wait upon grim Spartacus, desperate Cethegus, and fell Cu∣taline, prompt us to action, and till we have set up our Oligar∣chie, no peace to England.
No peace.
Let Regicide and Patricide be sent for: from their two heads we will distill a juice stronger then Stibium, baneful∣ler then Hemlock.
It is then concluded that K. Charles must die, His blood dissolves the English Monarchy.
Let's in to counsel; for I long to see The first Scene acted of this Tragedy.
Infernal Firebrands, whom the very tears
Of groaning England, while she mourning wears,
Cannot allay: Nor yet the bleeding veins
Of desperate Ireland, which even now remains
A very Golgotha, cannot assuage,
Whole Babes, the earnest of another age,
Taste of your salvage courses, and doe lie
The Lambe-like Martirs of their cruelty.
Let Catesby, Pierce, and that bloody knot
Be Sainted now, or else at least forgot,
And let these vipers vindicate their crimes,
In every Almanac for after-times.
O damned Projectors, whether will ye run,
Having usurped the Chariot of the Sun,
You drive amain till all about is hurled,
And your base folly fires our English world.
O England, dost thou yet want eyes to see
How many Rogues are digging graves for thee?
Doth not thy very heart consume with pain,
When thou consider thy Sovereign
Even with chains unto the earth is held,
His sufferings being unparalleled?
See thou not his Religious constancy,
His patience, care, and zealous piety,
And can thou still give credit to these Elves,
Who suck thy blood for to make fat themselves?
These Hippocrites clothed with holy zeal
Are thy obnoxious Fates, destroy thy weal,
They are mere outsides, have an holy tone,
Yet, are but Devils masked every one:
Their insides full of murder, lust and pride,
Sacrilege, treason, and all ills beside.
For shame then sit not still until you be
Struck dead, and thrown to hells profundity.
ANd are they still so foolish to implore his poor assistance, who's their prisoner, their vassal, made so by the chance of war, a cake of ice, whom with their breath they may dissolve to nothing.
Yes, Commissioners (forsooth) are now employed to move him yet to sign the PROPOSITIONS: Now by the happy Issue that I wish to all our Plots, I grieve to see their vainness and supercilious folly; is it not in them for to degrade him? doth the bare empty name of King affright them? O I'm mad, stark mad with rages—it must be so, we will remove this block that so chokes up our passage.
Sic est in satis, how Lord-like shall wee reign when hoe's re∣moved; I that have fared so well causing him troubles shall fare much better, having cause his death; then I and thee will become the Arch∣flamins of this Age, the Metropollitans of our new Anarchy; nor wine nor women will we want, spending whole days and nights in luxury, (the world knows PETERS ever loved a whore) therefore twill bee no novel news to them: the pit pat Blacke-coats shall not date to speak save what we shall prescribe, them that lived cor•ell, that once durst affront me. yea, bang me back and side, for that I tasted of his wife and mutton his mutton and his wife shall amply taste of sorrow.
As little Love will I show unto LOVE my ancient antagonist, who thwarted me even in the Temple before our Senators, bidding de∣fiance to my utmost Acts: O the brave times that we may enjoy, Saturns golden Age was a mere hell to what we shall enjoy! O the sweet dis∣courts, on Capon and Cock 〈◊〉, the halcion days that wee are now in hope of make us to vaunt too loud—but what's the news a∣broad? how doth it fare with the mixed multitude, I mean the ARMY, how doe the Linsey Woolsey men at Westminster, that medley of decree∣bid age and youth agree in their desires.
I'll for the Kingdom, but most well for us, the Army have al∣ready purged out all that are not of their Faction; the Adjutators of five Regiments, Apostasy, Conspiracy, Treachery and Impiety have broke the •ce to our Design, and op't a gap for Liberty to enter; severed themselves from their Coleagues, drawn up a manifesto to the Kingdom, divulged that they intend to purchase absolute freedom, and break in sun∣der the heavy yoke of Kings, and as persuaded of a happy Issue, that all the Vulgar will join as one man, they call it an AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE.
What speaks thy hast?
I come from the high and mighty States of Putney, who by me doe desire the instant presence bout matters of import.
Return our service, and that we will waite on um. Sol, to night. Regi, This night. Sol, I shall inform them so.
Now, what think thou hath brought forth this hasty Sum∣mons?
Something in Agitation on my life that doth concern our pre∣sent Interests; for my part I'm resolved.
The like am I, to bring to pass what I intend or did.
I like thy resolution, flag not my wings; Ple soar aloft, over the trunks of Kings.
THus doe these Wolves consult, combine,
To root out all that is Divine;
The five States-men of Turnum-Green
Now care not, though their Acts are seen;
They v•w for to kill CHARLES their Lord,
And level all men by the sword;
And to themselves, they doe propose
Another Leader should be chose;
They will new mold both Church and State,
Be to the People as their fate,
And not look 〈…〉
Their strange confused Anarchee
Erected; and on waxen wings:
Soar 'bove all sublunary things,
Th•… to effect, PETERS and DELL,
Lecherous Jew, treacherous Infidel,
Desired are to give their doom,
And what shall of their King become;
By Poison some, some by surprise
Would have him fall each doth devise
A way of death; yet while they stand
Co•sulting, he escape•s their hand.
O Treason of the worst Intent,
Such as Ravill•ack never meant.
Religion both sides do pretend,
But either to a different end;
They out of zeal would rear their own,
Those out of zeal would pull all down;
O bless us from both, but yet compare
Fax •n the vault, these in the Chair;
Though it was an unsuccessful sin,
Fixed those without, worse are within.
IF w•e observe the middle time of this Eclipse or full Moon, she defluxeth from the opposition of the Sun, to the Conjunction of Saturn and immediately after to the opposition of Venus, and then to the opposition of Mercury, who is the chief and domineering Planet in the Eclipse:—here's no body—I laugh to think how quaintly I deceive the credulous world, by making them believe strange things: they come to me is to some Oracle, to be resolved of doubts; and by my Soplustrie I so delude them, that they return contented and admiring; and I that know not whether Ptolomy were man or horse, am counted Englands Arch-Astrologer; yet some esteem me but a juggling wizard, one made up of tautologies and barbarism, and this all would confess knew they my windings, how I deceived the rare and gallant Lady, Fair Arnabella Scroope, giving her to my friend John How of Lincolns-Inne: the story thus, The Gentleman ingratiates himself into the favour of this Lady, comes to me for advice, (and in truth) craves some unlawful helps to gain her; large promises hee made me in case I brought his wish to pass, gave a round sum in hand, and since I knew my own unablenesse (to compass it by Art) I did resolve to act by policy, and to that end advised him to break his mind unto some trusty friend, one whom he durst rely on, he to persuade the Lady Arnabella to come to me, to be resolved about some horary question, and who should be her hus∣band (for at this time two gallant Lords were Suitors to her) this was of∣fected, the young Lady comes to me as to some Prophet; I told her that she should not marry (for direful plagues would follow) either of those young Lords, but another Gentleman, whom destiny and my skill poin∣ted at, of such a stature, hair and habitat; and for her better satisfaction in the point, wished her to go into Spring-Garden, and at the end of such a walk she should meet him ordained to be her husband, and if fhee married him, she should be the most fortunate woman in the world, if not the most happy under Heaven: Mr. How in the interim is very punctu∣all, and observed his directions to a hair, clad in the same habit which I
 had bid him wear, meets the betrayed Lady, the appearance whereof so amazed and bewitched her, that even through fear of fighting against the starr, she yields to marry him, her fortune being no less then 2500 l. per annum, by this device I gained an hundred pieces but now a despe∣rate part I undertake, the Adjutators of five Regiments have sent to crave my skill, and doe desire I would by art resolve them, whether their Plots will thrive and take effect, as if I knew what fate attends on things; but I must please the fools and speak them fair, tell them the motions of the Heavens foretell lucky events to all their undertakings, as in my Alminackes I use to say, when I cologne with them at West∣minster.
Sir, sir here's a woman that has lost some goods, her maid is run away, and carried with her six silver spoons, a pair of holland sheets, with di∣verse napkins.
Admit her, Would you good Woman, ought with me,
Yes Sir, somethings of mine are stolen, by whom your man informed you: I do desire Sir, that by art you'll tell where the wench is, that I may prosecute her, and here's a good Angel Sir to guard you.
When were they lost?
Yesternight Sir, about three a clock in the morning.
Let me see the first Saturn, the second Mars, the third Mercu∣rye; Mercury is a Thief; Woman, thy goods were stolen.
O Lord Sir, yes indeed were they.
What Countrey-woman was your Servant?
Glamorganshire Sir, and a friend of mine that lately came from thence told me he met her on the way.
Give me the Map of Britain, let me see England, Scotland, Wales, Brecknockshire, Herefordshire, Glamorganshire,—I see her—I see her, she has a pack under her arm, my art tells me Mistress shoe's gone down to her friends, there you may find her.
I thank you Sir, may Heaven increase your art.
Ha, ha, ha. Thus do I by my knavish art
Get more, than he that acts an honest part.
THis is the slave hath wounded England more
Then the Committees, sat at Goldsmihs hall;
Then the Excise, ne'er heard of before
Then our State Sophies (and the Devil and all)
He still hath told (by guess) the Rebels should
In the end beat the Royal Party down,
And hath presumed to foretell (for Gold)
That they should make a prize of Charles his Crown.
The Traitors, even ready for to sink
Like drowning men, took hold of his weak stay,
And once again recovered the brink,
And so escaped the Whirle-poole of decay.
And now in triumph through the streets are borne,
Trampling upon all those that Loyal are,
And at poor Englands miseries do scorn,
While King, and Peoples Lands they amongst them share.
For them both Land and Seas are searched, the Skies
Cannot afford them foul enough (they make)
All that is Englands Treasure, lawful prize,
Killing those that the least resistance make.
For now with Lucifer, their reign being short,
They rage extremely, and blaspheme against heaven:
But now the Traitors want their chief support,
Their props are all pulled forth, their Rock is riven.
NOw to the point of the business; how doth our Printed Papers take?
As well as heart can think, the people swallow them amain.
But what means shall we use to draw the rest of the Army on our side? It will be hard for us alone to bring to pass our great design, without there be joint consent of all, we run a desperate hazard.
For that my Brother Patricide, and I have so well dealt, that the whole Army at next Rendevou•, resolve for to declare for Anarchy, and live and dye with us.
For to depose their timorous General, who seems to be a∣verse to such designs terming them wicked and to be abhorred
But here's our Noble John, whom we'll elect to be our Captain General to guide us through all difficult adventures and actions 〈◊〉 to be achieved.
We'll cut our safety through their Coats of Steel, and write our Laws (as Draco did) in blood: I that have dared for to encounter death▪ when Legs and Arms did quarrel in the Air, shot off from my… 〈…〉 and hewed my passage through an host of Royalists, have been a 〈◊〉 Traitor against my Prince, and stood as sole Antagonist 〈…〉 will lead you Gentlemen through all assays, and make my way with fire and vinegar over the frozen Alps of Highgate Hill, nor put my Armour off till I do strike my Sword on London-stone, and be proclaimed Lord of London.
Thy resolution is magnanimous and worthy thy great self re∣nowned Hero, but yet let us join Policy with strength, and do our best to •ring our Cohorts in, we are yet but an handful if compared with those vast Legions that may join with us.
I shame to hear you run so rashly on without consideration, and sell the Foxes skin ere he is taken; know you not that King Charles doth live, he that six years maintained fierce War against us, and did His ut∣most to race out our names from under heaven, is He not now at Hemp∣ton-Court respected like a King, and yet in hope once more to grasp the Sceptre?
It is true▪ and while he is we cannot be.
He is the run unbiasses our Boules be the ground never so Level, and while He breaths we are not sure of life.
Is there no one that dares put forth his hand, and gall His vital thread?
Yes, here stands one, that for his Nations good and for the pro∣mulgation of the Gospel dares hew down that tall Cedar.
Do it Regicide, and be renowned for ever, Posterity shall so∣lemnize thy name in Songs unto the Timbrill, the Virgins of our Land shall deck thy head with Anadems of flowers, and thou fill up a Page in the Calendar.
Patricide and I will undertake to do it, yet will not act the blou∣die deed our selves, our Ministerial Coat prohibits that, but we will see it done.
What means shall we provide?
I hold it best by poison.
He is too wary what he eats, it must be by assault.
Now I think on it, tomorrow he rides forth on hunting; about the time that he s•ts out Isle lay an ambush in some covert place, and with an hundred bold adven∣tros Blades, surpr•ze his person, bear him thence to some place that's far remote, there keep h•m clogged with Irons, till we take order for his death.
And yet mean time, if opportunity will aptly aid us we'll save you so much laour.
Thanks to you all for your kind choice of me; now to your several Regi∣mints, you kn•w tomo•row is a busy day; and with the rest of the Army you must meet 〈…〉, where I will be, but in a 〈◊〉 manner, where if the rest join with us, Futra, for all our Foes; He make the House of Lords horse one another, while I doe lash their Buttocks, the Presbyters shall peep through Pillories, and he that hath most money prove most miserable: Come on, and let's away,
My soul doth long to see the dismal day.
The cursed trap is laid, the •oil is set
That they intend to take the Lyon in;
And thus one ill another doth beget,
While they (make▪ known) that sin must thrive by sin;
Think, what after may be tide
And that sin bears, a sharpe w••p at her side.
The Devil that at first, was wont to stir
The People up, to their own woe and loss;
To bring their Coin and Plate it, to raise war,
All Laws both moral and divine to cross,
Get into their Trustees, and forced them on
To act a privileged Rebellion.
From them the Spirit went into the Traitors,
That now had plotted for to kill their King,
And told them it concerned Adjutators
To LEVEL all, community to bring.
And when he is cast out, where will he go;
There's none besides that can be tempted so.
what direful Planet is it that thwarts my hopes? did I but know I'd seal Joves starry roof, there seize upon it, and throw it down from thence, like Lucifer from Heaven. O my accursed Fate, this ominous day hath blasted all my hopes.
Fly fly, all that we hoped for quite is crossed, even our own are fallen from us, and proffer their submission.
What make you here? Doe you not know Sir Thomas so hath wrought by mild and gentle Speechs, by his discreet and wise depo•tment, that not only our own protest against us, but doe acknowledge their revolt with tears
Curse light upon, 'embase, unstable Grooms.
This Rendezvous at Ware hath marred us all; the soldiers of our several Regi∣mints have pulled their Protestations from their Hats, and doe excuse them to the General, as drawn away, by our pernicious Counsels.
The fate of Monarchy is not yet determined for a subversion, the King is fled away from H•mpton-Court, and our designs are frustrate.
What an harsh melody this Quire of Scritch-Owles make; Mischief finds many Messengers.
With our own Mines our Castles in the Air are all blown up.
The Soldiers of our several Regiments are once more all turned round, nothing is heard amongst them now, but protestations of obedience unto their noble Chief, Sir Thomas Fairfax.
Here comes two Ravens more; what will they croak?
The Heavens conspire against us; which way can wee look, and not behold our ruin▪
Let Whirle-windes enter sp•ngie hills, and bear them thick and threefold on our heads, until we buried lye in deeper graves then those of old, that durst attempt the Heavens▪ I see the Almighties self with his Sword drawn, bearing his dreadful Thunder in his hand, armed cap a pe with lightning, riding on the swift Winds, stands ready to defend CHARLES, and his CROWN, against all Conspiracy a∣against him.
It is vain to strive against the Destinies, let each shift for himself.
And let the world know this, that those which strive
Against lawful Kings, their Plots sh•ll never thrive.
THus Traitors for a while may hope
To bring their ends about,
But in the e•d embrace a ROPE,
Or else are hooted out.
Our dearest Lord, great CHARLES, doth live
Us comfort yet to bring,
And maugre those would him deprive,
MUST Reign, GREAT BRITAINS KING.
Le Heaven shower upon his Head
The blessings of the Day,
And when his soul is thither fled,
Grant that his Son may sway.

A Second part (you'll say) the first weel swear
Was neatly writ, though not one good line there:
Another gives his Vote, and says fie, fie,
The plot was poor, the Authors brains were dry,
And each man gives his Doom; some not afraid
To pronounce judgement ever the cause they've heard,
You not the Author, but your selves disgrace;
And pray consider't, for here lies the case,
It oft false out in penny words of wit,
As in all bargains else, men ever get
All they can in; and will have London measure
A handful over, in their very pleasure,
Besides you might consider, that the Age
Allows not wit to enter on the Stage
As formerly, the sweat of Johnsons brain,
Nor yet the Comic Fletchers easier strain,
Which once a Hackney Coach conveyed you to,
Where you sate scorning all the rain could doe,
And for your twelvepences a piece could sit
As sterne browed Judges of all fresher wit:
And therefore since'tis so, you Gentiles all,
W•uld blast your own bliss, to be critical,
The Author praise you, for to think the store
Of wit is wasted by those were before,
And that the fatness of the soil being spent,
Men's brains grown barren, you'd not raise the rent.
THy father left thee much money, and but a small queen∣tity of wit to manage it. What—after all this to marry a widow, a kind of chewed meat—what a fantastical stomach hast thou, that thou can not eat of a dish till another first cut of it—who would wash after another, when he might have fresh water enough for asking.
M. Shallow Brains, and M. Sneak, the whole company are troubled at your abrupt departure—your fair wife M. Shallow-Braines is very sensible of your departure—
Why here Sneak tells me, widows are but chewed meat—and has set such a soil upon my appetite, that should I see her, I should go nigh to vomit.
Fie M. Sneak, that you with rude breath should go about to extinguish Hymens taper ere it is through ligh∣ted. Come hither M. Shallow-Braines,—M. Sneak, give me leave to pity thee, who would fine condemn that which I will make thee confess natural; and the sooner the better.
As how, as how?
First, I will prove that a widow is rather the chew∣er, then the chewed; for should we not account him strange∣lie
fantastical, that would spend an hour in pulling on a strait boot, when he might be furnished with enough that would come on easily, and do him more service, and as much cred•t▪ wine first broached drinks not half so well as after awhile drawing: would thou not account him a mad man, who whilst he might fair and easily ride on the beaten road way, should trouble himself with breaking up of gaps; a well-wayed horse will sooner convey thee to thy journeys end, then an unbackt Filly: it is Prince-like to marry a widow, for it is to have a Taster.
I begin to have my stomach come to me again.
I, but Sir, I pray resolve me, whether it be not bet∣la, if a man must be in prison, to lie in a private room, then in the hole.
I shall answer you with Pythagoras in his 2. Sect. de Cuniculorum, that it is better to lie in the hole, then sit in the stocks. —Come M. Shallow-braines, the widow you have married, I hope, will never give you cause to curse the time I joined your hands: she is fair and demure; come M. Sneak, will you along?
The jovial crew will blame our tardy stay,
And may they make the bridegroom drunk to day.
Isle follow you—I ne'er yet affected a woman but as an house of office, to exonerate nature for that time.
Women enjoyed, what ere before they've been,
Are like Romances read, or sights once seen;
Or like to Majesty, which we desire
Often to see, yet if too much we tire,
Fruition's dull, and spoils the Play much more,
Then if one read, or knew the plot before.
It is expectation makes a blessing dear,
All joys were nothing, knew we what they were.
Hoe's somewhat tall of stature, his hair somewhat inclining to black; his chin has no bush, save a little down, enough to give notice to the world, he now grows mannish.
Is he a blade, will he fence, and use his spit dexte∣rously?
O, no, he wears no sword, the Committees have ta∣ken away your fears in that point, and ordered, that on pain of close imprisonment no Cavalier shall manage steel.
I like that well, Rapio, is the word, what's the debt?
Nine pounds, Isle assure you.
Are you sure he's retired into his house?
Most certain, it is but a little waiting, I shall requite your stay, you shall find me at the next Tavern.
Stand close, I hear one coming.
He's not at home, this Povertie's so hated a disease, men fly from it as the Pox or Plague. — No matter, to morrow Isle embark for France, and prove, if with the climate I can change my fortune; but before I go, I have discovered that which cheers my soul, the States-men that so long have re∣velled, now hang their heads like full-ear'd corn, two of them supped last night in London at a place where I then was, &amp; in the midst of supper one asked what a clock it was, and when it was told, started, as if he had been to run a race, —there's some great storm towards, whispering in every corner; and there has been about the town to day a murmuring and a buzzing, such as men use to make when they do fear to vent their fears.
Tic he, upon him, upon him.
How now my friends, what means this outrage?
Quietly, twill be your best way.
Best way, for what?
Why twill be your best way, because there is no o∣there; Rapio, that's the word, you must along Sir.
Is that the word, then here's my sword.
Murder, murder, murder, he has kilt one of the Kings Officers, murder, murder.
The people begin to gather, I must not stay.
What's the matter?
Here Sir, here,—oh a man-mender, a man-mender has broached me in so many places, all the liquor in my body will run out—Oh, oh!
In troth neighbour, and in good deed saw, I am very sorry for your hurts; on my life this was one of the carriers.
Cavaliers you mean.
I Cavalier, would I had him in hold, the Commit∣tee, I believe would order him.
Hang the Committee, ô shall I bleed to death? some help good people.
Alas neighbour, — see, he has tapped him at the wrong end too, hee has been busy with you here behind (as they say) lend a hand some of you; I charge some — in the Kings name to follow me.
I Shall not scope them sure, which way now? ther'es no passage that way: —a door, and open too.
Where am I now?
O Mr. Loveless, my Mistress hath been in such fears for you—
Ha, for me, it is fit I apprehend her, and take the op∣portunity,  Alas I could not help it.
Sir, shoe's in the garden walks, hoping your presence.
This is pretty.  Isle to her instantly.
She hath been so distempered.
How shall I bear my self?  I am very sorry for that.
Come Sir, my Mistress will rejoice to hear your entrance.
Isle venture in, Love guide me right this night, and lovers shall restore thee back again those eyes the Poets took so boldly from thee. Isle henceforth learn to love a woman better then I was wont: who knows how this may prove?
The world is of a vast extent, we see,
And must be peopled; children there must be.
What cause their quarrel?
This Sir: because when you, my Master, and M. Time-Server, were with him at the Sun Tavern, you went a∣way and left him sleeping on a bench, which act he took so heinously that the next day he sent a furious challenge to my Master.
The place.
Hide-Park.
Tell M. Suckdry I will be there and back him, as his second (vengeance pursue him, why made he choice of me) I have had vigour in my arm ere now, and yet I can doe some∣what, tell him Isle meet him at the hour appointed. Farewell.
I shall inform him Sir.
The death of slaves pursue thee: — So now my hour of death draws near, I could not force my tongue to a denial — I shall meet them at more distance, then a country Gentle-womman, sees the Lyons at first time — Isle go (though by the way I fall to ashes.)
Is he drunk? Har. So dead, that you may pound him in a mortar, or shake him in a blanket stuck with pins, and he ne'er cry for help.
Very good fortune, this favour does me ample amends for all thy frowns: Sweet tic thy marriage night, the thought of that creates an earthly heaven, while now the fool thy husband snorts in's bed, and dreams, that passing a rough tide, he arrives at Cuckolds haven; I'm swallowed in the O∣cean of thy beauty, and thus I spread my arms for help.
So, close Priest, I shall pound you with her, my wit is not so shallow, but it can prompt me to save my head from being grafted on my marriage night: J, so, revel with your salt lips, the other sport is fulsome.
Thou know J ever loved thee, and that J took this fool but for a Stale, his money thee and J will revellout in clothes and banquets.
O where!
Ha, ha, ha, was ever such a novice, to fill the bed himself his marriage night,—sweet shal's go to a cham∣ber, and there we will feast love unto the height, and use va∣riety in lust, which shall beget perpetual appetite.—
I'll circumvent you—Sir.—
But now I think on it, first, I pray resolve me Sir, doe you find no remorse at no time, that you who are obliged to be a guide to others, should so forget the way your self?
And what of that? let men do as I say, and not as I do; is man enslaved more then the beasts? Does not the womb of one fair spring bring unto the earth many sweet Rivers, that wantonly do one another chase, And in one bed, kiss, mingle and embrace: nice observations cleave to easy souls that love to be deluded.
Can you deceive the world so?
As easily as Whores their jealous husbands; I must seem holy to the public view, else there's no comings in, it is out-sides men are taken with, I can on the Fast-daies press abstinence, and on Thanksgiving days, teach how wee ought rejoice with moderation, on Sabbath days exhort to strict devotion, and keeping of that day inviolate, else not a penny from the Sisters purses but oh away profane.
Ime very cold, that villan will undo me.
Sir, you are absolute in hypocrisy, an art I'm not to learn, but I that have been false my self, would fine rely on your fidelity,—will ye prove true unto me, Shallow, lightning blast um, would they would rise.
By this and this loves breakfast,  and by his feasts to come, by all the beauty in this face.—
O hold, swear not by that, sickness and mischance, are great devourers, and when there is not in these cheeks and lips left red enough to blush at perjury, when you shall make it, what shall I doe then?
Our souls by that time, sweet, will by long custom so acquainted be, they will not need that duller truch-man flesh,
Mean time weel teach love how to aim aright,
While we do wound each other in his sight,
Ha, ha, ha, they're taken in my toil.—
Now M. Time-server, and my Bride, how  do you like your bathe.
We are undone, this vault is full of mire not water.
I do confess my fault, sweet husband draw me out.
I have no ambition to be hanged for you sweet-heart, nor for the lecherous Priest there, here one of you bind your self to this rope, and view the light again,—come now.
So now pull you up the Priest, or let him lie there; I think I have so cooled you, you are this night unfit for Venus sports, to morrow I'll proclaim ye.
Hereafter men for this my name will hallow,
And will esteem them fools, shall count me shallow.
I sink deeper, and deeper, was I ordained to pe∣rich thus in mud.
here Sir, fasten your body to this rope,— if my weak strength can help come Sir.
My clothes are weightier then if I were armed cap a pe for the battle, where shall I shift my self?
I shake like to a lamb new yean'd upon a sheet of snow; O fatal chance, this misery Sir you have brought upon me!
I thought he had been so drunk the cannons iron throat could not have waked him; let's seek some place to shift us.
They pass through whirlpools, and deep Ills doe shun,
Who weigh the event, ever that the action's done.
WHat have I done unto the Fates that they should thus find ways to ruin me, this whore betrayed me to my death, and like the Siren uses to allure those that pass by, to prey on um, for none live here but whores and villans, J have escaped their hands, this house is full of three∣sholds and trap-doors, would I were out: J was in the cellar too where maids were couched, J laid my hand (groping for my way) upon one of them and and she began to squeak; J must submit to chance, and think on some way to relieve my self in meet time, wait with patience.
We must not let our grief be too profound,
Mans pain should be no greater then his wound.
You have observed your time, are nobler then J thought you would have been;—where is your second?
Whore's yours?
Here.
What Shallow-brains?
Yes Sir; Shallow-braines, who intends ever that his Ma∣ster shall be wronged for to beat out your brains? —
J like thy humour well, go on and prosper, my friend stays long.
As J live, they are so foolish, as to fight, see where they stand. J would give twenty pound now for Fortunatus wishing hat, that in a trice J might fly home again,—J had thought not to have found them there.—
Now yon∣der comes my friend.
Yes, he steals along as he had robed some henroost.
J am descried, nor can J now give back, fear seizes on me like the hand of death.
—Gentlemen J am come but may not fight.
How not not fight,— Reb. No Sir, this night J had a vision, that certified me, if J should fight to day it were as much as my life's worth.
Base coward get thee home again, draws: Come M. Suck-dry let us now meet in single battle here, and struggle till wee want our souls.
Alas Sir, you see my second doth refuse to fight, and be∣sides, as yet J have not made my peace with heaven, J ne'er thought on it till now.—
Under this tree (kneel down) and quickly end thy orisons.—
Alas Sir, this place is not convenient, let me go home, and any other day you shall appoint, J will be sure to meet you.
They're busy in discourse, Jle take the opportunity, —runs—away.—
Slave, Jle be thy confessor, thou art not worthy of my sword, a wand were better,—cuts a cudgel,—Jle bee your ghostly father,—nay stir not, if thou dost, Jle cut thee into At∣•oms, and let the humorous wind to fan the o'er thee earth.
Oh, oh! good Sir, let me go home, Jle enter into bond to give forty pounds.
So perishing sailors pray to storms, and so they hear again,  — sirrha confess unto me, J know J have been every way as guilty as thy self, but Tve repented of what hath been, and left my cursed calling, and now Jle Cur•e thee into a better Creed.
O hold Sir, J will confess.
Come then.
J do acknowledge,
J have hitherto pretended zeal to God and love to good∣ness only to blind the eyes of men.—
So.
And J have contrary to the very light of knowledge extolled those men for virtuous, faithful ones, whom J have known to be the worst of Traitors▪—
Men that turn black to white, and can with ease
Form holy earth, the rivers and the seas.
Good, very good.
That I with them have daily hoarded that coin the foolish Commons have brought in, —swayed with a foolish zeal, and that I have used all means to impede what ere did tend to peace.
Hold, my ears are blistered sore already, and should I hear thee further, I fear they will drop off; be gone, Isle leave thee, wishing thy conversion; the constitution of my soul agrees not with this climate; Isle leave this Isle ere long▪
Where want keeps virtue down, and none can rise,
Without they are of the Committees, or th'Excize.
I've escaped with life, Isle home, and if I can.
I will till death be a Committee-man.
YOu know what's my disease Sir.
Yes, and the cure.
If it take, I will reward your friendship: is my uncle sent for?
Yes.
My friends, I've sent for one able enough to pay you.
But is he willing Sir?
For that you must remain in hope, two hours will not expire ere you receive your money, or be for ever out of hope.
Of payment? Heaven forbid it sir.
Isle join with you in the same prayer, but if it happen that unawares you do receive your money, you'll not be time∣rous to trust anew.
You shall not want for cloth.
For Linen.
For money.
I thank you all.
Mr. Rebellion is without.
Admit him in. Sir, von know your charge,  Now must I practise my disguise.
How now nephew, although I once resolved forever to desert thee, yet natural affection cannot be hid: what's your desire?
You see Sir, in what a despicable state I am worn quite away with sickness, my soul now ready to take her flight to him that lent her me. —Oh, Oh, I can no more.
Help for Gods sake, rub him, rub him, so, so, so, how do you nephew.
Death deals with me, but as with tortured men,
Whom states preserve, only to wrack again.
We must all die, the sisters spin no cables for us more∣talls: you're his Physician I suppose Sir, what's his disease?
A burning Fever Sir.
Me thinks he looks too pale for that.
Alas the operation's secret, which renders him the worse, it is Aurum palpabile alone can cure him.
I quite despair of life, were it thou a second Aesculapi∣us Doctor, thy skill were spent in vain, on me only thus Sir I would desire you Uncle, as you are virtuous, and would not be thought guilty of obstructing my journey unto heaven, you would before my death discharge those debts I am to these engaged, which when I see performed, I shall with joy depart; embrace my death with as much willingness as ship-wrack Sea-men would the shore, or Malefactors a reprieve: till that be done, my soul is much distracted, and worldly thoughts encountering those are pious, maintain fierce war within me. Oh! oh! oh!
Ha, I'm caught,  cannot for credit of my own humanity, deny for to perform his hests; I shall be rid of him at once: what's he obliged to pay you?
Twenty pound Sir to me for cloth.
Thirty to me Sir for linen.
Twenty he borrowed of me, beside the interest.
It must be so, Isle pay it, Gentlemen you shall have your money.
We thank you Sir.
The world sha'nt say I damned my brothers son. May I use a servant?
O yes Sir: Richard, come hither.
Your pleasure.
Go you my friend home to my house, —Thou know.
Yes Sir I do.
And bid Thomas bring me the sealed bag that lies in my Study window; this key will further him.
I shall Sir.
How fare you nephew?
Sir, now my
soul is pacified, and I shall pass away as in a pleasing dream; pray heaven the fatal Sisters cut not into my vital thread, until I see the money paid: pray take your seat uncle, M. Urinal pray sir down; Gen∣tlemen, pray fill those chairs: I've a device ere I depart the world, worthy your observation.
What's the conceit of this?
This is a vision Sir, fore∣warns what is to come, and is an excellent preparative for me.
I understand not what was meant, but much I like their postures.
Sir, here's the gold you sent for.
O very good, Gentlemen draw near, here's pen, ink, and pa∣per, give me acquittance, and subscribe your names, then take your money.
Willingly.
Let me see, there's twenty  pounds for you Sir, there's thirty for you Sir, there's 20. for you Sir. Now nephew, I trust, your peace being made on earth, you will make peace with heaven, I have discharged your debts.
I thank you Sir,  This hearty love of yours has wrought my perfect cure.
Fa, la, fa, la, la, fa, la, la, la, la, la.
Does he counterfeit? I'm fooled out of my money, these var∣lets have spread a net to catch me threescore and ten pounds, —I shall run mad, I can't contain my self, what shall I do?
Isle get an halter, and on the next tree
Isle put an end unto my misery.
Come, let's away, Rebellion hanged and dead,
Loyalty with applause will show his head.
WOman besides the trouble, has ever bin thought a rent∣charge, and though through the vain curiosity of man, it has often been enclosed, yet it has seldom been brought to improve or become profitable, it faring with married men (for the most part)
as with those that are at great charges, wall in grounds, and place, who cheaper might have eaten Melons elsewhere, then in their own garden Cucumbers, they are creatures (for the most part) so beholden to Venus, that they cannot contain themselves without variety of gli∣ster-pipes, nay and are so ravenous, that they court men by proxies to meet them.
Come none, they'll meet their slaves, those out of the way.
A tankerd-bearer for his pains they'll pay,
He absent, no man found, ere they'll abide
Delay, they'll let a horse, get up, and ride.
But I, under the rose be it spoken, have let my wife to farm, and make the best of her: those Gallants that resort to her, pay liberally, and so that I gain coin, let them gain—what she gives them: but there's one Damme a Ruffian that would engross her to himself, drives those away that come and bring in gain, nor will disburse himself one do it.
A fellow takes no rest, if peace he keep,
A quarrel still is prologue to his sleep,
And I that have the Moon before me borne,
With my large Antlers, am but made his scorn:
He are how we quarrelled, if a quarrell't were,
Where he lays on the blows, I only bear:
He stands before me, and commands me stand,
And I must be obedient to's command.
Alas, what would you have a man to doe
In the hands of one that's mad, and stronger too!
Whence, who's there? Damme without. Whore's Mrs. Horns.
I shall be beat to dust if be set eye on me, Isle send one to him,  without I am Who's there? Dam Open the door you rogue.
Rogue, who are you?  OM. Damme, you are welcome Sir.
Wher's thy mistress?
Not at home Sir.
Then all my fears are true, any she is false, false as a falling star, or glow worms fire: this devil beauty is compounded strangely, it is a subtle point, and hard to know, whether it has in it more active tempting, or more passive tempted, so soon it forces, and so soon it yields—Shees light as ayre, Isle once give her the bells, and let her fly to the devil.
Isle to the tavern, that my thought may move,
And then Isle go, and find another love.
Iames, Is he gone Iames? His vo•ce doth terrify me more then thunder doth the Indians: my game is gone, my wife is run away, I could for spite now be a convert, and turn •onest in my age; I have a Countrie-house in Warwick thire, thither Isle go, and live upon the Onions that I sow, and Beans that I shall set. W… along Iames
Yes Sir.
Come then, and since I've lost my city wife.
Isle for the future lead a countrey-life.

