HEre's a sweet change of Times; I, who had wont
To have my boy sing me asleep between
My Mistress Arms, and charm me every Night
In• a soft Ely•ium with his voice.
Have been this week kept waking with this 〈◊〉:
If this hold four days more, I shall be fit,
Like Blackbirds, to be whistled to, and taught,
Out of mere •amenesse, to learn Tu•es. Neand: I doe
Observe a certain kind of Copulation
Twixt sound and sound. This noise hath sexes in it.
The Drummers, and the Trumpeters, and Fifes,
Make the Male noise o•ch Streets; The Women's cries,
Loud shriekcs, &amp; howlings, make the Female. Between them
A strange, ambiguous, confused roare's begot,
Much like the fall of Nilus, where the waters
Make All that dwell near deaf.
My lodging stands
In the Middle Region, Gentlemen; I lye
Every Night in a Storm▪ and every Morning
Do rise in perfect Thunder; Then my sleep•▪
Are but my days fears; which do walk; and then
Present themselves in Visions. Two Armies usually
Join Battle in my Dreams; where I behold
Thine, His, My Brains knocked out. And when I wake,
Wonder to find my self with all my Limbs;
Feel for my other Leg•; suspect my eyes
When they in form me I have both my Arms.
I've slept but twice ever since the news came that
Eurym•don was landed; And then I had
The strangest Dreams too. My Man found me scaling
My Curtains for a Fort; Killing my Pillow;
And entering Duel with my Breeches. Last night
Me thought wee Three (pray Heaven avert the Omen)
Were shut up here in the City, and besieged
By the Hangings of my Chamber.
How?
Me thought
The Tree•jan faces were all turned to Thracians.
And in this Siege, I dream't, that You, and Hee,
Forced by the Famine, were resolved to be
My Cannibals and eat me.
I doe feel
One of my Sirloins going.
Well, what followed?
At last you cast Dice on my Body, which
Part should be eaten first; And after all
Concluded on my Head, and Purtenance.
These are the fruits of Thievery; Thus it is Gentle∣men,
When Kings can't Love the common way, but must
Needs couple withou• Friends consent, and draw
A Hue and Cry of forty thousand after 'em.
True,
I doe maintain, that Armies
Plundering of Towns, and ravishing of Virgins,
As naturally follow a good Face
Stolen, as this was, as Aches doe your Winching.
Or as your Taylor, Artops, follows you
With an old Bill unclear'd▪
There surely is
An unknown pleasure in all Matrimony
Which carries danger with it. Else, why should Men
So itch to steal their Wives? Our Neighbour Troy
Is, Gentlemen, a sad example. If
This prove a Smock. War of some ten years long;
Or if Roxane be the Comet, and
The burning of Bithynia the bright blaze
Which she draws after her, wee cannot help it.
How stand you two affected to the War?
Troth, I should like the Camp well, if the Fields
Did bring forth Featherbeds▪ Or if the Streams,
Like those of the Golden age, did run pure Wine.
Or if Court Meals would every twelve, and seven,
Observe due hours. But; Gentlemen, to lye
Half starved▪ with cold, in the Air on scarce fresh Greensword▪
Just so match earth to earth; And then to live
The Life of Nature; or, as some doe call it,
The life of the Hardy; Quench my thirst at the
Next Spring, or Fountain; Coffin up my self
Each night in Turf; and thence come forth like one
Of Cadmus Soldiers, sown of Serponts Teeth,
A•d start forth armed from a furrow, is
A course, I fear, I shall leave to the valiant.
And then the dangers.
True▪
Here comes a troop on,
And you in honour can't but loose an eye.
A• Engine there goes off, and you will show
Your self a Coward unless you loose an Arm.
Here you're surrounded, and then 'twerc base to bring
More then one shoulder off. Gentlemen▪ Consider
What a Discredit it is to have a Nose
After a Battle; Or to walk the Streets
On your own legs.
I •eel my self, already▪
Partly composed of Flesh, partly of Wood.
Methinkes I swing between two Crutches, like
One hanged in Chains, and tossed by the Wind; I look
Within this week, to bee but half the Thing
You see me Now; The rest lopped off; And I
Sliced into Reputation.
I doe perceive
Your disc eet Disaff•ction to the War.
It is but a wise care of our safety; Nature
Bids us preserve out selves.
But how, Neander,
How, without loss of fame, can we avoid
To accompany the King?
Why, briefly thus.
The King intends to send the Princesses
Over to the Island as the safer place.
And will assign a thousand for their Guard.
Let's get our selves enrolled in the Number; so,
Besides security, wee shall enjoy
The Company of the Ladies.
Right; And in
The absence of their Lords.
Peace, here they come.
You see your Nuptials, Bright Roxane, and
What choice you've made. I thought to have brought you to
A Cour• and Palace, where your entertainment
Would have been only Songs of Virgins; Posts
Crowned and adorned with Go•lands; Sacrifices
Striving to make our Streets but one perfume;
And taking from our sight our Temples, with
The numerous Clouds of Incense which they scatter,
And send forth from their breathing Altars; And
No other sounds heard but my peoples shouts,
And acclamations for your wished arrival.
But you perceive you're landed in a Camp;
And your first step upon the shore proves to you
A most unnatural Siege. If for a Brother
Thus to pursue a Sister be unnatural.
Had you had his Consent, Sir, and no storm
Followed your transportation of me from
His Court to yours, but •ad you, undisturbed,
Untroubled▪ in the progress of your Love,
Proceeded to the Temple, There joined hands,
And matched the common way of Princes where
All that's required to make the wedding Day
Solemn, are Tapers, Banquets, Revels, Music,
'T had been a Dream, no Marriage; our soft Joys
Would have lost both their edge and appetite.
That which you call unna•urall in my Brother,
I look on as a favour; Thank him for
The Argument he lends me to express
How much more Dear your Dangers make you to me.
Believe me, Great Archydamus, the fire
You kindled in my heart, when in those still,
Quiet, silent nights you first did woo me, was
But a weak Spark, compared to the large Flame
Which this War kindles in me. I behold
Now a new amiablenesse in You; And
Look on you through this Tempest, which is raised
For my sake, as one made more Lovely to me.
And with the same content doe take delight
To mingle Sufferings, as Nuptials with you.
Nor should I think my self your Queen, unless
With the same equal Mind, I could go half
In perils, as in Kingdoms with you
Still
You doe speak like your self, Roxa•e, Still
Breath words, which sweeten Dangers, and provoke me
To court them in their worst and dreadfull'st shape;
As things, without which, I should want fit Matter
To merit by, or some way make my self
Worthy of her for whom I undertake them.
Nor will I doubt of victory, where I
Have such a •rave Inspirer. Had I been
Borne cold, or sent into the World a Coward,
Such a fair second, such a beauteous Cause,
Would strike a valiant Heat into me; And
Were my Sea covered with as many Ships,
As anchored before Troy; or should an Army,
As vast, and numerous as his, who drank
Up Rivers in his passage, and join•d Europe
To Asi• with his fleet invade me, I
Assisted with your Virtues, should not doubt
But to return with Conquest. Who are these?
The Ambassadors sent from the Prince of Thrice▪
To demand restitution of their Princess.
Admit 'em to our presence.
The King expects you.
We are now prepared to hear your Embassy▪
Your Prince's pleasure?
By us, Archidamus,
With all the freedom which an injured Prince
Can use towards Him that wronged Him, He lets you know,
That it is no thirst, or coveto•s Ambition,
T'enlarge his Territories, or to seek conquest there,
Where it is as easy for him to o'rcome
Almost as say so, which hath provoked him
Thus to invade your Kingdom; But a just sense,
And apprehension of the blot, and stain,
Which Annals and posterity (Besides
The scorn of the present Age) must stick upon
His •luggish memory, it He coldly should
Sleep o'er his Infamy; or let you break
The Laws of Hospitality; and abuse
His Court, in carrying away a Prize
More dear to him then his Kingdom, unrevenged.
For though you may pretend Love for your boldness,
Or say the Princess was an Actor in
Her Amorous stealth, (which yet Hee much suspects,
And she must blush t'acknwoledge) He says, Herein
You doe but guild your Crime; For what you call
Affection Hee calls Rape; And says, Hee hopes,
You'll pardon Him, if Hee doe look upon You,
N•t as a Guest, but Robber; One that came not
To fetch a Queen, but to transport a prey.
Is this all?
He adds farther, that though Hee
Confess Himself inferior to the loud
Fame of your Sisters Beauty; To which nought
Can be a Match but her own virtues; yet,
When He• looks on the Story of his Ancestors,
From which Hee thinks Hee hath not yet degenerated;
When hee considers (without boasting) that
He's borne to a Kingdom, to which yours hath been
(Be it spoke without contempt) a Tributary;
But chiefly, when he searches his own mind,
And finds nought Hostile there; but a pure fire,
Kindled from the report of the admired,
Inflaming, rays, diffused from her bright eyes,
He thinks you trespass against love, Sir, to
Obey an angry, conque•'d, old mans Will▪
Made in the passion of his Overthrow,
Although your Father, and to refuse a suite
More noble, and open, then your own; And whil'••
You're pious, show your self revengeful too▪
Briefly Sir, therefore whither it were force,
Or Combination, (For which to call it
He says he knows not) unless you will restore
His Sister, or repair him with your own,
He says, he is resolved, either to fall
A willing sacrifice •to his wronged Honour,
Or build his unglad satisfaction on
The Ruins of your Country. And to this
He doth require your Answer,
Were Roxan•
A Helen, (as she's not in •ught I know
But her great Beauty) Or were I a Paris;
(Who find my self none but in the numerous fleet
Brought after me) Had I been entertained
A Prince, by a Prince, Sir, at your Masters Court,
And, in his absence, had first loosely tempted
To my unlawf•ll bed, then stolen his Wife;
I do confess it were just for him to cite
The breach of Hospitality, and to invoke
The Gods of Weddings, and Marriages against me.
And I, till I restored the unlawful prey,
Should look upon my self, not as a Guest,
But Ravisher. But if I came a Suitor,
And brought a flame as pure, as holy, as
That which burns on his Altars; If the Princess,
Her own free Empress did vouchsafe to meet
Mine with the like pure, amorous, equal fire:
If I have since preserved her honour; kept
Her white, and spotless as a Vest all; still
Approached her presence with the same religion
As I would places consecrate, or Temples,
Whilst •hus Hee doe's pursue my harmless Love,
With Words far more injurious then his Army•,
With the like freedom You may tell Him, I'm
The injured Prince. And though I grant his Father
Once conquered mine, and wee paid Tribute, (which
Hee does not nobly to upbraid) It may be
My turn to conquer next. Nor is the Bay
Planted so fi•mely on his head, but that
A good cause may remove it, and mak'• mine.
As for our close departure from his Court,
Which he brands with the stile of Rape and The••,
You must assist me, Madam; was I your pirate,
Or Servant? Did I lead you away Captive,
Or conspire with you?
Sir, it were one wrong more
Offered to your Virtues, And I should transgress
Against my clear Affections, not to say,
The Plot was half mine, you did reveal your thoughts,
With so much generous heate, so worthy of me,
That I had no way le•t t'expresse my self
As generous too, but to mixflame with flame;
And to requi•e you with this poor return,
To make your Country mine; And there to think
My self a Princess only, where I might
Call you my Prince•
Then, for my Sister▪
I am no Tyrant like your Master, Sir,
To claim a sway o'er her Affections; Nor
Doc count her Will in the number of my Subjects:
She has free Liberty to make her choice;
And can best answer you. Only she will,
I hope remember, if there be a reverence
Due to the words of dying Parents; Or if
The last, short, breath were sacred, which be qu•ath'd her
To the Prince of Thessaly, she can't consent
Unto your Masters Suite, and not disturb
Her Fathers Shade, to call him from his Ur•e,
To be a grieved Spectator of her Nuptials.
Besides Sir, as a stranger to a stranger,
Pray bear a Pri•cesse message to your Prince.
Tell Him He comes not nobly, thus t'invade
Her whom he loves; or strive to make Her Hi•
By a fore't Conquest. He's the first l've read of
Who Wooed a Lady with an Army by;
Or put a po•yard to his Mistress breast,
And then desired t'appeare gracious.
Wee look for softer Courtships; Humble pray•••▪
Sighs which confess the Breather is our Captive•.
I have no Beauty to entice him to
Lay down his forces. But if he come unarmed▪
In Person, (For I doe not like State Love,
Or to be wooed by an Ambassador,)
If He bring with Him noble purposes,
Such as my Brothers were, tell him, perhap•,
I shall as nobly hear him. Mean time, his Sister,
And I expect some pen•nce from him, for
Thus Troubling of our Peace.
Doe you enjoin
The Chain, or Fetters, 'twil be his glory Madam,
To wear them as your prisoner,
—Have you prepared
The Ships, Liens•stes, to convey the Ladies
Over to the Island?
They are ready Sir,
And only doe expect their beauteous fraught.
The Ladies Sir, will look like Goddesses
Borne of the Sea.
And have you made, Polydamas,
The Castle fit to entertain them?
Sir,
The Ladies locked up in a Brazen Tower
Were not more sate? It is now a place where pleasure
Dwells joined with Strength. It only wants their presence,
To be a Fort without, within a Palace.
You are turned young again, My Lords; you speak
So amorously I do begin to doubt
Whether you may be trusted wi•h a charge
So dangerously inflaming.
Sir, our son•
Can promise for us, we intend no sieges
Against their Beauties, in your absence; All
O•r Batteries to good faces were long since
Spent on their mothers.
Wee dare venture you.
Your sons, Theagines and Meleager,
Shall go with us to the Field.
And will you then,
Deprive me of the Glory Sir, of being
A sharer in y•ur dangers? I endured
The Sea with you; Why should you think I am
More timorous to endure the Land?
Because
The Land's now more tempestuous then the Sea.
For that smiled on your passage; And the Wav•s,
As if they had teemed with a second Venus,
Or understood the sweetness of their burden▪
Grew calm, serene, and Hal•yon. But here
You will expose your self to Night Alarms,
Day Battles; and run hazards where the blind
Sword can't distinguish twixt the fair and foul;
See men act Wolves parts, and behold a spectacle,
N•t fit for your soft Sex, Men fallen, and dying,
Striving to kill their killers and depart
With mu•uall slaughter.
What difference is there
Betwixt the eye, and fancy, bu• only this
Tha• dangers to the Absent still show greater?
When I make these descriptions to my self,
And think you in the midst, though no Spectator,
I shall as truly suffer. My own Thoughts
Of you will pass for Battles; And my fears,
Where ever you place me, will be fights and sieges.
You could not deal more cruelly, should you
Restore me to my Brother, then thus divorce
Me from your Company. Besides, It is
My Cause you fight for; I've an interest
Going in the War; And will you, Sir, deny me
The poor content of binding up your Wounds
Received for me?
Madam, you'll give me leave,
Here to strive with you; I've a Cause going too.
Let me Sir, join in the request, that you
Will take us with you. If there be no other
Use of us, We will help to put on your Arms,
And take them off.
If our two Wives do join
In the Petition, with their Chambermaids,
They'll make a Female Regiment.
I look
My Wife wi•hen these three days shall be Knighted.
And I that mine be made a Colonel.
Alas you know not what you ask; pray tell me,
How would a Spear show in your hand Roxane?
Or Sister▪ How do you think it would become you
To wield a Pike? or wear a sword? Or how
Could I look on my self but as a guilty
Betrayer of you, if the chance of War
Sh•uld snatch you from me? Or you two be made
Part of the Conquerors Triumph? Come; I have
Provided gentle• entertainments for you.
Your wishes will su•ply your presence; and
Put Wings unto my Victory.
It is part
Of my love Sir, to be obedient.
What? You expect we should be solemn now.
And take a ceremonious farewell of you?
We should not else think we have civil husbands;
To leave us bluntly; or as Soldiers court
Their Mistresses; who scarce doe ask consent
But fall to the business.
Well, look you show your selves
Our true Wives in our absence. If you should,
To easeretirement, and divert the Melanch•lie
Of Solitude, weave us a fine Court Laurel
To Crown our Victories at our return—
You understand Thalaestris?
Sir, we hope
You are not jealous; you will place no Spies,
To register who visits vs.
No Lady;
But Stories speak of certain strange things done,
By Ladies in the absence of their Lords.
They speak Sir, of as strange things done by Lords
In the absence of their Ladies.
If wee should
Slip from the Camp sometimes, and steal a night,
I hope you would not shut your Castle gates
Against us▪ wo•lt you?
It is as wee hear report
Whither you're valiant. I disdain a Coward
Though't be my Husband.
And I.
And in these
Stout, generous thoughts we leave you.
Look I doe
Win reputation by you.
Farewell Thalaestris.
Remember, Sir, You doe things worthy of me.
Ladies, we have a small suite to you, which
Concerns your selves.
Twill the more easily
Be granted, Sir, what is it?
It is, that you'll speak
To the King, we may •tay, and be listed Guards
Unto your persons, in these times of Danger.
It is no plot Ladies, to decline the War;
But to doe service to you here at home;
And to defend you against Assaults.
That, Sir▪
The Fortwill doe, and the strong Walls of the Castle.
Troth, Madam, we beg this in pity to you.
How will you spend your Days, Ladies▪ with Ladies,
And but two reverend old Males among you?
Either you must betake your selves to your needles.
And work the Siege of Troy o'er; or the Tragoedy
Of Hero and Lender, in sad Stitches;
Or else betake your selves to your spindle, like
Penelope, and sing the adventures of
Your absent Husbands to a distaff, and
Beguile the Hours in flax.
Or else you mus•
Hire some old, frosty, cold Philosopher,
To read on flowers t'you, every time you walk
Into the Garden, and convert their Colours
Into Your Lectures. Show You why the Primr•s•
Is pale, and why the Marigold is red.
Then for your Nights—
True, Ladies, Doe but consider,
How you will spend your Nights?
Watch how your lone,
Forsaken, Taper wastes it self, and pines
Away, out of the mere sense it hath to burn
So fruitlessly, till it consume it self
Into its own Darkness?
Or shall your Women keep you▪
Awake with amorous Tales? Troth, Ladies, Story
Is a dead Thing, if not reduced to practise.
Say, to delude the tediousness of the Night,
You should share in the same bed. Two of the same Sex,
Make but one in the affairs of Love,
We see
You've studied our case for us. Truth is, Gentlemen,
The lists are •ull already.
Besides, two•d breed
Saspicions in our Husbands. So we leave you.
We are defeated, Gentlemen;
what remedy?
By that time they've lain fallow but three Nights
They will send after, and petition us.
Come let's prepare to go with th'King.
Lead on;
Necessity breed's resolution.
Oh Neighbour—
What's the news. Sir?
Heavy news, Oh Sir—
Out with it.
Neighbour, I doe look
Within this hour not to be worth a Spit,
Bristle pot, or a Child's whistle; or to be able,
To call this aged Satin doublet mine,
In which I've borne five praetorships. The enemy
Hath taken the Island, burnt the Castle, and
The Ladies in it.
How?
One of their Guard who escaped,
Heard •ix of 'em cry out for water. And
They are sailing towards the City.
I'll home presently,
And hide my money. It came from the Earth,
And shall a while thither return again.
That will not serve the turn.
No?
No; They say,
There is one ship laden with nought but Engines,
To torture those who doe refuse to tell
Where they have hid their Wealth. I feel my fingers
Already squeeze•d '•waxed pincers; Irons hissing
At the soles of my feet; My body caught
Up into the Air by the Strapado. Tricks
Shown on my Limbs; My bones tossed out of joint,
And finely tossed, and racked in joint again.
To prevent this, and to defeat their tortures,
I'll choose my own death, and e•no hang my self•,
What pity it is that such fine Ladies should
Have such untimely ends.
Do you hear? The news
Is certain▪ They are burnt.
I doe perceive it.
•ray He•rk▪
They say Great people have their Desti∣niece,
As well as Meaner. And they that are borne
Under a Watery Planet, to be drowned,
Shall ne'er dye in their beds.
Are then, the Ladies
Drowned, Gentlewoman?
Not cast away by wrack, •ir.
It seems the Enemy way laid the Ships
That carried 'em, and sunk 'em.
But is this certain?
Most certain Sir, my Husbands Journey man
Came just now from the Port, and saw ten of
Their bodies swim down with the Tide.
And what
Do you hear of the E•amiss coming?
They have sent
A most strange Message to the City, Sir.
What is it, I pray?
Why, Sir, that all rich Burgesses
Must put themselves in Tribes; And in their Chain•,
And scarlet Gowns, some three hours hence, must, in
A solemn, grave, procession, two, and two,
Your Officers before you, with their Maces,
T'enrich the entertainment▪ meet them at
Their Landing; where together with your Chains,
You're to resign the Keys to all your Chests,
And, then, for us; They do demand that all
Who are not rich, but yet have handsome Wives,
Shall yield them up. How do you think, Sir, will
The Soldiers deal with us, like Women?
I do
So fear their boistero••ness. Will they, think you,
Strip us and leave us naked? Or be content
To ravish us, and let us go?
Look, here
Doe's come my servant Pistoclerus; he
Can tell us more. What news dear servant?
Fly, fly,
The Prince is overthrown; The Ladies are
All taken Prisoners; The Enemy is entered
Half way into the City; Your two Houses
By this are ransacked; I saw divers loads
Of Jewels, Plate, and Hangings, ca•riot out.
But good, but good Sir, is this true?
Is my
Name Pistoclerus?
Yes, Sir.
Then it is true.
Make haste and save your Daughters, or they'll else
Be put to ransoms for their Maid•head•.
We thank you Sir. Come Neighbour.
Oh that ever
I did live to be rich, or see these Days.
Your husbands too are seized on, And are th••atned
To be put to the Rack, unless they will
Produce their Wive••.
We'll make haste to relieve them
I take my leave; And shall be glad to see you
Sometimes in the Suburbs Sir,
In le follow you.
This is called Comoedy, raised from Tragoedy.
Never was City in such •umult, as
I have put this into. The women want
Nothing but spears▪ circled with Ivy, to hold
A perfect feast to Bacchu•. And to bea•e
Their Pans, and Kettles, up and down the streets,
Instead of Drums, and Cymbals. The men have all
Armed themselves with what came next to hand.
I saw a Troop of Butchers marching down
Their Shambles wi•h their Cleavers. After them
Followed a Regiment of Taylors with
Their Yards, and Bodkins. In the rear, a Company
Of Shoemakers with Awles. Each Trade takes Arms
Wi•hen its own profession. Now will I follow
My Suburb Mistress; whose husband is content
To make one of the fifteen of us; And doth
Connive by turns. The •amassed fellow, and
So little owner of his own Wife, that
He verily believes hee Cuckolds us
When he lies with her. Amongst us there is One
Maimed Soldier▪ with one leg, who still pays doub••▪
And goes to bed to her with a stirrup? It is
The commonest, •nd the prating'st Varlet, she
Calls me her Chaerilus, I her my Lycoris.
She makes me tell her news whole days together:
Which I, her sponge, do suck up in my travels
From Company to Company, and doe
Enlarge with my Additio•s, and Notes politic;
And then as severally disperse; And so
Draw Custom to he• House; which she cal's pay.
This must needs be conspiracy; There is
A Riddle in it my Lord, which you and I
Cannot unfold. It must be Time, the Mother
Of Truth, which must expound this Mystery,
How should they draw their Fleet up else? By what
Instinct, or mark, should they know so exactly
The Ship the Ladies were in, As if they
Had hung their Petticoats for sails up, or
Had turned their Gowns to streamers? Single it out
From all the rest, and take'em? As if one
Of the Princesses had been a sign of the Vessel▪
And stood forth the Roxane, or Barsen•▪
Instead of the Centa•re, Andro•eda, or Cast•r?
They did not bring a Thracian Prophet with them▪
Or call Tyre•ease from the Ely•ian Groves,
To be their Oracle, to tell them justly
The Critical Point, and Min••e of our passage.
It is now just stealth for stealth; our King transported
One pair of black eyes, A•d they've seized a Carricke▪
And Ship •ull of them.
I will straight put to Sea,
In their pursuit. If they be not transformed
Into Sea-Nimphs; Or hide their watery Deities
Amongst Eels, and Dolphins, I will rescue them.
Twill concern me to stay here, and compose•
Those Frights of the City; which this news hath put
Into a posture of Confusion.
At your return we will to the King; And let
Him know the Accident. Mean time, In hope
You'll bring them home true Ladies, as they went.
That's humane Ladies, purely made of Flesh;
Or else true Mermaids, that is, Ladies made
Half Fish, half Flesh, I'll stop all Messengers.
The news will but disturb his Victories.
Could you imagine you could carry your
Design in Clouds, and change your shapes, like Spirits,
And take what forms you please, and we not know it?
Alas we had our plot going too; Our spies
Gave us intelligence, where, when to seize you.
It is not unknown to us you called a Council
Of War; In which, without your husbands knowledge,
You did resolve to put your selves in Arms,
And fight against us. We can tell you that
Roxan• was to be your General;
Barsene Cap•aine of the Engines; You,
Lady Vlisses, were to command the Horse,
This Lady Hector the foot; And these two, •ere,
Were to be Scouts by Night, by Day your Squires,
To bear your Targets after you.
You've had
A noble Conquest of it, to surprise
A Company of poor weak Women. Is this
The valour of your Nation, to proceed
By plot and stratagem against such as us?
These are War Arts.
Or is this noble usage,
To Fetter us, and cast us into Chains?
You could but Manicle your slaves thus.
We
Do but observe the Law of Arms towards those
Whom we do take in Arms.
Does then the Law
Bid you keep no distinction between Sexes?
Yes, where the Persons whom we conque• do.
But you have lost your privilege; And put off
Your Sex for ours.
We look not on you now▪
As vanquished Ladies, but as vanquished Captains;
And so must use you.
Alas, what's your Intent?
Is it to enrich your selves with our poor spoils?
If Plunder be your aim, pray take our Jewels;
Bestow them on your Mistresses, at your
Return; And tell them how generously, how stoutly,
You purch•st them; Say you betrayed the Wearers
First, and then rifled 'em.
Pray strip us; And
Let us redeem our Liberty with the
Poor ransom of our Clothes.
You are deceived;
Our purposes are much more high, and noble,
Then to raise booty from you, Thieves conquer •o.
Our Custom is, when we take Prisoners, to
Lead them i• Triumph through our Thracian streets;
Your Beauties, thus adorned, will save the charge
Of gilded Pageants, to entertain the People.
Must we be made a show, then, to delight
Your Wives and children?
How should they make us welcome
At our return else?
Could we take your fields,
And Towns, and Cities, and Rivers Prisoners too,
And could transport them with us, these we should
Make part of the Triumph; But because we cannot,
What Nature makes impossible, we do
Supply with Art, And lead them painted; And
The Pencil doth present in Colours, what
T•e Truth of Things denies.
Then for your persons,
Being ou• lawful Captives; It is our Custom
To give you to our Ladies, to be their slaves
In ordinary; To starch, and to belong
Unto their Laundries, And so we doe divide
Our Conquests with them. But because we will
Deal honourably with you▪ we intend
To use yo• as our other Wives; you shall
Be seconds in the pleasures of our Beds.
I do presume such Warlike Ladies, as
Your selves, must have read Homer; you shall be
My Briseis, I your Agamemnon.
You
My Chrysis, I your stout Achilles; These
Two white she Myrmidons will serve to raise
A Breed between them and our Pages.
Sir,
Have you a sense of Nobleness?
Yes Lady,
And you shall find it.
Finish your Conquest, then,
And take a •ife I'm weary of. I am
Your Prisoner, Let me be your sl•ughter too.
Show your selves equally as valiant in
Our Death, as our Surprise. Take a frail breath▪
Which, to enjoy, with these conditions, will
Add new weights to our Thraldom; And you will
A•flict us with our preservation.
By your own Lady, Sir, if you have one,
Let me beseech you, kill me; Twill be far
More noble then to Love me.
Every hour
We live your Captives, thus, will seem an Age
Of Infamy.
Madam, Let's stand upon
Our Natural Defence; They are but two
Against us four.
Let's Mutiny, and by
Our own swords free our selves. They've only
A Heart to take us treacherously like Thieves;
But dare not fight with us.
What would you do
Pretty Serjant Major Damsel were you loose,
Who are thus Valiant in your Shackles?
Now
You'll know your Dooms. Here comes our Prince with his
Fair brace of Prisoners.
—You're the first Lady, Madam,
That ever yet bore such Arms against her Lover.
I thought to find your Quiver in your Looks,
Not hanging at your back; And to encounter
No Shafts or Arrows, but those bright ones shot
From your fair eyes. Thus doubly armed you have
Taken a Course to make me twice your Captive.
You show, Sir, how you love me thus to stile
Your self the prisoner, of your prisoner.
You're the first Prince I've read of, (If I may
Call you a Prince, who by this act have shown
Your self s'unlike one) who first did surprise
His Mistress▪ and then Wooed her▪ Or bound her first,
Then told her that he loved her. Wilde Salvag•s,
And lustful Satyrs court thus; who do know
No difference betwixt their Loves, and Rapes;
But call a rude force Kindness; Think they are amorous
•the midst of violence; And call'• Loves fire,
And flame, which is a foul intemperate heate,
Kindled from every thing that's fair; on which
They look not as it is fair, or amiable,
But as it may be sullied and contribute
Unto their beastly fatisfaction.
I hope you think not, Madam, I'll make use
Of this advantage so barbarously, as
T'attempt your person?—
That were a crime, which would
Provoke the Gods, which doe inhabit these
Quiet, hallowed shades, to take revenge upon you.
And you would trespass against the place, as well
As against your honour.
I do confess you are,
To an irregular eye, wholly composed
Of sweet enticements. A thousand Beauties fly
From you, at every look in soft Temptations.
And from a mind which knows no holier use
Of such a heavenly form, but first to covet,
And then t'enjoy, there might be danger; And
The Assailer might excuse hi• fault from that
Which left him not himself, but snatched him to
Forbidden pleasures. But I doe look upon you
With other eyes. As you're to me a Venus,
And strike a warm flame in me, so you are
Diana too, and do infuse a chaste,
Religious coldness. You do not only stand
Before me safe as in a Circle, made
By your own charms; But do inci•cle me
With the same Vertuou• sp•ls.
I yet scarce think
My self secure, when I think you my Pirate.
You'll find the enterprise deserves a name
More gentle, when you know my Sister went
Half Pirate with me. I had no other way
To gain a free, and Innocent Access.
To enter your Castle had been impossible;
Unless, like Jove, I had transformed my self
Into a Shower, and rained my self down from
The Skies into your presence.
Had you a hand
In my betraying, then?
If for one Lady
To con•rive Se•vice for another; Or if
T'assist a Brother in his Virtuous Love
Be to betray, I do confess Barsene,
I'm a Conspirator. Or if he break
Conditions, and make this ignoble use
Of such a favour, having had his Audience,
Not to restore us to our Liberty,
I am betrayed too. They were first my Letters
Which drew him from his Country with a Flee•e,
In show for my pursuit, but in reality,
T'enjoy this Interview, and make his eyes
The Judges of the picture I made of you;
Or whether I e•'d not in my descriptions, or
Presented you by a false partial light,
When I deciphered you just such another
As he doth now behold you.
Is this true, Sir?
Witness ye Gods, if among all your Worshippers,
There be one who contemplates your Divine,
Invisible, Shapeless, substances with a
More awful reverence, or pays Devotion
I•o Powers he sees not with a stronger fervour,
Then I did to you▪ Madam: whom I did
Adore before I saw; And you had then
A perfect Shrine, and Temple in me; where
I did fr•me such Idaeas of you, so pure,
S• free from these gross figures, which do stir
The vulgar admiration, that▪ if I said,
A Mind was worshipped by a Mi•de, And that
My thoughts supplied the place of Sacrifices,
Which flew between us; And, like winged prayers,
Maintained a sacred Intercourse, &amp; traffic,
With the Original of what I fancied,
I doe but rudely▪ but half express my self.
You make me blush.
But when in the disguise
Of my Ambassador, I saw before me
The Queen of Love, veiled in your beauteous shape;
With all he• Graces, &amp; winged Cupids about her.
When I beheld all those celestial Images,
Which I framed of your Absence, and adored
Abstracted from you, clothed in your fair face,
If I projected for this hour, or used
The Invention of one struck, to purchase this
Short Audience from you, you are t'impu•e th'offence,
Or boldness, not to me, but unto Nature,
Who did not make me blind, But sent me in
To th'world with eyes.
If you proceed, I must
Accuse her, that she gave me ears to hear
Such praises so misplaced.
Mad•m, then briefly▪
I claim an interest in you, Love for Love;
Which that you may grant as a Princess, and I
Receive it as a Prince, here I doe banish
All shows and signs of Hostile force, and doe
Release you, and your fair Train. You Hippocles,
And Clytus, First ask pardon for your cruelty,
Although but acted, and then unbinde the Ladies.
Madam, I hope you can forgive; If not,
Please you to take me prisoner, so you will
Promise my thraldom shall be only such
As yours should have been, had we in earnest kept you
Outright our Captives, I will be content
To exchange shackles with you.
Pray hold your leg•
A little fairelier, Madam. Methinkes we two
Make the Emblem of the Jealous husband, and
The Handsome wife.
How's that Sir?
Why there was
One, who by day still locked his wife in chains,
And gave her ease by night.
You two would fine
Have your two legs at large too.
Now your Arms
Are set at liberty, look you employ not
Your natural weapons against us.
What are those Sir?
Your Nails.
We scorn to scratch.
Next, after this
Rude Interruption of it, For when you
Have pardoned it, I still must look upon
It as an amorous Crime) I will my self
Continue your safe passage to your Island;
And see you received in your Castle.
That
Will only alter our Captivity,
Not tak't away. We must still think our selves
Your prisoners there, if you bear Arms against us.
Here, then, To let you see, my purpose is not
To be an Enemy to your Brother, and
A Supplicant to you; But that I came
To carry a Queen, not conquest home with me,
I doe resign my Forces, and lay down
My self, and Armies at your Feet, Bright princess;
Say, what peace would you have? I will refuse
No Articles, so you be one of them.
You have expressed your self so Nobly, shown
Such generous Signs of your Intentions, and
Gained such a Conquest over me by your free,
And Princely Carriage, That as an earnest of
Greater returns, We'll make you partner in
A harmless plot we have, which shall conclude
With all that all we wish.
Wee've a Design
To try how our surprise takes with our Camp▪
O•r Habits and the Art we will put to 'em,
Will keep us from being known.
I will defer
Your farther satisfaction, or confess
How much I am engaged, Sir, to requite
Your pure Affections with my own, 'till our
Next Conference. And left you should bell•iv,
(How 〈◊〉 you've changed a Tempest to a calm,
And m•k• me now in Love with my own fright)
You not deserve to undergo some penance
For making us afraid, your punishment,
Shall be to fetch m• Answer at my Tent,
And I sh•l• think it an Age 'till I receive it.
Did we three ere look to be Captains?
Troth▪
I thought my Marches only would have been
To lead • Company of Ladies in
Court Ra•ke▪ and 〈◊〉, unto a Mask, and Play,
A•d back again.
And as for skirmishes,
I thought all mine wou•d have proved Chamber ones,
Ton•ue-Fights Or if they had proceeded farther
To the Drawing of Blood, at most, Naile-Combates.
I've
The strangest Company of Volunteers;
All Gentlemen of Hedge•s▪ &amp; Highways.
I doe command an Hospital. Of Fifty
But two have Shi•s among 'em; And those worn
Not as sh••t, or Things at first ordained to be
Made clean, and washed; but as perpetual Garments;
Not to be put of 'till They doe forsake
Their Wearers, Voluntarily, and creep from them.
That which was linen once, Time turns to Troops.
I'll unde•take could all Quick Things which are
Bithynian in our Regiment bear Arms,
We need not fear the Persian. Every Soldier
Would be a moving Legion. Neand. My Company,
Is much like yours. Last Muster, when I recko•'d
By th'poll▪ They were Threescore, But when by doublets,
Scarce Thirty; And these fit for summer Wars.
A fine, warm, intercourse doth pass between
Their Skin, and Sun. Far off They show dir•ctly
Like soldiers of the first Ages, bef•re such Things
As Clothes, or Garments were invented; N•are hand
You'd thy•ke They had held civil co•flict, and
Torn one another thus ragged▪ If we fight
With the Enemy; their first great Enterprise
Will be for Breeches; The next for Conquest.
Troth,
Mine are not altogether so completely
Ragged and torn, as yours are. But for Courages
And Looks, I doe perceive a kind of quiet,
Yet understood Conspiracy among them,
How not to fight; And can observe a speaking,
Sly Combination pass twixt face and face,
How to escape. Their Marches are divided
Between a certain provident care to fly,
And fear of hanging.
And yet these thin-sould Rascals
Dare mutiny for pay. This Morning I
Consumed in hearing grievances. One told me
He was this Week preserved by Miracle;
Lived on one bunch of Radishes, which sure
He thinks did multiply from one to many,
He had been famished else. Another told me,
A Cheese had like to have raised Commotion
Twixt him and four Comrades; which had sufficed them
Four Days. A Third doth verily believe
He shall in time reduce his Body to
A perfect Habit of eating nothing; For
He doth protest He hath not tasted food
These eight and forty hours.
Here comes the King▪
How doe your Works go on Theagines?
Are they of Height and Strength enough to keep
Us from the Assaults of the Enemy, until
Our other Forces come?
Unless we should
Like the Ancient Gyan•s, who invaded Heaven,
Pile Hills on Hills, or compass• in our selves
With Mountains hooped on Mountains, Sir, we cannot
Immure our selves with more Defences, or
Raise Guards more strong, or more Impregnable.
That which was er'st a Champion Field is now
A perfect Fort. If they have winged Horses,
Or feathered Breed of Pegasus, and can
Be a flying Army in the Air▪ or give
Us battle from the Clouds, there is some fear
They may surprise us; But by the common way
Of Battery by Rams, or Engines, They
As well may besiege Rocks, or strive to make
Their Soldiers scale Towers.
And have you Meleager
Made true Discovery of their Camp?
It seems
They mean to make the plain beyond next Hill,
The Scene of the Fight. I have observed from thence
Their several Quarters; Tents cast into Streets,
Painted Pavilions in the midst, and Heart
Of the Leag•er. which show like moveable palaces;
And vie a kind of bravery with the Sun,
Which shall cast, or reflect the brightest Glory.
About these in a decent order stand
A Numerous Town of Tabernacles, of
Less Glitterings, which doe end in a large Suburbs
Of common soldiers Cabins. Had they brought
Their Wives, and Temples with them, it would be
A perfect warlike City.
You describe
The preparations of a Wedding; This
Trim show can't be intended for a fight.
Have they secured all this with Trenches too?
Have they Walls to their painted City?
It seems
They mean their number shall supply those, Sir,
Unless it were the P•rsian Army, which
Was overcome by Alexander, where
The Grcekes once fought, and beheld a Masque,
Performed by Ladies in gilt Chariots; And where
The Soldiers took Directions how to fight
From Harps and Lutes, which played between the battles,
As between Acts and Entrances, I ne'er read
Of any expedition which consisted
Of so much Spectacle and Number too.
Surely Euimedon hath raised these forces
To make an Entertainment for my sister,
And make his Conquest of the Ladies show
More sweet, and Courtly. H••ke; what means this shout?
Go one of you, and see.
T•oath, Sir, if I
May take the humble leave to speak, methi•ke•
You might compose this War by Treaty. A Priest,
In my poor judgement, Sir, might save much blood,
And join hands, which divided will join battles.
You •aine would give up your Commission, Callias,
And beat Co••t again.
Troth, Sir, I had
Much •a•her tire my self wi•h dancing at
Y•ur, and your Sisters Nuptials, the• here venture
Ma•ts on my transitory Life. Which if
It have a lease of three w•ek•s longer, or
If providence doe spy• it •ut a Mo••th,
It is more then I expect. Your Father, Sir,
Mu•t tha•ke you in the Elision Shades hereafter,
For being so pious to prefer his will
••fore you• Subjects safety. If Jury•ed•n
E•d•w your Sister with your Kingdom, say
Y•ur Court once bred a Prophet.
Called a Coward.
The Queen of the Amazons, Sir, hearing of
Your Wars▪ is newly landed, and hath brought
An Army of She Archers in your Succ•ur.
She hath before her sent tu• Cap•aines of
Her Guard▪ who call Themselves Embassado•rs; But look
Like Nymphs sent of an Errand from the Goddess
Of Woods and Huntings, who would have your leave,
To make War on your Stags, Wild Boars▪ and Panthers▪
Look here they come, Sir▪
—Pray which is the King?
He, Lady, in the purple scarf.
Our Queen,
The famed Hippolyta, having achieved
Her conquest on the Scythians, and returning
Home, with Antiope, her sister, to offer
Their Laurels up to those Assisting Gods
Which cast them on their Victory•, as she sayl'd
Along your Coasts, hearing you are engaged
In a War something like the Trojan, where
She lost an Ancestor, offers her self,
And whole Fleet to your service. Her reward,
She says will be the Acceptance, nor expects
More thanks, then to be Known to your brave Self,
And the fair Cause you fight for.
She adds farther,
That she desires (Because she will not, Sir,
Unshippe her Forces, without your consent,
Which might raise terror in your people, And
Appear no Visit, but Invasion)
You'll send a Conduct to meet her on the way
Now to wards your Camp; So, to secure the passage
Of these few Ladies she brings with her.
Ladies,
Pray tell your Queen, she hath by your brave Message,
Purchased one Laurel more; And added Me,
And my whole Kingdom to her other Conquests.
The honour she vouchsafes me is so great,
That I'll my self be of her conduct.
Sir?
She's proud to be your soldier.
Ladies?
Sir?
You have no Message from the other Ladies,
To us Three, have you?
How do you mean•?
If
Your Queen come here to propogate; or if
You, and your sister Warriors bring a purpose
To carry home Bithynian Issue, pray tell em
We are their Servants.
We shall Sir,
And so
•Diana speed you, Ladies.
You two prepare
Camp Entertainment for her. You three put
Your Troupes in order to attend us.
We shall Sir:
Twill be the strangest sight to see naked men
March before Earn•ed Women.
Gentlemen,
What think you of this Embassy?
Why that
The Revolutions come, In which we shall,
Be conquered of our Maidenheads.
Methinks
I see my self already a Father to
A fine, smart Amazon; I look she should
Come into the World with Bow and Arrows, And
Be borne with a short sword.
If our fights prove
Night Skirmishes, I'll sacrifice to Love.
Two weeks of this, conceive me, Gentlemen,
We cannot scope a famine, but shall frolic
Our selves into a Dearth, Then live by the Ounce▪
And dine and sup in weight and measure, to
Permit things to increase again. We have
At once exhausted three Elements, the Earth,
Water, and Sky, for Rarities; If the fourth
Bred ought but Salamanders, or afforded
Ought strange, or edible, I doe believe
We should have ransacked that too.
I have read
Of feasting▪ and heard Philosophers dispute
It for a vice, but ne'er saw it practiced but
In this large entertainment. Sure the Lords
Who had the ordering on it first read the works
Of some old studied Epicure, who placed
Felicity in the palate, and then brought
His rules and precepts into you•e. There wanted
Only Pearls to be mel•ed, Gems dissolved,
And Jewels drunk to the Queens health, to make it
A perfect Sacrifice to Luxury.
If this hold, Gentlemen, I doe forefee
We shall within this Month forget our selves
To be Bithinyans, that is, Soldiers, who
Can live on Camp fare, and turn Persians,
Where our whole business, will be only these
Two fine, soft, exercises, to eat, and wench.
How do you like the Queen?
Me thinks her cheeks,
Speak through their Amorous browne, as if she came
For something else then fighting. There's a story
Of a Greek Prince, and of a Queen, her Country woman,
Who joined Sex thirteen days together, to
Raise Progeny between them. If this should
Claim Copulation by the Law of Nations,
And challenge a short use, for a month, or so,
Of the Kings body, for procreation sake,
I cannot see how, in humanity,
Having so good a Title as the Want
Of Men, and Males, in her own Country; she
Can be denied.
Or if her Sister should
Claim the short use of one of us, and plead
Her natural Right unto our Bodies, it were
A National Wrong, not to endeavour to
Dismiss her with posterity.
You speak
As if you had hopes, Artops.
I profess
To me shoe's Lightning, Gentlemen; she melts
My sword in the scabbard; I stand before her like
Stubble before a burning Glass, Her eyes
At every glance do turn me into flame.
Will not one of the other Ladies please
Your high taste, Artops? Me thinks those faces are
Most fair, which are most easy of fruition.
I am resolved to sound the true depth of
Their errand.
And I.
I think I shall submit,
And make a Third▪
Peace, here they come; Me thinks
Yon'd two by Sympathy already do
Send Tickets to invite us to their Tents.
You truly show, Gracious Hippolyta,
How much you are a Soldier, who can be
Content with such rude Entertainment; where
The most I could express, was, that you were
Received into a Siege. Where my Di•tresses,
And poverty, are fame to call Themselves
Magnificent from what I lack, but would
Fine furnish out with Words, and say My Intent
Was large, though my expression was but small.
If ought hereafter make this place or Army
Deserving of your stay, it must be your
Own self sufficient Goodness, which can put
Splendid Names on Defects, And the fair Train
You've brought along with you. Whose Company,
Transforms a Wilde Camp into your own Court;
And makes you at home in my poor Country.
Sir,
We hope you doe not think we came to feast,
Or revel with You; For that you have expressed
Even to a trespass against our Discipline;
Whilst taking us for Women, you forget
W'are Soldiers too; And turn your Camp into
A soft Receipt of Ladies. It is against
Our Country Custom to spend our Days in Bancuets,
Or Nights in Masks; Our Times are more virile,
And different from the rest of our soft Sex,
Who doe divide Themselves between their Beds,
Glass, Tyres, Dressings, and Discourse of Servants.
We count our Hours of the Night by several Watches,
And Reliefs of our Sentinels; And reckon
Our Hours of the Day, not by our Feasts, but Marches.
We know no Glass but our own Armour; Nor
Ever see our selves but in the clear Brightness of
Our Shields, and Helmets; And then our D•essings are,
Such as you See, a Sword, Bow, Shafts, and Quiver.
We came to help you fight, Sir, And to carry
Deeds worthy of our Name home with us. Twill
Be our reproach in History, if it be known
We did nought in Bithynia, after all
Our other great Achievements, but see plays;
Pass the loose Thou•es in feasting; Know no fights
But such as are Dramatic, and proceed
From the Invention of your Poets; who
Kill only on the Stage, and then revive
Their slaughtered persons in the Tiring-House.
If with my Queens leave, I may speak, Sir, I•
We vanquish not the Thracians, who are now
Your Enemies, or give them battle: We
Shall seem a fleet of Gossips, who took shore,
Only to see, and to be seen; And so
Return Inglorious.
Besides, Our Citizens
Will count us Cowards; And weary to be governed
By such faint, sluggish Princesses; will mutiny,
Shake off the yoke of Subjects, and endanger
To turn our Monarchy into a Many.
He•ded Democracy; And then you know
What must needs follow where the State consists
All of Plebeians; where that Beast the Rude
Multitude rules, and none obey.
You show
Valours so much beyond your Sex, and stir
S• just a shame, and blushing in us of
Our own unequal Courages, that I
Must needs look on you, not as you are Ladies,
But warlike Goddesses stepped down from heaven;
Each of you an Armed Pallas, to assist
The just Cause of th'a•flicted. Or if this
Express you not; In each of you, Methinkes,
I once more see Achilles like a Girl.
And twill be Honour to me, when hereafter
Posterity in Chronicle shall rank me
A sharer in your Actions; And my Conquests
Shall run in story bound with yours. Not to
Offend you therefore with ought effoeminate,
Or what befits not you to see, or this
Place to present, as one addition more
To your entertainment l've provided
A warlike Dance performed by Warlike Moors;
Just in such postures as they adore their Gods,
Before they go to battle. Bid 'em enter.
My next care, Madam, shall be to make these follies
Pass into better spectacles. I will
Send for the Ladies from their Castle. Your presence
Will maked a new delight to enjoy the sounds,
And roughness of the Camp.
—My Lord Lyncestes,
How doe the Ladies brooke
Their Solitude? Have they not yet created
One of themselves Priest to the Company,
To say prayers twice a day for their releasement?
Sure Sir, They were not Ladies, but a Crew
Of Spirits; who appeared like women, and
A while wore humane faces made of lips,
And eyes, and cheeks, &amp; dimples, to delude
The easy sight of the beholders, and
Then vanished back into themselves again.
They are not grown invisible. I hope;
They've no enchanted Rings among 'em?
Sir,
I have sailed round your Coast, as far as Water
Would give me leaze; Have ransacked every Creek,
Examined every hole which would but lodge
A Conger, or a Poore-Iohn; And can find
No more print of them then Ships leave in the Sea.
Uulesse I should have hired your Negro's, Sir,
Which I met here at door to dive for 'em,
As Indians do for pearl, in hope to find 'em,
Some forty Fathom deep in Oyste• shells,
I know not where to seek 'em.
Are they lost then?
Eurymedon in person with his Fleet
Concealed, Sir, seized them in their passage over
Into the Island; And whether he have sent 'em
Home to Bizanti•m, or keep them here
His pri•oners, is uncertain.
The Report
Had like to have put Chalcedon, Sir, into
A Civil War. The People of both Sexes,
'Till I allayed them, were up in a Commotion.
O my prophetic soul! which whispered me
I •hold not trust 'em to an Element
So false and treacherous.
Are our two Lady•s
Vapour'd a way in the mist too, Sir, and seized on?
Yes, and their women; They have not left a beauty
In the City; or ought which you can call handsome
To breed upon, or to continue a
Succession of good faces.
I expect
I• time to see my wife return then, with
A race of little Thracians all noble by
The bearers side.
And I that my Wife save me
The future labout of begetting, and
Without my help return me a fine Troop
And Squadron, which will call her Mother, and
Me Captain.
Had he seized my Crown; or taken
Me prisoner, and with me my Kingdom, It
Had been a loss I could have borne; And thought it
One of the Chances which prove Princes subject
To Men's Misfortunes. But to deprive me of
Her, who to me was Empire, Kingdom, Crown,
And all Things else, which make men happy; She
Whose two eyes were the Suns that ruled my Day,
And to whom only her Absence did make Night;
She who smiled virtue, and whose beauteous Looks
Were a soft, visible, Music, which entranced
The lo•cares on, and struck harmonious raptures
Into every chaste soul, and instilled pure fires
Int' every unchaste; She who had the pow•r
To charm fierce Tigers, and make Panthers tame,
And civilise the wildest Salvage, but
He who surprised Her, and made his Sister, and
My destined Queen part of his piracy;—
Thus to deprive me of my Joys in the porch,
And entrance to them, is a wrong like that,
Where the fair Bride is ravish• from the Bridegroom,
Upon the Nuptial Day; or where their Hands
Are rudely sundered whilst the Priest is tying
The hole• Knot. But why doe I turn Woman,
And add to the loss by my Complaints. You two
Straight back to the City; Raise new Forces; Add
Wings to your expedition, I shall think
Time moves not with its own hast, 'till we give
The Robbers Battle, and redeem the prey.
Come, Sir, you shall divert the Thought of your
Recoverable loosse at our Tent; where
We will divide griefs with you, or find ways
To make them wholly ours.
Your Company
Re•eives me, Madam; And I shall not think
My self unfortunate in such a presence.
Ladies?
Sir?
You don't train this afternoon,
Or muster, doe you?
Your reason Sir?
Because,
If no Affair of Discipline call on you
To leave us, weed fine change some Camp Air with you,
W'are at full leisure, Sir.
Pray, Ladies, let us
Be bold to ask you then, what places hold you
In your Queens Army? Doe you command the Foot,
And Infantery? Or are you Cavaliers
And Regents of the Horse?
Why doe you ask?
Not out of curiosity, to inform
Our selves in your Arts Military; But only
Out of a free desire we have Commanders
To be admitted servants to Commanders.
How doe you mean?
Troth, Ladies, to divert
The Melancholy and Sadness which this Acciden•
Will raise among us; we would gladly join
Soldiers with Soldiers, and make both Armies one.
That's done already Sir.
Our meaning is,
We would fine doe you civil Right, and pay you
The debts of nature which you come for. Officers
Mingling with Officers will raise a Race
Of stout young Alexanders between them, who'l
Once more subdue the world.
Now you speak
Without Clouds, we conceive you. Doe you think then,
We come to seek men to get children on us?
We hope you're like your Mothers. We know, Ladies
Without our Help you are but barren Things;
And cannot propagate between your selves.
Well, say this be our Errand, since you speak
So understandingly; what would you doe
To help us in Necessity?
Doe? Why,
What should we doe? Doe service to your Country;
And strive to keep you still a People, by
A new succession of Amazons.
But say
They should prove males, Sir.
Then breed them up to save you
The trouble of such journeys; and employ 'em,
As you do us their Fathers, to the public good.
B•t it is against our Laws to Foster, Sir,
Male births.
What do you with 'em? drown 'em then?
Restore 'em to their getters. Would you receive 'em,
If we should send 'em home?
So they be borne
Perfect; not half male, and half female; I'll
Nurse no Hermaphrodites.
Besides, you have
Been used to the Ladies of your own Court; you'll
Ne'er like our Company. We are not fair
And beautiful enough to stir your Loves
To serve us in our needs.
By this hand, Ladies,
I'm more inflamed to see a certain true,
And Genuine smile creep •'re your N•tbrowne faces,
And make a kind of Day-breake there, then all
The Artificial whites and reds, laid on
By our Court painters, who call it Beauty •o
Create their own looks.
Are there such Arts, then?
You saw the two Lords here?
Yes Sir,
They
Have two young Ladies, whom I do question, whether
They may call Wives, or Pictures.
Their wedding day
Saw them, perhaps, in their own blushes; And
They lay the first night in their unbought Roses;
But ever since have varied shapes; scarce worn
The same face twice. Who'd lye with such she Proteusses?
Who change form in the embrace; And do lye down
One Mistress, and in the morning rise another?
Our looks are course, but native, Sir.
You're like
The Times which Love delights in; we behold
A fair night in your faces stuck with Stars.
Me thinks ye exceed the Queen of Love; she had
But one black Mole, you are all but one fair Spot.
Believe it Ladies, were he not a boy,
I'd say you'd brought each of you in those lovely,
Dark, shady cheeks, a Cupped, who from thence,
As from an amiable twilight, shoots
His golden arrows.
You do express your selves
So affectionate, so like lovers—
So comply
With our own wishes, which are to requi•e
Your love with love—
And do so nobly know
The wants of Ladies, and can as nobly pardon
All their defects, that henceforth we will expect
Some enter course of visit from you.
We
Shall long to see you at our poor Tents, choose
Your own times; We lock not our curtains.
What, laying siege to the Ladies, Gentlemen?
Trying, my Lord, what Forts They wear; or where
They are most easy to be Scaled; We have yet
But made an Attempt upon their Outworkes, and
Held parley with them.
And how, and how, in Troth,
Do you find em? Tractable? Will They surrender
On easy Composition, without a long
And tedious Battery?
We find em made,
As other Ladies are, of flesh and blood:
I do perceive no difference, My Lords,
Twixt Airs, and Climates; But where men meet women,
Nature will have'ts Effects, for the preservation
Of the Universe: unless there should be some
To ask, others to grant; some to beget,
Others to bring forth, the World would have an end
In the short Circle of one Age.
• hope
It is not come to that already; you have
Had a quick victory, to see and conquer.
They are very Waxen, sure, who take Impression
At the first chafing.
W•xen? Why I'll tell you,
I never yet saw Things so yielding▪ So
Obedient to the Touc•. I do believe,
Should we dissemble coyness, or stand out,
They would put Questions to us; And upon
Refusal, take Arms, and invade •ur Lodgings.
And what would be the fruits of such a War,
Backed with so good a Cause, your Lordships judge.
Alas you must consider, Good my Lords,
Necessity's a Tyrant. Had they Men
In their own Country to supply their Wants,
Or were their State composed so, that without
Danger to the Commonwealth, there might be some
Kept at the p•blique charge to lye with them,
At the Age of procreation, and so be
The Fathers of their Country, whilst they mingled
Natives with Natives, It perhaps would seem
Immodest to seek foreign Help. But where
Males are against the Law; And where to Marry
Is worse then to commit; And where a Husband
〈◊〉 a Crime worse then Fornication; what
In this Case w•uld you have them doe?
Unless
Nature had made them double, and enabled 'em
To be both Sexes to themselves; Or else,
Unless they could bear children, as we see,
Ou• fields bear flowers; Where one and the same Soil•,
Watered by a 〈◊〉 shower, or breathed upon
By a Warm Air, is Father, Mother, All,
To its own 〈◊〉, How do you think they should
Produce posterity? Troth, My Lords, I feel
A certain generous pity in me to
Their •easonable Longings.
Well, Gentlemen,
Y•u have convinced us. But doe you think the Two
Princesses came for the same purpose?
As sure
As we have leave, Sir, to make visits, or
Choose our own Nights with these departed Ladies.
And have you?
Ask them, Neand Troth my Lords,
Work enough with your own two Ladies, when (you'll have
You next recover'em; and therefore will not,
We hope, disturb us, who are single, in
Our amorous courses. We are promised all▪
The pleasures which their Tents can yield: And told
There shall be no lockes twixt us and our Joys.
How now? What have we here? The Sign oth'Battle
Twixt Time and Ragged Breeches? And whither now
Tends your most tottered March? What make your four
Half Doublets from your Colours?
Sir, we are
Employed as public persons, by our Companies,
To tell the King our Grievances. Beat on
To the Kings Pavilion.
Public: It is true, you are;
Your Elbows witness for you; There's not one
Bare part about you that's not public. But
Pray stay, pray stay a little, Gentlemen;
What Grievances have your most lousy valours
To present now?
Such, Sir, as we have often
Complained to you of, and you'll not redress us.
The King is Just, Sir, and allows us pay,
Which you melt up by the way. You may make sport,
And laugh at our poor Ruins; But it is our Rags,
And bareness, which doth make you glitter.
If
We had our Right, your large Scarfs, every one
Of which displayed, would make the Colours to
A Comp•y, should be our Shirts.
How, Sir?
Sir, it is true; And your large Feathers, each
Of which, wav'd by the Wind, does make you walk
In perfect flourish; And present you like
Three winged Dedalus's, prepared to fly,
Should be our Coats, and plume us.
And that shine
And blaze of plate about you, which puts out
Our eyes, when we march' against the Sun, and arms you
Completely with your own ••lt Lace, which is
Laid on so thick, that your own Trimmings doe
Render you Engine proof, without more Arms,
Should go to buy us bread.
This is most rare
With reference to the Feathers in your Hats,
Most pilfring Gentlemen, which show you have
Skirmished with Neighbouring poultry, larely, and having
Eaten part of your Conquest, wear the rest
As Emblems of your wandering from the Camp,
And Inroads on Backsides. If I may ask you,
Where have you learnt this Eloquence? I do not
Read that Demosthenes declaimed with Toes
Looking through leather Casements. Or that He was
Sent in an Embassy with half a Stocking,
Or such decayed Caparisons, as I
Observe in your retinue.
Sir, wee need
No Teacher but our wants to find us words.
Had you Three reckoned th'Age oth'Warre by fasting
As we have done; who by our hunger know
'T•• now a month since it began; or did you
Know only these two poor Relee•es, Warm days
For Clothes, Warm Ayre for food.
Or had you
Been Three Comrades like us, Three days to one.
Dried Biscuit, and •orne Stock•fish, both which might
Be shot for Battery, And for hardness be
Reckoned into the Art••ery, we doe
Believe you would not starve in silence; Or
Depart this life without some Testimony
That you were famished hence.
Why hark you, you
Rascals, who think the life of man consists
In eating; And that you were sent into the world
To dev•ur Flocks and Herds▪ what are you made for?
Resolve me, if you can; What is the End
O• your Creation, but to fight, Go naked,
And starve in Sun shine?
True; other use
Can there be of you in a State, but either
To be hanged if you steal, if you do not
To suffer hunger, and be lousy in
Your Countries Cause? And if you scope the Sword,
And do survive, to be a Burden to
The Common wealth, to be dispatcht by famine•
for the public ease?
Besi•es, why do you trouble
Us with your meager visages? what are
Your torn necessities to us?
Does not
Our pay pass through your hands? Are not you our Captains?
And are there no ways, Sir, to live, besides
Your four and eight pence weekly?
Weed be glad
To learn them, Sir▪
Pray let me ask you, then,
And answer with discretion. What is
The natural use of Capons, Hens, and Geese?
For what serve Turkeys?
To be eaten.
Right;
You and I jump. And what's the use of Sheep?
I do not mean with fleeces; (That falls under
Another question:) But as they are Mutton?
Why to be eaten too.
Still right. And lastly,
What is the use of Wool made into Cloth?
Is it not to cover?
It is so, Sir,
And what's
The use of Plate and Money? Is it not to
Supply Men's Wants, and buy the things they need?
Most true Sir,
And are these times which do make
The stealth of all these lawful, And reach out
All these unto yo• for the venturing: And
Are you so cowardly, or rather so
In love with your own Lice, that you must ask
Us for rely•e? Or think of such a base,
Poor, contemp•ible thing as Pay?
Is this
The answer you will give us?
This is all.
Plundering's a large Revenue; 〈◊〉 is your own
Fault if Towns cloth you not; Ore• the Fields
Afford you •ot provision.
We must then
Here let you know, we'll Mutiny. Beat back.
You Mutiny, you ill faced Rascals; Have you
A mind to cheat the Hangman with your Wardro•es?
Or an itch to disgrace the Gibbet with
Your Goblin Carkaffes before your times?
Wee'• raise the Camp again•t you•
Co•e, l••'s r••se
Let's raise the Camp.
Away you heaps of ver•••.
Earth your selves in your Trenches: And there live
The quiet life of Moles; Feed on the Roots
Of wholesome herbs which grow about you Go.
Ser:
My L•rds, we must take leave.
You see the peace
Of the Army lies on it.
We kiss your Lordships hands.
Why here be three new Captains now, who make
The Right use of the War. Spend their Assaults
On such soft, harmless, yielding Things, as Ladies,
And keep Themselves in Spangles, with the pay
Of their poor Soldiers.
It appear•s to me
Strange what Design should cast these Amazons
Upon our shore. I hope they have no Aim
To take Advantage of our fight▪ or keep
Themselves Spectators 'till both Armies have
Weakened Themselves, and then ore'come the Victors.
I would be loath to have it said in story,
We were subdued by Women with one Breast.
And it would trouble me to see my self
Led Captive; And transported to a Land
Where I must propagate at the mercy of
Those who did take me prisoner; And get Children
By th'night, and task, upon my Conquerors.
Beleiv't their project is le••e politic.
You hear the Errand they come for is to
Lye with us in our Land.
Still it is strange
They should so quickly open, And reveal
Themes•ves so easy, so prepared, as these
Three make 'em.
Pray Heaven, my Lord, our Ladies
Show n•t ••emselves as easy, and as pliant,
•the ot•er Camp•. It is true indeed, their case
Is 〈…〉 had no Dea•th of Husbands,
Which sh•u'd invite 〈◊〉 to require Relief
Fr•• 〈◊〉 Enemy. But if they should conclude
A peace for us; And it one of the Articles
B•, to give something they can spare, and we
N•• m•ss•, we cannot help it if they show
Themselves good pat•iots; And prefer their Country••
Before our private Interests; or their
More private Honesties.
True; It is but loosing
A little Honour for the public Good;
And Honours but a Word; We shall not be
Impoverished by the loss. All parts in Women
Are like their lips; And lips you know are Springs.
If a whole Army quench their Thirst there, still
As much is left as taken; The first stock
Menal.
Remains entire.
My Lord, Behold; what say
You to a Message now?
l'me now confirmed.
Are you my Lord Theagines?
Yes Lady.
And you my Lord Meleager?
It is my name•
You're of the Bedchamber to the King?
We are so•
They have had good Intelligence.
Our Ladies
Hearing you're noble, and delighting much
In persons valiant, and of great Action, (as
They are informed you are) will take it for
An honour, if you will vouchsafe to be
Of the Bedchamber to them too, for the space
Of a short visit.
They say they doe long,
Long, very much t'impart a business to you.
You doe not know what it is?
Sir, it requires
The secrecy of they• Tents to know it.
When
Pray, is the time they'd be at leisure, Ladies,
For us to waite upon'em?
At all times, Sir,
They say you cannot err. Only they will
Tak't as the greater favour, If to beguile
The tedious hours with discourse of the Ancients,
And the Comp•riso• of Women's deeds,
With those of Men, you will divide your Nights,
Sometimes wi•• •hem.
But chiefly, they desire
You would now come along with us.
My Lord,
What woul• come on it if we Two should suppose
Our selves unma•ried? Our Wives when we next meet,
If before hand they not requite us) will
Find us whole H•sbands.
I am resolved to make
Use of the Opportunity. The worst
That can befall us, if our Ladies know it,
Is to seal m•tuall pardons.
Come, Ladies, you
Shall be ou• Clue to guide us.
We will lead you
Into a pleasing Labyrinth.
'I will be
Our wish to be lost in such Company.
Come, Sir, wee are resolved, if it b•in the power
Of Ladies to effect it, to cure you of
Your sadness, you no longer shall aff•ict
Us and your self with melancholy. It does not
Show princely in you, thus to enthral your self
To the 〈◊〉 of a Woman. We thought to find you
A 〈◊〉; One in whose stout breast •o poor
So effoemina•e a thing as Love, or the
Loss of a Mistress, would have past among
Those ordi•••y Cares, which are at once
Considered and forgotten▪
It is for subjects
To affect Constancy, or melt and pine,
And breath themselves away in the Contemplation
Of those they Love; Or to affect Lone walks,
There raise an Idol to themselves, And then
Fall down and worship it. You've turned your Camp
Into a Cloister, Sir. And are re•ir'd
•the midst of Legion•. Nor can we imagine
We have your Company, when present with us,
Your thoughts are so away.
Had you ever seen
The wondrous object that attracts them, or
Di•••n'd the secret influences, which
Pass from her soul to mine, and mingled there,
In one strict union, at this distance make us
So much each others as to have no power
T'untwist ourselves, or have the leisure to
Look towards ought which wears not her fair shape
To me, or mine to her, you might as well
Condition with the passive Iron not
To turn to the Loadstone; Or chide the Needle for
Moving towards the bright pole, as accuse me
For thinking on Roxane. I confess,
Bright Princesses, It is Love that makes me rude;
And but I hope you have brought pardons with you,
And can forgive one robbed of his free self,
Nor left to his own Carriage; I should count
Those Hours which I have stolen from you, to pay
Devotion unto Her, a Sac•iledge
Committed against your Beauties; Or a Theft,
Which doth take Worship from 〈◊〉 Goddess to
Consume it on Another.
We'll allow
Roxane, Sir, (For so I doe perceive
You call your Princess) To be all that a Prince
In Love can fancy fair, or amiable;
(Yet I must tell you too, Love's a false glass,
Which still shows things much fairer then they are.)
We'll grant all your Descriptions true, that to
Her Fairness she hath Virtues, which doe add
A Beauty to her Beauty, and render her
One, pure, through, rich Gem▪ which entirely is
Nothing but Worth and Luster; yet if this Gem
Be dropped into the Sea, or lost in the vast
Chaos of Waves, will you make war with Nature,
O• force the Ocean to restore your Jewel
Made Irrecoverable?
Doe you then look
Upon my loss no otherwise?
Not, when
I weigh her Brothers power; Th'uncertaine Chances
Of Wars like this; The many Subjects lives,
Which must be sacrificed to her recovery.
The most you can expect if you prevail,
Is that your Nuptials should be mixed with slaughters;
And that your Marriage Tapers should be kindled
From funeral piles; And so Roxanes Wedding,
Thus ravished to and fro, like Proserpines,
In the under World, be kept amongst Ghosts and shades▪
Besides, how are you sure your constancy
Is answered, Sir, with constancy? Our hearts
Are changeable• nor do I see why Princes
Should be less frail then others, who confine
Affection to the sight, since Love's a fire
Which doth not only languish, and go out,
Where fuel is subtracted, But is kept burning
Only in the presence of another fire.
Isle rather think not•re can change her Courts
Rivers run backwards from the Ocean,
Things heavy can fly up, and light fall down;
Or that the Heav•nly Orbs can vary, and
By shuffling of themselves, the higher with lower,
Loose their first Order, and in this confusion
Wheel round in Discord, as before in Music,
Then she can cease to Love me. Roxane is
To me a Vestal, and I one to her;
There's but one holy flame between us, which
Cannot expire but with our selves.
But you'll
Allow there m•y, Sir, be degrees in Love;
And that a lesser fire ought to give way
In justice to a greater; And though not quench••,
Yield it self swallowed by it.
Madam, pray
Explain your self.
Say, then, Archidamus,
(For now I will be free) there should be those,
Who though they bring no bright Stars in their eyes,
Or such charm•s in their faces, as Roxane,
(Which to affect, were to take fire from looks,
And love by th'sense, and outside, not by the mind.)
Yet being of equal birth, of as great virtues,
Of greater Dowries, (For those I speak of
Do with a Kingdom bring their Conquests too)
But above all (for they dare strive here, and
Account themselves superior) say they should bring
Greater Affection, And to show they do,
No longer able to conceal their Flames,
Should lay aside their Sex, and Act your part,
And tell you that they love you; Would such deserve
A repu••e from you? Or could you, Sir, to gain
The name and •tile of Constant unto one,
Be unjust to two? And not repay their flame
With such another?
There can be no such, Madam.
Without more Clouds, say, Sir, we be those two?
You, Ladies? You are fit to conquer Princes;
And to have the Gods steal down in varied shapes,
To beget Hero's on you and half Gods;
Not to betray such weak aff•ctions as
To sue to those who do adore you. Besides,
You two admit no choice, where both are equal,
Both Twins in their perfections, as in birth,
Unless I could divide my self, and •e
Two to you Two. (for here is no election
O• one without wrong to the other) And
Could multiply my self into a number,
How can I answer both?
By choosing one.
We are agreed between our selves; she that's
Refused, shall home, and wear the Crown, the other
Stay here and be your Queen.
O Love• why as
Thou dost weave knots, doest thou not teach a way
How to untie them too? I do confess
My self lost in a sweet perplexity.
In•e now the Prince' fore whom three Goddesses
St•ova for the Golden Ball, or which should be
Preferred for Beauty. When I do consider
Your several shapes, I am snatched several ways;
And am at once three Lovers. If I therefore,
Amidst such equal merits, can't make choice
Of one before the other, It is because
I 〈◊〉 not blind. Where Objects are alike
Fai•e, and distracting, He must want his eyes
W• doth prefer.
We'll give you this nights respite
To think upon election. Mean time, Sir,
T•e•e's a shoe•t Banquet waits you at our Tent.
You'll be the Music to it.
Madam,
Now your Ploy's done, ours will begin; we doe
Only w••t stage room.
Look y•u play your parts well.
As well as our Hypocrisy &amp; false faces
Will give us leave.
—Orithya, what do you think
Oath Prince's Constancy? should he be tempted
To leave Roxane for Roxane, and make
Choice of the Disguised for the true, it would prove
A fine Gin laid to prove men frail, and subject
To our Infirmities.
I know not how
This tedious Scoene of Love hath wrought on him;
But it to me was Opium, and raised slumber.
A Gentle murmur did glide by my ears
Like the soft fall of Streams. A little more
Of such slight, aëry stuff, had bound my senses
Up in a perfect sleep.
I did observe
The Once•s, &amp; Replies too; Methought they ran
In Artops &amp; Neanders candid stile,
When they doe court our Women in Milke-verse,
Or tell them News or Stories in Sonnet prose.
I should ne'er be thus cruel to him I love,
To show him shades in stead of substance; It is,
Methinkes, embracing Clouds.
—Madam, your great Design
Goes rarely on, Your Lords are come, and are
Disposing of their Ambush.
And have you, Menalippe,
Bespoke the false Alarm at the just hour?
Clocks strike not dulier after Quarters, Madam,
Then our she Drum• will observe her Cue,
And make things dreadful.
Marthesia, stand you Sent•∣nil
Against they come.
Troth, Madam, it is to me
A Comoedy before hand to imagine
How they will bear th'affright.
Methinkes I see 'em
Rolling themselves up in their own gold Lace,
Like Urchins in their prickles▪ Or wishing to
Exchange place with their swords, and case themselves
In their own scabbards.
Stand, who comes there?
There they are; Go Menalippe bid the Lords
With their stout Squadron, observe their Entrances.
You'll not exact the Word of us, I hope,
My pretty Perdue Virgin; if you doe,
Pray call your Corporal.
We doe not come
As Spies; If you suspect, commit us to
Your Ladies.
Or else keep us prisoners in
Your Corpse of Guard, till they release us.
Now,
I know you're friends, you may pass. I was set
Here to attend your coming; To p•event
Your danger of mistaking the right Tent.
We should have found that by Instinct. Neand. Bright Ladies,
We have made bold to use the Liberty
You gave us; And try what camp hours you keep.
I hope w'are not unseasonable; we
Came, Ladies, to keep watch wi•h you.
The time
Of the night adds to our visit; Had you come
By day, you'd brought but half your selves, and only
Made visit to our eyes; where all that could
Have past, had been to see, and to be seen.
True, Ladies, whereas now you have us all;
And other Senses may be pleased too; And
Go sharers with the sight.
Besides, The Day
Turns all Things into Crystal, Sir; Our Tents
Had been transparent, like their Silks; And we
Had not been private in ou• Closets.
Right;
Whereas the Night turns all Things into Shade;
And draws Jet curtains about our pleasures; And
Makes a fair Lady invisible in ones Arms.
Will you vouchsa•e to sit and taste of this
Slight Banquet, Ge•t•emen.
You make it Three.
You do not reckon us'mon•st Marmalade,
Quinces, and Apricots• o• take us for
Ladies preserved?
No Ladies; yet I hope
It is no •ff•nce to say you're each of you
A various Banquet, where a breathing sweetness
Feasts the Spectators; And diverts all thought
Of eating to behol•ing; And from beholding
•enjoying.
All these do take value,
Not from the Art, which joined to nature, made 'em,
But from you who bestow'em. These Cherries do
Take Colour from your Lips; This Amber casts
A perfume from your Breath; what ere's delightful
In them refiects from you.
And least there should
Be Muse•ke wanti•g to this Ba•quet, when
You speak, the Sirens si•g
You've brought, we see,
The art to fl••la and •is••mble with you.
I now begin to fe•re you. It can't be
Y•u sh•uld thus fine and love us.
Not love you, La∣dies?
Why what signs would •ou have? What is required
To Love which we would not perform?
Would you
Fight foru•, if need w•re?
O•enter duel
In Defence of our Honours?
Would we? By
This hand, should you command, we would, our selves
Alone, now venture on the Thracian Camp.
O• presentl• send 〈◊〉 to Nine
O•the• be•• Captains, 〈◊〉 fight Three to O•e.
We will do more then figh•; with your fair leaves,
We •ill get Fighters on you
Is that your iran•?
That a•d to •elpe away the Soli•ude
And 〈◊〉 of the night.
Well, since we do
〈◊〉 you 〈◊〉, and worthy of our favours,
How will• you 〈◊〉 things? Three to two Women
Is one to much:
One must stand out; unless
You'• take the Sentinel in for a Third.
To men of your indifferent purposes
It should be all one; she's of the right Sex.
We will draw cuts who shall have her. What say you
My pretty Diomed of the Cawdles. will you
For one night lay aside your contemplations
How to take Town in Marchpane; or express
The Siege of Thebes, or Travels of Vlisses
In sweet meats, And make one of us?
I'll take
My fortune Sir,
Artops, She's yours; I did
Praesage thy melting Hymns, and S•rains, would end
In a Corne-Cutter.
She is not fifty Sir,
Nor I the fifteenth in succession, to
A Flavia, who brings manchet to the Camp;
This is no Sutlers wife.
Go wench prepare
The Beds.
But should you, now, reveal, or rumour
Your Entertainment.
Do you think us ill-bred Rascals?
Fellows that can't conceal?
Or should you tell
How kind, how free you found us how we used you—
We will rather cut our tongues our &amp; live speechless.
Hark, what means this?
The Camp is up in Arms
Fly, Madams fly, we are betrayed.
The enemy
Hath seized upon the Works; taken the King;
Burnt our Queens Tent; flaine all the Captains; and is
Now marching hither.
Now show your valo•rs, And
Help to defend those whom you Love.
Alas, Ladies;
You can fight for your selves. This is the first
Time we ever saw the Field.
Alas what can
Three doe against an Army?
Will you not
Then draw your weapons, But stand like worcester•ted Captains
In Arras?
Will you let us and your selves
Be taken and make no resistance? or will you
Be killed like people in their sleep?
'Lasse, Ladies,
What would you have us doe? we have been borne
And bred in peace, and were ne'er 〈◊〉 to fighting.
O more then Women Cowards! And will you dye
Like men oth'peace to?
Hark, swords, swords; they come.
Why doe you quake? why doe you look about yo•?
Would you fine hide your selves?
Hark swords again.
If you will, There's an old Drum yonder, with
One head, wee'• whelm it over you.
Thank you, Ladies.
Or pack you up in one of the Waggons, with
A bare Hide over you, where you may pass
For Cheese, or Ammunition.
Twill doe well.
O• Madam, what if we pulled down our Tents,
And wrapped them up in the Curtains?
Twill do better.
Theag. within. You Three take that way, we will take this; slay all
That will not yield.
Oh•here they come The what? flying?
Taking wing? Seize these Captains; And di•a•me 'em.
Ladies, we doe intend no war against you.
Our Quarrels are with men.
Doe they refuse?
Show them Camp Law.
We doe not, Sir, there F•eind,
There is my Sword.
And there is mine; pray use
Me •eke a Gentleman.
Come, Sir, you part
As slowly with your sword, as that with the Scabbard.
You've no Artillery in your pocket, have you,
That will o'retake men at a Distance, and
Arrest'em at Fivescore?
Sure Friend there's all.
Next b•nd their eyes with their own scarfs.
〈◊〉 Ge•tlemen.
H•lt your heads fair, &amp; shut your eyes, that we
M•y close '•m double.
Stir not as you desire
To kee•e'•m in your Head, and not put out.
We doe not, Sir.
So; There's one Darkness more
Then that we caught you in.
Now lead'em bound
To the other Ca•tives, And attend the Council
O• War with'em in the morning.
Come Gentlemen.
Ladies, you see we've kept our Words; The Hours
Did fly with leaden Wings 'till we did earn
The sweet Rewards you've promised.
Next unto
The thought of this nights Raptures, which you will
Inspire into our souls, we doe take pleasure
To be thought worthy to be Actors in
Your just revenge.
My Lords, we look on you
As those we dare trust; such as understand
What Ladies favours are, How merited;
And withal, how to be concealed. Love hath
His Mysteries, as well as shrines, &amp; Temples;
To which a Secrecy is due; And they are
Profaned when published.
Besides, you are our Equals;
And though we cannot call you Husbands, yet
To reap the fruit of Husbands from you, will be
No stain, or blemish to us. But could you think us,
So vulgar, so indifferent, so hard driven,
In making our Elections, to defile
The Honours of our Beds with those who next
Would find us Bodies?
Especially, with those
Who'd make our Nights the Discourse of Their Days.
And so they might gain credit by our favours,
Would prostitute our Fems; And when They did not
E•joy our persons, would call it new pleasures to
Lye with our Reputations.
What would These Three
Parcell-guilt silken-Gentlemen have said
Had They possessed us, who so freely boasted
The leave we gave them to make visits to us?
As if to show good breeding were a Crime;
Or to be Civil in a strange place.
True Ladies;
They said you were the most strange easy Things;
So inclining to Mankind, as if you had
A purpose to disperse Bills through the Camp,
To invite Men to your Lodgings; And would propose
Rewards to them who best performed.
They said
You had two Ladies too, which did use painting;
And ne'er wore their own faces; But did vary
Shapes every Morning; And go forth of their Closets
Things of their own Creation.
They left it
Doubtful too, and to be suspected, as if
Your Ladies loved Plurality; And that they
At Court did go half Husbands with you.
Well,
Half our Revenge is past; The other Half
We will contrive between your Melting Arms.
You two sing us asleep; And when you've done,
Go walk the Round, and see the Watch relieved.
Time is a feathered Thing;
And whilst I praise
The sparklings of thy Looks, and call them Rays,
Takes Wing;
Leaving behind him as He flies,
An unperceived Dimness in thine eyes,
His Minutes whilst they are told,
Doe make us old;
And every Sand of his fleet Glass,
Increasing Age as it doth pass,
Insensibly sows wrinkles there,
Where Flowers and Roses doe appear,
Whilst we doe s•eake our fire
Doth into Ice expire.
Flames turn to Frost;
And e've we can
Know how our Crow turns Swan,
Or how a Silver Snow
Springs there where Jet did grow,
Our fading Spring is in dull Winter lost.
Since, then, the Night hath hurled
Darkness, Loves shade,
Over its Enemy the Day, and made
The World,
Just such a blind and shapeless Thing,
As it was before Light did from Darkness spring;
Let us impl•y its treasure,
And make shade pleasure;
Let's number out the Hours by Blisses,
And count the Minutes by our Kisses•
Let the Heavens new Motions feel;
And by our Embraces wheel.
And whilst we try the Way.
By which Love doth convey
Soul into Soul;
And mingling so,
Makes them such Raptures know,
As makes them entranced lye
In mutual Ecstasy:
Let the Harmonious Spheres in Music roll.
Come Gentlemen, Without Resistance now
Disrobe your upper parts. What's wanting in
Good Clothes, your patience must supply.
Good Troth
Your Doublets •uite not with your Breeches; Rents
To Rents, And Rags to Rags is fashionable.
But as you're now you look like Men of Gold
Creeping forth of your
And are the Emblems
Of that State which does know no middle Subjects,
But is composed wholly of Lords and Beggars.
Well, Sir, Necessity which made you feed
The Numerous Thraeians, which now feed on me
In these your Breeches, And draw blood, which is
Against Camp Law, does here persuade me to
Resign my Doublet; pray shake yours, Sir.
There,
My Friend, who ever you are, There is whole plunder.
Pray, if you can, spare me a Doublet which
Hath Linings in it, and no glass-windows. For, if
My feeling doe not fail me with my •ight,
Your Nether Garment is half Net, half Breeches;
And Statutably will catch Greater Fish,
And let small pass, as well as cloth.
Troth, Sir,
You shall even have 'em as I wore'em, fellows;
They were New once; It was not in my power
To keep them at a stand, by Miracle.
Time which devoured his Children, will eat Holes, Sir.
Stay, stay, stay, stay Friend: Sure you must release
My eyes, to see to put your Ve•ture on right.
I warrant you, Sir.
So; There is one Arm•
Past through a Labyrinth• I doe expect
The Other should be lost by th'way. This Jerkin
Is wholly made of Doors; And had need have
A Thread belong to it.
Now it is on, Sir.
Thank you.
You're sure you've not mistaken?
How do you mean?
I mean your Breeches for your Doublet; As being
Indifferent in their use; which should be worn
Above, and which below?
Ell's right, Believe it, Sir.
Next, Gentlemen, you must once more submit
Your Arms to these Hemp prisons. No striving; You
Know where you are▪
Sir, we are tame; you've made us
So by the Imprisonment of our Legs already.
But if our •loowes doe break prison, pray
Impute it to the looseness of your buildings.
So; Now you're All Complete; you looked before
Like Him who first invented Coaches, to hide
His double Making; Who was downwards Serpent,
Upwards a well shaped Man.
Good troth, Me thought,
Your Nether parts looked as They would petition
Your Upper for an Alms; Or else, as if
You had •bove Girdle been the Founders, and
Below, the Hospital.
Well, Friends, you may
Laugh at our Miseries, and raise sport from
Your torn Exchanges. But is this noble usage
Of Soldiers unto Soldiers, thus to strip us?
When we take sheep with golden Flecees, It is
Our Custom to return Wool for their Plate.
We doe not strip you, but change Cases: Clothes
For Cloth•s was still held honourable.
And now,
In troth, most Worthy Captains, (For we have
Created you) what's your Intent? what will you
Doe with us thus reduced to Totters?
That
Is as the Council shall determine. Perhaps,
Employ you in our Works to dig: And there
Work out your Ransoms, 'till the War be ended,
As pioners.
Must we roll Wheele-barrowes?
Or manage Spades, and Mattockes then? And earn
Our bread and water with the Picke-Axe?
Perhaps,
We shall obtain you outright for our Slaves.
Then having marked you, to be known our Bond-men,
We will transport you home to Thrice, and there
Make sale of you in some public Market: you'll
Be vendible Commodities. Perhaps,
Some who have store of Wives will buy you to
Make Eunuchs of, and geld you.
Or perhaps
Some Ancient Widows, long past bearing, will
Buy you for their own private use.
Or else,
Perhaps, to make short work, The Counsel will
Condemn you to the Galleys, There to row
Your Days out •against the Pers•an; or fetch Corn
Monthly from Egypt: Sugar from Cr•et: or Spunges
From Samos.
And our Wages be to feel
The scourge about our shoulders if the Wind
Sit opposite, &amp; we can't row.
There must
Be such corrections, to quicken Diligence.
Pray as you're noble, and know how to pity
Humane Misfortunes, let us ask one Question.
As many as you please.
If by Starre-light
You can discern so far, How far are we
From a Tall Oak, which may be climbed by such
Ivies as we? Or a straight Elm, which may
Support th'Imbraces of such Vines?
Why ask you?
Because if any such kind natural plant
Be near, we would entreat you not t'omit
The Opportunity; But to prevent
Our Greater by less sufferings, would employ
Those Cords which bind our Arms, about our Necks,
And hang us up by Mooneshine.
Alas, such favours
Are not in our powers. If it be your fate
So to be sentenced, we will doe you all
The friendly Offices we can.
We thank you.
Mean time, perhaps to you it is Midnight, Gentlemen;
No Sun appears to you: But to us Day breaks.
We will conduct you to the place where you
Shall know your Dooms. Pray follow leisurely.
And doe not stumble.
If it be our Destiny
To dye by the string, the comfort is w'are Three.
In my opinion, my Lord, these are
The strangest Amazons that ever left
Their female Country for the use of Men.
How did you find yours? Mine had Breasts.
Troth mine,
I think hatl. sea•'t the razor too; I had
No le•sure to examine parts. I found
No defects in her; But methought she was
To me a whole and perfect Woman; I'm sure
She found me an entire and perfect Man.
There's a strange sweetness in them; how they melt
Between one Arms, and call one Husband?
I
Thought mine would have fulfilled the Fable, where
The Nymph dissolved into a Fountain.
But
How will our Ladies brooke this if they know it?
How? Thank us for being Civil unto Ladies.
Would they be willing these should report us Clowns?
O• Men void of Humanity, at their
Return home to their Country.
It is true; had we
Dismissed them as they came, both to our shame,
And shame of our posterity, they might
Record us Impotent in Chronicle;
Or say they were received Women by Women.
Here they come. Ladies, you appear to us•
Like Two Sun risings breaking from your Curtains.
The Day 'till now was not begun; you make
The Morning, which enables us to see
Those Beauties by their own light, which did turn
The Darkness of the Night into such pleasure,
As happy Lovers doe enjoy below,
In their Elision Fields.
Fie, fie, my Lords,
Is this your recompense to mock us for
Having bad faces?
Cause Nature played the Stepdame,
And made us not of the same Orient matter
Of which she framed your Ladies; Must you add
Your flouts to her hard Workmanship?
Before Heaven
I could for ever gaze on your fair eyes.
It is Heaven, where ever I may behold your faces;
You're wholly made of charm.
You are two Circes,
Two amiable Conjurers; Once gotten
Into your Circle, there's no getting out:
A Thousand Graces play upon your lips,
And every Kiss is a new Siren, which
Invites us to take more, and there to fix,
Till they grow Infinite.
Then for your beds,
They are two Phoenix Nests which breath perfumes;
You rose from us, to Day, as Spice from Altars,
Two perfect Sacrifices
Well, since you will
Needs put great value on slight favours, we
Shall know how you esteem us by your visits
In this kind often.
Next, That you may perceive
What Confidence we dare put in you; And
How ill it would become us to admit
You to our Beds, and shut you from our Counsels:
Kn•w that this Day, if you doe not prevent it,
Your Camp will be betrayed to th'E•amy.
How Ladies? It is not possible; pray who
Should be the Traitors?
Our Princess, and her Sister.
You stand amazed now.
Troth it stirs my wonder,
Treason should lodge in such fair Looks.
These Looks
Are, Sir, the Cause, and Ground of what we tell you.
Your King ignobly did refuse them, when
They fell below Themselves, and wooed Him.
Which
Being known to the Prince of Thrice, he joining Love
To their Revenge, hath frequently stolen hither
In a Disguise, and courted, &amp; prevailed.
This Morning is appointed as the last
Time of their Interviews, before the Nuptials.
It is too concluded, Sir, He shall restore
Your Princess, (For He says, To force Affection,
Were to wed •alfe a Queen, and match her Body
Without her Soul; Nor can the Marriage be
Perfect where Minds join not as well as hands,
And have their Knot too) And in her stead shall
M•ke choice of one of ours.
Then for
R•xi•e, He will transport her back, as scorning
To match there where Himself hath been refused.
And for the Carriage of all this, It is Ordered
That when the Battles join, we, on the Word,
And Sign given, shall revolt, and turn to that side.
You have m•de great Discoveries.
Who is this?
Now trust your own eyes; That's Eurymedon,
G•ing to our Queens Tent. Make what wise use
Of this you please. And say you have not lost
By th'Company of Ladies.
We look upon you
As the preservers of our Country.
We
Will erect Sacred Statues to you, as
To the Tutel• Deities that saved us.
Madam,
Here is the second part of the Comoedy.
The So •ldiers are come with their prisoners:
The strangest spectacle—
Why, what's the Matter?
Unless it were the Farse, where the Decays
Of Time are acted, I never saw three men
So made of Rags. The Soldiers have changed Clothes,
And plundered 'em.
Go bid 'em enter.
Come Ladies
We'll make two in your Council, And then to th'King.
Come Gentlemen, now stand in Rank, and keep
Due Distance from the Lords; Lest there pass from you
A creeping Intercourse, which may disturb
The sitting of the Court.
Are these the Captains
You took last Night?
These are the Three Commanders
An•t please your Lordships; who have since changed shapes
With us their Conquerors.
Indeed They look
As if They lately had been in a Fight;
Their Garments doe want Surge•ns. What's your name?
Callias Me. What's yours?
Neander. Me. What's yours?
I do remember you; you were employed
In our late Civil Wars, by the factious Members
Of our Synedrium, when they armed their slaves,
And made their Bondsman Cuirassiers against
The Equestrall Order; And did enact it lawful
In the Kings Name to take Arms against Him; And
Out of Obedience to Him to rebel.
And amongst their other Wilde and surious Votes,
Dec•eed it lawful, for the Good of the Subject,
To rifle their Estates; slaughter their persons;
Ravish their Wives, and to deflower their Daughters.
Are these the Three, who helped to make war against
Our Gods? And to reform their Temples, did
Deface their Altars? And called it sacrifice
To rob Them of their Incense, And pull down
Their Images? And did erect strange Priests,
Taken from Awles and Anvils, to deliver
False Oracles unto the people?
These
Sir, are the Three.
Apply the Rack to them,
To force true Answers from them to our Questions.
Pray hold, pray hold, Friends. Alas, My Lords, we are not
The men you mean. We ne'er saw Wars before,
Civil, or Foreign; Nor ever were beyond
Our own Coasts yet.
N•r do we understand
What your Synedrium is, unless it be
Your Mayor and Senate of Bizantium.
Who, as we hear, once in an age run mad;
And then talk Idly, of nought but Liberty;
Changing of Government; The fatal periods
Of States and Kingdoms; How They may coin new Gods,
And new Religi•ns.
They may vote twice two Thirty:
Or their own Scarlet's gray; Or Thracians, Scythians;
Or that They not rebel against your King,
When in a popular fury They cast off
The yoke of Subjects, For any aide They ever
Received from us.
Well, since you've cleared your selves
Of that great Doubt; Resolve us then, what makes
The Queen of Amazons among you?
What made
Her Grandmother in Alexanders Army?
She comes to show Her •el•e her N•ec, To fight,
And to have Amazons begot upon her.
Had these not interrupted us, we should
By this have known whither her Ladies came
For the same business.
That Sir is presumed;
Subjects are bound to imitate their Princes.
Next, what are your Designs? we hear you mean
This Day to give us Battle. Call. For our Designs,
Some say you have tame pigeons, taught to fly
With News and Letters, betwixt Camp and Camp;
Whereby our Counsels are no sooner hatched,
But They take Wing to you.
Others affirm,
You have your Multiplying Instruments,
Which take our Truths at one end, and, like Glasses,
Show Them in various shapes to the people; And
Return your Monsters to us at the Other,
In shapes more various and prodigious,
To fright us, as the Barbarous did of old,
With Elephants, and Castles in the Air;
And such like Expeditions; which once known,
Look big, and are despised.
Then for the battle,
This is the Day for our New Legions
To be brought in; which when They come; Our King
Intends to stake his Kingdome' against your Princess:
The Conqueror take both.
This is a playnesse,
Which does show generous in you. Lastly, therefore
As you'll avoid the Tortures of the Wheel,
Or Rack, in Questions of this moment; Tell us,
What Officers have you that may be bought,
To let us have good penny-worths, if we
Should have occasion to join Art to Arms,
And chaffer for a Castle, Fort, or Town,
Or a Defeat, or so? How's your Prince guarded?
As a Prince should be, by Gentlemen; whose Lives
Are cheaper to them then their Honours; And
More cheaply to be purchased from Them. Men
Who'd look on Tempters, as New Enemies;
And think it New Justice added to their Cause,
To fight against those who would corrupt 'em, Briefly,
T•• are Men who doe propose only these two
Brave Ends unto Themselves, to dye, and to
Be Loyal to their Prince; About whose person
Their Valours make one Guard, their Loves another.
Some under Officers perhaps there may be,
Whose Trade &amp; Occupation it is to Kill,
And to grow rich by Slaughters; Vile Market Spirits,
Who doe not fight for Fame, or Cause. but think
That side is most in the Right which gives most pay,
And these Wars justest where there is most plunder:
Whom you may buy o'er to your side, and we
Upon a New Sale, may buy back again.
You I believe have some in your Camp too,
Who are like Victory; Hover a while
With doubtful Wings between both Armies, and
At last forsake the weakest.
Since you've made
A free Confession, we'll now proceed unto
As free a Censure of you. My Lords, pronounce
Each in your order.
My sentence is, that since
They were caught in a Ladies Tent, at Hours
When all good Soldiers should be on their Watches;
And since They were surprised, and no swords drawn:
(Which renders them incapable of a
More Manly punishment) They be attired
In Women's Clothes, and so led through the Camp
In triumph, then left to their Ransoms.
I
Concur with you; But doe add farther, that
In stead of Ransom, in that Dress They be
Returned to be Another show of scorn
To their own Army.
What say you two?
We
Doe both agree in one brief Vote; which is,
That since we hear they boast of Ladies favours,
To which a grateful speechlessenesse is due,
That first They have their Tongues cut out, and so
Made Mutes; Next, that they be gilt, and made Eu•uches;
And thus disabled from all what concerns
The Company of Women, but to keep 'em;
That they be fold to the Persian; who'l employ 'em
With these Capacities in their Seraglio's.
You see we told you true.
Pray, pray my Lords,
Reverse this cruel sentence. Rather let us
Be dressed like Women, then be made not Men.
Rather cut off our Heads, then Tongues; and make us
Mutes that way.
To which of us doe you speak?
To the Lords with the treble voices.
Well,
Though we might show our rights of Conquest on you,
And yet proceed to harder Dooms; since victors
Cannot be cruel, where the worst is lawful;
Yet if you'll swear never hereafter to
Bear Arms against us, with your eyes we will
Restore you to your Liberty.
Let's swear;
'T will be a fine excuse to keepe's from fighting.
We swear.
By our Gods or your own?
By all
Our Country Gods we will near bear are•es against you.
You take the same oath?
Yes.
If you'll have me
I'll swear by all your Gods too, you shall never
Take me in arms against you.
Perhaps you will
Outrun your followers. Now unbinde 'em; next
Give'em their sight.
Ha, ha, ha, Look how meekly,
And peaceably they look?
what a Tranquillity,
And harmless Calm is in their Countenances?
How undisturbed they beat this? How serenely?
As if they were at Truce with all the world.
who would not be a Coward, to be endued
with such a gift of Patience?
Gentlemen,
Having so amply testified your valors
To us, and these fair Ladies, We will report
Your Chievalry to th'King. Mean time we leave you
To you stout Resolutions, and Chronicle,
To be set forth in Epic Meeter on you.
Farewell brave Champions; Take heed your examples
Do not infect your Companions.
Pray, when
You have spare hours, and are returned unto
Your Courages, let us once more partake
Of your defences at our Tent.
And as
You find us free, and yielding, pray for our
Sakes, and your own, conceal your Entertainment.
Pray keep your selves whole men.
And safe from danger•
Captains we have our pay a month before hand.
We will take leave too, and return to our postures.
Pray stay pray stay; Is not your name Macrinus?
Yes Sir.
Yours Lacer• I take it?
True Sir.
And you are Lants•esado Serpix?
Sir,
I should deny my self else.
And '•S thought
These are your Breeches?
We confess it; And
These yours, and Doublets.
Troth we know you scorn
To wear 'em after us; or to put on
Clothes which you once cast off.
Adieu sweet Captains;
We will report your B•untie to the Camp.
And show how you have gilded us, and made us
Three Complete Gentlemen of your Companies.
Neander?
Hum.
Was this a Dream, &amp; did
All these appear to us in our sleep? or wast
A real vision?
Why doe you ask?
Because, if it were real, I expect
That passages so fit for History,
Shall not scope Mercuries or Scout. Gazettes;
But shortly be recorded with the Deeds
Of Democratic Iohn, or the Red-nos'd Burgess,
Who enacts Ordinances in Sack; Or with
The Life and Death of preaching Nol and Rowland.
If we scope rascal poetry I care not.
All my fear is, lest He who carved the Emblem
Of the Ox with four Horns, spitting fire, like one
O•h' Bulls which Iason conquered, should cut us
With Wings, in most vile libel figure, flying,
Like Owls by Twilight, and moultring these our feathers,
Before two she Kites, following us with Quivers.
True; And then Pistoolerus, who lives by
His yearly Go•ts in scraping verse, and pictures,
T'expound this to the Multitude in Ballad,
Sung to the direful Tune of Orpheus torn
By Oyster Wives.
Artops, Suppose this should
Arrive to th'Knowledge of your browne Lycoris
In the Suburbs?
Pray don't trouble me, I•me in
A serious Contemplation.
What is it?
Why▪
If you'll needs know, It is whither it be not fit
(To prove our selves no Cowards, and to show
How much we can slight Death in any shape)
That we should call our Regiments together;
Erect a handsome T•averse; Then desire
The Company They'd join with us in one
Of Homers Odes, and after a short Confession,
Turn our selves off in Packthread.
Come, we must
Doe something to redeem our Credits: The Boys
Will else tie Squibs behind us, as we pass,
And make us walk the Streets in Fireworks.
Madam, you put too great names on my Visits,
To stile them meritorious Dangers. It is
So little I have done, thus to adventure
To your fair presence, secured only by
The weak veil and cloud which I wear about me,
That this but ranks me yet amongst vulgar Lovers;
Who would doe much more for one fading Kiss,
Which dies in the fruition, and perishes
Whilst it is received, from her they love.
But Sir,
So often to descend from your great Self,
Where once had been enough to gain a Princess;
And to submit your self to this dark shade,
Which might betray you, and at best conceals you
But as Eclipses doe conceal the Sun;
Which when They hide, doe rob him too, and take
His bright rays from him; And all this to enjoy
The frail Sight of a Woman, who returns
You nought but Task for Visit, and whose presence
Might it securely be possessed, and you
Not venture a Captivity as often
As you pass to and fro▪ at most can make
But this poor, short requital, To be seen
Such as She is, one only rich in promises,
Where She wants Trea•uric more Sub•tantiall;
And those performed so much below the Receiver,
So apt to breed Repentance, as to deserve
Only to pass amongst the Injuries of Love,
Is such a Nobleness, which first esteems
And values Mean Things, whose Worth is Opinion,
And then finds Arguments to prize them, and
T'account them amiable▪ you've added This
To my Releasement when I was your prisoner,
Still to proceed in the same generous error;
Still to believe me worthy to be loved,
As then to be surprised, and to be told so.
You are the first, Most Gracious Barsene▪
Who robbed Her self to make Another rich;
Or stripped her self of her own praises to
Adorn Another Wants, and then look on him
As a Thing Worthy to be valued, The Gods
When They return a large and plenteous vintage
For a few Drops of Wine poured on their Altars:
Or doe repay a Grain or Two consumed
In Sacrifice, with a whole field of Incense;
Or when They doe requite a pilgrimage
M•de to their Shrines, with Answers which doe promise
More then the Supplicant or asks, or hopes for,
Are not more Bounteous, more free and liberal,
Then you; who thus doe glorify what You
In Justice might despise; And call your own
Perfections, which attract me to your presence,
Des•rt in me; Or think I merit, when
You make me happy. Nor can I count my visits
Among my Dangers, which are so much •wee•ned
By your Allowance of Them. If they be Dangers,
'T•s a felicity I cove• to
Be 〈◊〉 ways near my Thraldom. To be taken
Coming or Going, and held Captive, Will
Be such a suffering as will endear it self;
And be one of my pleasures, when I think
For whose sake I'm a Bondsman.
But, Great Sir,
What can you see in me, besides a Mind
Willing to understand it self beloved▪
And to return Affection for Affection,
Which should expose you to these perils; And
Maked an Adventure every time you see me;
And your return back an Escape?
I see
A form more beautiful, more attracting, then
All those for which the King of Gods left Heaven.
And which t'enjoy, he rather chose to be
Transformed into a Flame, or spangled shower,
Then to remain the Thunderer; And thought it
A happier shape to be a Swan•e, then to
Be clothed with his own Lightning. Should you set me
The tasks of Hercules, or bid me turn
Fable into story, and make his Labours mine;
Or should enjoin me fights where th'enemy
Grows numerous from my Conquests. And multiplies
From every wound I give him; And having finished
One Labour, should you straight prescribe another;
And make me so divide my life between
My Love and Conflicts; Such a reward as you,
Would be a greater recompense, then to
Be placed among the Stars, and there to shine
A Co•stellation, wreathed about with my
Own Victories; and glittering with the spoils
I took from Lyons.
Well, Sir, Barsen• hath
Received so true, so full a Testimony
Both of your Love, and forti•ude, that now
Nothing is wanting to put both you and us
In full possession of our wishes, but
The opportunity to reveal our selves
After the noblest manner.
Your Task is only
To set your Army in Array, to join
Battle with ours, that, from this show of War,
We may at our Re•urn unto our selves,
The better raise a peace: And make an Olive
Spring from our Myrtles. Mean time I am your Conquest.
And I, who came a Prince, return your Captive.
My Lords, Lyncestes and Polydamas,
You Two stop all the passages by which
The Prince of Thrice is to return; That done,
Put the new forces you have brought in posture,
And fit Array, if need be, to supp•esse
All Camp Commotions. We are not safe amongst Women.
It shall be done.
And let th'old Forces be
In Readi•esse, if th'Adverse Army doe
Invite us to join Battle, to entertain it,
And meet them in the Field.
It shall be Ordered.
But is it credible Eurymedon
Sh•uld have the Confidence to trust Himself
To a thin weak Dis••ise, and in a Cloud
So open and transparent, should pass through
My Camp, on such a treacherous Enterprise?
He's now Sir at the Queens Tent, where they hold
A secret Consult••ion▪
We saw him enter
J•st at t•e 〈◊〉 when two of her Ladies,
The O•e 〈◊〉 General of the Army,
The Other Lady Marshall of the Field,
Were telling us plot.
That it is concluded,
Roxane shall be carried back to Th•ace,
Barsene •e restored (perhaps de••our'd)
And He to choose Hyppolyta, or her Sister,
Instead of Mine to be •is Queen?
Yes, Sir,
They are indifferent, and are resolved,
Since you refused 'em, to wed by Lottery,
Of which refusal they are so sensible,
That when both armies join, it is too contrived,
(Which I do wonder they should, yet, discover)
The Amazons, upon the sign given, shall
Turn to the other side; And sacrifice
Your overthrow to their Revenge; Or what's
More to be feared, your Kingdom to their Nuptials.
Antiope, the sister, wants a portion;
And if she bring your Crown, and Sceptre with her;
Or, if t'enlarge her Husbands Territories,
She add yours to 'em, the Match will be more Princely,
And she appear so much the more her self, Sir,
If she can raise a Dowry from your Conquest.
Oh the deceitfulness of Women! whose
Affection's like the Rainbow, can show painted,
And Court us with a thousand Beauteous Colours,
Yet all this only serve to guild a Storm;
And make a Tempest look more flattering.
We must use Plot against P•ot. To seize upon
The Ladies were dishonourable; And
To take these Captive who are now our Guests,
(Though they deserve it, having forfeited
The S•isle of Friends they brought, for Enemies)
Would be our blot in History. You two, therefore,
Seize on the Prince at his return, His Ransom
Shall be the Resti•ution of our Ladies.
Hark, what means this?
Arm, arm your selves, •oath Camps
Are joined; And the Amazons have put themselves
In Arms against us, It is rumor'd through the Field,
To charge us in the R•are, The Thracians
In Front: and so t'encircle us i• a
Parenthesis of Enemies, composed
Of Men before us, and Women, Sir, Behind.
We will to the field stra•light• O false Sex! The Wind
May be made constant, but not Womankind.
I'm glad I have met you out of Clouds, in your
Own shape, and like your self. You've hitherto
Obscured your self, in Mists, of your own raising
To play the These in, since you landed false Prince!
Was it not enough you did pursue my Queen
With yo•r unnecessary expedition;
And when our Nuptial Torch was placed, and kindled
Upon the Altar. must then quench 〈◊〉, And
Like those who do rob Temples (For to take her
Thus from me was plain Sacrilege) must snatch her
Then back again, just when the sacred Cake
Was breaking twixt the Flamens hands, And all
The Gods of Weddings in their Saffron Robes,
But as part of your piracy, and stealth,
(If yet the treacherous surprise of a
Weak Company of Ladies do deserve
A name not yet more Infamous) must join
My sister, and the beauteous part of my
Whole Court, and Kingdom in the Rape? As if
You meant •erect a new Seraglio, or
T'enlarge your old▪ And take them prisoners first,
Then use them amongst your other prostitutes?
Is this all?
There is one thing more. To show
Y•ur power upon that Sex, (which you, I •ee,
Have strived by all ways to make yours, And, where
By force you could not, have conquered by Petition)
Was it not enough you did begin the War
In the surprise of Ladies, but that since
You must co•tinue it by Stratagem,
More treacherous then the first? And in your false
And by••owed shapes, (In which you nightly have
Appeared to the Queen of Amazons) must tempt
Her, and her Ladies from their pure Affections,
Which made them first resolve, won by the Justice,
And Goodness of my Cause, to fight for me,
Until •educ'd they grew Conspirators,
And did resolve to fight for you? Had you
First taken, and then matched Barsene, yet,
To be your Queen, thus, had not been a Wedding,
But a Captivity; And to be forced
Unto your bed with shackles on, is not
To be your Princess, but your slave. But first
To take her prisoner, And, (For ought I know)
To use your power of Conquest on her, And
To make her first unworthy of your Nuptials,
And then despise her, for one more entire,
More free, and more unto•cht, (For your new Loves
Made to Hippolyta, and her sister Prince,
Have not been so disguis', like you the Lover,
As to escape my knowledge) is such a wrong,
(Besides my other Interest of having
My Queen kept from me) as I stand here to punish;
Or else to add my fall unto my sufferings.
Have you, Sir, finished your Oration?
This
Only remains. To save th'expence of blood,
Which may be shed on both •ides, since the Quarrel
Is purely ours, Let's not engage our Armies
But here conclude the war, The injured with
The Injurer, in one fair, single Combat.
Sir, we've a Cause going too; And have two Ladies.
Who well might think us two Indiffereut Cowards,
And very cold in their Revenge, should we
Stand peaceable Spectators, whilst you fight.
We do beseech you, Sir, Let us join our
Poor Interest with yours; And since the number,
And quality of the Combatants is equal,
T'expresse the like sense of our wrongs, let it
Be Three to Three.
We do accept the c•along;
And will maintain, your Ladies are our Prisoners,
More Nobly then they were at 〈…〉 Wi•es;
And that we took them fa•re 〈…〉
Then you first married'em. 〈◊〉 Pray stay a little.
To show Archidamus, (〈…〉,
Although I j•stly might, call you 〈◊〉 Prince,
B•ing gui•tie 〈◊〉 those •cc••sations, which
You stick on me) that we being 〈◊〉 causes,
As well as equal Val•urs, to d•f•nd th•m,
Since you observ'• a Method in your Wrongs,
And those suspicions 〈◊〉, and imagine•rye,
I'll use one in my Ensue•s? It is con•est
I did use Art to gain by ••ot what was
By plot taken from me, Roxane, my best sister.
And if in her surprise I di• recover
But what you first •whole, and redeemed my Loss
With some enforcement, this deserves the name
Of a Retrive not of a Piracy.
Next that I took your Sister with my own,
It was part of my Affection to her; Love
Prompted me to the Action; which doth not
Cease to be Love. because it once put on
The shape of Force▪ And that force but made use of,
To let her know that he who took her was
The greater prisoner, and was first surprised.
How I have used her since, the Gods, and she,
Her ow•e Historian, when you see her next
Will wi•ness for me. Lastly, if refused
By you, (I will 〈◊〉 say by her, for her
Cousin• takes flame from yours) •'ve been a Suitor,
Where I've been freely heard, and entertained,
Asked an• prove••'•, For you to claim a Sovereignty,
Over th'Affections of Hippolyta.
Or her ••i•e Sist•r, or call me Thief, or treacherous,
〈…〉 nights to my disguises,
〈…〉 to them might be more
〈…〉, is s•ch a Wrong
To me and 〈◊〉; T•at in their Absence. I
Scand her• to make good with my sword, my stealths,
Have been more noble then your open Visits.
And that I am more Constant to Barsene
In the new purchase of their Loves, Then you
Are to Roxane in refusing them.
Now, Sir, I am prepared to meet your strokes.
Your Challenge holds too?
Yes; you shall per∣ceive,
You fight not now with Women.
We see you're Men,
And you shall find us such.
It is nobly promised.
Hold as you're Princes; And respect the Cries,
Of your own Ladies, who in your wounds bleed.
And, if you fall must here expire with you;
Since neither of you can fall singly, and
We not be slain too.
Great Archidamus,—
My royal Lord Eurymedon,—(For now
I dare profess you) what mean you to contract,
And thus remove the War into a Duel?
O sheath you▪ swords; See your Barsene begs.
Once more hear your Roxane, Sir; And here
Cast do wne your weapon. Or if we be the cause
Of this your strife, be reconciled by turning
Your swords on us. See here two Sacrifices
Ready to buy your peace with their own slaughters.
How's this? Roxane and Barsene? Sure
My eyes are not themselves; Or else my Joys
Make 〈◊〉 Visions for Realities.
B•leeve us, Sir, These are no empty shades
Which will appear and vanish.
There have bodies,
Composed of Flesh and Blood.
Now, Sir, you see,
If you'll proceed ith'Combate, I want not
A •oble cause to fight for. If you'll now
Call my surprise of these a piracy,
Or my stolen visits since made to their Tents
A Treason, in which these went Conspirators,
I hope you'• think it a Treason, in which I
Had only this one honourable aim,
To render my self worthy to be owned
by this fair Princess; and to be•ray you to
A league and friendship with me by th'Excharge
O• Queens and Sisters.
Is this true?
Our plot
Was in thee borrowed shapes only to try
How you would bear our Loss; Or whither we
Might tempt you from y•ur Constancy. Which, Sir,
Hath been so firm, so settled, four shaken,
So much beyond her Merits who made trial,
That •'me now twice yours; And the second time
Here ca•t my self into your arms.
You're here,
Once more my bright star fixed in your own sphere,
Then, for you, Great Eurymedon, To leave
Your Kingdom for the sight, and spectacle
Of one, whose Beauty can at most aspire
But to be seen, and pardoned; After that,
To turn that which at first showed boisterous force,
Into a generous Courtship; And to change
That which I first took for a rude surprise,
Into the noblest way of Love; And there
To be a Supplicant▪ and to spend sighs,
Prayers, and Petitions, where you might command
Affection as your Conquest, Adds so pure,
So clear, so bright a Luster to your flame,
And calls forth such a just, and virtue•us heate
From me, to meet with yours, that from the time
You did release, I became your Captive;
And you gained this by set•ing of me free,
O•ely to change one Thraldom for another;
And from that time to make me wear your Fetters,
And to be wholly yours.
If these be Fetters,
I sh•ll for ever wish to be your prison;
And thus to hold you chain•d. I hope. Sir, you
Will not unlinke us now.
Such a Separation
Were such a si•no, as would be punished with
The Anger of the Gods; And would deserve
To have another added to it; And I
Be once more in the number of the Divorced.
To make the knot more firm, here, Sir, In sign
You've had two conquests of me, I lay down
My self, and Weapon at your feet.
And I
First Conquered by your Sister, next, your self,
Make this confession of it.
My Lords
You see the Wars are ended; If it please you
Let us put up our swords.
We will show the way, Sir.
Next since there's nothing wanting to Combine us,
In one strict Union, but the Priest, and Temple,
Please you, we will to the Altar, and there first.
Conclude a lasting peace, And then our Nuptials.
Lead on; I follow you.
I mar'le, my Lord.
Our Amazons appear not, with their Brace
Of Posset-makers.
They are but shifting faces;
That they may laugh at us in their own shapes.
See where they come.
How's this• How's this? •'le pawn
My life another Comoedy; Let's stand,
And over-heare'em.
Look how they show in Helmets.
Come, come along. Nay you shall know most stout▪
Most sterne Bellona's, what it is to be Traitors
Against a State, Was this your errand? This
Your •air pretence of having Children by us,
To betray those that should beget em? Now
We know how you or'ecome the Scythian•;
You did invite them to your Tents, And there
Conquered the Men by night, by day their Country.
What could you see in us to think us of
A feebler Fabric, or not so well built,
Nor of such tough Chines as the Thracians, that
You should so itch to sell us to 'em, for
Nights Lodgings, And the transitory pleasure
Of keeping of you waking?
To the wrong
You offer to our Innocence, and Hon••rs,
You're scurrilous and that is one wrong more
Offered to our chaste ears. Your mouths need washing;
Or rather gelding. We project to betray you?
Why, I beseech you, Lady Telam•n,
If I should ask you, And this Lady Ajax,
Together with your two Sarpedons here,
Was it not contrived you in our absence should
Se•ze on our Magazine? Then crested thus
In your bright Helmets, (To which nothing lacks
But a shield with a Gorgons Head, to turn
Vs into a stone, and Conquer us with ill looks▪)
That you should sally forth upon us; And
Then join, almost had said couple, with
The E•amy? You will deny this?
Yes▪
And having had experience of your Valours,
Dare here maintain the contrary with our swords,
Two Women against three Me•, without our second•▪
We seize •pone your Magazine?
so you'll
Deny you did receive us at your Tabernacle,
Your amorous pavilion; A•d that these two
Sweet •ymball-beaters, otherwise called Drummers,
Did strike a false Alarm?
Or that you hired
Three Meager-halfe-pin'd-Rascals, having first
Dep•iv'd us of our eyes, To lead us thrice
Round about the Works, to lengthen out our progress
Towards the Enemies Camp; And there to be
Arraigned before a Council, which consisted
Of two she C•ll•nils, two she Clerks of
Your Comfits, and Suckets; two yo•ng Lords; who no doubt
Enjoyed all that we came for.
It is confessed, Sir.
Had you enjoyed us, •ur Children only had
Been va•iant by the Mothers side.
We will have
Our Coun•ell too; where we expect you shall
Confess your Treason too, Against the King.
March on before there.
Pray stay Gentlemen;
Where do you lead these Ladies, thus three deep
In File, without a Drum•? You are not going
To teach 'em postures, are you? Or make a Mu•la
Of four commanded by three?
If you mean
To lead 'em against the Enemy, to show
Your Fortitudes before 'em, once more; surely
The Wars are ended.
Sir, we are leading 'em
To th'King; we have discovered a foul Treason.
How?
Yes, Sir, such a Treason, and these the plotters
As does show Women make but the other Twin
With Mischief; And that Falsehood, when it would
Betray men, still assumes their shape.
These Sir,
Who can lodge Serpents amongst their Roses, and
Smile o'er their Treacheries, But that we did
Timely prevent 'em, would have put the Camp
Into a Mutiny. We did take these
Two Lady-Rhetoricks mounting heaps of Turf,
Provided to make speeches to the Soldiers;
T'inflame them to Rebellion.
It is not possible.
Yes, Sir, And these two Yeomen of the Gally pots▪
Were employed, as we hear, to offer the
Free use both of Themselves, and Ladies, to
All those who with them would forsake our side,
And turn to the Thracians.
Wee will endure't no longer.
These iron Veils cast off, thus we confute you.
How's this? Orithya and Thalaestris? with
Their Women Menalippe and Marthesia?
Amazon-fighters turned to our own Court peace-wormes.
And my two Troilus's transfor'd to Knitsters?
They are our Wives. Was ever such a plot
Laid by two Women to keep their Husbands honest?
They've turned what I thought Fornication
Into the acts of Wedlock. How I love
Such projects, where men are betrayed unto
Their lawful pleasure, and tempted to commit
Adultery with Innocence, and no sin follow?
Pray view us well; And now our paintings off,
(As you once pleasantly did stile us) pray,
Officious Gentlemen; what other plot
Can you discern in us, but to laugh at you?
This comes of policy; Our wisdoms have
Made us three sage, discreet, d•epe, most rare Coxcombs.
Ha, ha, ha; Sure they did expect the King
Should Knight 'em for their rare Discovery.
Or
Prefer 'em to the Council Board, and make 'em
Spies General of the State.
Troth, Gentlemen,
If you intend to seape Plays, and at your
Return home to Chalcedon, not to see
Your Deeds brought on the Stage, take our advice;
Travel 'till this be over.
And be sure,
You keep your selves from Duels; Least your Country
Do suff•r in your Valours.
You see there is
No meddling with these Women; I'll undertake,
They can change shapes, as often as shift Linen.
The Book of Transformations, which reports
Of Women turned to Baytrees, and of Men
Turned into Women, hath not more various forms,
Then these can practice.
Alas it is not your case
To be deceived. They did deceive us too.
We have two constant Lords of you. So't had been
Had we been Amazons in earnest.
you are
The Two f••st Ladies that ere made their Husbands
Cuckold themselves with their own Wives.
By this
Good light it would be but justice now to put
A Cour••trick on you.
Alas Thalaestris; I
Discerned you by your breasts.
Be sure you say
With your own Wife.
Look, Gentlemen,
Do you know these Shape•? Here comes the second part
Of the Metamorphofis.
—Thus having made
Our Realms one people, by the League and Knot
We've tied before the Gods, you two proceed
In the last •ites of this our Union,
And sing the Nuptial Song.
Behold these hallowed Tapers; And here see,
What Wells, and Springs of fire they be.
How their two Lusters twining
Make ••tuall shining.
Whilst one from the other kindled, doth requite
E's borrowed, with as great a Light for Light,
And kindles back again.
And thus combining Rays with Rays,
And joining fla•es, like Marriage Day•,
A holy Nuptial twixt them do maintain.
Yet these but the dark signs, and amble•ms be
Of those concealed fires, which none see
But Gods, and such whose eyes
Love Glorifies,
Between these breasts a sacred flame doth spring,
Which intermingling Rites, whilst we do sing,
Is to it self the Priest.
Whilst Heart with Heart, thus intermoved,
And pairs made one, The Loved with Loved,
Themselves between thems•lves in Hymens twist.
—Hark, hark, what is
The meaning of this shout and Ac•lamation?
Sir, the two Armies hearing that their Princes
Have struck a Peace, have first exchanged their Arms,
And next, in Imitation of your Nuptial•,
Which with this shout they celebrate, have cast
Themselves into new postures of Embraces.
Did you behold 'em, you'd believe there past
A mutual wedding between Troop• and Troop,
And Regiment and Regiment. They want
Only one of your Priests here to perform
The holy Ceremony between 'em, To
Make it a perfect Day of Him•eels.
And so't shall be. Nought now remains, but that
We do add Tri••ph• to our I•yes▪ and mingle,
Our Feasts, and Danes with our Sacrifices,
In thankfulness to th'Gods. Then Princes doe
Match truly, when their Kingdoms marry too.

IF you were pleased before how much more now
Must you needs smile, and your applause allow.
When you behold Barkstead a Courtier gay,
Who was a Plow-boy, but the other day.
And Raignsborought, a Skippers boy to Reign,
Uice-Admirall, on Froathie Neptunes maine.
Burligh's illegal Trial (wondrous thing)
Oliver, Metamorphiz'd, to a King.
With various passages, that will invite,
Your sense at once to wonder and delight.
Here then with candar; but be ruled by me,
Speak not a word, what ever you hear or see.
For this Author, bid me to you say,
Heed live, to see this plaid another day.
well be it as you said concerning King, and that our Charles; is free from those great crimes, the Houses charge him with, yet doe you think we cannot without him live, and thrive.
surely no; hee is the head, and we the members be, he is our Father, and wee are his Children, Kings of their King∣domes as the Centers are, to which each weighty thing it self exposes for as all mighty Rivers, flowing streams, the liquid pow∣ers what ere they be, do seek in sundry parts by several currents, great Neptunes bosom who as a Steward of the tumid deeps, doth send them back by many secret windings, and as fame tell us, when the moisture needs, send forth her humid treasures to re∣fresh the Sun-burnt parched plains, so are Kings breasts, the depths where daily slow clear streams of knowledge, for he that hath In∣telligence over all, doth commonly communicate to Kings, all ac∣cidents of weight perchance may happen, no doubt great Jove since they supply his place, so with their charge to make their virtues even, doth give them supernatural prescience, and were not our State-mongers grossly blinded, they would perceive the
virtues of their Sovereign, and bow to CHARLES their King, as best of Princes, but their black souls are so orewhelm'd with guilt, they dare not to be reconcild unto him, and rather then they'll meet deserved Destiny, they will be perjurd, both to God and man, which while they do, England sweats blood, bathing it self in tears, yet thus twill bee
Until the powers, show more benignity,
The worlds a Tenniscourt, the Rackets Fates
Great Kings are Balls, when God will toss their States.
The King did trust to much unto himself, which made him fall into so many snares of all men else, great Monarchs have most need, to square their actions, and to weigh their words, Just▪ as the Inferior spears of force do move, as the first framer, doth their course allot, so doth the peoples manners still attend, on what their Prince, most usually doth do, Kings for the use of many are ordained, not for to feed themselves luxuriously, keep Rioters, and Roisters, to attend them, whose pride for to main∣taine how oftentimes, have we oath Communalty been racked and torn? how many Gavestons K. Charles once kept, whose words were orders, and whose wills were Laws, then Shipmoney, and Polemoney together; Subsities, six at once were not enough, for to maintain▪ those Epicures at Court, Kings like the Sun, should quite exhale all mists, which often dim the eyes of the rude vulgar, as precious stones, are the ornament of Rings, the Stone decors the Ring, the Ring the hand, so Kings decor the Court, the Court the Kingdom, and as one drop of poison spent alone, infected fountains doth with venom fill, even so the greatest states by one mans means, may be corrupted, tainted above thought.
A vicious Prince, is a contagious ill,
A Bassilisk, that all hee sees doth kill.
Thou art Ismeno, all for Anarchy since CHARLES did ebe, thy fortunes have swelled high, tic wealth and honour that your gang adore, and yet that your wild course might darkened be, your care doth seem, all for your Country bent, then maskt with Zeal, your Crimes are counted pure▪ A show of
good, doth vulgar minds content, yet this Isle give, as your due Eulogy in all your plots▪ there's courage Joined with art, a slow advice, but quick dispatch, used nought but success, your ends doth justify who must command, or come to be accused what heinous thing so odious is by nature, that hath not been commit∣ted for a crown.
I wonder not, at these insatiate men
They have no other God, but Gold, how then.
Can they be constant who so live by change.
Who sell themselves, fell all nor is it strange.
Well Royalist, thou hast now shown thy Zeal, in vindication of thy faulty King, but you, and all your Gang, may talk, not doe, for all the power is or's by Sea and Land, and maugre all your hopes of Jockey's aid, supplies from France, and Spain, and Denmark too, Oliver, shall be Rector of the Land. what think will Jockey come,
No trust is to be given unto them, for Gold they'll sell their God, for silver pawn their souls.
Their faith is never firm, their love not bright
As Anchors without hold, fires without light.
Nought Constant is below, no not true worth.
It melts South, and freezes in the North.
THe first that spoiled our public rest,
Was avarice, the greatest pest.
Thou did disturb our quiet state
O Monster most insatiate,
This Daughter of sterne Pluto still.
Her Fathers Dungeon, strives to fill.
We were all Rich, but not content
And therefore came a parliament.
Who hath Reformed us; of our Lives
Our Goods, our Children, and our Wives
Have quite undone the public weal
Yet all out of their hearty Zeal.
They quite have spoiled, our Church, and Laws
Yet this in a most Righteous Cause.
And to pr'eserve us from decay
Have ceased on the Militia
From out his hand who was our father
Before these Traitors met together.
and for the Cities Honour tic
that now their Mayor, a prisoner is▪
While the fool warner in his stead,
About the street in Pomp is lead.
But sure this cannot always bee,
Now let us dare our destinee:
And since no worse can happen to us,
Thou Oliver can not undo us.
CAn Heaven behold one stand to stain these times, yet to the Stigian streams, not headlong hurled, and can the earth bear him, whose crims are such, that to him∣self he seems a monster fell, why sends not Heaven to have my course confined, a death denounceing flash of rumbling thunder, else [roaring terror] clouds of circling Wind by violence, to tear me limb from limb, what corner yet unknown remains for me both burned with rage, and freezing in despair where none but monsters live, thither Isle go whom all the world detests, and barbaric amongst the brutish beasts, where Tigers rage, roads spew and Serpents hisses: But though in scorn vast zone I find a field, where Melancholy might a monarch be, while silent deserts not a man inhabits, to shrink for horror, all my strange approach, yet of my deeds when all the World doth talk, this cannot raze the still proclaimed scroll, since in my breast, I bear my Hell
about me, and cannot scope those terrors hemb me round, those fearful monsters of confused aspects Chimera, Gorgon, Hidra, Plutoes Apes, which now at midnight fearful mortals fright, their devilish forms which doe the World confound, not half so horrid as my self I deem, when on my own deformities I gaze, amidst black depth, of a polluted mind, yet whether it was Fortune, or my Fate, or some Hell Hag, that did so cause my spleen to rise in arms against my gracious King, and having him subdued, to shut him up, close prisoner, under a dire restraint, O Plague abhord, I have undone the land, and am the Instru—meant of all their harms, then Moun∣tains  fall, and bruise me, by your rounds, with my offence, no torment can be even.
Arch Traitor to my King, isle stand alone,
Here, though Pandorus plagues were all in one.
Horror, death, and Dismal houses,
Such as are sent, from damned souls▪
Shreekings, Yellings, forced groans,
Able to rive, the hardest Stones,
Dwells round about thee, for to shoe,
whither thou must shortly go.
Cromwell shortly, must descend
And thou accompany thy Friend.
Fire, ardent as the Lemniam flame
Which Buckets full of blood cant tame,
Ascend aloft, in expectation
When you will leave your earthly Station.
The sacred guitar of the Heaven
You both, into our hands hath given,
Bellona, and Erinnis both,
To Scourge you on, have pledged their troth.
Seek Plutoes throne for to Invade.
You now must to Avernae's shade.
There Cataline, you shall behold,
And mighty Nimrod, famd of old;
There Spartacus, cathegus too,
With Bickris son one like to you,
Hast, O hast, and come away,
That hell may keep an holiday,
O rigorous Judgment, O outrageous fate, must I survive, the Funerals of my fame, some wail for want of friends, but I of foes, to wound this breast, where all hells host doe reign, what man not wondering, can by deeds behold, the providence of all commanding Jove, whose Brazen edicts cannot be repulsed, when sleep, the Brother most resembling death, locks up all others eyes, I am disturbed, with horrid Dreams, and dreadful Visions, sometime me thinks my King Placed on his throne, haz past his doom and I must die.
And then soon after fancy doth persuade,
I am surrounded with a multitude,
Heaven ore my head, Hell burns beneath my feet
As both enraged, to fight with flames would meet.
OF all the passions, which possess the soul,
Ambition, most disturbs, mortal minds,
The restless stone that Sysiphus doth roll,
Though it be still in ur more respit finds.
Fairfax is first in name Cromwell in power▪
The upper house are Peers, the lower sway:
All topley turney; since that evil hour
Their base projections drove their King away.
MARTIN can rail, against the Lords anointed,
And SAY revile him, in a flooring vain,
Yet how will all their hopes, be disappointed,
When Jove shall place him, in his Throne again.
Then every Traitor, will seek out a cell
To hide him from his Sovereigns wrathful look
But where them holes to find: they shall not tell
They shall desire, but be denied, their book.
THus like great Caesar▪ when hee did triumph, over the seve∣rall Nations of the World, that was lately but a Skippers Boy now Reign, as King, on froathije Neptunes brim, prosper me Saturn, and those wicked stars, whose Influence makes Villains fortunate, the Navy that was lately stilt the Kings, is now to be commanded by my will, CHARLES is immund, within a Cage of stone, despised, contemned, and stinted of his fare, while we his Conquerors, live in height of glory Revel Luxuriously, extort even what we please, from those we trample on,
Nor shall thy Fate O England it prevent,
But thou shalt ever have A Parliament.
A mutual band, must made amongst us be, to make one fortune common to us all, and from henceforth, we must be surely fixed, to fall together, or together rise, and now since CHARLES, is dead unto his Crown, weel take his state, yea and his Title too, we must be crowned, yea and be known for Kings, the dia∣them of greatness, is the tower all vulgar Judgements lean on, yet of my thoughts some doubt new counsel claims, and with
huge horror, aggravate disgrace, the stain of Treason, still at∣tends our fate, and with our error, burdens, our Posterity, and we though pomp a space appease our souls shall find afflictions to disturb our Reign, the sacred title of a Sovereign doth work a terror, more then can be thought, but how dare my fond thoughts, thus rashly chide me,
Drive on, drive on, while Brazen Trumpets sound
He cannot die, whom terror cannot wound.
GOd save your Excellence, and send you temperate weather on the Seas.
Thanks my kind Subjects, be you true to me, and weel not fear, Grim Neptunes enmity, let Spain now load the Seas with lazy Hulks, the Dutch with their broad shallops, yet Maugre all will so guard the Maine, no foreign force shall land on English ground, yea Gods of Seas, and all you watery powers, be you propitious, let your aid be given, and weel not fear his power that sits in Heaven.
Why bears a noble Gods-head
a water Rat in folio doth the Fool think for ever thus to Lord it.
Yes if our Parliament prove everlasting, but they have mortal hearts, and steel can pierce them, pierce um until they groan. But lets away, my Cabins are not cleansed, yet I swear
nor have I hanged the Halsers,
Let the earth gape, and quick destruction bring
And the Sea swallow, those that hate their King.
THis Race of Ixion, to embrace the Clouds,
Contemned the happy State, wherein they stood,
And to be famed, among the Valgar crowds.
Resolve, for to Manure the ground with blood.
Their thrones, they on dead bodies do erect,
While they all fear, as virtue do reject.
While Ireland mourns, Environed with all ills,
Sword, Famine, Fire, confusion, dreadful sorrow,
While sad complaints, the echoing Heavens fills,
And air afflictions, take birth with each morrow,
They busy are, and make it their chief vent:
To bring us here, to that predicament.
All Laws Divine, they basely abrogated.
When Reverend Laud, was martyred by their power,
All Regal sway, by heavens will created,
When Noble Strafford, fell in evil hour,
And that all human Laws they may untie,
Therefore ere long, must Learned Ienkins die:
BRing forth the Prisoner, Officer, room for the Prisoner, bear back those fellows bear back there,
Why comes he not forward?
Captain Burly, hold up thy hand, thou art indicted by the Name of—Burly for that thou the said—Bur∣ley, did tumultuously and traitorously attempt to raise a party to destroy the parliament of England, upon pretence of rescue∣ing their Prisoner King Charles out of their hands, Speak art thou guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty, ye Hell-hounds.
art thou sure these men have o∣pen
souls: who dare do any thing be it ne'er so wicked
Do you doubt um Sir, why these are Plutoes Eldest Sons, who had they breasts transparent, would frighten all Mortality to Monsters, I have already told them what to doe, and the reward proposed them by the state.
Let us proceed then,
What can thou vile Burly to excuse thy late most trea∣sonable action.
to you who are on purpose chosen to receive my inno∣cent life, I am no Traitor, he a Traitor is that doth oppose his 〈◊〉 not he that serves him, those, whose sworn servants you are, the men whom by all Law, I Traitors call, they that under a pretence of purging errors clean from out Gods Worshp have op't a gap to all licenciousnesse, Blasphemies and Profaneness. those whose pretences, once were for the King, and made their boast to elevate his Throne: above the chiefest of his Ancestors, and yet Imprison him within a Castle, not suffering those that love him to come near him, those who would seem to maintain the power of Parliaments, and yet will suffer none to sit amongst um, that dare but speak one word for an agreement, or stipula∣tion with the King. Those who impose each day, new Cesse∣mints and taxations on the people, for to maintain their own vile Luxury, awing them daily with Committee Laws, who give to those are of their creation, an Ordinance of Indempni∣tie, for Murders, Treasons, Rapes and Robberies, or whatsoe∣ver else, they dare to act, those are the men deserve the Name of Traitors, Grand, Famous, Glorious Traitors.
Proud fool, thou shalt repent this saucy Lan∣gauge:
Repent, do thou repent vile man who dare bee par∣teal, and urgent against him ne'er did thee wrong, only to currie favour with my Murderers, but doe I repeat my thoughts to you, since private hopes your Judgements do bewitch, but yet for such a cause as I maintain, he that would faint at the conceit of death, is trebly damned, not worthy to survive, except amongst Furies, pound me like Anacharsis in a morter', precipitate me from some pinnacle heat Phalaris, his Bull, until it, and throw
me in, to bellow out my woes, yet Isle not flinch, nor shall fear force my tongue, for to recant the least that I have done.
So shall you to your terror find and see
That hee is Martyred, dies for Loyalty.
Well Sir, your large oration, cannot save your Life, Nor, no nor the King whom you seem so to love, was it not e∣nough you durst oppose the State; and rise in arms against them but must now revile them before us, who really adore their fire∣tuall power, O thou incorrigible hateful Traitor.
Proceed unto the Sentence, Jury, bring in your Ver∣dict?
So cordial we are unto the states, that had we each of us his Father here, standing in this mans stead, we would pro∣claim him guilty, right or wrong, we need not go aside for to confer, we did agree amongst our selves before to find him guile∣tie of high, were he as innocent, as is the light.
Then take him hence, as a pernicious traitor, to be hanged, drawn, and quartered for high treason, and that on
Thursday next, return him back to Prison
It must be so, the Fates do so ordain,
My fall must help to raise my Sovereign,
Troth I would pity thy distressed ease
But dare not forfeit, the Recorders place,
As those to whom all other things are free,
Must have their life &amp; Reign both of one date
So private men once grasping Regaltie,
are hardly forced into their former state.
Our states-men Fortunes, in the Book of Fates,
Is written down, Cromwell shall be a King
Martin the Secretary to the states
And poor Tom Fairfax, Tom a Bedlam sing.
Both Joyce and Pride, with Ireton to boot
Are privy Councellors, and counsel well
But if they doe not look, the better toot.
The Bonny Blew Caps, will their places sell.
Then Cromwell, Fairfax, Ireton, Ioice, and Pride
With the whole Knot of Traitors else beside
Shall wish, they had kept to their pristine state.
When hangum tuum, ends the grand Debate.
Now OLIVR Ascend the throne
Fear not to tumble down
Come all you Furies every one
And bring the burning Crown.
But look how ore thy head doth hang
A sharp and threatening sword
Denouncing terror to thy gang
And thee their perjurd Lord.
The furies sally forth of Hell
Rhamnusia, is their guide
For to chastise those dare Rebel
Persisting in they pride.
What folly prompts you, ye profane
To usurp CHARLES his Right 
But thus you tamper with your bane 
And play with acconite.
THanks to you all, my faithful Coadjutors you that resolve to live and die with me this glorious wreath, that circles,
now my temples doth Hierogliphically show our * Love, that my true care shall still * run in a Ring for all our preservations how Harry why are thou so sad,
me thoughts Sir, I heard one sing but now behind the arras, prophetically appointing at our fall,
thou art too superstitious, our dear Harry, it is not puffs must shake our resolutions, come sit down
What shall we do now to confirm our Kingdom? what Laws shall we invent meet for our purpose.
The people ever hunger after change, and theirfore tic not heard their laws to alter.
We must be sure by some quaint wily train, to send King Charles to the invisible land, which may be brought to pass and yet the vulgar not Imagine it, no not in twelve months after.
I doe applaud thy council.
Then next we must dissolve this parliament, they have a name of power which, should they once combined against us, might much obstruct our hops:
Thou speak all Oracle, come no more of this at present, we'll now unto our palace;
And if wee can the peoples pleasures gain,
Wee may perchance, in peace and quiet Reign,
Else wee are lost, and O I greatly dread,
At once to loose my Kingdom, and my head.
why Oliver, should thou so high aspire,
Phaeton like, to manage Charles his Wane,
When thou art in, thou can not back retire.
That man is Mad who glory for to gain.
Doth cast himself upon the Lightning Fire.
Kings do admit no fellows if thou Reign,
CHARLES must surrender, but I surely hope
To see him Rule, thou Ruled in a Rope:

YOu  Nuptial Powers! and thou  Lucina,  Head,
And careful Guardian, of the  G•…niall Bed.
And  thou who Tiphys taught, as with a rein,
To guide the  first Ship, through the subdued Maine!
 Dread Sovereign of the Seas! thou ever bright
Phoebus! that to the world divid'st thy light.
 Three-formed Hecate! that dost display
On nightly mysteries thy conscious Ray
And all ye Gods by whom false Iason swore!
Or you, Medea rather should implore,
Dark Chaos! deeps Infernal! damned souls!
The King who Hells sad Monarchy controls,
And  Queen with better faith was ravished,
Hear whilst we imprecate! ye  Furies dread!
The punishers of guilt; in bloody hands
Grasping your pitchy-blacke, and sulph'ry Brands,
With snaky Curls, and squalid looks appear!
As horrid, at our Nuptials as you were.
Death on the new-made  Bride, on Corinths King,
And our own Progeny, untimely bring.
And with some imprecation yet more dire,
'G ainst my false Husband, my fell mind inspire.
Live he, through Towns, despised and friendless rove,
Fear, hatred, poverty, and exile prove,
Wish me his Wife again; and harbour, from
A stranger crave; now a known Guest become.
And, then which, none a greater curse can be,
Children be get he like himself, and me.
See! our Revenge doth with our Wish conspire;
These we have borne: We Plaints in vain expire.
Why rush we not upon our Foes? and there
The Bridal Tapers from the Bearers tear,
Extinguish them, and bury all in Night?
Behold thou this thou Fountain of all light,
Phoebus,  the Radiant Author of our Race?
And drive through Crystal skies, thy wonted space?
Run thou not back unto the East? and Day
Remeasur'st? O! to me resign thy sway;
Give me the Guidance of those burning Reins
That rule the Coursers with the fiery Mains,
I'd scourge, 'till Corinth whose.  small Land divides
Two opposite Seas, and breaks their battering Tides,
Consumed in Flames, should make them way to join.
Nought rests to doe; but that a Nuptial Pine
We bear; and when the holy Prair's, and all
The Rites are done, then, that our victims fall.
Through thine own Bowels reach at thy Revenge
Soul if thou liv'st; all Womanish Fears estrange,
Let thy stout mind, on her old strength presume,
And more then Scythian Ferity assume.
What Ills, once  Colchos, now shall Corinth see,
Horrid, unperpetrated cruelty,
Terror to Men and Gods, works in my Mind;
Wounds, Death,  spread Funerals of Limbs dis-joyn'd;
Pish! what flight, trivial Ills doe we recount?
Acts of our Virgin hands: Our Rage should mount
Ills more sublime, more horrid Acts of Blood
Suite with our married state, and Motherhood.
Courage then: On, to act thy Tragedy
With all thy Fury; that Posterity
Thy fatal Nuptials, and divorce may find
Equally signal;—Stay; thou rash of mind!
Thy spouse by what means leave thou?—by the same
I once did follow him: All sense of shame
Abandon, and delays as fruitless fly,
▪The Faith by Ills confirmed, by Ills shall dye.
 You Gods, whose Empire in the skies,
Or in the tumid Ocean, lies!
These  Princely Nuptials bless we pray,
 Whilst all due Rites the people pay:
First to those  Powers that thunder fling,
And Scepters bear; for offering
A Bull, white without spot, shall dye,
A Heifer that did never try
The servile Yoke, then snow more white,
Thee,  O Lucina! doth delight.
 To her, who Mars his bloody hands,
Doth ma•…isle in peaceful Bands,
Who strifes of Nations doth compose,
Whose  Horn with growing plenty flows,
Shall fall a gent•…er Sacrifice.
 And thou who these Solemnities,
And Rites  Legitimate dost grace,
And the nights sullen darkness, chase
With thy auspicious hand, come drowned
In Wine, thy  Head with Roses crowned.
 And thou bright Star, with silver ray,
Fore-runner of the Night, and Day;
That slow to those dost still return
Who with loves mutu'all flames doth burn.
Mothers that long, Daughters new wed
Wish thee thy early beams to spread.
Among the  Cecropian Dames, the Pride
For Beauty, veil unto the Bride
The Virgins of the  Walls Town
Who on  Taygetus his Crown
Themselves, (as is their Countries guise)
In  manly Pastimes exercise.
And those their limbs in  Dirce lave
Or in  Alphaeus sacred Wave.
To the  Aesonian Youth, for grace
And Form, shall  Bacchus self give place,
Who to the Yoke •…ierce Tigers chains,
Or he who o'er the  Tripods reigns,
Mild Brother, to the  sterner Maid.
The  Swan-got Twins fair Laedae laid,
Castor, with Pollux who for blow
Of weighty  Sledge, doth all out-goe,
Yield to  Aesonides the day.
So, so Celestial powers we pray,
All wives excel the the beauteous Bride,
The Bride-groom pass all men beside.
When with the Virgin Quire  she joins
Her look 'bove all with lustre shines.
So when the Sun his Beams displays,
The splendour of the Stars decays.
So fade the  Pleïads, scarcely seen,
When with her borrowed shine, night's Queen
Inorbs her Crescent, so to the eye
White blushes with  Phaenician Dye.
So when day dawnes, Sols ruddy light
Shows to the dew-wet Shepherds sight.
From  Phases horrid bed releast,
Wont with unwilling hand, the Breast
To touch of such a barbarous Bride,
With Parents wills first ratified,
Now happy wed a Grecian dame.
Now Youths with Taunts permissive, game
And in loose Rimes chant sportive words,
Rare is this licence against your Lords.
Fair  Issue of the God of Wine,
Tic time to light thy carved Pine:
 With Wine-wet fingers, then put out
The solemn Flame; whilst all the Rout
With mirthful jollity doth ring,
And the  Fescennine youths doe •…ing
Their Festive Flouts; she want these Rites,
And grace of Hymeneal l•…ghts,
Who as a fugitive shall wed
Her self unto a foreign Bed.
OH! I am slain; the  Hymeneall's sound
Hath pierced my Ears, and given my Heart a wound.
The Ill I suffer, I scarce yet believe.
And thus could  Iason cause Medea grieve?
When from my Father, Country, Crown, and State
H' had brought me, thus, to leave me desolate
In a strange Land? could he our merits slight?
Cruel, and thankless wretch! whose powerful might
Seas rage, he saw, and force of Flames out-went?
Thinks he then all our stock of Mischief spe•…t?
Perplexed and wav'ring, my unquiet Mind
Labours, which way she may her vengeance find.
Would Heavens he had a Brother! Stay; a Wife
He has; let's then attempt against her life,
Full Compensation for all injuries.
If Greek, or Barbarous Towns, (in villainies
Skil'd) have known a mischief, such as thou
Media, yet ne'er knew, or practid'st, now,
Now attempt t•…e like. Let thy resolves find
Co•…ncell from thy own Ills; call to thy mind
The signal  Glory of the C•…lchian Crown
Made prize; thy Brothers Limbs dissected, thrown
About the seas; sad Funeral to his sire!
Think on old  Polios boiling o'er the Fire.
How oft have we spilt guile•…less blood? yet n're
Did we act Ills in rage; Loves rage we bear.
Alas what could Iason doe, at the dispose
Of a Superior power?—His Breast oppose
To a murdering sword.—Ah! better words afford
My passionate Griefs; rather, so Fates accord,
May he live still my Iason as before.
If not, yet may he live; mindful of poor
Medea, to whose love his life's a debt.
The fault was wholly Croons: by whose great
O're-ruling power, our marriage-bands he brake;
He did the Mother from her Children take,
He cancelled our strict-plighted faith; Hee, he.
The Butt of our deserved vengeance be.
I'll bury his proud Palace in a high
Heap of Ashes, whilst the black Clouds that fly
Of Flame-driv'n smoke,  Malea shall amaze,
Which storme-beat Vessels puts to long delays.
For love of Heaven be silent, and restrain
Passion to recluse sorrow; "who sustain
"Wrongs that oppress 'em, with a quiet 〈◊〉
"And unmoved thoughts, know best the way to find
"How to repay 'em. Anger kills, concealed;
"Hates miss of their revenge, when once revealed.
"That griefs but small which Council can o're-sway;
I'll meet all opposites.
Thy •…ury stay
Dear Daughter; scarce a still retiredness
Secure thee can, open Attempts much less.
"Fortune the Valiant fears; but tramples on
"The coward soul.
"Then resolute•…
"Is good, when the Attempt is possible.
"What
"To courage, and a mind resolved, is not?
"No hope a Remedy to a lost affair
"Doth show.
"Who nought can hope, should nought despair.
 The Colchi'ans hate thee, in thy spouse no Faith
There is; of all thy vast store, Fortune hath
Not left thee ought.
Yes, here's Medea still,
Here Seas, Earth, Fire, Gods, Thunder, what can kill
As well as Steel behold.
Th'incensed Ire
Of the King yet's to be feared.
What was our  Sire?
Fear thou not force of Arms?
Not though from Earth
They sprung, and took from thence their hostile birth.
Thou'lt suffer death.
It is that we wish.
Be led
At my request to fly.
That I ever fled
I grieve; Medea fly?
Think what thou art,
A Mother.
Yes, by whom, you see.
To part
Hence doubt thou?
No; we'll go, but first revenge
Th'avenger will pursue.
It will be strange
If we not fin de him obstacles.
Suppress
These Menaces rash Woman, and redress
Thy pertinacious thoughts; with time comply.
Fortune my Estate may ravish from me, my
Mind she ne'er can rob me of. Hark! I hear
The Palace doors to creak; who is it draws near?
It is Croon the proud Tyrant, Croon, high,
Elated with  Pelasgian Royalty.
Yet does  Aeeta's noxious issue stay
Within our Confines? not yet gone away?
Something she machinates, whom all doe brand
For Noted Fraud, and a nofarious hand.
Whom spares she? whom, suffers secure to rest?
T'extirpate by the sword this worst of Pest
We once resolved; the Entreaties of our Son-
In-law prevailed; and our Concession
Got, that she might live; on terms she quit
Our Realms from future fears: with looks that threat,
And truculent Aspect, she gins to bend
This way her steps, as though she did intend
Some speech with us; Our Guard there! Hence, Away
With her, nor suffer her to speak; to obey
A Kings Command, once let her learn; with speed
Dispatch, and send the Monster gone.
What deed?
What Crime of ours mulct you by flight?
A Cause
The  Innocent soul demands!
"If by the Laws
"You govern, before you Judge first understand.
"If by your will alone you rule, command,
Dispute not; it is our pleasure, right, or wrong.
And thou shalt suffer't.
"Unjust S•…epters, long
"Continue not.
Away; to Colchos, hic
To your own home again.
Most willingly,
So he that brought me thence, return with me.
Your Wishes come too late to our Decree,
"Who ought decrees, nor hears both sides discussed,
"Does but unjustly, though his Doom be just.
Old Polios rued for lending thee an Ear,
But speak; and your egregious Cause let's hear.
 How ill appeased is the w•…ath of Kings.
And what a pride in royal Fancy springs,
Their first-fix'd Resolutions to pursue,
From our own Princely thoughts w'have learned too true,
For though with sad Calamity oppressed,
Scorned, suppliant, our-cast, every way distressed
W'are now, we once, in Royal State did shine,
And from bright Sol drew our Illustrious line.
What  Phases in his winding Arms doth close,
What here behind the  Scythian Pontus shows,
Where the salt Waves grow fresh with floud-mixt stream•…,
All that extent of Land, whose borders, hems
The silver  Thermodon; in trampled Fields,
Where  widowed Troops display their luned shields,
My Father with Imperial Sceptre sways.
In joys of Royalty, and happy days
There flourished we; Our Marriage-bed those sought
Whom now, we seek: But Fortune, light as thought,
From us those Sceptred Glories having rent,
Hath now exposed us to sad Banishment.
"In Crowns confide! whose wealth Chance doth transfer
"At pleasure; But this yet, what no day ever
"Can take from them, Kings, great, and glorious have,
"To help the afflicted, and the suppliant save.
This only from our Colchian Realms, away
We brought, that by our favour, we can say
The flower of Greece and Princely Ornament,
Achaia's chiefest strength, the high descent
Of Gods, were saved from death. Orpheus whose song
Charms stony Rocks, and draws the Woods along
Is our free gift; that Led•…'s Twins survive
Our double bounty is; by us doe live
The sons of Bores,  Lynceus, he whose sight
Extends cross Pontus its emitted light,
And all the  Minyae, by our Favour, were
Reserved from ruin: not to mention here
The  Chief of all those Chiefs; whose safety, we
Reckon no debt, to none imputed bee.
To you the rest, to us, this one we brought
Away: Inveigh your worst then▪ count each fault
Of ours, of all this only can you blame,
Argos return: yet if our Virgin shame,
And love of Father, had not stooped to love
Of Iason, (whom before these we did approve)
The Chief of Greece had perished, and your son
To ruin, on Bulls flaming breaths had run.
Fortune our Cause my oppress, (though undeserved)
Yet shall we ne'er repent to have preserved
The off-spring of so many Kings: With you,
Of all our Crimes is the reward, and due.
Condemn us so you please; but first the Crime
Declare: W' are guilty; true: So were, what time
Croon thy  knees we touched, and did implore
The  Faith of thy protecting hand. No more
Ask we at present, but some place obscure,
Where we our selves and sorrows may immure:
If from this City banished by your doom,
Within your Realms, afford us yet a room.
That we with rigour rule not, nor with high
Pride, trample upon humbled misery,
Sufficient Proof we seem •…n this to have shown
By such a  Son-in-law electing; One
Exiled, afflicted, terrified with fears.
For thee the young  Acastus, who now wears
Thessalia's Crown, seeks with death-threatning i•…e,
T'avenge the Murder of his aged Sire,
And his dissected Parents Limbs; when by
Thy false suggestions led, too credulously,
The perpetration of so foul a fact,
The pious sisters impiously did act.
Wave thine, and Iason can his Cause maintain,
No guilt of blood his guiltless hands did stain
Nor touch of wicked steel; far from thy dirè
Counsels, he still innocuous did retire.
But thou vile Machanatrix of all Ills,
Whom wom'anish spleen, and manly courage, steeles
For all attempts, regardless of thy fame,
Be gone, and purge our Realms of such a shame.
Hence your letiferous simples take; from fear
Free our perplexed subjects, and else-where
With thy Complaints vex Heaven.
To be gone
Compelly'us? or Ship, or a Companion
Afford; why us alone, command you hence?
Alone we came not; or if your pretence
Be fear of War, expel us both; why two
Equally guilty, thus distinguish you?
To  him, not us fell Polios; add our flight,
Our Kingdom's Prize, our Sire deserted quite,
Our Brother peece-meale torn, or if beside
A Crime there be he teach to his new Bride
It is his, not ours: and though so often pressed
To ill, it was ne'er for our own interest.
It is fit th'wert gone; why spin'st thou out delays
In talk?
Vouchsafe thy parting Suppliant prays,
This last request; Let not the Mothers fault
Be as a Guilt upon her Children brought.
Go, go, we'll guard these with a Fathers care.
By these more happy Nuptials; by thy fair
Future hopes, and by this thy regal State,
Which Chance with various change doth agitate
We pray; afford some small time ever we go,
Upon our dearest Children to bestow
Our last, and perhaps dying kisses.
Time,
Only for fraud thou ask.
What fraud, or Crime
Can in so short a space be feared?
"None can
"For mischief be too short.
Deny thou than
So small a moment to a Wretches tears?
Though thy entreaties by our ominous fears
Opposed are; one day thou shalt obtain.
Thy Grant's too great; revoke some part again;
And hence we speed.
If before to morrows Sun
Advance the cheerful day, thou art not gone,
Thou surely dy'st. But us the Time now calls
To prayers, and Rights of Hymens Festivals.
 Rash man was he, with ships frail Beak
Did first the trech'rous Billows break,
And his own Native Soil declined
Durst trust his life to trustless wind.
The Seas with doubtful Course divide,
And in a slender  Plank confide,
Drawn to too thin dimensions far
Twixt life and death too poor a Bar:
Celestial Signs were yet unknown
And of those lights use was there none
Whose Fires bespangle all the Skies.
Nor yet were Pilots grown so wise
To shun the stormy  Hyads threat,
The Olenian  Goats bright star, not yet;
 Nor those which that old lazy Swain
By•…tes drives, the Northern Wane.
Bores and Zepbyre, yet to none
By names distinguished were known,
Typhys did first on Seas display
His Sails; and taught the Winds to obey
New Laws: Now before a quartering Gale
His Course to run with all his Sail.
Now bring the Tack aboard; now fast
His lowered Yards, bind to the Mast.
His Canvas then unfurled again,
Unto the Winds to hoes amain,
When the too greedy Mariners
Calls for a Gust; and th'red Drabler
Unto th'inlarged Sail made fast,
Trembles with the impulsive blast.
The Candid Age of Innocence,
Our Fathers saw; free from all sense
Of Fraud; Then in secured rest
Each man on his own ground, lived blessed
With length of Years; with little rich,
Nor of more wealth, then that with which
His Native Soil was stored, could tell.
The  Pine of Thessaly, the well-
Divided World's Partitions b•…oak,
And cause Seas feel th'Oares lashing stroke;
And the secluded Ocean made
Part of our fears: yet sadly paid
For this so bold a wickedness;
Through tedious dangers, and distress
Long driven: when those  Rocks that bound
The Entrance to the Pontick Sound,
Tilting with Impetuous shocks,
Did Echo like loud Thunder knocks.
Twixt whom, the Sea crush't, mounts, and laves
The Stars and Clouds with foaming waves.
Bold Tiphys then grew pale for fear
His faltering hands forgot to steer;
Silent was Orpheus and his Lute;
And  Argos self was then struck mute,
What? when the  Maid whose waste surrounds
A Cincture of fierce ravening Hounds
Did all their Jaws at once extend!
What man with horror did not bend
At such a sight? who without fear
Could that still-barking Monster hear?
What? when with Magic of their strain
Those * dire Plagues charm, d the  Ausounian Maine!
'Till on his  Lyre Pierian, played
Orpheus, and even the  Siren made
Wont ships to captive while she sings
Follow the Music of his strings.
What was the Purchase of so bold
A Voyage? but a Fleece of Gold
And  greater Mischief then the Sea,
Medea: fit the Freight to be
Of the first Ship. The passive Maine
Now yields, and doth all Laws sustain.
Nor the famed Argos, by the hand
Of  Pallas built, by Heroes Manned,
Doth now alone complain shoe's s•…rc't
To Sea; each petty Boat's now cours't
About the Deep; no Boundure stands,
New Walls by Towns in foreign Lands
Are raised; the pervious World, in't's old
Place, leaves nothing. Indians the cold
 Araxis drink,  Albis, and  Rhine
The Persians. The  Age shall come, in fine
Of many years, wherein the Maine
M'unclose the universal Chain;
More land may, and new worlds be found,
Nor  Thule be Earths farthest Bound.
AH whither rapt with eager speed away!
Hold, Daughter! curb thy rage; thy Fury stay.
As when some frantic Fro, whom Bacc•…us mads,
Trots her wilde Entheou•… Dance, and raving, gads
On  Pindus snowy top, or  Nysa's Crown:
So here, now there, she hurries up and down,
As if with a  Lymphatic Rage possessed.
Her looks attracting fervour from her breast.
Cries, O you Gods! then weeps, now smiles again;
And all the Symptoms of a troubled brain
Discovers; Doubts, threatens, with anger boils,
Laments, and sighs; Oh! to what Center toils
This weight of cares? these threats where will she wreak?
Or where will this high Sea of fury break?
Which like an Inundation swells: No low
Nor vulgaire mischief she intends; to out-goe
Her self she seeks: we know •…ull well, her old
Distempers signs; some Eminently-bold,
Horridly-impious Act, she plots: 't appears
In her fell looks; The Gods deceive our fears.
If wretch, a Rule thou would prescribe thy Hates,
Thy rash love imitate; Tamely (ye Fates▪)
And unrevenged shall we these Nuptials bear?
Shall this day idly pass? sought with such care
And toil! with so much difficulty gained!
Whilst selfe-poiz'd Earth in midst of Heav'n's sustained,
And the bright Orbs their stated Changes run,
Whilst Sands no number know; whilst day the Sun,
And night the Stars attend; whilst about the Pole
The  undrencht Arctos turns, and Rivers roll
Into the Maine; our deadly, vengeful Ire
Shall ne'er have end, but grow, and still rise higher.
What wild Beasts Savageness? what chafed waves
Engulfed in  Scylla's, and  Charibdy's Caves?
What Aetna (under which  Typhaeus lies
Expiring Flames) our rage shall equalise?
Nor rapid streams, nor Torrents heady course,
Nor wrathful Euxine Seas, By  Corus force
Vexed into storms, nor flames blown up by wind,
Can stop th'incensed Fury of my mind.
I'll down with all.—Croon his seares did move
(Forsooth) and King Acastus Arms;—"True love
"Can never stoop to fear of any?—But,
O'er powered he was enforced to yield:—Could not
He yet, to his poor Wife have bid adieu!
My life! stout though he be, he feared this too.
Yet sure, being Croons son, he might a while
Have respited the time for our Exile.
But one short day, to take my last farewell
Of both my children!—Yet, though short, it is well.
Much, much shall these few hours produce; that fact
Which all days else shall ring of, this, shall act.
We will invade the Gods, and shake the frame
Of the whole Universe.
Thy mind reclaim,
Thy Heart with griefs disturbed pacify.
"No thought of rest, 'till with our own, we see
"A general Ruin; perish if we shall,
"Perish all else; We will not singly fall.
See how great Dangers, thy Attempt•… oppose!
"Against potent Opposites none safely goes.
Still cruel Fates! Fortune severe alike!
Equally bad, or if she spare or strike:
So often Heaven, hath for our desperate Woes,
Found Remedies more desperate then those.
Would we the Faith, to our Wives merits due,
Have kept? We must have died. Death to escheue,
We must be faithless. Not to this inclined
By abject fear, but a Paternal mind.
For in their Parents ruin, our poor Race
Would be involved. O Justice! if a Place
In Heaven thou hast, by thy white Throne I swear,
The Children overcame their Sire. Nor ever
Shall I think other, but that  she, (though fierce
Of heart, and beyond all Reclaim perverse,)
Her Childrens lives, would before my bed desire.
With Prayers we were resolved t'accoast her Ire,
But see! sh'hath spied us; Ill the sight she brooks:
Disdain and passion, printed in her looks.
We fly, Iason! we fly; For us to change
Seats, is not new; The Cause is new and strange.
For thee we used; but now from thee we fly.
Whom thus from your Aboads enforce you hic?
To whom dost send us? shall we Phases flood
Colchos and our Sires Realms, or fields with blood
Of slaughtered Brother stained, go seek? what lands,
What Seas must we find out at thy commands?
The Pontick Straits? through which that Princely Train
We safe brought home; when through th'incensed Maine
And dangerous Symplegades, we fled
With thee, now turned Adulterer to our bed?
Shall we for small  Iolcos make? or steer
Unto Thessalian  Tempe? what ways ever
To thee we opened against our selves we closed.
Then whither send ye us? to what Lands exposed?
To Exile an Exiled wretch is sent,
And yet no place assigned for banishment.
Yet go we must, so to command seems sit
To Croons  Son-in law; And we submit.
Inflict on us the worst of cruelties,
We have deserved. Let Croon exercise
The bloudiest Tortures Tyranny ever bred,
To plague a  Strumpet to his daughters bed.
Load us with Irons; and shut us from all light
In a dark Dungeon of eternal night:
Yet shall we suffer less then we deserve.
Ungrateful wretch! think, (if thy heart will serve
To let thee) of the Flame-breath'd Bulls; the Field
Which Armies of Arme-bearing Foes did yield.
When at our sole Command, those Earth-borne Bands,
Mutu'ally fell by their selfe-slaughtering Hands.
To these; add the Phryxaean Rams rich prize,
And steeples Dragon charmed; whose wakeful eyes
Obeyed sleeps unknown Power: our Brother slain,
Mischief, with mischiefs re-inforc'd again.
Fraud-blinded Daughters urged to divide
Their Parents Limbs, unto new life denied.
And our own Kingdoms, for a strangers Crown
Deserted; by what hopes so ever you own
Of your dear children; by the certainty
Of thy new-fix't abodes; and victory
O're-vanquish't Monsters; by these hands of ours,
Ne'er spared for thee t'imploy their utmost Powers.
By fore-past Fears; Heavens,  Seas, (the Witnesses
Of our wronged Nuptials) pity our distress.
And in thy happy state, to us that crave
Render that comfort thou would wish to have.
Of all the wealth by  Scythians rapt away
From Sun-scorch'd Dwellers of rich India,
To o narrow an Exchequer, for whose store
Our whole Court seems; with whose superf•…uous Oar
W'adorne the Woods and Groves; no part brought wee
But our slain Brothers limbs; And those, on thee
Impended; Country, Father, Brother, Shame.
We this Dowre wed; parting, restore the same.
When wrathful Croon sought thy life to have,
Moved by our tears for death, he Exile gave
We Exile thought a Punishment; but now
We find, that, for a  favour you allow.
Whilst yet thou moist, get thee from hence convay'd;
"The Wrath of Kings is heavy.
You persuade
This to endear you in Creusa's love;
You seek a hated  Strumpet to remove▪
Objects Medea love?
And Treachery
And Murder too.
What Crime is there, against me
Thou can object, deserves so foul a blame?
All that wee ever did.
Then it is your Aim
T'involve us in the guilt of your misdeeds,
Those, those are thine. "He to whose gain succeeds
"The Ill, is the Ills Author. Though our Fame
All should oppose, thou ought defend the same,
And say w'are blameless: "He should guiltless be
"In thy Repute, is guilty made, for thee.
"That life's a burden, which enjoyed, brings shame.
That life discharge, enjoyed with loss of Fame.
Rather appease thy wrath incensed B reast,
For thy poor Childrens sakes;
No, We detest,
Abjure the thought; What? shall Creus•… live
And Brothers to Medea's Children give?
Twill be an honour when our Exiled race,
A Queen, shall with her kindred Issue, grace.
Come never so unfortunate a day
To the already wretched, with Allay
Of baser blood, to mix our noble line.
 Phoebus with Sisyphus his Nephews join.
Why seekst thou ruin on us both to bring?
Let me entreat thee to depart.
The King
Could yet vouchsafe to hear us speak.
Declare
What's in my power to doe for thee.
Me! dare
Any mischief.
On either hand, see here
Two potent Kings.
Then those, a greater fear
Behold▪ Medea: let us exercise
Our Powers, and Iason be the Victors prize.
Wearied with Miseries, I yield; Forbear;
So often tried, the turn of Fortune fear.
Mistress of Fortune we have ever been.
Acastus there; here Croons nearer spleen
Threatens destruction.
Void thou either Harms:
Not against thy Father-i'-law to rise in Arms,
Or stain with kinreds blood thy Innocence,
Medea wills. Guiltless with her fly hence.
Who shall oppose, if they their powers combine,
And against us with united Forces join.
Add Colchians too; Aeëta General;
Scythians with Gracious join; we'll foil them all.
I potent Scepters dread:
Rather take heed
Y'affect them not.
Left this our Conference breed
Suspect, here let's cut short our long discourse.
Now Jove o'er all the Heavens thy Thunder force,
Stretch forth thy Hand, thy vengeful Flames prepare,
And from cracked Clouds the world with horror scare.
Nor with deliberate aim level thy throw,
Take him, or me: which of us each, the blow
Shall sink, will guilty fall; if at us cast,
Thy Thunder cannot miss.
Resume at last
More sober thoughts, language more mild; if ought
In Croons Court, in Exile may be thought
Easeful to thee, ask, and the asked for have.
Thou know we can, and use with scorn to wave
The wealth of Kings; we only wish we might
Our Children have Companions in our flight;
That in their bosoms we our tears may shed.
More Sons thou moist expect from thy new Bed.
I must confess me willing to comply
With thy desires; forbid by Pie•…y.
Nor could I suffer this, though Croons Ire
Should force me to it. For this alone, desire
I life; of all my cares the only •…as,
Sooner I could want Breath, Limbs, Light, then these.
Loves he his children so! it is well; we have it, 
Now we know where to wound him.—We hope yet
We may our last words in their mindful Breasts
Implant; embrace; seems this a just request?
This too, wee with our latest speech entreat,
What our rash grief hath uttered, youl'd forget▪
And a more favourable Memory
Of us retain; all Passions buried be.
All, ell's forgot by us; and here we pray
Thou moist the Fervour of thy mind allay,
And gentle curb unto thy passions give.
"Patience is Miseries best lenitiv•….
Gon! is it even so? hast thou forgotten me?
And all my Merits? slipped from thy Mem'ry?
No; we will ne'er slip thence. Now mind thy Part;
Summon together all thy strength and Art.
Tic thy best use of Ills, to think there's none.
Scarce will there opportunity be shown
T'effect our Treachery. Our Plots they fear.
Run then a Course from all suspicion clear.
Begin, Medea! to thy task prepare;
And what thou can, and what thou can not, dare.
O faithful Nurse! whom Chance, with us hath made
Partner in woes; our wretched Counsels aide.
A Robe we have, our Kingdoms Ornament;
As Pledge of his Ethereal descent,
By Sol t'Aeeta given. A Carquanet
With Gold enchac'd, and a rich Coroner
Set with bright Gems; These to the new-wed Bride
My Sons shall bear; first, with dire Tinctures died.
Invoke we Hecate; our sad Rites frame
The Altars strew; now crack this Roof in flame.
Nor force of Flames, nor strength of Wind,
Nor Thunder we such terror find•…
As a  divorced Wife; set on fire
With hate, and Ardor of desire.
Not Cloudy Austere where he powers
Forth Deluges of Winter showers,
When  Ester like a Torrent rolled,
Breaks Bridges down, runs uncontrolled.
Not  Rhodanus with rapid Course
Where he resisting Seas doth force,
Nor  Haemus, when the Suns hot Beams
In mid Spring, thaw his Snows to streams.
Love spurred with Passion's blind, disdains
All rule, nor brooks imposed reins.
Fearless of death; covers upon
Drawn Swords with obvious steps to run.
Pardon you Gods! we Pardon sue,
Safe may he live, did Seas subdue.
Yet the Deeps Monarch storms, his Power
Next Jove's, should stoop t'a Conqueror.
Bold Phaeton, that durst aspire
To rule the Chariot of his Sire,
Whilst from prescribed Bounds he strayed,
He felt the Flames his rashness made.
None suffered in a known way; tread
In that safe Path where others lead.
Nor violate the sacred Bands
Imposed by Natures sacred hands.
Who ever those noble Planks, which made
Bold Argos, touched; spoiled of his shade
The sacred Grove which  Pelion Crowned;
Past  floating Rocks in the profound;
Did through so many perils wade
Of the vast deep; and Anchor weighed
From off a Barb'rous Coast, possessed
Of foreign Gold; for home addressed,
With sad event the Breach he rued
Of the Seas Rites; with plagues pursued
And justice of the angry Maine▪
Tiphys, who first the Ocean
Tamed, to an  unskilful Pilot, left
His charge, on foreign Shores bereft
Of life  far from his Native Land.
 Amongst unknown Ghosts lies tomb'd in sand.
 He from the vocal Muse that springs,
At sound of whose Harmonious strings,
The rapid streams their motions ceased,
Their Murmurs the rude winds suppressed,
While Birds their own Notes left, to his Song
Fled listening, and Woods danced along;
His Limbs o'er Thracian Acres spread
Dragged unto  Haebrus streaming Head,
To Styx descended, known before;
And Tart'•…us, to return no more.
 Alcides Bores Issue slew;
 He who could various shapes endue,
From  Neptune who derives his breath,
From Hercules received his death.
 He too, when Seas and Earth h' had Crowned
With Peace, and forced the Stygian Sound,
Alive on Iota's Pyre reposed,
His Limbs to cruel Flames exposed.
While mingled Goares Infection, sent
By h's Wife, his flesh with Tortures rent:
A Boar  Ancaeus life ore-threw,
 His Uncles Meleager slew,
And by the vengeful hand doth fall
Of his enraged Mother; All
Deserved; What Crime, did expiate
That tender  Lads untimely Fate?
The  Boy by Hercules unfound.
In Waves of secure Waters drowned.
Go now bold Spirits; plow again
With like feared destiny the Maine.
Horror my trembling soul invades, some great
Pernicious Mischief, present Ill does threat.
How vast a Rage her swelling grief dilates!
Its own Incendiary! Integrates
Her lapsed powers! with fury o•…t possessed
I've seen her charge the * Gods, attempt to wrest
Heaven with her Charms: some more prodigious Act
Then these yet works she; for as hence she packed
With frighted steps, and her dire Conclave entered
Forth all her Spells she powers, and what to have ventured
On her self long feared, there broaches; a▪ whole Hell
Of Ills let's loose, close kept in that dark Cell.
And whilst she with sinister hand, prepares
The Infaustous work, sh'invokes with Magic Prayers
What ever Poisons  Lybya's scalding sands
Create; what Taurus, (where cold Winter stands
Clothed with perpetual Snow,) in's frozen veins
Congeals; and every Monster. At whose strains
Craule scaly Multitudes from under ground,
And as officious Agents wait her round.
Thither an aged Serpent trails along
His o're-growne Bulk, and darts his forked tongue;
Seeking on whom to inflict a death; at sound
Of her dire Charms, his poys'nous length in round
And complicated Orbs he folds: She cries
Poor are the Ills, and base the Weapons, rise
From this low earth; I'll from the Heavens fetch down
Poison's to serve my turn; This instant Crown
With Ills worthy thy self; Now, now's the time
Something to act above a vulgar crime.
Hither descend  the Snake that seems to lye
Like a huge Torrent rolling cross the •…kie,
In whose Immense folds either  Bear is tied,
 The great, to Achaians, less, Sydonians, guide.
His griping hands let  O phiuchus loose,
And the squeezed venom of his Snake infuse.
Hither repair, drawn by these Charms of ours,
 Python that durst assail two Heavenly Powers.
 Hydra, with all the Serpents were subdued
By Hercules in their own deaths renewed.
And thou the Colchians wakeful  Spy, whose eyes
In drowsy sleep our Spells did first surprise.
Then, (having, called of Serpents all the kinds,)
She in one Mass, all pernicious simples binds.
What ever on Impervious  Eryx grows,
What  Caucasus (where sit continual Snows)
Stained with Promethian blood, brings forth; what ever
The Warlike  Medes in charged Quivers bear.
What flying  Parthians use; with what the points
Of his keen shafts the wealthy  Arab noints.
〈◊〉 Juices which the Noble  Swedes inclined
Near the cold North, in Groves  Hercynian find.
What ever the Earth in the procreating Spring
Bege•…s, or in the Winter forth doth bring,
When rigid Cold in Ice hath all things bound,
And Forests of their Summers pride uncrown'd.
Those Herbs which bloom with a pestiferous flower,
She culls; the Juice endued with baneful power
From roots distorted wrings. From Pindus some,
Some Drugs from high Aemonian  Ethos come.
These tender sprigs as on  Pangaeus top
They grew, did her bloud-cankred Sickle crop.
These  Tygris n•…urish'd; whose swift streams oppress
His gulphy Channel; these  Danubius, these
The famed  Hydaspes▪ whose warm Current, Eaves
Dry India's Sands with Gem-inriched Waves.
And  Baits whence its land a name did get,
Whose languid streams against Seas Hesperian beat.
These felt the Edge of knife at Birth of day,
In dead of drowsy Night, this slender spray
Was from his stalk cut down. This ripened Blade
She did with her charme-tainted Nail invade.
The deadly weeds she takes, and forth doth squeeze
Her Serpents putrid Venom, and with these
She mixes Birds of  inauspicious flight,
The Heart of the solitary Owl; th'hoarce Night
Ravens Entrails whilst alive exsected.
These the Pernicious Artist, thus selected,
In parcels puts; flames ravenous force these hold,
Those the Icy chillness of benumbing Cold.
Words to her Poisons adds of no less dread
Then poisons are; See! she begins to tread
Her frantic Dance, her Rites Infernal makes;
Now charms; the world at her first Accents quakes.
You silent People of the shades below!
Ye Gods infernal! and dark  Chaos; Joy!
To you we bow; Thou gloomy Mansion
Where  sooty  Dis resides! seated upon
The lowest Hell; the den of squalid death!
Wee you invoke: Quit your Abodes beneath,
Leave your old task of torturing souls; and pack
To the new Nuptials. From his wheeling Rack
Released; a while rest let  Ixion have,
And  Tantalus sup free the fleeting Wave.
Whilst Croon feels more horrid pains then these.
Let  Sisyphus his Torments find no ease.
 You who in perforated Urns, still vain
Successelesse toil deludes; cease from your pain
And thither high; this day your hands requires.
And thou the Empress of Nocturnal fires!
To these our Rites invoked, come. Put on
Thy worst of Looks, and with more * Fronts then one
Menacing, appearo! with loose hairs thus displayed,
(As thine becomes) W'have searched each secret shade,
With naked feet: called from dry clouds the Rain
And to it's Bottom forced the suffering Maine.
Whilst old Oceanus affrighted, hides
Within his waves recess his vanquished tides.
Heavens Laws inverted, shown the World the light
Of Sun, and Stars, at once; the day and night.
 Drenched both the Bears in the forbidden deep.
And changed the course the constant Seasons keep.
Clothed Earth in Summer with a Spring new borne,
Made Ceres see, a Winter crop of Corn.
Swift Phases turn his streams back to their source,
And Ester in seven mouths divided, force
His waters to a stand; his Spring confined.
And made floods roar, seas swell, without a wind.
An ancient Wood, whose leaves its Couvert made,
At our commanding voice hath lost his shade.
Phoebus his course day left at noon, forbears;
And when we 〈◊〉 the stars drop from their Spheres.
It is time drea 〈◊〉, at these Rites of thine
Thou present were; To thee this Wreath of  nine-
Imbraided Serpents wrought with bloody hand
We offer. •…o! his  biform'd •…imbes durst band
Against Jove's high Empire, bold  Typhaeus! this
The poys'nous blood of treacherous  Nessus is.
Given by himself as he did life expire.
These Ashes raked we from the  O•…tean Pyre,
Dryp't with Herculea•… Foam. See, in this hand,
The pious Sisters, impious Mothers Brand
Vengeful  Althaea! these Plumes found wee cast
By rapefull  Harpies, as by  Zeres chased.
These are the wings the wounded  Stymphal'd bore,
Slain by the Shafts dipped in Lernaean gore.
 The Altars sound! and our own Tripods, moved
B'our fav'ring Goddess, show these Rites approved.
See  Trivia's whirling Carre! not as when bright,
With a full Orb illuminating night,
She drives; but such, when with a lured face,
Vex't with  Thessalian Charms, a nearer race
To Earth she runs: So shine thy tristful light
With pallid Ray, and with strange  Horror, fright
The world: whilst thy extreme•… to ease, O great
 Dyctynna! rich,  Chorinthian Brass is beat.
Upon this Bloud-stain'd  Turf our sacrifice
To thee we make; this Funeral  Torch, supplies
Nocturnal fires; snatched from the flaming Pile.
 To thee our Head we toss, with neck bowed, while
Our Charms wee utter; our hairs loosely spread
A Fillet binds, as when we morn the dead.
To thee this  withered bough thus wave we round,
Brought from the dark shades near the Stygian Sound.
To thee with bared breast true  Maenad-like
This  rusty knife thus in our Arms we strike.
Our streaming blood down to the Altar flows;
Inure your selves my hands such wounds t'impose,
And learn the dearest Blood of thine to shed.
The  hallowed Flood our pierced veins have bled.
If thou complain'st thou art too often pressed
B'our Orisons, pardon a forced request.
That thus O  Parses we thy Powers implore,
The Cause is still the same as heretofore,
Stili Iason: now infect the Brides Attire;
That when put on, the close, Serpentine fire,
Her inmost marrow may consume within
The yellow gold, couched lies the flame unseen.
 Which he who rues his Heavenly Theft, with still
Renewed Liver gave; and taught the skill
How to conceal its force: Mulciber did
Give us these fires, in subtle Sulphur hid.
This living flash of fatal lightning, we
From Phaeton our Cousin took; here be
The gifts the triple-shap'd  Chimera gave.
The Flames breathed from the Bulls scorched throats we have,
Which mixed with  Medusa's Gall doe serve,
So charged, the secret Mischief to conserve.
With Power these poisons Hecate inspire,
And guard the hidden seeds of the close fire
Lurks in these gifts, let them deceive the Test
Of sight and touch; whilst in her veins, and breast
The subtle fervour spreads; and doth calcine
Her melting Limbs, in smoke let her Bones pine,
And her inflamed tresses, beam-like blaze
And dim the light her Nuptial Tapers rays.
—Our Prayers are heard;  thrice Hence•… barked aloud
Thrice with sad flames, her sacred fires she showed.
Ell's finished. Nurse! my Children call, that they
Unto Creusa may these gifts convey.
Go Children; issue of a haplesse mother;
Go; by your prayers, and Presents, seek another
Less kind, to appease. Back hither quickly hie,
That we your last embraces may enjoy.
Wither runs bloody  Maenas drove
By the fierce fury of her love?
What Mischief with wild rage prepares?
Wrath with rough frowns her looks impairs;
Shaking her head she proudly jets,
And menaces the  King with threats.
Who her an Exile would suppose?
The flushing red in her cheeks glowes,
Now paleness thence the red doth chase,
No colour long her changing face
Retains; now here she runs, now there,
Distracted as her passions bear.
As Tigress of her young bereft,
With wilde speed prosecutes the theft
Through  Ganges Forest; so, nor rage
Medea knows, nor love t'asswage.
Now wrath and love their Powers conjoin;
What will she doe? to which incline?
When from Pelasgian lands, away
Will she her cursed self convey?
And by her wished absence, clear
The  Kings, and Kingdom of their fear?
Now Phoebus drive with winged pace,
Nor curbing Reins retard thy Race.
In her dark shades let friendly night,
Now hide the lustre of the light.
And Hesperus Night's usher steep
The feared day in the Western Deep.
Ell's lost! our Kingdoms Glory sunk in fire;
The  Princely Daughter, and her  Royal Sir•…
In blended Ashes lye.
Say how betrayed?
Even by those usual Trains for Kings are laid,
By Gifts.
In those what treachery could be?
Nay, that's my wonder: nor though the fact I see,
Can my belief receive't for possible.
The manner of so strange a ruin tell.
As it was  commanded, the devouring flame,
Assaults each part of the Palace: the whole frame
In pieces falls; and now we fear the Town.
The raging flames with throwne-on waters drown
Even that astonishment, and wonder breeds
In this disaster; Fire on Water feeds;
The more suppressed, the more it burns; and grows
By that which to extinguish we impose.
Fly; fly Medea! quickly hence be gon,
And seek with speed some other Region.
How should we fly?—No; were we fled, to see
This day, we would return again: to be
Spectatresse of these gallant Nuptials.—Heart!
Dost stop? pursue thy happy rage; this part
Of thy enjoyed Revenge, what is it?—Distraught!
Dost thou yet love? is widowed Iason, thought
Sufficient? Work Medea! work; invent
Some strange, unusual kind of punishment.
Hence with all right, expulsed shame be gone.
"That's poor revenge which by weak hands is done:
By all intent on wrath; bravely excite
Thy drooping thoughts; and with more eager might
Rouse up the old sparks of rage, hid in thy breast.
What we have done already, to the rest
W' intend, may be called piety: now ply't;
Let the world know how vulgar, and how slight
Our former Ills were, but as Preludes, to
Ensuing rage. What could such rude hands doe
Might be termed great? or by a Girl be shown?
W'are now Medea; our Invention grown,
As our Ills multiplied; Now, now w'are joyed
We lopped our Brothers head, and did divide
His bleeding Limbs; that we our Father spoiled
Of his Crowns sacred Treasure; and beguiled
Daughters to take up particidiall Arms.
Seek matter for thy Fury, for all harms
That brings a hand prepared.—Wrath whither, oh!
Transported art thou? Against what treacherous Foe
Intend these weapons?—Something my fierce mind,
But what I know not, hath within designed,
Nor darest' her self disclos't.—Fool I have been
Too fondly rash. Oh that I could have seen
Some Children of the Strumpet got!—What's thine
By Iason, think Creusa bore. This kind
Of vengeance likes; and likes deservedly.
The height of Ills, with a resolve as high
Attempt: you, we did once our Children call,
For your Sires Crimes a satisfaction fall.
—Horror invades my heart; an Icy cold
Stiffens my limbs; my breast pants; wrath, his hold
Hath left; and there, (a wive's sterne Passions quit,)
A Mothers soft restored affections sit.
We in our Childrens blood our hands •…mbrue?
Ah! better thoughts distracted griefs pursue!
Far be it from Medea yet, to act
So soul a Sin, or so abhorred a fact.
What Crime, poor wretches! shall they suffer for?
—Their Father's Crime enough; and greater far
Their Mother; let 'em dye; they're none of mine.
Hold! they're thine own: then perish because thine.
Alas! they're innocent; without a touch
Of Guilt? it is true; My Brother too was such.
Why stagger'st thou my soul? or why doe tears
Water my Cheeks? whilst Passion this way bears
My wav'ring mind, now that way love divides;
Tossed in an eddy of uncertain Tides.
As when the Winds wage war the passive Waves
Are counter-rock't, the Sea a Neuter, ra•…es.
So floats my wrecked heart, now Wrath wins the field,
Now Piety; to Piety wrath yield.
Oh you the only joy, and comfort left
Of our sad state; Now, of all else berest;
Come hither, my dear Children! and with mine
Your little Arms in close Embraces join.
May in your lives your Father yet delight,
Whilst I your Mother may.—Exile, and flight
Enforce me on: Strait from my Arms with cries
Will they be torn; then perish from all joys
Of Father as of Mother. Grief again
Renews; My hate boils high; my heard brain
It's old Rage fires, and stirs my abhorred hand
Up to new mischief: On then, thy command
We follow. Would an issue from my womb
As numerous as  Niobes, had come.
And twice seven Children had from us derived
Their Births: our Barrenness hath even deprived
Our Vengeance; yet w' have two: enough to expire
As victims to our Brother, and our Sir e▪
—Whither does this dire Troop of Furies bend?
Whom seek they? where their fiery strokes intend?
Against whom shake they their bloody Brands? Snake, wound
In lashing whips with horrid hisses sound.
Whom does Megaera with infestive Post
Pursue? what yet unknown, dismembered Ghost,
Is this appears? 't's my Brothers; come to crave
Vengeance of us: And vengeance shalt thou have.
But first, fix all these fire-brands in my eyes;
Tear, burn; my Breast to furies open lies.
Hence these dread Ministers of vengeance send,
And bid these Spirits satisfied descend.
Leave me to my self, Brother; to employ
This Arm in thy revenge, that did destroy
Thy life;  thus with this  victim we appease
Thy injured Ghost.—What sudden sounds are these?
What means this none?— Arms against my life are bent,
 Up to the Houses Top force thy Ascent:
Finish thy Murder there. Come you with me
My small Companion: whilst this body wee
Convey along. Now, soul! thy task intend.
Nor thy brave Mischief unregarded end
In secret; show it the People; let them stand
The amazed Spectators of thy Tragic hand.
You whom the Murder of your Prince, doth move
With sad Resentments of a loyal love,
The Author of that execrable deed
Help to surprise; hither with weapons speed
You armed Cohorts; here this House surround,
And lay the Fabric level with the ground.
I, now our Sceptor, Brother, Sire, again
W'enjoy; and Colchians their rich spoil retain.
Our Kingdom, and our lost Virginity
Are now restored: O long cross Destiny
At length grown kind! O festive Nuptials! On;
Give thy Revenge, as Crime, perfection.
Dispatch while thy hand's in.—Why thus delays
My soul? what doubts?—Our potent wrath decays;
Now of the Fact a shameful penitent.
What have I done? Wretch! such though I repent.
I've don't. An ample joy my unwilling Heart
Seizes: it grows upon me. Yet this part
Of Vengeance wanted, he not being here,
Nor a spectator; without whom, what ever
W'have done, is lost.
See where she sits! upon
Yon Houses shelving Top; hither some one
Bring burning Brands, and Fire impose on Fire;
That scorched in her own Flames she may expire.
Doe; raise your Sons a Funeral Pile; your Bride,
And Father-i-law, our kindness did provide
With Rites of Sepulture; his Doom this Son
Hath felt, the like shall this, whilst thou look on.
By all the Gods, by our Community
Of flight, and Bed, which, un•…nforced I
Ne'er violated: spare this child; O spare
Me this: the Crime is mine, then let me share
The punishment; and let deserved death,
Seize on my guilty Head, and loathed Breath.
No; where thou would not have it; where thou dost feel
Most sense of sorrow will we force our steel.
Go now, thou proud Insulter, go, and Wed
Young Virgins now, and leave a Mother's Bed,
Let one suffice to have suffered.
If our Rage
One death, or single slaughter could assuage
We none had sought; and though both dye, yet that
To our wrongs is not revenge commensurate.
If in our womb a Pledge there be, even there
This steel shall searched, and thence the Embrion tear.
Dispatch thy Villainy; no more we pray:
Nor longer now, our punishment delay.
Haste not my Grief; but leisurely employ
Thy slow revenge. This daye's our own; w' enjoy
The accepted time.
Death, cruel! we implore.
Thou pity crav'st. So;  now ell's done; nor more
Had we (O sorrow) as a Sacrifice
To offer thee. Erect thy humid Eyes
Ungrateful Iason; here look up; dost know
Thy Wife? thus use we to escape: Heavens show
Our flight clear way; See both our Dragons here!
Who freely stoop their scaly necks to bear
Their willing Yoke.  Now take your Sons; whilst I
On wi•…general Wheels through airy Regions fly.
 Go, mount the skies; and by thy flight declare,
(If thou unpunished go) no Gods there are.

AN Ordinance from our pretended State,
Sows up the Players mouths, they must not prate
Like Parrots what they're taught upon the Stage,
Yet we may Print the Errors of the Age:
All their projections cannot hinder so,
But if we write, the Presses needs must go,
That, that alone, heales our dejected Sense,
We can divulge our penned Intelligence:
Slight is our vein, not Clio's aid we crave,
If THALIA smile, we our sole wishes have:
Smooth PLAUTUS, ARISTOPHANES his vein
We now affect, not SOPHOCLES high strain:
Yet thus we differ, they for mirth were fixed,
But we have Joy and Dolor, both comixed.
ARe you for the Exchange?
Yes: I have appointed a Vonetian Mer∣chant to meet him there.
What News is stirring?
None, but what Fame speaks in the nose by the Lyur∣nil, and the rest of the Gazets.
And what speak they?
Why, that you and I, and all must be undone by our Machavilians, they will not yet accept their Sovereigns prof∣fer, nor hearken unto any name of Peace, 'lesse that he take his Crown from off his head and place it at their feet; and this they term the Subjects Liberty, and privilege of Par∣liament.
The name of Liberty hath ever been the watch-word used before Rebellion▪ the idle echo of uncertainty, that in all Ages ever hath abused the credulous multitude; but I in troth sometimes am overcome even with pity, when I cogitate the dire events will follow these base Actions, how giddily our States-men hurry on without fear or wit, proposing this and this they will have done, though thereby they infringe all Co∣venants▪ and violate all Law; the King hath proffered that, which six years since they durst not hope to have, and though some of their Party boasting, say, it was fear constrained him to it; first let them know the Maxim is most true, That good from Kings must not be drawn by force; yet this his gracious proffer, freely came from an heart truly sorry for those Ill, that lately sell, and doe even now lye heavy on his oppressed people.
But this the Sophies dare not to believe, it is mischief makes them fat; like Theseus, they are in a Labyrinth, but de∣stitute of Ariadnes Clew: they know the ills they have already done cannot be purged with sacrifice; no, though they of∣feared Heccatombs of Beeves, and therefore they resolve to ex∣piate their lesser Crimes with greater, one poison must ex∣pell another; thus while they practise Paracelsian-like, and stanch our bleeding wounds with Gun-powder,
The Body Politic with weakness reels,
And proud Dissention trips up Consorts heals.
And will this City evermore be fooled, until her Ba∣tlements doe Kisle the earth?
Our Mayor and Council construe so the Laws,
They still agree to that's the strongest Cause;
Like Snails they hide their heads these hideous storms,
And dare not once for to thrust forth then Horns.
Should this be told unto the after-times, how would it dim the glory of this City?
Alas great Charles, how is thy Swords edge dulled by those that did pretend to surbush it? O horrid change, able to strike him deaf that hears it named? Sufficient to cleave the marble Tombs of mighty Edward and great Henry, and make their Ashes stir with lively heat, and starting forth from their cold Monuments, dog our Rebellious Grandees up and down, frighting them to obedience.
Too true it is the Tyrant Dionisius cause to be drawn the Image of a King▪ when Damocles was placed in his throne, over whose head a threatening Sword was hanged, fastened up only by an horses hair, to show the winding-paths that For∣tune treads, how she can make even Kings to know her power.
But yet the Heavens strong arms do compass Kings; an host of Angels guards the Royal Throne; witness our Roy∣all Charles, who now bereaved of strength and outward power, like to a Castle that's impregnable, whose basis touch the Center of the Earth, repells the surious shock and fierce assault of his malevolent treacherous Parliament, who puffed up with their fortunate success, disdain for to comply.
The happy Issue of Conspiracy makes Treason sacred,
and Rebellion holy, they cheer themselves with thought of their great Victories, but they remember not how dear they cost, how many widows lost their loved husbands, and i will∣drone their kind parents, the chance of War they say hath made them Kings, and they resolve to sway.
They would (no doubt) had they their wish, but there's a clog hangs heavy on their heals, the supreme Coun∣cell of King Oliver doth emulate their greatness; there is a pack of Ravens, which if they be debarred of their prey, most sure will pick their eyes out.
To stop their clamours, and to buy their favours, they Vote them what they ask, for you must think, it were simple policy, the heard of Wolves should jar, Lyons so near; and there∣fore they have sent unto the City with all speed for to levy their Arrears.
O foolish Cuckolds, that will suffer thus their noses to be bored▪ Fond men, they long have seen the Devil in Crystal, been cheated with fair words, how treasons takes its turns▪ The City first stirred up the men at Westminster to raise a Traitorous War, they backed the City with a name of Power, and now those men whom their Rebellion raised, hang like to Meteors over their cursed heads, threatening new War and vengeance, just guerdon of their cursed Treachery.
He that resisted his dread Sovereign Lord,
Doth damn his soul by Gods own very Word,
A Christian Subject should with honour due,
Obey his Sovereign though he were a Jew:
And be assured when Subjects doe Rebel,
Gods wrath is kindled threatening fire of Hell.
It is almost Change-time▪ let's away.
Those that in Blood a pleasure have,
Descend still bleeding to their Grave;
Men know not what themselves will bee,
When as more then themselves they see:
Lust reigning Murder follows fast,
As Leaves before the Winters blast:
Desire of Rule, it was that which made
Our Trustees false, our lives betrayed.
Thus the World goes its common course,
From good to bad, from bad to worse,
From worse to that is worst of all,
And then into its former fall
With Victory, Revenge should cease,
But it with us doth more increase.
How can they justly Honour claim,
Slighting those should advance the same?
How can Gods worship be advanced,
Where Error still is countenanc't?
Vice mixed with Nobility,
Truth shrouded with Hypocrisy,
Learning thrust out, Ignorance in
Th•y soothed, in their slavish sin;
N•••ing vile Error, with as Factious Fools:
These are our mighty Men, or mighty Fools.
FRom the black Lake that runs round Erebus I come, permitted by the King of Flames, to visit those that my Co-partners were, when I was clothed in flesh: I, whose projections grim and dangerous, brought a free people into slavery, incensing them against their gracious Prince, and topsie-turvy turned all LAW and RIGHT; while England England wounded, Civil broils eat up the Natives, ravenous Mulci∣ber divested Houses and large Granaries; Tumults, Sedition, Schisms, Blasphemies, like a Gangrene, over-spread the face of beauteous Britain: I, that for the same am doomed for evermore to fry in flames, with an admired swift velocity, proper to spirits, and aerial forms, now tread on English ground: pale •ynthia mounted in her silver Wane, now takes her progress by the milky way, and now Aldeboran is mounted high, a∣bove the shiny Cassiopeia's Chair, all things are hushed &amp; still, the world's a sleep: thou perfect Image of grim Death, whose drink is Laethe, all-oppressing Sleep hang on his eyes, whose factious soul is charmed with soporiferous draughts of idle ease;
While I surview his person, borne to be
His Countries Bane, the Fate of Monarchy:
See here the emblem of Democracy, the very abstract of Sedition; be bold my Cromwell, and inexorable.
For such a Will Hell doth afford to thee,
Thou shalt not fear to fetter Majesty.
What airy Fancies doth the sleepy God distill  into my teeming Brain? Me thought I saw the gates of Hell unbarred, the Iron doors unhindg'd▪ from whence swifter then Lightning issued out the spirit of my Patron Pym—Stay gentle Shade, and if Hells King give leave, let me embrace thee in my longing arms—Deluding Fan∣cie, how doest thou persuade, that I should thus discourse with my own shade—Here's none, I did but dream; me thinks, like Aeson, I am now renewed, my spirits are more vigorous, and of a bolder temper then of late: Is not my Body now a walking Armour, my Ribs are Bars of Brass, my Hands of Iron? So please ye, ye all∣powerful Destinies, that my Heart fail not, nor my Sinews
shrink till I have brought to pass what I intend, till I have made my self Lord Paramount, and quite eradicated all those Laws which many Ages past have been adored, till I have quite dissolved all Monarchy, and topsi-turvey▪ turned all Regal Pow∣er: let my fierce Soldiers, like the Nubians,
Go headlong on, impatient of all stay,
Through blood and horror for to make their way.
〈◊〉 •ee• I doubt to bring my ends to pass, since now I have new cast the timorous State, made up my Faction all the Kingdom o'er, Imprisoned Charles my King, exiled his Friends; what let's me then that I ascend a throne—O Yes, there's thousands doe make me their curse, and I am now become a public hate, the people staggering, stand as in amaze.
But to undo their doubts I will provide,
As Alexander Gordius, Knots untied.
The world's a popular Disease, and all
Are mortal find it Epidemical,
It's still distempering poor anxious men.
Firing their brains till they to dust again;
One raves, as troubled with a boiling heart,
He craves the favour of the blind gods Dart,
Another lets his Oaths about to fly,
Which deafes men's ears like Joves Artillery;
He's drenched in care, the tother frisks and sings,
This man loves study, tother Revellings;
He hugs his Gold, another spends it all,
One niggardly, tother a prodigal:
Tic sure a symptom of approaching Ill,
When dis-acquainted sense knows not the will;
What less (then fools) are they that prog &amp; plot,
To gain their utmost wish? but being got,
They lavish out the chiefest of their care,
And in the end dye mad, or in despair.
THe news Symancha, how did thy project thrive? Simon. As well as our Lord God the Pope can wish; I am elected for a constant Preacher to I▪ his Regiment.
And I have so much favour gained, to morrow I re∣ceive an Institution to be established in a wealthy Living which lately was Sequestered.
Why▪ then our journey hath been prosperous, and thanks is due from our most holy Concalve; what shall we pitch upon?
Not to divulge our selves, it is dangerous, but this I propose as most emergent; we will assay, even with our utmost power, to fan the fire of those grand differences which doe prognosticate a cruel War between those Heretics on ei∣there side, the Independents and the Presbyterians, and so what SPAIN, nor ROME, nor HELL could bring to pass, we shall I hope effect.
We need not seek to destroy them, although Ply∣tine, Sylvester, Prierius, Bellarmine, Bozius, and Pezantius, do warrant the black Deed, the Treachery and damned deluded minds of his own Subjects will ere long dispatch him; and in the mean time to unrivet them, Fire, Murder, and Sedition we will raise, the better to bring low the Heretics.
To us this doth belong, to this we swore by the sacred Holocaust, and it is the duty of all Catholiques, be they ne'er so pedantic, by Fire and Sword, Poison and Gunpowder, and all such other Plots and Stratagems, to take out of the way all Heretics, and so to elevate the Papal throne.
Now Christs Vice-gerent shall have Peter-pence once more paid out of England, the English Kings shall be con∣strained to stoop, and prostrate to kiss his blessed feet, to whom all things are possible, but to err.
Sing out ye sacred Quire of Choristers, and chant loud Anthems in a jocula-veine, for we have won the Goal; but think thou it were not good my best Symancha, if wee inquired at that BLACK ORACLE, the mouth of Pluto, what
will be the event of their Distractions, and these our underta∣kings?
It will be safe to doe so.
Help spread the Circle; now stand firm with me in this circumference, let silence charm thy tongue, strength fortify thy heart, while I raise Lucifer with my incantations, and make all Hell to tremble at my words:
Hear me, O thou Stygian God,
Who forfeitedst thy first abode,
Thou who allurd'st the inferior Stars
With Great JEHOVE to manage Wars;
While the sweet hormonious Spheres
Were Drums and Trumpets in your ears,
Yet, as the murmuring winds conspire,
With thunder, and with flashing fire
The world to fear, and make us think
Our cup is full even to the brink, 
And when amid these angry tones,
Innumerable weighty stones
Of hail fall down, whose fragour make
The MACHINE of the world to shake,
So were thou precipict'd from Heaven,
When Michael had thy sentence given,
With thy cursed Followers, who like flies,
 Could we see with spiritual eyes,
As Atoms doe hop up and down,
Hang o'er each Village and each Town,
Come, O come, without delay,
Before more powerful charms I say. 
What would Chirlandus?
I charge thee, by the Regent of the night, the tri∣formed Hecate, to tell me what will be the period of all those mighty things in Agitation which now the State of England labour with? Will the most dreadful storm that threatens them, shower down amain, or else be blown away?
Those secrets that are writ by Joves own hand I cannot be permitted to scan o'er, yet by my conversation in that Clime, my sly intrusion into Families, this I dare to pro∣nounce:
When the time comes that you shall see
A headless Body Active be,
And many horrid Deeds performed
By a Trunk, without an Head adorned;
If that same Body and the Head
By Friendly Hands be soldered,
Then happy Days may chance ensue,
Or else for aye bid Peace adieu.
Shall Rome gain footing here once more? And shall we be successful, yea, or no?
If when the two parts vanquished be,
The Third keep fixed to Hierarchy,
No hope of that, but if they fail
The Papal power may prevail.
There's all I dare relate.
What mystic sense his words include?
We'll sift the sense in private.
Strange mysteries in the Book of Fate doth lye,
Not legible to every common eye.
Lo from our cursed Dissentions, and our Wars,
How Rome gets strength, the whore of Babilon
Doth clap her hands, and laughs to see our Jars,
Hoping ere long she us shall tread upon:
Heavens bowl of Vengeance we have quaffed it up,
And shall we also caste her deadly Cup?
That Reformation cannot (sure) be good,
That craves the Sword to hew its passage out:
By Schism, Sedition, Treachery, and Blood,
Antichrist thrives▪ even all the world about;
When men compel their fellows good to act,
The manner of it discommends the Fact.
It is sure, that never Rome such footing had
Since Mary fell, as she hath gotten now,
That damned  Sect all o'er the Kingdom gad,
Who falsely unto Jesus make their vow:
Whose task it is for to augment Dissontion,
And for to fan the fire of our Contention.
If it be for Gods glory, to pull down
All decent Rites, and Orders, if it may be
A King should become great, high in Renown,
By being Captived, Plunged in Misery:
If that tho people by all loss may throve,
Then let us for to thank our States-men strive.
Is the Guard placed about the Privy Chamber, and are the Castle Gates barred sure?
They are, Sir.
On what a ticklish point I stand; and like a man walks a ridged Battlement: If he digress to the right hand or the left, hazards the bruising of his fleshly tenement, and forseiture of Soul; so I, betwixt the fealty I owe unto my rightful King, and the commands of an all-powerful State, am doubly purged; the one desires me show a Subjects Duty, the other doth command a Traitors hate; If I obey the one, then I accrue my Sovereigns displeasure; If satisfy the other, then lye I liable to Imprisonment, or if they please, to Death. O Fear how potent art thou! The man possessed with thee, cares not to sell his Country and his King, to Act the worst of Crimes that Hell ere hatched, so he secure himself.
I am resolved, though LOYALTY dissent,
To Act even is it shall please the Parliament.
Isle not pay a farthing, let the Cit-ty Cuckolds pay it and they will—
Nor I by Oliver; we'll find a time—ere long to search their Mo-ney Ba-gs: shall men—of Clo-u•s have Gold, and men of War-re want it?
You are under Col. Bax-ter, the Thimble-maker.
Mar-ry am I.
I serve under the Command—of Colonel Oker, Okay I mean.
A pox upon it, wud I were amongst the Bacon-boyes again, with them my Oaths could profit me; but here, if I but utter once an angry word, I'm snapped,—here's not a farthing on the pub-like Faith—eight pence a day—will hardly find me Drink.
Hark—Isle sing thee a Song.
Out with it.
WHat Rogues were we,
So deluded to be,
to come hither to our sorrow;
I would White-Hall
To the ground might fall,
that we might be gone to morrow.
If here we doe call,
And not pay for all,
we are sure to be soundly beaten;
As sure as our Coats,
They'll pluck out our throats,
if we pay not for what we have eaten.
I wish we were gone
From hence every one,
for sure we shall be all undone;
Should the Army come all,
What would them be fall?
they care not for Soldiers in London.
It is time we were at our Quarters; let's away.
Shall we never find our error,
but still stumble, till we fall
Into that Pit of endless Terror,
for our Crimes so capital?
Shall we still behold our God
Despised, his Priests without abode,
Our King for ever under-trod?
Shall our Laws be ever wanting,
and our own swords cut our throats?
Shall our hearts be always panting,
and nothing heard but dreary notes?
Shall a sort of Knaves still Rule us,
And a sort of Dolts still fool us?
Shall our faintness ever cool us?
England, will thy eyes ne'er bee
with thy wrongs illuminated?
London, wilt thou never see,
but for ever be amated?
Let England rowze, and London rise,
Ere't be too late, if they be wise,
T'regaine their pristine Dignities.
Isle have no more Proposals sent to the King and so let them at Westminster be told; they're purely Iretons Issue, begotten by the Court-influence on his brains; as, Sol &amp; Homo generate Hominem.
No; we will at one blow break the yoke of Kings, and make our selves sole Lords: as for the Scots, we'll kick them home again, with their Presbyterie; they are not Engines fit for us to use.
I doe rejoice to hear your good resolves.
And I am proud to be partaker with you.
Nor shall I count it any stain to honour, to set my helping hand.
What Law is there, that can obstruct our hop•s now, we have conquered our Conqueror? And if none have •••ue and legal ••g•• to the outward ben•••ts of this life (sage Saints) then none ought to enjoy their Sweets, BUT WEE. If any
dare to rapine or emulate at our greatness, is not our Army numerous &amp; strong, and able to stop their months with earth?
It is true, great Sir, there's nothing visible that can retard our hopes; but Policy persuades, to have a care of what may be hereafter: for this end, let us send to them at West∣minster, to frame an Ordinance to this effect because the peo∣ple groan under their burdens, and sigh for sorrow, when they think, that yet more Troubles are to come, a choice Com∣mittee now selected are, for to redress their wrongs, and hear their grievances.
Nor is this all need to be done: the people prophecy we level all, and that the House of Peers with us are useless; now should the Lords, incensed with their wrongs, conjure a∣amongst their Tenants, the Devils would not easily be laid.
To noose those Lords yet further, since yet wee have not made our best of them, let there a Declaration be drawn up, in which we'll say, that with our utmost might wee will support the Peerage of the Kingdom.
Fond fools, doe they imagine, they can conserve their Honours, when CHARLES hath lost his Greatness? or, that when as our ends are served upon them, wee will not shake'em off with scorn and spite.
It is decreed, and they shall find it so: what now re∣mains, but that wee doe proceed to make our selves FREE STATES? Which to accomplish, let no time be lost, in voting down the KING, in sifting of his Manuscripts and Papers, that so wee may have matter for his Life:
And then, though Heaven and Earth say no such thing,
Yet spite of PATES, and MEN, I will be KING.
Atlas, doe thou our falling World sustain,
for wee are sinking now into Abisse;
Let the Eumenides come on amain,
the high Cythaerus top, is Cromwels bliss:
But thou Maegera bring him down again,
and quench his Pride in the salt Meotis▪
Or else let some brave soul for virtue stand,
And send his soul into Enio's hand.

Our high and mighty Parliament,
Fell sick of late with discontent.
The business thus, a Scotsmen came,
(Whom for his own sake) I'll not name;
And justling him, began to say,
Why dost thou God, and Man betray?
And dost thy league with me forsake,
Not suffering me for to partake;
Of all thy glory and degree,
Nor dost set up Presbyterie:
Be sure ere long, armed Cap a pee,
Strict Vengeance I will take on thee.
Hee gone, one Poyer, with his Mate,
Called Powell, who by happy Fate;
Had ceased Pembroke Castle; and
Incited all for CHARLES to stand.
Came in and said, O cursed Devil!
We will make the now repent the evil,
Thou hast these seven years put in ur;
Yet would have us to count thee pure.
This put Sir Parliament, in dread,
And presently, he took his bed.
Where a sore sickness ceased upon him,
That he despairs to shake if from him.
And now alas, he's drawing on,
And sinking to perdition.
O Run, run, Mr. Privilege or we are all lost, Sir Pitiful Parliament hath taken grief, which hath so prevailed over his powers and mastered his faculties, that he is now be∣come a mere Skeleton and lies drawing on—away with winged hast—hark how he groans—his heart-strings
crack like a Cable, when the affrighted Bark breaks from the Anchor,—hee yawns again,—O good man, that hee that hath been so long flourishing, of such health of body and wealthy above Craessus, should now bee wasted with a Scotch Feaves, and shaken to pieces, with a Welsh Ague, and fall as poor as Ir•s; O run, run good Privilege, some Aqua∣vitae, for our sick Parliament, or ell's lost.
The Doctors, the Doctors, post, post, for the Doctors, doe you two, stand here like statues to behold your sick Master surrender his Ghost; dare you be Spectators with the Devil; O Mr. Privilege, O Mr. Vote, one of you run for Doctor King, the other for Dr. Bishop, but bid the last not to appear in his Lawn sleeves; for the shape of any thing resembling Innocence, will hasten my Masters end,—run, run, for Gods sake:
To fetch the Doctors, Privilege, and Vote
Are gone, they are come, and now what follows note,
Behold Sr. Parliament, here in his bed,
Sr. Ralph Rebellion, holding of his head:
With all the Rabble, of his new made Creatures,
Knowing their names, you needs must know their natures
For Pluto's sake cheer up Sir, or else all Hell will be sor∣rowfull, O how his temples beat, as if hee were possessed with a Vertigo good Sir bee comforted, the Scots are not yet com∣ming, Prince CHARLES is yet in France, Poyer may yet bee named, the Londoners are still Sir at your service, the Coxcombs are bewitched unto their ruin you yet may Rule the roast o'er King and People, why should you dye yet.
O Rebellion, thy comforts come too late, my Conscience,
ō my Conscience, it is that kills me were there no opposition, J am a man that am died o'er with blood, am guilty of an hun∣dred thousand lives,—oh, oh,—I have for to enrich my pri∣vate Cosers, undone a Nation, made ten Thousand beg, have wronged my King, that is the best of Princes, pulled down all order in the Church and State, and introduc't the worst of Turcisme,—oh—oh.
Conscience is merely, but an airy sound; shall fear persuade you Sir to penitence, recall your wonted temper, and imagine to be as great as ever, dear Sr. without you, I that have seven years, maskt with the veil of seeming Pity, been worshipped as a god shall now decline into my wonted orb, and abhor∣red, as the worst of Devils.
I can hold out no longer, it is in vain for me to cheer my self, when Death's approaching, shift for thy self Rebellion, I must leave thee, I see as in a glass my Fate is cast, and that the King will have his own again; and if the words of die∣ing men be Oracle, believe then▪ that ere Three years are ac∣complisht, all things will be as they were seven years since, it is best for me to dye and so escape the fury of those Lyons, wait to tear me; dost thou not know the Commons of this Isle have found their error, and doe now resolve to have one King, rather then forty Tyrants; see thou not how my mise∣ries throng about me, perceive thou not that Heaven it self is bent to give a period to my undertakings, all England, Ire∣land, Wales, Scotland; yea the Universe, protest to fall them∣selves or ruin me: Whore's Mr. Covenant.
Here Sr. yet with no weeping eye, doe I deplore your miserable Fortune; for you have do it with me, as some with Jade, ride them of their legs, then turn them to the Commons: I have been hackney to you Sr. this seven years, have made great journeys, and yet carried dou∣ble, and but of late when you were swollen with pomp,
and hemd about, with all mistaken glories, when I expected love and great preferment, you thrust me forth of doors, with scorn and obloquy, for which you now lie Cauving.
I never meant for to make thee my Rival, how ere, for to add to my own advantage, I entertained and hugd thee in my bosom, Machiavill was my master, any thing that might help forward my cursed undertakings, Oaths, Cove∣nants, and Protestations, with or against God, all was one to me; home to thy Blew Capt brethren, both I and thee must near expect our wishes; the King, the King man, now must rule again.—Whore's Mr. Plunder.
Here my dear Master.
O my delicious servant, to thee J am engaged more then to all my creatures, thou hast been my supoorter all along, nor shall I leave behind me now I die, a doer, but what by thy help I have gained.
Be cheerful Sir, I still am your true Trojan, give me but Warrants signed with your hand, Isle plunder all without di∣stinction, fetch you in Money, Cattle goods and Treasure, make you Delinquents, let me make them poor, show me a Clergy man, that doth preach sound Doctrine, whose life con∣formable unto his words, whose Charity extends unto ye poor, dares build Almshouses, whose sauciness is such that he dares pray for the King Queen and Progeny, Isle soon cease on his living and estate, and command none for to afford him succ∣our, show me an honest harmless meaning man, who hold it best untroubled to remain, and view the fate of things and not to meddle, whose happy soul addors the golden mean, and wishes truth alone may get the better, Isle strip him of his te∣nements and lands, and try his patience more, then Satan Iobes or show me but a Citizen whose Chests, ring, loud with silver bells, though he be ne'er so honest and upright though he sought for Cause and Covenant; yet this vast treasure shall
pronounce his doom; that he is rich shall be a heynons crime, all that he is possessed of I will rifle, to add unto your store.
Thou hast been faithful in thy undertakings, but my employing thee hath been my ruin; come all at once about me, Mr. Privy∣ledge, Mr. Vote, Mr. Declaration, Mr. Rebellion, Mr. Covenant, and Mr. Plunder, my glass is almost run, I now must leave you to be the scorn and hate of after Ages; yet ere I make my Exit it were convenient that my last Will, and Testament, were drawn, which shall be in this form.

The Parliament in strong labour is,
pray Women come away,
Least Reformation we doe miss,
alack and well-aday.
Call Mistress London the Mid-wife,
call Mistress Lent-all too,
That if the First can't save her life
the last may see her go.
Bid Rainsborough to Rigg his Sipps
with all convenient speed,
Lest Gregory doe fit his slips,
and then wee Saints must bleed.
Blow, blow strong Winds, lend one stiff blast,
and send her quick to hell,
Our miseries then shall soon be past,
and our sick land be well.
RIde, run, go, with all celerity, and fetch hither Mistress London the Midwife; tell her that Mrs. Par∣liament desires her to come away presently, for she is in strong labour, and hath most miserable pangs and throws that come thick upon her; pray heavens she hath
not taken some fright; I heard her the other day complain of a Scotsmen, and of an Irishman, and a Welshmen; Well, well, it was ill done, Isle besworn, to fright a Gentlewoman of her quality and breeding, one that came of so ancient and Hono∣rabble a Family too, as the Parliaments of England? Who is it al∣most that has not known the Parliaments to be as honourable as ever was any Family in England (next the King, God bless him) and hath done as much good for the Kingdom: and now to be despised by every sause-boxe boy, and loose fellow to make Rimes as they call them, and sing-songs of her, ma∣king of her a Whore, and no better then the arrantest Strum∣pet that ever went upon two shoes, telling her, that she hath imprisoned her Husband, and prostituted her body to a very Eunuch, that had nothing to help himself withal; and since, hath followed the Camp, &amp; became an Amunition-W, and turned up her tail to every lousy Ill-dependent Rascal in the Army; Sir Thomas himself, and king Cromwell too, a very Town-Bull, and committed flat fornication with Broom-men, Tinkers, and Champion∣nell-rakers, and hath learnt to murder, Rob, take Purses, pick pockets; but she is not the first Woman that hath done amiss, These are but slips occasioned by the weakness of her sex; Isle in and make her a Spiritual Caudle to comfort her weak back; for I promise you, I doubt that she will have but an ill bargain on it. Mrs. Parliament; why Mrs. Parliament I say; how doe ye Mrs. Parliament; Will ye have a little Strong-waters, or a Caudle to comfort ye?
Oh sick, sick; I must cast Nurse; pray reach me a bowl: 〉haw 〉haw.〉....
Well said Mistress, fetch it up; up with it: Heaven bless me! What is it that looks so red Mistress?
Oh it is Blood, innocent blood, that hath lain in clodds congealed at my stomach this full 7 years; hark how loud it cries for vengeance? I never felt it before I came to Strafford, only once since, at Canterbury; O Tomkins, O Challoner, Burly, &amp;c. too well I understand that you suffered by my cruelty unjust deaths. 〈awe.〉
It is well tic up; cast again Mistress.
J will Nurse. 〈awe, awe.〉 Oh, Oh, my heart is burst.
Lord Mistress, What is it that looks so yellow? is it Choler?
No Nurse, it is Gold, accursed gold; For the love of this J sold my God, my King, my Soul, committed Sacrilege, murder, and all manner of mischief. Awe........
What's this Mrs. that looks like Paper?
Oh Nurse, those are Ordinances, Votes, and De∣clarations; Pray hold my back hard Nurse, my heart will shiver to pieces else. awe, awe, sick sick.
What's this that comes so strongly up? Foh, how it stinks all the Kingdom over.
Oh Nurse! This is the accursed Declaration a∣against my King, wherein He is so falsely flandered and re∣proach'd; Pray fling some hot Embers on it, and make all the haste you can to call Mrs. Sedition, Mrs. Schism, Mrs. Tolera∣tion, and Mrs. Leveller, tell them, That if they come not pre∣sently, J shall miscarry of the sweet Babe of Reformation, that hath cost England so much money, blood and sweat.
J am gone: Here's the Midwise forsooth, mistress London.
Oh mistress London, help me now or J die; never did Parliament endure such bitter pangs; Oh, oh; J am rea∣die to depart.
Depart in the Devils Name if thou wilt; thou shalt have no help of mind; J come to laugh at thy sorrow, more then to help thee; thou hast had too much of my help already, and that hath emboldened thee the more to play the Strumpet with security, and to prostitute thy Members to all manner of Wickedness and Uncleanness: No, languish still, till thou hast brought forth the bastard Jssue of thy own Lust thy own self, which was begot in obscenity, and shall be brought forth in iniquity for me; and may it prove as mon∣strous in its birth, and as fatal to it self, as it hath been omen∣os to others.
As soon she had made an end of speaking, in came rushing Mrs. Privilege, Mrs. Ordinance, Mrs. Schism, Mrs. Sedition, and Mrs. Toleration, who presently fell about their business; one held her hands, another her back, and a third her members▪ She being in this grievous agony (having no hopes to scope with life) desired Mrs. Truth to indite a bill to have her prayed for; and that it be speedily sent by the Lord Mayjor to the se∣viral Congregations within every their respective Parishes for her safe Deliverance, which most accurately she penned in form of a Declaration, in these word following.
WHatsoever dangers are threatened or feared, either by the great perplexity I am at this present in (or by rea∣son of my manifold sins that now in my weakness lie heavy upon my Conscience,) yet I have assurance, that if I confess and forsake them, I shall find mercy;
Therefore I confess and acknowledge (though not from the boat∣tom of my heart) that for the space of these 7. Years I have been a most cruel murderer, not only of bodies but of souls; that I have perjured my self, first by my Oath of Allegiance, and secondly by my Solemn Covenant, wherein (as in Hos. 1. 9.) I have spoken words swearing falsely in making a Covenant; And now Judgment spingeth up (against me) like Hemlock in the furrows of the field; that I have most traitorously betrayed, and impri∣soned my lawful King, the Anointed of the Lord; that I have corrupted his Laws, and turned judgment to wormwood; that I have made Gods House and the Kings House a Den of thieves; that I have loved wickedness, and practised it; that no fear hath dehorted me from doing any thing (but justice) that I have Robbed both God, and the King, and have not feared the one, nor honoured the other▪ that I have used all manner of Jugglings, Cousinage, Contradictions, and Equivocations; that my Religion hath been Rebellion, Murder, and Rapine; that I have, not only coveted, but (by the instigation of the Devil, and
against the Laws of our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES) taken Stole and forcibly carried away the Goods and Chat∣tells of many thousands of his Majesties Loyal and obedient subjects; that I have made this Canaan of all happiness, a Gol∣god, and field of Blood, and yoked my fellow subjects to the pride, tyranny and Oppression of my own Lust, and Ambition; in stead of Reforming J have Deformed, and in stead of repairing J have pulled down; Which hath occasioned all these miseries to fall upon me; My greatest grief of all being, that I know J have committed all this, and much more, but cannot Repent for the same; therefore the several Ministers within the Cities of London and Westminster▪ and the late Lines of Communicate∣once, are desired upon the seventh day of May, (being Rogation Sunday) if I shall not be delivered before, to keep a Day of Humiliation, and Prating, that the heavy judgements that so inevitably threaten me, may be diverted: That so I may still Rule Reign and Tyrannise over you, Parliament everlasting, Impositions, Assessments and Taxations without end.
But in the time this was witing, Mistress Parliament grew still worse and worse, and the good Wives made account she hand been drawing on, therefore Mistis Privilege stepped unto her and spake as follows.
Mrs. Pri. Dear Daughter, I perceive by thy Pulse beating, and by so much blood coming in thy face, that thou art not long lived; and it is a question whether the child thou now art in travel with, ever come forth in its right shape, or live to receive its Christendom; and although I have been the suppor∣la and upholder of thee this 7 years day, and Privileged thee in all thy Actions, though contrary to Truth▪ Religion, Law or Reason, yet I cannot privilege thee from Dissolution; Therefore I desire thee to make thy Peace with God, and thy Consci∣ence, which I perceive is much troubled; next I advise thee to restore all that thou hast fraudulently taken away, either from God, thy King, or thy Neighbour, and to repent of thy Perjury
and blod-shed, and heartily bewail thy self for the same, deli∣ver thy Lord and Master out of Prison, and preserve him from the treacherous designs of Fairfax, Cromell, Ireton, Hammond, Rainsbrough, Joys, &amp;c. (setting the first aside, who is neither fish, nor flesh, nor good red herring) a company of Schismat∣ticall, broken, Rakehells, Mechanics, and loose fellows, that will have no Rule for their lives or Actions and yet must be Lords of Misrule, and have the Persons and Estates of a free∣bron People at the mercy of their hellish wills; O Mrs. Par∣liament, here is Mrs. Schism, and Mrs. Sedition hath too much mislead thee, and hath brought thee to all this shame and eg∣nominy that is now justly fallen upon thee, and disgraced both thee, and thy Honourable House for ever, and how ugly will it appear in the Chronicles of after times? The Commons House of Parliament (that should be the Fountain of Justice) a Common Bawdy house, to prostitute her members to all man∣ner of uncleanness, Murder, Theft, Treason &amp;c. that should be the members of Christ, pure, holy and undefiled, and blame∣less before God and man, which is now hateful and odious to both; that whosoever, (whether Minister or other) doth but speak truth, or tell you of your faults, must be worried to the death by your Blood-hounds, and Walkers bitch Ione Ruggles, and the rest of the damned crew of Jailers, Pursuivants, Roagus and Judases, that care not whom they betray for money:—
Whilst she was speaking▪ the room was strangely overspread with darkness, the candles went out of themselves, and there was smelt noisome smells, and heard terrible thunderings, in∣termix'd with wawling of Cats, howling of Dogs, and bark∣ing of Wolves against the windows flew ill-boading screetch-Owles, Ravens and other ominous Birds of night, that struck a great terror to the hearers; at the same time Mrs. Parley∣meant, was miraculously delivered of a Monster of a deformed shape, without a head great goggle eyes, bloody hands growing out of both sides of its devouring paunch, under the belly hung a large bag, and the feet are like the feet of a Bear; if you purpose to see it, you must make haste; for it is now ready to adjourn to a new Plantation.

WELL, well; Never make comparisons with me Good Statute, it is, known to my Neighbours what I am well enough, and to what Houses allied; thou art but of a mean Parentage; nor that Trollup (thy sister Justice neither;) marry come up mother Ʋgly? shalt thou and thy Sister Damnable take the upper hand of me? I de∣fie ye both, and scorn to foul my mouth with two such Bag∣eggs, that for neglect of doing your several Offices, are now turned out of service by my Mother Parliament, and now doe ye think to take place? Yes, yes, when my mother hath no∣thing else to doe, so ye shall. Get you gon to your King to the Isle of Wight, he perhaps may entertain you, (if Colonel Ham∣monte pleases) for my Mother shall have nothing to doe with such homely Gossips as you are; Pray be packing: neither Sty∣tute, Justice, Law, Reason, not Religion, either comes within her doors so long as Ordinances eyes be open: And though I say it (that should not say it,) I have been an obedient Daugh∣la to her, and have up rising, and down-lying, with all dilli∣gence executed her commands (right or rong) she knows it well enough, and so doth my Father in law Cromwell too; and my Reveren'd Uncle, the new Chancellor of Oxford. High and Mighty Phillip Switch, Earl of Pembroke, will swear Dam him he loves me; and I must love him again, in despite of what doe ye call it hue, hue, hue, I huming Learning, it is; my Mother and I have peppered huming learning, Bishops! ha, ha, ha, I laugh to think of Canterbury; oh my sides, how I made him shorter by the head, and quite spoiled his huming learning: Doctors cotha; I have cast their waters for them, and made many of them to
drink water, and to leap at a crust too; I laugh to think on it, what doe they call them, Deanes, Prebends and Chapiters; all one with me, or my Uncle Phillip either: If we say they be all Popish, they be all Popish, and pray who dare say the contrary; then will my Uncle and I out them their profane Nurseries of Learning because there should be none wiser then our∣selves; and put in their Places Innocents in Learning, pure J•norance, Devout Folly, and Zealous Madness; What though the Wicked term them Fools, Mad-men or Knaves, so long as we are a•l accounted so at Westminster; Is it any matter for Learning? Give me my Mother tongue in a pure Parliament Dialects the Alphabet where of begins with K. that is in plain English Knave, or Knaves: L. betokens Learning, and may be let out, Besides it is a Numeral Letter, and signifies fifty, that is some of the Number of the Beast; and is used in CharLes • M. that may stand, because we cannot spell money without it, which my Mother Parliament loves exceedingly: Money is the main Key of our Work; Take away money, alas Ordi∣nonce is not worth a straw, nor Parliament neither: O begins my own Name; wee have taught the people that already, to cry out O, oh! when we kill them; Rob or Plunder them of all they have, and then the poor wretches being ready to starve, will quickly learn O: P. begins my Mothers Name, P. Par∣liament, P. Privilege, Pay, Perjury; P. is the best Letter in our Alphabet. Q. is profane, being the first Letter of Queen, and is not to be used in my mother tongue, save in two places; Question, and Quarter: R is abomination, and so is C too; who hath not read 〈◊〉 we cannot endure it, Rex, it is as hateful to us as a Cross upon a Steeple; yet in Riches or Re∣venue it is tolerable: S signifies Sessments, Say and Seal, and is a Letter much used in Westminster School, as S for Sed•ti∣on, S. Sacrilege, S slavery: T TOM, T— &amp;c. T Traitors, T Tyburne, T tyrants, and T task-masters, Turn coats, &amp;c. V. Vote U for me, and isle Vote for U: V shall pay for all (U the Common People I mean:) V have undone us all; the Devil take U, and all the rest of the Alphabet for me; Here be Let∣ters enough for my mothers Children; your will with me Statute?
Had I my will, I would hang both thee and thy mo∣there too: had thy mother been an honest woman Statute had never forsaken her; when I and my sister Justice gave her o∣ver she entertained thee into service, to execute her unjust commands; then she played the Strumpet to some purpose be∣came a Murderer, a Witch, a Thief.
Wilt thou prove my mother a Witch or a Whore?
Yes, and a murdering bloody Whore too: Sister Justice call hither my Cozen Trut•, she can witness it.
I will obey ye. Sister Truth? why Sister Truth, Come into the Court.
Truth, here is a difference betwixt Mrs. Ordinance the Bastard Issue of Mrs. Parliament and my self; I know thou art her professed enemy; but yet thou art so honest, that thou can not hate her Person more then her Conditions; therefore I de∣sire thee to speak of her as she deserves and no otherwise.
I will; she deserves to be hanged drawn and Quar∣tered; or burnt with her Houses about her ears.
Make her Crimes known good Truth; I must not al∣ways defer deserved punishment.
Dear Cozins, had either of you both been used by her as I have been; you would not •uffer her to live a Day.
I prithee tell us how?
Why she has Voted me a Malignant kicked me out of the Church, the Parliament-House and all the Courts of Ju∣stice, and banished poor Truth into an •land, where J have suffered all miseries whatsoever, as cold, hunger, nakedness, whilst she like a Strumpet, hath •ur•eited with the Excess she hath gained by Extortion, Theft and Rapine; Robed God, the King and Common-wealth, and hath bewitched the People in∣to abhorred Rebellion, and led them blindfold by the Noses to their own destruction; That her eldest Bastard Ordinance is likewise a Traitor to the Kingdom, and a bloody mur∣derer, of souls as well as bodies▪ and an arrant Pick-pocket, and a Pawde, and her Daughter the like; for what mischief so∣ever hath been Ordered by the one, hath been acted by the o∣there, both against Reason, Law and Conscience.
I can forbear her no longer; apprehend the Scrumpet that she may suffer deserved punishment, according to he• crimes?
Isle prosecute the Law on them, and Truth shall brine• in the Evidence against them both. But who comes here cla• all in sables?
Was ever grief like mine? O my HEAD! my Eye are dimmed with weeping; my bowels tremble, my hands are palsied over, my heart weeps blood, and all the faculties of my soul and body are out of frame; I am troubled with lunatic passions, and a dull lethargy seizes on all my vitals; sure I am bewitched, a Paniqe fear glides through all my veins; Help, help O ye Celestial powers, and stave Confusion off me, which threatened my sudden ruin.
It is Mrs. England; shoe's in a strange fit, isle see if I can comfort her,
And know the reason of her discontent,
Sure shoe's bewitched by Mrs. Parliament.
All hail to sad dejected England; What is the reason of your heaviness? if Justice can administer any comfort to thee; be sure on it: Here is my cozen Statute too, and honest Truth will doe the like.
Dear friends, welcome to poor despised England; this full seven years J have enquired after you, and never could find you out till now, though J have sought for you at West∣minstered, and all the Kingdom over.
Alas Mrs. England, we have been, all three banished from thence this seven years, and beat out of the Church too, Robbed, Plundered, and Sequestrated of all our Lands and goods, flung into Prisons, and exposed to all the miseries that Malice could invent against us.
Mrs. Inland, our sufferings are all alike: therefore it is but folly to complain of our wrongs; let us find out the au∣thoresse of all this mischief, that by her Witchcraft and black Sorcery hath wrought all our ills; Know you who it is has wrought all this that J may whet my glittering sword, and pierce the Strumpets heart.
It is soon known who is the Author of our miseries it is that damned Hag Mrs. Parliament, and her Daughter Or∣dinance, that feeds fat with Theft and Rapine, and quaff whole mazor Bowls of Englands blood.
Let's apprehend the Witch, and try her and her Daugh∣la by the known Laws of the Land; but first let us degrade her, strip her out of her Parliament-Roabes, and then search the Imposture, to see what marks she has about her privities, to give such damned Spirits suck, as Manchester and Lenthall her two Familiars, and those Evil spirits Mildmay, Vein, Martin, and Devil Challonor conjured as low as hell, and all the dam∣ned Furies in the Houses to know tbeir wrists, and bite their fingers ends off, tearing their Snaky locks whilst they sit mum∣bling over their hellish Charms, and execrable Spells, till we have dispersed all hells baleful Powers, that now seem to o∣vertopp us.
We are all agreed; let's make it known unto the Com∣mon People, and they'll dispatch her presently; many hands will make light work with her: but first let Mrs. London guard her surely lest she run away before this be effected.
No, it is pity the Rude multicnde should handle her; Let me first try this damned Geneva Witch; perhaps she may con∣fess her guilt: If she can rehearse the Lords Prayer, or the Creed she is no Witch.
She hath denied that long since; Nurse Synod can tell that well enough: Isle draw up her Indictment presently.
Doe good Truth, and isle produce you witnesses enough against her Isle warrant you.
Summon them all three to the Bar.
Mrs. Parliament, Mrs. Ordinance, Mrs. Synod, answer to your Names, and appear in the Court to answer what shall be objected against you for my Lord the King.
Mrs. Parliament hold up thy hand to the Barren, Thou
art Arraigned by the Name of Parliament, That whereas thou hast (not having the grace of God before thine eyes) ever since Novem. 3. 1641. against the Laws of our Sovereign Lord the King, by the instigation of the Devil, Traitorously endeavour∣ed to change the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; and to root out the King and his Posterity; to root out, and over∣throw the very beings and foundations of Parliament; and to bring a scandal and reproach upon that High and Honourable Ceurt; That she hath by her sorceries and delusions bewitched the People into Rebellion against their Gracious Sovereign the Lords Anointed; That she hath sacrilegiously robed God of his Worship, he Church of its Patrimony, the King of his Re∣venue; the Subject of his Liberty; and changed Religion into Faction; Preaching into prating Blasphemy, Treasons, Country∣dictions and Tautologies; That she hath by the Power of the Sword by the help of a Tyrannical, Schismatic and Over∣awing Party) robbed and killed the Subjects, even at her very doors as they come to make know their a grievances; That she still keeps her King in Prison, and insults and Tyranizes over the Lives &amp; Fortuns of a Free-born people, charging them with insupportable Impositions to maintain an Army to destroy themselves who act nothing but Rapine, Murder and Cruelty, and hath brought all the Plagues of God upon this Nation.
What say thou Mrs. Parliament, art thou guilty, or not guilty of all these crimes objected against thee by Truth?
Guilty of all this, and ten times more, and would doe it again, had I yet power.
Graceless wretch! Let us proceed to sentence.
Mistress Parliament, thy Conscience is a thousand wit∣noses: I Wish thou could repent; Thou art to return to the place from whence thou came and from thence to be drawn to the place of Execution, and there to be hanged and Quar∣tered. So Lord have mercy on thy soul. Take her Jaylo•.
I defy ye all; doe your worst: Yet save my child.
Call a Jury of Women to search her.

NOW, our good Lord be thanked for this great Vi∣ctory, which the Righteous under the Command of that holy Saint Morton, have obtained over the wicked, under the Command of those Reprobates, Poyer, Powell and Longhorn.
It was a happy Providence my dear Si∣ster, and much to be admired amongst the Saints, for this will prove the animation of our own party, and the discouraging of our enemies those pagan Cavaliers, who now begin to take arms, and to fall foul on the people of the Lord.
Very true Sister, who would have thought of this new distemper, or that our honourable Sister Mrs. Par∣liament, who was arrived to the very highest pitch of honour and said to her self, J sit like a Queen, and shall know no sor∣row, should on the sudden become wretchedly miserable, she whom a Nation courted, offering their lives and estates at her feet, and maintained her for the space of seven years, in open Rebellion and Disloyalty against her head and Husband, she that imagined her self so sure, that no humane strength could shake her, is now become in a manner desolate.
Like to a Whore, both old, and evil grown,
She hated is, and pitied by none.
Hell take this everlasting Parliament, or rather, this incorrigible Iunto, what a tossing to and fro they make of me; the King my true and only Master must not Com∣mand me, (because forsooth) like another Minerva, the fate of new Troy, as once that of the old consists in me, Mrs. Par∣liament who hath commanded me this seven years (the De∣will take her for it) is now wood by Mrs. London to part with me, and let her another while enjoy me; this she hath (but to her great cost) obtained, and now;
As at the first, a Royal Prince did own me,
His Power laid by, seven years the world hath known me.
A three piled Bawd, to Mrs. Parliament;
Now Mrs. Londons; Cuckolds bee content.
Look Sister, yonders that malignant Dame, Mrs. Militia, muttering to herself against Mrs. Parliament, O it is a notable Scold and of such force, that she is able to break open iron barri•ado'd gates, to stand an Army and toss huge Cities in the Ayre, but J have purchased her of Mrs. Parliament, with a round sum of money, and the truth is, that godly woman, is altogether swayed by Gold, she will do nothing for me without greeting in the fist.
Tic very true, experientia docet, for my part had I the money once J freely parted with, moved with my sister Parliaments pious words, I'd be advised ere I gave it away, but I hope well of her, and that with us, she is a Saint by calling; how does Mrs. Militia.
Sick sick at heart, of the very same disease, that is now so catching, the Pox, the Plague, and all those cruel maladies Pandora brought on earth to ruin men though all conjoined in one, are not so mischievous.
What disease Mrs. Militia.
Why? Its called Parliament, the same that hath murdered so many thousands of loyal English subjects, this
Mrs. Truth, her Speaker (pro Tempore) well knows, who for her honour hath busied himself, to raise an Anagram, on her name, and to anex an Epigram thereto, it is this.
A Trap they are, a Snare unto their Nation,
Having undone them, by a Reformation;
A Trap that Satan set, as since wee find,
To fetter Kings, and ruin all mankind:
A Snare, a Trap, a Pit, wherein wee fall,
And if they live, then must wee perish all.
But yet there's hope, it so, may shortly hap,
These Traitors, shall be tan in their own TRAP,
Ill men, yea such a vile Rebellions crew,
No History records, no Age ere knew;
Men merely made of mischief, blood, and error,
Men borne to bee their own, and the worlds terror.
Devils yet clothed in Flesh, cursed Projectors,
Good Men's sure ruin, evil men's Protectors,
Haters of sacred Peace, damned Regicides,
Horsleaches, Cannibals, and Patricides:
Who place their thrones on Immolated men,
Have banished Justice, hoping she again
Will never more return, by Furies nursed,
Gotten by Devils, in their Cradles cursed:
Whom all the powers of Hell, this seven years
Have aided; Slaves that joy to drink our tears.
But the time now will shortly happen when
Treason must terminate, in those, Ill men.
〈2 pages missing〉
it printed is sufficient to make the people out of conceit with Mrs. Parliament, while the world stands. Mrs. Co•…; it is this same witch Mrs. Truth that hath undone us, but who comes here. Mrs. Parliament, Mrs. Thanksgiving. Mrs. Humiliation.
O Mrs Parliament, I much joy to see you never was woman of your rank so contemned and abused, here was, Mrs Militia the Malignant but even now, who showed me and my sister Common counsel, an Anagram, which the Traitoresse Truth had framed on your names, wherein she taxes you of I know not how many crimes, and says you are worthy to bee hanged, as an enemy to your Country.
Mrs Parliament, no matter what Truth reports, you know I care not for her, but for Mrs. Militia and the rest ò the Malignants, I have given order for their removal, twenty miles from thy presence Mrs. London, Mrs Common counsel, you are to publish the order, read it Mrs Thankgiving. Mrs. Thanksgiving Reads.
I Mrs Parliament, by the permission and assistance of Pluto, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Supreams Governess, doe de∣cry and ordain that al Papists by whom I mean al those that are for Monarchical government, for the Book of Common Prayer, for Archbishops, and for order and decency in the• Church of God, that all soldiers of fortune and all other persons whatsoever, that have borns Arms against me, that is to say, all such, as have according to their oath of Allegiance the Law of God the Law of the Land, and the Law of nature, been in Arms and fought for the honour of their Sovereign Lord King Charles to pull dow•• my usurped power, to put a period to my Rebellions shall at or before the five and twentieth of this instant May 1648 depart the cities of London and VVestminster, and all other places within twenty miles, and if any of the said persons aforesaid, shall continue within twenty miles as aforesaid, after the five and twentieth day of May, they shall bee apprehended, Imprisoned and proceeded against as Traitors.
I like the order well, wee will have none
to converse with as Mrs. London; but those that are Righteous what fellowship ought thereto bee between us Jaws, and those saweie Samaritans of the Royal parti•, verily none, Mrs. Land; Jnsooth you speak like a most godly Saint, my dear sister, and for my own part I would have none to re∣side near me, but the good people of the Lord.
Mrs London, and Mrs Common Counsel, you both know that the wicked ones of the Land are now com∣byning together against us; therefore a little to protract the time; I have devised a way for to amuse the people, Mr, Horton whom I sent with a party for the reducing of Poyer, hath late∣lie ceased on divers Country fellows, who met with an In∣tent to list themselves under the command of Poyer, Powel, Longhorn and the rest, this isle have noised to bee a victory a great and mighty victory, which news will cramp the Roy∣allists Designs, keep back the Scots a while, encourage our own party and cannot choose but bee an help unto us; you therefore Mrs Thanksgiving, proclaim throughout the City, that every man praise God in his own parish, those that have money feast and make good cheer, for this most great and mighty victory.
I shall forsooth, but who shall Preach before you on that day.
Who but my bonnie Bulehin Marshall I have not amongst al my Priests not so fit, the B•lli• God Vi••s, is a mere Barrel and yields no noise without you taber on him, No• sqeaks so low a new shoe trod on by a sickly woman, makes better melody, but Marshal bellows out my triumph, in such a tone, not all the bulls that at Geneva thunde•, when they exclaim against Episcopacy, yield the like music, go you Mrs Thanksgiving to him, and carry these good Angels which will increase the vigour of his •••…gs Mrs Th•nks▪ good Mrs Common counsel, See that a Saint-lik• 〈◊〉 bee prepared, and store of wine, that we may •eat our Zeal, you know wee can∣not heave our eyes to heaven till wee have often elevated cups, Mrs. Common coun, Wee will abound in al things, the creatures
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
none ought to enjoy but wee, b•acts of the field, the fowls, of the ayre, the fishes that flock in the tumid deep were made for us and for our use alone.
The most ungodly Caval•errs are dam'nd
Not fit to have their gut• with Pull••… ••••…d,
They must bee fed, with creatures of low rate.
Least that they doe increase and propagate,
To eat large Oysters Lobsters, and high fare,
Only is meat for us that Righteous are.
But my good sisters what shall, wee doe to please the Surry men, who are incensed against us, and swear to bee our deaths men to prevent which and pacify their fury, you Mrs. Humiliation proclaim abroad, that all bee sorrowful and morn in ashes, for those good men's fall: Ha, ha, ha, I laugh to think how my soldiers felled the Rogues, who durst d•∣s•re a King.
I will not fail in my hypocrisy, I can lie down and cry and wring my hands, strew slowre upon my face, and look as mongerly, as when used to mourn during the war when as the Saints were beaten by the wicked ones Mrs Parl; Now let us each unto our several charge, you Mrs London, stand fast to me as I will doe to you, I am resolved that you shall not out live me, you Mrs Common counsel, bee sure you smell out more plots and stratagems each day, it makes for our advantage, thus take wee hands, thus swear to fall to∣gether, when as the house where I so long have voted shall bee pulled down and levelled to the earth, t'will doe me good to see thee Mrs London, consume in flames, a sacrifice to Treason, to conclude, stand unto your •••kling stoutly, when wee fall, all the land shall taste of ruin.
T'Wil bee my joy, when as I needs must fall
For to behold a ruin general;
This is the period of my Reformation.
To kill my King, and under my Nation.

The Kingdoms mine, I am the child, My name's Tom. Presbyter.
It is false, it is The Saints; whose King I'm, styled, Holy St.— Oliver.
We are the Saints, we, Presbyters.
We Independents, are.
Nor Saints, nor Kings, what need these stirs?
It is mine which you would share.
I smell a plot, the Kings no doubt,
To prove true, what is known;
When Thieves about stolen goods fall out
True men still get their own.
No, no, arm, arm (the common Foe
Appears for Charles) I'll; bawl
Herod and Pilot made friends so,
Though Christ, he then must fall
The Child-wif's laid, the tables's spread: but oh!
The Gossips strive for place, it is always so.
ANd why you first, Mrs. Schism. Pray you give place to Seniority.
Nay, nay, neighbour Sedition, me thinks you and I should be better friends, our affections are the same.
And one Progenitor, the Devil, belongs to both I confess, only, because I come of the Elder house (for though you
are of the House of the Incendiaries in the Church, which is a very ancient Family, I grant, yet I am of that of the Incendiaries in the State, which proceeds in antiquity) I claim the priority, both here, and also in presenting my service to Mrs. Parliament, yea, I expect the pre-eminence above you in her Honours employ∣mints too.
Cozen! Whatsoere your seniority may plead for you to her in your behalf, my past actions in her service may exact as due to my deserts: Never did any State Incendiary bring the Designs of any Tyrant to such perfection in an age, as I have done Mrs. Parliaments in less then seven years, under the vizard of Religion, therefore, by your leave Mrs. Sedition, I think my self worthy to be preferred before you in her affections.
Marry gip with a wynnion! you preferred before me. Have not my pretences, to make every free-borne Subject a quiet possessor of his propriety and liberty, to suppress Tyrant∣ny, and prevent Arbitrariness in the King (which I intend to act my self) brought Mrs. Parliament to this height of unlimited power which now she is at, and doe you think now to carry a∣way her favour from me?
Fie, fie friends fall out about trifles? You have both deserved well, and no doubt shall in fit time and place receive your reward; but agree, agree, and the rather because the common enemy begins to stir and hold up his head again: and will you by your divisions give life to their dead hopes? what were this but to blast all your former glorious actions, absolutely frustrate all your golden hopes, and wholly annihilate your vast expectations, and will you now prove such enemies not only to her, whose servants ye profess your selves to be, but also to your selves and all your friends? Come come, you shall (like gentle∣women of equal birth and merit) walk hand in hand, and have the same degree of place at her table and in her affections: only for the present I must prevail with Mrs. Schism, that Mrs. Sedi∣on may have her right hand; for Mrs. Parliament hath now occasi∣on to use the sword, (as indeed when will she not find occasion to use?) and we all know Mrs. Sedition knows how to wield that best for her advantage.
I am content, for I must confess that I am no ••ghter, though none could ever match me for an Incendiary and Abettor to war and blood▪shed. Will it please you walk to Mrs. Sedition?
Your Servant, in your hand, sweet Cousin Schism.
So this is well and timely brought about.
We loose our precious hopes if these fall out.
Nurse, Nurse,—why Nurse, Where art thou Nurse?
Anon forsooth Mistress, I am here: What is it your plea∣sure I should do?
O, prithee Nurse speak softly (for a time:) the noise which tho• make with thy babbling and prating pierces my head, and may prove a great hindrance of my Recovery, if not totally obstruct it. I am very weak with my past sore Travail, and should I fall into a Relapse it might cost me my Life; and then Nurse, you would (I know) confess (as being sensible of your loss) that the most bountiful Mistress, that ever you had, is de∣ceased: Was it ever known that such a rate was given a Dry Nurse before; four shillings a day, besides other by-blowes, gre∣tuities and especially three or four steeple-houses and pofitable Le∣ctures? therefore Nurse it nearly concerns you to have a special care of me.
Dear Mistress, you shall for the future experience my diligence to comply in all things with your desires, and my care hereafter shall evidence the readiness of my obedience to your commands.
It is well said Nurse:—But is Mrs. Truth gone?
Gone, quoth you? Why what should she do here? Do you ever hope to recover your strength or regain your credit by her? If you should follow her Directions and take such Physic as she would prescribe you, she would give you such a Potion as would make you fall a vomiting with a witness, and then up would come (to the view of the whole World) all that you have converted to the satisfying of your own private Lust, though pretended to be done for the public good of the Kingdom; as the Revenues of the Crown—
O, prithee Nurse speak softly.
Noble men's Estates, Bishops Lands and Houses, all Se∣questrations, and vast Compositions, besides great sums of Loan-money for Rebels Lands in Ireland, Public Faith Mo∣ney, Excise money, Contribution and Free-quarter; All would up. Verily Mistress, if you be ruled by her, it will inevitably foal∣low, that you cannot escape your (I too sadly fear too too sud∣dain) dissolution.
It is truth Nurse; I have ever rejected her Counsels (though I have always made the World believe I have followed them most precisely) and though I sent for her in my extremity, and desired her to indite that seigned Confession so to blind the eyes of the World that I might the more securely and undisco∣veered compass mine own Design, yet know Nurse, that I hate her company, and loath her sight, much less will I follow her Dictates and Directions.
No, do not Mistress, Did you ever reap any benefit by her company? or, Did at any time any good accrue to you by following her counsel? If the People should know all that she can tell of you (and she can as well be hanged [which you know is the least you have deserved] as conceal her knowledge, but will at some time or other discover all) What would be the event thereof? Indeed Mistress I tremble to think (being in the same condemnation, and deserving the same reward with your self) and by that little experience thereof, which you have had of late you may be sensible enough what you must expect.
No, no, Mistress, if you hope to recover again, make use of Mistress Mendax, the whole Pack of your weekly forging Pam∣phleters, they have ever stuck close to you, and by employing them still, you know how advantageous it hath been to the ad∣vans of your Designs; but among them all there is none (since Britannicus his decease) comparable to Luke Haruney or Walker, the quondam pillory Iremonger, he is always at your elbow, with his out-side Satin, and in-side Devil, ready to breathe into the ears of your tame Gulls and noosed Woodcockes, what you think may best advantage the Cause (though never so false) in his perfect Occurrence.
Besides it is evident what service his double diligence hath done you in endeavouring to suppress your worst Enemies, the Tell-truths of the Times, Pragmaticus, Melancholicus, Elenti∣choose, &amp;c. whose publishing the Truth of those foul Enormities which they by intelligence have and do daily discover in your Actions, have done you more hurt of late, than all the Kings Are∣my could heretofore; by their pens having wounded you deep∣er in your credit and reputation, than ever the Sword of the Ca∣valiers did your body in your Soldiers; and therefore the care of your creature Walker, in endeavouring to discover and so sup∣press them, deserves your notice and encouragement. Besides as a testimony of his affection to your Service, and to manifest his
knowledge to be as deep in the Greek as Hebrew Tongue, he hath desired you to hear this Etimologie of Parliament, 1648.
Read it, good Nurse, let me hear it: I know he ever puts that forth that shall tend to my Honour and advance∣meant in the good opinion of the Saints. Read it Nurse, read it Nur. Parliament in the Greek is written thus 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉.
They that can read and understand it may, Isle look for the English of it according to his direction, Rev. 17. v. 5.
Do good Nurse, I long to know the English of it, MYSTERY BABYLON THE GREAT, the Mo∣there of Harlots and Abominations, Nurse of error, heresy and blasphemy. Parl. O hold Nurse, sick, sick, a sudden shi∣vering carreers through every part, besides—a—deadly—qual—O—Nurse. Help good Women, help, help. Mrs. Schism, Mrs. Toleration, What are ye all deaf? Cannot one of you hear? Why Mrs. Sa-Yand-Seal. Help, help.
What's the matter Nurse?
O Mrs. Parliament, Mrs. Parl.—is gone, is gone.
Be patient Nurse, she is but in a swoon, burn some ill-senting thing under her nose: that will bring her again.
Oh what shall I burn?
Nothing makes a loathsomer smell than the Vote wherein she resolved upon the question, that she would make no more addresses to her husband, herhead, and that it should be treason for any to bring Messages from, or carry intelli∣gence to him.
It is well thought on, Mrs. Sa: Yandseale good Nurse run to H. Elsing, and wish him to cut it out of the jour∣nil book, and bring it thou hither, and burn it presently
I fly—Melancho it is more than time, shall I hail Rainsborough for you.
But Gentlewomen doe you not deceive your selves? (pardon me I am jealous for Mrs. Parliaments good, and am the foundation upon which her rising to this height was laid at first) as I conceive no incense would smell better, and be more comfortable in all men's nostrils than the fume of that, burnt
Yea (Gossip Jealousy) but not in the no∣strils
of all women, especially hers, because it would trouble her much to be made s•nsible of the burning of that her darling: and as for others, it is good to please sooles a while: so she recover, it is no matter for burning of it: when she ge•s strenght again, it is but pre•mbling that it was done in fear, and in case of eminent danger, and t•en she may revote it again.
There spake an Ac…p•l 〈◊〉 indeed, and he must no•s be a good man, for we read th•t his counsel was as the Oracle—
Have, her', here '•is. Mrs. Sa. That's well burn it quickly, rub her temples, she sneezes—so, so,—she com•• again—why M•s. Parl•a∣meant.
And I hope shortly to see he come to that good-m•ns end, it will save G•eg the trouble.
Where am I—O sick, Awe—Awe,
A Basin Nurse, quickly:—so—up with it Women—so it is well.
God bless us, Whoa is here?—What black stuff is this?
Nothing but Atra bilis or melauchollicke adust, throw't aside, throw't aside, I have many times my self vomited the like.
I believe you indeed Mrs. Sa-yand-seal, for (good People) it is no less than and Heresy Blasphemy, which during her health she winked at and swallowed, and now in her weakness up it is come: And—let me see—there is something else in the bowl—What is this?—A scroll?—and something writ in it too?—Read it Gentlemen, I warrant she hath uttered her mind in it.
From XLI. to VIII. have I (a Brood
Of Vipers) England swayed: and (in an hood
Of zeal close lurking and the public Weal)
Bewitched the simple and their hearts did steal.
But now by time unmasked it is plainly seen
For Englands Blood and Wealth my thirst hath been.
Gentlemen, I am sorry she's come again, I was in good hope she would have gone this bout, but (believe me) she's not long lived, the next news from Wales sets her packing, if that from the North do not do it before.
Rowze up your valiant hearts brave English men
And put in Charles his hand his sword again.

