WHo says the Times do Learning disallow?
It is false; it was never honoured so as now
When you appear, great Prince, our night is done:
You are our Morning-star, and shall b'our Sun.
But our Scene's London now, and by the rout
We perish if the Roundheads be about:
For now no ornament the head must wear,
No Bays, no Mitre, not so much as Hair.
How can a Play pass safely, when we know,
Cheapside-Cross falls for making but a show?
Our only hope is this, that it may be
A Play may pass too, made ex tempore.
Though other Arts poor and neglected grow,
They'll admit Poetry▪ which was always so.
Besides, the Muses of late times have bin.
Sanctified by the Verse of Master Prin.
But we contemn the fury of these days,
And scorn as much their Censure as their Praise.
Our Muse, blessed Prince, does only on you rely;
Would gladly live, yet not refuse to die.
Accept our hasty zeal; a thing that's played
Ere it is a Play, and acted ere it is made.
Our Ignorance, but our Duty too, we show:
I would all ignorant people would do so.
At other times, expect our Wit and Art;
This Comedy is acted by the Heart.
PRithee widow be not in∣cens'd, we'll show our selves like young Lords shortly; and you know, I Hope, they use to pay their debts.
I, you talk of great matters, I wis, but I'm sure I could never see a great yet of your money.
Alas, we carry no silver about us,
That were mechanical and base;
Gold we about us bring:
Gold, thou art mighty in each place,
Of Metals Prince and King.
Why I tell you my pockets have not been guilty of any small money in my remem∣bronco.
I know not, but all things are grown dear of late; our Beef costs three shillings a stone, and the price of corn is raised too.
Nay, mother, coals are raised too, they say. These things you think cost no∣thing.
Nay, Tabytha, Mistress Tabytha! ifaithlaw now I'll make a Psalm for you, and be but peaceable.
Contain thy tongue, and keep it in
Within thy mouths large prison.
Both jars, and also many a sin
From out the mouth has risen.
I'm only for Odes, by the Muses, and the quickest for them, I think, in the Christian world, take in Turks, Infidels, Jews and all.
Have but a little patience, widow; well• I'll say this for thee, thou art the ho∣nestest Landlady upon the face of the earth, which makes me desire to live in your house; and you shall not lose by it: do but mark the end.
I stand not so much upon that; but I use to have Lawyers in my house, such civil complete gentlemen in their Satin doublets (I warrant you) and broad ruffs, as passes; and Courtiers, all to be laced and slashed, and fine fellows as you shall see in a summers day; they would not say Why do ye this? to a wo∣man: and then Knights.
I, and Gentlemen too, mother.
But you, forsooth, come in drunk every night, and fall a sweari•g as if you would rend the house in two, and then mum∣ble and tumble my daughters clothes, she says.
I, and would have—
What would we have done?
Nay no good, I warrant you.
And then you drink up a kilderkin of small beer next morning.
All this shall be corrected and amended, Landlady: yes faith, Cutter, thou must repent, thou hast been to blame some∣times.
Besides, you are always so full of your fripperies, and are always a grinning and sneering at every thing: I was wont to have sober boorders in my house, and not such hee-hee-heeing fellows.
Nay, they mocked and floored at us as we sung the Psalm the last Sunday-night.
That was that mongrel Rhymer; by this light, he envies his brother Poet ho∣nest Iohn Sternhold, because he cannot reach his heights.
O the father! the Colonel's as full of waggery as an egge's full of meat: I warrant, M. Dogrel, what you get by him you may even put in your eye, and ne'er see the worse for it.
Well, and how dost in faith now, ho∣nest Landlady? when shall we walk again into Moor-fields, and rejoice at the Queens Cake-house?
I'll bespeak Cakes and Ale of the purpose there; and thou shalt eat stewed Prunes, little Tabytha, till thy smock drop again. A word in you ear, Landlady: Can you accommodate us with two shillings?
To morrow ere the rosie fingered morn
Starts from Tithonus bed, as Authors write;
Ere Phoebus cry Gee-hoe unto his team,
We will restore again, and thank you for your pain.
I'll tell you a secret, Landlady: Captain Blade and I shall be called shortly to the Court; the King has taken notice of our deserts: I say no more: though yet thou scorn me, Tabytha, I'll make thee a Lady one day. Will you lend, widow? Great af∣fairs bid me make haste.
I care not much if I trust you for once: Come in and take it.
Then Mistress let me lead you thus,
And as we go let's buss.
Buss me no bussings. O lord, how you tumble my gorget!
I could now be as melancholy as an old scabby Mastiff, or the Lions in the Tower: it were a good humour to repent. Well, Ca∣ptain, something must be done, unless a man could get true gems by drinking, or, like a mouse in a cheese, enlarge his house-room by eating. Four hundred pound a year ca∣shier'd? Four hundred, by this light, Ca∣ptain. All my comfort is, that now the usu∣rear's damned; and now that niggardly three score and ten withered chap-faln Pu∣ritanical thing, his wife, refuses to marry me: I would see her burnt for an old witch before I'd take her for a wife, if she had not Agues, Squinancies, Gouts, Cramps, Pal∣sies, Apoplexies, and two dozen of diseases more then S. Thomas Hospital; and if she live long with all these, I'm sure she'll kill me quickly. But let her be damned with her husband: Bring some drink, boy; I'm soxt, by this light, with drinking nothing yet.
What are ye come? Bring us a Tun then, and that so big, that that of Hei∣delberg may seem but like a barrel of pickled Oysters to it. Welcome Snapsack, welcome little vermin of Parnassus: how is it, my Lour•ate Rhymer? Cost thou sing Fortune my foe still with thy brother Poet?
Ye Muses nine assist my verse,
That dwell by Helicon along;
Captain Blades praise I will rehearse,
With lyre and with song.
Why this right Ballad, and they hobble like the fellow with the wooden leg
that sings them. And how dost, man of blood?
As well as a man of worth can do in these days, where deserts are so little re∣guarded: if Wars come once, who but Cutter? who else but Colonel Cutter? God save you, Colonel Cutter, cry the Lords; the La∣dies they smile upon Colonel Cutter, and call Colonel Cutter a proper Gentleman: every man strives who shall invite Colonel Cutter to dinner: not a Cuckoldly creditor dares pluck me by the cloak, and say, Sir, you for∣got your promise, I'm in a strait for moneys, my occasions force me, or the like.
Cheer up, my Hercules upon a sign, I have a plot for ye, which if it thrive, thou shalt no more lie sunning in a bowling-alley, nor go on special holidays to the three-peny Ordinary, and then cry It pleases my humour better then to dine at my Lord Majors.
Would we had some drink here to stop your mouth.
No more be sick two or three days while thy boots are vamping: no more out∣swear whores in a reckoning, and leave the house in an anger.
Have you done?
Nor sup at Taverns with Radishes: nor for a meals meat overthrow the King of Spain of the Hollanders when you please: no• when you go to bed produce ten several Tavern snuffs to make one pipe of To∣basso.
'Slid would I had one here.
Nor change your name and lodging as often as a whore; for as yet, if you had lived like a Tartar in a cart, (as you must die, I fear, in one) your home could not have been more uncertain. Your last Gests were these: From a Water-mans house at the Banks side, (marry you stayed there but a small while, because the fellow was jealous of his wife) passing o'er like great King Xerxes in a Sculler, you arrived at a Chand∣lers house in Thames-street, and there took up your lodging. The day before you should have paid, you walked abroad, and were seen no more; for ever after the smell of the place offended you. Next, you ap∣pear'd at an Ale-house in the Covent-Gar∣den, like a Duck that dives at one end of the pond, but rises unexpectedly at the other. But that place (though there was Beer and Tobacco there) by no means pleased you; for there dwelt so many cheaters there∣abouts, that you could not live by one ano∣there; they spoiled your trade quite. Then from a Shoo-makers, (as you entitled him; marry some authors call him a Cobbler) to a Basket-makers; from thence to the Coun∣la: from thence, after much benevolence, to a Barbers; changing more lodgings then Pythagoras his soul did. At length, upon confidence of those new breeches, and the scouring of that everlasting Buff, you ven∣tur'd upon the widows, that famous house for boorders, and are by this time hoisting up your sails, I'm sure; the next fair wind you're gone.
I wonder, Captain, among so many rascally houses, how I happened to miss yours. It is true, I have not lien leaguer al∣ways at one place: Soldiers must remove their tents: Alexander the Great did it an hundred times.
Now to the words of comfort — drink first—then Lordings listen all.
We do, both great and small.
O my conscience this cup of wine has done my genius good.
When first my brother departed —
It was poorly spoken, by this day.
He committed his daughter and estate to my care; which if she either died, or married without my consent, he be∣queath'd all to me. Being five years gone, he died.
How frail is humane life! Well sung the divine Poet
Like to the damask rose you see,
Or like the blossom on the tree,
Or like, &amp;c.
Sirrah, Trundle, either hear out peaceably, or I shall cut your ears off. Pro∣ceed, Captain.
I falling into ill company, yours, or some other such idle fellows, began to be misled, could drink and swear, nay, at last, whore sometimes too; which courses having now at last made me like Iob in every thing
but patience; your Landlady (for to her husband my estate was mortgaged.) I have sought all means to marry.
That Niobe! that Hecuba!
Pish! I could have lien with either of the two, so 't had been before Hecuba was turned into a bitch, or t'other into a stone: for though I hate her worse then small beer.
Or pal•d wine.
Or proverbs and Latin sentences in discourse.
Or a Sermon of two hours long.
Or Dogrels verses, or what you will else; yet she has money, blades; she would be a Guiana or Peru to me, and we should drink four or five years securely, like Dutch∣men at a Wedding. But hang her, let her die and go to hell, it is only that can warm her: she scorns me now my money's gone.
Thus Pride doth still with Beauty dwell,
And like the Baltic ocean swell.
Why the Baltic, Dogrel?
Why the Baltic? This tic not to have read the Poets.
Now if my niece should marry, praesto, the means are gone; and I must, like some Gentleman without fear or regard of the gallows, betake my self to the high-way, or else cheat like one of you, and tremble at the sight of a pillory. Therefore— (prick up your ears, for your good angel speaks) upon conditions of share, I marry her to one of you.
I but how, Captain? how?
Why either she shall have one of you, or no body; for if she marry without my consent, the money's mine own: and she'll be hang•d first in the Friars rope, ere she turn Nun.
I'll be a Franciscan, if she do.
Not a Carthusian, I warrant thee, to abstain from flesh. Thou might well have taken holy Orders, if it were not for chastity and obedience: their other vow of never carrying money about thee, thou hast observed from thy youth up.
I'll have her, by Mercury; I have two or three Love-odes ready made; they can't choose but win her. Cutter, adore me, Cutter, thou shalt have wine thy fill, though thou could out-drink Xe•xes his army.
You get her? what with that Em∣ber week-face of thine? that Razor of thy nose, those ea•s that prick up like a Puritan∣cal button-makers of Amsterdam? thou look as if thou never had been fed since thou suck'dst thy mothers milk: thy cheeks begin to fall into thy mothers mouth, that thou might eat 'em. Why thou very lath with a thing cut like a face atop, and a slit at the bottom! I am a man, and can do her service; here's metal, boy.
It is in your face then.
I can fight her quarrels, boy, and beg•t on her new Achilleses.
Yes—thou art a very Achilles—in the swiftness of thy feet▪ but thou art a worser coward then any of the Trained Bands: I'll have a school-boy with a cat-stick take away thy Mistress from thee. Besides, what parts hast thou? hast thou scholarship enough to make a Brewers clerk? Can thou read the Bible? I'm sure thou hast not. Can thou write more then thine own name? and that in su•h vile characters, that most men take them for Arabian pot-hooks; and some think thou dost but set thy mark when thou write thy name. I'm versed, Cutter in the whole Encyclopaedia, a word that •s Greek to you. I am a Wit, and can make Greek verses ex tempore.
Nay not so; for if you come to your verses▪ Dogrel, Im sure you have done with wit. He that best pleases her, take her a Gods name, and allow the tother a pensi∣on: What think you, gallants?
Agreed; thou shalt have three pound and a cloak.
Away, you puff, you kickshaw, you quaking custard.
Prithee be patient, thou shalt have lace to it too.
Pox take you both; drink and be friends.
Here's to you, Cutter. I'm some∣thing choleric, and given to jeering: but what, man? words are but wind.
I'll call her in. Why boy within three, call my niece quickly hither.
I'm undone; I have left my Ode at home: undone, by Mercury, unless my me∣mori help me.
Thus and thus will I accoast her: I'm the man; Dogrels clothes will cast him.
When she has seen you both, one void the room, and so woo by tu•ns.
I•ll go out fi•st, and meditate up∣on my Ode.
Welcome, dear niece; I sent for you to entertain these Gentlemen my friends: and hark you niece, make much of them; they are men of worth and credit at the Court, though they go so plain; •hat's their humour only: And hark you, niece, they both love you; you cannot choose amiss. I have some business—Your servant, Gen∣tlemen.
Not choose amiss? indeed I must do, Uncle, if I should choose again. You're welcome, Gentlemen.
I thank you, fairest Lady: I am a Soldier, Lady, and cannot complement; but I have travelled over all the world, Ger∣many, Morocco, Swethland, Persia, France, Hungary, Caleput, Peru.
'Slid▪ ho• he shuffles all the Coun∣tries together like lots in a hat!
Yet I never saw before so fair a La∣die. I cannot complement in faith.
You've taken a long journey, Sir it were best
To rest your self a little: Will you sit?
Will you, Sir, take a seat too?
'Slife I can't say my Ode now. I'll wait upon you presently.
Fair Lady—(This it is to converse with none but whores: I know not what to say to her.)
You are the only mistress of my thoughts.
My service to you, Lady.
To me, Sir, do you speak, or to the wine?
To you, by Mars. Can you love me, Beauty? I'm sure your uncle prefers no man under the cope—
Soft, Sir, do ye use to take in Towns so soon?
My uncle gave an equal commendation
To both of you.
What? to that mole-catcher in the old Serge? he brought him in for humour, to make you sport. Ill tell you what he is.
Pray do, Sir.
The very emblem of poverty and poor poetry: the feet are worse patched of his Rhymes, then of his Stockings: if one line forget it self, and run out beyond his el∣bow, while the next keeps at home (like him) and dares not show his head; he calls that an Ode. Your uncle and I maintain him only for sport. I'll tell you how I found him; marry walking in Moor-fields cross armed: he could not pluck his hat over his eyes, there were so many holes in it: he had not so much linen about him as would make a cuff for a Bartlemew-fayr-baby. Marry the worst I like in him is, he will needs some∣time•, in way of gratitude, present me with a paper of Verses. Here comes the vermin.
I'll leave him alone with you, that you may have the better sport: he'll not show half his tricks before me. I think I have spoiled his markets. Now will I stand behind the hangings, and hear how she abuses him. I know by her eye she loves me. Cutter, you're blessed
Fairer, O fairer then the Lily,
Then Primrose fair, or Daffa• ely;
Less red then thy cheeks the Rose is,
When the Spring it doth disclose his
Leaves; thy eyes put down the star-light;
When they shine, we see afar—light.
O these eyes do wound my heart
With pretty little Cupids dart;
Wounded I am with deadly smart;
The pain reigns in every part.
Thy beauty and thy great desert
Draw me as horses draw a Cart.
O that I had Rhetoricks art—impart-sart-mart-start.
To move thee; for I would not start
Till I—
Take heed, Sir, you'll be out of breath anon.
Y'ha' done enough for any honest Poet.
Fairest nymph, I swear to thee,
The later part was made ex tempore?
Not a bit of prose goes down with me.
(I must know it.)
May I be so bold as to enquire of you
Your friends name that was here; he seems to be
A man of worth and quality.
That's I.
Quality? yes?
That's I again. If whoring, drinking, cheating, poverty and cowardice be qualities, he's one of the best qualified men in the Christian world.
O the devil!
He's a great traveller.
In suburbs and by-lanes; he never heard a gun but in Moor-fields or Finsbury at a mustering▪ and quaked then as if they had been the Spaniards: I•ll undertake a Pot-gun shall dismay him
A plague upon him—
Those breeches he wears, and his hat, I gave him: till then, he went like a Pa∣per-mill all in rags, and like some old statue in a ruined Abbey. About a month ago, you might have seen him peep out at a grate, and cry, Kind merciful Gentlemen, for the Lords sake, poor prisoners undone by sir••tech•p, and the like.
Contain thy self▪ great spirit; keep in a while.
We call him Colonel in an humour only. The furniture of his chamber (for now, at mine and some other Gentlemen's charges, he has got one) is half a chair, and an earthen chamber-pot, the bottom of an inkhorn for a candlestick, and a dozen of little gally-pots with salve in um; for he has more diseases—
I can endure no longer.
Dogrel, thou lie; there's my glove; meet me an hour hence.
And there's mine. I'll put a good face on it; he dares not fight, I•m sure.
Two hours hence
Expect the Saracens head; I'll do it, by hey∣vans.
Though hills were set on hills, and seas met seas, to guard thee,
I'd reach thy head, thy head, proud Dogrel.
Nay, you're both even: just such an ex'lent character
He did bestow on you. Why thou vile wretch
Go to the stews, the gaol, seek there a wife;
Thou'lt find none there but such as will scorn thee.
Was thy opinion of my birth or fortune,
My chastity or beauty (which I willingly
Confess to be but small) so poor and lowe,
That thou could think thy self a match for me?
I•ll sooner marry with my grave; for thou
Art worser dirt then that. See me no more.
Scorned by a mistress? with a friend to sight?
Hence, lighter Oder; I'll biting Satyrs write.
I must be gone, my Lucia; I must leave
My self, and thee more then my self, behind me
Thus parts the greedy usurer from his bags,
With an heart heavier then those: he fixes
His covetous eye upon the charming metal,
As if he meant to throng those many plea∣sures
Which several times would yield, into one minute.
With as much joy he kisses his loved Idol,
As I do thee, to whom all gold compared,
Seems but like Pebbles to the Diamond:
And then he sighs, my Lucia.
And weeps too, if, like us, he bid farewell.
Why should your father be so cruel?
He's old and angry, Lucia, very angry,
And either has forgot his youthful days,
Or else I'll swear he did not love my mother
With half that noble heat that I do thee:
For when he heard your uncles resolutions,
Doubting your portion if we two should marry,
He forced me to an oath so strange, which though
I then durst swear, I scarce dare now repeat;
An oath ne'er more to see nor hear thee, Lucia,
After the envious shortness of this hour,
Without his leave.
You will forget me quite then.
Forget thee, Lucia? it is not death it self
Has so much Lethe in it: I shall not choose
In the long sleep of the grave, but dream of thee,
If it be true that souls which leave hid trea¦sures
(Being buried far less peaceable then their gold)
Walk up and down, and in their urns want rest,
How will my ghost then wander, which has left
Such precious wealth behind it? Sure it will
Desire to see thee, and I fear will fright thee.
I would say more, but I shall weep anon.
So quickly gone! he might have staid, me thinks,
A little longer, and I owed that happiness
To the misfortune of his future absence.
Why did he swear to's father? I'm a fool,
And know not what to say.
Stay, Lucia, prithee stay; I had forgot
The business which I came for.
I owe much
To your forgetfulness, my Truman: if
It be such always, though you forget me,
I'll pardon you. What was your business, pray?
To kiss your hand, my dearest.
Was that all?
I'm glad to see your grief so small and light,
That it can find leisure to complement:
It is not like mine, believe me.
Was not that business, Lucia?
In my opinion now, th'affairs of Kings,
The honourable troubles of a Counsellor,
Are frivolous and light, compared to this.
May I not kiss your lips too, dearest Lucia?
I have an inward dropsy; and my remedy
Inflames my thirst: tic that best Nectar only
Which has the power to quench it.
If there be Nectar there,
It was your lip that brought it thither first;
And you may well be bold to claim your own.
Shall we sit down and talk a little while?
They will allow us sure a parting-time.
And that I would not change, not this poor minute
In which I see, and hear, and touch thee, Lucia,
For th'age of Angels, unless thy loved pre∣sense
Make a heaven there for me too.
What shall I do to bring the days t'an end?
Sure they'll be tedious when I want thy company.
I'll pray for the success of our chaste loves,
And drop down tears for beads.
I'll read o'er the large volume of the creatures;
And where I find one full of grace and beauty,
I'll gaze and think on that; for that's thy picture.
Whatever kind of Needle-work I make,
Thy name I'll intermingle, till at last,
Without my minds conjunction and con∣sent,
The needle and my hand shall both agree
To draw thy name out.
I will gather flowers,
Turn wanton in the truness of my love,
And make a posy too, where Lu•in
Shall be mysteriously writ in flowers:
They shall be fair and sweet, such as may paint
And speak thee to my senses.
Mistress Lucia, Lucia.
I am called: farewell.
My father, cousin, would speak with you.
I'll wait upon him.
Will you be gone so soon, Sir?
I must offend your father else.
You would have stayed longer with her, I'm sure.
It may be so. Your servant, Lady.
Contemned by all? while my proud cousin walks
With more eyes on her then the moon: but I,
Like some small petty star without a name,
Cast unregarded beams.
It must not be; I snatch of all those glories
Which beauty or feign•d virtue crown her with,
Till her short light confess her but a Comet.
I love thee, Truman; but since it is my fate
To love so ill, I'll try how I can hate.
Come on, Dogrel, now will I cut your throat.
You•ll be hanged first.
No, by this light.
You'll be hanged after then.
I'll slice thee into steaks.
I believe indeed thou art so hungry, thou could feed like a Cannibal.
No, thou'lt be a dish for the devil; he'll dress thee at his own fire. You called me Coward: had thou as many lives as are in Plutarch, I'd make an end of um. (I must daunt him, for fear he should fight with me.) I will not leave so much blood in thee as will wet my nail: and for thy flesh, I'll mangle it in such manner, that the Crows shall not know whether it were a mans body or no.
(He was once a Coward, and I no∣ver heard yet of his reformation)
Hear, thou altitonant Jove, and Muses three.
(Muses? a plague upon um I meant Furies.)
Hear, thou altitonant Jove, and Furies three.
Nay then
Leap from the leathern dungeon of my sheath,
Thou Durindana brave.
(Will nothing do?) Come on, miscre∣ant.
Do, do, strike if thou dare.
Coward, I'll give thee the advantage of the first push.
I scorn to take any thing of thee I.
Thou had better eat up thy mothers soul, then touch me.
If thou wilt not strike first, take thy life.
I had rather die then give the first blow, since thou hast said it.
I see this quarrel, Cutter, will come to a quart of wine: shall's go?
How rash is anger! had not reason checked me,
I should have killed my Poet for a woman,
A very woman. Let's sheath, Dogrel—
Here's company; 'slid I'll fight then.
How now, Paynims? fighting like two sea-fishes in a map? slaying and killing like horse-leaches? Why my little gallimau∣fry, what Arms and Arts?
Tam Mart, quam Mercurio, I. 'Slife, outbrav'd by a fellow that has no more
valour in him then a women's Tailor?
By my fathers Soul, I'll kill him an he were an Army.
Hold! stop! this Colonels spirit's all flame.
It is the flame of a flap-dragon then, for twill hurt no body.
Mr. Puny, you do me wrong.
What do ye mean bufles?
'Slife, an you hinder me Puny—
Pox take you, kill one another and be hanged then, doe, stab, why don't ye?
At your command Mr. Puny? I'll be force•d by no man; put up Dogrel, we'll fight for no mans pleasure but our own.
Agreed, I'll not make another sport by murdering any man though he were a Ti•kerr.
Why now you speak like righteous Home•ncles, ye have both great spirits, as big as Indian-whales, for wit and valour a cou∣ple of Phoenixes.
It is my fault Puny; I'm the reason∣lutest man if I be but a little heated. Pox take it, I'm a fool for it.
Give me thy hand.
I did not think thou had been so valiant, i'faith: I should have killed my self, if I had hurt thee in my fury.
So should I by this hand.
This is rare! up and down like a game at chess;
Why a game at chess more then any other?
A game at chess? why—pox you're a kind of Poet I confess, but for wit you shall pardon me—ther's as much in Tom Co∣riots shoes. But prithee, why did you two Pythagorians fall out?
A trifle, only a Mistress.
A pox take her, I wooed her in an humour only, I had rather marry a wench of ginger-bread, they're both of a Comple∣xion.
And then her mouth's as wide as a Crocodiles, her kisses devour a man.
Her eyes are like the eyes of a no∣dl, and her nose pointed like that; I won∣der her face is no cleaner, for those two per∣petually water it: As for her lower parts, blessed are they that live in ignorance.
What an Heliogabalus make you of this wench? would I could see this Barb∣ra Pyramidum.
Hang her, she looks like a gentlewo∣man upon the top of a ballad.
Shavers, who i the devils name would you guess to be my Mistress?
Some w•nch at a red lattice.
Some beast that stincks worse then Thames-street.
And looks like a shoulder of mutton stuffed with parsley.
Faith guess who.
It is impossible among so many whores.
Faith Tabitha, none but gentle Mistress Tabitha.
We shall have him turn Brownest now, and read Comments upon the Revela∣tions.
Thou hast hit it Dogrel: I'll put my self into a rare garb; Buff, thou must off, true•y Buff thou must.
'Slid, a good humour; I could find in my heart to change religion too.
Pox! no body will change with me, I'm sure. But can thou put off swearing with Buff? can thou abstain in the middle of long grace from crying a plague upon him, the me•ts cold? can thou repeat scripture enough to make a Puritan? I'm sure for understanding thou'lt be like enough to any of um.
Let me alone, I'll deal with no oath above gods fatlikins, or by my truly: exclaim upon the sickness of drinking healths, and call the Players rogues, sing psalms, hear lectures; and if I chance to preach my self, woe be to the act, the object, the use, and applica•ion.
Thou art an everlasting stinker Co∣lonel, it is a most potent humour, ther's mu∣stard in it, it bits in the nose.
Dog•el, take heed of swearing before Tabitha.
If I look not as grave as a Judge upon the bench, let me be hanged for it.
Come away Physicians; 'slid I'll be of some Religion ere•t be long too.
You hear me—
Sir—
Sir me no sirs: I say you shall mar∣rye Mistress Tabitha.
I hope sir—
I, when I bid you do any thing, then you are a hoping; well, what do you hope sir?
That you'd be pleased—
No, I will not be pleased till I see your manners mended: marry gap, you'll be teaching your father.
I am —
Go to, you're a foolish boy, and know not what's good for your self: you are? what are you, pray? we shall have you crow over your father.
I shall observe—
You will not sure? will you obe¦serve me? it is very well if my son come to obe∣serve me i'my old days, you will observe me? will ye?
I mean sir—
You shall mean what I please, if you be mine: I must be bound to your meaning?
It may be—
You'll teach me what may be, will you? do not I know what may be? it is fine, it is very fine: now i'your wisdom, now what may be?
That Captain Blade—
That what? what can he do? I'll see his nose cheese before you shall marry his niece. Captain Blade's a swaggering companion; let um swagger, and see what he gets by his swaggering; I would have swaggered with him for his ears when I was a young man. And though I have done swaggering—well—I shall meet with Captain Blade, I hold him a tester on it—
(Would he were gone.) I shall obey —
Obey me no obeyings, but do what I command you. I'll to the Widow, and talk oboe•t her portion: stay • I had al∣most forgot to tel you; oh—Mistress Tabitha's a virtuous maid, a very religious wench; I'll go speak concerning her portion.
It may be sir—
You•ll never leave this trick, you'll be at your may-bees; take heed boy, this humour will undo thee—she cannot have less then three thousand pounds: well — I'll go see—and do ye hear? she goes plain, and is a good huswife; which of your spruce mincing squincing dames can make bone∣lace like her? o tic a notable, apt, quick, wit∣tie girl—I'll go to her mother about the portion.
About this time her letter pro∣missed me a meeting here: destiny it self will sooner break its word then she. Dear Mistress, there's none here besides your vassal. She's ready—
Ha! why this covering?
This is mystery darker then the veil
That clouds thy glorious face; unless t'en∣crease
My desire first, and then my joy to see thee,
Thou cast this subtler night before thy beauty.
And now like one scorched with some ra∣ging fever,
Upon whose flames nor dew nor sleep hath fallen,
I could begin to quarrel with the darkness,
And blame the slothful rising of the morn;
But with more gladness entertain't, then they,
Whose icy dwellings the cold Bare ore-looks,
When after half the years continued night,
And the most •odious night of all but death;
A sudden light shot from their horizon,
Brings the long wisht-for day, which with such glory
Leaps from the East, as doth thy mateless beauty.
When thus the mist departs—
Why shrinkst thou back?
I prit hee let me see thee, Lucia.
I'd rather some good power would strike me blind,
Then lose the cause for which I love mine eyes:
At least speak to me: well may I call it night,
When silence too has joined it self to dark∣nos.
And did I not swear I would not —
Thy witty goodness can save others too
From sinning: I had quite forgot my oath
Yet sure an oath forced from a lovers tongue
Is not recorded in heavens dreadful book,
But scattered loosely by that breath that made it.
However thy blessed Letter makes me patient:
Thou give all virtues: I can love thee thus.
And though thy skin were such, that it might seem
A black veil cast by nature o'er thy body,
Yet I would love thee, Lucia: every night,
Which is the harvest-time of all our hopes,
Will make thee as you are now; and dost thou think
I shall not love thee most then?
We trifle here: I'll follow thee, O heaven;
Prosper the wise invention which it hath taught thee.
Is he carried to prison? that damned Urinal-monger, that stinking Clyster-pipe-rogue! that ignorant Satin cap! He has not so much physic as would cure the tooth∣ach. A slave that poisons Gentlemen, to keep his hand in ur Must a slave come up stairs mount the bank for money, and not be dishonoured down? He look•d as pati∣ently then, as any Fiddler need to do. Give me some small beer, and the godly book; I must not go to hell; there are too many Phy∣sitians there. I was never in a worse dispo∣sition to die, in my life: my guts begin to squeak already. Nothing vexes me now, but that I shall stand pictured in a Ballad, with Beware the physician, or some such sentence, coming out of my mouth. I shall be sung in Smithfield: not a blind Ale-house but the life and miserable death of captain Blade shall be pasted up in: there shall I be brought con∣fizzing my sins at the later end, and giving good counsel. (You will be jumbling still.) Ten to one but Dogrel makes an Epitaph; there's another mischief. Here, take the book again; I'll not trouble my brain now I'm a dying.
Here's the widow, Sir, and her daughter, come to see you; and they have brought M. Knockdown to comfort you.
How? everlasting Knockdown? 'Slid, will they trow•ble a man when he's a dying? Sirrah, blockhead, let in Knockdown, and I'll send thee to heaven before me. I have but an hour to live, my Physician says, and that's too little for him to preach in.
Shall I let the widow come in?
That's a she—Knockdown too. Well, let her come in; I must bear all torments patiently now. But, rogue, take heed of Ioseph Knockdown: thou shalt not live with ears, if Ioseph Knockdown enter. A plague upon all Physicians.
How do you? how is it, Sir?
Cut off in the flower of my age, wi∣dow.
Not so, Sir, you are old, neighbour, God he knows.
In the very •lower, i'faith. That damned quicksilver.
He looked like a rogue; a man might know him for a rogue, by his very eyes. Take comfort, Sir; ye know we must all die either sooner or later. Our life is compared to a flower; and a flower is sub∣jest to uncertainty, as M. Knockdown obe∣serves.
O the torture of such a tongue! Would I were dead already.
Alas, good man! his tongue, I warrant ye, is hot: look how he raves, daughter! I have heard, indeed, that many rave when they are poisoned. Think of your sins, Sir.
I prithee molest me not; there's none of um worth thinking of. I'm hotter then a dozen of Fevers: give me a cup of Sack there: Shall I die thirsty?
By no means, M. Blade. Fellow, take heed what ye give him: he must have none; it breeds inflammations.
I'll never repent without a cup of Sack. Do, do, choose whether you'll ha'me saved or no.
For his souls sake then, I'll drink to him in a cup of Sack
To my good journey widow. Sir∣rah, fill me a brimmer. Here, Tabytha.
Stand to 't now.
I'll warrant you I'll stand like a knight of the post: I'll forswear with the de∣vile. As for Cutter, he has don't forty times before a Judge already.
My dearest father, though we cannot call
The sentence of fate back that's past upon you,
Yet heaven has mixed some mercy with its anger,
And shown us the cursed plotters of your ruin.
How now, varle•s? ye see I'm go∣ing to heaven, and ye must follow; but the Captain must be saved before the Colonel. Who art thou? a godly Weaver?
I am not he that I was of old: what hath passed, is gone and vanishes; but what is now, remains.
No I'll besworn is he not; never was Christian creature so altered, as they say.
He said a prayer last night so zea∣lously, that all the house heard him, did they not? Brother M. Cutter.
Sister, I did pour out my self last night. Captain, you're abused.
A small abuse; nothing but only poiso••d.
Yes faith, we saw the Physician, Mi••ress Lucia and Truman consulting all together: the Physician plucked a box out, showed it them; they seemed to approve: an oath of secrecy we heard them take, but suspected nothing, by this hand. We honest men do seldom suspect others.
Is this true, Colonel?
Should I say it is not true, I should not tell the truth if I should say so.
You swear it is true?
Before an Elder I shall swear.
Aurelia, send for um immediately, as if I meant to see um contracted; and bid the servants be ready to carry um away. I'll see um clapped up close before I die.
I go, Sir.
Dearest Uncle,
I come to beg one boon of you, the last
Which you can grant me, or I need to wish.
Speak, gentle Niece.
That since the love twixt Truman and my self
Hath been so fixed, and (as our fortunes) equal,
You will be pleased to seal with your last breath
The confirmation of our loves, our Con∣tract:
And when your soul shall meet in heaven my fathers,
As soon as he has bid you welcome thither,
He'll thank you for our marriage.
Oh by all means: whore's gentle M. Truman? He's sorry for my death, good man, I warrant ye. Weep not for me, dear
Niece, I know it grieves you. Whore's loving Mr. Truman?
Without Sir, waiting on your will, as on the voice of his good fate.
Pray call him in.
Sirrah, fetch two or three more of my knaves in.
Oh the dissembling of these women; they're like a folded picture, that every di∣varsity of light represents diversely.
Hang all women beside you and your daughter, widow: I could almost like Ma∣homets religion, for turning all the sex out of Heaven.
It is as we wished, dear Lady; O this blessed hour!
Away with um immediately, let um be sent to prison straight.
What means this rudeness? I under∣stand not this incivility.
Ungratious children, ye have poi∣soned a most virtuous Soldier here.
I poisoned? what do ye mean?
Away with um I say, they shall •inde another place to answer for it.
Hei ho! what pity it is.
Captain, prithee away with these two impertinences; since you must dye, let's have a parting cup for shame.
But thou art turned Apostate.
I did but fain all this; I'm as very a Rogue as ever I was.
Thou speak righteously, we will not make a dry farewell on it. Widow. I have some business with these two; shall I desire privacy a little while?
Fare ye well. Mr. Cutter, you can speak comfortably to him: I'll see you a∣gain anon. Oh the wickedness of these worldlings! Come Tabitha.
The Doctor says, I shall dye with∣out pain; therefore my sparks of Asia, let's be merry for a while. Boy, fetch some wine and an hour-glass.
An hour-glass! what emblem shall we have? bring a sith too; and this same lean, greedy, hungry Poet, shall act Time here.
Well said my little Pawn. So, thus I'll husband my time. According to my Emperick's computation I am to live an hour; half which I do allot to drink with you, a quarter to settle some business; and the rest to good medit•tions and repentance. How like ye this my gallants?
Most Logically divided; never Scholar divided mess better.
How it sparkles! Never be drunk again? My Homer junior, have at thee; this will string up thy Muse: rejoice young frog of Hells•n.
No, rather let me weep, drop briny tears, Till I like Niobe —
There's a piece of her sticks in his throat still, drink it down Dogrel.
Do, for when I am once gone, ye must even like Mahumetans, count wine a thing forbidden.
Let's drink, let's drink, whilst life we have:
You'll find but cold drinking, cold drink∣ing in the grave.
A catch i'faith.
Boy go down,
And fill's the tother quart;
That we may drink the Captains health,
Before that we do part.
Why dost thou frown, thou arrant Clown &amp;c.
Ha hei boy's! another catch i'faith.
And all our men we•e very very merry.
And all our men were drinking,
One man of mine,
Two men of mine,
Three men of mine,
And a man of mine,
As we went by the way, were
Drunk Drunk, Damnable Drunk;
And all our men were very very merry &amp;c.
Hei brave boys! now, Cutter, thou
art a precious Puritan.
And thou a puissant Captain. Some would have pined, and kept a quarter, and howled at their death, and have been more froward and troublesome then a Citizens wife when she takes Physic. This is true valour.
Sure he has died before, he's so ex∣pert at it.
What says old Priam to Achilles great?
It is well, I'm glad to see you in you Priams; but for all your Priams, and your Killisses, what have you done with my Son?
Thrice was thy Hector drawn about the walls.
Xanthus and Simois, with his pur∣ple gore.
Alas, and welladay! we are stained all o'er.
Ha, ha, ha.
It is very well, excellent well, ell's well that ends well; I say—I shall find Law I hope. My Son Dick in prison, and old Dick laughed at here by Raggamuffins: It is very excellent well; I thank you gen∣tlemen I thank you heartily.
It is not so much worth i'faith Sir; what do you mean Sir? pray spare your curtsy, nay, I pray be covered Sir.
It may be so, it is very likely Sir, an there be Law in Westminster—
—And what dost thou mean, old man?
—And what dost thou mean, old man?
—If thou mean to live long, plump, lusty, and strong;
—Then take of the cup and the Can.
Ha, ha, ha.
Well, I'm made a laughing stock, it seems.
And good Sir—
Yes, I am made the laughing stock; I shall take some other course, I hold you a great. Rest ye merry Gentlemen, I pray be merry, very very merry.
Nay, you shall stay and drink first.
Shall I, Iacksauce?
Pray Sir, be you covered too.
Come old Iethro, here's a cup of wine will stir thy brains again, they're mouldy now.
I, you'd poison me, would you? it is ve∣rye well if a man may be suffered to poison whom he pleases.
No, your good Son has got the art of poisoning.
My Son? Thou least. My Son?
If ye be raging Lyon-mad, do ye see that door? Be gone to your Son, and take some juice of Opium: Thou wants sleep, Iethro.
There's Law, Captain.
There is so; would you'd go fetch it.
Nay there's none it seems.
True, there shall be no Law, so you'll be gone
There shall be no Law, say you? I desire no more, it is very exceeding dainty. There shall be no Law; I desire no more, it is a kind of petty Treason: You'll remember, Sir, that there shall be no Law: That's enough, I pray remember Sir: and so fare∣well. There shall be no Law.
This worm-eaten old fellow has spoiled our sport. And what says my hour-glass now? Time was i'faith.
How do you feel your self?
As hot as Hell. Come we'll take our last farewell within; and farewell here all drinking. God send me a good journey, I say.
Then briny tears come trickling down apace,
For loss of him—
And what?
Nay, ye put me out.
Not poisoned you say?
No, hes as well as we.
It may be he has more lives then one, or used himself to poison, as we now, that are Scholars, and Poets read, of one Mithidrates.
He was never sick.
Yes, very hot.
I, as a painted fire, his fancy made him so; I smell a plot in it. Lucia, you say, urged him then for Truman. It was a mere plot, I doubt, to put him in fear of death.
I shall be taken for a kind of Rogue then, for bearing false witness
You shall not be mistaken, Sir, at all.
Pilloried, and whipped, with my godly brother Cutter.
Abused by the Prentices as you walk in the streets, and have rotten apples slung at you.
Have a hundred blustering oaths of mine no more believed, then when I swear to my Creditors, I'll pay all.
Be abandoned by all men above a Tipster; and not dare to look a gentleman in the face; unless perhaps you sneak into a Play-house, at the fifth Act.
If ever I have to do with women a∣gain, but in the way of all flesh, may I dye an Eunuch. I'll never lye or swear hereafter, but for my self. Were not you the virtue∣os gentlewoman, with the brown paper-face, that persuaded me to it?
The very same, Sir; and I have just such another exploit here to employ thee in: therefore be secret, close as a cokle, my good Rymer.
To employ me in!
Nay, you must do it i'faith; I have sworn first, Dogrel.
By this good light, I will do nothing at thy entreaty: not if thou should entreat me to lye with thee. Must Poet Dogrel?
I, must, if he intend ever to drink Sack again; or to make more use of his little-poc∣ket, then to carry Tavern-bills in it; must do it, unless he intend to die without a shirt, and be buried without a winding-sheet.
I like thy wit yet wench, what is it?
I would marry Puny; he's rich you know, and a bravery, and a wit.
He says himself he is so; but few are of his faith.
He dances too, and courts the Ladies.
Yes in more postures then a dozen of Bowlers.
But he's rich, Dogrel, and will be wise enough; when I have got'um knighted, then I shall be a Lady, Dogrel; have a dozen of French-Taylors, Doct•rs, Jewellers, Perfumers, Tyre-women, to sit in consultati∣on every morning, how I shall be dressed up to play at Gleek, or dance, or see a Comedy, or go to the Exchange in the afternoon; send every day my Gentleman, to know how such a Lady slept, and dreamed; or when∣there her dog be yet in perfect health: Then have the young smelling braveries; all adore me, and cut their arms, if I be pleased to be angry: Then keep my close and open Coaches, my yellow satin Pages, Mon∣kies, and women, or (as they call um) cry∣tures.
Be then a politic, Lady; keep none but ugly ones, you'll ne'er be handsome else. But suppose all this, what's this to Dogrel?
Dogrel shall be maintained by me, he shall have fine new Serge; and every day more wine then's drunk at a Corona∣tion.
This qualifies. And when the good Knight's dicing, or at bowls, or ga∣thering notes in private out of Romances; might not Dogrel have a bit?
Yes, like enough your Poetry might tempt some of my under-women to it. But are you prepared to cheat, in your own be∣half,
and mine?
I, but how must this be done?
Why thus briefly. First read this Letter.
Dearest Truman,
We have long desired to be contracted to∣gether, that nothing might be wanting to our Loves, but Ceremony: To night about nine a clock, I shall find opportunity to meet you at the garden door, and let you in; silence and the help of veils, will save the violating of your oath. Farewell.
Yours, Luc. Blade.
I'faith, was this her writing?
No▪ but the hand's •s like hers as the left is to the right. This you shall show to Puny; and tell him that you found or stole it from Truman: I need not I suppose in∣struck you, to polish over a lye; he knows their love, and cannot suspect any thing; persuade him to make use of the occasion, and come himself.
And you•ll meet him veiled.
Hast thou found it out? thou hast shrew•d reaches Dogrel.
I'll do it. Thou shalt be blessed. I'll do it i'faith.
About it then; I'll leave you: and fail not, Dogrel; remember wine and serge. But first, I have another way to undo thee, Lucia: And that I•ll try too.
Go thy ways girl for one, and that's for Puny I hope; I see thou'lt ne'er turn Seamstress, nor teach girls; you would be a rare wife for me, I should beget on thee Donnes, and Iohnsons: but thou art too wit∣tie. We men that are witty know how to rule our selves, can cheat with a safe consci∣ence; it is charity to help thee, Aurelia, and I will do it, and merit.
Our minds are like the Sea, and eve∣rye Passion
Like some fierce Tempest stricken from the North,
Disturbs the Peaceful calmness of our thoughts:
Custom of anger drives us from our selves,
The Adrian Gulf a milder fury hurries;
Those Waves touch Heaven, but these arise to Hell.
Sometimes the winged whirlwind of blind Avarice
Shoots it self forth, and sweeps up all be∣fore it.
Now we with greedy hope, knock at the Spears,
Anon the deadly hand of cold despair
Throws us beneath the grave: and midst these dangers
The flame of Love appears in stead of lightning;
And with sad glory frights the night it self.
Oh! it is a subtle fire! and kills, but wounds not.
Good God! What more then man can safe∣lie pass
The Bil•owes, Rocks, and Monsters of this Ocean,
Unless some power Divine, become his Pilot?
For then the winds would scatter, the waves shrink,
And th'outworn storm suffer it self a ship∣wrack.
Thanks good Taylor; now I'll only beg that I may buy your secrecy: Fare thee well, Friend.
Ha! I did but speak just now of Heavenly powers,
And my good Angel enters! welcome
Lucia; I can scarce say so here, yet welcome heartily:
You see how ill our honest Plot succeeds;
I see we must out-weary fortunes anger,
And I have armed my self for it—ha!
I have with much ado gotten to you, and can stay with you to night. (Ha!) Why should we defer our joys longer, since we are married in heart? The opportunity, and impatience of such delays, forced me to de∣sire that which else my modesty would not suffer me—(Modesty?) —Your desires— to your bed —long wisht-for—(why this is strange) hum-hum-hum— Yours, Lucia. No, no, thou art not Lucia. If thou dost (As thou say) love me, do not use that name.
Some devil has changed thee— This i• worse still—with much ado—to night—joys longer—opportunity—
May all remembrance of thee perish with thee,
Unhappy paper, made of guilty linen.
The monstrous relic•s of some lustful woman:
Thy very ashes here will not be innocent,
But fly about, and hurt some chaste men's eyes,
As they do mine.
Oh thou that once were Lucia! thy soul
Was softer then, and purer then swans fea∣theirs,
Then thine own skin: Two whitest things, that paper,
And thine own self, thou did at once de∣file.
But now you are blacker then the skin that co∣verse thee:
And that same gloomy shade not so much hides
Thy Bodies colour, as it shows thy Minds.
Kneel not to me, fond woman, but to heaven;
And prithee weep: tears will wash cleaner Ethiops—
Would thou have had me been mine own adult'rer?
Before my Marriage too? Would thou have given me
An earnest of the horns I was to wear?
Is Marriage only a Parenthesis
Betwixt a maid and wife? Will they remain
Entire without it? Go, pray go back,
And leave me too, since thou hast left thy self:
When peace is made with heaven, it is made with me.
What are these women made of? Sure we men
Are of some better mold. Their vows and oaths
Are like the poisonous Spiders subtle net,
As dangerous to entrap, and broke as soon.
Their love, their faith, their selves enslaved to passion.
Nothing's at their command, except their tears,
And we frail men, whom such heat-drops entice.
Hereafter I will set my self at liberty,
And live more free then is the air I breathe in:
And when I sigh, henceforth, it shall not be
For love of one, but pity of all the Sex.
But how shall I represent this An∣thropophagus?
Only speak softly, lest she chance to know your voice.
I warrant you I'll whisper like wet wood in a Justices chimney at Christmas.
But of all things, take heed of too much wit; that's always dangerous, but especially now. Truman, you know, is an ho∣nest harmless fellow, and is contented to speak sense.
I, hang him; there's clotted cream in his head in stead of brains; and no more of that then will completely serve to fill the eye of a needle. But I shall ne'er abstain from these fine things, hyperboles and simi∣litudes: my nature stands a tiptoe: Truman has got the cramp; his genius is like some gouty Alderman's that sits in a chair. And I were in Phalaris's Bull, I think I should be witty.
Nay, I know it; a man may as
well keep a prentice from Moor-fields on a holiday, as you from your Muses, and Ca∣nundrums; they're meat and drink to you.
No, my good bag-pipe, they're meat and drink to you, that feed by um.
I see you're ashamed of the Muses, and I hope they're even with you. But so much for this: you•ll find wine, I hope, when I have found you the wen•h.
Though thou would drink cups bigger then Pa•ls-steeple, or the great bell at Westminster, thou should have um. How long dost thou think has this night worn her mourning-gown, and looked like a funeral?
Indeed, she has many torches. Why sure, it is just about the Critical time which she appointed. You know your busi∣nos: First break a piece of Gold; profess before Heaven and Angels, you take her for your wife; then give her half of it: and after that, somewhat as you understand me.
Will she be malleable, do ye think? Shall I stamp Puny on her?
There's a Metaphor indeed! It seems it is the fashion; you take your wife for Gold. Hark! the door opens, use your fortune well.
Now, if my Alcocadin be right, I'm sure, I am made.
Pox upon um, they put me into a horrible fear; but I am glad I am so hap∣pily cheated, for all that. Well, I must de∣vise some horrible lye, to justify my fears; some trick must be thought upon to gull Truman. How now? What news from Tripoly.
Sad news, my Lord; here's an Are∣my at the door, to speak with you.
Who are they? Creditors? a Mer∣chant, a Mercer, a Scrivener, a Taylor, a Butcher, Six Cooks, a dozen of Vint∣ners, and the rest? Ha? Tell um I am sick, taking Physic, or else abroad; hang um Rogues, come like quotidian Agues on a man.
No, Sir, it is old Mr. Truman, the Widow, and her daughter, and Mr. Dog∣rel, and I know not who; there's a stock of um.
They are those I wished for, let um in.
Now, Signior Blade, If ever thou would see the golden age of yore, this is the time.
O Sir, my Son has poisoned you, I see; there's no Law yet, is there?
Mr. Trum•n —
True me no more then I true you. Come, Captain Blade, I know what you are, and so shall others too.
You'll hear me, Sir, I hope —
And so shall you hear me, Sir; I can be heard, I would you should know, in as good a place as this is; and before as good as you are, Captain Blade.
First leave your raging, Sir: for though you should roar like Tamerlin at the Bull, it would do no good with me.
I Tamerlin? I scorn him, as m•ch as you do, for your ears. I'll have an act∣on of slander against you, Captain; you shall not miscall me at your pleasure: remember you called me Iethro once before.
O the Father! little did I think, I wuss, to see you ever with these eyes a∣gain.
Pray, Sir, hear me; The wrong I did you, when you were last here, came from distraction only, and not my will; and therefore deserves pardon. The business, if you please, I'll relate truly to you; and by what special providence I escaped the danger.
Well, Sir, I'm not angry; but
I'll not be called Tamerlin by any man.
Upon my faith, Sir, it was an Anti∣dote; I vomited up more then any whale could have done; things of more colours then twenty Rhetoricians were ever able to invent.
I shall teach my son—
No good Sir, I forgive him with all my heart: but for my Niece—You remem∣ber, Sir, the Will my brother left; you were witness to it. For this her disobedience, the means are fallen to me. Now if you please to marry M. Richard to my daughter, Lucia's portion shall all be hers.
Thank you good Captain Blade; I thank you for your love heartily: pray send for um; he shall do it presently. I thank you heartily for your love, good Captain: he shall do it, he shall do it.
(What good luck was this, that I spoke not to the widow for her daughter!) How do you, widow? you're melancholy methinks; you're melancholy i'faith, that you are.
Well, I praise God, Sir, in better health then I deserve, vile wretch. I'm glad to see our neighbour so recovered.
I, good man, he has had a dangerous time of it, that he has, a very dangerous time: his niece is a naughty wench, a scurvy girl, to repay him thus for all his care and trow∣ble: he has been a father to her, Widow, that he has; to my knowledge he has: Her father was an honest man, I'm sure on it.
Was he? I, as ever trod upon Gods ground, peace be with him; I, and as loving a neighbour too—
We have drunk our half pintes of Muscatel together many a morning, that we have.
My husband too was all in all with him. Hei-ho! I shall never forget how merry we were when we went with him to Mortlake in the Easter-holy-days: and we carried a shoulder of Mutton with us, and a fat Pig, and he carried his bottle of wine down with him: I warrant you he he loved a cup of wine as well as his brother; in a fair sort, I mean.
Ah widow! those days are gone: we shall never see those days again. I was a merry greg too then, and would ha'danc'd and cut capers: ha—who but I? I was as merry as the maids.
My daughter Tabytha was just four year old then, come Lamas-tide.
Captain, I thought thou had been at Ere•us by this time: but it is no matter; it is but an Epitaph lost: hanged, it was made ex tempore and so let it pass.
Had thou made one i'faith?
Yes, by thy, light.
I'm glad I did not die then. O here they come. She's a good handsome wench; it is pity to cozen her. But who can help it? Every one for himself, and God for us all.
Welcome, kind Niece; you see I live still: there were Antidotes as well as Poisons.
He has been a loving Uncle to you, Mistress Lucia: he might have deserved better at your hands: you might had Master Truman, I warrant you, had you but held up your finger to him: he would not have seen you perish, Mistress Lu•in; I may say I know him so far. Speak, Mistress Lucia, speak for your self, good chuck; your Uncle will forgive you: we'll all speak for you: He shall forgive you, that he shall: he knows we have all our faults.
I understand the language of her si∣lence; it's strong and good. You bound your son, Sir, to an oath never to see nor hear her without your commission: it is that troubles her conscience; she has a tender one.
I bound um? Well, I absolve um then; what's that to you, Sir? I'll bind um again, if 't be my pleasure so: if not, a fig for you; that's all I care. I love to speak my mind; you must pardon me, I have spoke to as good as you i• my days.
Do ye speak thus always? I'll have you in a Play if you do.
I'm glad you are so religious, Sir; did I bind you too to silence? Go too, Sir; I told you what your may bees would bring you to, you'll always be wiser then your father: Nay, you may speak, and your Mi∣neon too, if she pleases.
Does any man here accuse me of any thing?
We, and your conscience do.
My Conscience? it is as pure as Sythian Crystal,
From any spot; I can see throughout at plea∣sure.
Whatever crime you mean, (for yet I know not)
Would it were written in my face.
You would be blacker then a Moor if it were. Did not you consent with that damned Physician to give me poison?
There was none given you, I call God to witness:
If such a thought had slipped into my dream,
The horror would have waked me, and I feared
Ever to sleep again. No; what we did, Sir,
Was but to fright you with a painted danger;
That the just terror of your own destruction
Might call to your remembrance my dead father:
For sure, Sir, you forgot him when you thought
To match his only child with one of these
Fellows that live extempore; whose fortunes
Are patched up like their wit by several pa∣t•once.
Should I have married thus, (but I would sooner
Endure the shameful end which they de∣serve)
Your conscious Ghost would start to meet my fathers,
And look more pale then death it self hath made it.
Let her alone, she'll call names and fling stones about anon.
Alas poor soul! you may see she's not her own woman.
What a poor excuse she made! a very idle simple excuse; have you never a better for us?
No, she says true.
You wo'nt bite off my nose? will ye, Sir? pray do not bite off my nose, I pray, Sir, do not?
What a bevy of men's here! ha! My little Load-stone, art thou here, my lit∣tle Diamond? I'll speak to your Uncle now; we'll have a Parson cry I Nicholas presently.
You're rude, Sir: what do you mean?
I, so you said in the garden, when I began to gather, you know what fruit: Come put on your vail, you'll blush else; and look like the picture of a red-rose in the hangings. Captain, Salve, it is done.
Done! What?
I have her, i'faith.
God give you joy, Sir.
Nay, she's my own.
I am very glad of 't.
I scaled the walls, entered the Town, and left a garrison there, I hope.
I congratulate your Victory, Mr. Puny.
You shall go to my wedding, with me and thy• fair Chorus. I'm as nimble as a Lybian Rabbit: Come, you must go, though you be as lame as a cripple, that b••s at Westminster, or a Crow in a gutter with∣out her right leg. What do ye wonder at? I tell you, she's my Penelope now.
May I be so bold, Sir, as to ask, who it is you mean?
'Slid, can thou not see my mean∣ing? are your brains in a litter? I'm con∣tracted to your Niece, and have got upon her—Nay, never blush, we're as good as married, my dear Agate.
Have you then lien with her?
Ha! No figures nor similitudes, good Mr. Puny; be as open and naked with me, as you were with her.
As plain as a Scholars mourning-cloak. I have don't i'faith, but do ye see? We broke this gold between us first, and will be married to day. Who's that? Truman, ha, ha; he looks like the Globe of the World, now: look how he scratcheth his poul.
God give you joy, Sir: but she has not a farthing portion.
How, Captain?
Not so much as will buy ribbons: all s mine own: a lawful prize, i'faith.
Oh monster of her sex!
Wilt thou, vile man—I cannot speak to him—Witness all these—
So it is all forfeited to me. Will you try how your sons affection stands towards Aurelia?
Come, Dick, the Captain has forgiven you: never think of Lucia; she's not worth your thinking on; a scurvy girl: ne'er think of her; thou shalt marry fair Aurelia: there's a wench, a wench worth gold i'faith.
I can't marry.
What can't you do, Sir?
I can't marry.
Do you know who it is you speak to, Sir? you do'n't sure: Who am I, pray? you can•t, when I bid you. Surely you know not who it is you speak to: you shall do it, or I'll know why you shall not.
I won't marry.
Get you out of my sight: come within my doors no more; not within my doors, Sir.
Take heed, M Truman, what you do.
I wo'n't marry.
Pray hear me all—
Come, M. Truman, let's talk of these things within: come, Gentlemen.
Hei-ho! I'll ne'er trust a wart of the right cheek and a twinkling eye again whilst I breathe, for Mistress Lucia's sake. A man would, think, that sees her▪ that butter would not have melted in her mouth. Take heed, Tabytha; the still Sow eats up all the draff, I see.
I'll never acknowledge him for my son again: I tell you, Captain, he's al∣ways thus; he's always with his may-be's and his wo'nots: I can't abide these wo'∣notts, not abide um.
I ll follow him about the portion; he sha' not think to make an Asdrubal of me.
Now my plot works.
How precious were those tears, if they were true ones!
How much more worth then all the Oceans Jewels!
But they are only false and empty bubbles;
Fair to the sight, but hollow as her heart:
There's nothing, nothing in um: he that weighs um,
Shall find um lighter then a mad mans dreams,
Or women's resolutions.
I never did that fellow any wrong.
Why should he pay so dearly for the loss
Of my poor honour, as to sell his soul for it?
O she confesses, now, sh'has lost her honour.
They triumph in the ruin of us wo∣men,
And woo our beauties only, or our dow∣ries;
Which when they miss of, they resolve to take
Revenge of their unworthiness on us;
Stealing away all that makes rich our dowry,
And beauty fair, our Name. But it is no matter,
Since heaven and Truman know my chastity.
Ha! he's here still! How do you, Sir?
Well, well.
You look ill.
No, no, no.
Indeed you do: your are not well, Im sure.
I am. Will you be gone?
How, Sir! You do not know me, sure.
I would I never had.
What do you mean?
To see thy face no more.
You said you could not live without the sight on it.
It was a good one then.
Has one day spoiled it?
O yes, more then an hundred years of time,
Made as much more by a continual sorrow,
Could ever have done.
I do not think my glass will say so.
That's
A false as you, perhaps; but it is not half
So brittle. Dares your husband trust me alone
With you so long?
My husband?
I cry you mercy;
The man you sin withal. You scorn to use Pretences.
Yes, I do, Sir:
For she that scorns the offence, needs no ex∣cuse
Have you so little confidence in that
Which you have seemed to praise so oft, my Virtues?
Or did you flatter only? Sure you did not:
For I remember I have heard you swear
You spoke your thoughts. Are Oaths but complements?
It is done unkindly, very unkindly, Truman;
And were 't not your self, I should be angry.
Had a bright Angel come to me, and said
That you were false, I should have sworn •t had lied,
And thought that rather false then you. No∣thing
Could ever move the opinion of thy con∣stance
But thine own self; and thee I must believe.
And I'll believe my self in what I saw.
I know thou can speak prettily; but thy words
Are not what Nature meant um, thy minds picture.
The Bee has left his honey in thy tongue,
But in thy heart his sting.
O do not say so:
My heart is honest still, unless thou spoildst it
When it received thee in. 'T had but three corners.
And thou had two, at least. Would thou could see
How little room I've left my self there in it.
Yes; for it is crowded up with many guests;
So many guests, that they excluded me:
And now I freeze without; but never more,
Never will enter: it was a Palace once,
But now tic turned a Dungeon.
Will you leave me?
I will not call you fickle nor inconstant;
But sure you are too blame: you will not find
A woman that will love you half so well.
I do not mean to try.
Yes, prithee do.
But when you've talked, and loved and vowed, and sworn
A little while, take heed of using her
As you do me. No, may your love to her
Be such as mine to you; it can't be better,
What ever you think; I'm sure it cannot, Truman.
May she be worthier of your bed then I,
And bring forth many little selves to you:
And when the happy course of divers years
Makes you seem old to all besides your wife,
May you in the fair glass of your blessed issue,
See your own youth again. But I would have um
True in their loves, and kill no innocent maids.
For me it is no matter: when I'm dead,
My busy soul shall slutter still about you;
Twill not be else in heaven: it shall watch
Over your sleeps, and drive away all dreams
That fly not with a soft and downy wing.
If any dangers threaten, it shall beckon,
And call your spirit away till they be past;
And be more diligent then your Guardian-Angel.
Only sometimes, when your best leisure serves,
(For I'd not trouble you more dead then living)
Bestow •no thought on Lucia, and then sigh,
And (if you will) drop down a tear or two.
But that's a task Ill not enjoin you to:
And if you do it, spend not too many on me;
One will suffice: then only say, That maid
Deserved more of me. And again t'your business.
For my wronged virtue and forsaken truth,
I ask no more. So, dear False-man, farewell.
Farewell? That word has charms and poisons in•t;
It makes my frighted soul start back and tremble.
It is but an aerie word. Do ye hear me, Lucia?
Who calls?
Farewell, Lucia, farewell; that's all: farewell
Repent, and meet me in heaven—
Why did rash Nature quarrel with her self,
In making one so excellently bad?
She is more fair then May•s new painted blossoms,
But falser then the smiles of faithless April:
And this I know, and yet me thinks I love her.
O she has killed my Reason: I have lost
That and my self for ever.
Every thing now has left me; tears them∣selves,
The riches of my very grief, forsake me:
Sorrow, me thinks, shows nakedly without '•m.
My sighs are spent too; and my wearied lungs
Deny me fresh supplies: and I appear
Like some dull melancholy •pril-even,
When after many a shower the heavens still lower,
As if they threatened more; and the s•ed Sun
Leaves nothing but a doubtful blush behind him.
And I could wish my eternal night were coming,
Did I but know who it is that makes me wish it:
Else, when my soul is ready for her slight,
And knows not who it is she must forgive,
A thousand light suspicions will call
Her charity several ways; and I may chance
To doubt thee, T•woman. But thou art abused:
I know not why; but sure thou could not do it.
I fear thee, cousin When we were both girls,
Thou would accuse me falsely to my Mi∣stress,
And laugh to see my tears. I fear thee, cousin;
But I'll not judge too rashly: for I would not
Have any innocent wronged as I have been.
But I•m resolved to try her. She's now seeking
(Hoping that all my fortunes now are hers)
For a new maid t'attend her. That maid I'll be.
Clothes I have got already; and my face
Grief has disguised: that and my voice some art
Will quickly alter. I have left a Note
Upon my chamber-window, which will keep um
From all suspicion of my staying here.
Hei! the Sisters are ravished, and we have holy kisses enough. I shall be as great among um as—Who's there? What, your Spouse, Pury?
She looks like Niobe on the moun∣tains top.
That Niobe, Dogrel, you have used worse then Phoebus did. Not a dog looks melancholy, but he's compared to Niobe. He beat a villainous Tipster t'other day, to make him look like Niobe.
Why faith that 's pretty odd, like one of mine.
O, Sir, had you the virtuous impu∣dence to slander a poor maid thus?
Poor enough now indeed. I will not marry thee: thy portion was a condition of the Contract. I'll sooner marry a woman that sells Oranges with a face like Belins∣gate.
I scorn thee—I contracted to thee?
Were not? Answer.
No, by heaven.
Bear witness, Gentlemen; these words are Ca•duus benedictus to me.
And what will you do now, fair Gimmal Lucia, you that contemned the Co∣lonel? Will you knit for your living?
Or else weed gardens for six pence a day and bread.
This is unheard-of rudeness.
Nay let me have mine too; I have got a pat one for her. Or else turn Apple-wo∣man, live in a stall, and sell pippins for eight a penny.
Or hither in triumph twixt two panniers ride,
And sell the bouls of wheat and butter in Cheapside.
The last is a little too long: but I imitate Spencer.
What think ye, Gentlemen? she'll make a pretty Laundress.
A Laundress? hang her, she looks like a foul handkercher.
Pray let me go; I have business re∣quires me.
What? you're to meet some Gen∣tlemen? How is it? twelve pence a time, I warrant, in these clothes.
Where do you set up? Nay, we are true strikers. What, is it in Covent-garden?
Or do you renew the decayed credit of Turnbal-street?
Or honour the Mill-bank at West∣minster.
Or flee to Wapping, and engross the Sailors.
Or Moor-fields, and sell cakes.
Are all barbarous here?
Nay tell's; we shall be customers.
Enough, enough; give her a clap of the breech, and let her go.
Well, fare thee well, girl; we shall find you at the Play house in the six-peny-room sometimes.
And do ye hear, Lucia, Keep your self wholesome: your tub's a terrible thing.
Unworthy villains— But I'm born to wrongs,
And must endure um.
Ha, ha, ha.
A pretty Scene i'faith. Now for the Captain; he'll entertain us like foreign Princes: we'll drink this half-yeer with him before we eat or sleep.
I'll drink like Gog-Magog himself, or the Spanish Tinker on a holy-day.
There will I whet my Lyric Muse
With Falern wine as I do use.
Captain Blade cannot refuse
To entertain us; he cannot choose,
When we bring him such good news,
As that his niece is gone to the stews.
Leave your verses, Dogrel. I hate your verses, Dogrel, till I be drunk. It is a glory∣os Captain.
As free as Free-town in Germany▪ Here comes Ieronymo.
The story says my niece is run away. The story is not bad. Now will I get the widow, turn off my old rascally companions, and live like an Emperor.
He says he will live like an Empe∣roar; ha, ha, ha, brave Captain.
Invincible Captain Priam.
Hei brave Captain!
What do you mean, Gentlemen? Are ye broke loose from Bedlam? Have you no other place to play your tricks in, but at my door? If you come here as Mummers, much may be done; happily you may have twelve-pence: or else depart; depart, if you be wise.
Why how now, Captain!
If you be not gone immediately, I'll have my men switch you further off—Here are saucy knaves indeed with all my heart—
By this light the Captain's drunk without us.
Prithee, Captain, thou art as hue∣morose as a bell-rope. Dost thou know me, man? I'm M. Puny.
Y' are a fool, an addle egg: there's nothing else but cobwebs in your
head: The height of all thy knowledge is to find out the quarter day against thy rents come in, and thou could not find out that, if it were not marke'd in the Almanac with red letters. Yet you forsooth, because you see some Gentlemen and Poets of late, a little extravagant sometimes in their simi∣litudes; because they make a pretty kind of sound to those that mark um not; make that your way of wit, and never speak with∣out comparisons. But never were comp∣reasons so odious as thine are. And these two Rabbit-suckers, for a quart of wine extol thee, and cry good when thou speak so.
The Captains raging mad like a Baker when his oven is over heated.
And that was one of um—
Come leave your humours, hang you, confound you, pox take you, Captain, we come to drink here.
Mine's no blind Ale-house, where you may roar and swagger with half a pipe of Tobacco in your mouth.
Do you know me, Captain?
I would I never had. Thou art one that say thou hast seen the wars, but thou least basely; for if thou ever wast in a battle, i'm sure thou winkest there. Thou art one that liv'st like a Raven by prove∣dence and rapine: one that if thou should chance to go to bed sober, thou would put it down in thy Almanac for an unlucky day; sleep is not death's image with thee, unless thou be dead-drunk.
He dares not abuse me thus.
Is it even so, Captain? Has your money exalted you?
No, it has humbled me, and made me know my self and you, whom I shall study to forget hereafter.
Come, Captain, shall you and I drink hand to hand?
Oh, you're his Lansprizado, Sirrah, Trundle.
Let not thy wrath swell like the A∣drain Sea.
Thou that trouble thy self to be a fool; I will so beat thee, Trundle, that thou shalt hobble like one of thy own Rhyms. Therefore, if ever thou show that Poetical face of thine within my doors a∣gain, Isle use thee worse then thou did me, when thou made an Ode in commendation of me.
Then break thine oaten reed—
Fare ye well Gentlemen. I shall see thee Cutter a brave Tipster shortly; it must be so i'faith, Cutter; thou must like Bar∣dolph in the play, the spigot wield. Dogrel shall make and sell small Pamphlets in the play∣house, or else Tobacco, or else snuff Can∣dles. As for Puny, his means will serve him to be cheated of these five or six years.
It is very well the times are so al∣ter'd.
Ye cannot want a living Gentlemen, as long as there are Whores, Bowling-allies, or Ordinaries; especially such able men as you are. There will be wars too shortly; never quake, Cutter; here's Dogrel, when his want has spun him out a little thinner, will serve you for a pike.
It is very well: pray God your mirth last, Captain.
When you're grown old, and your fingers then only nimble with the palsy, I'll provide an Hospital for you—Sedes ubi fata quietas — Fare ye well, Gallants; and pray be merry: Fare ye well heartily.
Poverty, the pox, an ill wife, and the Devil go with thee, Captain.
I vexed him, when I put that jest up∣on him, like a Baker when his oven's over∣heated.
If I don't compose a Satire shall make him hang himself, may I never write verse more.
I would beat him like a Buck, but I shall be bound to the peace for it, and be affronted afterword by every one.
No, no, no—let me see—Besides my Satire I have another way—let me see—His brother trafficked at Guiny.
Yes, but the Merchants there report him dead.
The more knaves they: he lives, and I am he.
How? How, Dogrel, thou the Mer∣chant man?
By this light, I either am, or will be.
How, Dogrel! Though thou be as thin and penetrable as a spirit, yet thou can not assume dead bodies.
Prithee, Dog•el, hold thy peace; thou talk like a hogs f•ce.
De•id not Puny: if I be not more like then any of your similitudes, I'll be hang•d for it.
Thy face, indeed, will do exceed•ng well to represent one risen from the grave
By long conversation with the Ca¦ptain, I know all the passages between him and his brother; know what his humour, what his state and fortunes were, better then himself did when he lived.
I, but thou 'lt ne'er act him. Why, man, he was a thing more st•ange then any monster in Africa where he travelled.
What was he, prithee?
I knew him well enough; he had lost his memory, and therefore either writ down every thing, and took his business with him in a scroll, or else trusted it to his man Iohn, whom he carried with him.
O I, that Iohn and he went perpetu∣ally together, like the blind man and his dog.
Or a Tinker and his t•ull. But do ye hear, gallants, let me do apple-Iohn: never was such a Iohn as I'll be, not Iohn a Gaunt himself, nor Iohn a Nook.
But Dogrel, how wilt thou be made like that Cinque-•ater?
Why we Poets can do any thing. First you may remember (unless you be like him) it is seven years since he went from hence; and time, you know, will alter men. I made an Ode upon that subject once: Time, that dost eat, and makst no Lent—
Pox take your Ode; go on in your business, Dogrel.
Then I and my man Iohn (as simply as he stands here) will swarthy over our faces as if the Country had made us so: for if you remember my verses, In Africa they are black as coals—
The devil's in thy verses. Prithee on.
Besides, we'll be attired in some strange habit of those Countries: I know not how; but you shall see it in Speed, Maps.
Why now I like thee, my little Ovid; go about thy Metamorphosis. I'm for Toby∣th•; she's taken, Dogrel, •altered like virgins wax. I ll to her presently, and tell her that the vision appeared to me last, and warned me to carry her to S. 〈◊〉; there will I have a Priest.
A Priest, Cutter?
A Minister, I mean; a holy, godly, zealous Minister: and she—You conceive me, Dogrel—
Well, let's be going then. Puny, take heed of your wit when you act Iohn: I shall beat my servant Iohn, if he be witty.
That's the devil; I shall hardly ab∣stain.
And Dogrel, you must make no verses, Dogrel: let that be the first thing your memory fails you in.
Well, I'll follow you in a pissing-while.
Do so, good Iohn.
Now will I turn Iohn, as round as a Wedding-ring: and if that plot be cut of• by the nose—Ha? Here comes sententious Bias that walks gravely. I'll observe my young Laconian.
She's gone for ever. Peace be with thee, Lucia.
Where ever thou art.
Now he begins his Epithala •ium.
If she be guilty,
Forgive her, heaven; she'll repent, I'm sure:
For she is soft, and melting as the dew,
That kisses every morn the •ambling roses;
And howsoever beauty and youth misled her,
She cannot be, I know, a stubborn sinner.
Did ever Basket-maker talk thus?
to himself too, l•ke a Conjurer in a garden?
Ha! This is he, that wicked man,
That devil which betrayed her.
O, are you thereabouts?
Nay stay,
For were thou armed with thunder and my anger,
Yet I would bring thee back. Tell me what charms,
(For I will rip thy heart up but I'll know it)
What witch-craft did thou use t'entice her thus?
Never deny it. For had thou been more handsome
Then other men's, or thine own flattery
Could ever make thee: hast thou been as beautiful,
And could have spoke as well as she her self,
All this were nothing; she would look upon thee,
But lust no more then thine own Angel does.
No, thou did use some cursed art to tempt her,
Some Philter—
Not I by all—what do ye mean pray, Sir?
Why then you ravished her, by Heaven you ravished her:
Alas, she's weak and tender, very tender,
And was not able to resist that strength
Which youth and furious lust did arm thee with.
It was basely done, above expression basely,
And I would presently revenge it fully,
But that my sword would take from the laws justice,
And from thy shame.
I ravish her? By this light I scorn't.
You did enjoy her body? Did you not?
I did so.
You did? I prithee do not say you did so;
This is to brag of the vile act you have done:
But I shall spoil your pride and shameful glory
Which your base sin affords you.
You bid me tell you the truth, what would you ha'me do?
Do? I would have thee fix thy adul∣taros eye
Upon the ground, which thy cursed feet dishonour;
And blush more red then is the sin you have acted.
What would I have thee do? I'd have thee weep,
Shed as true tears as she does for thy fault,
And sigh away thy body into air.
What would I have thee do? I•d have thee kill thy self.
And sacrifice thy life to her wronged Soul.
Can thou refuse to do all this for her,
For whom you have damned thy self?
We were contracted first ever I en∣joyed her.
Did thou enjoy her then? How durst thou do it?
Why she was mine, I tell thee she was mine;
All the Seas wealth should not have bought her from me,
While she remained as spotless as my love:
And so she did remain till thy sin stained her.
I tell thee to that hour she was more innocent
Then thou, false man, were in thy mothers womb.
Did thou enjoy her? Either fetch back that word,
Say, nay I'll have thee swear thou did not touch her,
Or by those joys which thou hast robed me of,
I'll kill thee strait.
Seed I did not touch her. What would you have me say? would I were Iohn the Merchants man now.
O Heavens! O most unheard of villainy!
Th hast done a crime so great, that there is hardly
Mercy enough in Heaven to pardon thee.
Tell me, (for now I'll argue mildly with thee)
Why should you seek to undo a harmless maid?
To rob her of her friend•, her life perhaps,
I'm sure her fame, which is much dearer to her.
It was an inhuman act; an act so barbarous,
That Nations uncivilised would abhor it:
I dare say boldly she nev'r injured you;
For she was gentle as the breath of Zephy∣rus:
And if she ever did but begin a thought
Of wronging any man, she would have wept
Before she thought it out.
I had rather be a pickled▪ Oyster, then i'this case I am in now.
Is Lucia abused? and I stand here
T expostulate with words her injuries?
Draw, for I'll talk no more with thee.
Do ye hear, Sir—by Heaven I lay with her, but we were contracted first—will you be pleased to hear me?
No, be gone.
Most willingly. Fare ye well hear∣tily, Sir; I wish you a good night-cap.
The want of sleep and diet has distempered me,
If I stay thus I shall be quite distracted;
Me thinks a kind of strangeness seizes me:
And yet if I go home I shall be forced
To marry with Aurelia. Is it possible
There should be women good, if Lucia be not?
They are not sure: She looked as well as any,
And spoke as well too.
I tell you, Captain, he's a stub∣born boy, a self-will'd hair-brain'd boy: he has his know-nots, and his wo'nots, and his may be's, when I speak. I have told him of his manner a hundred ti•es; nay I may say a thousand.
Pray take •y counsel for this once: though I be a soldier, yet I love not to do all things by force. Speak fairly to him.
Speak fairly to my son? I'll see him buried, I'll see his eyes out first.
I mean, desire him.
O, that's another matter. Well, for your persuasion, I'll do it: but if ever I speak fair to him—
I know his nature's such, that kind∣nos will sooner win him—Look you, he's here i'faith, as melancholy as an owl in the day-time.
O, are you there, Jacksauce—
Nay, remember what I told you.
It is true indeed How now, son Dick? you're melancholy still, I see.
It best becomes my fortune, Sir, now you have cast me off.
I cast thee off? marry God for∣bid, Dick. How dost do, Dick? Thou look ill, Dick, in troth thou dost: I must have thee merry.
I see all kindness is against this dotards nature, he does so over-act it.
Wilt thou have a Physician, Dick? Thou art my only son, Dick, and I must have a care of thee: thou should ride a∣broad sometimes, Dick, and be merry. We'll have a wife too for thee, Dick, a good wife, ha—
I thank you, Sir; but I know not—
I, now he's at his know-nots. I will make you leave those know-nots, boy—
Remember, M. Truman, what I told you.
It is true indeed. Your father's old now, Dick, you see, and would fain see a grandchild: tic out of love to you, Dick, that I persuade you to it; you may be a com∣fort, Dick, to your father now.
You may comm•nd me.
Well said, Dick, I see thou love me now, Dick; dost thou want any money, Dick? or clothes? or horses? You sh•uld tell me what you want, you shall have any thing —here's the Captain, a hearty friend of yours—whore's your Daughter, Captain? there's a wench, Dick! ha you seen her?
Yes, Sir.
And how do you like her, Dick? speak freely.
I know no cause why any should dislike her.
Why well said, Dick; keep thee of that mind still, and God will bless thee.
Your father means, Mr. Truman, I suppose, how you like her for a wife.
I can tell my own meaning my self I hope, I'm old enough I'm sure.
You wrong her much, I never shall deserve her.
Alas, I am a man so weak in all things,
So lost both to the world and to my self;
That if I loved a woman heartily,
And wooed her with all zealous passions,
And valued her love 'bove all things else but Heaven;
Yet, when I thought upon my own unwor∣thiness,
I should my self persuade her not to marry me.
Well, Sir, if you esteem her worth your choice, she shall be yours.
Why what should ayre him, Cap∣tain? He esteem her? Must he, forsooth, or I be Master pray? Captain Blade, you make him too saucy with such talk; never tell me, Captain Blade, I say it makes him too saucy, I marry does it, it does i'faith; must he be his own Carver? Come no more words, I•ll have you married presently: i'saith law, Captain, you make him too sau∣cy, that you do, you do i'faith, Sir; I can't abide when sons must come to esteem, he esteem her with a vengeance?
I desire time only to consider—
I, why I told you this; it is such a another wilful, hair-braind Coxcomb, he's always a considering. Captain Blade, I could never keep him from his considering; but I shall so consider you—go get you in, Sir, I'll have it done when I please; get you in, Sir, I'll keep you from considering here∣after.
What did you say your name was?
Jane, forsooth.
Well said, Iane; and as I told you, Iane, you shall have six pound a year, Iane, for your wages; and then my clothes will serve you with a little alteration: There's a gown of my Cousins within will almost fit you, you're much about her height, you shall have that too. I had a Cousin here was a foolish thing god wot, it is well I'm rid of her—and do ye hear—you must be very se∣cret and faithful to your Mistress; a wait∣ing women's place, is a place require, secrecy.
I shall ill deserve your favour else.
Nay, I dare trust thee, Iane, thou look ingenuously: did thou ever live at Court?
No forsooth.
O, you must learn the fashions of the Court: I'm already contracted to one Mr. Puny, though he little things of it; Take heed of speaking, Iane, you see I trust you. And when I'm married to him I'll live at Court: He's a simple thing God knows, but I'll have him knighted, and I like him the better for it: A wise woman you know will make the best use of a foolish husband. You know how to dress me, Iane, in the Court fashion?
Yes forsooth.
And you can lay me on a Fucus handsomely?
I hope I shall quickly learn it.
And when you see a friend with me, or so, that I would be private with; you can stay in the next room, and see that no body come in, to interrupt us?
I shall not be deficient in my duty.
Well said. And can you tell in pri∣vate such a Gentleman that you heard me speak in commendation of him, and that I dreamt of him last night? that will be in your way, Iane, such men will be grateful. And say that I was longing t'other day, for such a jewel or such a toy?
I hope you shall not find me want∣ing in any service to you.
I believe thee, Iane. To morrow I'll teach thee more: I shall read to you eve∣rye day a lesson, till I see you perfect in the sci∣ence: it is requisite that you have a little of the Theory first. Go look out the pearl chain in the Cabinet within; and stay till I come to you.
The wench I see is docile, and will learn; but alas she must have time; she has a little to much City breeding, I see, by Curtsies and forsooths.
How now? all alone, Aurelia? you're eating soap and ashes here, I warrant you, without so much as saying grace for um.
I'd rather repent in ashes, Sir, then eat um
What would you think if I should marry now this very day?
I should think, Sir, you'd repent to morrow for•t.
And the widow too.
The widow? then you'll repent to night, Sir, I believe.
I wooed her long ago, and now she sees there's an estate fallen to me, faith she's content; and, to save charges, is willing to be married to day privately.
But I hope you are not so, Sir: why we shall have all the silenced Ministers hum∣ming and hawing thrice a week here; not a dish of meat but will be longer a blessing then a rosting. I shall never hear my Verge∣nils when I play upon um, for her daughter Tabytha's singing of Psalms. The first pious deed will be, to banish Shakespeare and Ben. Iohnson out of the parlour, and to bring in their rooms Mar-prelate, and Prince works. You'll ne'er endure 't, Sir You were wont to have a Sermon once a quarter at a good time; you shall have ten a day now.
Let me alone to deal with um. If any of her eating talking tribe show their ears here, I will so use her tribe, that they shall free the Pope, and call me Antichrist here∣after: and the widow, I•ll warrant you, I'll convert: I'll carry her to Plays, in stead of Lectures: she shall see them, as well as the dancing of the ropes, and the Puppet-play of Nineve. But this is not my business, girl: I have an husband too for you.
I could wish you would keep him, Sir, if you have him; I know not what to do with him my self.
Come, it is a man you'll like, I'm sure; I have heard you often commend him for his parts. It is young M. Truman.
Truman, Sir? the melancholy cross-arm'd Gentleman that talks to trees and ri∣verse as he goes by um? We should sit all day together like pictures of man and wife, with our faces towards one another, and never speak I'll undertake, upon our Marriage-night he'll only sigh a little, cry Cruel Fate, and then go sleep.
Never fear't. Come, thou shalt have him, girl: go quickly and dress your self; we'll both be married on a day. The humour is good, and it saves charges: there's the wi∣dows humour too.
You'll give me leave, Sir—
No, no, no; prithee go dress thy self: by heaven it must be as I say: the fates have ordained it.
Be pleased to hear me, Sir.
I would not hear thee, though thou were an Angel. I'm as resolute as he that writ the Resolves. Come away, and adorn thy self.
Me thinks. I look now like a two-peny apple pie, I know no• how.
Iohn, What's your name, Iohn? I have forgot your name, Iohn.
Do you mean the name that was given me at the Font?
Font? Font? I do not remember that Font. Let me see my scroll.
There's ne'er a such town in Africa as Font. I do not remember Font.
Your memory, Sir, 's as short as an Ephemerids.
Did not I warn you, Iohn, of such strange what-d'ye-call ums? Here's for that word.
I have forgot what word it was: for the word I mean.
Pox take you, Dogrel, you strike too hard.
You would act well, I see: we'll have thee to Golden-lane, and there thou shalt do
a King, or else some God in thine own clothes.
When a dead man from Orcus I re∣tract,
Well may you see that to the life I act.
Did not I warn you of these what-d'ye-call-ums? Faith we'll be even, Ma∣ster.
Very well, Iohn; those be good Me∣morandums for your Master.
I should be angry with thee for it, but that I have quite forgot it.
Let's see your scroll.
Me•morandum for my house: I have a house in Fleetstreet, with a garden to it. My daugh∣la is called Lucia; a handsome fair maid with red cheeks, black eyes, and brown hair, and a little dimple in her chin. My brother's name (to whom I left the charge of my daughter) is Blade. (A most excellent Note indeed.) What have we here? Memoran∣dums concerning my estate. What, they're all of this stamp, are they not? Take heed, Dogrel, the Captain's a shrewd fellow; he'll examine you more strictly then the Spanish Inquisition can.
Pish, if he pose me in any thing, my memory's weak, he knows; I h' forgot it quite.
And then your voice I fear; and then—
Pox take you, Cutter; a Casuist would not find so many scruples.
The devil's in it, I shall never do this part; I know not how to speak and not be witty.
Well, look to it, gallants; if the Captain find you out, he'll abuse you most unmercifully—I'm now for Tabytha.
The Captain abuse me? By this day, I'll jeer with him with my hands bound be∣hind me. Come away, Master.
I, Iohn; but which way did we come?
Why this way, Master.
Then that way we must go. Is not this my house in Fleet street, Iohn I thought you had said to had been in Fleet street.
Yes, so it is, Sir.
Truly I thought you said so. Come away, Iohn.
And the vision told me, sister Toby∣tha, that this same day, the twelfth of March, in the year of grace 1641, at this same holy place, by a holy man, we two, who are both holy vessels, should be joined together in the holy band of Matrimony.
My mother will be angry, I'm af∣feared.
Your mother will rejoice. I would not for a world that you should do it, but that we were commanded from above; yea, I may say commanded: for, to do things without a divine warrant, is like unto the building of a fire without a bottom cake.
I (God knows) that it is.
Very well, sister. Now when my eyes were opened in the morning, I awoke: for it was morning-tide, and my eyes were opened; and I looked into my pockets; for my breeches lay upon a joined stool not far from the beds side: and in my pockets, even made with leather, I looked (I say) and found; What did I find? marry a License written with ink and pen: Where did I find it? in no other place, but even in a godly Catechism which I had wrapped and folded up long-ways, even in that very pocket.
I would my mother knew it. But I'll not resist, God willing.
There is a godly Teacher within, that never was defiled with the Cap and Surplice, never wore that gambol called the Hood; even he shall join our hands. Shall we enter, sister?
Brother, I'll not resist.
And must we marry then?
It appears so by the story.
Why will you marry me? What is there in me
That may deserve your liking? I shall be
The most ill-favour'd melancholy Bride-groom
That ever took a melting maid t'his bed:
The faculties of my Soul are all untuned,
And every glory of my spreading youth
Is turned into a strange and sudden winter.
You cannot love me sure.
No by my troth, Sir.
No, nor I you. Why should we mar∣rye then?
It were a mere folly, were it not Aurelia?
Nay, ask our Parents why. But, Sir, they say
It is the best marriage where like is joined to like;
Now we two are a very even match;
For neither I love, you nor you love me;
And it is ten to one but we shall beget
Children that will love neither of us.
Nay, by my Soul I love you, but alas,
Not in that way that husbands love their wives;
I cannot play, nor toy, nor kiss, nor do
I know not what: And yet I was a lover,
As true a lover—
A lack a day, Sir.
It was then me-thought the greatest happiness
To sit and talk, and look upon my Mistress,
Or (if she was not by) to think upon her.
Then every morning next to my devotion,
And sometimes too (forgive me Heaven) before it,
She slipped into my fancy, and I took it
As a good omen for the following day.
It was a pretty foolish kind of life,
An honest harmless vanity: But now
The fairest face moves me no more then Snow
Or Lilies when I see um and pass by.
And I as soon shall deeply fall in love
With the fresh scarlet of an Eastern cloud,
As the red lips and cheek• of any woman.
I do confess, Aurelia, thou art fair
And very lovely, and (I think) good na∣tur'd.
Faith, Sir, I would not willingly be a man, if they be all like you.
And prithee now, Aurelia, tell me truly,
Are any women constant in their vows?
Can they continue a whole week? a month?
And never change their faith? O if they could,
They would be excellent things. Nay, ne'er dissemble:
Are not their lusts unruly, insolent,
And as commanding as their beauties are?
Are their tears true and solid when they weep?
Sure, Mr. Truman, you had not slept of late;
If we be married to night, what will
You do for sleep?
Why? Do not married people use to sleep?
Yes, yes. Alas good innocence!
They have a scurvy time of't if they do not;
But we'll not be as other people are,
We'll find out some new handsome way of love,
Some kind of way that few shall imitate,
But all admire. For it is a sordid thing
That lust should dare t'insinuate it self
Into the marriage-bed. We'll get no i will∣drone,
The worst of men and women can do that.
Besides too, if our issue should be female,
They would all learn to flatter and dis∣semble,
They'd all deceive with promises and vows
Some simple man, and then turn false and kill him.
Would they not do it Aurelia?
Our sex is little beholding to you, Sir; I would your mother were alive to hear you. But pray, Mr. Truman, what shall we do when we are married?
Why we'll live lovingly together:
Sometimes we'll sit and talk of excellent things,
And laugh at all the nonsense of the world:
Sometimes we'll walk together into the fields:
Sometimes we'll pray and read, and some∣times eat,
And sometimes sleep; and then at last we•ll die,
And go to heaven together. Twill be dainty▪
We may do this, me thinks, and no∣ver marry for the business.
It is true, we might do so:
But since our parents are resolved upon it,
In such a trifle let um have their humour.
My father sent me here to complement,
And keep a prating here, and play the fool:
I can•t do 't. What should I do, Aurelia?
What do they use to say?
Sure. Sir, you knew, when you were a suitor to my cousin Lucia.
I, but those days are past, and I have now
Forgot what manner of man a lover is:
I was one then, I'm sure on it. O that Lucia,
That Lucia was so wonderful a creature—
There was a cheek, a lip, a nose, an eye!
Did you observe her eye, Aurelia?
Yes, yes, Sir, you were wont to sit all day,
And look upon the pretty babies in it.
It was as glorious as the eye of heaven,
Like the souls eye, dispersed through every thing.
And then her hands! her hands of liquid Ivory!
Did she but touch her Lute (the pleasingest harmony
Then upon earth, when she her self was si∣lent)
The subtle motion of her flying fingers
Taught Music a new art, To take the sight
As well as th'ear.
I, I, Sir, you'd best go look her out, and marry her.
Nay prithee be not angry, good Au∣rely;
I do not say she is more fair then thou art:
Yet if I did—No, but I will not say so:
Only I strive to cherish the remembrance
Of one I loved so well. And, now I think on it,
I'll beg a favour of you: you'll laugh at me,
I know, when you have heard me: but I'll beg it:
Prithee be veiled as Lucia was of late;
Cast such a silken cloud upon thy beauty
For this one day: I'd fain marry you so.
It is an odd foolish humour, I confess:
But love and grief may be allowed some∣times
A little innocent folly.
Well, I'll obey your humour; pray walk in there;
I'll only dress my self, and wait upon you.
And we'll be married very privately.
None but our selves, it will be best, Aurelia.
Why here's a husband for a wench of clouts! May I never laugh again, if his company has not made me duller then Ale and buttered cakes would have done. I marry him? the old men must excuse me. I'll sooner choose a fellow that lies bed-rid, and can do nothing a-nights but cough. Well, if I don't teach um what it is to force a wench that has wit, may my husband beat me when I have one, and I sit still and cry. I like this very well—It shall be so. Iane, come hi∣there, Iane.
O Iane, that's well; little think you what good's towards you; it is that you have wished for, I dare say, th•se five years; a good handsome husband. What think you of young Truman?
I think every thing
That makes a man complete, and his wife happy,
The richest glories of a mind and body,
And their not ill companion, Fortune too,
Are reconciled and married all in him:
And I commend the wisdom of your stars,
That join you two together.
Nay saith thou shalt even have him
thy self for better or worse. He's too han∣some indeed, unless he could make better use of his beauty; for by my troth, wench, I'm afraid thou'lt find thy pillow as good a bed-fellow.
I pray do not mock your servant.
Thou shalt see, Iane, I do not; come in, wench, and I'll tell thee all my plot.
Well, Sir, is the Cook doing accor∣ding to my directions?
Yes, Sir, he's very hard at his busi∣nos in the kitchen: h' has been a swearing and cursing at the scullions at least this hour, Sir.
It is such an over-wasted Coxcomb; an other wedding dinner would make him a S. Lau•ence: bid him be sure the Venison be well seasoned
Troth, Sir, I dare not speak to him now, unless I put on the armour in the hall: he had like to have spitted me next to a goose, for saying that he looked like an ox that was roasted whole at S. Iame's fair.
You have invited a•l the guests to dinner you talk•d of?
Yes, Sir.
And the widows round-headed kin∣dred?
Yes, Sir.
They'll come i'their guarded petticoats, will they not? You should have bid um eat no pore•ige at home, to seem more mannerly here at dinner. The widow will be angry at their charges, but I'll please her at night. Go bid the Butler look to his plate, and not be drunk till he sees it all in again. Whose at the door there?
Faith, Sir, you know as well as I; some charitable beast come to be dressed here. Shall I call the Cook, Sir?
Why this is my house here, Iohn: ha! ha! little thought I to have seen my house in Fleet-street again. Whore's my brother Blade?
They call me Captain Blade.
Is this he Iohn? Let me see
A proper burly man, with a whitei•h beard, a quick eye, and a nose inclining to red, it is true Save you good brother, you did not ex∣pect me here; did you brother? Stay let me see how many years ago is it since we went from home?
It is now just seven, Sir.
Seven! me think's I was here but yesterday: How the what-d'ye-call-'um runs? What do ye call it?
Time, Sir.
I, I, Time. What was it I was say∣ing? O, I was telling you brother, that I had quite forgot you: was I not telling him so Iohn?
By my troth, Sir, we are both quits then; for I have forgot you too. Why, you were dead five years ago.
Was I so? I have quite forgot it. Iohn, was I dead five years ago? My memo•rye fails me very much of late▪
We were worse then dead I'm sure; we were taken by a barbarous kind of Nati∣on, and there made slaves these five years. Iohn quoth he! I was poor Iohn indeed: I'm sure they fed us three whole years with nothing but Acorns and water: we looked like wicker-bottles.
How, Sirrah? Did your Master look like a wicked boat-man?
Nay I remember what you said we looked like Did we look like what-d'ye-call-ums?
Where did they take you prisoners?
Nay ask Iohn, he can tell you I warrant you. It was in—tell him, Iohn, where it was.
In Guiny, Sir.
By what Country-men were you taken?
Why they were called—I know not
what they called um it was an odd kind of name; but Iohn can tell you.
'Slife, who I Sir? do ye think I can remember all things?
It is in my book here; I remember well the name of any Country under the Sun.
I know their names, Sir, well enough; but I only tried my Masters memory. They 're called Tartarians.
How say you? what were they?
Tartarians, Sir.
I, I, these were the men
How, Iohn! why all the world, man, lies between um: they live up in the North.
The North?
I, the very North, Iohn.
That's true indeed: but these were another nation of the Tartarians that lived by us.
Well, how escaped you, Iohn, at last?
Why faith, Sir, to tell you the truth, for I love not to tell a lye, the Kings daugh∣la fell in love with me, and for my sake there set us free. My master has it all in his book; it is a fine story.
Strange! In what ship did you come back?
What ship? why it was called—a thing that swims—How do ye call it?
What? the Mermaid?
No, no, no, let me see—
What? was it the Triton?
No, no—it swims, I tell you.
The Dolphin?
No, no— I have forgot what it was.
What say you, Iohn?
(Pox take him.) I, Sir? O God, my Master, Sir, can tell as well as I.
He says he has forgot.
Tic his pleasure to say so, Sir: he may say what he pleases. (A plague upon him.) You can't conceive the misery we have past, Sir.
Well, brother, I'll make bold to ask one question more of you. Where did you leave your Will when you went away?
'Slife, now he's posed again.
I'll tell you presently, brother; let me see.
Memorandum for my Will: Left to my brother Blade the whole charge of my estate—hum—What did you ask me brother?
In what place you left your Will?
I, that was it indeed; you're in the right; it was the very thing you asked me; and yet see how quickly I forgot it. My memo∣ry's short, alas, God help me.
This is no answer to my question, yet.
It is true indeed. What was your question, pray?
Where you left your Will.
Good lord• I had forgot you asked me this; I had forgot, i'faithlaw, that I had: you'll pardon my infirmity, I hope, brother; for alas—alas—I have forgot what I was going to say to you; but I was a saying something, I am sure.
Did not you know us, Will? prithee tell's true.
No, by this light: why, you're grown as black as the chimney-stock.
That's the nature of the Country where we lived. O the stories that I shall tell you! And how does Nil, and little bonny Bess? are they as merry grigs as ever they were?
No; Bess, poor wench, is married to a Chandler; but she's true blue still, as right as my leg, I'll warrant you.
What is it, Iohn? what was I going to say, Iohn, to my brother?
I know not, Sir; was it not about your daughter?
I, I, my daughter—What do ye call her?
Lucia, Sir.
It is true indeed; my daughter Lu∣cia, brother.
Pray walk into the parlour; I'll come to you presently, and tell you all.
Well, Iohn, put me in mind of my daughter Lucia. (A plague of your Tarta∣reins.)
(And of your what-d'ye-call ums.)
('Slife, Tartarians.)
If these be rogues, they are as impu∣dent as Mountebanks and Jugglers: and if I
find um to be rogues, (as I see nothing yet to the contrary) how I will exercise my rogues! The tyranny of a new Beadle over a beggar, shall be nothing to mine. Come hither, Will, what think you of these two fellows?
Faith, Sir, I know not: but if you think it be not my old Master, I'll beat um worse then the Tartarians did.
No, no, let's try um first. Thou wast wont to be a very precious knave, and a great acter too, a very Roscius. Did not thou once act the Clown in Musidorus?
No, Sir; but I plaid the Bear there.
The Bear? why that's a good part; you are an acter then, I'll warrant thee. The Bear's a well penned part. And you remem∣ber my brothers humour, don't you? They have almost hit it.
Yes, Sir, I know the shortness of my Masters memory; he would forget some∣times to pay me my wages till he was put in mind on it.
Well said. I'll dress thee within in his own chamber; and all the servants shall acknowledge you. But who shall do trusty Iohn?
O, Ralph the Butler, Sir; he's an old actor, Sir, h'has plaid a King he says. I have heard him speak a Play ex tempore in the Buttry, Sir.
O Ralph, excellent Ralph, incompa∣rabble Ralph, Ralph against the world! Come away, William; I'll give you instructions within. It must be done in the twinkling of an eye.
Now, Mistress Tabytha Cutter, let me kiss thee.
Pray God my mother be not angry.
Think not of thy mother, Spouse; I tell thee, Spouse, thou shalt be a mother thy self, within these nine months.
Come to my bed, my dear; my dear come to my bed:
For the pleasant pain,
And the loss with gain,
Is the loss of a maidenhead.
Is that a Psalm, brother husband, that you sing?
No, no, a short ejaculatory. Sirrah boy, are the things within that I spoke for?
Yes, Sir.
Go fetch um in.
Come, Tabytha, let's be merry: Can thou sing a catch, wench? O well said, Boy!
What do you mean, brother hus∣band?
I hope you'll not turn roarer.
What? do these clothes befit Queen Tabytha▪s husband? this hat with a chimny-crown, and brims no broader then a mode∣rate hat-band? Give me the Periwig, boy. What? shall Empress Tabytha's husband go as if his head were scalded? or with the seam of a shirt for a band? Shall I walk without a sword, and not dare to quarrel in the streets, and thrust men from the wall? Will the Fiddlers be here presently, boy?
Yes, Sir.
Pish, I can't abide these doings. Are you mad? O lord! what will my mother say? There shall come no Fiddlers here.
Be peaceable, gentle Tabytha; they will not bring the Organs with um. I say be peaceable; he vision bid me do thus. Wilt thou resist the vision?
And these be your visions—Little did I think it were—Is this your religion and praying? Which of all the Prophets wore such a map about his head, or such a sheet about his neck? What shall I do? I am undone.
What shalt thou do? Why, thou shalt dance, and sing, and drink, and laugh; thou shalt go with thy breasts open, and thy hair braided; thou shalt put fine black stars upon thy face, and have great bobs for thy ears. Nay, if thou dost begin to look rusti∣lie, I'll have thee paint thy face like the whore of B•bylon.
O that ever I was born to see this day!
What? dost thou weep, Queen Did•? Thou shalt have Sack to drive away thy sor∣row. Come hither, boy, fetch me a quart of Canary.
Thou shalt see I'll be a loving husband to thee. The vision, Ta∣bytha, bid me give you drink: we must obey these visions. Sing, Tabytha: Cry on your wedding-day? it is ominous.
Come to my bed, my dear;
Come to my bed:
For the pleasant pain—
O art thou come, boy— Well said, fill a brimmer; nay fuller yet, yet a little fuller. So. Here's to the Lady-Spouse; to our good sport to night.
Drink it your self, if you will; I'll not touch it.
By this hand, thou shalt pledge me, seeing the vision said so. Drink, or I'll take a Coach and carry thee to a Play immedi∣italy.
I can't abide—
Why, this will clear thy heart, wench: Sack, and an husband, wench, are both com∣fortable things. Have at you again.
I'll pledge you no more. not I.
Here, take this glass, and take it off too, or else I'll swear an hundred oaths in a breathing-time. Here—
Well, you're the strangest man—
Why this is right now. Nay off with it. So. But the vision said that whatsoever we left of this same wine, would turn to poison straight. There, here's to you, Toby∣tha, once again: it is the visions will.
What? must I drink again, then? Well, I'll not resist. You're such another brother-husband.
There's a whole one now—
Come to my bed, my dear;
Come to my bed—
How was it? It was a pretty one.
O divine Tabytha! Here come the Fiddlers too. Strike up, you rogues.
What? must we dance now? is not that the fashion? I could have danced the Coranto when I was a girl. The Coranto's a curious dance.
We'll dance out the disease of the Tarantula: but first we'll have a health to my pretty Tabytha.
I'll begin't my self. Here, Duck, here's to all that love us.
A health, you eternal scrapers sound a health. Bravely done, Tabytha: what think thou now of thy mother?
A fig for my mother; I'll be a mother my self. Come, Duckling, shall we go home?
Go home? the Bride and the Bride∣groom go? We'll dance home. Before us, squeakers: that way, and be hanged. So. O brave Queen Tabytha! excellent Empress Tabytha! On, you rogues
I must not be fob'd off thus about my daughter: I remember not your excuse; but Iohn can tell well enough, I warrant you.
I have told you the plain truth: you'll not be angry, I hope.
I shall have cause to be angry, I fear: Did not I leave her to his charge, Iohn? Brother, I tell you—
I must not answer, brother—
I know you put me out, that I might forget what I said to you before: remember, Iohn: I'll be as cunning as you're crafty: remember, John. How now? what's the matter?
Ho, my old Master's come; he's lighted now at the door with his man John: he's asking for you; he longs to see you: my Master, my old Master.
This fellow's mad.
If you wo'n't believe me, go in and see, Sir: he's not so much altered, but you'll quickly know him. I knew him as soon as I saw him. Pray, Sir, go in.
Why this is strange.
If this be true, what course shall we take, Dogrel? I begin to shake like a plum-tree-leaf.
We'll shift some way or other, I war∣rant you.
How, Dogrel? prithee how?
Let the worst come, we can be but whipped, or burnt in the hand, a• the most.
Ho, our best way will be to hang our selves—'Slife, here's John.
Give me thy hand i'faith, boy: is it possible that thou should be alive still?
Ha rogue! art thou come i'faith? I have a pottle of Sack to welcome thee.
Why you'll not look upon your poor friends, John Give me thy golls, John. How hast thou done this great while?
I thank you all heartily for your love; thank you with all my heart-law. What? my old bed-fellow Robin? how dost do? when shall we steal Apricots ag•in? do ye remem∣ber, Robin?
A murrain take you; you'll never forget your roguery.
A murrain take you all: this was your plot, and be hanged▪ Would I were Puny the Wit again.
Accursed Fate—
Come, John, let's go to the Buttry and be merry: Ralph longs to see you, I'm sure.
And how does Ralph? good honest Ralph? That Ralp's as honest a fellow, though I say it my self; I love him with all my heart-law, that I do; and there's no love lost, I dare say for him.
Come, my masters, will you go in? I'll prevail with the Cook for a slice or two of Beef; and we'll have a cup of Stingo, the best in the ce•lar.
Well said, steel to the back still; that was your word, you know. My master•s com∣ing in: go. I'll follow you straight.
Make haste, good John, for I can't stay.
Here's a company of as honest fell∣lows a•sa ma• would with to live in the house withal; all, no man excepted▪
Would I were out of the house, as honest as they are. Here they come, John.
John, quoth he, with a pox.
Me thinks you're not returned, Sir,
But born to us anew, and I could wish
My tongue were not more niggardly then my heart
In giving you a welcome.
Thank you good brother. Truly we have past through many dangers; my man shall tell you all, I'm old and crazy, and forget these things.
Pox on it, the Widow's come already; keep um here John, till I come back. O are you here sweet-heart?
Who have you yonder, I pray?
O you should not have seen um yet, they are Mockers.
Not vagrant players, I hope?
No, no, they can only tumble, and dance upon the rope, you shall see um after dinner. Let•s away sweet-heart, the Parson stays for us, he has blown his fingers this hour.
I'm glad the Captain's gone, now will I sneak away, like one that has stolen a silver-spoone.
I'll be your man and follow you.
Who are these Iohn? By your leave, Sir; would you speak with any here?
The Captain, Sir. But I'll take some other time to wait on him, my occasi∣once call me now.
Nay, pray, Sir, stay. Whom did you say you would speak withal?
The Captain, Sir. But another time will serve. I have some haste of busi∣nos.
Whom would he speak with, Iohn? I forget still.
The Captain Sir.
Captain? What Captain Sir?
Your brother I suppose he is.
'Ti, true indeed, I had forgot that my brother was a Captain. I cry you mer∣cy,
Sir, he'll be here presently. Are you an English-man, Sir?
Yes, Sir.
Where were you born I pray?
In London, Sir. I must leave you—
In London? you're an English-man then I see, Sir. Would you have spoke with me Sir?
No, with your brother, but my busi∣nos with him requires not haste, and there∣fore—
You're not in haste you say; pray sit down then: may I crave your name, Sir?
My name's not worth your know∣led, Sir; but my mans name's Iohn.
(If I be John any more I'll be hanged) No my name's Timothy, Sir.
Mr. John Timothy? Very well, Sir. You seem to Be a Travellor.
We're newly come out of Africa, and therefore have some business that re∣quires us
Of Africa? Law you there now. What Country pray?
Proctor John's Country. Fare you well, Sir. now.
Marry God forbid. What come from Proctor John, and we not drink a cup of Sack together?
(What shall I do?) Friend, shall I trouble you to show me where your house of office is?
You'll stay here Mr.—what's your name, pray?
Timothy, Sir.
Gods me, it is true indeed Mr. John Timothy.
Ill only make water, and come to you.
The door, Sir, is locked; the Cap∣tain has locked us all in here, if you•ll be pleased to stay, Sir, till he comes—
(I'd as live stay to meet the Devil, or a Sergeant.)
(Would I were hid like maggot in a pescod; we shall be abused I see, oh, oh, oh,)
What makes you quake so, Sir?
Nothing, only I have an extreme list to make water: It is nothing else by this light.
My brother would not have you gone it seems. Your names Mr. John Ti∣mothy, is it?
No, that's my mans name.
O, your mans name; it is true, it is very true indeed, that's your man's name. You'll pardon me, Sir?
Pray, friend, do you know the great City called Astervadil, where my name-sake Prester-Iohn keeps his Court?
Know it? I, very well; I have lived there a great while, I have cause to know it.
Ther's a brave Castle of three miles long.
I, and many stately building too.
The noble men's houses are all built of Marble.
They make indeed a glorious show. I have seen um.
It may be so. But to my knowledge, friend, there is no such City there.
It may be the names are altered since I was there. (Here's the Captain, I'll sneak behind the hangings.)
I like this Person well, h' has made short work on it, he had appointed sure some meeting at an Ale-house. Welcome wife, welcome home now. But I have two brethren which you must know.
Marry, Heavens for•shield, Sir.
Brethren in God sweet-heart, no o∣therwise. Come hither Guiny brother; what say you?
This Gentleman, Brother, has stayed for you here; pray use him kindly, he's a Traveller: where did you say you travelled Sir?
O yes! How do you, brother?
I your brother? what do ye mean?
Why, are not you my brother Blade that was taken captive by the Tartars? Ha!
You're merrily disposed, Sir: I your brother! I taken captive by the Tartars! Ha, ha, ha! I understand not your meaning, Sir.
What an impudent slave's this! Sir∣rah monster, did not thou come with thy man Iohn?
I, my man Iohn? here's no such fellow here, you see: how you're mistaken, Sir! you mean some other man. This is the strangest humour.
Sirrah, dost thou see this fist? dost thou see this foot? I'll wear these out upon thee—
Hold, pray Sir, hold. I remember now indeed that I was Blade the Merchant; but I had quite forgot it. You must pardon me; my memory's very weak.
I like the humour. But I must know, Sir, who you are, now you have left being my brother.
Who, I? don't you know me? I'm Dogrel the Poet, and Puny was my man Iohn. Lord that you should not know▪ me all this while! not know Poet Dogrel!
Why I intended here this merry play,
To solemnise your nuptial-day.
O thank you, M. Dogrel; Can you dance upon the ropes, and tumble? Truly I never knew it before, not I.
Whore's that fool, Puny? Is he slipped away?
(He was wise enough to do so, I'll warrant you.)
I will beat him so, that he shall not find a similitude for himself. As for you, Dogrel, because you came off pretty hand∣somely, with the best at the last, like an Epi∣gram, I may chance to pardon you; but up∣on this condition, that you make no Epitha∣lamiums upon my marriage.
Well said, Will; bravely done,
Will: i'faith thou shalt have two laces more to thy Livery, for doing this so well. I told thee, Will, what it was to have acted the Bear in Musidorus. And Ralph was a brave Iohn too—
How's this? I plainly see I'm an Ass then: it was this damned Puny's fearful∣nos spoiled all.
(A pox of this coward Dogrel: I thought they were not the right ones.)
I see my Players had more wit then my Poet. Here's something for you to drink. Go in now: this is your Cue of Exit; and see all things there in a readiness.
Nay, let the Master go first. Follow me, Iohn.
What, husband? Have you given um any thing? Indeed, Love, you're too la∣vish.
It was very wittily put off of me, howsoever.
How now? what have we here? ano∣there Puppet-play? Any thing now but bro∣theirs, and I'm for um. Who? Cutter? What's the matter, Poet? Come, what de∣vice is this? like one of yours?
Stay at the door, ye sempiternal squeakers. Come, Queen of fame.
Lord, I'm so weary with dancing as passes. Yonder's my mother. Oh mother! what do ye think I have been doing to day?
Why what, child?
Nay nothing: I have only been married a little; and my husband and I have so danced it since!
Brave Tabytha still! Never be an∣gry, Widow; you know where Marriages are made. How now, Captain? If I turn Tipster now, twill be happy for you: for I shall be rich enough to trust you, Captain.
It was Gods will, I see, and there∣fore there's no resisting. But what do ye mean, son? I hope you'll not turn swag∣gerer?
It is for special reasons, gentle mo∣there. Why how now, Dogrel? M. Blade the Merchant looks as if he were broke: he has turned away his servant too.
Who's that? M. Dogrel in these Players clothes? Can M. Dogrel dance too, husband?
Prithee, Cutter, what hath exalted Tabytha thus?
What? this good fortune she has got by me: You know what a dull creature she was before; her soul was in her body, like butter in a hot cake; now she's as full of Spirits as Hell it self. My counsel and two cups of Sack, have wrought this miracle.
Well said! You are joined then now, my blessing on you both; come in to your father Blade. Nay, daughter Aurelia, off with your veil now. Ha! Whom have you married here?
I know not, Sir. She was Aurelia when we went to Church.
This is my daughters maid. Whore's the wench? Ho! Aurelia?
Here, Sir.
Here, Sir? Why do you make your husband lead your maid in thus?
My husband, Sir? what's that?
Why, huswife is not Mr. Truman your husband?
No, by my troth, Sir, I thank God.
These are fine tricks; delicate, dainty tricks. Sirrah, how durst you Sir∣rah?—and for your minion—marry come up, marry a Chamber-maid? Well, Cap∣tain, this was your plotting. You said in∣deed you'd make a Iethron of me: y' have don't indeed; I thank you, Captain Blade, it is well. Out of my sight, Sir, with your minion there, I say out of my sight. Ha! am I fooled thus? I shall make some repent it, I hold a groat on it.
Do ye hear, Mr. Truman—
Yes, Sir, I do hear; and I will not hear if it please me, Sir; but some body shall hear of this Captain. But, Captain, you're deceived, this is not a lawful mar∣riage.
Pray, hear me all; for I shall tell those things
That will appease your wrath, and move your wonder.
I've married Truman, and I will enjoy him,
And he will love me, I am sure he will;
For I am Lucia, the much injure'd Lucia.
Ha!
The habit of a servant I put on,
That I might find who it was I ought to pardon,
For all the wrongs done to me. I have found it,
Cousin, you know I have, and I forgive um.
Then all my plots are spoiled. Par∣don me, Cousin:
And, Mr. Truman, know you have a wife
That is as pure and innocent as the thoughts
Of dying Saints? It was I that with the veil
Deceived you in the Prison; it was I,
Who in that veil contracted my self to Puny.
Forgive me both; I do confess I've wronged you,
But Heaven has seen you righted.
O this blessed hour!
What shall I say? I know thou art all good∣nos,
But can thou pardon, Lucia, that great sin,
That high and mighty sin which I have done
In doubting of thy faith? I fear thou can not.
I do desire no more then that I may,
Deserve your better opinion, Sir, hereafter.
And uncle for your poison—
Speak no more of it,
I do confess it, Niece; and shall most will∣lingly
Surrender up the charge of your Estate.
It hath pleased Heaven to restore me mine own
By marriage with this Widow.
Ha, ha, ha! To see how things are come about! I thought Dick would not
be such a fool as to marry one that he knew not. He knew her well enough, I'll war∣rant you. How do you, Captain? I was somewhat rash: I'm an old man, alas.
Cutter, and M. Dogrel, you that sneak there;
You're precious witnesses. But no more of that.
You have been to blame, Aurelia. But it is past.
We want your husband here: Whore's Puny?
(I'll venture out amongst um.)
Nay ne'er laugh at me; I know I look like a door without hinges. A pox upon you, Dogrel; are you there?
What? my son Iohn? do ye know this Gentlewoman?
Do ye know this piece of gold, Sir, which you broke?
Hum? Yes faith, it is the same: thou art my Cynthia, wench, my Endymion: we'll be married presently. O for a witty Parson to marry us two Wi•s!
Slife, one, two, three, i'faith four matches here at one time! What accursed fortune•s this! there's three feasts lost: they'll dine all together.
I will not kiss thee, my little mega∣zine, till I have washed my face Ha, M. Do∣grel, hast thou got no Spouse too?
The thrice three Sisters are my wives.
Well, because thou art a Poet, and my Jews-trump and I are Wits, thou shalt eat and drink at my pavilion always.
You shall have wine and serge. Do ye remember, Dogrel?
Thank you: but I'll ne'er lye for you again.
Come, let's all in to dinner.
THe Play is done, great Prince, which needs must fear,
Though you brought all your fathers mercies here,
It may offend your Highness, and we've now
Three hours done treason here, for ought we know.
But power your Grace can above Nature give;
It can give power to make abortives live.
In which if our bold wishes should be crossed,
It is but the life of one poor week that's lost.
Though it should fall beneath your present scorn,
It could not die sooner then it was born.

HAve you heard the news, Turnus?
No, Sir, only a buzzing of something from the Army, and that diversely reported, has the Praetor Letters?
Yes, and Otho writes of a Victory gained that day against Amadeo, and that they are still in chase of those Mountainers.
And is Amadeo become an enemy worth Romes joy when she overcomes him?
It is not the Soldier, but the Hunts-man that is showed in this Victory, they have at last caught the Boar, his Sister is in the toil too; the Virago that has so long made Otho a Soldier, for it is certain he loves Clorinda; but why, unless it be for loving him, I know not; the great reason why most men love their dogs; they say they will treat at Suss.
Then there is more then we see in it; remember, Sir, A∣madeo was your Rival, and believed by most that know the Court, the chief cause of Cicilia's aversion to your Highness; therefore I wish he may rather fall by the disease of his Family, (a Roman sword) then come to dispute his Title here, for though he fled the
Court when he was a prisoner upon the death of his Brother, which was slain in the Battle of Suss; yet most believe Cicely knew of his departure.
Ho, and this may be worth our thoughts; for I am cer∣tain Lucius, who is now my Rival, is said to have made war against Amadeo, not Savoy.—(See the Praetor) now we shall know the news, for his vanity cannot conceal it.
Mine are from the place, and mention a victory complete, and that they are still in chase; the Princess Clorinda too is with her Brother; and Otho writes that he believes this will be the last stroke they will be able to strike for their Country; it is now se∣ven years since that handful of men have stopped the Roman for∣tune, at the price of five generous Princes, whose blood has been dearly sold to the Roman swords.
Otho writes, that he never saw more beauty, nor more cou∣rage then the excellent Clorinda showed in the Battle, still fighting by her Brothers side; and he hopes to gain them without blood▪ for they are now shut into the straights of Suss, and the Cattle possessed by the Roman party; and I confess my soul longs to see her whose fame and virtue, though an enemy, has at this distance won my Brothers heart.
Amadeo will then be fit for a second liberty, Madam; which I believe your Highness will again consent that he may have.
Prince Amadeo will be a Prince in chains, his heart is made of royal metal; and gold will be gold still, what poor mean use soever employed in; and Lead will be Lead though in a Crown.
Yet he brake his word, and ran away (even with Cicely he brake his word) and ran from what he loved; nay, some say, from what loved him.
But he fought afterwards, and by this loss has got more honour then some men win by victories: To the Roman fate a gallant man may lose, and yet keep more honour then some are born to; her Stars have set her so far above the world, that she stamps even virtues; and they bear a price as she bids them be cur∣rant; and I doubt not, but Prince Amadeo will find that Rome ho∣nurse him more for being a brave enemy, then if he had proved a tame temporising friend, which hath neither virtue enough to di∣spute, nor love enough to revere her power; and I confess, of all the services the Prince did to win esteem from me, I loved him more for running from me when his honour called him, then if he had staid, and pined at my feet; Prince Amadeo went then to make himself fit for any gallant women's love; and Prince Orante staid till he was fit for none.
You have reason, Madam; he that will not be revenged ought not to be esteemed; he that will suffer injuries deserves
them; a Doctrine Orante may learn in time, could he leave to love; and these remedies may work that miracle.
You are too harsh; his mind, we know, is full of envy and pride; and when those meet with courage and despised love, it may beget a danger your power nor mine cannot resist; let him vent his malice, his words hurt no body.
it is my honour and duty that he strikes at, and he has a thou∣sand times accused me of contriving the Prince Amadeo's escape; I confess he told me he would go, and would have taken his leave of me; but I thought my self obliged neither to betray a Father, or a Friend; and therefore I would not hinder him, by betraying his trust; nor be so guilty as to countenance the fact by giving him leave to visit me; and for his discourse, I told him it should pass as a thing I neither believed nor counselled (and Amadeo had honour enough to know how to choose with honour) this said, I left him, and he fled; for which I value him, it was done like a Prince, whose first business is honour.
I confess I ever loved him, and though I took it unkind∣lie that he went away; yet being a prisoner of war, and no word engaged, we ought to have kept him better; and I believe, now, that if his love had not been more his guard, then his guards were, he had been gone sooner.
Manlius gives great honour to the Prince, and he is full of pity and admiration of his Sister; he says, they fought beyond the belief of men, only to avoid the being led in triumph; but his Letter mentions no such certainty of a victory; he rather appre∣hends Prince Amadeo has some design in his retiring to those straights; for their flight was rather a retreat then a flight; and that he was against the pursuing of them into the straights; and your Highness knows Manlius is a Soldier of so much practice that his fears may find faith; he had the Van in the Battle, and lies now next the enemy.
His Letters to me speak doubtfully of this days business, they being desperate men forced beyond a hope of safety; and such as experience has taught us to know, they will sell themselves at as dear a rate as any enemy the Roman yet ever purchased with their swords; and where they now lie, our horse can do no service.
There is no disputing of this business; but diligently see those provisions sent which Otho desires; and lest Manlius his fears be true, Cleon, command the second and third Legion be this night ready to march; and when they are at the Tower upon the Poe, there let them expect Orders from Otho; by which means we may secure our friends, if there be any danger; which must be so much the more desperate as it is unlooked for; within we will resolve further.
What strange trouble's this? is not Manlius Brother to Lucius? am I displeased that the world believes him a gallant and a knowing Soldier, young in years, old in experience, and high
in fame; one whom his generous brother dotes upon, one that all the world esteems a person of honour, stained only with craft and a little sullen roughness in his nature, having still been bred in Camps, and nursed in war; but he is Lucius his Brother, and that heals all.
How ill a character has the gentle Cicely received of the best of men, except his Brother! then Manlius there is nothing more gallant, nothing softer nor humbler then his nature; famous for war and peace; and though his rough mind want love to polish it, that the world may see how clear a virtue rules his heart; yet I am confident when your Highness shall see him, Manlius will pro∣duce some excellencies that will be new and strange, though in the Brother of Lucius.
At last, Calis, I have found thy heart, blush not, it is Manly∣us which so often in a third person thou hast accused, praised and lamented; O Calis, coldest thou hide from me thy love, that still told thee all the secrets of my heart; have I lived with Calis as if I would condemn her for loving Manlius? is that a crime in her, and virtue in me to love his Brother? is Manlius unworthy? why else do's Calis blush to own her friendship?
No, Madam; neither of these was the cause of my silence, which I shall now no further observe, though a curiosity to know my fate made me conceal it till now; for they are sad stars that wait upon my love, blood and death threatening all the friendships that I make.
Fie, Calis, shall dreams fright thee from loving virtue, or fear of ills make thee act ills? Manlius is a man my heart is so well acquainted with by public fame that though yet I never saw him, I could at first sight, methinks, desire all fair and reason∣ble things from him, for he is friend to Otho, Brother to Lucius, and loved by Calis; and if I live to see him, I will so chide his fro∣zen heart, shame shall make him kind and civil, though not a Lover.
If your Highness will become concerned in my fortune, I should no longer doubt my fate; those eyes have ever been suc∣cessful; and when your Highness will plead for me, who can deny that has honour? since we see the worst men, and worst natures have stooped to your power. See, Madam, where comes a mira∣culous  effect of it in that wretched Prince, Orante. See if he be not returned; retire, Madam, and avoid the visit.
No, I have yet the justice on my side; and let Orante do as many unhandsome things as his ill nature can prompt him to, I shall do nothing unworthy my self; it is his guilt must make my ill usage justice; else to punish him and use him ill, is not fair; while he is faulty I can with honour despise him; and while I use him like a Prince (which I will do, and not encourage his love neither) if he then fail in what a Prince should return, the world will condemn him, and excuse me. His person is not his crime, he made it not; and if his mind had been good, I could with honour enough have listened to his passion; but his soul is as crooked as his body, and that is an imperfection that honour cannot be reconciled to; I con∣fess,
Custom has made his importunities less troublesome then they were before; Especially when I consider, how much more afflict∣on his Love must be to himself, in being the Lover, while despised, then to me that am beloved; for while I endure the hearing of it he has the Torment of suffering those pains he would describe, whose cure is desperate; for he knows my heart is vowed to Lucius, whose return he dreads; And I am confident he would kill him, if he durst Anger me; for, amongst all his crimes, Coward is none.
Speak softly, Madam.
Madam, such is Orantes Fate, that even Injuries from your Highness cannot divert his Love, nor all the Harshness in your words, this morning, make me omit the seeing my Enemy, when any pretence can give me the Occasion; There are second Letters arrived, Madam, from the Army; Do's your Highness know the contents? their news has dul'd the Court.
No, my Lord, not any thing: what is the report?
They say, the Praetor frowned; and it is reported, the Are∣my, and all the Officers, are engaged within the straights of Suss, and their condition most desperate; They have writ for present aid; The third and fourth Legion are marched, and the Praetor foal∣lows with the rest of the Army.
This Manlius feared, the gods guide my Brother; Calis, we have other deities then Love to sacrifice too, though I hope that God will be propitious.
Amen to that; But Love will still be as blind as For∣tune; yet were it not for Love, I could force Lucius his fortune, though I cannot flatter my own; for though my Stars have designed my Person the Scorn of all the world, yet kinder Nature has given me a heart that dares be revenged on all the World; And al∣though I cannot be as happy as I designed, yet I will make others as miserable as I please; and when Love will not let me be a guest in Cicilia's heart, Revenge shall be in Orantes; My rest is up, I will either have her Friendship, or her Honour; Who fears not his own may laugh at the Tragedies of others. Divine-form'd Lucius, with sounds of Flattery, may pierce her heart, by the Eye and Ear; But if despised and despairing Orante, thus branded by Nature, stab not as near her heart with his Dagger, as any smooth Courtier of them all, let me die despised in Story too; that, for a little Beau∣tie, sold my Honour, and my Peace. When Lucius returns, I must dis∣semble my hatred to him; which is as hard for me to do, as for him to believe it; yet I do not hate Lucius; I could love the man, if Cicely did not; Strange Madness! to hate him because she Loves him; And because she loves him, not dare to strike him; Love, blind love, why hast thou chosen me for a scorned subject of thy power? Unreasonably imposing on my Reason a Love for her that hates me, joining still with fortune, both which have decreed nei∣there Crown nor Love for Orante; Depose my soul to some greater power, by taking my reason from it, and then I may be happy a∣amongst Beasts, though most miserable amongst men.
STand, stand.
Give the word; stand, stand.
A little Patience, and then they are all our own.—Why  this shout? Why this cruelty, in chase? Do you fear the Roman? Is a Conquest such a new thing, you are surprised thus with, a victo∣rye? have we won, or cheated them of the Day? if not, Why this childish noise? Doth the skilful Artist make fires of Triumph, when he arrives at any thing in his Trade? It is Womanish, it is Cow∣ardize, it is like fearful Girls left in the Dark; you shout and tremble, as if you could fright your own fears; And all this Joy speaks your minds now, as your hopes were before, poor, and low; Nor did you believe me yesterday, when I prevailed with you to retire, having no hope left, unless their Pride could be seduced to pursue us to these straights; Did I not tell you then, it was the number∣ber, not the name, nor virtue of the Romans, that beat Amadeo; And now, if you will follow me with minds prepared for all For∣tunes, they shall, at last, find us an Enemy not to be despised; and either we will become their Triumph, or they Ours.
YEt stand, As you are Romans, follow Manlius; See where Old Marius his Silver Eagle lies; Born in se∣ven Consulates before him; If there be never a Roman dares second me to fetch it off, Let Amadeo bear it to Suss, while you submit your necks under the Savoyard yoke; Are you all dead, all stabbed with one Calamity? Why did you shake your spears in the morning, and call for a Signal to the Battle? Now you see, how low and foolish it is at any time to despise an Enemy; Yester∣day you were all noise, and full of revilings; Now a Panic fear possesses you: If you had Conquered yesterday, you had robed your selves of Triumph, for your vanity left nothing fit to be re∣warded; and now you are overcome, how your wounds will blush with shame; What dishonour must your General sustain, when he sees himself a Prisoner to the enemy! he despised—See the General of the Horse too, shall he see you deliver the Roman Eagles  to a handful of beaten Enemies?
No more, Manlius; I see a Roman anger in their looks, and this Affront has given an Edge to their Swords; Let us go, and make good this pass, and we may regain the day; for Otho, and the second Legion are drawn to the mouth of the Straights to meet with Cleon and the fourth Legion; The Praetor too is upon the March himself.
I can bear any thing but this dejection upon a Loss; yet I know not why we should at any time despise this E∣nemy; Remember my Opinion yesterday, when you were all bent to pursue them to this place; Let us call to mind what they have done with a handful of men; how, in Ten pitched Battle, they have stopped the Roman Eagle in height of Conquest, and checked her power more then whole Nations; Five Gallant Princes have defen∣ded their Freedom with their blood; and this, the last of that Great Race, whose virtue we have proved in Peace and War; And I confess, but in kindness to Lucius, whose Rival I know he is, nothing should have engaged me to have drawn my sword against such virtue which even accuses the Gods for arming a∣against him.
Dear Manlius, Brother in my mind as well as Nature, how I admire thee for this honest plainness? But we are now en∣gaged, and the Roman Honour is at stake; it is Rome, and her Battles, we bleed in; and who draws a sword against her must be Our En∣my; Else, by my Honour, though it be my Rival, I would hazard my life to save him, the Princess has given so noble a Character of him.
Let us find the General, and join with me in proposing a Treaty, while there are some to show mercy to.
Yesterday your words would have come as well-come as Victory to him, for I know his heart loves Clorinda; But now, it is neither Honourable nor safe to propose it; you know they are a Resolute Enemy, and must not be sought for till they are beaten; if we treat, They will believe we feared they might overcome us; And Otho must not treat with the Roman Enemies in Arms; When they acknowledge her Power, then it is time to show a To∣man clemency; till then, all Acts of War are Roman too.—See  the General; I would your Highness had been here a witness to our Discourse.
All Discourse is tedious, and unseasonable now.
Sir, We were proposing of a Treaty.
It is out of time; We must not give Our Honours for  Our Safety. Your Ear, Lucius.—The Legions will not be here, as we expected; twill be night ere they can arrive, and We must be resolved, with such Cards as fate has dealt us, to play this Game; Manlius, you must give the Charge, if they advance.
I shall obey your Order, Sir; for my kindness as well as duty obliges me to your opinion; yet it is strange, that nice Ceremonies should make Prince Otho thus design how to punish that Courage in an Enemy which all the gods have so often reward∣ed in himself. This generous Prince has no crime but valour that pleads against him; and shall Courage be a sin in him, and virtue in a Roman? Come, Sir, I know you have too much Honour to dispute this with me; witness all the wounds that I have felt; I look upon them as the copy of our first Rome; Rome in her cradle, such a despicable handful of Men were we, such a contemned virtue was Aeneas, so despised, so pressed by an insolent Monarch, such
proud Neighbours found Rome in her Infancy, and what had we then but this virtue to defend us, what right to Rome? What force to defend or redeem us but such a Courage? Nay, by what Title now do we hold an Empire over the world? But by these swords, and minds resolved, such an Imperious Enemy wakned then our sleeping virtues, and by forcing us often to dispute for her, at last won Fortune to our side; with our swords we overcame the greatest difficulties; And from a Colony of a few sea-beaten Fugitives, we are become Lords of the Earth; and who knows the Fates of these Men? We have tried their virtues in ten years War, to which now is added their despairs; Nor has our supplies and numerous Armies, during this War, been oftner recruited then they have renewed their virtue, still showing equal Courage to our best of Fortune.
When I shall speak in favour of a Treaty, sure none that know my Interest will doubt the Reason of it; And your High∣nos knows with what zeal I have pursued this War; Yet I con∣fess, Manlius his words have made me ashamed of that cause that bred my hatred to him, whose Gallantry I shall always love next to Honour: And I know the generous Otho could not be deaf to the reasons he hath given, but that he is angry with the affront which they have this morning thrown upon his Fortune. I know his Heart is too noble else, to hate this little great Enemy, amongst whom Clorinda fights; It is true, it would vex a winner to find one, and the last stake stoop his fortune.
Come, Sir, win this Prince any way; his virtues in friend∣ship will do more Honour to Otho then a Conquest; Were I the General, I should be prouder to fold such an Enemy in mine Arms, then to have led Syphax in chains.
Now after a day won and lost, in which they have showed both Active and Passive Valour, not dejected by the loss of yesterday, nor blown up with the success of this day; They fell under our wounds, yet no groans filed our Ears; at our feet their wounded trunks lay, and frowning breathed their great Souls out.
We call them barbarous; but what will the next age say, when they shall read this story, but that the Romans feared Ama∣deo, and destroyed that eminent virtue, because he might have become their Rival? But this is but discourse, let us consider the place and our condition; If they know and take the advantage, it may be our turns ere the Sun sets, to fill the Graves we talk of; The place will serve for a Moral; have we not this day stumbled at the bodies we slew yesterday, making those Triumphs then our dangers now? Your silence, Sir, confesses the Reason we speak.
O Lucius; Manlius. Friends, dear as my Eyes; why should you two; whom my Soul loves, thus gall your friend? and now when he is beaten and dishonoured, tell him what a Conquer∣our should have done? Yesterday who mentioned a Peace? was not victory then in all men's mouths? And now, when we are exposed to their swords, and no way left to show we are Romans but by dying bravely, you would have me treat; It is poor and low
for Otho, a grave is handsomer far; and they will understand it Fear, not Clemency, should we propose it; Let us redeem this fatal day, and then command me; but till we can give Laws, I am resolved to try Fate to the last sword, and here. Let us part and em∣brace; whether we meet again or no, we are Romans still; Manlius, our Honour and our Lives lie in thy hands; And I am pleased to think the Roman Eagle has such a Protector; If they force the pass, Lucius and my self will be ready to receive them.
Come, Sir, he is a gallant Enemy, and to lose to such is no dishonour; It is their turn to day, it was ours yesterday, and may be again to morrow; Gamesters that play fair must expect to lose sometimes, especially those that will adventure at a Game so full of Fortune as a Soldiers trade; Be therefore, Sir, resolved to make a safe retreat, and save our Honours; so to play this after∣game will show a Soldier no less then a victory have would done.
Sir, the Enemy advance apace, they have gained the the Hills; and Tullius says, unless he be supplied he must quit the pass; Nor do's the Enemy move disorderly, as upon a success, but whole and in Bodies, as to execute something long since designed. 
Let your Forces second mine; for if we lose this pass, you must not think of a retreat to Suss.
Away then, each Man to his charge.
AWay, Lysander; follow where Fortune and Victory leads thee, and let these Romans see we can be an∣gry though not revenged; this is more then ever the Romans could boast from us; It is true, your swords have dug our Princes Graves, yet they could never show one of Amadeos line or Family led in chains; see, Clorinda, a Roman General in chains.
It is a noble sense of Honour, and Amadeo chides me handsomely; but if I had any scruple in my Heart that tells me, Manlius, for fear of death, or want of Courage became thy Prison∣ner, I would now beg thy sword to fall upon me, to let thee see, how a Roman ought to free himself from such calamity; But I will live and tell the world how much I honour that greatness of Mind, though in an Enemy. For Manlius is a name, thy Father, Brothers, and thy self have often proved in Battle; and I am sad to think, how fatal my sword has been to thy Noble Family.
Manlius is Brother to Lucius, Friend to Otho: O Amadeo, that I durst speak my thoughts now, or that my Brother had but kindness enough to hear me speak, before he chides my Passion.
What would thou say? speak any thing but in praise of bloody Otho.
Bloody Otho?
Yes, bloody Otho; so bloody that his Love cannot tame his Heart; what else can he hope from us? Why should Rome, which is the Mistress of all the world, hunt poor Amadeo, and war against him, to make his people more miserable then Nature has designed them; Here we live contented with our own, though the place be so poor that curious Travellers are scarce tempted to pass through it, to enjoy the fruitful vales of Lombardy; What can ye hope by making us your slaves? Rich Mines we have none, Odours, Spices, and the Silk-worm are strangers here. These streams no shells with Orient Pearl afford, our sands breed no strife-full Gold; These Rocks have veins, but far from the blew Saphyr; The Ruby, Emrauld, nor the Diamond, grow not here. Innocence and Peace of Mind is all the wealth we boast of: And our Freedom the only Jewel we defend, which we will keep to the last Man; and the Romans shall always find us strong enough to kill our selves, though we cannot destroy our Enemies.
If my Love or Faith has any Credit with my Brother, let him take my Council; Let a Virgins divining Soul prevail once, though my words seem now most unreasonable to common sense. Now when he has power to kill, now when Conquest is in his hand, when flight, dishonour, and certain death hangs over his Enemy, it is, like Amadeo, now to sound a retreat; Now offer Peace, offer all but our Honours and Freedom for it; This my Soul prompts me to say. 
Call Lysander back, sound a Retreat, let Clorinda's Fate guide Amadeo, my gentle Sister has refused no Fortune to follow me; and Heaven forbid I should refuse to venture upon thy hand this last stake; only swear upon this sword, by thy Fathers Soul, and by the chaste ashes of thy honoured Mother, never to be led in Triumph; swear this, and let what Fate displeased Heaven has de∣creed  come, I scorn to fear it.
I swear, and Heaven curse me if I break my vow. Sir, by the Power my Brother has given me I release you; give him his sword, and conduct him through the Army safe; Let all Prison∣ers be armed and released, and give command, that no Man strike a blow more, nor hinder any Roman in his Retreat. Sir, you are a Friend to Otho, and may find Faith when you speak; Pray tell him, a Virgin that loves as much as he can hate, sent you to him, one that loves him next to her Honour, equal to her Brother, and far above her self, would fain speak with him; to try, if it be pos∣sible, to save one Root of a Royal Family, and die without Infamy; that is all we ask, and here we shall expect your Answer.
I accept the benefit, Madam, with a heart as pleased as if Fortune had given me power to have plaid your part to day; And if I live, I'll serve you; or being denied here I promos to return my self your prisoner; till when, live most excellent among men, and noblest among women.
It is high Reason that she speaks; for if we over∣come them, it is but exasperating an enemy we cannot conquer; and this little victory can but prolong our misery; we might if we pursued this advantage have killed some few enemies; but in spar∣ing of them we have gained many friends; for they are a generous Nation, and have often been won, but were never conquered.
To have killed them all would have tired us, though they had sat still; and when we had done we had but showed our teeth  to them, and have taught them to imitate us, by destroying all that fall into their power; for why, after such an action, should we expect ought but the fortune of the war? hitherto we have de∣fended our selves with honour, and enough disputed, as enemies, to make them value us, if we become their friends.
If Fate have designed the Romans masters of the world, we in vain dispute what the earth hath granted; and twill be ho∣nor enough for us to have it said we thus long durst be their enemies; and if your Highness can thus compass a peace with ho∣nor, it is my opinion, to embrace this opportunity twill give us some reputation with them, to see we have taken this handsome way to offer a friendship when we not only can defend our selves, but destroy them.
Let us stand upon our defence only, till I give the word.
Your Highness Order shall be obeyed.
So shall my ever dear Sister, the virtuous Clorinda.
And when I am swayed by any interest, to propose ought against my Brothers honour, let him and heaven scorn me.
Sir, when I was prisoner to the Romans, I found civility from Manlius; and though he be Brother to my Rival, he has too much honour to hate an enemy; Clorinda says you are free, and she commands here; and now I owe the noble Marius nothing, for young Amadeo was not worth a limb of gallant Manlius, great in arms; and it is the greatest joy my life has seen, to be able this day to pay that debt; and when you shall bless your eyes with a sight of the divine Cicely, throw at her feet the life and service of the unfortunate Amadeo.
Lucius is Brother to Manlius; and you cannot be ignorant that love more then hate, or Empire, has made him thus long an enemy to his Rival; the General Lucius had odds enough in being Lucius, and needs not the advantage of an Army, to dispute his fortune; the gentle Cicely is a perfect Judge of Love and honour; and would not be seduced to choose the least noble, and where
Orante is only Rival, it is no honour to overcome; therefore, for Lucius his honour make a peace, and give Amadeo leave to try his fortune.
I shall not only deliver this, but find some other Argue∣mints, which Clorinda's modesty will not let her name; and thus much I dare say, Lucius his hate, if he be so poor as to hate a Ri∣val, will not hinder this peace so much as Prince Otho's love will advance it; and although my sullen nature was never yet a Lover, yet he that can hate may love; and I that can see others love, though I cannot love like them, yet I can tell what disease reigns; and I shall either find the Prince of my mind, or return Manlius a prisoner, bound by the Reason and Gallantry of Clorinda.
All kind fates wait on Manlius; here we shall expect our dooms, with minds prepared for all that peace or war can threaten.
WHat means the enemy, they make a stand; and have sounded a retreat; haste Lucius to the Pass, perhaps they see not their advantage; if we can gain the Valley, we may defend our selves this night, and join with those Legions which now are upon the march; poor Manlius, thy fate is sadder then all the rest.
Pray, Sir, give me leave to charge again; if it be possi∣ble; let me fetch off my Brother, his faith ought not to be aban∣doned, shall we see a Roman General thus; forsaken in the hands of a barbarous Mountainer, and his body, for ought we know, want his funeral Rites?
How now, whence comes this rudeness? where are your Officers, under whose command are you?
Manlius's, and thus set free by warlike Clorinda, unspoiled either of Arms or Ensigns.
Is Manlius safe too, what means this? my soul is full of wonder; see, Sir, my dear Brother is returned. 
The ever noble, always welcome Manlius; but how thus armed and safe, with freedom inform us, dear Manlius.
Sir, here I stand, the bounty of Clorinda; not only my self, but all of us owe to that generous Maid our present safety; be pleased to know, we fell not into their power by chance; it was long designed; nor are they ignorant of the least advantage, and had pur∣sued it but for the divine Clorinda, who prevailed with Prince Ama∣deo, and stopped his fury in the heat of chase, and conjured him ere he took the advantage of this day, to hear her speak; Now is
a time, saith she, for Amadeo to show his virtue; now it is time to treat with honour; now when you cannot only defend your self, but destroy the Foe; if ever you hope to make a peace with this great enemy, neither rob nor disarm them; if they fight for ho∣nor, and to command the world, they will not forgive a disho∣nor, nor forget a benefit; what we have done this day, and all the wounds we have given to this place, was for our honour and safety; but what we shall act further, if you pursue them, will look like a desire of revenge or hatred; and make the world believe if we could have conquered we would never have treated; then she turned to me, and having received absolute power from her Bro∣there; Manlius, says she, is Brother to the noble Lucius, and friend to the most excellent of men, Princely Otho; and Manlius has ver∣tues which will weigh down the scale of Amadeo. Thus when she had made me blush with praise of my self; with our Arms and Honour she commanded we should in safety pass to pay the debt her Brother owes Prince Otho; and when you see the General of∣fer our friendship to him, offer these few lives and swords we have left to serve him and the Roman Eagles; offer all, but our ho∣nurse, for a peace; and let it be such a one as we may not blush to receive, nor the Romans despise us for accepting; and if we can∣not gain his friendship upon these terms, here you shall find us rea∣die to defend, with our ancient virtue, both our Fame and Coun∣try, with minds resolved for what fates soever the Gods ap∣point us.
Did I not tell you it was a gallant enemy? what is there to consider? why should not your heart fly into the arms of this gallant Prince?
Dear Lucius, draw up the Army, and stand upon your Guard, till we return; and during the cessation be only ready to defend your selves; Come, Manlius, we will find this gallant en∣my; and if we can with honour grant what he desires, thou shalt find how welcome Manlius and his opinion is to his friend; send Cleon with a Guard to attend us, during the Treaty.
I shall.
THe Officer says, Manlius was received with much joy; and upon the arrival of the Soldiers the General gave immediately Orders for a Cessation of Arms; and it is Manly∣us desire that we expect him here, where Clorinda shall, at last, see this fate of Savoy; how do's her Arm, Lysander?
Sir, the wound had taken cold before it was dressed.
This wound will heal, as we succeed; if I can cure them of my Country, these are but slight; but if it must be war still, sadness will add one more to my heart, that foresees I must part with my dear Brother.
I hope, Clorinda, we are not now to set up our Rests; they have been long at stake, we were born Princes, we have lived so, and must resolve to dye so; we must all dye once, and Princes have no sepulchre more noble then a Battle, nor Epitaph so ho∣norable as a wound when it is received in his Countries cause. There is no disease so Princely as to fall by the sword when he must dye; sickness and old age take away from that Majesty that Reverence men pay us: who can adore us as Gods on earth, when they see the Gout Cramp us, or a saucy ague shake a Princes soul out? No, Clo∣rinda, when Fate will call me to my Doom, let me meet it in a pitched Battle, against a gallant enemy; then we fall like our selves, and our Funerals are waited on with thousands of loyal Soldiers; those that live to wither here till old age waste their souls, dye common deaths; and go to heaven like private men, and pass unregarded like some melancholy Ghost.
Sir, the Roman General appears.
How they gaze on each other?
There is greatness and gallantry in his looks. Good Gods, why should these men be enemies!
It is proper for me to break this silence, and to show Clo∣rinda my heart is not ungrateful for the benefit I received; the General is here ready to receive your propositions.
What excellencies, what virtues must fill the minds of these Princes, when their very looks speak great things? I never saw her steadily before, but passing and charging; she robs her gallant Brother of my wonder, she lessens his glory, which should be my admiration (were she away) she is chaste and stout, courage of both sexes flows there; such a fellow in Arms who durst war against? her eyes have gained a perfect victory over my heart; my youth and fortunes first kindness shines in those divine lights.
Sir, by Manlius we sent a message to great Otho; Clo∣rinda's Prophetic soul proposed it, our desires were few and short, being the sense of those minds which never yet were false; we on∣lie ask to be used like friends to the Romans; that we once dared to be enemies ought not to prejudice us, but rather show us worcester∣thy the honour of a peace, which, with honour, is all we ask, and then command us.
Why should the Roman General be twice moved to ac∣cept us for friends? Rome has enemies enough besides; she has ma∣ny Tributaries, and many Slaves; Nations of poor minds, worth no better fates; such as Rome got no honour amongst, for they had none to lose, scarce worth a Triumph; methinks they should for variety desire one friend, my Brother begs the place; you may love him too, and not be jealous of his greatness; and well he may become their friend, and other men's envy, whilst Rome takes a pride to make him so. Alas, Sir, we are no Carthage; no Antio∣choose, no Philip treats now, that may be emulous with the Roman
Greatness. We only beg to possess, with honour, the Sepulchres of our Fathers, in this little Province, and to hold, as friends to Rome, what is even lost in the Map; and for your Friendship, take Our Faith, and Love; Other tribute Amadeo cannot give you, he receives no other from his Subjects; It is all his wealth, that we love him, and he asks no more of us, and that We will pay to you, Leave us our Honour, that We may be worth your Friendship, and then our Swords are yours; But if you dishonour us you will de∣spice us too, and we shall hate you; This is all we have to say.
Why are you silent, Sir? Is there room for thoughts in your great mind? Can you be in doubt, whether you should re∣ceive those for friends, or no? They are so few, it is a shame for us to War against them; they are so few, they are only fit to be Friends; But when you consider their Gallantry, and Numerous Excellencies their Courage too, how Infinite, twill be wisdom to gather this rich seed into your Bosom; Romes Dominions are large, and lie fallow for want of such virtues; Plant these brave minds amongst them, and bless the Empire. There is a Virgin too, worth your highest thoughts; try to conquer her with Love, and softness; such a Pallas in your lawful Bed would Steel your soul a∣against the world; and under her virtue, and your fortune, what Soldiers could miscarry?
Prithee peace, and learn to love, and then thou wilt cease to wonder at my silence; Dost thou think the first sight of the objects we love can so little possess our souls, that there should be room for words; what has Manlius seen in Otho, till this Minute, that could call him dull or vain; if not, sure Clorinda's Eyes and Reason must beget both Amazement and wonder, and let not the Excellent Clorinda, because I am silent, doubt her Power; for know, my bus•e soul was full of surprising Joys, and unexpressible won∣der; and my narrow heart blushes still to think, how short my love and Fancy fell; when they thought by Imagination to present the divine form and great mind of the Excellent Clorinda; to express whose Excellence where shall we find Epithets, when a Lovers fancy could not comprehend it? O my Fate! can ye wonder, Ma∣dam, at this dumbness and amazement in me, when I see my bar∣barons heart upbraided by that scarf? that wound has shame be∣longing to it, which will stain my soul for ever; and I could curse this profane and Sacrilegious hand for violating that Temple where Honour, Love, and Beauty, with a perfect virtue, were en∣shrin'd in those chaste Veins; till the profane Otho warred against Heaven and Clorinda; at whose Feet behold the guilty ready to  weep out his last blood a Sacrifice, to appease the incensed Clorinda.
Do not despise me, Sir; for though Clorinda may lose her hopes, yet she will keep her Honour; and then, though she be not worth your Friendship, yet she ought to be above your scorn.
Frown heaven, if I despise, or dissemble with the best of Women; and some Curse, new and beyond Example, as his sin, strike Otho at your Feet, if my soul have not a clear faith and Ado∣ration for Clorinda; nor will I rise from this place, till she believes
and pardons me this crime, which thus, in shame and Repentance, I have confessed.
No more, Sir; It was the first favour I ever received from Prince Otho; it is an honour I shall ever be proud of; from this wound I gathered Courage, and began to hope your Highness had some value for me; Whilst Prince Otho turned away in Battle, whilst he received my Blows, and would not deign to strike again; he called me Woman, and despised Clorinda, which made me both with Love and danger hunt him till I had gained this Wound; then I began to hope, since he thought me worthy of his Sword, when we were Enemies, if we live to see a Peace, I might be worthy of his Friendship too; and if this Wound can make Prince Otho kind, I am happy to have bled for the health and safety of my Country; and if your Highness have kindness enough to wish it whole, Em∣brace my Brother; Then you shall see, with what Pride I will kiss and wear this Scar.
I embrace him, as I would my peace of mind, or Clorinda's Friendship, and at her Feet throw my self and power; Here, Sir, ends all Acts of War betwixt us; And if We dispute again, it shall be to overcome in kindness; Sir, I am here my Fathers Lieutenant; Till he and Rome Sign and Confirm my Acts, They are only kind in∣tentions, which have a readiness to show how much my heart is vowed Clorinda's; Though I believe the Senate will not dispute my Act; However, Sir, your are safe from this War; Manlius, let all the Garrisons be drawn off, while this Prince and People be re∣ceived as Friends to the Senate; and see there be no injury shown to the meanest person; but let all be treated like part of those whom thy friend Loves and Honours; at Millain we shall expect you, whither if your Highness please, we will repair, to stay my Fathers march; whose kindness is, now, upon the way, to pre∣vent that Danger our Alarm gave him last Night.
I shall wait upon you, Sir, and not despair, by your in∣tercession, to obtain the Pretors pardon for my uncivil depar∣ture last.
Marius is too much a Roman to be displeased with a ge∣nerous Act, though his Enemy perform it to his prejudice; Your Highness needs not fear your well-come where Marius commands.
May your wishes find the Gods as propitious to you as you have been to us, while we love and Sacrifice to Otho, the No∣blessed of the Romans.
Otho is, in all things, Clorinda's Servant, and Prince Ama∣deo's Friend; Manlius, you are sad.
Not displeased with our happiness, I hope.
Heaven forbid; No, Gentle Clorinda, though I have been bred in Arms, unacquainted with the Peace and softness of the Court, nor ever tasted this Love you so greedily drink down, ha∣avenge never known nor sought other Honour then the Sword gave; yet I find, it is not impossible for Manlius to learn to love, if he had such a Lesson as Clorinda before him to imitate.
War, Sir, has been your Mistress, and your Business still;
and it is a Trade that Princes learn with Honour; Swords are the Instruments, and with His the Noble Manlius has Writ high things; There is no Beauty like an Army, in a Soldiers Eyes; Victory is his Mistress; And passionately gallant Manlius has, all his life, pursued her.
Manlius has not yet seen any thing he thought beautiful, perhaps; but love will have a share in his heart: Honour and Cou∣rage are but Fore-runners of that god, to prepare the Heart, when it shall bid Beauty and Virtue Well-come, which makes me pro∣phesie, I shall live to see Manlius, for all his roughness, a passionate and a handsome lover.
She is a Witch, by this light; It is the Devil, or love, vexes me already.
If your Highness please We will retire, and give Manlius Opportunity to see the Army march.
We are here to receive and obey your Highness Orders.
The Noblest of Romans! I am not envious, nor proud, yet the Noblest, me-thinks, is a Title should be bought at a higher rate then Otho has paid for it. Ambition is a Soldiers Beauty, Honour his Mistress; and I will not give place to any man when that is in dispute; What, a Pox, makes me thus Quarrelsome; Thus on the sudden concerned in her Opinion; There is some∣thing seems new and strange to my mind; it is troublesome, and yet it is pleasing, it is a vexation I never felt before; Her words raise a storm, and her Eyes allay it again; I never was concerned in a Wo∣mans thoughts before; Me-thinks I could now be strangely plea∣sed to act something, that might please her; If this should be love What would become of me? A peace and Love both together, You must get a dark house for Manlius; They will make me fit for Hellebore; I will find Calis, and tell her my pain, she has talked of Love, and loving me; I will find by her, whether I am bewitched or no; My heart will not be idle, I perceive; We no sooner are proposing of peace, but he is busying himself with Love. All brave men I loved before; But never saw a Woman that could possess my thoughts; But this has so much of the Soldier in her, I begin to fear; I would I could see her spin; This storm has so disordered my mind, all things lie on heaps in my heart; Love and Hate, Reason and Honour, lie shuffled together; twill cost an Age, in thoughts, to Collect them, and place them as they were before this fatal day, so full of care. O! That I could see what fruit this bit∣la root can bear.
O Calis, all my fears are ripe, and the doubts my soul laboured with are now delivered to the world, thou
know my heart has tried Love, in all his Passions, but never felt a Torment like a jealous mind.
Whence this disorder? Why this fear? Is the Army De∣feated?
No, no, Victory and Peace attends it; And with that Peace, All my miseries flow in'; In short, Otho loves Clorinda's beau∣tie, and Amadeos Gallantry; all these several virtues make but a poi∣son for Lucius.
Be plain; Or else Expect no help in my Counsel.
Know then, it was all our opinions, That Otho should make a Peace with Amadeo; which being done he now avows his Love to Clorinda, whose heart has always admired Prince Otho, and hither they are coming with speedy Marches, to renew the Ancient kindness betwixt Cicely and Amadeo; which sprung first, when he was a Prisoner, more to Cicilia's Eyes then Marius his Guards; you know the story: O Calis! had the Princess less ver∣tu, or Beauty; Were fame silent in her praise, or had the noble Amadeo been only born great, like wretched Orante; had not hey∣ven given him Honour equal to his Birth, I could then have slept with a secure mind, seeing him love while she had despised; But his virtues, Calis, make me fear a second spring will grow, whose Harvest cannot but be fatal to Lucius. I conjure thee therefore, let my passion prevail above thy Reason, that I may receive the Ho∣nor of speaking with the Princess, this Evening, that my trow∣bled soul may find some peace from her, to calm my Jealous heart, whose doubts, and fears of my own worth, make me still Jealous I may lose the Jewel of my Heart; Dear Calis knows, I never pre∣tended to purchase Cicely; No such guilty vanity has stained my Love; but, like an humble Beggar, still offered all my Heart for Love; And if her gentle mind can forgive this fear, which I can never lose, till she be mine, though a smile from her may allay 
 the Tempest that now distracts my mind.—Ha! The princess. Madam, if you have heard me, Behold, at your feet, the blushing and the guilty Lucius.
Rise, Sir, Lucius is welcome as mine own wishes; Lucius, to me, in his faults, even in this fear is well-come; and though I will not chide him, because his Fear is Love, yet I will counsel his Jealousy, which, to this hour, I confess, is not only pardonable, but ought to be rewarded; Which thus I do. Know Lucius, Though Amadeo has Excellencies enough if it were possible to justify a broken Faith; Yet it must not be where my friend is his Rival, Who has all that is required to make a happy Friendship, if not stained with Jealousy. Be therefore con∣fident that I have Honour; And here must cease all the un∣handsome fears that tell your heart ought, but Lucius shall en∣joy my Love; And now I have said this, if Lucius shall again stain me with his Jealousy, I fear my heart will not bear such an Injury; For none but a faulty heart can doubt the Honour of his Mistress, when she has given her faith.
Alas, Madam, would you have me hate Jealousy,
whilst you Excuse it, and reward it thus? it were Ingratitude; I ought rather to Sacrifice to that weakness, since it has been so fortunate as to make me happier then all the endeavours of my life be∣sides.
Justice, Sir, shall ever prevail, and that makes me confess your jealousy to this hour was Innocent; for it tells me, Lucius was afraid to lose me; But if, after this declaration, he shall doubt a∣gain, that doubt calls me false, and tells all the world I am not worth his Friendship; Therefore, if you love me, here you must begin to hate jealousy or I shall find as severe a Revenge to punish that Injury, as I did a kindness, to reward this Alarm which Love gave to Lucius his heart.
Pray, Madam, spin this Thread no finer, lest it break.
I have done, the Praetor expects you, whither now I am going, and long to hear the truth of this Business, which has so much surprised the Court.
WHen we have paid our sacrifices to the Gods for this deliverance, not only from a danger but from a war too, twill then become Otho to provide for the entertain∣meant of these Princes, like Friends and Allies to the people of Rome; whose Honour is no less at stake now when they are Friends, then when they declared themselves Enemies.
I shall most gladly, Sir, receive this Commission; and I am so partial to mine own Heart, that I am apt to believe Rome never got more Honour from the Triumph over any Prince, then she will in the Friendship of those whose Virtues and Persons call the gallant part of Mankind to protect them.
Amadeo has more years in his face, else the same Man he was when he fled unkindly from us; I confess, I never saw any stran∣ger I had so much kind value for before. There is something too so  new in the Princess Clorinda, which I cannot but admire and pity; and I would not, for my old Honours, this war had ended in the sword; it would have upbraided the Roman clemency; Cicely, I observed, you were disordered at the sight of them; you see Beauty nor Virtue are not confined to the Roman Empire.
Far from me be the vanity or guilt, to wish the Gods should confine their Blessings; it is well if the Romans can preserve their own Honours, and nobler far then to seek the ruin or destru∣ction of it in others; I confess, I never saw nor read of any persons more to be admired then these two Princes: And Rome joins with me in their praise, since in all her pride of Empire she has thought these worthy both of War and Peace; and now, after seven years dispute she embraces them.
Did your Highness never see them before? has there never been any League betwixt your selves or Nations?
Not any, Sir.
Always Enemies! What esteem had you of them?
Nor Friends nor Enemies; unthought of, they lived by us. Good Heards-men, sullen, stout, hardy fellows, such as this his race have always been; who because they know no better, seem to despise the valleys wealth, bravery and luxury they are unac∣quainted with; For what should they be drunk with? Milk? How exercise their gluttony? upon black bread and scorched flesh? For Clothes, you see, they have as little variety as invention; a Sun-tan'd skin, with the Fur inwards turned, with the season, is the Wardrobe of their great Shepherd.
I find Orante has no great kindness for the Prince nor People; yet he cannot deny the Princess Clorinda is a strange ex∣ample of Virtue and Courage; she fears no wounds not dangers.
She will play at foot-ball, thresh, and hew woods, as well as her Brother; Alas, Sir, it is not there as in Rome, and the Eastern World, where the Women are soft, bred nice, and full of tender thoughts; Here is no difference betwixt the Sexes, but that they esteem them less then Men: Their Cowes plow too, and their Mares bear burdens, and their Women fight. No beast of that Country has any privilege; and I wonder at nothing so much as the Roman Curiosity, that has made War thus long against this wasps nest in a Rock. By all our Gods, we never thought their Country worth asking for, we only banished Malefactors thy∣there; and they have chosen rather to return and die here, then live and wither out their days in that nest of Winter. Cold, Pover∣tie, and Ignorance, are the only commodities, I know, their Country affords.
Yes, they have something else; they have a breed of stout and handsome Princes; Their Nation too have Loyalty, and Amadeo looks like a Prince among his People, his Mind too is Princely; and though he live in a Cottage himself, yet his Soul resides in a Palace; which is nobler far then to see Fortune blindly give a Crown to a wretched Prince, who fills a Palace himself, while his Soul lies in straw.
You are Otho that say this, else you should know Orante understands it.
And it is to Orante I say it; who, I am certain, has guilt enough to know I mean him; whose Envy cannot suffer the Virtues of a gallant Prince, and faithful People, should be praised; Be∣cause he knows it is upbraiding of him, who has neither Merit to win, nor Power to keep a Crown. Where were the Battles fought that won those fruitful Valleys? What have we to triumph over in Orante?
No more, I say; the Prince is in our protection.
Let him talk on, Sir; he has Reason on his side; For Orante is both in Person and Fortune fit for Otho's scorn: But if Ci∣cilia's eyes had not more Magic in them then his sword, I should
ere this have found a way to be revenged.
Otho raises storms, and I must allay them; All this will fall upon my head; and, in serious earnest it is not well done to upbraid him with his Person or Fortune; you will rub that tender part till he grow desperate; A thousand times I have heard him say, it is yet in his power to kill a Prince, though he cannot restore one; which dark saying he will never explain with other answer, then, Am not I a Prince, may I not kill my self?
Let him be just to others, I will be just to him; Why should his ill Nature find excuse, and my truth be trouble∣some? Why should he lessen my Honour in this War, by despising my Enemy, undervaluing, and detracting from the nobleness of those Minds with whom we have made a Friendship?
I confess you have reason to be angry, if the subject were worthy of it; but being branded with the marks of a Malice∣os Nature and an ill Tongue, you ought to despise his words; for how can you be handsomely angry with one you have overcome already? To whom you may give Honour, but can hope none; And I know Otho scorns such an easy secure War.
Yet I am then like my Sister, who, whilst she con∣damns it, fights that battle, and has again overcome a Brother, whose Heart and Reason has by a thousand victories confessed her Power, and still shall remain the loving, though the conquered Otho.
When you see Lucius, let him know I would speak with him, and let us have no more of this dispute; You know, he is a thing we cannot fear, let him pass by; and since he has not Ho∣nor enough to kill himself, let him live.
How now, Calis! sad!
So will Cicely be, when she knows what I see.
Prithee what can there be of new that should make me sad?
Did you observe Lucius, when Amadeo spake to you?
Not particularly.
I have so much Friendship for Lucius, as to fear there may be some trouble in his Mind; some fears worth the remedy of his friends to cure betimes.
His fears? it is not possible, sure, that Lucius should have fears now; if he has, they will be more dangerous then any thing he apprehends; for if he fears me after this mornings satisfaction, he has lost my Heart; for I shall despise him that call me false. Love has but one path, but one safe way; he that would walk in two may lose himself; and I have told Lucius he is that way; and no∣thing but his Jealousy and Injustice can make Cicely stray.
See, Madam, a visit not to be avoided; would Amadeo were no more to be suspected for Lucius sake.
While Orante is civil, I must bear his visit; and his Love
is less injurious then Lucius his fears will be.
If my return be troublesome, as my fears still tell me, unfortunate Orante is even in his Love to Cicely, who has no guilt but what she and Love are to answer for; Behold I am come once again to offer, with humble thoughts, all the service of my life at Cicilia's feet; Dot no despise me because your Brother throws his Injuries upon me; it is your Highness protects him from Orante, who fears nor loves any thing but Cicely; for whose dear sake I have still born the burden of my Miseries.
Sir, I am not now to tell you why your Propositions come too late; Orante is not ignorant of that Obligation Lucius has upon me; and to pursue me after that knowledge is such an Injury, as if Orante doth not repent and desist from, I shall be bound in Honour to punish.
To punish you have reason, Madam; your Brother teaches all the world how to treat tame Orante.
Your Highness is only sensible of those Injuries which are done to you, and never consider how you force Men into Passion; would you have heard a third person despise the Princes? I am con∣fident you would not; why then should your Highness in a full Court speak disdainfully and slightly of Clorinda, knowing what Passion the Prince and she have for each other?
I despise her not, nor ever consider her or her Brother so much as to beget my Envy; I cannot admire them for lying in snow, and eating of black bread; they live and eat as they were bred; better food would set their teeth on edge.
Yet it is great Virtue to bear those difficulties, and suffer them rather then lose their Honour; and will be admired by all generous Minds that shall read their story.
Not at all; no more then we admire our Horses for eat∣ing grass, it is their Nature; nor is there more wonder nor pity due to what Clorinda acts or suffers, then to a Tree for standing in the rain; and I would call one as soon into my house as the other; they are all bred to it, it is their Countries Nature and Custom; their Fathers did it before them, and their Children must do it after them; it is Nature not Virtue you admire.
If this be not Virtue, what will plead for an Admire∣tion in your sense? What do you believe worth Honour and Admiration?
Their contrary; to have been born great, heir to the pride of Nature, Prince of a Country the envious world, nay Rome her self, hath looked upon with covetous eyes to have pos∣sassed; That without trouble, fear, or danger, to have had all the blessings that the Gods could send a Man; To give these, nay be robbed of these, and not feel the theft, but willingly suffer to be thus deposed from all his joys for Cicilia's sake. This if it be not worth her admiration, it deserves her pity at least, since she is the cause of all this misery; For her Beauty is the chain that binds me from taking Revenge for this theft, for whose dear sake I have di∣gested all these scorns and injuries; Nay, I have brooked a Ri∣val,
a happy Rival too, because she loves him; but be not too obe∣stinate in this cruelty, urge not a heart too far that is full of love and duty; your scorn may bow him till he breaks all bounds of Love and Honour, as you have done of Charity; My form, I know, is despicable; but Love is beauty still; Love can make me lovely, and scorn, gentle Maid, is as deformed as I am; and such a poison it will even infect Cicilia's heart, and make her ugly, even in Orante's eyes; Scorn will do more then Reason, Love, or Ho∣nor; twill beget anger, in whose dark shades, in whose storms Love and Beauty will be blasted; and then what succeeds, hate, dangerous hate, whose effect will be as full of misery to Cicely, as Love has been to me; who cannot hope will be angry, and re∣avenge still waits a despairing Lover; and who ever he be that is despised, till he despise himself for loving so unfortunately, may when he will be revenged, though not pleased; your Father con∣quarrelled my Country, betrayed by those I trusted; all, but Orante, Treason gave you; but I was reserved to give a victory to Cicilia's eyes; but if she still delight to frown, know, I can and will be free; but I have yet so much love, as to fear, for your Highness, what issue your scorn and my revenge may have. When I have the honour to see you next, and your Highness has considered what I have said, I shall hope my love may beget an answer to bind me ever to your feet; your pardon, Madam, I will retire.
What do you study, Madam? is there any thing in this to be considered? haste to the Praetor, let him and your Brother be acquainted with the dangers that he threatens; he is no more to be trusted loose, my heart prophesies he will act some desperate vile∣lany, if you permit him to walk and converse among us.
I have my fears too, but not for my self; Lucius and Otho are the objects of his hate and envy, which makes me apprehend, for them; else for what concerns me I despise him.
WE will dispute this no more, Sir; pray give me leave that my faith and love to the fair Clorinda take all ways it can to express it self; I held it a duty in friendship, when I knew your noble heart had still retained his love to my Sister, not to expect your solicitation to express my readiness to serve you; and since we have gained my Fathers consent, doubt not the rest; for I know she is too much a Daughter, and Sister, to refuse to meet our desires in Prince Amadeo's love.
'T was the opinion of many when my Brother was prisoner here, the Princess was not displeased with his addresses; but ab∣sense and such a diligent Rival as noble Lucius makes us fear a greater opposition then your kindness will apprehend.
That Lucius loves I doubt not, for Cicely has beauty and
virtue enough to win an esteem from the severest minds; but cer∣tainly I am so much a friend to both, they will take no resolution without my consent.
Alas, Sir, how blind is kindness; and how unlike to a Lovers passion is that which Nature owes, and pays betwixt Bro∣there and Sister; had your Highness my heart and my eyes, how visible would those Lovers appear? how many kind jealous doubts would their looks, this day, have raised in your heart? know, Sir, I am certain he pursued this late war more as my Rival, then your General; and how much against his heart this peace was made, time will show; but when I consider his fears told him the Princes Cicely was at stake, I love and forgive him for that hate; for she is cause enough to put the world in Arms, and worth the trial of their fortune, till she declare whose she is; and then it is equal sin and treason to oppose her desires, as it is now virtue and true honour to aspire her friendship.
And if Amadeo be the man designed for this blessing, The gods have largely paid all our sufferings, in the friendship of two such Princes.
I confess, my fears make me wish the Princess had first been moved on my behalf; then the Pretors consent had com∣pleated all my wishes; the honour I have had heretofore to practise her excellent mind makes me fear she should believe me faulty in this Proposition; for though it be kindness in your Highness, as a Brother, to move it to her Father; yet I that am a Lover know the first sacrifice of Duty and Prayer are to be paid to the Mistress; else she may believe I desire her friendship, but am loath to take the pains to win her.
Come, Sir, no more fears; shall we in peace know that pain we felt not in war? or doubt a conquest over a Sister when honour pleads against her, will she deny to follow this president; and by the example of Clorinda that has blessed me with her friend∣ship, refuse to make Amadeo happy? she cannot sure, unless she re∣sove to make me blush to death when I shall find how much I have loved, and how little reason I had to value her kindness.
If your Highness then will discover to her how far you are advanced (as unknown to us) twill be a way to inform your self, and prepare her for the love and service my Brother is ready to present.
This morning I have designed to speak with her, that she may not have any ground for her displeasure; I will only acquaint her with it, as my desire, which before I would proceed in it, I took my Fathers opinion; according to her answer, we will resolve; till when, your Highuess pardon.
YOur Highness is sad.—Pray heaven Lucius's fears be vain.—
I confess, my mind never had more business then at this hour; then now my heart had never more use, nor ever was less capable, of counsel; divers interests plead within me, but honour shall still be my guide, and Lucius may (if he be wise) still keep his power over this heart; yet his second fear has made me so angry, that I begin my self to fear Amadeo.
And what do's that fear prompt you to?
To believe that Lucius and my self had kind stars that re∣moved him hence, lest such a gallant Rival might have disturbed our peace; for it is not easy, without partiality, to decide such a dispute as their love must have bred in a mind of honour.
I do not wonder at Lucius his fears, since I find you doubt your own strength.
I do not say this from any guilty thoughts of mine, which should give Lucius reason to be jealous; but as I apprehend the world may condemn me of my injustice to Amadeo; for certainly, with∣out partiality to himself, Lucius could not pretend to that injustice which my kindness gave him; for my love to Lucius cannot blind me so but that I shall always confess I ow Amadeo what I can no∣ver pay; and though he nor the world shall ever know how much this debt troubles me; yet he shall have all the satisfaction I can in honour give him.
I confess, Madam, the character that Manlius gives this Prince is enough to inflame the world.
Manlius has his clouds too; and methinks, Calis should have remembered his praise of Clorinda; had I been she, it would have concerned me more, Manlius is one I never saw before; and though my mind were too busy, then, to make an exact observati∣on of him; yet, methought, there appeared none of that gayness in his humour, none of that voluble tongue men speak of; By this sight of him, Manlius is changed, or else the character I have heard of him was made by a very ill observation.
I shall hide my fears no longer from your Highness, but confess his coldness since he returned; and that strict friendship he has made with Prince Amadeo makes me believe he has some de∣sign on the fair Clorinda, which vain hope; when I consider, her mind and his Rival, I cannot fear he should be master of his wishes; yet the attempt will be enough to let me see I am past hopes of mine; for I know him of a nature most violent in his passion, ei∣there of love or hate, bred always a Soldier, and taught by success to know no opposition but what a Soldier ought to remove; yet when your Highness sees him you may, by some Questions, as by chance, inform your self of what I dare not mention.
He is Brother to Lucius, and friend to Calis, which are obligations enough to make me concerned in his fortune, and to justify such a curiosity; and if I can deserve from him, Calis shall find a diligent friend; and he shall be very crafty if he hide his passion from me; and if I perceive any name but Calis in his heart, I will so chide him, so shame him to himself, he shall not dare to pur∣sue so injurious an act.
But how will he brook this freedom, Madam, being so newly acquainted; I would not for the world he should believe I set you on; for we have still made it our business to hide our friendship, so much, that it is yet a secret to Lucius.
That shows Manlius has not so open a nature as his Bro∣there; for I am confident Lucius has not a secret but Manlius knows it.
Madam, the General and the Lord Cleon are within to wait on your Highness.
We will follow you; come Calis, a little patience will re∣council all; and remember these thorns will grow where there are Roses; it is as natural as his beauty, or his sweetness; and kind nature that gave us the Elixir of the Bee, gave him a sting to de∣fend his Hive against Drones, but not to wound thee or me.
Nay, Madam, I am so perfect a Lover; I find little things make me fear, and less reason hope; yet it is as pleasant as strange, to observe in Loves war how many fear, and how few despair.
It is most certain, Sir, I heard your Bando proclaimed; the people said it was published upon a complaint the Princess made of a violence that you threatened; three days you are limited to present your self.
Then there is three days to be revenged in.
I was told too, from a good hand, that Prince Otho had gained the Pretors consent for Amadeo to marry the Princess Cicely, so to tie by a cross match an alliance betwixt the two Families.
And all this stir only to complete a curse for Orante; yet I have three days, and this Dagger left; and if this hand hold his humour, and this Dagger keep his point, I may spoil the Plot; my Lord, we must keep our friends and our selves still in readiness, and in this disguise walk amongst them, for a day or two; but this cursed person of mine that will lye hid in no disguise: how in the Devils name shall we contrive to obscure it? this hill upon my back calls all eyes to my vexation and my scorn.
Like an old woman, stooping upon your staff, you may creep amongst them; and in that disguise frequent the temples, where you are sure to find an opportunity; and in these woods here you may abide amongst the old Hermits, and mingle with
those beggars that haunt Juno's Temple, while I prepare our design in the City; and when it is time then be resolute; and let us strike home, better dye at one blow then wither thus.
How comes it they defer thus long the hunting of the Boar? Otho and Amadeo were wont to delight in that chase; me-thinks Otho should long to see his Virago, that cloven knight, come pricking over the Plains, clad in mighty Petti-coats, Clo∣rinda hight; that hateful issue of a fruitful enemy, how comes she to change her savage mind for love?
Love has made her change her tragic Buskin, and now she delights in the soft steps of Comic love.
Sure all the world changes its nature only to vex me.
Well, Sir, we must now leave to wonder or talk; and resolve speedily to take our revenge upon them; your disguise shall this morning be with you; and if I can learn any news you shall immediately have it.
To what a straight am I forced by Love and Fortune! how have I armed all the world against me! but Nature, unkind Nature was my original enemy, who has not only set the world, but my self against my self; mine own eyes despise this object, what wonder then if Cicely hates it; yet I love Cicely, and her mercy is as due to my love as her scorn is to my person; but it is not my deformity makes me despair, but Cicilia's love of another; that is it makes my blots so visible, and my despair so high, that of all the passions mans heart is capable to feel, revenge is only in my power; and that, if fate deny not, Orante will command.
YOur anger, Sister, is more unreasonable then your de∣sires; and the worst way you can take to satisfy a friend.
When my heart tells me I have injured you, like a Sister that honours and loves her Brother I shall humbly beg your par∣don; but you must give me leave to say, I am injured now, which I will not dispute with Otho; whose heart is so busy about his own love, he has no leisure to consider his Sister; else I am confident he would have spoken to me before he had engaged himself, or my Father; and it is not the least of my troubles to find a Brother that I have loved, so slightly to part with me to please another, with∣out a thought of Cicely, or her future happiness; I must there∣fore tell you, Sir, I am engaged to Lucius, who has honour and love for me; and humbly he has vowed it, and I have kindness enough to see it. This I know is no secret to Otho.
Engaged! how can you engage, or how dares Lucius re∣ceive it? have not you a Father and a Brother? have they no share in Cicely? sure you will make but an unhandsome present,
if you give their part without the consent of such friends.
At least my own part is free for me to give, and that is Lucius his, the rest you may give to Amadeo; and if Lucius keep his value, all the interest I have in Cicely is his, and nothing but Luci∣us shall make me forsake him.
You are now in passion, yet that shall not make me lose my kindness, nor my respect; nor can you wonder to find me sir∣prized with this answer, since it is the first time I heard Lucius his pretence had gained your heart; and what I did in moving for Prince Amadeo, was in kindness; believing his love would be well∣come to you, without making you blush at the saying so; nor was this my single opinion. But I have done; and since Lucius has for∣got the respect he owes to me and my Father, I shall find other ways to resent his injuries; he is no Brother, yet, though Cicely be a Sister.
Nor Otho a Brother longer then he is just to Lucius; it is not threats nor anger can prevail with me; I have too much of Otho's nature in me to be beaten into any mans opinion; if your kindness and Reason cannot overcome me, your anger shall not.
Something I shall do.
This rash act of Otho has forced me to discover our Resolutions, which I meant should have lain hid till Lucius could have made his way to my Fathers consent, who has long since been acquainted with our friendship; and knows how much I have been concerned in the honour and fortune of Lucius; I cannot there∣fore but wonder he should give his consent to Amadeo, without speaking with me; it is not of yesterday that we have been friends, and he has known it; nay, I know he has not been displeased with Lucius his pretence; I will be better satisfied, for I believe twill prove only the importunity of Otho; but I must mind the present business; passionate men when they do injuries they are loath to see them; and Otho is as much displeased as Lucius ought to be, and his threats are fit for my fears; for I know Lucius will no more endure a threat then Otho will fear to give it; something I must do in time to prevent what the pursuit of such a passion may breed betwixt 'em: They are too much Lovers, for Reason or Friendship to se∣cure them; Clorinda is at stake in Otho's anger, concerned in her Brothers love, equal with her own; and I am at stake with Luci∣us, who I am vain enough to believe will not, for fear of any mans anger, quit his pretension. These thoughts distract me.—See Calis, she is come as if sent from heaven; she shall know all,  and acquaint my Father with it, as her own observation; so to se∣cure them from deciding by the sword what Otho pretends to; and she shall intimate to my Father how unkindly I took Otho's motion; and how to the heart it struck me; that after all the love and duty I had shown him, a Father could part so slightly with me; and consent to rob Lucius of the reward of all his faithful service, and give his friend to a stranger, unasked.—
Madam.
O Calis, there is an accident happened this morning,
which will require both thy kindness, friendship, and discretion, to manage our part of it; within my friend shall know all.
I met the Prince, and he would not speak with me:—There is the Princess too, I will speak my griefs to her before my fears take root, and try if her friendship hath kindness enough to weed them out. Ho! gon without speaking to me!
See, Madam, there he is,
It is enough, away Calis; make haste, I will entertain him here while you return.
Leave the rest to me.
Otho's Injuries have made me forget those of Lucius; and my kindness has now spent that stock of anger I had for him, that should have armed my Justice against him.
She is troubled too; I fear, Madam, my visits are un∣seasonable.
If there were nothing more unseasonable in Lucius his Heart then this visit, he would not think so.
Love, Madam, is a fruit always in season in a Lovers Heart; and other fruit then Love Lucius his Heart never bare for the fair Cicely.
Why then, after all my kindness, do's he fear his Harvest?
That storms, Thieves, or the wild Boar may destroy it.
But he is a Mad-man that will for fear of these possible ills afflict himself as if they were come; or cut his Corn green to prevent the Lightning that might blast it when it is ripe; And a jealous man is this Mad-man, and Jealousy will be that storm, that Boar, that Thief you speak of; And if Lucius will not leave con∣versing with that Enemy to Honour, which will break all bands and Laws of Friendship, he will find too late the danger of such an Injury as pursues with doubts and fears a Heart that loves him.
This Remedy, Madam, will not cure the wounds that afflict my Mind, they are too near of kin to my fears. Your anger was the greatest danger I apprehended; and since that is fallen upon me for loving, what would not my Heart doubt hereafter? Why should Cicely be angry with Lucius for loving, if it did not hinder her from receiving the Love of another?
Yet I have kindness enough, notwithstanding this An∣swer, to tell Lucius when ever I shall dare to be false, I shall not fear his displeasure; and a few hours will show him, though Jealou∣sie be at all times as unreasonable as the fears of Cowards, (which makes them ridiculous when there is no danger, and disarms them when there is;) Yet, at this time it is most injurious; and if Lucius be a Lover, he has no way but that to destroy his  hopes.—
It is done, the Praetor was much troubled at the accident, he has sent to command them both to their Chambers. The Prince was seized while I was there; and Dyon is now coming with a Guard for Lucius.
Ho! Dyon and a Guard, what will this be?
This Ring, Madam, will make my excuse; By virtue of which, and the Pretors command, I beg your Highness leave to deliver his pleasure to the General.
There is nothing, Sir, but Duty in this place.
My Lord, it is the Pretors pleasure you retire to your Chamber; where I shall wait upon you till I receive further Orders.
To my Chamber!
If I have any power, I shall beg of Lucius to submit to this command.
It is enough, Madam; when your Highness says die, though I do notlove enough to please, yet I shall obey you, though it be to become a sacrifice to my Rival; Sir, you may execute your command, I am ready to obey.
The Praetor commanded me, in his name, to prohibit your Lordship from sending a Challenge to, or receiving any from, the Prince or any Man.
What Riddle's this?
In the evening, at your Chamber, I will inform you of all: till when, let no troubles afflict you.
Madam, I can obey; and that's the true obedience, when we do it only to show what power they have who command; without requiring any reason for them.
Why did you not tell him the cause of the imprisonment?
Because I am loath to declare so absolutely against a Brother, as to join with his Enemy against him; Therefore, dear Calis, go from me to Lucius, whom thou wilt find fuller of di∣straction then ever; tell him all that is past betwixt my Father, Otho, and my self, concerning Amadeo, and his desires; Tell him of the consent they have gained; but withal assure him, it is in the power of nothing but Lucius to alter my Resolution; Tell him, I have confessed our Loves to Otho, which bred his Anger, whose threats begot this Imprisonment; But then conjure him to remember, Otho is my Brother, and not to think of a Revenge upon him, if he loves Cicely.
I shall not fail to observe your directions.
Love is so short-lived, and subject to so many diseases, that few Lovers live long enough to know their names or reme∣dies; Nay, some die with Receipts by them ere they know which to use; I am now to cure Lucius of his fears, and yet observe the duty and kindness due to a Father and a Brother, though Otho
(unkind) to show his Love to Amadeo, forget a Friend in Lucius, and a sister in Cicely; And now how shall we remedy these ills? though We know how to cure them, yet we are to seek the Ingre∣audience; for though the Receipt be common, yet where are the Drugs? Justice will cure all, but partial Love, in Otho, conceals the remedy.
PRince Otho, Sir, is a Prisoner too.
Do you know the Reason?
Not certain, there are divers Reports.
Some say, that the Prince and Amadeo have from the Praetor obtained the princess Cicely, which bred a dispute betwixt him and the Princess.
Ha! Prince Amadeo? has the Praetor given him his con∣sent? Otho would not speak to me this morning; foul! foul! that I am dull, cold, negligent Lucius.
Prince Orante too is fled to Rome, disguised, as they say, with the news, and some Injurious words that Otho gave him late∣lie; In short, the Praetor and prince are full of disorder, your Bro∣there too is missing; observed to be dull and melancholy of late, and do's look much upon Clorinda.
Orante is this day banished, at the Complaint of the Prin∣cess, to whom he threatened violence, and has but three days to ap∣pear.
It is Amadeo, and Lucius must dispute this; and if thy fate give thee Cicely, I will wish thee all Honour and happiness; But know, neither her Father nor Brother shall make me quit my Interest, though Cicely her self join; the Sword only shall decide our doubts. It is visible now why she made me stay till Calis re∣turned, with whom she whispered when Dyon ent'red with the Guards; The plot is visible, it was contrived betwixt her and Otho, this morning; to bind my hands till they had past the Ceremonies of a wicked and a perjured Hymen; She conjured me too I should remember Otho was her Brother, whose Interest has prevailed; and, to please Clorinda, Lucius is to be sold, and condemned to misery for ever; her stay too confirms my fear; for her promise was, her self to come and clear my doubts; and Otho is made a Prisoner too, for fear of my Revenge; it is clear as the Heavens she is fore∣sworn by.
He is strangely nettled with this news; it makes me be∣lieve, there are some grounds for these discourses concerning him and the Princess.
Amadeo is yet at Liberty; I will find him before he has  time to triumph over my misery; This Window is not high, When they are gone, I will leap it; But how to be rid of the Importunity of these people! I will forbid them to let any body speak with me,
and, under a pretence of a privacy when I write this Evening, make my escape; Cleon pray give Order for a Pen, Ink and paper, I will write to the Praetor.
You are sad, Sir; which the Noble Lucius cannot be, but all that love him must be curious to know the cause; you wrong us too, if you conceal it; He is not born, Sir, shall injure you; Pray tell us only the public part of the cause; and if We can serve you, command us.
I thank thee, Memnon; and if I thought both the Court and Camp had not been full of it, I should my self have told you. Know then, Amadeo has broke my Friendship with Otho, and his Sister; We have long been Rivals in Love and Honour; But Ama∣deo has the odds; Clorinda is a powerfuller Argument, then all my Services; she pleads with Otho; to please whom Lucius must be sa∣crificed to Amadeos Love.
I am glad to hear it is no worse.
No worse? dost thou understand what I have said?
Yes, Prince Amadeo is your Rival. Will you kill all that love the Princess? twill be a great task, though Lucius undertake it; and when he has done, he must fall upon his own sword too.
What has he said?
By my faith, Sir, much reason me-thinks; and if you hate the Prince for loving your Mistress, what would you do to him that should hate her?
Kill him.
So you would do this that loves her, if you had your will; how ridiculous would this be, in one of us, that should di∣spute the rewarding Love and hate alike? Well, Sir, I am glad you have no other cause of trouble; By this light, I thought the Prince had raised some scandal upon her, struck her, or ravished her; these Injuries, I confess, had been fit for your rage and our Revenge; But to be angry with a prince, and sad, because he loves an Excellent, virtuous, beautiful maid!
This is thy sense, Memnon; But love has his own reason; and though he gives Laws, he will take none; and Love has said, he cannot Love his Rival; and if Love be against you, what will your Reason avail?
But the General had wont to give Reason place; even in his Anger, and his wounds, he would not be averse to Reason; else I should not venture thus rudely to give him my opinion. Pray, Sir, tell me, is it a Crime to love, or a sin to be loved? for in one of these two lies the guilt; if it be a sin in either, why are you so partial to believe your self Innocent for doing that which is a Crime in the prince? whose Love is Honour, rather then prejudice to you, and but justifies to the world that you have placed your Affection upon a deserving person; and this Injurious jealousy of yours, but shakes her Resolution; and, by disgusting of her heart, gives more ground to your Rival then ever his Addresses could have won. Were I the General, who would should love my Mistress better then I, so she loved me better then him; And then my Rival should break my
neck as soon as my sleep, upon that score. Rivals are so many Wit∣noses and Arguments, so many Affidavits, that she has honour, so many Bucklers to defend her against the Envy and malice of the world; and when you fold her in your Arms, they become so many Trophies of your Victory; Rivals are, in Loves war, as Pri∣sonars, Colours, and the Cannon; Win the Battle, and lead them all in Triumph.
I confess, this is wild reason, yet such as I cannot deny; but what can you say to hinder me from hating and seeking to be Revenged on both, when you shall know the Prince tempted her, and she has broke her faith? and as I loved the virtuous Ci∣cilia, so I hate this; for she is false, though she prove true to Amadeo.
Faith, Sir, if this be so, (which few will believe) my Counsel is, that you should be silent; for she has such a stock of Reputation in the world, as no single Opinion, nor any one Action, can waste; and twill not be for your Honour, while the world esteems her, to say, I am that Lucius that the Princess Cicely loved once, but she is now inconstant; it is the same thing, as to say, you had like have cozened her, but she found her Error: Hide this misfortune, rather, as some imperfection; it is a story better forgot; for either, you were deceived in her, or she in you; it is clear, one of you wanted your value; Come, Sir, let no man think to get any advantage over his Mistress, or, to add to his own Esteem, by saying she is false; for no worthy man ever let a Gallant Woman be false; it is not possible to destroy a perfect Friendship, you may destroy nature as soon.
This plain speech has posed him; and if not cured his jea∣lousy, yet he has so vexed him, I hope the Nobler Passion, anger, will possess him; This damned jealous sickness is as ill in a lover, as a Coward in a Soldier.
Cleon, you have heard all this, and your silence makes me curious to know your sense of my suffering; you have studied and travelled in your time, and are now a Soldier; how would you have born my part in these three several Conditions; When you were a Courtier, how would you have born it, had you found your Mistress false?
Faith, Sir, in those youthful days I dwelt in the Garden where they grew; and when I found my self injured, as a wither∣ed Flower I forgot her, and still gathered some new Rose unblown with the praise or flattery of any; in whom I fancied still more pleasing Graces far then the former had.
This was, when you were a young Courtier, Cleon; But now you are a Soldier, whose Passions, both of Love and Anger, are not only Excusable, but laudable.
Why, I would have given her love the lie, and in her new lovers face spit the vows and faith she gave me, and, to vex her, Cut his throat.
Ha! it is but just a Soldiers anger should be revenged, not reasoned, nor argued into Peace; no Quarter to his Rival, nor
violence to his Mistress; I love thee, Cleon, and thou and I will talk further on this business.
Pray, Sir, ask him how his Philosophy would have born it; hear all, and then choose.
I would, as near as I could, have imitated History, which delivers many stories to us, by which are preserved the honoured memories of chaste and virtuous Lovers, of both Sexes, whose Friendship stands high in Story; Many too are the blots that stain even the sheets they are writ in, whose black Actions and names are left as Terrors and whips, to deter mankind from becoming like them, the hated subjects of succeeding ages; Yet nothing has met my wonder more, nor bred my amazement so often, as to find that excellentest of Creatures, Women, whose body and Nature, when virtuous, are so tender that we pity them if the wind blow sharp upon them; Yet when lust has prevailed, and armed them, you would start to read where they have taken the sullen Mur∣derer by the hand, and undaunted led him through difficulties even those men shrink at; Nay the murderers heart has become soft; Poison has lost her force, and the Dagger his point, to save what they have doomed to death.
No more Cleon; heaven keep Cicely from breaking with the gods, if she should be false to men.
Your patience, Sir, that I may Vindicate History, and my own memory, in being Just to that Sex whose very Nature is soft∣nos, and these but the Monsters and depraved part of that Excel∣lent Creature, lest the world believe I only such the Poison out of History; Where I find more Excellence in that Sex then you once fancied in the divine Cicely; where the Crimes of the wicked have not arrived to the sufferings of the good. Their constancy in Love, their often and patient becoming Martyrs to Friendship and Honour, as far beyond the merits, as faith of men, scarce one of them trusting that has not been betrayed by our perjured Sex; Mercy being their Nature, and oftentimes their Enemy, having rendered them miserable; For could they see us sad, they might laugh; But their pity of false men makes many of their Scenes set in tears and blood; and it is as rare to find a Constant man, as a faulty Woman; Yet I find History condemns revenge in either, Mercy in the last Act being as becoming a gallant Lover, as Love in the First, so to strive to win from the world a handsome Cha∣racter, by forgetting and forgiving each others crimes; and those who seek by Revenge to vindicate themselves; The guilty has from that found pity, and their Rage stood condemned by gods and men; Yet, in this latter Age, we have delivered our selves up to a mistake of Honour; and Custom has made it so binding, that it is not to be disputed against, it is by Duel; which vain &amp; Choleric men embrace with Joy, as a quick way for the one to be known to the World, and the other to be revenged of the World; Nay, wise men submit to it now, as a necessity; and though, in your case, some would fight, Yet there are divers would not; Much is to be said for them both, and against them, and the wilde Justice
of a Duel; but he that disputes it must be some one that is known to plead against his own practice; for whoever will be heard to declaim against Duels must fight many first; and when his va∣lore is undoubted, his Reason may prevail; but where to find such an Orator as will use his Rhetoric to persuade the people to  pull down the fame he built at such a rate, I know not.
I am glad to find there is so much of the old Lucius left, as will give over rather then be beaten.
Have not I fitted him for a grave speech?
Yes, I dare say, if he had thought thou coldest have re∣membred so much of Books, he would have broke thy head ra∣there then opened thy memory with a Question; he looked for a Sa∣tyre, or some Raillery.
I guest as much, but thought this the shorter way; A pox on it, they know we are Soldiers, and have other business then to observe him while he besieges one woman, and defends another all his days; if he had staid, I was coming into mine own eel∣meant; he knows we are Soldiers and Travellers; fit people to de∣cid Questions in Platonic Love, that have been bred in the li∣bertie of other Nations, whose kindness has engaged me to defend that sweet sin he speaks against; if he had asked me what I would have ventured to enjoy another mans Mistress, it is a case I have been versed in, and he might have been resolved; but for the re∣vengeful part, By my troth, I am to seek; for I never had any Mi∣stress of mine own yet, upon which I ever cared to shut the door when I went out; that and Marrying I defy; my experience has taught me it is so much cheaper and easier to get another mans Wo∣man, then keep mine own; and now he is gone, prithee be free; dost thou think the Princess a Rogue, Sirrah? By this light, if she be.
And what if she be?
If she be, I am sure I am one; and I cannot choose but hope; and if she be one of us, let Cleon alone to tell his tale; come, come, let us away.
And if Cleon do's not, let me alone to tell it to the Princess.
Well, well: when you dare tell, it will be a jest for Cleon to laugh at as well as Memnon.
SUre, Love makes me his scorn; and I that could not love any now dote upon all; Clorinda wiped Calis from my mind; the one sighs too much, and the other has too much anger in her eyes; and now all her graces fall too, since I saw Cicely; in whom there is not more virtues, then difficulties; it is hard to say whether my Lover despair be greatest; why did my Brother and
Amadeo praise her so to me or having praised her not hid her from mine eyes? either vanity or madness made them send me to her, for my destruction; my way was prepared too, by a friendly character; That I heard nothing but praises of Manlius from her, even then admiring Manlius for friendship and honour when his heart was busy how to destroy a Brother and a Friend: yes, those are the ties, those are the impossibilities that I must labour against; yet their Love, Birth nor Merit, I fear not; for though they star∣ted before me, they shall not make more haste then I to gain the prize, could I reconcile the action to my self; but it is a breach of trust and faith to both, both have told me their several passions, and sent me as an indifferent friend to solicit their hopes; Lucius, though he believed I loved Clorinda, yet that knowledge could not make him doubt an unjust action from me; and Amadeo, though I was his Rivals Brother, such a stock I had amongst them that the ties of Nature, nor interest of affection, could not make these men fear Manlius, who till he saw Cicely was as honest as they were just; and could till then have defied the world to ac∣cuse me of one wry step, or one stumble in the whole practice of my life, where honour was concerned; but now by what curse I know not, friendship, honour and virtue seem slight; her smiles are preferred before gods or men; yet how many crimes must both of us act ere I can enjoy her friendship: I love my Brother, his nature and sweetness of humour, so stout and kind it wins even upon his enemies; Amadeo too, how shall I look him in the face when I have betrayed his trust? their angers will be too just for the boldest man to meet; but that danger is the least, there is but sword to sword, and fortune may be as well on my side, as justice on theirs; and could I answer it to honour and friendship, I should not then make this dispute; but it is the friend, not the enemy threatens, and that will wound my soul ere I can be an enemy too; for my anger though it has been as fatal as any mans, yet it is most unreasonable here; and therefore I must take some quiet secure way to gain my ends; how unwilling I am to be a villain! ye gods that see excuse, or divert the crime; but what if she will not receive my love, what rests for me? twill be too late to put back when I have discovered the villain; she will hate, and they despise me; and I shall sell all my past honours for a shadow; what rests then? Force. Ha! good gods! what may not man be if he will once break the bounds of honour? see if I have not already swallowed the great difficulties of Friend and Brother, and given up that honour I have preserved through a thousand hazards; and lust, finding it self master, would not only reign, but bring in murder too; sure I was never honest, never stout, all my fighting was but cowardice, nothing but fear to dye made me defend my self; If I had either honour or courage in my heart, they would now defend me against my self, and make me ashamed to yield my sword to lust and treachery; sure if it were ever lawful to kill, it is now; for a greater villain then my self no man can strike.—See this Dagger prompts me to it; the act will be no∣ble, 
having first in two short li•es writ the cause; then to stab and dye, she could not choose but love me when she shall know I fell in this strife, her martyr; I will do it; since I cannot live worthy her love, it is resolved I will dye to find her pity.—Ha! see, see, ye gods, she comes, her eyes shake my resolution. 
Calis stays long, Lucius will be impatient to know the cause of his imprisonment; see his Brother, he is sad; I will take this opportunity to try if I can find who it is he loves; and while Calis is busy to serve my friend, I will try if I can advance her de∣sires, though my mind a• this time be not bent to mirth.—What makes the gallant Manlius so sad? thoughts are such strangers to his humour, that it is a civil curiosity to inquire the cause; sure something new and excellent must be happened that's able to decor∣der his mind whose happy Stars have made him all he can, in ho∣nor, wish; is it your Brothers imprisonment, Sir, that troubles you? if it be, let me assure you, there is neither dishonour nor danger in it.—Ha! he minds me not, or at least will not trust me  with his secret; yet Manlius knows that I at first sight gave him all the secrets my heart ever swelled with; and if he refuse me his friend∣ship, I shall believe he thinks me not worthy of his Brothers love, or else grudges me his kindness.
Heaven and earth witness; and I guilty? who knows his fate till he proves it? how beautiful, even in her hatred, will the  fair Cicely appear; but thus adorned with friendship, and her words thus clothed in kindness, how divine, how charming every grace! there is Magic in every sound, her words whisper my soul to be happy, and something bids me be a villain; if the loves, I shall be happy enough, in her embraces, to weigh down the opinion of the whole world besides.
What strange accident is befallen him that can make him thus silent; there is distraction, fear and wonder in his looks, and all I say passes without regard.
I will speak to her, she is alone.—Do's not your Highness find a new kind of character here? is not Manlius his mi∣sery visible in his forehead?
Yes, and it was my wonder.
My distracted heart and troubled mind, are they not writ so plain in my face that your fair eyes may find and read my for∣tune there?
It is true, and one whose eyes are less concerned then mine may find a new kind of humour in every look; every mote∣on tells something strange is happened in Manlius his fortune; and my heart has so much gratitude and kindness for him, that if it lay in my power, I would serve him faithfully; but finding him un will∣ling to impart them to so idle a subject as Cicely, I shall leave you; lest my company be as troublesome as my Question.
Why this, if not more? why should she tempt me thus, if her heart had not love she never showed, nor I durst hope before? I will tell her I love her, she is a woman; and what if she once had honour, so had I; yet she had power to blow that
bubble hence, and who knows but that I am designed her fate, as she was mine.
Ha! he sighs and weeps; why these tears, Manlius? why these sighs? what can thy heart wish or desire within the bounds of honour that Manlius should despair of? pray tell me your griefs, I may be a friend where you least believe it; for I know something; and, perhaps, have seen what you would fain have hid.—Sure he loves Clorinda, and is ashamed to think of his faults to Calis. 
Know, Madam, your kindness has ripped op my heart; and now take a secret, the first and last of my life; too great for my heart, though too little for her I would present it to; a fatal one, I fear, and yet it is love; doubting, humble, and faithful love.
Then the gods have heard the wishes of his friends, if Manlius be a Lover.
Ha! what do's my surprised heart hear? do's your High∣nos rejoice to find Manlius a Lover? that glad sound has struck confused joy to my heart; nor do I know how to understand that joy of yours.
O Manlius, thy noble Brother and my self have often wished thee a Lover, to refine thy mind, and weed some harshness, and those wild thoughts from it, which like weeds infest the noble flowers that nature had planted, and honour watered in thy Soul∣diers heart; love in Manlius is all he ought to wish for, or his friends rejoice in; love will make him envied by those that hate him, and adored by those that love him; of which number none is a more real admirer then Cicely; and happy she, who ever she be, that is born to reign in thy heart; for Manlius has courage, and all that is required to make a happy friendship; and now I beg to know who it is, that after a curious and a long search Manlius has found worthy of his faith.
O Madam, when you know that you will hate me, and say I have reason to be sad, and curse those Stars that have cursed you and me; can the noble Cicely see a Lover in my eyes, and not find who it is by my actions? is Manlius so general a Lover that his passion cannot be discerned? Is he such a dumb distracted thing in all companies, that his disorder cannot speak her name he bows to? must my trembling tongue tell her name ere your High∣nos discern it?
Alas, Sir, my busy heart has been so intent upon her own business, I never observed it diligently till now; but rather then be troublesome to Manlius, I shall wait his leisure, and not rudely press into his secret thoughts, unless I can serve him; and then he wrongs me if he conceal his love, who will to the world avow the friendship and value my heart has for him.
Why shall I be silent longer? I will tell her I love the gentle Cicely.—Stay, Madam, and take the secret of my soul,—Twill not out; I have yet so much honour as to guard the door  against that guilt that would fain tell you, I love; and the divine Cicely is the object; and if you be curious to know how much; to death, by all.—
Hold, no more; my busy innocence, and folly, you have in two words sufficiently punished; yet you will find we are both deceived; I in a vain false opinion that Manlius had honour, and was worth my friendship; I should not else thus have betrayed my self within his power, where he shall find his part too, for having so low a thought as durst doubt my honour; but since I have found him false, I shall live to repent my error, as he will do this mean opinion of me; Go hide thy self, false man, till thou can repent the injury thou hast done thy Brother; and if there be any spark of that honour left in thy heart which the world took fire at, let shame kindle that flame again; Go repent, sleep, and forget this treacherous act, and wake again worthy of thy Brother and thy friend; I have yet so much kindness as to be sorry for thee; and if thy fault dyes here, for thy Brothers sake, it passes as a dream, and we will awake, to morrow, friends again, else thy love shall not exceed my hate and scorn; No reply; I have an Are∣gument in mine own heart pleads for thee, more then all thy words can do.
What a fool was I to put my self into the power of for∣tune, whose blind partial hands have still opposed me? vain deity, by me no more valued when thou fawnest, then when thou frown∣est; but more despised for thy false flattery when thou smiled in the beginning of our discourse, then thou art hated now, when thou hast declared thy self and her mine enemy; thou found me, this morning, relying upon honour and virtue, whose faithful pro∣tection had I not abandoned to lean upon thy rouling-wheel, I had still kept the honour of Manlius; who striving to become one of thy Minions is now left fit for Chains and Greaves; which of thy hated great ones attain to honour, but they are at last hurried to fates more violent then their fortunes? I am now embarked, and engaged beyond my own knowledge; and dare not find safety from the counsel of my friends; now the blackness of this act ap∣pears when I dare not tell my friends how miserable I am; this shame is only left me for a sting to my soul; and all the Reason and Honour I have left is only to make me ashamed of what I have done; Calis too, my last counsel; her kindness is barred at this time; yet something I must do to lose the old Manlius, or to find the new.
THough I am not guilty of Otho's fault to the Princess, yet I am afraid to appear before her; and methinks, there is a kind of guilt in being unlucky where we love; and Otho's kindness too hastily employed, has, I fear, gained me her dis∣pleasure yet her justice makes me hope when my innocence shall appear, twill find her pardon; for if I find her heart given to my Rival, Heaven forbid I should oppose her desires, but rather with
sacrifice of my own give her back the promise and engagement of a Father and a Brother; for Amadeo shall never receive his Mistress but from her own hands.
Sir, this paper is directd to your Highness; do's it re∣quire no answer? 
Follow me to the Princess Cicilia's lodging, and you shall have your answer.
He is grown vain and insolent already; Death! is the Princesses Chamber become your place of audience already? Hell upon him, he will date it from their bed, if I prevent not their speedy Hymens, I am mad with rage; Cicely came not neither, nor Calis, as she promised; Manlius is sullen too, and out of the way when I should use his counsel; the whole frame of friendship is fallen in pieces, as if the world conspired to make Lucius miserable, without the remedy or protection of one friend to advise him; yet kind fate has left this to protect me.—But while I talk, and forget my  self, I may be missed and prevented; and to live without Cicely, or a revenge for her, were to exceed all sick men, or chained slaves in scorn and misery.
SPeak with no body!
It was his command.
Come, I will make your excuse, for disobeying him this time.
Pray, Madam, pardon us; till he calls we dare not open the door.
Do you fear I should bring him a challenge? well, Sir, I will retire; and when you see him, pray, tell him that I was here to have spoken with him from the Princess Cicely; and I believe he will not thank you for refusing me the door.—This passionate man will suck poison out of every flower; and I know his jealous  humour and choleric heart is now gnawing it self; and con∣cludes all the world false to him, and has not patience to imagine one truth of his business; it is the greatest misery in the world to have a friendship with such a jealous nature to whom all things ap∣pear as his fears present them; and what is meant with most kind∣nos, their jealous nature corrupts into injuries, so that it is impose∣ble but friendship wanting the nourishment of faith must wither and dye; and were I so miserable as to love such an humorist, I would set my heart before him, and let him carve himself; for it is impossible to please him, give him what bit he will: Now in the evening when he shall hear I was at the door, how he will storm that I came not in! and if he had not been obeyed, his rage would have been as great; there could be no reconciliation with a jealous man; but that we know, jealousy commits and punishes her own crimes; for none of those doubts but has his own sting, which car∣ries
Revenge as well as Injury for the Lover. I am now to find the Princess, and when she shall know he refused to speak with me, it is ten to one but she grows as angry as he is jealous. They have indeed both their diseases, though from different causes; which I fear will never be cured till they are bound in a pair of sheets to∣gether; Hymen and a Bed some Physicians hold a certain cure for Love; would Manlius and I had honestly tried the Receipt.
SHe is all a perfect Mine of Virtue; no one thought but has a guard, such as Modesty and perfect Honour set over the Hearts of Princes; Her words werefull of Justice, and though she conceived her self injured and neglected in her Brothers Treaty, yet her Answers were calm and full of civil sense; still mentioning me and my passion with respect and sadness, which has so divided my thoughts I know not how to proceed; If I pursue her against her will, there is nothing but hatred to be ex∣pected. I will observe her, and make Clorinda break my way either to her Love or Friendship; and if my Fortune will not make me hers, yet I will have the pleasure of contributing my own peace to the making her as happy as she desires.—This paper I had forgot: Ha! from Lucius!
I Have this Evening broke Prison, and so I shall all Laws and Civility too, rather then out-live the Injury your Highness has done me. The Princess Cicely is a Jewel nothing but your Sword can win from me; though her Ambition has made her break her Faith. And since I can promise my self no longer the being beloved, I am resolved to be re∣venged, or fall in the attempt. This Morning I shall expect your Highness under the wood side by Juno's Temple, where I shall attend you alone with my Sword only. The Honour I have had to know your High∣nos makes me not doubt the receiving this satisfaction, that I may at least preserve my Honour, though the rash Cicely has falsely profaned hers.—
Fond Lucius, dost thou need more Enemies then thy self? Thy wild injurious Heart has wronged a Princess, whose least thoughts thou art unworthy of; and, for her sake I will meet thee; and if my Innocence be any guard, I shall punish thy low thoughts of the most excellent of Women. Cicely break her Faith? Vain and
and false? He would have me believe she has given it him. Fool! She knows too well the value of that Jewel to give it thy savage Heart. Rash Cicely! Rash Lucius rather, whose madness has now made room for my hopes, and given an occasion I could not have hoped for; And I shall take it, to show how much I loved the Princess, and how little thou deserve to be preferred before me. Sure no Man of Honour could ever have thought he should have occasion to draw his Sword in the defence of the Princess Cicilia's Honour against one that knew her. And who knows but For∣tune has appointed this Injury to give me the advantage of the Sword against Lucius, who thus long took Romes Sword, not to fight his Countries quarrel, but his private interest; and pursued me as his Rival, not Romes Enemy. I will instantly find him.—Ho, Clorinda?
Brother, saw you the Prince since his confinement?
Yes, and he is as much to seek for the cause as they will be for satisfaction that caused it; We hear Lucius is a Pri∣sooner too.
I believe the cause is easily guessed; you know the Prince and his Sister have this Morning disputed with some heat and Choler concerning our affairs; Lucius too is informed that the Praetor has given his consent at the desire of Otho; and the displeasure the Princess showed her Brother is but a spark of that Fire you are to expect from Lucius, whose nature can never endure, nor dissemble his troubles; whence came you now?
From making my excuse to the Princess, where I re∣ceived so civil a resentment of my proceedings, that her dislike was but one degree of less Obligation then the acceptance of my Love would have been. For I must confess, my Reason Honours the Princess when she acts great things; and to be faithful is most Princely. It is like her self, to avow her Friendship; yet her words were full of civility, and, in all her expressions as just to me, as kind to Lucius; And that Civil Justice shall bind me as much as her Love can my Rival. And though his pretence may be more fortunate then mine, yet who ever shall give a true Character hereafter of Amadeo's Love, the world shall say, he owes nothing to Honour nor Cicilia's Friendship.
Be yet so kind to me as to visit the Prince, who is now our Prisoner; to whom pray say all that a Maid is fit to justify, all that Amadeo's Sister should say when such a Lover woos, and such a Brother counsels, while I find the Princess, and take the first oc∣cession I can handsomely to present your Resolutions.
Farewell, dear Clorinda; I shall not fail to visit the Prince as soon as I have dispatched a business which concerns me to give audience in this Morning. Live and Love, thy Brother, dear Clorinda.
Love my Brother!
THis is the place, within this wood I will expect him; I wonder he is thus late; guilt has his sting, though in the Courage of Amadeo; when he is to justify an ill action he is even slow in coming.
Revenged? upon whom? foul Revenge is due to thee, not from thee; Thou hast injured a Friend, a Brother, and a Mistress; and thou talk of being revenged, of which of these? good Heaven! whither am I fallen? Reason and Honour are dead within my Heart, and the Coward is crept into this breast, else I could save all yet; Thus: this Sword bent against the Tray∣tor here would do it yet; But Honour has lost his power, Lust and Revenge reign Tyrants over my Heart, Revenge: whose plea∣sure is of so short a reign, it scarce out-lasts a thought longer then the storms that Injuries and Anger raise; and who enjoys it most is most Beast, and shows more wicked nature then all the several vices that Man was born subject to; Nay, it is hard to say, who repents a revengeful Mind most, the Revenger or the sad subject of his Revenge; That I, who this Morning was a Lover, should be∣fore night degenerate into such contraries as Hate, and desire to de∣stroy the thing I loved, it starts my Soul. I that would have die∣ed this Morning to have served or pleased Cicely, am now bent at the rate of all that is precious to Man, Honour, Health, and Peace of Mind, to seek her despite, and, with hazard of mine own life, strike Lucius, though a Brother, which she nor Nature can long∣er protect; For though my Heart tells me he is my Brother, yet she has said he is my Rival; which very thought has more mystery in it; then I shall live to understand. That I should have reason to know this, and not have power to master that impious Passion! They have too much reason who affirm there is a Fate in all things, which commands above our Reason; and it is vanity in Man to think or resolve he will be virtuous: His Stars laugh at him; and what is writ in Heaven we must act, for we but play our parts here; how would the world wonder else, when they shall read this part of my story? Manlius, that in his youth did something like Hon∣our, and aspired at nothing but a fair Fame, proud of the worlds esteem; Now, when he has found the highest Object Honour and Virtue can work upon, which is to Love handsomely, without any design or hope of Reward more then such a virtuous action brings; To know this, and to despise all the rewards that the Gods and Cicely must owe to such an action, and sacrifice to Revenge all that a Brother, a Friend, and a Mistress claim, must beget mise∣ries which already beget my despair. Love, if thou be a God,
as thy blindness has led me to this precipice, thou hast wings though no Eyes; and twill be Justice to lend me them to save me; else this new kind of madness will find too late a pity. My Hate levels at all, Brother and Friend are not out of distance. What she loves I must hate, my Rival cannot be my friend; nor can I with patience think she should be any others, though I know she will never be mine; But woe to the happy Lover who ever he be, it is not Brother nor Friend shall protect him. Calis too, though I never said I loved, yet I have listened to what she has said of modest and kind; so that this crime of mine cannot stab less then four; for each base act that I commit, she will bleed though innocent.—Ha, what noise is that? it is Horse-men; sure I am pursued, I will take the covert of  this wood to observe the motion.
This by the description should be the place, yonder are the Hermits Houses, and there is the Temple.
I Come not, Madam, to justify the mistaken kindness of Prince Otho, whose Friendship to me out-ran the respect was due to your Highness; when I desired him to speak for my Brother, his Love mistook the Object, and without either of our knowledge moved it to the Praetor. This we both started at when he told us the success, and feared what your just disdain would do, when you should find we had not paid the duty and civility a Lo∣ver owes to such a Mind, whom we first ought to have prepared, being the chief concerned in Love and Hymen. This Truth, Madam, has faults enough, and therefore we may hope to find belief; and this Error which a Brother committed, we hope for a Brothers sake may be pardoned.
Your Highness had need make no more excuse; though, I confess I was something troubled at the first; But since I received a visit from the Prince, I am so far from accusing him when I per∣ceived his Innocence; I think he will confess, I said more to let him see I was not angry, then I should have done to have pleased another; For give me leave to tell you, Clorinda, in all her kindness, has not more value for Prince Amadeo, then I have. But love him I must not. Cicely is not worth her esteem when she is false to her vows, which (I confess,) I have given Lucius; and nothing but Lucius can absolve that vow. Death, or Lucius his faults, can only set Cicely free; This I would have told the Prince, but that I was loath to add to his griefs a knowledge that might make him hate my friend or me.
I know my Brothers Heart so well, I am confident he will worship this Virtue in your Highness, equal to all the
blessings of the world beside; and when he shall know your Heart has pity for him, Honour will change his Love to Friendship and Adoration; and he will still worship the fair Cicely, without 
 one earthly wish or stain of mortal thoughts.
What paper is that?
I know not, Madam.
It is directed to Prince Amadeo. I shall not be so curious to know the secret.
Not I, Madam, till you read it; I am certain my Brother has no secrets he would hide from Cicely, since she knows he loves.
I should know this hand, it is Lucius his Character, my Heart fails me; This paper bodes some mischief.
She is troubled, pray, Madam, read it without any scruple.
I confess, I would fain be satisfied, for I have as much Interest in the Character as Clorinda has in the direction, it is Lucius his hand.
Heaven forbid my fears, pray give it me,—it is a challenge from Lucius. 
This I feared; Calis, a word; Your Pardon, Madam.
Something I must do to prevent this mischief; who that had read this paper would hereafter trust the Love of any, since Lucius can be thus faulty to such a person; My Heart begins to doubt, Otho may have his faults too, but this is no time to talk.
Gone?
Gone Sir; he leaped his window that looked into the Garden.
Prince Amadeo is from his Lodging too, and was seen to ride out alone this Morning.
Take the Guards and follow them with all dilgence; disperse your selves, and if it be possible prevent them.
Stay, my Lord; Sir, if you please to read this paper, twill direct you where you may certainly find them; I found it in the Gallery this Morning. 
Insolent and false, thou shalt find what it is to despise my Orders, and violate the Roman Protection given a Prince; be∣side what my Justice shall inflict upon thee, that durst without my leave, treat this saucy Friendship with my Daughter; and not only rob me of the Duty of a Child, but dishonourably seek to take her fair Name from her. Lysander, and Dyon, haste to the Grove, where Juno's Temple stands, there is the place of ap∣pointment; Alive or dead bring him to our Justice. Dyon, you know me, look I be not disobeyed; Some of you call Cicely hither, and set a strong Guard upon Otho. Your pardon, Madam; this trouble has made me thus long forget my respect to you; This In∣solence
showed to the Prince, and despising of the Roman Disc∣pline, has robbed me of my patience; But I shall give his Highness full satisfaction, and with his blood make him an example.
Heaven forbid, Sir; I know Amadeo will sooner die for him, then bring any such sad Calamity to his friends, and there is much to be said on both sides. You have high Reason, and ought to have the first place, as his and Romes General, doubly injured in your blood and power; Yet Love and heat of youth have their Friends that plead for Lucius. And we cannot expect, Sir, a Soldier and a Lover enraged should find place for Reason. Honour and Opinion slave the world too much; Lucius is a To∣man; and from Romes example where he finds difficulties he draws his Sword to remove them; See the Princess.
His displeasure is high, for his Orders were to kill him if he resisted, or else to bring him alive to Justice; You know how strict the Roman Discipline is, upon such a breach as this, to which is added Personal Injuries; and if your Highness do not in∣terpose, twill be sad; there is no safety for him if you show a dis∣pleasure.
Though he has injured me, I will not be so unjust to condemn him, before I hear him speak; fear not, Calis, it is not the anger of others shall make me forget what I owe to Lucius; and though he has done a rash act in disobeying my Father and my self, yet I will look upon that disobedience as Love to me; and Heaven forbid I should join to punish him for faults committed upon that score.
I sent to speak with you; did you know any thing of this business?
Nothing but what my fears prompted me to, and that I gave you an Account of by Calis.
If he hold his appointment, I shall at last have my Re∣avenge upon him.
I am sorry to find your Highness thus bent against a Per∣son whose Friendship to me has been thus long known to my Father; It is true, this act is not to be defended, but I am consi∣dent I need neither blush the becoming his Mediator, nor my Father be ashamed to let my importunity prevail against the se∣verity of that Law that condemns my Friend.—Which thus I do upon my knees, interposing my Tears to save from your displeasure  a forfeit Friend.
Rise; you must not plead for such an insolent offender; Innocence comes in question when it appears so partial in the in∣tercession for the Guilty. 
Sir, my Interest in all his sufferings plead for him, Lucius his guilt is my pride; Lucius his crimes is love of me, and here again I profess him my Friend; I love the Man, and if you punish him you make his crimes mine in the Affliction; and though I had no
hand in his guilt, yet I shall feel all his punishment, such is the mystery of Friendship; You cannot execute him a∣lone, and I am as innocent as the Law you would revenge; and your Justice upon Lucius is unjust upon me; so that to satisfy an Injury, you will murder a Daughter. This be∣loved Guilt, this affected Malefactor has won my Heart; even this Crime is an Obligation. My Friendship shared in all his good, and shall I abandon him in his misery? Heaven forbid. You know, Sir, in his healthy hours, in his days of Triumph, Lucius left not me out. Can I then with Honour share with him in his glories, and abandon him in this sad afflicted Fortune, where I am the cause too? It cannot, it must not be. You may deny me his life, but know then, you cannot persuade me to out-live him. Nothing shall say, Lucius was so much gallanter then Cicely, as to die for her that would not in his Funeral bear him company.
While Lucius knew how to be a Soldier, I loved and preferred him; But grown Insolent, and perverted in his Nature; as his virtues found my Friendship, so his crime shall feel my Justice, till he stands in story an example of both.
When Lucius was in health he needed none of your Physic; and now he is sick, you will not afford him a remedy; Innocent Lucius feared not your power, even that power which his sword has confirmed, though now you threaten his noble life with it. Nor will the world wonder why I plead for him: Is guilty Lucius such a common Theme? Were he not guilty, why should I bow my knees? A Daughter to one, and a Friend to the other? Are her tears no tie? Are her knees bowed, and her hands held up, of no force with a Father for a Friend? Is there nothing due to these? Common Miseries find common Remedies; And my Father may by a thousand ways show his Justice, though how for my sake he show Lucius Mercy.
Fond Girl, Thy kindness but heaps coals upon his head, and speaks him a black Villain to injure a person so far above him both in Love and Honour.
My Reason, Sir, loved him once, and my Love makes me pity him now; his Virtues overcame me then, and I but imitated the world in loving him. Thousands were Lu∣cius his Virtues, thousands were his glories, and ten thousand were the ties he has laid upon the world; Single is this ha∣tred, Sir, single his Crime, single your Justice too, and in that, Cruel. Lucius was ever glorious, and but once guilty. Ye Gods! who would through such narrow ways and crooked paths, with difficulties, hunt for flying Honour, if her wealth prove such a burden unto Men, that even with Friends an Age of Virtue cannot weigh down one rash Act? Lucius for one Crime dies, for whom a thousand generous actions past could not prevail; and Cicely, from a cruel parent must return denied. But I have
yet anger enough left to laugh at those that believe this Cuelty can make way for any low design.
See fond Wretch, blush and hate thy Folly. Read  this, and be▪ thy own Judge. Behold what a Friendship thou hast built thy Peace upon, scorned and suspected; In that read thy Lucius, and see to what a miserable Fate thou art arrived, after thy having given thy Honour, Duty, and Brothers kindness to purchase a Friendship with a Jealous, Choleric, Insolent Youth. Go, haste to the Temple, make him your Lord, that he may choose some other Beauty to pay his broken vows to.

SEe, Sir, I am here, according to your desire; But know, till I had read your Paper, I had nothing of Quarrel to you; But that had so little of Lucius, I cannot but hate my Fortune, when I consider my self out-rival'd by one that has so low a thought of the Princess; In whose name and revenge I draw my Sword.
It is better well-come then your words; For the wounds  that you have given both my Love and Honour are past their Re∣medy: and thus I must be healed, or receive more.
It was the noise of Swords,—ha! Two fighting.—Ye gods! Lucius and Amadeo, my Rivals: why does heaven thus tempt me?—Prince Amadeo, as you have honour, hold; Why Lucius, Amadeo, Lucius, Brother, pray hold.
Ha, Manlius! Lucius, if I would injure you, I could say, this is not well to have your Brother here; But I am so confi∣dent of his Honour, that I cannot fear an Injury from him.
How comes this? Did you not promise, you calmly would Expect your Fortunes, and not lose a Mistress, and a Friend
both? have I, for this, laboured both your Interests with the like faith and reality, neither swayed by the Partiality of a Brother, nor the kindness of a Friend, to find you two destroying all my hopes, and your own? What ridiculous thought is that which tells you, your Swords should decide who shall have the Princess? Do's your Highness think that she, or her friends, will be won with a Murder? Or can Lucius, after all his practice, and knowledge of Cicely, so mistake her, as to believe she will be set the Reward of the successfullest Sword? Now she will despise you both for this bold claim you lay to her; It is not now, who she will shall be happy; A duel, Not her kindness must dispose of it; As if Cicely were a thing any may have that can catch her: I am ashamed to find you have lost your Reasons; How must the Praetor and the Prince understand this, when they find themselves so far neglected? when they find a Sister and a Daughter cut from their Power by a Duel? Lucius, this Jealous anger will destroy all your hopes; Pray, Sir, let me know the cause of this sudden change.
Your brother can best inform you, who, this morning called me out; But, why, I am yet Ignorant.
Your Highness is not so ignorant of the cause as you pretend, though my brother be; To whom I now confess what your Highness already knows; Know then, After the Princess, in the presence of Calis and the gods, gave to thy brother her hand, in faith of Friendship, and her vows were writ in Heaven; yet, after this, Building on his greatness, The Prince, and his party, have se∣ducat her heart, and, by the Interest of a Brother, they have made Cicely false, and Lucius miserable.
Ha! What says he?
Otho, too, ungrateful Otho, All my services thrown by, has Interested himself in my Ruin, and has chid, and threatened his Sister to her dishonour; Otho, Manlius, Otho, for whom I so often have shed my blood, has gained the Pretors consent for Prince A∣madeo, and Cicely must be his; And thy brother, (after her faith given) Rejected; Now if these Injuries be fit for Lucius to bear, then chide him; if not, retire, and let me finish my Revenge, and do not thou Join in my dishonour too.
Is this Truth, or do you both conspire to make me mad?
Truth, by Heaven, after she had given her faith to thy Brother.
Put up your Sword then, and take a secret from a de∣sperate heart; Know, I hate you both, and Cicely is the Cause; Cicely has begot that hate; Hell on all your Trust, would you had been struck blind, and dumb both, when you saw her first, then your praise had never betrayed me to my ruin. Why did you send me to her when you found such Magic in her Eyes, as neither of you could resist? Why should you believe me such a fool, or so blind, as not to love, or Court such a Blessing? Why should you believe Manlius so cold or Dull, when he saw such a prize, such a reward for Honour, calmly to sit still while you pos∣sest
her? What claim has either, more then Manlius, But that you saw her first?
Sure, he raves.
No, Lucius, I love: and, despair of what I love makes me hate the fortunate Lover; And who ever he be, let him be sure I am in my grave before he dare possess her; For by Heaven, I will kill him; And since Amadeo is like to be the man, let him de∣fend himself; she knows, I love; and I know she hates me for ha∣avenge said so.
Hold, by all thy past Honours, or I will strike thee at my Feet; it is no tie of blood shall make me spare thee; Though I have lost Cicely, I will preserve my self fit for her in all her virtues.
Why should not I be revenged, as well as Lucius?
Take your time; If he out live me, The man will fight; you know he will, you have tried him; What would the world say, if he should die now? would they not call us Treacherous and Cowards, that betrayed a Gallant stranger, and called him forth, under pretence of Honour, to Murder him?
Who dares say so, while we live?
All dare say, and believe it too.
You had best resolve, Sir, We lose time; for thee (Manlius) I scorn to claim a friendship with thee; Yet my wonder would fain know, why you are so furious? Sure it is no news to Manlius, that I love the Princess.
You, and all the world may love her, so she loves me; But Cicely loves Lucius, and Amadeo shall enjoy her if I prevent it not; This is the cause of all my Anger: I profess my self an Enemy to any thing more fortunate then I am in my Love; And if you have her Fathers Consent, and he hers, what rests then but despair for me? Resolve therefore which will be first; for by degrees, I will either fall, or destroy you both; Think not upon any other Enemy, while I am upon the Earth.
His love is not more new, then Extravagant; But if Lucius will look on, I am ready to punish thy falsehood to a friend, and a brother.
And I, to kill a happy Rival, that must, I know, de∣spice me, because my Mistress do's so; All the world will see Rascal writ in my face, if I out-live story, that have lost a Friend, a Bro∣there, and mine Honour too, for nothing; Baubles, such as I will∣drone play with, will be more precious then the name of Manlius; Twill become a by-name for Treachery and Folly: Despised and false as Manlius, I will not live to see the Day,—Defend your self.—  Be thou the man then, that has won and lost her; Poor spirited Lu∣cius, to let her go when her faith was thine? It was Lucius made her hate and despise me. When I was faulty she loved thee, jealous mad man, for which defend thy poor heart.
Manlius, Lucius! What Planet has struck these men? Are  you not ashamed, Brothers, to bend your Swords against each o∣there? have you neither Honour, nor Reason left?
Tell me not of reason, Honour, Friend, nor Brother, They are all Idle sounds, without love; Without her love I am an Enemy to all the world; therefore spare your tongue, and use your sword; This Oracle shall tell you who is designed for Cicilia's love; Do not despise my words, for you shall not be so diligent to gain her Love, but this shall be as solicitous in the destruction of what she loves.
Perfidious, Degenerate Wretch, Coward, Bastard, no Brother of Lucius; hence thou barbarous Dog, be gone; or, by all the gods, that thou hast profaned, under my feet I will tread thy hated flesh.
How often have you seen Manlius thus treated, Sir? you strike me at your foot! Begin when you dare, you will find this Dog bite as sharp as Lucius; defend thee.
That's Dyon's voice, Hell upon this Beast; We are pur∣sued, I must take some other time; Sir, I know the Pretors Rage is not to be met now, I shall therefore retreat, till I can find a fitter time to receive the satisfaction nthis Madman has hindered.
Pursue Lucius, while we secure these; is your Highness wounded?
It seems so, in parting those Madmen; Pray have an Eye to Manlius, for his designs are false and mischievous.
Pray, Sir, retire, your wounds bleed apace.
NOw you know why we committed you to your Chamber, and conjured you neither to send, nor re∣ceive a Challenge from those Brothers; And I believe by this time Cicely is reasonably mortified with the Paper I gave her; Come, Madam, let us give the Prince a visit, I hear his wounds are slight; and I doubt not but that I shall give his Highness full satis∣faction, if Dyon Execute my Orders.
Manlius, they say, prevented them.
I am sorry the Praetor was so severe with the Princess, lest she may believe I am solicitous, to the prejudice of Lucius, in this business, which (as well as I love Amadeo) I would not do for all the world.
Come, Madam, time will heal all these wounds; Love has his Morning and his Evening fair; and though he threatens storms at Noon, yet he gives us time to dispatch our business in.
MY Lord, if you have any friendship for Lucius, immedi∣italy find him, and let him know what has past here this morning; tell him there is no time to delay his fortune; and if he has a hope to continue his friendship with the Princess, let him this night come to the Garden-house in some disguise: Amadeo and Clorinda have prevailed, and his Bando will this day be revoked; by this means there may be some hopes to reconcile himself to the Princess; when he is there give me notice, and I will contrive it so, that he shall speak with her; you may tell him how unhandsome and how injurious an action his jealous madness has made him commit against the Princess; while you do this, I will go find the miserable Manlius, whose treachery is now discovered by himself; the noble Cicely concealed his crime, in kindness to his Brother; what to say to him, I know not, when I see him. When his heart was at leisure and innocent, he would not be just to me; and now I know his crimes lye too heavy on his mind to listen to what I shall say of Love or Reason; yet I will find him.
Pray do so, and till I return have a care that he and the Prince meet not, for twill not pass without some unlucky accident; they are both incensed, the one with his guilt, and the other with injuries.
I shall use all diligence to prevent their meeting.
It is most certain, Sir, they fought this morning under the wood side; Lucius is banished too, and the Praetor highly incensed; if I meet him, have at his head, there's liberty, revenge, and reward, and your Rival gone; the princess is daily pressed to the marriage with Amadeo, whose wounds are slight though he keeps his Chamber.
There is no Star favourable to Orante, else I might have been by this morning, and with a seasonable thrust or two decided this business; but I am resolved, thus disguised I will to Court; and ere Lucius can return I will spoil their mirth. Who is that? obe∣serve,  quick, get your alms ready for the old woman, and then be gone.
Who are those? inquire of them the way to the Temple.
Good woman, which way must we take to find the old Temple of Juno?
The first broad Path on your left hand will lead you to the ruin of an old Altar, from which a Path will conduct you through the Grove to the Temple of the great Goddess, which stands upon the hill; in whose sacred name bestow some charity up∣on a poor wretch, despised and abandoned by gods and men.
There; is it far thither? 
A little half hours walk for my aged feet; but you that have youth and strength will in a thought arrive.
There it is, we are to meet him.
It is Dyon and his Soldiers in search of Lucius.
Dyon is his friend.
The better, and we shall the sooner find him, by tracing them; you are certain, if they were enemies he should never have known where he was; observe their motion, quick, follow them, if we find him we will make a sad sacrifice to Juno; be all ready and diligent, I will dog them, as if to beg; and when I stab him, be ready to second me.
NO more; I am not worth thy care, nor kindness; thy good∣nos upbraids me, and thy friendship makes me haste to finish what I have resolved.
By all that ever was precious to Manlius I conjure him to hold that desperate hand; why should Manlius think the world so wicked as not to pardon him one folly, a fault only in the intenti∣on? Alas, thou art so far from being wicked, that thou mistake thy own good actions; this cruelty thou show thy self to pre∣vent a sin, is more innocent then never to have been tempted.
Thy kindness mistakes me, and dost not see the wicked∣nos that is in my mind bent to the destruction and dishonour of what I love, if not prevented; and when it is done, Remember I must dye; consider that, and then thy kindness will kill me, while I am worth dying; here take this Dagger, strike, and save Manlius; if thou let me live to commit this violence, all the earth will stab me with their curses, and I shall fall unpitied and unmourned; be kind therefore, and kill me, or I shall kill my self, An act abhor∣red by all the gods; and thus only thou can save Manlius.
He is distracted sure; Heaven! do you offer me your Dag∣ger? would you have me that love Manlius become his murder∣er? unkind, is this the return of all my love and service? though thy insensible heart would never be brought to return my love; yet, methinks, thou might be contented that I was miserable all the days of my life, without seeking to draw murder upon me, to rob my soul of her peace too.
How much thou mistake the justice of this act, in exe∣cutting me; thou but savest the lives of two innocent persons, which thus, by chance, the gods have given to thy protection; and if thou now refuse to prevent my sins, it is Calis, not Manlius is guilty hereafter; it is Calis murders Lucius; it is Calis that ravishes Cicely; it is Calis that stabs Manlius to the soul, by resusing, now he is innocent, to prevent what she knows he is bent to act; Kill me then, and save thy friend, Kill me and save a family, Kill me now, and all good men shall mourn for me; for to have been tempted is no sin, thou say, it is yielding to temptation makes the crime, thus to resist would be an honour; and thus would thou show thy virtue and mine, that choose rather to dye then to be wicked; and kind Calis durst kill what she loved, rather then see him out-live his honour.
This Reason bids her love, and save thee; and Manlius ought to glory in, not punish, this nobleness in his mind, whose heart is so full of honour he will rather dye then think a sin; be still so severe, be still an enemy to that design, it is like your self; he or she that never was tempted ought not to glory in their innocence, but to praise their good luck; and now my friend hates himself most I love him best; now when he would destroy himself he is fit to be protected by all good things.
You will not kill me then?
Heaven forbid.—
For pity, for charities sake, do not leave me; or if you  will, do but kill me ere you go; you will not? Live then to curse me, fall all my sins on thee, and this cruel kindness.—
DId you ever love her?
Love Cicely? yes, with my soul, and she de∣served it then; for she had honour, beauty, and a thousand graces; such excellencies too, as are strangers to all the minds and faces I ever saw, or practised; this even my hate and fear must confess; but her mind, of late, has stooped, if not to sin and dishonour, yet guilty vanity has stained it; she cannot love enough to oblige any man, and yet she loves so much as has disobliged a Nation; to be born in her own Country is a crime, and cause enough to be de∣spiced; why else were Valerius, Polydor, Thersis, or Turnus, neglected? Men that through the whole world have had public Honour, fa∣mous  for Wit, Person, Fortune, Courage; and if those virtues could have prevaild', why were they disgusted? her reason was, she knew them not, but I rather believe they knew her, and re∣tired betimes, before she had power to sacrifice their peace, as she has done mine, to this stranger; Amadeo only is mentioned with
honour, at his danger she starts, and grows pale at the sight of his wounds; a wanton wanderer only in his way to Rome must make her break her faith to Lucius; and in scorn of the Roman Nation, this Mountainer must have that presented him which we in tears and wounds have begged; how oft have we exposed our selves to certain dangers to deserve from her a smile, while the emulous World grew Rivals for her favours? how many great souls have unwillingly entered the Elision shades, because they were to leave the conversation of Cicely here? but now that she is false, who would live, or love?
If this be so, why this rage? if her beauty has lost her power, and you your love, let it rest like Tales ill told, unregard∣ed and forgotten; but if they have their power still, which your anger confesses, let me have leave to defend them.
Here needs no Argument; all that have eyes must con∣fess Cicely had all that was beauty; but since she has broke her faith, it is become a Chaos all; for perjured beauty is like flying Armies, and blasted Fields that have no grace, no terror left, nor longer bear any mark or character of the Deities that moved in them, but the wounds of those Rods that in vengeance have fall∣len upon them.
You only can accuse the Princess of this fault, for your addresses are to the world yet a secret; and Prince Amadeo's love, public as his person, even when he was prisoner here; but that the Princess paid him more then civility; your fears are the first that accuse her, and I believe, deceive even your self.
Deceived! no Dyon, her love is as visible as her beau∣tie, durst he, else, move the Praetor for a consent, who you know dotes upon her, and her words like Laws or Oracles have still been powerful with him? nor was he ignorant of our friendship, no nor displeased; Come Dyon, you know she must consent before this be acted, and then to entertain me in discourse in her own Cham∣ber till you came with a guard to make me a prisoner; her Bro∣there too confined by a trick, while her Favourite is left free, to con∣clude their Hymens; and for the more security, my injured hands were bound from revenging their treachery; what is visible, if this be dark? the day is not more clear then her falsehood, and I have traced him in his love; his steps are as visible as when in snow we chased him; she is a Roman, Dyon, and will have her vanity satisfied; we that are her slaves, Prince Orante and my self, and (the falsest of men) my Brother Manlius, she is proud of all; Nay, Manlius has confessed his making love, ere she detected the Tray∣tor; proud of all, she can in triumph lead, but how she is changed, witness gods and men! when I first received this fire which now afflicts me, with what fear and silence I made my way to her! with what reverence I approached her breast! till then unacquainted with love, as she professed, kindly still interpreting every sigh; and fearing my fears only, she could then read an humble motion; and every sad look had her pity and pleased, when any handsome ass∣dent presented an occasion to please me; thus in silent secretness
we in friendship past our days undiscerned, or envied; the fish that glides in the silent stream, the Parthian Arrow, nor Birds that gently cut the air, make not less noise, nor leave less paths nor stains behind, then our love; the most jealous eye, Dyon, could not perceive we thought of each other when we had but one thought.
How came you to fall from this height, thus to suspect her virtue? that her eyes have the same majesty, appears by Ama∣deo's love, who deserves more then Lucius, or she less then Lucius, else she would still hold her power, which once with a look com∣manded him.
Alas, Dyon, what signifies the fire in those eyes, to Luci∣us, since it is exposed like those of the sacrifice, where every cold pre∣tence may warm it self? Cicilia's breast is now a shrine for every lame and blind passion, to offer up their impotent loves to, and there they drop their sickly false tears; this is it that puts a cloud before those stars; for eyes that with pleasure on all faces roll, can no longer Lucius heart control.
See the difference of men's opinions; you ground your displeasure upon that which to me would be joy and satisfaction; for you complain because all the world loves your Mistress; do you think Apollo would make the worse household god for having had a Temple and an Oracle at Delphos? does not the fame of many Oracles give us faith that there is truth in his answers, or is he lessened in his Deity by having received a sacrifice, and given an an∣swer? 'tisyour case, nor has your jealousy any ground; for all those rivals you so apprehend come but like pilgrims to the princess, they approach no nearer then her Temple doors, her eyes, her ears, there they their offering pay, Cicely is within; and while Lucius keeps his virtue, they may knock at her heart, but he only will be let in; for it is a truth, (that honour has in all ages proved) never any wo∣man that had honour lost it by being handsomely beloved; for while she is pursued with honour, she can lose none; nor gain any when she pursues any man; therefore leave this sullen retreat and jealous humour, and know if the Princess be faulty it is when she seeks Lucius, not when Amadeo or Manlius Court her; for it is cer∣tain, wooing women, if they do not want before, yet then they lose something of their value; and I do here confidently pro∣nounce the virtuous Princess so innocent from all that you accuse her of, that she must commit a fault ere she can pardon Lucius.
Dyon judges by the eye, so did I once, and purchased her friendship at the rate of my heart, because the prospect pleased me; but how sad and how unhealthy the seat has proved the world can witness; but thou, Dyon, and the rest that admire her now are but passengers, and such are by their eyes deceived as I was; but stay and inhabit in her mind, and then tell me how vain, how inconstant, and how ambitious Cicely is of all friend∣ships, which makes her unworthy of any; her vows have no roots, and such trees every passion shakes, and every cross withers.
I have no patience to hear you give such a character of a heart you know too great for such low thoughts to possess; and
were you not my friend I should not suffer it.
Who knows better then I? she had a great and gallant heart, the Empire too her own, till vanity betrayed it; but now it is torn and divided into several states; Orante, Manlius, and Ama∣deo have their several Provinces there; so might I, if I would be con∣tented with a Colony; but I scorn a part, or corner of a heart; and till Cicely be again reduced to Monarchy, I am free.
If you have reason, return; and with your presence pre∣vent this danger; and with your friendship defend her from such a destruction; this scandalous and sullen retreat betrays her to the enemy; had you heard her plead this day to the Praetor in your behalf, your soul would blush, and abhor this mean character.
Have I denied my protection? did I not stay till she be∣trayed me to prison? have I not like the kind Shepherd stood all storms, to guard her Flock; which be it never so full or fair, if the Nymph that owns them subject be to stray as they, by our gods, I would not her Shepherd be, to become Pan. A Mistress that must be watched and folded every night, or else she will be gone, before I would her Lover be, I would change conditions with that Tree. What dost thou gaze at? this Bracelet? it is hers;  and I confess it bound me more once then her arms can now; for since I find I have fellows in these chains, and that her Auborn Tresses grow as free as fair, and every Lover reaps her hair, Dyon must confess, it is not Jasons Fleece that I have won, though she Me∣dea prove.
I must not cross him now, his jealousy is too high wrought; besides, I know his nature is easier led then drove; in this particular Lucius has some reason; nor can I justify a Maid in such actions; for women that will give and take, for fancy, are not safe; because custom may bring them to like some things so well as to purchase them they may be persuaded to buy and sell; then the man that can soonest flatter them into a bargain has the undoing of them.
So he may; but whoever he be that will betray the Princess so, be sure Lucius be first in his grave, else all my rage thrown by, I shall find love enough to revenge, with sad fates, such a treason; for if I cannot suffer others to love her, Dogs gnaw me when I out-live him that hates her, though it be my self.
There is much more reason in this passion then in your other Arguments; for if the Princess could have learned the guilt of other women, it is probable she might have learned their craft too, and dissembled; which I am certain her fervent kindness (pleading in tears upon her knees, vowing friendship and love for Lucius, receiving no denial, making all his crimes so many loves to her, and so many Arguments for her love and protection) will acquit her from; till that fatal Paper, which you sent the Prince, was by her Father given her, which when she had read she was struck with the unkindness, and the displeasure of that thought that told  her Lucius had injured her.
O Dyon, Dyon, thou hast perfect Honour: a Faithful friend dwells in Dyon, one whom misery nor passion has divided from his Friend; when all the World armed against Lucius, he took my part; how I love thee for chiding me, and defending what I love! But alas, my Friend, my heart is grown sick of Love and fear: You must not believe all I say, I scarce do it my self; It is my fear, not my faith, that speaks in this passion; yet she was too cruel, because she might be mistaken; Manlius mistook it you saw, for Love; how then can you blame me for thinking I am robbed, when the Thief confesses the theft; guilty Manlius confessed his Crime, which she hid, and cherished; But I hope, my Friend (when he has told her of my fears) will present them too as the effects of a distracted Lover, which I would fain beg her pardon for;
Most gladly; It is Calis her counsel too, that you should come in some disguise to the Gardeners house this evening, where she will give you an opportunity of speaking with the Princess.
All my Rage, if she believe I love, will find her Excuse; for who is he that loves and will not fear to lose the thing he loves? Dear Dyon, she had wont to praise particularity and Constancy, and to admire it as the greatest virtue either Sex could arrive at; and call them the minds Chastity▪ without which what that woman will do with a Lover that Lusts so for a Lover, is easier feared then prevented.
This I shall say; only promise me to be quiet, till I come, and let your mind be in repose.
I obey.
It is Lucius, and Dyon, let them pass; This Evening, we must dispatch our business: Amadeo has her Fathers; But this Cicilia's heart, and both my hate; and they shall both feel my rage as high as their hopes, or my despair; And while they dispute which in her affection Highest stood; Despised Orante shall fill the Scene with rage and Blood.
HAs your Highness seen your Sister since this mis∣fortune?
No, Madam; her griefs are yet too fresh; it is better to give her passion some time to recover; This Night I mean to visit her, though I know her heart is struck deep with the injury Lucius did her; which is the more unsupportable, because we know his fault, which she cannot now hide from us, and therefore she will punish; And who knows but that it may take off that obstinate kindness she has set upon him?
When you mention me, Sir, to her, pray only pre∣sent my Service, and be pleased to ask her, whether I shall have the honour of her Commands to Rome, whither, within few days, I shall depart, that my absence may give her leave to pursue her Friendship with Lucius, if it be his Fortune; and time, I hope, will reconcile to her mind the Name of Amadeo; But ere I go I shall beg the Honour to speak with her, and take a sad Farewell.
Your Highness is Melancholy, and I hope a day or two will remove it, and this resolution; To morrow, the Praetor has or∣dered to chase the Boar, a sport your Highness has not often seen in the valleys.
The open Country will sure make the Chase much more pleasant; for our hills keep us from being in at the fall, which is the heat, and pleasure of the Chase.
This is for to morrow; But I must know where to wait upon your Highness when Lysander returns, for I hear he has met with Lucius; I confess I would gladly, this Night, undeceive him, and if it were possible, embrace him as a friend; And then I may hope to see to morrow rise with Joy; For my heart witnesses I have no rancour against him, since I perceived all his Injuries to me proceeded from his Love to Cicely; And since his Stars have preferred him before me; I shall be so Civil to her choice, as to be∣lieve Lucius much more fortunate and gallant then Amadeo.
Trust me, Sir, this is a kind of Complement I understand not; and I here profess, were I Rival with any Deity in the Love of fair Clorinda, I would make no Complement at this rate, till Hymen had decided whose the Reward should be.
THis from Lucius? sure he is mad to urge me thus.
Alas, Madam, it was love in Excess corrupted into Jea∣lousy, (not he) that said it, and his distraction is fitter for your pity, then your Anger.—It was ill done of me, to tell her what he  said in this passion!
Jealous? of whom? His own merit? that was only fit to be suspected; This Paper is enough; he needed not to have  blown the fire again; it is enough Dyon, and too late, he will find it; Cruel and sudden, may false winds blow in all thy thoughts false as those, thou told the Story of thy love in to me, too, too Cre∣dulous Fool, may storms of doubts and fears still afflict him, and distract his soul, as he has done mine, by a low mean Jealousy, which has rendered me Justly despised, for having so partially pre∣ferr'd Lucius before the world; Amadeo, Orante, all that were dis∣pleased, turn back and see me revenge you on my self, while I con∣fess my punishment just, though nothing be more unjust, then Lu∣cius to become my punisher.
When your Passion, Madam, will give me leave to speak,
I am confident, I shall make it appear Lucius has no Crime to an∣swer, but what has his Root in Love; for even Jealousy has been held Loves fruit, and such as even hatred has relished.
Jealousy! Who, that has Honour, can defend him, or his Injuries? Does not the first word, Jealousy, whispered in a Lo∣verse ear, call his Mistress whore; And since false Lucius has thus incensed my heart, and forced me to play Ariadne's part, exposed and left on that barbarous Rock, his Breast, Dyon, shall see me, with this hair and Eyes, crown some Rival, and shine in another Sphere; for though it break my heart, I will be revenged to the height; and Lucius shall see a despairing despised Rival fold this breast in his surprised Arms, and then his jealous heart will split with rage, and destroy the monster.
Well, Madam, I shall take my leave, and hope to find an hour more seasonable, to deliver my Opinion in; I shall only beg now, that your Highness will not, in this Passion, take any sud∣den Resolution, lest your Repentance come too late.
O Calis, had thou come sooner thou might have been a Witness, and a Judge of the Cause, as well as a Partaker of the Rage I am in. Lucius has, by Dyon, sent me such a remedy for Love: Would thou believe his poor heart should avow a Jea∣lousy for the Prince, and accuse me, as if my heart were a Common Inn, for every wandering Lover to bait at.
It was my fear his old disease had seized him; But what can he say?
All that his malice and his anger prompts him to; But how false, Heaven and Calis can witness; Ambition, Covetousness, Vanity; All that is ill his Injurious soul has thrown upon me; If ambition could have tempted me with her false light, How came Valerius to go single hence, whose birth and Fortunes were swelled with the favour of two Kings, and in his power the disposing of all Honours, and all preferments of three rich Nations flowing with peace; himself too a man made up of all the Gods: yet these and him I looked upon with Indifference.
Your Highness was not born to woo.
No, Calis; and therefore Valerius had only a Curtsy for a leg; and this false man knows, it was neither Ambition, Beauty or Fortune, I loved, But Love; If valour could have conquered, why did Polydor sigh? If Courage would have forced my heart, it had been his, for there was a quiet Courage, and conquest without noise, an humble meek valour waited on Polydor; why Jealous then? Fool, Fool; If Beauty could have charmed me, thou might have feared Thersis; for sure he would have been the business of my mind, before the world, Thersis must have been preferred, where beauty can take place, for there was beauty in all her choicest dress; Manly negligence, unthought of graces, sweetness and soft∣nos in every look, no Art, all careless, natural and unaffected
sweetness, yet graceful and pleasant in every motion; a harmony in his whole form, with a kind languishing modesty in his eyes, that could he have loved, he promised such a nature as must have won; if Thersis would have plaid these Cards he could not lose; but it was no reason lookers on should win the stake they durst not venture for; and if not of Thersis, why jealous? Fool, fool.
Alas, Madam, nor these, nor Turnus with his Voice nor Harp that charmed the world, could fetter your great mind. This I have heard him say, with vanity, in his joy.
No Calis, his heart knows it was not these in all their glo∣ries could prevail; nor one made up of all these could make me stoop; all these without love, though I value them, I will not sa∣crifice my freedom to; why then jealous? Fool, fool. O Calis, if Lucius had not pretended other title to my heart, I had not now been miserable; it was love, Calis, well dissembled love, which in a bleeding passion armed Lucius; in silent tears he has assailed my heart, Lucius, that durst fight, kneeled, weeping at my feet; Luci∣us that had wit and honour, stood dumb, not able to speak sense, but stammered out his story, while his breast swelled with love and fear; as if his kind heart were grown too big for his breast, and too little for his love; when I saw that, I had no power to resist the storm; but striking all my sails submitted my Resolution and my Reason to his grief; and to cure his despair have made my self thus desperate; for then, me thought love had raised that storm; me thoughts I saw his painted wings wet with his tears, and scorched with his sighs, and love sure was moving in that storm; nay, that storm was Love it self. O Calis, that shaking, that dumbness, those tears, his Quiver, Bow and Arrows are not more his characters, then they (when they are true) but these were dissembled all; and my revenge shall be as curious now, as my love was then, which I will take at height; follow Calis, and be a witness of that as thou hast been of my love and injuries; no words; By thy friendship, I conjure thee, no dispute; for I am resolved.
VIctory has undone us, and now our slaves lead us in triumph, and every passion commands Manlius, to whom this fatal peace has proved far more fierce then war, while lust fired by beauty burnt at every eye, and made slaves of virtue, honour, and all that is precious, till thy kindness, gentle Calis, re∣stored to my heart her peace again; without thy friendship, my de∣spair had run to his old remedy, wounds; for know, this breast is so used to them, it is scarce well but when it is wounded; it was foul blood that made this war in my heart; dear, let me ease it of that dangerous guest, lest it put me upon some new horrid crime.
Manlius is so severe against himself for one fault, which I know he cannot so soon repent as the Princess can forgive; for
she yet loves Manlius as part of Lucius; whose guilt is so unpar∣donable, as if not suddenly redeemed, I fear a danger not to be resisted; but I am now in haste, and cannot stay to tell you my fears (though it shall be my business to provide against it) because the Princess stays for me; but to morrow I will not fail to bring her hither, as soon as the chase is up; till when lye quiet, and leave the rest to me.
With what brow shall I see her, having confessed my sin to the Prince and my Brother? which she had concealed; her good∣nos still exceeds our guilt, which makes my crime more monstrous, and I that am to leave soliciting my love, find hourly greatness of mind, and new virtues to build upon; and what at first was passion and lust she has digested into Reason, Love and Adoration; what then rests for me to pay that debt I owe my friend?
Let me see Manlius reconciled to himself, and honour once possess his place again, and I shall find a thousand ways to be hap∣pie in my friendship; nor is the Princess so poor in virtue, but she can pay her debts to Lucius, and yet reserve an Alms for Manlius; I heard her once confess your speech had such a wild boldness in it she took it rather for madness then love; and it bred her pity, ra∣there then anger, your friends too plead with her; and though she will not chide for that sudden fact committed by chance, yet take heed of falling into the fit again; twill then be looked upon as a disease in Manlius; and what is mercy now, to pass by, then her honour and justice will both be engaged to punish.
I am resolved, for now I dare dye again; twill be always in my choice to dye fit for her pity when I cannot live fit for her friendship; and having such a guide as Calis my heart will find the path it lost, and stray no more at this sad rate; Good gods, how do they do that are villains always! I have been one but some few days, but would not continue so; I would live a Dog first.
Farewell, all peace rest with my friend; this resistance, this return shows his virtues never to have been tempted; never to have fallen speaks only happy stars, no tried virtue; to resist the temp∣tation is worth the name of Manlius, to have brought back such a servant as Manlius, gone astray from honour, whose peace of mind is my reward.
I will not promise, till my heart be purged by confession of her faults, and beautified by the Princesses Pardon; but then, if the ever noble Calis would accept of such a present as Manlius friend, Death only shall make him leave to serve her.
No more; when Manlius is least himself he was then a bless∣sing Calis prayed for; and it was happy for me that he fell from that height of honour, since this fall has made him mine; if he had not lost some of his pride and value, I fear he would have joined with the world in opinion that he was too great a blessing for Calis; yet I kept my friendship perfect, and kinder stars have blessed my love, whose humble wings never durst, till he was faulty, hope to reach his heart, and this fiery trial has but purified, not stained my friend, whom all the gods protect.
If your leisure could stay to hear me, I would chide Calis for descending so low as to value such a wretch as Manlius before her own virtue; but I shall look upon all these kind thoughts, as so many links to the chain she has laid upon my heart, which by a faithful, grateful, and eternal friendship, shall make me esteem my self her slave whose honour and kindness has redeemed me.
No more, no more;—Calis is too happy here; tomorrow, if heaven say Amen, I will find you, and bring the Princess with  me.
Ha! Manlius a Rival too, and the foolish Calis believes he can forsake Cicely for her, when honour and a Brothers inte∣rest could not bind him; does she think her foolish Chains and Bracelets can bind his rough mind when lust and rage has blown his blood to such a height that the reverence and beauty of the Princess could not hold him in the bounds of his respects? but why do I trouble my self with this, since it is a chance has done more for me then all I could have designed; the Princess will be here alone, to morrow.
And shall she go again? if she do, I would Orante were in his grave; Death, Sir, do something, to vex that cursed brood; since she will not have your love, take her honour, and please her in spite of her teeth, and then you shall see all her Lovers stare upon each other, and pass by her as if she were stinking fish, and I dye laughing to see that proud fool of fortune vexed to death; it would be a full revenge on Amadeo, and Otho too, that insolent Roman; then Lucius, how he would storm! S'death, do it, or let me do it, and do you look on; we can escape in this disguise, the act once done, by flying to our own shapes again.
I love her yet enough to be pleased in the act; and I have hate enough to take pleasure in vexing her, the revenge will be high too.
She will come alone too; S'death, it is such an occasion; if we had designed a revenge we could not have hoped it; and if you let it pass when your pleasure and your anger both prompt you, I shall never blame Otho for despising you, for I shall do it my self; the thought affects me, twill so vex her soul to have the crooked, ugly, despised, lame Orante enjoy her, without making an excuse, and pluck that fruit her pride has let Princes sue for upon their knees; I would do it too, in this old women's habit, while we persuade her it was the Devil in a Witches shape; you shall not be seen till we have bound her; why do you study? Is there any thing in our fortune or danger worth Orante's thoughts? is not death after this revenge better then to live deposed and despised?
It is decreed; hence Love, all thy charms thus I blow away; and a thousand thanks, kind Turnus, for awaking my heart
from that sleepy coldness that has slaved it thus long, the mischief will be more then the pleasure pleasing; and to enjoy her, and despise her, full revenge for her past scorn, and satisfaction for my despised love; in her Rape both my blood and mind will taste their several sweets; love in lawful bed might have found one plea∣sure; but now my revenge will have her share too; this stroke strikes all at once, Father, Brother, Rivals; the whole Nation are wounded in it, who in their women are more concerned then in their gods.
And, which adds more to the pleasure, she that would have satisfied any Lover rather then Orante shall taste no other man.
No, Turnus, nor live (if this Dagger hold his temper) to distinguish betwixt Orante's kisses and Lucius's.
If she be of the true Roman breed you may spare your pains; for Cicely will find a Dagger of her own, while Tarquin Orante, in the old women's habit, laughs unseen.
First we must kill Manlius, lest he play some pranks, and hinder our design.
That shall be my business, as soon as it is dark, I know his Quarter; let us lose no time, but call our friends together, for to∣morrow will be quickly here.
YOur pardon, Madam, for this intrusion, which, but upon this occasion, I should not have committed; my Brother being to take his leave, if not troublesome, would say: something of his own griefs; whose sad story I fear I may spoil in the de∣livery.
It is little, Madam, I have to say; your pardon for having said I loved, and leave to love you still; your pity and your justice, for a passion most reasonable, because it was of an object most di∣vine, is what I now shall beg; nor can you with justice punish me for what has honour to justify it self with, when it shall be a crime to love the Princess Cicely as Amadeo does, without desiring her to be unjust to her self, without taking one favour from him that has so highly deserved above me: for I shall not be so partial to my self, as to question the judgement of your choice; yet thus much I may say, my heart has never lost one grain of that honour it was born to, nor one spark of that fire it first took at Cicilia's eyes; Absence, time, nor War, no, not Cicilia's love to another, could change my heart; though rigid honour made me once fly from her, yet that love and honour both now have called me back; and again send me from this Paradise to eternal misery. This Riddle, Madam, those Tyrants will read best to your mind.
That you could know my fate, Sir, and I not tell it you!
you'll find me so miserable, I can neither be happy, nor make you so; yet time will justify me to the Prince, by giving him un-imagi∣ned reasons of my mis-fortunes. I know your Highness will when you are gone, at least, inquire after Cicely, if then; I do not let you see Lucius had only my passion, and Prince Amadeo my reason, then let him condemn me; and at such a rate I will punish my rash heart for giving it self away upon so little trial, as even your self shall pity me; and when I lose that esteem for your Highness ver∣tu that a gallant man can pretend to, and not lose his value of me, then let all the world despise me, more I cannot say; all that I can give with honour, take.
He that desires more must not have such an object as your Highness, nor such a subject as Amadeo's heart to work upon; who now without envy looks upon Lucius and his fortune. For heaven witness, I have all the ends my heart desires in the friend∣ship of the fair Cicely.
Stay here, till I find the Princess; Remember you observe my counsel, let her passion pass; answer little, defend nothing, for your fault is not to be justified; besides, I know when you are si∣lent her anger will want what to say; but from your answer she will still gather substance to express her displeasure, which is such as I fear you will scarce excuse, especially since your last madness; what made you send Dyon to her with that ridiculous Message which has almost distracted her?
What is past is not to be remedied; it was Lysander told me she gave the Prince a visit since we fought; and that Amadeo and Clorinda are never from her, which being my enemies, and she knowing their design upon her, and my relation to her, methinks, till my return it would not have been unreasonable to have ex∣pected she should have kept a distance with my Rival, and my Enemies.—Ho! see where they are, and Amadeo on his knees  kisses her hand, Hell strike him; ha! she weeps too: O Calis, Ca∣lis, she is false, she is false, she is perjured; trust the Wind, or Sea as, soon as any woman; what can she say now, let it be chance or de∣sign in both, she is false, Cicilia's false.
Stay, you are mad; what should this mean? his rage is be∣yond counsel; this accident is beyond my guess.
Ha! what voice was that?
A lying one, and a Traitors it was, whoever he be that spoke it; and if he escape me, Fortune shall do more for him then justice dares do for me.
Stay, Sir, give me leave to speak before your anger take its course.
Hold, Sir; whoever he be, he is not worth your sword;  My innocence none can better justify then your self; and none that has honour will question mine; and I beg this favour from the Prince, to look on some few days, and see me take mine own re∣avenge
for this scandal; till tomorrow, Madam, I must desire your pardon for parting thus abruptly.—Calis, a word.
It was Lucius's voice.
I knew that, but was loath to grieve her heart with tel∣ling her so.
You must expect his fury should discharge it self upon you; therefore be so just to the Princess, as calmly to tell him his error; and upon how unreasonable grounds he builds his jea∣lousy, this will confirm what you have said to her; for every fault Lucius commits her kindness makes heavy to her; and what ere you may believe, let him be never so guilty, she will not love his punisher; for to make his faults public by Amadeo, is to up∣braid her; and if you would destroy a Rival more gracious then your self, wisely see, and seem to hide his faults; then all your gallantry is his poison, and obligations upon her; I would not now fight with him till he struck me; and that patience shall win more from a generous heart, like hers, then thou can possibly reap with thy sword; for she and all the world knows, it is not fear of Lucius but love to Cicely makes Amadeo spare even his enemy, because she loves him.
Dear Clorinda, from love and thee I have learned two hard lessons; it is to stoop to Love and Anger; and I shall only ex∣pect what he will do, and resolve in order to thy counsel; I confess, I now begin to pity him, even my self that was this morning his enemy; sure Fortune begins to frown upon him, there was strange malice in this chance, to bring him to see that only which must vex him.
TOmorrow they hunt in the Forest; I will meet him, and in this disguise take my revenge; if he escape me, let him take her for whom I scorn to fight; but that I hate him more then I love her; besides, I know it will strike her soul to have him fall by me, and to see him killed for whom she broke her faith; this revenge will render her despised, having neither Honour nor a Lover left.
O Calis, how vain are our thoughts, how endless those de∣sires that rule our hearts! Lucius his jealousy has so humbled my heart, so discouraged me in the pursuit of happiness, that my soul is grown desperate; it is vanity for any Maid to hope by Reason, or Virtue, to tie any man to her friendship; the blind
pursuit of some, may by chance some minutes be happy; But no Rule can prescribe a certain way to make a Lover happy; Now I find, it had been better far for me to have had a nature like other common women, with a mind easily satisfied, and in a modest Ignorance have believed all that their false Sex said, and have ta∣ken what my fate would have sent me, then to labour the know∣ledge of the best minds, and, with a sweet Vexation, make my self fit for such as I cannot find, so to be only more miserable then other Women; for they in their folly gain that bliss I in my dreams have only found, and not knowing better enjoy all their wishes, living contented, and dying loving, and lamented, whilst I in pain languish, having lost that pride and value of my self which Lucius once begot; But it was flattery all; I am not fair nor virtue∣os sure; There is no Magic in this Form, as that dissembler swore; Else were those graces here, how came Lucius to despise me? Had I virtue, how durst that dissembler doubt my honour? O Calis, this scorn has robbed me of all my Friendship, I have scarce enough left to protect my breast against my own hands, which hate the heart that this false youth has wounded; Therefore no more, no more, I know it was he, and I am resolved; and since Calis has sworn to be secret, she shall now know my design.
Madam, I was never so much Lucius's as to abandon your Highness, for him; when I can serve him without pre∣judice of my Faith, I shall do it, in memory that he was once your friend.
That Idle thought is past and gone, my anger is resolved into Reason; yet his Injuries are such, that I can calmly tell thee, thou might as soon reconcile that Eternal Quarrel betwixt death and Nature, as Lucius and my heart. His jealousy has committed such low sins; I wonder he is not ashamed to converse with such mean thoughts; and I hate my self, to think I was such a fool as to let it be twice in Lucius his power to Injure me; But, from this hour, all the memory I shall retain of such a Crime as his Friend∣ship, shall be to show him I am Innocent when his Repentance shall come too late.
I hear, and grieve to hear, (You are both Subject to pas∣zion) and your miseries are like to be as great as your hearts; And though I dare say, neither of you love any thing better then each other, Yet that Love is like to be a fatal Enemy; for your Anger and displeasure is as high as his Jealousy and Rage; No one of you having patience to defer your Anger, or Revenge, till you see each other; This wild Justice, which both pursue thus passionate∣lie, I fear you and all that love you may repent too late.
That's my hope, and my design, that misery is now my souls wish, for you know I am Innocent; But since Lucius can doubt my Honour twice, and not speak to me once, he shall never be satisfied by Cicely but when it must breed his despair, which shall only find him when I am out of possibility to redeem him. For know, my soul is resolved to Morrow to find his Rival, and give him all the Joys I had laid up in store for Lucius; Though it
break my heart, I will do it; which I know twill do, when I shall find my self embraced by his Rival. This (Calis) is the Revenge I will take upon his Jealous Soul; and, if he love, twill wound him more then his own Dagger; For to a Lover it must be perfect misery, to see his Mistress condemned to a loathed Bed.
Heaven forbid—upon my knees, Madam, I beg, you  will not Sacrifice to your passion all things that ought to be precious with your self, your Friends, and your honour; No one of which but must be stained and wounded by this Action; And give me leave to say, it is not all the virtues that wait upon Amadeo, though in your lawful Bed, can preserve your Highness from the Censure of the world. In this Action you will lose many grains of Honour; for though the Prince weigh down Lucius, yet Lucius had your Faith.
Amadeo? No, Calis; Prince Amadeo is as far distant from his hope, as Lucius.
Not Amadeo? Heaven guard my poor heart; If Manlius be the man, I am lost; for I cannot with honour hinder his hopes; what shall I believe?
When saw you Manlius?
Ha! Now, Manlius, thou shalt find I love thee above my self. Lately, Madam, and a sad penitent for his Crimes; Is there no hope his repentance may find your pardon; are his faults allied to Lucius? I hope they are, else Calis is miserable.
No, fears, Calis; my Intent is to punish the faults in one brother, not to encourage them in the other; and my fate guides me to a Revenge on Lucius, not Calis that's my friend.
Then the gods are favourable to Prince Amadeo.
No, Calis; Prince Amadeo has too many virtues to make me happy, as Lucius has too few; and twill be as great a dishonour for Cicely to marry the Prince, as it is virtue in me to renounce Lucius.
Too many virtues? Heaven bless me, what fine points do we propose to make our selves miserable! too much honour, and too many virtues, to become Cicilia's Hymens; this is a Riddle I un∣derstand not.
To be revenged, and save mine honour, is now my bu∣siness; not to give my fame to punish Lucius; Can you persuade the world that I left Lucius, and resolved to punish my self for his Crimes, when they see me married to Amadeo? A man that is made up of all that is Excellent, Great, or Honourable? one that might Justify a Maid, even in the breach of Faith? should I marry him, it would make the guilty Lucius Innocent; and Innocent Cicely as black in story as jealous Lucius shall be; for who will stick to say, when we are married, Lucius then was Jealous upon too sad a ground? No, Calis, having practised and known the virtues of Amadeo, I confess, my heart told me he was a Subject fit for any Lovers fear, where he would become a Rival; Therefore betimes, to prevent such a danger as Lucius his Jealousy, you can witness I gave Lucius my vows and faith, before the gods and thee; And
after that, to have him doubt, and not only fear, but call me false, robbing me of that honour, and good Name, which with his life he should have defended, making himself those scandals a Gallant man would have stabbed, or strangled in the bosom of a Brother? But Lucius is false; it is not a kind fear which all that Love must have; but a mean jealousy, which does not only make me unfit for his Friendship, but the esteem of all gallant men; This is his Crime, which Lucius may live to repent.
If not Amadeo, what rests then, where is the Rival?
Orante.
Orante, what of him?
To that wretched Creature Fortune has reserved Cicely, not for his good, nor that she owed him a blessing; But for my Curse, my Affliction; To that wretch I will give my self; To him my vows of faith, if he will receive me, are now designed.
Orante! Heaven forbid.
Yes, Calis, I will marry Orante, not withstanding thy won∣der, and all the worlds, and having vowed to him pay him a faith as just and observant as Lucius should have had; And that false man shall see, honour obliges me as much to that wretch as love should have done to him; This way, Calis, thou shalt see thy friend revenged, and the world shall justify me, and say, Lucius was jealous without a Cause; for sure Orante is a Subject few or none will believe I should break my faith for; and when Lucius shall see him possessed of what he loved, the vexation that his heart must feel will be my Revenge.
But will your Highness, in a Passion, destroy your self, and punish all that love you because one has been false? Did you love nothing but Lucius? What have we that are your friends done? that you should afflict us thus, to see you make your self miserable beyond Redemption? sure you never loved Lucius.
Yes, Calis, and it was my Crime; for I have loved and obliged him beyond his hopes, beyond reason or Justice, preferred him before a gallanter man then himself; you know I loved him, First, for his fears, and they were lovely then, and his doubts as obliging as his jealousy injurious now; And this Act will let him see I never loved any thing but Lucius.
But suppose Lucius despise you for this Act.
Why then I will suffer for having loved one so un∣worthy.
If Lucius his faults had not their Roots in Love and jea∣lousy I should not defend him; me-thinks I should love him more for doubting his fortune, then for a saucy confidence of me, till I was his; There must be something, Madam, of the vain and inso∣lent, that pretend to love, and woo without fear, or doubt; Rage in a Lover I should take for Love it self; If Lucius had loved another, then a high Revenge were due; But all your anger strives to punish him for loving you; suppose a friend falls, suppose he goes astray, suppose he be sick, shall we then be angry? one of these is Lucius his case.
This I know, and that Orante's body is furnished with a mind more mishapped; one that will omit no means to gain his ends; one whose Lust prevails with him more then Honour or Conscience, which beast in the mind adds even to his deformity, and has bred such an invincible hatred against me; Yet now I will stoop even to that hate, and suffer my self to be miserable beyond example; My time will be the shorter to out-live the injuries of so false a man as Lucius.
But what have we that are your friends, or Prince Amadeo done, that you should punish us?
I have said Prince Amadeo has too many Virtues; and could I love again he were the man; This I said when I thought my self happiest, else I should not say it now; This I said, when I refused Amadeo, else I should not say it now when Lucius has re∣fused me; And when thou see him tell him this story, he will hate Lucius, and pity me, who will punish my self and become fit for his pity, for not having been wise enough to preserve my self fit for his Love, of which crime Lucius was the original guilt.
Can you forgive Orante all his deformities, all the sins and wickednesses that are natural to him, and marry what you have ever loathed, and not forgive Lucius that loves you, Lucius that you have loved, one fault, one crime? A sin yet to be dispute∣ed, whether it be so in Love or no; for Jealousy was once Love, Jealousy in the root none doubts is Love; It is true, what the fruit may be is doubtful; But Lucius his Jealousy yet has only born unhandsome fears, passionate choleric words.
O Calis, thou art yet to seek what abused Love is, thy Fortune was kind by chance, that made thee always love unbe∣loved again; But when thou shalt be sought to by divers Gallant Men, till thy free Heart fix on one whom thy kindness will oblige above the world; When neither Honour, Person, nor parts could tempt thee; when, like me, thou shalt have loved for Love only; then to find thy self deceived, suspected, injured, and de∣spiced by him for whom thy partial kindness has thus made war against the world, as I have done for Lucius, then thy Honour will fire thy Heart; and rather then not be revenged, like me, strike thorough thy own Breast rather then let such a sin pass unpunished; Disdain and Scorn will rise in the face of Love, when thou shalt see thy faith and kindness accused for false by one that begged at thy feet till his false tears had gained thy Charity; And now the saucy Beggar will proportion and give Rules to my Bounty, and confine that Honour, that pity, that kindness, that from a Beg∣gar, made him Master of my Heart; This ungrateful, dissembling, insolent, jealous, injurious Lover, is Lucius; and I by my Folly made so miserable, as to find a pleasure in being revenged on the thing I loved; which design to morrow I will pursue: And, by all thy Friendship I conjure thee, plead no more against my Resolve∣tion; But, in order to thy Oath, prepare for to morrow; and when the chase is up we may avoid the company and retire to some
place, to put on that disguise which I have already furnished, till when Farewell.—
Something I must do to prevent this mischief; when she hath spoke with Manlius the occasion will be fit; and to morrow, when we return to put on our disguise, I will lead her as by chance into Juno's grove, twill be proper to conceal her; And those sacred limits will afford a privacy fit to reconcile us; which being once done, I will break all vows rather then see her throw her self into the loathed embraces of Orante, though I will not now oppose her Passion.
THis time has been so full of Tempests, Madam, the storm would scarce give Loves gentle wings leave to fly in the Court; Jealousy and foolish Passion, those Birds of prey, still stooping at his Mothers Doves; And here, where Love should be heard sing, mutinous war has given our Hearts more Alarms then the Camp; But now these troubles are blown over, I shall hope it is not unseasonable to invite the Prince to honour our Hy∣men's with his presence.
Amadeo is yet all the staff Clorinda can in Honour lean upon; and I hope he will not refuse this hand now, when I am to walk in paths so strange to Clorinda as Hymen leads to; For though Otho had my hand to be his Bride, yet Amadeo most not be forgot, that has always been kind as a Lover, faithful as a Brother; And twill show a kind of insensibleness in me to desire his stay, only to add to this affliction by seeing others happy, and then to begin his misery; Nor would I punish Otho for others faults, by delaying his rights, which I confess are due; This straight your kindness must lead me through.
SOftly, and follow me; now you have seen him make ready; The first that meets him shoot. Saw you the Prince Orante?
Not since he went to the Hermit's; It is late, I wonder they stay thus long.
Stand close, I hear some body coming.
Be ready, he comes.
Away then, we will follow you.
MY Brother at your Hermitage?
Yes, and Calis with him; They are now gone to walk in the Grove, they have some design to morrow, I heard them appoint it; This path will bring us to him; and I am confident when you see him you cannot but pity him; So sad, and so dejected a Mind I never saw, yet I have concealed him all I can.
His poor mean Treachery was the first step to my mise∣rye; Had he been true to either of us, Amadeo had not lived to have acted, or Lucius suff'red a second Injury: And all the ties of Brother can scarce forget his Crime, though I know he hates him∣self for it.
Twill be Charity at least to reconcile your self to him.
His Injuries are yet too fresh; pray let a day or to pass, and then we will meet at your Cell and embrace; till then, no words of my being here: The Sun is low, and I will retire to your Brothers Hermitage.
THe Repentance of this Crime has brought a quiet and a calmness over my Mind; Anger, Jealousy, nor Lust have no longer power over me. One good Resolution has dispersed them all; I am now Master of my self again, and can with the world see and admire that Star without Ambition of plucking it from Heaven, and aspiring to its place; I could find Lucius, and kiss his feet, ask him pardon, and rejoice to see him possess the blessing I have lost, and, without Envy, hear him call the Divine Cicely his; This storm has made the Harbour sweet; I had such perpetual quiet, such constant happiness, before I knew not the value of it. This Affliction wak'ned me; and if to morrow be fortunate in the Princesses Pardon, all the rest of my days will be full of Joy and Calis Friendship.
Away, I hear company, leave him.—
Oh my Fate! this is sad to die I know neither how, nor why, and fall ere I have made my Peace with the Princess; a fullen Fate has prevented me to be grateful to Calis.
It was a shoot.
It was so, and in this place, What might it mean?
Hark, I hear some body groan.
Ha! your Brother lies murdered, Manlius; Sir, it is your Brother calls, he faints, give him air.
Quickly find his wounds that we may bind them; then  we will convey him to your Cell, where I have some remedies.
Trouble not your self with that; if his wounds be not mortal, I have a Balsam will give him a sudden remedy.
While you attend this Cure I will find the Murderer, he cannot be far.
Help me to convey his body to the Cell.
Poor Manlius, thou art my Brother still, for all thy Crimes.—
SO, this is past, and we are far enough from search; this poor habit will secure us; yet it is good to be privately armed, lest any suspicion find us.
To night he cannot be found in that unfrequented place, and our business will be done early in the Morning.
Where shall we expect her?
Upon the entrance into the wood, where we can stand and see them undiscovered; when they are entered seize and bind them, and convey them to Juno's Grove, whose privacy will be fit for our design; For being sacred to the Roman Deities, none will come there to disturb us: The Act once done, you may re∣solve to quit this shape and stay; or protected by your disguise thus escape.
I am not satisfied with your leaving Manlius: The fell∣low says he was not dead, and believes his wounds but slight.
Slight? A shot and two thrusts, that you may see thorough him; if he licks them whole time enough to hurt us, I would have the Praetor keep him to lick the Army, instead of lead∣ing them, he will heal them as soon as a Charm; Besides, I have no Malice to him, he was always a good plain fighting fellow, that would never talk much; one that when he was outwitted would repair to his hand still, and use his cold Iron as his last Are∣gument: I have seen him so beat a better wit then himself, for disputing with him beyond his Reason, that he could have wished himself a fool to have been out of his hands: Besides, he is none of our Enemy in this quarrel; Alas, he is as angry as we, a poor despised Lover, and mutinies against Prince and Brother; He is a lame Cripple of Cupids, that hath both the blind ones against him;
Love and Fortune are both his Enemies, and a Man need no more affliction in this world then to be in Love, and have those two de∣clare against him.
Let us not part to night, that we may be sure to attend our design to morrow.—
THe Princes are both in their Chambers, and now a making ready for the Chase.
But Manlius is missing, and Lucius though banished, is not far off; His Peace is made by the generous Prince Amadeo, and was for certain, last night, at the Gardeners little house in the Grove; Calis confesses she brought him thither, and that he flew from her in a Rage when he saw the Prince Amadeo taking his leave of the Princess Cicely, and mistook their parting for a con∣clusion of what his jealousy has apprehended; This, if you meet him, you are to assure him of from Calis and my self, that his mind may find some peace; Let us divide our selves, he was seen to en∣la this wood, and his Horse was taken up this Morning loose; I will take this path, and we will meet in the place where the Hounds are uncoupled; Let not the Praetor know he is hereabouts, till we have spoken with him.
I shall observe; but if there were no other way to wo∣men then these Princes find Lysander would curse his Stars; Dost thou think there is so much to boot betwixt a woman and a wo∣man as these foxes pretend? If there be, I thank the Gods for my ignorance, that understand not the difference of the common∣ditty in my practice; Sweet, and young, and kind, if sound, goes far, and when they were alone they would all hear Reason that I have had to do with: But here is such fighting, and sighing, such hunting and losing, and squatting, starting, and turning of a Coney, such erring, swearing and staring, and Puss is as angry as any of the kennel of Mad-men that hunt her. Are all Roman Princesses thus hard to be caught? Sure he that gets this will not complain she is tough; And if a hunted Mistress be a good Bed-fel∣low, bid him put this in crust; I warrant her she will eat short, yet I have heard a Lover say, his Mistress Heart cannot be too soft, nor her Arse too hard to make a servant good sauce.
Beast, such a description I expected from thy Camp, and sucklers observations; And how many servants does't thou think Gentle-folks can in Honour make happy?
In a Day and a Night, how do you mean?
No, no, in all her life, fool?
Why, a Regiment of Horse, and a Brigade of Foot, I dare say, Faustina has past so many pikes as that comes to; and yet she works for her living, and has no good convenience to dispatch her business neither; had she time and opportunities
that your idle Ladies throw away; their several rooms, and loneness when they please; she would have done brave things.
If I had malice enough to publish this in the Court, how the women would all to behang thee for this roguish opinion; why I tell thee, it is sometimes seven year ere a good sufficient Lover gets leave to kiss his Mistress, and fourteen ere she kiss him again; but to let two men kiss her, Heresy, and they are burnt; I never heard of but one that was seduced, or persuaded to that Heresy; and the Rogue told of her, but no body durst believe him; for the Plague is not more mortal then such a discovery against a Platonic Lover of this age.
And do we take pains to preserve this Race of Fools? prithee, let them find and kill each other, to the end of the Chap∣la; S'death, if my Lady, or her woman, should deny to do me reason when she had time to answer my Question; By this hilt I would hide this blade in her belly; A pox of this fooling, Does your Prince use my Princess so? By this hand, if I did not think he had knocked her down ere this I would poison him; she is a blade, in faith, Dyon, none of your no forsooth, none of your whining no fies: By this hand, if she does not strike first she has cozened Lysander; hark, I hear the horn sound in the plain.
Farewell then, till the Chase is done; and then I will bring you to Calis, and she shall make you a Platonic Lover.
I will be gilt as soon as be converted by that whining Broker; she is Cupid's Baud, and withers in her Petti-coat, for one of those thousand Curtsies she has done for others, she loves men for loving other folks, and she has reason; for unless she mends her face she will scarce do it, for loving her; Colic's old sayings, and I had as many Maiden-heads as she has brok'd away, I would not be dis-virginated in a year; she hunts Manlius count∣er; and if he go on when will they meet, less in a Comedy? where to see an old reverend Maid that has sate seven ages in a Court Receiver of Loves Customs, at last, pretend with Arguments to persuade a Soldier to the love of shadows, Platonic friend∣ship, twill be as ridiculous as the Miller that laid the Sack upon his neck, and then got up to ease his Mare. Farewell, Dyon.
NEither this last night, nor this morning, could I find any that I could suspect for this murder; those were the Keepers, and to them I dare not be seen; the woods are full of people, sure the Praetor hunts to day.
He does so, I spake with the Master of the Game this morning when they were pitching of the Toils.
I lost my horse last night, and I fear I may be discovered by him; therefore I will retire; and if you can discover any news in your Cell I will expect you; I will to my Brother, who since
he has rested gives me hope his arm will not hinder our search in finding out who it was that shot him.
I have persuaded him to eat something; fasting and loss of blood are both dangerous for him; I will mingle my self among the people, and to all but Calis conceal your abode.
Pray do so, and tell her Manlius and my self are reckon∣cil'd, but mention not his being hurt.
I observe you.
How unreasonable a thing an enraged man is since I have listened to Manlius his discourse I find the fault my heart has com∣meted against the divine Cicely such as I cannot hope for pardon; a fault so great and so unjust I am so far from believing she will for∣give me, I cannot forgive my self; what a fool a Lover may be? what beast but Lucius could have doubted Cicely? there is a folly in jealousy, and a kind of cowardice; I wonder any thing that is man, and has conversed with honour, could let it prevail over his thoughts; there is nothing so maliciously bent to the destruction of Love and Honour as jealousy; it strikes at the first blow the root of both honours, the Lovers and the Loved; it calls her what is not fit to be beloved, and tells her we are incapable of loving; that low passion calls our selves what we would not hear another say, nor live with that man that we believe thinks so; Lysander had reason when he despised my jealousy, because it confessed my Ri∣val deserved better then my self; else my Mistress is either a fool or false vanity; though it be poison to love, yet in this case a lit∣tle is Physic, and allowed to defend us against the danger of jealou∣sie; all Treacles have some poison, which like the key open the door to let the Cordial in; vanity in a healthy proportion, and ta∣ken in season, may do our selves justice, and defend our loves; and Cicely would sooner have forgiven Lucius a little vanity then this jealousy; Lucius might have said, what if Amadeo be a Prince, and Lucius a subject; is not Cicely a Princess too? and what though the world prefer Amadeo, she has chosen Lucius; and if I have grace in her eyes, let him be hapy where he will: what if Amadeo have Otho's consent, while I have Cicilia's faith? this I ought to have whispered to my soul; and when my fears apprehended Ama∣deo's person, or his parts, my thoughts should have prompted me, Cicely had honour and friendship for Lucius; and those thoughts would have smothered that fire which jealous anger bred in my un∣fortunate breast; and rather have died then doubted the fair Cici∣lia, while intemperate love, I fear, has thrown down the Altar we were so long a building; unless her goodness will still act more of the Deity then Lucius of the fool or mad-man.
Sir, the Forest is full of people; the Praetor and the stranger Princes are all abroad; the Game was up, and all men inquired for you and your Brother; your horse was taken up this morning; I saw the Princess Cicely, Calis was with her, they are both sad; it is my opinion you retire till Calis come.
I will follow you; men in mis-fortunes have a large
Stage to show themselves upon; and he that Acts well, be his part never so Tragical, leaves the blame upon his Stars; I am now en∣gaged, Love and Honour have brought me on; and though jea∣lousy has made me stray, yet those guides will find the way.
IN this disguise I will make my revenge perfect, though my fortune be miserable; it is not Orante's deformed body, and soul crookeder then his back, lost his fame, low as his conditi∣on, and a nature worse then his fortune, shall make me change my resolution; to whose loathed embraces I will now fly; yet here I confess, death's cold lean arms would be welcomer far, could I then see Lucius miserable; no reply, as thou love me, but haste to the place of our retreat till this business is over.
Stay, fond Girls, and know your fates from me; Weak and poor your designs are; you may vow to what gods you please; but here in this place you shall find your Destiny at his utmost date, born to enjoy nothing but what you fear and hate; seize upon them.
PRithee, Lysander, stay; my heart bodes some ill, there is a heaviness upon it will not let me enjoy neither the Company nor the sport to day; saw you which way the Prin∣cess Cicely went?
Calis and she entered the Wood but now, and see where their Clothes lie.
Heaven, what may those pretend? Some violence sure,  Murder, Treason.
Undoubted, Thieves would have taken their clothes; see, there is money in their pockets, and a paper directed to Lu∣cius; hold, Sir, I apprehend from this paper the Princess has taken some resolution to absent her self from the Court, to avoid being solicited in your highness behalf; for, faulty as he is, she loves Lucius.
It must be so, let us away, and find the Prince; Bring
the clothes, that they may know the chance, I cannot guess enough to satisfy my troubled mind, my fears have robbed me of my Rea∣son; See the Prince.
What means this?
Here in this place we found them, and this Letter di∣rected to Lucius.
Heaven guard my Child.
All the gods pro tect the Princess.
From all but her own Passion I believe she is safe; but I know her heart is troubled at Lucius his Jealousy; I fear she has ta∣ken some desperate resolution; Pray, Sir, open that Letterl for I am confident she there tells him all her thoughts. 
Ha, Orante! to find Orante? to give him her vows, and faith for ever, to marry Orante, to be revenged on Lucius, [all O∣rante? Read, Read,] my eyes are lost in tears; Otho, your se∣verity has forced her to this Justification of her love to Lucius.
Away, Sir, let us all divide, and beset the Wood, they can∣not escape, it is but now we parted; for heavens sake disperse, lest the sad delay beget the Curse she threatens, Orante's bride? a Grave rather, good heaven, thou see her in that loathed place.
If we can find her, Sir, all is safe; I know, she has so much kindness, honour, and duty, she will not refuse to give up her trouble and passion to your Authority; I know it is only Melan∣cholly, and displeasure against Lucius; Which kindness from your Highness will in a little time remove. She still with tears lamented to me your Highness severity, and that of late the brother was quite buried in you, and all you said or did was full of the States∣man, and the Prince, without a thought of her love, nor the least kind sense of her, or her wishes; and being thus abandoned by a brother, wanting some kind friend, to lament; to sadness, and grief, having no vent, Lucius his Injuries has made her take this desperate resolution; and I am glad Calis is with her, a person of too much honour and discretion to consent to this design, though she may seem to comply with her passion.
However; let us not delay finding of her, and I believe it is fit conceal our knowledge of this Paper till her mind be quieted.
Divide then; Otho, come you along with me.
Lysander, let us take this path.—No Clorinda, there is  your path; Blush not gentle Maid, Otho is a Prince, whose friend∣ship no Maid ought to be ashamed of; Be faithful to him and his fortune, dear Clorinda; Else all the kindness thou stealest from him is not worth the taking; Love and Honour him next the gods, let Otho possess thy heart, and then thou art kind to Amadeo.
This generosity in Amadeo is more chains then those we load Our Captives with, and I willingly stoop to him; for it is no dishonour to be overcome by Prince Amadeo; the great Example
of Honour and friendship; But if the unfortunate Cicely had not been condemned to misery she might have paid a part of this Debt; But fate that gave such a Jewel to the world as Clorinda, and Amadeo, knew too well their Price, and therefore appointed them for fortune, not merit, to possess.
Any time but this my thirsty soul would watch ages to drink the Joy it has, to hear you vie who should love each o∣there best, while I smile to see how much a maid out-loves you both; which I do, or my heart deceives me; for I am sure I would. And what a lover kindly would is to a Lover Currant pay; for Love is all as happy, and as obliging in the will, when it is placed upon a Noble Subject, as the Act it self; But we lose time, and with that hazard the most precious things of the Earth; Otho's sister, and Amadeo's Friend, which Title Reason and her Passion both have given me.
In the plains we will meet if we miss them in the Woods.
Haste, Amadeo; a Lovers Eye is as curious in his search as the Cretin hound in Chase; and my divining soul tells me Ama∣deo must find her though he lose himself.
O Manlius, the gods then decreed my ruin when they let thee fall from Honour; Thy wilde Injuries di∣stracted me; A Brother and a Friend at once I lost, and at a time when I had most need of Counsel, Anger having broke her bounds, despising love and reason; and that hedge thrown down all the ills that uncollected man is capable of, like weeds, possessed my wild breast, and over-ran my mind.
I cannot but wonder at your Jealousy for those few days past, when I was so bold in ill as to tell her my crime; she was then all Lucius's; The gods and my Brother had only Interest in her heart; Nor can I, in all your discourse, gather one cause of anger but her silence, that only was her fault; for she was not in Passion though Lucius was; and therefore her friendship should calmly have cleared his doubts, and rather have quenched his an∣ger with kindness then have kindled hers at his passion.
No more, dear Manlius; though thou art now my dear Brother, yet from thee my kindness must not hear the least de∣tracting word, not a thought that tends to accusing the Princess; It is the Quarrel I have against my self, which no friend shall re∣council; I hate Lucius for that sin so much, that thy kindness, which is now new heat by a happy reconciliation, and would now receive all impressions from thee easier and readier then before our unkind∣nos; I must not hear thee speak in that strain: shall I, that would not have heard my bosom friend say the Princess loved Lucius,
endure to hear it told me, she is false? as if her love had been a Crime or sin, and her falsehood a virtue? No, dear Manlius, thou can witness, with a Sacred Reverence We held our Loves, till this fatal Jealousy robbed me of my Reason.
Reason had saved us both, But the gods will not let Reason be always in Season; Men came too near their Deity, did not our Passions master us, could we keep them tame and low, how quickly our hearts would have found the precipice we stood upon; When we both made it our business to find arguments to hate what we loved, and with tongues and words strove to publish to the world that lie that said Manlius hated Lucius, or Lucius could hate Cicely.
And I, that all my days despised the worlds opinion, and their way of love: Did we love like the common people? Did we make the world our Judge, or guide to love by? No, no, nor shall their depraved Customs stand Examples for Lucius now his Reason is re∣turned. How I will oppose her past favours against my present fears, and they will defend Lucius; This thought, and such a friend as Manlius yesterday might have saved me from this misery; He might have told me how late I came to Court; When love with all his strength had besieged her heart, youth and beauty, honour and fortune, power and wealth, were there seconded by all that were famous for Arts or Parts; Thus engaged I found her heart, yet their Batteries, nor Mines, nor Assaults, nor Intelligence within, could win the Excellent Cicely; who, with honour made defence, till Lu∣cius, (Then too happy Lucius) came and raised the siege; In which he such glory got, he stood the envy of the gods and men, till this Cursed Jealousy struck him to the Earth.
Had not I been mad too, a friend might have saved us both; a Friend is the staff and safety of our Peace; he might have said, shall we, when a friend loses a Limb, or Child, or any other the lesser gifts of Fortune; Or if by sickness afflicted, will Lucius in these cases be sad, and show an Extraordinary kindness in Tears, or diligence to give them Comfort; and when his Mistress has broke her Faith, or lost her Honour, will he then be angry, and seek a Revenge? how unreasonable were such an Action, to add his afflictions to the shame and trouble of her mind; her guilt would be load enough without thy hatred or thy anger; sooner fatal wounds should let out my life, to banish from her sight an Object that upbraids her, ever I reviled the name I loved; such a hate de∣clares it was self-love, else thou would pity her now; and in this sickness of her mind, at all rates of mercy and kindness, compass her peace; such a generous silence, and handsome bearing of her Injuries would speak thy love to her; and who knows what such a Cordial may work upon the most desperate disease that love is subject to, and restore her heart, or at least pay that debt Lucius owes her, whose mercy could not see him sad, but at the rate of her self once bought his Peace.
O Manlius, chide me still, chide me, till my blushing soul has with shame and hatred of my self expiated my guilt.
Hark, Sir, the Noise of people draws this way, pray let us retire; and if Calis can prevail with the Princess, here you may find an unexpected blessing, for she has promised me as soon as they can lose the Company, to guide her, as if it were by chance, to this place, to beg her pardon for that fault which you must both for∣give; But I would not have her see you, till Calis be acquainted with with your being here; Hark, they draw near, pray let us retire.
O Calis, it is Orante, I know his voice through his dis∣guise.
It is so.
Yes, it is Orante, That Orante your scorn and Malice so lively described even now; But thy knowledge of him will cost thee dear; for when I have took my pleasure of thee prepare to die, I will try if your Curious Lover can find by those steps which my Lust shall leave on thy proud Body, who it was trod down thy Virgin Flower; Know fond woman, thy scorn has made me hide self in a thousand shapes; But to take a full Revenge, which I now shall do, by thine own folly; This Occasion Calis gave me; for which Manlius shall thank her; for know (twice betrayed) thou art come hither to meet the lust of Manlius, who here was ap∣pointed to expect thee; But that danger my Interest, not hate to him, nor kindness to thee, has removed; And when those Soldiers have entertained themselves with Calis, they will show her where she may busy her self with burying of him.
O monster, unheard of Villainy!
It is high revenge to vex you, and to have in my power to force what your scorn would not give; and now know, all the Treasure that the Earth has shown, or hid; All that Treason has bought or Sold; All that the Sword hath won or lost; All that Love hath given, or lust has cost, shall not buy from me this Re∣avenge; Turnus, bind her, and then leave us.
Calis, O Heaven, dost thou see this, and not protect the Innocent?
How sweet this Rose smells; Much more Honey is there in this Nectar, then in that Jove drinks; Dispatch, Turnus, that my soul may be drunk with Beauty and Revenge; Let Heaven frown another Age upon Orante, if Fortune would but give him such an∣other Revenge.
They are tongue-tied already.
Dumb, Cicely? How their Hearts swell, now they play Orantes part, her Heart would burst now to be revenged; This is that pastime your scorn used to take upon Orante; Come dispatch, no resistance.—A Bracelet of this Orante now might wear with∣out  wooing for, but that Lucius and Amadeo would be jealous.
Ye Gods, what words can express this villainy! what voice can speak the Injuries and Rage my Soul suffers! Heaven in Thunder tell this monster what I designed for him; and then to punish that crime save but my Honour, and let thy lightning strike him through this unfortunate breast. 
S' death, I think they have gotten men's minds and strength with their breeches; A Jury that should condemn your Highness of a Rape upon either of these two alone, ought to be hanged themselves for false Rogues; It were an even lay a Jury did not do it; S' death, she bites, and scratches, hold her hands, a pox.—S' death, you whore, had it been a little higher it had sped my plough: What shall we do now? she will be mischievous.—
Hell upon it, kill her, and I will enjoy her while she is warm; any thing rather then let her have her sullen will to die a Maid, and rob me of my Revenge.
Hold, Villain, till I have spoke, and then do what Hell and thou shalt decree; for having thus secured my Honour from thy force I can smile on death. From my last words take this truth, and believe me; though thou hottest me, I am not so wicked voluntarily to go to my grave with an useless lie in my mouth; Stir not, leave that vain thought that bids you hope to disarm me; for know, though this dagger and a feeble arm be not able to de∣fend Cicely; Yet she has Honour enough to defend her Honour, and kill Cicicilia, which I shall do upon the first step that moves this way. Know then, thou hast prevented thy own Fortune, for witness Heaven, (to which thou hast now forced me take a hasty journey) my business and this disguise was to find an occasion to give my self to Orante for a Bride, if he would have received me.
Ha! it cannot be, this lie will not save you.
No, monster, it is so much truth I will not be saved; for I confess, I ought to die for having so base a thought; Yet be∣cause thou shalt believe what I say, thou owe me nothing for that desire; for had Lucius been worth the having, •• Cicely worth the presenting to generous Amadeo, Orante should never have had her; whom my Soul feared and loathed, and my Heart divining some horrid villainy from thee, has always trembled at thy Name; and but to punish my self and jealous Lucius, Orante had sunk un∣thought of.
Riddles, by Heaven Riddles; But I shall find an Oedi∣pus to read them.
No monster, the truth is too sad; And had thou been a Man of Honour, and fit for any Hymens but one enraged and blind with Passion, Amadeo had this day been happy; But his Honour made him unhappy, having as much nobleness more then weight, as thy base mind was poor and destitute of good.
It is truth she tells thee, and now I defy thee. This kind Remedy Heaven has sent me against all my past miseries; And thy horrid intents are the loud calls, the Gods have used to bid me make haste to them; and if thou move one step this way, thus I go.
Shall foolish fear or pity make me afraid to embrace or enjoy Cicely? Fond Girl, dost thou believe I will lose thee when there is only the difficulty of a dagger betwixt us? No, proud fair one, thou art mine in the spite of Fate; even in thy dying groans, it is decreed, I will enjoy thee.—
Help, Rape, Murder, Treason, help, Murder, Treason, Rape, help for Heavens sake, Treason, Treason, O horrid Villains!—
Stop her mouth.—
Hold your prating, or I shall cut your weasel.
This way the noise called, it was a women's voice that cried for help; Ha! See, Sir, the same that wounded me last night.—
So, this danger is past; and there is yet enough left of the proud Cicely to satisfy my Revenge.
Cicely, and Calis, Heaven! what chance, what calamity is this?
Dost thou wonder, false Man, to see the ruin thy jea∣lous Soul has made of all our happiness? Murder, Self-murther, Rape and dishonour threatened, Self-murther, whose black path thy jealous Heart has forced me to tread, to save that Honour Lucius would first have ravished. Live, and find all that thou mistrustedst innocent; And, for thy Curse, let them thou trust next be as false as Lucius.
O my Fate! Why have I lived to see this day? Orante, be yet so kind in thy crime as kill me. Durst thou stab? Had
thou a power to strike that breast, and find remorse at mine that am thy Rival? Villain, or kill me, or be sure thy hated soul shall never sleep in that cursed body of thine, though when it is let out twill but change Hells; Dog, dost thou smile upon our miseries?
Thy jealousy struck deeper, and more fatal, then his Dag∣ger; that gave the first wound, that struck my fame, and wounded more then his fury can; false and unkind, thou deceived'st my heart, and were false to her that loved thee; this wretch has only acted that my hatred ever feared; the world expected nothing bet∣la from Orante, branded and marked from heaven, and despised by men; But Lucius, jealous Lucius, has deceived both gods and men, and abused their trust; but these wounds, I hope, will justify me, and punish Lucius, and deceive the hopes of cursed Orante.
Heaven lend your hand, to save the Princess.—O, my fate!—
If I were loose, I might call for help.
Like Birds with broken wings we lye expecting sad fates, to be the spoil and scorn of the foolish fowler; sure I have so much strength as to crawl to Calis.
She is faint, but not dead, now she is tame enough; see Lucius, this was your Cicely; there is beauty and pleasure even in her dust.
Villain, Murderer.
Oh ye gods! lend but so much strength as to save the noblest of women.
Sure heaven's kind to Orante; what music there is in their cries.
Help, Murder; Treason, help!
Ha! loose, I must not lose; time when I have dispatched this, then prepare your selves to bear us company.—Lucius, this 
 kiss grew upon Cicilia's lips, fruits designed for thee jealous fool, which thus I gather, lest it wither on the Tree. Farewell, Lucius, the scorned Orante with all this deformity will leave thee to ima∣gin the rest; be all the world cursed, so I am blessed.
Help heaven, Murder and Treason.
Ha! Amadeo and Calis; then Fortune's a whore, Lye thou there; yet he is alone, and Orante never feared a single sword.—Hold, it is enough; death could never have come so unwel∣come as now; had he staid his visit till my revenge had been per∣fact I would have saved thy sword this pains; for I had no such foolish thought as to out-live this day, in which I would have made some as fit for graves as Orante; Hell on that Sun-shine that made me believe there was one hour of joy destined for Orante; my fate is now all spun in one thread; from the first to the last accursed.
O, Sir; leave talking with that monster, and lend your help here to save the Princess, that now breathes her last breath, murdered by that horrid villain.
The Princess! Heaven forbid.
There is music in that voice, so she dyes; I care not so no body else has her, it is no pain to lose her,
O Calis, is it thy arms that embrace me?
Yes, Madam, and your fears are blown over by Prince Ama∣deo, sent from heaven to revenge, and save our honours.
Prince Amadeo! are his hands sent from heaven to heal the wounds Lucius gave a heart that loved him beyond her Reason; for I know, it was her blindness in me that neglected Amadeo; but faith and passion must plead for me, yet this truth let me leave with you; though I lived by love and vows Lucius's; yet his in∣juries have made me room to dye Amadeo's, who had my value in spite of my passion: do not despise me, Sir; for though this heart once swelled with Lucius, proud of that name, while he was faithful; yet since he could doubt, it breaks with Amadeo. There lies that false man that beat it from him, when it pursued him with all that love and kindness could pay; it was his ignorance in the value made him neglect such a Jewel, whilst I too much prized his broken friendship which has broke my heart; yet by all the peace he has robbed me of I have not lost one grain of honour the gods gave me in trust, but what his jealous heart has stolen from me, and pulled strange curses down.
Hold, gentle Cicely, cease to find a new curse; your hate is mortal enough; and if your wounds give you leave, you will find Lucius needs no enemy but Lucius; since he has lived to dye unpitied, unlamented by Cicilia's, who shall make his funeral fire since she has frowned upon him? she said Lucius was false; who then will mourn him? she has condemned; after whose sen∣tence he scorns to live; Cicely lived Lucius's, and dyes Amadeo's; O heaven, after she has condemned him, why should your thunder spare Lucius? yet thus innocent he will fall, and these wounds witness Lucius's innocence, who lived and died Cicilia's; whose name only filled his heart, and with it thus it breaks; to show that  jealousy, though it be a weed, yet it springs from noble seed, and no where to be found but in Loves richest ground; a sad truth avowed by pale Lycoris, and proved by unfortunate Lucius.
O, what has he done! O hold his hand, for Heavens sake.
What have I done? why, I have let out cruel Cicely, that she might flow to Prince Amadeo?
O Lucius, Brother, Friend; what has thy rash hand done?
I have done that I would always do to the man the Princess Cicely hates, destroyed him; yet this advantage my story will have, I found no peace after she withdrew her friendship; yet my crime was only excess of love, unpractised love; dear Man∣lives knows I was so unpractised in loves passion, it cut a Brother and a Friend from my heart to make room for Cicely; but love
was a rude guest, and thus I have forced him from my heart, where he has broke all Laws of Hospitality; O, it is late, and this dark∣nos over my eyes tells me I am near my home; Manlius, thy hand. Farewell, forgive me, Madam; Behold I dye, would your hate have more? Behold I dye, nor shall I repent my fall, if my death find that faith my love could not, who never feared nor loved any thing but the fair Cicely; and at what rate, witness this fate.
O, help to lead me to him.—O Lucius stay, and hear my last breath (in sighs) give my sad heart the lye for having said it loved ought but Lucius; see these wounds that I wear for Lucius, had I not loved thee why did I select thee from all the world? O look up, and in charity out-live me; for dying Lucius brings despair and horror on my soul; O ye gods, lend so much life, at least, to tell my story; and from dying Cicely take this truth; Prince Amadeo has surprising virtues; but it was Lucius his jea∣lousy made me see them, it was his injuries pleaded more then they; the Prince called long before; and yet my heart was deaf to love and him; this Lucius knows, who severely has punished that passions that distraction which he begot; Not one word? can Lu∣cius his heart be so incensed as to forget all humanity and civility too? Death, sure will not refuse thy eyes so much light as to wait upon thy once dear Cicely to her grave; O kind heaven, forbid that my sad heart that could not be happy here should meet Lucius frowning in Elizium too; there at least let us be friends, that we may meet and mourn this part of our story, and kindly seek each others shadow; for I am kind enough to believe and mourn the wounds that I have given Lucius; and I hope Lucius will be so kind to me as to believe these wounds bleed for Lucius, who thus dyes upon his breast; and would fain get into that heart again from whence thy cruel kindness forced me. One cold kiss I will take, and then farewell; did Lucius ever love? O be merciful, and say so, though it be false; there is less sin in such a well natured lye, then with a cruel truth to add to a friends dying misery, who thus with wounds and prayers her heart sets op to seek the flying soul of welcome Lucius, loved companion of my heart.
O Lucius, can thy soul be deaf to such charms as these, of force to raise a Lover from his ashes! O look up, and see Ama∣deo offer all his hopes to Lucius; Live gentle soul; if thou hunt'st for Paradise, here it is most perfect in the friendship of this generous Princess.
Prince Amadeo is noble, the Princess divine, all Angel; and Lucius too earthy to aspire such a friendship.
The gods give us but a span of days, and we with folly waste that too; O for an hour to thank Prince Amadeo, and weep to Lucius those truths which now break my heart! who if he be just will kindly read and understand these sighs, and love these tears.
Every common spirit can indulge an appetite; choler, lust and revenge prevail with every beast; but man the noblest creature, made to delight and imitate his Creator, appointed ma∣ster
over the rest, should in such difficulties as these (Madam) ju∣stiff himself Prince of the earth; and this act is my duty as a man; but as Amadeo, a double tie of honour obliges me, being a Prince of men, from whom with what justice (Madam) can I expect obe∣audience when they see me rebel against the gods; and thus yield to my slaves, of which this passion (being unjust) is one and with what shame shall I appear when it shall be said, that's the Amadeo that disputed a great War against the Roman Eagles; and in peace stooped to this Kite, this blind Boy; No, Madam, these be the fiery trials that must distinguish and justify great and virtuous minds; they are storms, not harbours, in which the skilful show their virtue and their courage.
Great, and noble Amadeo, still, by mind and birth a Prince! 
Curse on his heart that breaks this love, noble Lucius; lovely in his crimes which were but loving crimes; and all these wounds and tears betwixt you are but like the thorns that grow about the Rose, whose beauty made me thy Rival; look up, and see me deck thy breast; of whom I prophecy all that is great and good, while she grows there; but when she shall withdraw her friendship, even in Amadeo's heart she'll pass for low, and very wo∣man; forsaken Lucius will find constanter enjoyments then beau∣tie or any other love; those doubts, this friendship, and the divers faults, but show the Mocker in his several shapes; your rage, his doubts, those fears, were but loves chains and charms, which unpractised Lucius took for Love in Arms.
Sure we are in heaven already.
Good heaven, what a sight is here? Cicely! what sad fate is this! 
O my dear, dear Sister!
This was unkindly done to steal away from us such a Pattern of virtue and honour; to leave me ignorant, and alone, to tread the sad world when she is gone which was my guide; how shall I do but stray and lose my way! I fear I shall never find my friends.
No Questions, nor more discourse, if you love them; there is no kindness like rest.
Clorinda, Otho, dear Otho, come near; and if ever thy Sister were dear to thee, love and forgive Lucius: Lucius the best Lover, but the worst expresser of his passion that ever sunk under that god's displeasure. O Otho, in one grave let our sad Corps lye, that we may, at least, become one earth.
Use no words, give them no answers, I pray, but help to convey them to some place of rest; lest you strive too late to pre∣vent the ruin this danger threatens. 
Was your Highness a witness of this action?
No, Sir, I came too late; but from Calis, within, you may hear the relation.
What a day is here? how different are the Torches from those that should have burned? Hymens yellow one must to the black, I fear, give place; Ha! who is that? Orante disguised.
Yes, Sir; and the foundation upon which all these miseries depend; this is the cursed cause of all this sad day, it was destined to passion; but a Scene so full of blood and fate no thought could ever have feared, though I confess her Highness was bent to execute a very extravagant resolution.
A Fever only may beget our fears; else I find no dan∣der, there being no vital part perished; it is only loss of blood, which thus in faintness binds their senses.
Heavens send a blessing that I may show to my Sister how much a Brother Otho is, while this hated dog lies unburied, and unpitied by the world.
Draw him and his cu•sed company off this sacred ground; and then let their hated Carcasses lye a prey for Birds and Beasts, while we in procession bear these Lovers; and when you have purged this consecrated place from blood and murder, to morrow we will sacrifice Hecatombs to Juno, the Deliverer, in expiation of these Lovers crimes; and join with you in vows and prayers that kind destiny will restore them to us, while I provide displeased Hymens Rites may no longer wont the vows their hearts have writ in heaven.
And if heaven smile upon our sacrifice, let me beg Prince Otho will defer our joys to wait upon their happy days; for I con∣fess my superstitious soul dares not approach the Temple thus alone, whilst death and black shadow my heart; sure it must be a fatal Bridal-bed that stands so near the grave of friends.
Be your desire the eternal law to Otho; let her love and command, while I love to obey Clorinda.
Here Calis, I have one hand yet left, which thus I will lift to heaven; and call all the gods to witness that love and faith, which here I give to Calis, and her peace for ever; and if thy much afflicted heart can forgive what is past, and love Manlius; we will vie with all the world for blessings, our miseries will then be pa∣stem; and these dangers, escaped, with more joy told then now they are feared.
The gods have heard my prayers; and now I am confident the Princess will be happy; and we mortals are vain foolish judges of what heaven can or will do; we measure the Deity by our weak capacity, who thus in justice lets us fall beyond our hopes, to raise us thus above our wishes.
Lead, holy men, and we will follow; and with patience obey in bearing my own bowels; but if kind heaven senile, how happy shall Marius lay down his gray hairs, after a sacrifice to the Hymens of my Otho, and ever dear Cicely.
That was the voice of heaven, piety and faith lay holy violent hands upon the gods, it hastens their blessings, and it
breaks their rods; and my heart foretells me your aged virtues have yet reward in store; and that Cicely as well as Clorinda shall receive an Hymeneal blessing from you; let no jealous Lover look Hymen in the face, but trembling call to mind the fortune of this place.
Let all men sing, and in full Chorus join, and detest this crime. An ancient Druid left this sacred Hymn, and against jea∣lousy commanded all to sing full Chorus round the Temple.
 FRom whence was first this Fury hurled,
This jealousy into the world?
From Hell?  No, there doth reign
Eternal hatred with disdain.
But she the Daughter is of Love,
Sister of Beauty.  Then above
She must derive, from the third Sphere,
Her heavenly off-spring?  Neither there,
From those immortal flames could she
Draw her cold frozen Pedigree.
 If not in Heaven, nor Hell, where then
Had she her birth?  In the hearts of men.
Beauty and fear did her create
Younger then Love, elder then hate,
Sister to both by Beauties side,
To Love by Fear, to hate allied.
Despair her Issue is, whose Race
Of fruitful mischiefs drowns the space
Of the wide earth in a swollen flood
Of wrath, revenge, spite, rage and blood.
 Oh! how can such a spurious line
Proceed from Parents so divine?
 As streams which from their Crystal spring
Do sweet and clear their Waters bring;
Yet mingling with the brackish main,
Nor taste, nor colour they retain.
 Yet Rivers twixt their banks do flow
Still fresh, can jealousy do so?
 Yes, while she keeps the steadfast ground
Of hope and fear, her equal bound;
Hope, sprung from favour, worth, or chance,
Towards the fair object doth advance:
While fear as watchful Sentinel
Doth the invading Foe repell;
And jealousy thus mixed doth prove
The season and the salt of Love.
But when Fear takes a larger scope,
Stifling the child Reason, Hope;
Then sitting on the usurped Throne,
She, like a Tyrant, rules alone;
As the wild Ocean unconfind;
And rages as the Northern Wind.
This Chorus was written by M. Thomas Carew, Cup-bearer to Charles the First; and sung in a Masque at White-hall, Anno 1633. And I presume to make use of it here, because in the first design, it was writ at my request upon a dispute held betwixt Mistress Ci∣cilia Crofts and my self, where he was present; she being then Maid of Honour: this I have set down, lest any man should be∣lieve me so foolish as to steal such a Poem from so famous an Au∣thor; or so vain as to pretend to the making of it my self; and those that are not satisfied with this Apology, and this Song in this place; I am always ready to give them a worse of mine own.

