OBonny Jove, and the rest of the b•…on gods that dwell in the Tipling-house of Olympus! There be metals &amp; hard things in the world, but nothing so hard as to be bound Prentice in Bedlam, and have a Fool to ones Master: my very Livery is faced with his VVorships foolery. Our condition is miser∣able; for if our Masters but dine at the Ordi∣nary of mischief, the poor Serving-man is sure to be fed with the scraps of misfortune: We must share of our Masters misery, we are but Tenants, they will not let us be Free∣holders to the petty Lordships of our own corpusculous Fortune; damnable Fortune! how fatally hast thou sold the tenure of us, to him that will pay us our wages! It is very true that I tell you: And now see the per∣verse effects of all. O how I could cuff Apol∣lo! I have a quarrel to Apollo, that wryleg'd, riddling, fiddling god, that snorts out Oracles from his gilded brundlet. They say, this same Gaffer Phoebus is a good Mountebank, and an excellent Musician; but a deuse on him, it does not seem so, he has sent my Ma∣ster home so sick of Melancholy, that I da•…e swear, this scurvy Tom Piper of D•…lphos did not play him so much as one fit of mirth, not a leg or Sellengers-round. And now see how he follows a blind Puppy in the tail, contrary to Law or Reason: For we that have our eyes should lead, not follow the blind. The very Dog in the Chronicles, that had his eyes, stood upon his royal Prerogative, of going before the blind Beggar of Bednal-green. Nor can he be content to doe it himself, but he must make me too guilty of the same eg∣norance. If I but ask him a question, he hath not so much manners as my Granam's Sow; I cannot get him to grunt me an an∣swer: yet I cannot choose but speak, though my hedge of Teeth were a Quick-set, my tongue would through. You sir, that say you are my Master, if you doe not tell me why we follow this blundring guide, be sure, I will never leave vexing and tormenting you: you shall tell me, that you shall.
O the Age we live in! Sir, quintes∣sense of impudence! To what a fine pass are you arrived?
Nay it is even so Sir: Your sword and buckler man must take the wit upon him for once.
But if you do not learn your distance b•…er; look, is not here a Crabtree-Cudgel▪
beware of weeping-Crosse.
Master, I am privileged: Do you see my Feather? so long as I wear this, it is Shrove-tuesday with us Prentices, perpetual Shrove-tuesday.
But if I take off your Feather, then we shall have you presently crest-fa•…'n, and then my Crabtree Tutor here may read a Lecture of Ethics to your saucy Shoulders.
Why, and if it do sir; you shall find that I have as valiant Shoulders as another man. Come exercise your cudgel: You Ma∣sters are like Roman Magistrates, you have Rods of authority; yet try, see whether you or I will be first weary. Come you Trifle, all the Cudgels in Christendom, Kent, or New-England, shall never make me quiet, till you show me who this is we follow. Why, sweet∣honey, sugar-cinnamon, delicate Master, if I did not wish you well, do you think I would be so inquisitive? In dud la you must tell me, and I shall be satisfied.
Well, I have not the power to con∣ceale thee any longer; for of all my servants, thou art so trusty, true-hearted, faithful and honest, that I dare swear there is not an are∣ranter thief amongst um.
Now heaven bless your Worship. I have always had your Worships commenda∣tions, pray Jove I may deserve it! Proceed good Sir.
Well, thus it is: In the days of my folly, I was a just, precise, and honest man.
It was in the days of your folly you were a Precision, I my self was almost half a one once, but I am converted.
Well, being honest, I was by natu∣ral consequence very poor.
Who knew not that? Though I know not what your honesty was; yet I am sure there is never a gut in my belly but may swear for your poverty. Nay, and you had no more wit then to be honest in this wise age, it were pity but you should live and dye a beggar.
But others, such as your demure Chea∣ters,
That have the true goggle of Amster∣dam;
With some corrupted Law-gowns, Ployde•…s Pupils.
That can plead on both sides for Fees;
With Round-headed Citizens, and Cuckolds,
I sir, and Townsmen.
These, I say, grew rich the while.
Damnable rich. Faith, master, such miracles have not ceased in these days: I have known many in these times have grown rich out of a poor estate, the devil knows how not I.
Therefore I repaired to Delphos to ask counsel of Apollo, because I saw my self almost arrived at Gravesend, to know if I should bring up my son suitable to the thri∣avenge trades of this age we live in, viz. to be a Sequestrator, or Pettifogger, or Infor∣mer, or Flatterer, or belonging to Knights of the Post, or a Committee-mans. Clark, or some such excellent 〈◊〉, clothing himself from top to toe in knavery, without a welt or guard of goodness about him. For I see, as the times go now, such thriving education will be the richest portion I can leave him▪
I Sir, leave but your son, the le∣gacie of Dishonesty, and J will warrant him he shall out-thrive all VVestminster-Hall, and all—
To your demand what did Don Phoebus mutter?
What answer through his Laurel-garland stutter?
You shall hear. He bid me in plain terms, whomsoever I first met withal, him I should follow, and never leave his company till he came home.
And was this piece of darkness the first you met with? Now in my conscience he was begot at midnight, goodman Mid∣night, and retains the quality of the season. None to meet but Blind-man-buffe, that winks at all faults!
This is the very man.
Troth, and he may tell you your for∣tune, Gypsie-like, and all out of your pockets too; He may show you your destiny: He looks like one of the blind whelps of my old Lady Chance. Ha, ha, ha! Master, though you be born to lands, I see a poor Serving∣man may have as large inheritance of wit as
a Justice of Peace. Why, and't please your Ignorance, any man of brains might easily understand the Gods meaning: why, he bids you bring up your son to claim the grand Charter of the City, viz. to be as arrant a Knave as his Countrymen. For truly,
A blind man may see, though he never see more,
That the way to be honest, is the way to be poor.
The Oracle doth not tend that way; there is some greater mystery in it, if this old Cupped would but tell us who he is. Come let's follow him close, perchance we may find out some other meaning.
On other meaning perchance we may pitch.
This is the way to be weary, though not to be rich.
Master, we have run a terrible long wild-goose chase after this blind Beetle: for my part I sweat every inch of me, one drop fetches another. As for my shoes, you must needs give me a new pair. Their ungodly souls are even ready to depart, they are giving up the ghost: And yet we walk like the em∣blame of silence; we have not put our blind Gentleman-Usher to any interrogatories. You sir, Homer the second! first I command you in fair terms tell us who you are: if com∣mands will not serve the turn, my cudgel shall entreat you.
You were best tell us quickly too.
I tell you, the Devil take you.
Do you hear what he says, master? The good old Gentleman bids your Worship good morrow.
He speaks to thee that asked him so clownishly. Sir, if you like the behaviour of a civil Gentleman, do me in curtsy the favour as to tell me who you are.
Why, all the Devils in hell, and as many more confound thee too.
Nay, nay, take him to you, master: keep your Apollo's Oracle to your self; I have no share in it.
Now if thou doest not tell me, by Ceres I will use thee like a Villain as thou art.
Good Gentlemen, let me be behold∣ing to you for one infinite favour.
What's that?
Why, to let me be rid of your com∣pany.
Master, be ruled by a wiser man then your self, for once, and follow my counsel: Let us take this same old Appius, that has lost the use of his natural spectacles, and carry him to the top of the castle-hill, and there leave him to tumble down and break his neck ere he come to the bottom.
Let it be quickly then.
I, and then we'll leave him to be hanged the next Assizes, for being a cessory to his own death.
Nay, good merciful Gentlemen!
Will you tell us then, you Owl?
You Bird of the Night, will you tell us?
I will never tell you: for if you but once know who I am, ten thousand to one but you will do me some mischief, you will never let me go.
By heaven we will, if you please.
List then and give ear: for, as far as I can see, being blind, I am constrained to tell what I thought to have concealed. I am Plutus the rich God of wealth: my fa∣there was Pinch-back True-penny, the rich Usurer of Islington; my mother, Mrs. Silver∣side, an Aldermans widow: I was born in Golden-Lane, christened at the Mint in the Tower; Banks the Conjurer, and old Hobson the Carrier were my godfathers.
As sure as can be, this Plutus God of wealth is a pure Welsh-man, born with his pedigree in his mouth, he speaks it so natu∣rally. I'll lay my life he was beg•…t and bred in the Silver-mine that Middleton found in Wales.
Thou had bin a very Rascal, if thou
had not told us thy name had been Plutus the God of wealth.
God of wealth! art thou he? O let me kiss thy silver-Jolls!
Thou art welcome to me too. But art thou Plutus God of wealth, and so mise∣rably arrayed! O Phoebus, Apollo, O gods and devils, and Iupiter to boot! Art thou Plutus the rich son and heir to Pinch∣back True-penny!
I am he my self.
But art thou sure that thou thy self art thy self? art thou he?
I am the self-same Plutus Rich, the self-same son and heir to the self-same Pinch-back True-penny: marry till my eyes are open, I shall never be heir apparent.
I, but how came thou so miserable nasty?
Forth from Patrochus den, from Hell at Westminster; conversing with some Black ones there, whose faces since their baptism hath not been washed.
And why goosed thou so lamentably poor?
Iupiter envying the good of mise∣rabble mortals, put me poor soul into these dismal dumps.
Upon what occasion, pray thee.
Jle tell you,
In the minority of my youthful days
J took a humour, an ingenious humour,
To flee the company of Rogues and Raseals,
And unto honest men betake my self.
Iupiter spying this (mere out of envy)
Put out my eye-sight, that J might not know
Knaves from the honest, but to them might go.
Was this from Jove? why none but honest men,
Honour his deity.
Why what of that? this heathen god accepts
As well the Pilgrim-salve of wicked men,
As the religious incense of the honest.
Thus does the Lecherous god, that hath al∣ready
Cuckoldiz'd half the world, and placed his bastards
By mortals fires, envy virtuous minds.
To leave off versifying, if thou had thy eye-sight,
VVould'st thou be true to fly from vicious persons?
I▪ I protest I would.
And wholly employ thy eyes to pious uses.
To go to'th' company of honest and ingenu∣os souls.
Only to them; for I have not seen so much as one of them this many a day.
Why, what if you have not, you blind Puppy-dog? What a wonder's that? Why, I that have as good Eyes as any man in the company, can hardly find many: They have more wit now a days then go abroad openly. Virtue by that means would become too cheap and common. I remember, J saw one once, but he died young for grief, that he had not wit enough to be a Knave; eve∣rye one laughed at him for being out of Fashion. Had he lived till now, J would h'showed him at Fleet-bridge for a Monster. J should have beggared the Beginning of the World; The strange Birds from America, and the Pop∣pets too. J would have blown a Trumpet Ta∣rantara, If any man or woman in Town or City be affected with strange miracles, let them repair bither. Here within this place is to be seen a strange Monster; A man that hath both his Ears, and but one Tongue; that cannot carry two Faces under one hood; that has but one couple of Hands, and on each Hand five honest Fingers. And what is more strange, he has but one Heart; who dares, as if he were none of Adams Posterity, be ho∣nest at this time of the year; and will give e∣very man his due in spite of his teeth.
Js not this as rare as a Blazing Star to look on?
Well, now you have heard all; pray give me leave to be gone.
Not so by Jove; for now we have a greater desire to stay you then ever.
I told you so, I thought you would be troublesome.
Nay, I beseech you leave us not now▪ for though you should take Diogenes his Lan∣thorn
and Candle and search from Noon to Night, you could not find an honester man from the Tropic of Cancer to Capricorn.
Sir, I will swear and be deposed for my Master▪ he is as arrant a Cancer as any Capricorn in Christendom.
I know they all promise fair, but when they have once got me, they lay aside their thred-bare honesty; as if being grown rich, it were a disparagement to be virtuous any longer.
Yet all men are not knaves.
Yes most, if not all, by Jove.
Pray Sir, though you put my Master in, let me me be excepted. Body of me, call me knave in a crowd! If I be not revenged, and that soundly—You were best take heed of your general Rules. Could not you have said (you blind Buzzard) for ought I can see you may be one among the rest; but to speak it so peremptorily?
Nay, if you but knew what you should gain by staying! Mark me, I can cure thee of thy blindness: I can do as great mi∣racles as Enston waters.
Truly, as blind as I am, I can see when I am well. Have my eysight restored? I hope, I shall never live to see that day.
What says the man?
He has a natural desire to be wret∣ched, To play at blindman-buff all his life time. Good Mole, what dost thou above ground?
No, no, if Iupiter did but know of this project, he would powder me into a pret∣tie pickle.
Hear me man, he cannot sows thee worse then he has already, to make thee run stumbling o'er the world: I warrant, thy shins have cursed him a thousand times.
I know not that, but me thinks my buttocks begin to quake with very thought of him.
I think so; but what the Devil makes thee so timorous? I know if thou shouldest but recover thy ey-sight, thou would not value Iupiters command at three half pence, but break wind in his face to counter-thunder him.
Nay, do not tell me so good VVick∣oddness.
Have but patience, and I will plainly demonstrate that thy Command is greater then any Nubicog Iupiters.
Whose? mine? Am I such a man, so powerful?
I tho, if thou had but wit and eyes enough to see it; for first, I ask you what does Iupiter reign by?
Why, by that which he rained in∣to Dana's lap, a shower of silver.
And who lent him that silver?
Why, who but Plutus; and yet the beggarly Jove pays him no Use nor Prince∣pal: Well Iupiter, we shall have Plutus lodge you in Ludgate shortly, to take up your Shop, and make your thunder-bolts there, and cry lamentably, For the Lords sake, Bread, Bread for the poor Prisoners; unless you can mortgage the golden or silver Age to give better security to your Creditor.
Ask, why do men sacrifice to Jove, if not for Silver?
By heaven, for Silver. No penny, no Pate•…-noster, quoth the Pope. Does good∣man Iupiter think we'll pray, to wear out our Stockings at knees for nothing?
No, of all prayers, this is the result,
Jove make me rich, or pray quicunque vult.
Is not Plutus then the Author of grand sacrifices? where would the Directory lie, if it were not for the new Act of the Priests maintenance? Nay, if we were to sa∣crifice a Bull or Ram, do you think the But∣cher would give it to the god for nothing? No, no, if Plutus should not purchase devo∣tion with his coin, the Olympian Kitchen would smell of nothing but Lent and Fasting∣days all the year after.
Why, I pray, may I put Iupiter out of Commons when I please?
May you? I marry may you. Doest not thou maintain him? He l•…ves at thy charges. Iupiter had not best anger thee, lest thou take an opinion and starve him.
Say you so? Is it by my curtsy they sacrifice to Jove?
Yes, altogether; for whom is he ho∣nored by?
By reverend Priests.
And dost thou think the Levitical men would not disband, if there were want of pay or Tithes? It is most certain, money is the Catholic Empress of the world, her com∣mands are obeyed from Spain to the Indies.
It is true Master, had I been rich (But I curse my Stars, I was born under the three-penny Planet, never to be worth a great) I should have scorned the degree of Sword and Buckler; but now for a little sell∣ver and a thred-bare Livery, I have sold the Fee-simple of my self and my liberty, to any worshipful piece of folly that will undertake me.
I have heard your Gentilizians, your dainty Curtezana's, in plain English, your arrant VVhores of Venice, such as are ready stewed for any mans appetite: if a poor man desire to sin a little, they presently sit crosse-leg'd; but if a rich man tempt them, at the sound of his Silver they cannot hold their water. Why, the VVhores of Pict∣hatch, Turnbull, or the unmerciful Bawds of Bloomsbury, under the degree of Plutus, will not let a man be acquainted with the sins of the Suburbs. The Pox is not so cheap as to be given gratis: The unconscionable Queens have not so much charity left as to let you damn your selves for nothing.
It is very true that my Master tells you: For Pluto•…ch reports in the life and death of Bess Bron•…bton, that she never un∣buttoned to any of the guard for nothing.
But you may think this is spoken on∣lie of bad men, such as have prostituted their souls to the world; As for good Round—they desire not money, no good souls not they.
What then J pray?
Why, this wishes for a good Troo∣ping horse; that, for a fleet pack of Hounds.
J, when they are ashamed to ask mo∣ney in plain terms, they vail their avarice under some such mask or other: but he that wishes for a Horse, makes silver the intent of his journey; and they that beg for Hounds, it is money they hunt for.
All Arts and Crafes amongst men were by thee invented. I, and the seven Sci∣ences (but for thee) they could never have been so liberal.
O horse that I was, never to know my own strength till now!
It is this that makes great Philip of Spain so proud.
Without thee (Plutus) the Law∣yer would not go to London on any Terms.
All the Generals, Hopton and Mon∣tross, are by thee maintained: 'Troth, all the Troopers or Foot-men without thee would never be contented with free-quarter only, there must come Taxes, Contributions and Excise to boot.
Did not Will Summers break his wind for thee?
And Shakespeare therefore writ his Co∣medy?
All things acknowledge thy vast power di∣vine,
(Great God of Money) whose most power∣full shine
Gives motion, life; Day rises from thy sight.
Thy setting, though at noon, makes night.
Sole catholic cause of what we feel or see,
All in this All are but the effects of thee.
O heavens! can I do all these things you talk of? Ill tide this wretched blind∣ness of mine, that would never let me see what Command or Power I had: All the world for a pair of Eyes and a Looking-glasse! Sure now the Delphian gate and J have good wits: for we jumped together in this opinion, that it is an excellent thing for a man to know himself: J shall love a Nosce teipsum as long as J live for this trick. Can J doe all these things?
All these? J by heaven can thou, and millions more then these. Why there was never any man weary of thy company (O god of wealth) Thou art a welcome guest where ere thou come. There is plenty of all things: Plenty of Love.
And pienty of VVhite-bread and Butter.
Plenty of Honour.
And plenty of Cheese-cakes.
Plenty of Friends.
And plenty of Bag-puddings.
Plenty of Servants.
And plenty of Furmenty.
Plenty of Health.
And plenty of Custards.
Plenty of Command.
And plenty of Pease-porredge.
Never any man has enough of thee. If he can change a Great, yet he despairs of a Bed till he can get a Tester. Then he pro∣cures a full Jury of pence to be empanelled for the finding out of a Shilling. That done, the ambitious Niggard will fain usurp a Crown, which must be made a Noble one: And that is never safe, till it have a good Angel to guard it. All this obtained, he can∣not without a Mark be reckoned a man of notice: Nor has he a patch of a Gentleman, till he be worth a Piece.
The good old Gentleman thinks he has jested all thiswhile handsome grave gray∣pated quiblets. Good heaven, what pretty things these wits are, when they are out of date!
When the Purse is full, the Pouch gapes; and when the Pouch hath his belly∣full, the great Chest yawns-wide enough to swallow 〈◊〉 •…dies, and Goldsmiths-Hall, and the Devil to boot; and yet when all is done, they think themselves as poor as I•…us, if their estates do not out-value Doomsday∣book.
You say true, Sir: yet methinks I am afraid of one thing.
What is that?
That I shall never attain to that •…utopia you speak of, it is a country so hard to conquor; Castles in the air are very im∣pregnable.
Sir, upon my word, let not that trow∣ble you: Do your endeavour, and i'll war∣rant you shall see as perfectly as any Lynceus in Christendom.
Then Lynceus! what was he?
One that could see the very motes in the sun, and the least things in the world.
I can see the least in the world al∣ready, I thank you for nothing: I can see less then any Lynceus living. But how can thou, poor mortal worm, take off the seque∣stration of my eye-sight, and restore me to perfect seeing again?
Do not doubt it; For thy delinquent Eyes
Shall be admitted to compound, and see most perfectly.
Be of good hope: the Delphian god hath sworn,
And therewithal brandished his Pythian Laurel,
That Plutus should out-look the stars to blindness.▪
Ha, ha, ha! How does he know so much? I never was acquainted with that same Apollo in my life. I remember I have been foxed at his Oracle at Temple-bar. I am afraid this Apollo is one of your fellow-Juglers.
Cannot a man persuade you? have not I said it?
Well then, do you look to it.
So we had need, for you cannot your self.
Take you no care, I will do it though I die to morrow before breakfast.
Marry and that were a miserable thing to go to the grave upon a fasting sto∣mack. Pray master, when you take in hand the cure of Plutus his eyes, let poor Ca•…yon have a finger in it.
A finger in it! That were the way to put out his eyes.
It is strange, master, you should have no more understanding: my meaning was, you would accept of my help, (good Mr. Chremylus.)
Well sirrah, we will; and some o∣there fellow-partners too, some of our plun∣dered neighbours that are enjoined for pe∣nonce to fast four days a week, for having surfeited on too much honesty.
Marry heaven forbid, I shall be ill help up with such miserable helpers as they: the hungry Rascals will go near to devour me quick like Irish cannibals. No, let me be blind still, that my eyes may never be con∣scious to the plundering of my flesh &amp; bones in pieces. It were a miserable spectacle for them to begin with.
I warrant, you need not fear that: if they once grow rich, they'll rather feed on Rost-beef and Marrow-bone pies, like Com∣mittee men, then cousin the worms of so lean a carcass. Sir Carrion, where be your cou∣ple of Footmen?
Here master, what should I do?
Run and call my honest poor neigh∣bours, you shall find the miserable drudges tugging at the Plough-taile for their Land∣lords. No, now I think on it, the Excise-men came to day and fetched them away for country∣bution. Go to them, you know the way to the Office near Cuckolds-Pound, London. Tell them in their ears, that we have Plutus at home, and will share him amongst us: we'll divide him into several messes, and each man take his part by seniority. But stay, do you hear: beware of Knaves, and of Veale.
Veale it seems is not so good. But what shall I do with this Leg of Mutton here? I dare not venture the safety of it amongst um; the villains carry dangerous teeth a∣bout um.
We'll take care for that: meet me at home two hours hence.
O what a plot are we going about! I could laugh for joy.
Now may I forsake my dump,
And bestir my hobnailed stump,
Skip about and •…risk and jump:
Honest men are turned up trump,
I shall find them in a lump,
But▪ every Knave must have a Thump.
ô what a plot is this, to blow up all the knaves in a kingdom together, nay in all the world, put in Turks, Jewes, Pagans and Jnfidels! Why, Catesby and Percy were punies. Garnet and Digby and Fax, if they had gone about such an honest Gun-powder treason as this, they had never had their heads upon poles a Daw-catching over the Parliament-House. Well, they were hanged for knaves and fools; but we shall thrive, and be wise and worship∣full, and honest too, for Carrion's a man in the plot.
This is a stratagem was never such,
That honest men alone now should be rich.
That honest men should thrive by right, not wrong.
London, take heed; for thoul't be poor •…re long.
J live at Islington, and J have heard
Plutus is come to Westminster: Sure, sure,
He'd take it ill if J forbear to visit him,
He knows J am his kinsman:
For J was kin to Pinch-back True-penny
His Father, who did live at Islington,
An Usurer almost next door to me.
Most opportunely here he comes, J see.
God save you sir! your poor kinsman salutes you.
Who's this? my eye-sight fails me; what's your name?
Scrape-all your kinsman, lives at Islington
O J remember; are you honest now?
J have a humour to love honest men.
The Country thinks so, J'm con∣verted lately:
Dull-pate my son is also here come with me:
Of what profession is he?
A Parson verily.
What would he have?
A Benefice, two or three,
An't like your Worship.
He's a true Scrape-all, of the Scrapealls blood;
True Dull-pate Scrape-all, He hath past the Synod.
O, has he so! J thought to have sent him thither.
J have few Livings left now to bestow.
My golden Prebends which J had at Pals,
You know are sunk ith dust: For other places
The best the Synod has um. Yet your son
Dulpate, J know he cannot want preferment,
He looks so learnedly, and goes in black too.
He may change habits, it is allowed of now
As the world goes. Is he not a Tradesman?
He'd thrive the better, if he can snuffle handsomely.
Was he ever trained up at the Universities?
Yes out of both; that is, never of either.
However he will be rich. Let him leap over
The Steeple-houses, and teach in private;
His veils will be the fatter: Tithes and Cures
He must preach down as Antichristian,
And take as much as both. He has an excel∣lent name,
A thriving name! I think you said it was Dulpate.
Yes Sir. Now thank your Patron, and be gone.
Thankatus &amp; Godamericatus ve∣ster dignitas.
He gives your Worship thanks and god-a-mercy.
I have no skill in Physiognomy:
But sure thou wilt be rich, Dulpate, &amp; wealthy.
Uncle, we thank you: will it please you know
The entertainment of ou•… poor cottage?
No, it is against the complexion of my humour
To visit any mans house: I never got
Any commodity by it in my life.
For if I chance to light into the clutches
Of some vile Usury•…, he buries me
Quick under ground, or keeps me prisoner closely
In his old Chests, where without sheets I lie,
But his Indenture•…s keep me company.
And if J fall into the prodigal hands
Of some mad roaring Tytire tu, he spends me
Upon his lecherous Cocatrice; or playing
Throws me away at passage: So am J turned
Stark naked out of doors, with not so much
As a poor Purse to make a Night-cap of.
It seems you never met with mo∣derate men.
But this is my disposition: when oceasion
Serves, no man more liberal: when oppor∣tunity
Jnvites, no man more thristy.
Come, let's go in. O how my wife shall joy
At sight of thee, as much as for a French Hood
Or Taffeta Kirtle! Thou art my best be∣loved.
J easily believe it.
Who would not tell thee
The truth of things, J wish that he were lousy
(Sweet rogue) at Beggers-bush, or else confined
To the perpetual regiment of Bridewell.
Come my dear Uncle, come! O how J love
The silver-hairs of thy most delicate chin!
Though J be rich by wickedness and sin.
Come along you old Hobnails. J'le have your horses shod with gold of Ophir or Peru▪ Ha, you old Muck-worms! J'le make your Hog-trough paunches so fat, that the leanest of you all shall out-weigh the Arch∣bishop of Spalato. What an Esopical roar∣ing Lion am J, to lead this army of Asses into the field! Come, my masters, old friends, you that have eat many a bushel of salt, J would say garlic in his coompany▪ Make haste you Plough-lacquies, Boots his kinsmen. You neighbour Lackland, set the best foot forward. And you goodman Clodpole, old Snail with a slimy nose, if you make not haste, they will have done scrambling ere we come.
Now by the rood of my Granam's soul, J'ch go as vast as my legs will bear me. What would you have of an old man, that's grown crazy?
Crazy!
J, crazy. Do you think a man that has one foot in the grave can trudge as vast as such a young knave as thou? When J was a stripling of thy age, J could have tricked it ivaith, Mr. Ficar knows, with the best of the Parish.
Neighbour, neighbour, J'le tell
you what I do devise you now, this is my pinion.
Your pinion, you goose? and what is your pinion?
Marry this is my pinion now: This saucy knave may do it to uflout us. It is best •…o command of him what is his masters con∣tention in •…ending for us now la.
Why have not I told you? My ma∣ster zends for you to change this nasty con∣dition of yours into some delicate happiness. You shall be rich, you Rogues, all of you Justices of Peaces, Lords, Emperors, or what is more, High-Constables.
Very well said. But I will be none of his Peaces nor Lords; let me be a High-Constable. I will have a new v•…ail as soon as I come to my honours, and thou shalt be next to exzeed me in my house-of-Office.
I, but neighbours, how shall this be defected? Let him dissolve us of that now, it seems not possetible, so it does not.
Why you Villiago's, my master has brought home an old lame, rotten, mangy, toothless, sapless, bald-pate, rusty musty crusty fusty dusty old Dotard, just such an∣other as my neighbour Stiff or Lackland, or you Clodpole with a slimy nose, with a great bunch-back.
A bunch-back! Nay then thou art a messenger of gold. Ho neighbours, that was not a bunch-back, I warrant you la, they were huge bags of gold. That's another pini∣on of mine, neighbours, what do you gesture in that?
You gesture like an ass: That bunch at his back was but a natural budget of old mischiefs.
Do not think to play the Jack∣anapes with me for nothing. Have I not here a good cudgel? if thou do, thou shalt be clap∣per-de-claw'd.
I wonder what you take me for: what dishonesty did you ever know by me?
Dishonesty, say you! None, not we. It is a very honest Monkey: Yet I have seen him, neighbours, zit in Bridewell, when the loving vetters have been close friends to his legs.
Very true; at the same time you were one of the Justices of hell, Radamanthus had newly resigned his office to you.
Now the murrain founder thee, thou parlous wag, thus to 'buse thy betters! Sir, look you deveal unto us why your ma∣ster hath vited •…s from our natural poccu∣potions.
Prick up your ears then, and I will tell you. My master hath brought home Plutus to enrich you all. Thou shalt be Mayor of the City; can not thou sleep on the Bench? Thou shalt be Bailey; hast not thou wit enough to tell clocks? And all the rest of your frozen-bearded Neighbours, understanding Aldermen.
Nay so they be Aldermen, it is no matter for Understanding: it is a beggarly quality vit for none but poor Scholars and Losophers. But has thy master got Plutus, and shall we all be rich in good zooth, Carrion?
I in zooth neighbour Lackland, as rich as Midas, if you had but asses ears.
Nay, for if that be all, I shall do well enough I warrant you, mine are of a pretty length already: it does me good at the heart neighbours, so it does.
Void would Mr. Olip-latine our Ficar were here too. He's an honest man, he reads Common-prayer▪ we can vollow him and understand him; He will not med∣dl with Diricks-stories nor Extrumperies. He has but poor twenty Nobles a year, think of it Neighbours.
Void and thou says right neigh∣bore Stiff, and he gives us good destructions once a month, as good as a Nominee.
I, and I like him: He's none of the Hum-drums, he'll clap it up quickly, e∣specially if there be a match at the Alehouse,
Mass, and he'll drink Sack and Claret as fast as any Synod man.
I, neighbours, and he's none of them that be proud; he will not scorn to drink with his poor neighbours too: if Plutus would give him twice twenty Nobles, I would not think it too much.
I warrant, our Proprietor would
hang himself vo•…e he would allow it.
Tic no matter, we'll tition Plutus our selves for him.
Nay neighbours, and lets tell him he'll cursten and bury after the old way. I warrant, when Mr. Clip-latin's gone, we shall never have such a man again to fit the parish. Every one loves him, but Never-good the Sequestrator, that—
When Plutus comes, we'll think of him. Void neighbours, shall we be rich? What will my neighbour Rem-all do? He'll get him a Satten-doublet, and scorn his proud Landlord: And Steal-all the Tailor, and Noise the Ballad-singer will ride about in Coaches, and all the rest of um too.
Void, shall we have Plutus! shall we be rich! I shall even throw away my leather∣slops &amp; my pitchforks. O it joyces my heart! Neighbours, it is as good news as a pot of ale and a tossed in a vrosty morning.
I could give a penny for a May-pole to dance the morris for arrant joy. Shall we be rich ivaith!
Now will I with the Cyclops sing,
Threttanelo, Threttanelo.
Which Polyphemus erst did ring,
To the tune of Fortune my foe.
Threttanelo, Threttanelo:
And sing we all merrily, Threttanelo, Thret∣tanelo.
Bleat you like Ewes the while.
Ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba.
Like frisking Kids full merrily go, Threttanelo, Threttanelo.
And sing we all—
Dance out your coats like lecherous goats, Threttanelo, Threttanelo!
And sing we all—
Let us this Cyclops seek:
To the place where he sleeps let us go, Threttanelo.
Put out as he lies
With a Cowl-staffe his eyes, Threttanelo.
And sing we all merrily,
And sing we all—
But now you shall see
I Circa will be,
And turn you to hogs ere I go, Threttanelo.
Go grunt you all now
Like your mother the Sow, Threttanelo.
And sing we all—
And sing we all—
But come you Pig-hogs, let us leave jesting. I restore you to your old Metamor∣phosis, as you may see in the first leaf of Fire∣gels Bucolics. I will go the next way to the Cup-board, and fill my guts like an Emperor. And then if you have any thing to maund me on a full stomach, you may ply me in what you please.
Honest neighbours, welcome: I will not bid you good morrow now. That was my salutation in the days of poverty: that stink∣ing complement never fitted my mouth, but when my breath smelt of onions and garlic. Gramercy old blades, for coming. Let me hug you. Oh what a sweet armful of friends is here! If you be but valiant now, and de∣fend Plutus, the least of you all shall have wealth enough to confront Prester-Iohn, and the Grand Signior too.
If that be all, my life for yours. Vali∣ant! Why Mars himself was an arr•…ned coward to me; I have beat him at voot-ball above twenty times. If you did but see me once, J warrant you would call me goodman Hector as long as I lived for it. Did you not see how J cuff with Hercules for a two-peny loaf last Curmasse? Let Plutus go! No, let me re∣turn again to Onions and Pease-porredge then, and never be acquainted with the hap∣pines of a Sirloin of rost-beef.
Well neighbours, march in. J see Blepsidemus coming toward. He has heard of my good fortune, that makes him foot it so fast. In the days of my poverty all my friends went on crutches; they would come to me as fast as black Snails: but now they can out∣run Dromedaries. This it is to be rich and
Now I have a rich Load-stone lies under my Threshold that draws in all their Iron Spurs.
He that will have his friends about him tuck,
Must have the alluring bait of golden muck.
What should this be? or by what means? it is strange
That my friend Cremylus is grown so rich;
I scarce belive't, because I know him honest,
Yet every Barbers shop reports it boldly.
It is very strange he should grow rich of the sudden.
And then it is stranger far, that being grown wealthy,
He calls his poor friends to be part'ners with him;
I am sure, it is not the curtsy of England.
Friend Blepsidemus, welcome; I am not the same beggarly Chremylus I was yesterday. Be merry, true-blew, be merry; thou art one of my friends too, I'll put you all into a hue∣more of thriving.
Are you so wealthy sir, as report speaks?
So wealthy? ha, soft and fair. Cozen
Blepsidemus, J shall be anon:
Things of great consequence have some dan∣ger in them.
Danger? What danger?
Why, J'le tell thee all. If we bring this business to pass, we shall be brave blades, Be drunk with Sack and Claret every day; glutted with roast Beef, Pasties and Marry∣bone-pies: but if our hopes be frustrate, we are undone, we must to Leeks and Onions again.
All is not right, J fear, J do not like it,
Thus suddenly to thrive, and thus to fear;
Makes me suspect my judgement and his honesty.
What honesty?
If those your sacrilegious hands have plundered
Apollo's Temple, and enriched your Coffers
With Gold and Silver, ravished from the Altars.
If you repent, yet do not mock your friends:
Perchance, you have invited all your neigh∣bours
To hear you make a learned Concession;
To shake hands from the Ladder, and take leave
Of their dear Chremylus at the fatal Tree:
No, you shall pardon me, •…me not in the hue∣more,
To take a walk toward Paddington to day.
Marry heavens forbid! there's no such cause nor matter.
Nay, trifle now no longer: it is too manifest.
You do me wrong, thus to suspect a friend.
Before Jove, J think there's not an honest man,
But drossy earthy muck-worm-minded Was∣sals,
And these full soon mortgage their Souls for Silver:
Iove's image for the States—
By heaven I think thou art mad. Do thy naked brains want clothing, Blepsidemus? for J see thy wit is gone a wool-gathering.
J see Chremylus is not Chremylus, for me thinks
Who hath lost his honesty hath lost himself.
As sure as can be, some gibed Cat that died issuelesse, has adopted thee for her Heir, and bequeathed the legacy of her me∣lancholy to thee. It is impossible thou should be so mad else.
Thy countenance so oft changing, and thy eyes
Inconstant gogling, call thee guilty Chre∣mylus,
Of a dishonest juggling soul.
Nay, good Raven, do not croak so. J know what your croaking tends to. Now if J had stolen any thing, you and the Devil would have put in for a share.
Do I do this to claim my share, what share▪
Come there is no such matter my fin∣gers have not learned the slight of hand. Picking and stealing is none of their profes∣zion.
O it is some learned distinction; What, you'll say
You did not steal, you did but take it away;
Well, it is not good to equivocate with a Halter,
Gregory is a cunning Disputant:
An argument of Hemp is hardly answered.
What melancholy Devil has possessed thee? J am sure it is no merry one. This madness doth not smell of Edmonton.
Whom have you plundered then? whose Bung is nipped.
No mans.
O Hercules! Whose tongue speaks truth?
In what cold Zone dwells naked honesty?
I see, friend, you condemn me •…'re you know the truth.
Come, do not jest your neck into the Noose,
Tell me betimes, that with the Key of Gold
I may lock up the Vermin's mouth. Infor∣mers
Are dangerous cattle, if they once but yawn;
As bad as Sequestrators, but l's undertake.
I will not have you undertake any thing for me; you will be at too much charges: Sir, my intent is to enrich all ho∣nest men.
Why, have you stolen so much?
No faith, a little will serve the turn, there are so few of them. But sir, know J have Plutus himself at home.
Who, Plutus? God of wealth.
The same, by heaven and hell.
What, heaven and hell by Westmin∣ster-hall, where Lawyers and Parliament men eat French-broth? Have you Plutus, by Vesta?
Yes and by Neptune too.
What Neptune? Neptune of the Sea?
By Neptune of the Sea, or any other Neptune in Europe. He is the smal-leg•…d Gentleman-Ushers god; for his Chariot is drawn with Calves.
Why do you not send him about a∣mong your friends?
What, before he have recovered his ey-sight?
Why, is Plutus blind?
By Jove is he.
Nay, J did always think so; and that's the reason he could never find the way to my house.
But now he shall at a short-hand.
What, Brachygraphy? Thomas Shell∣tons Art?
No, I mean suddenly.
He shall be welcome: But why do you not get some skilful Oculist for him? Have you never a Surgeon about the town that hath Eyes to sell of his own making?
Now the Spittle-house on the Puck∣fist tribe of them. If a man have but a cut Finger, the Cure of it shall be as long as the Siege of Breda: Physicians and Surgeons are good for nothing but to fill Graves and Hos∣petals.
Sure then, that's the reason none but Sextons pray for them.
No, i'll have a better device; he shall go to the Temple of Esculapius.
Come let us make haste, To be rich as soon as we can. Dives queen fieri vult, Et cito vult fieri—
We will get a Fieri facias of the Lawyers. They pick all the wealth out of the Country-mens pockets. Have but pati∣ence, J will warrant thee as Rich as any Al∣aldermen.
Must J needs meet you, you old Do∣tards? Are you not ashamed of your gray Coxcombs? you are going about a fine piece of impudence, to undo me and all my children. But J shall plague you for it.
Now Hercules and his club defend me!
J le cut your throats, and slit your impudent gurgulio's, you Calves at three∣score: How dare you undertake such confe∣deracy? but you shall throttle for it, by all
the ash-colour'd cattle about me.
What creature is this with the Red∣oker face? She looks as if she were begot by Marking-stones.
By stones sure: tic some E•…ynnis that is broke loose from the Tragedy.
By Ieronymo, her looks are as terri∣ble as Don Andraea, or the Ghost in Hamlet.
Nay, it is rather one of Belzebub's Heralds.
Why so?
Why, doest thou not see how many several Coats are quartered in her Arms?
So, so; and who do you think I am?
Some Bawd of Shoreditch, or Turn∣bull Broker of Maidenheads, &amp;c.
Why woman, why dost thou follow us? we have done thee no wrong.
No, good honest Scavengers, no wrong! By the skin betwixt my eye-browes, but Isle make you know it is a wrong. Is it no wrong to cast me out of every place, and leave me no where to be in?
Yes, thou shalt have the liberty of Hell, and all good kindnesses the honest Devils can do thee, for my sake. But what art thou? why dost not thou tell us who thou art?
One that will be soundly revenged on you all, for committing more then gun∣powder treason against a poor woman, that hath not so much as a tooth in her head that means you any harm.
We will not trust so much as thy gums for all that. Who art thou?
I am Poverty, Penny Poverty, eldest daughter of Asotus Spend-all, of Brecknock∣shire; One that hath kept house with you this thirty years and upwards; I have sate winter and summer at your Great-grandfathers table.
O Apollo and the rest of the Spittle∣house gods! tell me how I may run away.
Nay, stay you cowardly drone.
Stay! no not for the world, I will not keep Poverty company; there be vormine about her which I would be loath should cousin the worms of my carcass.
Dare you grunt, you unethical Rue∣sticks, being taken in the fact?
Stay Coward, shall two men run a∣way from one woman?
One woman! I, but it is Poverty; Penny Poverty, or Penny Penniless.
No Tiger so cruel: I had rather fight with Mall Cutpurse and my Lady Sands both to∣gether at quarter-staffe.
Good Blepsidemus stay.
Good Chremylus run away.
Shall we leave Plutus thus?
How shall we resist this warlike Amazon, the valiantest of all Tinkers truls and doxies! She has made me pawn my Bilbo-blade and rusty Head-piece at the Alehouse many a time in arrant policy. Let us run; there is no hope of safety but in foot∣manship. Our valour is clean contrary to Achilles, for our greatest security lies in our heels. Let us run: Stone-walls are not defence enough, her hunger will break through and devour us.
Take thy Porredge-pot (man) for a Helmet, thy Ladle for a Spear, and a Sword of Bacon, and thou art armed against Poverty cap-a-pe: And then Plutus shall come and cut her throat, and raise a trophy out of her miserable carcass.
Da•…e you snarl, you Currs, after the contriving such damnable injury?
What injury, you old Beldam! We have not ravished thee, I am sure; thy beauty is not so much moving. Doest think we mean to lie with Red-Oker! to commit fornica∣tion with a Red-Lattice! I know not what thy lower parts can do; but thy very Fore∣head is able to burn us. Let thy Salamander-Nose and Lips live in perpetual flames, for me; Jove send thee everlasting fire! There is no Cupped in thy complexion: a man may look upon thee, without giving the flesh oc∣cession to tempt the spirit: i•… all were made of the same clay thou art, Adultery would be a stranger in England.
O immortal gods, is it no injury to restore Plutus to his eye-sight! Now Furi•…s put our all your eyes, and then consume all the dogs in Christendom, that there may be none to lead you!
What harm is it to you, if we study the catholic good of all mankind?
What catholic good of mankind? I'm sure the Roman catholic religion com∣mands wilful poverty.
That is because Plutus is blind: his blindness is the cause of that devotion. But when Plutus can see again, we will kick you out of the Universe, and leave you no place but the Universities: marty those you may claim by custom, it is your penniless bench; we give you leave to converse with sleeveless Gowns and thred-bare Cassocks.
But what if J persuade you its no∣cessary that Poverty live amongst you?
Persuaded! we will not be pursue∣ded; for we are persuaded not to be per∣swaded, though we be persuaded. Thus we are persuaded; and we will not be pursue∣ded to persuade our selves to the contrary, any ways being persuaded.
If J do not, do what you will with me; leave me no place to rest in, but the empty Study of that pitiful Poet, that hath botched up this poor Comedy with so many patches of his ragged wit, as if he meant to make Poverty •… Coat of it.
〈◊〉 Tu•…pane, kai Cophona•… 〈◊〉 Jack Dolophin and his Kettle-drum defend us.
But if you be convicted and non∣plussed, what punishment will you submit your self unto?
To any.
Ten deaths: other Cats have but nine, Gram•…lkin her self. Let us be sure Po∣very die out▪right, I begin to be bowsie in he•… company▪ Let's march.
Yet I thank Jove I am better ac∣quainted in City and Country, then these think of. In the City many that go in gay∣clothes know me; in the Country I am known for Taxes, Excise and Contributions: besides I have an army royal of Royalists, that now live under the S•…questration-Planet, J shall muster them up if need be. But first I will go ma•…shall up my Forlorn-hopes of Tat•…erde∣mallians, welch, English, Scols, and Irish. J hope to give these Round—a breakfast, for all they vapour now; I hope to bring um under my dominion shortly.
Neighbours, I'ch hear we must chop Logic with Poverty; 'cha wonder what this Logicking is, tid never know yet te year: they say one gaffer Aristotle was the first vounder of it, A bots on him!
Cha remember my zon went to the Varsity, and I ha heard him say a fine song:
Hang Brerwood and Carter in C•…akanthorps garter,
Let K•…kerman too bemoan us:
J'le be no more beaten for greasy Jack Seaton,
And conning of Sandersonus.
At Oxford▪ or Cambridge it would make a man a hungry to hear um talk of Gismes and Argations, and Pretticables and Predi∣caments, and gatur Antecedens and Pro•…ums and Postriorums, and Probo's and Valleris. Cha think this Logic a hard thing next to the Black-Art.
Neighbours, an't be so, what a mur∣rin ails us! why, shall we venture Plutus on Pretticables and Predicarments? shall we lose all our hopes by an Ergo valleris? This is my pinion, this same Poverty will prove the best Competent of um all: why, she cannot choose but repute (as Mr. Ficar says) very well, and most tregorically.
Tregorically! Categorically neigh∣bore; Sir Iohn meant so I warrant you.
Why, tregorically, and catergoli∣cally; T•…e and Cater, there's but an ace dif∣ference, therefore bate me an ace quoth Bolton, and I say she will repute very well and tregorically, for she hath ever kept com∣pany with Scholars ever since my memory or my Granams either. No, let me take my Catergorical Flail in hand; and if J do not
thresh her to death with lusty arguments, let me never live to problem again at a Peas∣rick.
Neighbours, be content. Poverty stand you on one side▪ and I•…le, stand on the other; for I will be opposite to you è dia∣metro, and teach you to know your distance. Thus I dispute. The question is, Whether Plutus ought to receive his eye-sight? I say I, &amp; sic probo.
If it be fit that good and honest men,
Whose souls are fraught with virtue, should possess
Riches and wealth, which Heaven did mean should be
The just reward of goodness: while proud Vice,
Stripped of her borrowed and usurped robes,
Should have her loathed deformities un∣masked;
And vicious men that spread their Peacocks trains,
Have carcasses as naked as their souls.
But if once Plutus should receive his eyes,
And but discern twixt men, the world were changed:
Then goodness and full coffers, wealth and honesty
Might meet, embrace, and thrive, and kiss together;
While vice with all her partners starves and pines,
Rotting to dirt and filth, leaving to hell
Black souls. Who better counsel can devise?
Ergo it is fit Plutus receive his eyes.
That Ergo has nettled her, I war∣rant. Thou shalt be Plutus his Professor for this. What has my she-Bellarmine now to answer?
As the mad world goes now, who could believe
But pur-blind fate and chance did hold the sceptre
Of humane actions? Who beholds the mi∣series
Of honest mortals, and compares their for∣tunes
With the unsatiable pleasures of gross E∣picures,
Whose burst bags are glutted with the spoils
Of wretched Orphans: who (I say) sees this,
But would almost turn Atheist, and forswear
All heaven, all gods, all divine providence!
But if to Plutus we his eyes restore,
Good men shall grow in wealth, and Knaves grow poor.
In my pinion this simple-gisme—
Fie neighbour, it is a Syllogism.
Why simple and silly is all one: be what Gisme it will be, sure it was not in true mud and fig-tree, there was never a Tar-box in the breech of it.
O Dotards, how easily you may be persuaded to die as arrant fools as you were born! If Plutus recover his eye-sight, and distribute his riches equally, you shall see what will become of your Anabaptistical Anarchy: what arts or sciences would re∣main. If every Vulcan be as good as your selves, what Smug will make your VVorships dripping-pans?
Why he that makes the Fire∣shovels and Tongs▪ or if all fail, Quisque est fortune•… sue faber, we'll make our driping pans our selves: we can do more then that, we can preach to our selves already.
Who would coble your shoes, or mend your honourable stockings?
O there be Sermon-makers enough can do that bravely: the only Metaphysics they are beaten in, Rem acu▪•…angunt.
Who would carry you up to London, if the VVaggon-driver should think himself as good a man as his master?
Why we would ride thither on our own Hackney-Consciences.
Nay if this were so, the very Tailers though they damned you all to hell under their shop-boards, would scorn to come to the making up of as good a man as Pericles Prince of Tyre.
Marry that were a happy time for the Low-Countries: the Spanish Pike would not then be worth a Bodkin.
There would be no Presbyters to directorise you, no Laundresses to soap you, no Plough-men to feed you, no Inne-keepers
to fox you, no Sycophants to flatter you, no Friends to cheat you. Ergo you have brought your hogs to a fair market.
How she proves her self a Sow in conclusion!
It was in Conclusion, that it might not be denied. Me thinks Poverty disputes very poorly, and that's a wonder; for likely the naked truth is on her side.
Yet she remembered an Ergo, and that made her argument not so weak and im∣pudent: in my pinion this Ergo is a Quarter∣staff at least.
And (Poverty) what good turn can you do us, except it be to fill our ears with the bawlings of hungry brats and brawling bastards? No doubt you can bring us a flock of fleas and a herd of lice to store the pa∣stur grounds of our miserable Microcosms; the unmannerly hogs with hunger betimes to desire us to defer our breakfasts a fortnight longer. You can give us field-beds, with heaven for our canopy, and some charitable stones for our pillows. We need not expect the felicity of a horse to lie at rack and man∣ger; but yet our asses and we must be con∣tent with the same provender. No Rost-beef, no shoulders of Mutton, no Cheese-cakes, no Matchivilian Florentines:
And whence our greatest grief does rise,
No Plumb-porredg, nor no Plumbpudding pies.
Ergo (Poverty) I will answer your arguments at the whipping-post.
That was strong and piercing for Plumb-porredge: for truly one porringer of Plumb-porredge is an argument more un∣answerable then Campians ten Reasons.
Aliter probo sic. Your poor cry∣tures have not wherewith to bu•…y themselves; but it is not fit that the soul should go a beg∣ing for the charges of the bodies funeral. Ergo falleris Domino Poverty.
You do not dispute seriously, you put me off with trifling •…gations. Thus I dispute. If I make men better then Riches, I am to be preferred before Riches. But I make men better: for poor men have the better consci∣ences, because they have not so much guilt, J call their empty purses to witness. Aliter probo sic. J moralise men better then Plutus: Exemplum gratia: Plutus makes men with puffed faces, dropsy bodies, Bellies as big as the great Tub at Heidelberg; Noses by the virtue of Malmsie so full of Rubies, that you may swear, had Poverty had dominion in their Nativities, they had never had such rich faces: Besides, they have eyes like Turkey∣cocks, Double-chins, Flapdragon-cheeks, Lips that may spare half an ell, and yet leave kissing room enough. Nay, it is the humour of this age, they think they shall never be great men, unless they have gross bodies. Marry I keep men spare and lean, slender and nimble; mine are all Diminutives, Tom Thumbs, not one Colossus, not one Garagan∣tua amongst them; fitter to encounter the enemy by reason of their agility, in l•…e dan∣ger of shot for their tenuity, and most expert in running away, such is their celerity. Ergo, Irus is a good soldier, and Midas is an ass.
Troth she has touched Midas; she has caught him by the worshipful ears.
Nay tic no wonder if they be slender enough, you keep them with such spare diet: they have so much Lent and Fasting-dayes, that they need not fear the danger of being as fat as Committee-men. If a man should see a company of their lean carcasses assem∣bled together, 't would make him think Dooms-day were come to town before its time.
Moreover, that which is most noble is most preferable. But Poverty is most noble. Minor I prove thus: Whose houses are most ancient, those are most noble: But Poverties houses are most ancient; for some of them are so old, like Vicaridge-houses, they are every hour in danger of falling.
What a silly women's this to talk of Nobility houses! Does not she know we are all Levellers, there's no Nobility now.
Neighbour, I think so too: I am an Unpundant too, I think.
Nay she does not dispute well. Her Ma•… was born in Bedlam, her Minor w•…s whipped in Bridewell, Ergo her Conclusion is
run out of her wits. For well said M. Rhombus, Ass mulier blancata quasi lilium. Now I oppose her with a Dilemma, alias the Cuc∣kold of Arguments. My Dilemma is this: Citizens and Townsmen are •…each, for there's the Co•…nucopia; Ergo, Riches are better then Poverty. Nay, i•… Riches were not in some account, why would Iupiter be so rich? for you see he has engrossed to himself the golden age of 〈◊〉, and the silver age of Shillings and Sixpences, and left us no∣thing but the brazen age of Plundering and Impudence; for Tinkers Tokens are gone away too. To conclude in one syllogism more, J will prove my Tenet true by the example of 〈◊〉 Queen of Hell; she would turn the Clark of her Kitchen out of his of∣fice, and not suffer him to be the Devils man∣c•…ple any longer, if he should bring any lean carcass or any carrion-soul to be served up at her table. Her chief dish is the larded soul of a plump Usurer, basted with the dripping of a greasy Alderman; the sauce being made with the brains of a great Conger∣headed Lawyer, buttered with the grease of a well-fed Committee-man, served up for want of saucers in the two ears of an un∣conscionable Scrivener. Ergo, Poverty, you may go and hang your s•…lf.
O for the Barbados! J have no place left for my entertainment.
Come brethren, let us kick her out of the Universe.
O whither shall J betake my self!
To the house of Charity.
To the house of Charity? that's an old ruined cold lodging, as bad as a Corre∣ction house. Good your worships, take some pity on miserable Poverty!
Did you ever hear such a solecism?
Troth master, J never knew it in my life: All our Parish was ever against it.
And ours too, and J think all Eng∣land over.
Poverty, then J say thou shalt have a Justice of Peaces charity, the whipping∣post; thou shalt be lashed under the statute of sturdy Rogues and Beggars: look for no pity, it is charity to pity those that are rich: Go get you packing.
Well, sirs, though you put Poverty away now, yet you or your heirs may be glad to send for me ere long.
It shall be to the gallows then, by my consent: if you mean to prevent it, the best way is to go and pine away quickly.
Farewell old Rag of Babylon, for we must be rich, and therefore worshipful.
By your leave Mr. Parson.
Last night J laughed in my sleep. The Queen of Fairies tickled my nose with a Tithe-p•…gs tail. J dreamt of another Be∣nefice, and see how it comes about! Next morning Plutus the God of wealth comes to my house, and brings me an Augmentation and a good fat Living. He said he came to visit me: as sure as can be J am ordained to be rich at his Visitation, it is better then the Bishops or Archdeacons. Now must J be one of the Assembly, and walk demurely in a long black Cl•…ak at Westminster, forgetting all my Greek and Latin.
Faith brother, that have J done al∣ready: my name's Cl•…p-latine truly; J read a Homily, and pray by the Service-book divinely.
Divinely, quoth a! Thou must take Ex tempore in hand, or else thou wilt ne'er be rich in these days.
Do you hear, neighbours! shall us leave the Common-Prayer?
God forbid, Mr Ficar! why it was writ in Davits time; and Thomas Ste•…nhold and Iohn Hopkins joined it to the Psalms in those days, and turned it into such excellent Metre, that J can sleep by it as well as any in the Parish.
Besides, neighbour, we don't know this new Sect what they pray, we can't vol∣low them in their Axed•…umperies.
You see the case is clear, Sir: J am
for the King and the Prayer-Book.
Well said Parson, we shall love thee the better for that, hold there still.
Yet (Brother) because thou art of our cloth, I'll speak to Plutus for thee. Thou shalt have twenty pounds per annum standing stipend, and the love of thy Parish because thou take nothing of them, Doest mark me? Twenty pounds, I say. I must be gone.
A good saying and a rich. Now shall I surfeit in a Satin Cloak; from twen∣tie nobles to twenty pounds! O brave!
We are glad of it void Mr. Ficar.
Come Neighbours, upon this good news, lets chop up and to my Nosed Sn•…go's, he'll be glad to hear of it too. I am resolved to build no more Sconces, but to pay my old tickets. Come let's in and drink a Cup of stingo.
Void Vicar, thou give us good de∣struction still.
Come in, come, come.
O the divinity of being rich! Now Plutus is come. But who is Plutus? Why, he is the Nobleman's Tutor, the Princes and States fl•…et of Pl•…te, the Lawyers Littleton, the Major and Aldermens Fur-gown, the Justice's Warrant, the Constable and Bum∣bailies Tip-staffe, the Astronomers Blazing star, the Mathematicians Record or counting table, the Cavaliers Service-book, the Pres∣byterians Directory, the Independence Ex∣tempore, the Popes golden Legend, the Fri∣ars Nun, the Monks Breviary, the World∣lings God, the Prelates Cannons, and Bi∣shops Oath, &amp;c.—I could reckon more, but he is the very Ladder to worship and ho∣nor. I must be rich, and therefore hono∣rabble, and proud, and grave.
O gentleman-like resolution!
Yet now I think on it, J will not be grave; for grave bodies do naturally descend to base Conditions, which is clean contrary to the complexion of my humour; yet J will cry hum with the best in the Parish. J will understand as little as the 〈◊〉 Citizen of them all.
Marry, and that's a proud word, Blip∣sidemus.
I will sleep as soundly at Church and snort as loud at Sermons as the Church∣warden himself, or the Master of the Com∣pany.
O infinite ambition!
I will entertain none for my Whores under the reputation of Ladies, unless they be Parsons daughters.
O! because they may claim the be∣nefit of the Clergy.
I will deign none the honour of be∣ing my worships Cuckolds, that is not a round-headed Brother of the Corporation.
He'el make it a principle of the City Charter. Horns of such making, will be of as great esteem as the Cap of maintenance.
Hereafter Gentlemen, hereafter, I say, in contempt of a penny quart, I will throw P•…spot-lane in the face of Pie-corner: J will be foxed no where but at Round-headed Inns, that J may be honestly drunk, and carry it with the greater gravity and safety. The soul of Sack and the flower of Ale shall be my drink, that my very Urine may be the quintessence of Canary.
Why then, V•…spasian might desire no greater Revenue, then the reversion of your Chamber-pot.
But come let us withdraw, and car∣rye Plutus to the Temple of Esculapius; Ca∣rion make ready the necessaries, see you play the Sumpter-horse with discretion. Let us make haste, for J long to be worshipful.
Come friends, this day gives period to our sorrow,
We will d•…own ca•…es in bowls of Sack to morrow.
Soldiers, you see men Poverty▪ de∣spice
Since God of Riches hath recovered eyes;
Let us invade them now with might and main
And make them know their former state a∣gain;
March forth brave Champions, though your Noble Valours
Be out at Elbows, show your selves to be
Patches of worth, rags of Gentility.
Brave Blades, arrayed in Dish-clouts, dirty Plush,
Like the grave Senators of Beggars-bush;
With Poverty, sole Empress of your States,
Spend your best blood, you have no wealthy Fates:
Me thinks I see your Valours, and espy
Each rag, a Trophy of your Victory.
Come B•…un, thou worthy Scot of gallant race,
What though thou lost an arm at Chevy∣chase,
Resume thy valour. And thou Caradock,
True Leek of Wales, Pendragon's noble stock
Stir up thy▪ Welsh-blood to encounter these,
With zeal as fervent as thy toasted Cheese.
And thou brave Red-shank too, Termock by name,
Wonder of Red-shanks, &amp; Hybernia's fame.
To conquer these, or scatter them like chaff;
Or lick them up as glib as Usqu•…baghe.
And Higgen thou, whose potent Oratory▪
Makes Beggars-bush admire thy eloquent story,
Come bravely on and rescue me from dan∣ger,
Else Poverty to you will prove a stranger,
Which heavens forbid.
Poverty, poverty, poverty for our money!
Nay, without money Sirs, and be constant too.
Poverty, poverty, poverty, our Pa∣tronesse!
Cats plutrer a nails; Her were best by her troth take very many heeds, how her make a commotion in her stomachs; if her ploud be but up twice and once, her will tug out her Sword, and gads negs, let her take very many heed, her will carbonado very much Legs and Arms. By St: Taffie, E's tear the most valiantest of them all into as arrant Atoms as there be motes in the Moon. Try he dare whose will; I tickle their hoop∣sir Dominoes, else, never let her sing hapate∣rye, while she has live any longer. If her doe not conquer them upside down, let her no∣ver while she lives in Heuiope, god bless her, eat Coush-bobby with the man in the Moon. Her Coshen Marlin her Country-man, hath told her in a Whisper, very a many much tale of her valour above fourscore and twenty years since.
Bravely resolved; O how I love thy Valour!
Tic sweeter then Metheglin, I all Canarvon cannot afford a Comrade half so noble.
And Termock will shpend te bashed ploud in hish heelsh in the servish.
Renowned Termock, thanks from our Princely self.
Nay, keep tie tancks to thy self, La∣mock is tie trushty shubsheckt.
And eyes w•…s gang with thee Mon. Eyes have bin a prupder good man in the Bore∣ders. Eyes fought blithe and bonny for the got Earl Duglasse: Eyes show thy foemen a Scutch trick. Eyes mumble their crags like a Sheeps-head or Cokes-nose, Ais I do not let me bunt to Sup with nothing but Perk and Sow-baby.
Well said brave Brun, hold but thy Resolution,
And never a Soldier breathing shall excel thee.
Nay's mon, aif I cannot give um mickle rashers enough my self, eyes gang home to my Belliba•…no and get lusty Martial Barns, shall pell mell their Noddles: What gorse great Higgen?
Attend, attend; I Higgen the grand Orator
Begin to yawn, lend me your Asses ears;
Give auscultation. Higgen, whose Pikestaff Rhetoric,
Makes all the world obey your Excellence
By cudgelling them with Crab-tree aloe∣quince.
By lusty Doxies, there's not a Quire Cove,
Nobler then I in all the bowsing Kens
That are twixt Hockly in the hole and Islington.
By these good stampers, upper and nether Duds;
Isle nip from Ruffmans of the Harmanbeck,
Though glimmered in the fambles, I cly the chates:
I'll stand the Pad or Mill, the Churches de∣near.
Nip bungs, dupp gibbers leaguer, lowze and bowse.
Liggen in strommel, in darkmans for pannum
Should the grand Ruffian come to mill me, I
Would scorn to shuttle from my Poverty:
So, so, well spoke, my noble English Tatter,
Lead up▪ the Vant-guard, muster up an army,
An army royal of Imperial Lice.
And J will be the Scanderbeg of the Company,
The very Timberline of this ragged rout;
Come follow me my Soldiers—
Yaws grand Captain, fir, suft and fair; gar away, there be got men in the Company. Eyes Captain, for eyes have more scutch Lice, then thou hast English creepers, or He British Goats about him.
What then? my I ice are of the no∣ble breed,
Sprung from the Danes, Saxons and Nor∣mans blood;
True English-born, all plump and all well savoured:
Take warning then good sir, be not so proud,
As to compare your Vermin sir, with ours.
Pleash tie shit grash, let nedder nod∣der of them my shit Empress have te plash of tie Captain, J am te bashed of edder odder. J have seen te fish of the wild Irish. Termock knows vat it is to fight in the Pogs like a valiant Costermonger, up to the Nosh in ploud. Not to make much prittle and prat∣tle to none purposh▪ Termock has fight un∣der Oncale, for her King and Queen in te wars. Vat, J speak tech by te Shoes of Patrick, if that Termock be the Captain, thou shalt beat tie foes to pieces and pashes.
Is Caradock no respected amongst her; Her Lice are petter a pedecree as the gooddst of them all. Her Lice come ap Shin∣kin, ap Shone, ap Owen, ap Richard, ap More∣began, ap Hugh, ap Brutus, ap Sylvius, ap E∣neas, and so up my shoulder. An't her Lice will no•… deshenerate from her petticree pre∣tious Coals. Her ancestors fought in the Wars of Troy, by this Leck, as lustily as the Lice of Troilus. Nay, by St. Taffie, the Lice of Hector, were but Nits in comparison of her magnanimous Lice. Do not disparage her nor her Lice, if her love her guts in her polly.
But if Termock have no Lish, sall l e therefore not be te Captain? Posh on her Lish. Termock hash none grash a Patrick; no such venomous tings will pried in hish Country.
I will be Captain, for my Robes: re martial:
T•…ue martial Robes, full of uneureable wounds.
My Doublet is adorned with thousand scars,
My Breeches have endured more storms and tempests
Then any man's that lies perdue for Put∣dings.
I have kept Sentinel every night this twelve month;
Beheaded Ducks and Geese, spitted the Pigs,
And all to Victual this camp of Rogues.
Faith, and her clothes are as once∣ent a petticree▪ as thine, her fery Doublet is coshen sherman to utter P. ndragons Sherken, or else Caradock is a fery rogue by Saint Taffie.
You shall not thus contend, who shall be Captain;
I'll do it my self, Come follow me brave Soldiers.
I faith! she is a brave Virago mon.
By St. Taffie, she is an Amashon, a Debora,
A Brunduca, a Join of Oleance,
Pucelle de Dieu, a Mall C•…tpurse, a Long-meg of Westminster.
She sall be te Captain, for all tee, or any odder in English land.
Whips on you all! follow the Fe∣mine gender?
Fight under the Ensign of a Petticoat?
An act unworthy such brave spirits as we:
Remember our old Virtues, shall we forget
Our ancient Valou•…s? Shall we in this one action
Stain all our honour, blur our reputations:
Can men of such high fortunes deign to s•…up
To such dishonourable terms? How can our thoughts
Give entertainment to such low designs?
My spirits yet are not dissolved to whey,
J have no soul, so poor as to obey,
To suffer a smock rampant to conduct me.
Aife thou's keep a mundring man∣dring, mon, e's gang to Edinborow. The Deill lead your army for Brun, eyes no meddle, Adieu, adieu.
Ah Brun! Blerawhee, blerawhee.
Ah Brun, Brun! Shulecrogh, feather vilt thou, feather vilt thou?
What yaw doing mon to call Brun back; and you be sules, I'll stay no longer.
Ah Brun, Brun! shall be Captain, by all te green Sheese in the Moon. Brun shall be Captain for Caradock, if her would not give place to Brun▪ her heart were as hard as F•…int-shire.
Brun sall be te bashed in te company, if tere were a thousand thousand of um.
I'll not resign my right, J will be Captain.
It is fit I should: Hath not my valour oft
Been tried, at Bridewell and the Whipping∣post?
Let Higgen then be Captain, his sweet tongue
And powerful rhetoric may persuade the Rout.
Cats plutter a nails, Higgen shall be Captain for her Ears; yet Caradock will be valiant in spite of her Teeth.
Ho brave Captain Higgen!
Higgen, a Higgen, a Higgen.
So then Soldiers, follow your Lea∣der: Valiant Brun
Lead you the Rear; you Termock shall com∣mand
The Regiment of Foot. Generous Caradock
Have you a care of the Left-wing.
O disparashment to her repute∣tion! Brutus hish Coshen look the whing. Think you her will flee away. Her will stand to it tooth and nail, while there be skin and bones in her polly.
Let the Army gang to the Deill. Eyes no meddle.
Stay tere man, vat to•… doe Brun?
My brave co•…redoes, Knights of tat∣ter'd Fleece,
Like Falsta•…s Regiment, you have one shirt among you.
Well seen in plundering money for the Ale∣house.
Such is the fruit of our Domestic broils,
We are returned to ancient Poverty
Yet (seeing we are lousy) let us show our breeding.
Come, though we shrug, yet lets not leave our calling:
Leiutenants Rampant, bravely all trained up
At the well skil'd Artillery of Bridewell;
March on brave soldiers, you that near turned back
To any terror but the Beadles whip.
St. Andrew, St. Andrew.
St. Taffie, St. Taffie.
St. George, St. George.
St. Patrick, St. Patrick.
Saints are discarded.
But Andrew, Taffie, George, and Patrick too
May the whole •…esse of them be all propitious!
If any do resist us, let us throw
Our Crutches at them. J have here
An empty sleeve to strike out all their teeth,
Besides a ma•…kin to wipe all our wounds.
Be valiant, and as ear'st the Spanish Cobbler
Enjoined his eldest son upon his death-bed:
See you do nothing, that may ill beseem
The Families you come of; let not the ashes
Of your dead Ancestors blush at your dis∣honours;
Increase your glory of your House; for me
J'le ne'er disgrace my noble Progeny.
Caradock disgrash her Petticree? No, by St. Prutus bones; her will fight till her stand, while tere be legs in her beels. If her pe killed, her will not run away.
Eyes gar away? Eyes not budge a foot by St. Andrew.
Termock disgrash hish fadders and mutters? Termock will stand while tere be breath in his breech.
Higgen, Scandebeg, Tamberlain, grand Captain Higgen.
Soldiers shift for your selves. We are all routed.
Is this you would not disgrace your noble Progeny?
My Ancestors were all footmen. Run∣ning away will not disgrace my Progeny.
O disgrash to peat St. Toffee's coshen! Use the true Pretty•…h no petter?
Caradock, will you and your Lice disgrash her Progeny? The Vermin of He∣ctor and Troilus would not do so for all A∣chilles Myrmidons.
Her do follow her petticree from head to foot: Her Grandsire En•…as ran a∣way before.
Marry ill tide thee mon, use a mon of our Nation no better.
Generous Brun, I thought you would not have budged a foot by St. Andrew.
What of that woman? Eyes no en∣dure Poverty,
The Scuts love mickle wealth better then so.
Will Termock too disgrash his Fad∣der and Mutters?
Termock runs for te credit of his heels to look the Reshiment of foot.
Now, wo is me, wo is my Poverty!
That can find grace or mercy in few places.
What shall I doe? If my whole Army fly,
I must run too; if I stay here, J die.
So now you see Carrion for his valour may compare with Don Quixote or the mirror of chive•…rye. Come, come along you old for∣tunate Rascals, you that in the days of Queen Richard fed upon nothing but barley∣broth and puddings, you shall be rich you rogues all of you, feed hard at the Council∣table.
How daintily wilt thou become a scarlet Gown, when such poor snakes as I shall come with Cap and Knee, How does your good Lordship? Did your Honour sleep well to night? How does Madam Kate and Ma∣dam Ciss, have their Honours any morning∣milk-cheefe to sell? Will it please your Lordship to command your servant to be drunk in your honours-wine-seller? Your Honours in all duties, and so J kiss your Ho∣nurse hand.
Thou shalt kiss my Honours tail. Then will I again say, Fellow, how does thy honourable Lord? tell him he does not con∣generate from the noble family he comes of: I would have some confabilitation with him concerning a hundred of his Lordships pitch∣forks. But I am going to the Bench, and with the Committee to firk up the proud Priests before us, and humble the Country. Tell him Madam Kate is as sound as a Kettle: thou should have concourst with her Ladyship, but she is skimming her Milk-bowls, and melting her dripping-pans as busy as a body∣louse. Now fellow go into my wine-cellar to play on my sack-buts, and take no care for finding the way out again. But sirrah, see you drink my Honours health: your see I can tell what belongs to Lordships, and what is more to good manners. But what's the news a∣broad, my honest Coranto stilo novo sub 〈◊◊〉.
I know not what to say, but that my
master is Emperor of Constantinople, a second Tamberlain; we shall have nothing but glory Beef and Bajazers in every Cup-board. Plutus has left stumbling; the puppy is nine days old, and can see perfectly. Gre∣mercy Esculapius! tic pity but thou should have a better beard then Apollo thy father. O Esculapius, the very Pultise of Surgeons, and Urinal of Physicians!
Void neighbours, then let us make bone-fires: this news is as sweet as Zugar∣zopps.
My Iane and I full right merrily, this jollity will avouch,
To witness our mirth upon the green earth, together we'll dance a clatter-do-pouch. clatter-de-pouch, clatter, &amp;c.
And then will J kiss thy Kate and my Cisse, as soon as J rise from my couch.
The wenches isle tumble and merrily jumble,
Together we'll dance a clatter-de-pouch.
clatter-de-pouch, clatterde—&amp;c.
Jle kiss if J can our Dary-maid Nan,
Together we'll billing be found:
Let every slouch dance clatter-de-pouch,
Together we'll dance a Sellengers round.
J will not be found at Sellengers round, although thou do call me a slouch. Banks's horse cannot prance a merrier dance Then rumbling and jumbling a clatter-de∣pouch, clatterde &amp;c.
Then rumbling &amp;c.
Here's rumbling and jumbling in∣deed. I was spinning my daughter a new smock, and they keep such a noise I cannot sleep for um. Passion of my heart, I wonder what news there is abroad, and why that knave Carrion makes no more haste home.
Now will I be an Emperor, and con∣temn my Mistress
Cari what news Carrion?
I cannot answer them to day, com∣mand the Ambassadors to attend our will to morrow.
Why Carrion, I say!
Go give him my gold-chain and precious jewel.
What are you mad?
And a rich cup-board of my daintiest plate.
Well, let me see what it will cost me now,
For to maintain some forty thousand men
In arms against the Turks.
Sir, do you know your self?
Suppose I lend some twenty thousand millions.
Some twenty thousand put•…gs.
And send two hundred sail to con∣quer Spain, and Rupert too, and fright the Inquisition
Out of their wits—
If any be out more then thou, Isle be hanged.
The King of Poland does not keep his word:
And then my Tenants for my Custom-house
Are twenty hundred thousand pounds behind hand.
In Haberdashers-Hall, or the Isle of Tripoly.
Take that for your Haberdashers∣hall, or Isle of Tripoly.
Traitors; my guard! where are my Beef-eaters? O my old Mrs. was it you? why, are you not drunk with mirth? I was in good hope ere this to have seen you reel∣ing in a French hood. Well, have at your old petticoat. Madam, I have news will ravish you, my dainty Madam; a bushel of unmea∣surable joy.
Then prithee tell thy comfortable message; and if it tickle me in the telling, I will give thee a pair of high-shooes more then thy quarters wages.
Listen then while I anatomic my whole discourse from the head to the heel.
Nay good Carrion, not to the heel.
But I will, though your heel were a Polonian, or a French heel, which is the fashion.
Nay do not molest me, Carrion. I am
very squeamish, and may chance have a qualm come over my stomach.
Then I begin. First we came to the god leading Plutus, then most miserable, but now as happy as Fortunatus his Night-cap. First we made him a Dipper, we duckt him over head and ears in water, we made him •…n Anabaptist.
Alas poor soul, it was enough to have put him into an ague: one would not have used a Water-spaniel more unmercifully.
No, nor a cursed queen in a cucking∣•…ool, Mrs. You see what creatures these dip∣pers are. J warrant when the young Lasles were a dipping, the blind Rogue could see that well enough. Well, Mrs. coming to the Temple of Esculapius, where all the altars stood furnished with reeking pasties and •…ot pippin-pies, O it was such sweet religion, my mouth watered at it. Just upon the hearth they were beathing a great black-pudding, to stay the gods stomach till breakfast. Here we laid Plutus in a cradle and rocked him a∣sleep.
O the folly of such Simpletons, lay •…n old man in a cradle!
And why not? is he not a child the second time? Next, every man made his own bed: the liberal god allowed us fresh peas∣straw.
And was there no more lame and impudent creatuers at this Spittle-house?
Of all sorts, mistress. There was a young heir newly crept out his wardship, that had been sick of a young Lady three years and upwards.
Just as I am of Chremylus. Sir, seeing you are of good parts and properties, you may presume to come sometimes into my bed-chamber.
No mistress, the Dary-maid shall serve my turn. Next was a pretty waiting∣gentlewoman, that with dreaming of her Lord, was fallen into a terrible Green∣sickness.
Now by my holidame, J could have cured that my self; if she be troubled with the maidenhead-grief, J can give her as quick deliverance as any Esculapius in Europe.
Many Lawyers were troubled with the itch in their fingers; many young Heirs in a consumption; burst Citizens so over∣swelled with interest-mony, that they were in danger of breaking; many Treasurers, Sequestrators and Receivers came for help, for they had received so much monies, that they had lost their eye-sight, and could not see to make accounts: there were Townsmen came to have their brow-antlets knocked off, Presbyt•…ians for the Directory, Caves for the Service-book; some Tradesmen and Scholars, that had long fed upon costive Usurers, being much bound, came to the Temple to be made soluble.
Nay, if he be so good at it, Isle go and see if he can cure me of my corns; they vex me so wonderfully, J cannot sleep for um.
Marry Jove forbid, mistress! should your corns be cured, how should my master do for an Almanac to foretell the weather? Pond, Booker, Allestree, Ieffry Never Gent. nay nor Merlinus Anglicus, are not half so good Astronomers as your Ladyships pro∣phetique toes.
Mass if it be so, J shall save him two pence a year, rather then put him to the charges of an Alman•…ck. But was there any more?
Yes there were many Country-lobs, that having surfeited on the glory-bacon of their Milk-maids favours, were fain to repair to the next Alehouse for purgations. Deaf Scriveners came for their cares; Silenced Ministers to be cured of dumbness; many Scholars of Colleges, whose gowns having been sick divers years of the scu•…f, desired the god to do them the grace as to change the colour of that disease into the black-jaundies.
And did he cure them all?
All but Neoclides; a blind fellow, and yet such an arrant thief, that he sto•…e all things he set his eyes on. To proceed: the Monk put out the •…allow-tapers, bid us sleep, and whatsoever hissing we heard, to see and say nothing. There we slept soundly, and in the honour of Esculapius snorted most de∣voutly. Marry J could not sleep: for there was an old woman with a pitcher of peas∣porridge
at her head lay next to me. Now I had a great zeal to devour the delicious pile∣low: but putting forth my hand, I espi•…d the bald Friar eating the religious cakes, and cracking of the consecrated nuts. So I think∣ing it a piece of divine charity, studied how to cheat the old Beldam.
O sacrilegious Varlet! were not a∣afraid of the god?
Yes, lest he might cousin me of my pease-porredge. The woman perceiving me put forth her hand: then I fell a hissing like a Winchester-goose on S. Georges dragon; the woman snatched back her fangs, and for very fear smelt like the perfume of a Polecat: in the interim I supped up the porridge; and my belly being full, I laid my bones to rest.
And did not the god come yet?
O mistress, now comes the jest: when the god came near me, my devotions a posterior sent him forth most ridiculous orisons; the Pease-broth in me was so windy that I thought I had an Aeolus in my belly; my guts wambled, and on the sudden evapo∣rated a clap or two of most unmanerly thun∣der, the very noise of it broke all the Urinals in the Spittle-house, and saved Esculapius the labour of casting Iupiters water; it fright∣ed his poor Apothecary out of his wits, as he was making Saturn a glister 〈◊〉 and for the smell, Penacea▪ told her father that she was sure it could not be frankincense.
Yes, but was not the god angry that you kept your backside no closer?
Who he! It is such a nasty Numen, he would be glad if your close-stool were his alms-tub, that he might feed upon your meat at second hand.
Nay, but leave your windy discourse, and proceed with your tale.
At length two snakes appeared, and licked Plutus eyes: then Aesculapius beating Aigus his head in a mortar, tempered it with a look beyond Luther, well minced with the roasted apple of his eye: the whole confection boiled in a pint of crystalline humour, which being dropped into his eye with the feather of a peacocks tail, he recovered his sight in the twinkling of an eye.
But how came the god of wealth blind?
How! Because Honesty is like a Puck-fist; he never met it but once, and it put out his eyes: besides, the rich Rogue had too many Pearls in his eyes.
And what are we the better now his eye-sight is restored?
Why thus: None but honest people shall grow rich now; there's the wonder: my master Chremylus shall be an Earl, and you from the Cream-pot of Rusticity shall be churned into the honourable Butter of a Countess.
Nay, they were wont to call me Countess before: and I shall do well enough for a Countess, I warrant you. I thank my stars, I can spin as fine a thread for woollen, as any Countess in England. Well Carrion, now I am a Countess, Mrs. Ficar shall not sit above me in the Church; I will have as fine a stammel-Petticoat and rich Stomacher as the proudest of them all. Pi•…thee Carrion go to the Goldsmith, buy me a ring, and see it be well enamoured.
You would say enamelled. But Mrs. what will you do now?
I will go in to present the gods new Eyes with a basket of Pippins and a dozen of Churchwardens.
Good morrow to the morn next to my gold:
First bright Apollo, I salute thy rays,
And next the earth▪ Minerva's sacred land.
Truly 〈◊〉 soil, Athenian city.
How my soul blushes, and with grief remem∣bers
My miserable blindness! wretched Plutus,
Whose hood-winkt ignorance made thy guilty feet
Stumble into the company of Rascals,
Informers, Sequestrators, Pettifoggers,
Grave 〈◊〉, Sycophants and unconsci∣onable Coridons,
And Citizens whose false Conscience weighed too light
In their own seals, claimed by a principal Charter
The Cornucopia proper to themselves.
When good just men, such as did venture lives
For Countries safety and the Nations honour,
Were paid with their own wounds, and made those scars
Which were accounted once the marks of honour,
The miserable privilege of begging,
Scarce to have lodging in an Hospital.
And those whose labours suffer nightly throes
To give their teeming brains deliverance
To enrich the land with learned merchandise
The sacred Traffic of the soul, rich wise∣dome:
Starve in their studies, and like moathes de∣voure
The very leaves they read, scorned of the Vul∣gar,
Nay, of the better sort too many times,
As if their knowledge were but learned wick∣oddness,
And every Smug could preach as well as they:
Nay, as if men were worse for Academies.
But all shall be amended. I could tell
A tale of horror, and unmask foul actions;
Black as the night they were committed in.
I could unfold a Lerna, and with proofs
As clear as this deer light, could testify
How I unwilling kept them company.
O heaven forbid! what wicked things are these?
Yet such there be, that •…lock into my com∣pany,
In swarms as if they would d•…voure me quick,
That throng so fast, as if they'd crowed my soul
Out of her house of clay: while every man
Employs his supple hams, and oily tongue
To fained complements and importunate ser∣vice.
I could not walk the Exchange to day, but straight
Each head was bare, every officious knee
Bowed to my honour, and enquired my health;
And which is more intolerable, snow-white∣heads,
Whose every hair seemed died in innocence.
With that one leg which was not yet in the grave,
Crouched like so many Tipsters. These spring-tide friends,
These swarming Flies, bred by the summers heat;
Should but adversities black cloud appear,
With lowering looks, theatning a winters storm,
Farewell my summers swallow: these are friends
To Cremylus cupboard, and affect I see
My Oysters and my Puddings, it is not me.
Marry gods blessing of the thy soul! Now a hundred good morrows to thy eyes. I have brought the a dish of Pearmains and Pippins, with a dish of Lordings and Lady∣apples, and some of our country fruit, half a score of Russetings.
O it is unfit, my eye-sight being re∣stored,
To accept a kindness till I have bestowed one.
Marry and muff! I can be as stout as you if J please. Do you scorn my kindness?
Apples and Nuts, weel eat um by the fire,
Where the rude audience shall not laugh at us:
It were an absurdity in a Comic Poet
To make a musse of sweetmeats on the Stage,
Throwing a handful of ridiculous Nuts
To catch the popular breath and ignorant praise
Of preaching Cobblers, Carmen, Tinkers, Taylors.
Nay, it is even true, the good old Gentleman speaks very wisely; you may be∣lieve him, if you please. I'll be sworn, this morning, the Lay-Clergie, while they were a preaching at Bell-ally in Colemanstreet, I came by with my basket; the hungry Ras∣calls in pure zeal had like to eat up my Gin∣ger-bread, had there not been Popish pi∣ctures upon it; I had much ado to keep them from scrambling my Apples too, had not the sets of my old Ruff looked like so ma∣ny Organ-Pipes and frighted them. But
faith rake-hels, (and you mend not your manners) 〈◊〉 complain to Mr. Goodwin and the 'mittees too. Come in good Gentle∣man, though I have never a tooth in my head, yet i'll crack Nuts with my Gumms but isle bear thee company.
To be rich is the daintiest pleasure in the world; especially, to grow rich without venturing the danger of Tiburn or Whipping. Every Cupbord is full of Custards, the Hogs∣heads replenished with sparkling Sacks. The veriest Gippo in the house will not drink a degree under Muscadine. All the Porridge∣pots are arrant Barberry gold. All the Vessels in the house, from the Basin and Ewer to the Chamber-pot and Vinegar-bottle, are of Middletons silver. The Kitchen and Buttery is entire Ivory, the very purity of the Eel∣phants tooth. The Sink is paved with the rich Rubies, and incomparable Carbuncles of Sir Iohn Oldcastle's Nose. The Conduit runs as good Rose-water as any is in Ari∣stotles Well. The Dish-clouts are cloth of Tissue, and from the skirts of every Scullion drop melting streams of Amber grease. We the poor servants play at Even and Odd with arch-angels, and at Cross and Pile for Ja∣cobusses, in a humour, to out Philip the King of Spain. My Master is sacrificing a Sow, a Goat, and a Ram for joy; But J could not endure the house, there is such a smoke from the reeking of the roast, that though it please my stomach, my eyes are offended with it.
Boy follow me, for J have a zeal to be rich;
My devotion leads me in the righteous path
To Plutus god of wealth. Profane poverty
Is a Carthusian, and a grand delinquent,
One of the malignant party up in arms
Against the well-affected.
Say Brother, who are you, whose righteous Shoes conduct you hither?
Ananias▪ Goggle, verily.
A devout Brother, that hath oft been plun∣dered
By wicked persecution: but last night
My dreaming spirit f•…retold J should be rich
And happy made by Revelation.
Goggle, or Cogle, a Geneva brother
Of sanctified snuffling, a pure Elder
Of the precise cut, or else past Ordinances.
No, but a zealous Saint of Amster∣dam,
Whose Nose is forward to promote the cause;
Crosses are Romish Jdols, yet misfortune
Has put so many dismal Crosses on me,
Till every cross was spent, and sent away
On superstitious Pilgrimages: fie upon it,
That zeal and ignorance should be conver∣tible.
What would you have, dear brother? for J think
J have heard you Exercise at Bell-alley.
It is true, but yet
J come to Plutus Conventicle now.
It is he can cure my troubles, he brings joy
To the fraternity of Amsterdam,
To the Geneva brotherhood, and the Saints
Whose pure devotions feed on Bunbury Cakes:
He can restore my wealth, give me abundance
Of holy Gold and Silver purified,
Jncrease my talents spent upon the Sisters,
That J may thrive again as did my father
That reverent Saint Goggle, Patience Hypomo•…e
A holy Taylor and a venerable Parson.
Say Brother, may a Taylor be a Par∣son?
It is very fit: For first, his sacred Parchment
Can take the measure of Religion;
And from the Cloth of a good Conscience
Make up a Suit for honest Conversation:
Sewed with the thread of Goodness, stitched in the Seams
With twisted Silk of Piety and Innocence▪
Lined with good Thoughts and charitable Actions:
The sacred shreds and snips of holy Carsey
May chance to mend the Garments of the Righteous,
If Satan come to rend their guiltless robes.
But were you not in miserable con∣dition,
Before that Plutus came to speak amongst you?
He speaks with golden eloquence, believe it:
For now your zealous bags are full again
With holy silver, and good Brotherly gold;
You cannot fall to desperation,
Having so many Angels to defend you.
Yea certes: therefore now I find god Plutus
Has made me Collector of his contributions.
I must needs thrive, therefore I take occasion
To give the god the greatest gratulation.
But tell me, zealous brother, why doth that boy
Carry that Saint-like Cloak, and upright Shoes?
Cloaks are for Saints; they preach in Cloaks all now:
Gowns are all Popes: no Sermons without Cloaks.
This holy Cloak and I these thirteen years
Have friezed together, and these upright Shoes;
Not upright once, till their ungodly soles
That always went awry, were rightly mended
By a religious conscionable Cobbler,
With Leather liquored in most zealous tears.
These shoes, I say, ten winters and three more
Have traced the Conventicles of the Bre∣thr•…n.
These shoo•…s, this Cloak J come to dedicate
To Plutus, in requital of h•…s kindness.
What, your shoes come for Conse∣cration?
Now fie upon your Popish Conse∣cration!
This Cloak is not a rag of Babylon.
I offer these as Presents: this same is
A well-affected Cloak; and zealous shoes,
Never profaned with irreligious toes.
Such precious gifts they are, such devout presents,
He cannot but accept them verily.
O hone a cry ô hone!
My empty purse and belly weep for sorrow,
And every string and gut pores lament∣tions.
I was a Sequestrator once, and used
To find occasions of Delinquency
Committed against the State, like a Pro∣mooter.
But now my guts have sequestered my belly,
And let it out to others. Wretched state
Of them that die in famine! But in me
Jerusalems dearth is here epitomised.
Garret Ostle-bridge was down, welladay, welladay.
As I was wont to inform against Malignants,
So now my guts give informations
Against my teeth and stomach. Wretched Nere-be-good!
J now must pine and starve at Pennylesse-Bench,
Who starved Orphans and delinquent Pri∣sonars,
Like a Committees Marshal. Now I see
What it is to want a little honesty.
Oh that the Philosophers truly had defined
The Moon Green-Cheefe! J would desire the man
That dwells in such a blessed habitation,
To roast me one poor piece before I die,
That for my Epitaph men might write this Note,
Our Sequestrator had a VVelsh-mans throat.
Now verily I find by revelation,
This is a Varlet of no honest fashion;
Who because he had no honest occupation,
Is fallen into most wretched tribulation.
O hunger, hunger! Now good sky fall quickly,
Or J shall die ere it rain Larks. Who could
Endure to have his goods confiscate thus
By the blind puppy Plutus! Well, young Cerberus,
Isle hire the Furies to pull out thy eyes,
And once more put thee to the trade of stum∣bling.
This is a Rascal deserves to ride up Holborn,
And take a pilgrimage to the triple-tree,
To dance in Hemp Derricks Caranto:
Lets choke him with Welch Parsley.
Good friend be merciful, choke me with Puddings and a Rope of Sausages,
And I will thank you here and after death;
For I shall die I fear for want of choking.
Where is the god that promised golden mountains
T'enrich us all: is this the gold he gives me?
He has not left me coin enough to purchase
A mess of Portage, like my brother Esau.
Empson and Dudley, happy were you two
Being the prime Sequestrators of your age,
That you were hanged before this day of fa∣mine.
I pine and starve, live to outlive my self,
Turn Ghost before J die. Blind fornicator
Plutus hath sequestered the Sequestrator.
J tell thee out of zeal to the Cause thou lie.
So my good zealous Brother of eg∣norance,
And what says your Amsterdam Nose? you think
That every man turns Factor for the Devil,
A Reprobate, that comes not every night
To hear your fine reformed Basket-maker
Preach in his VVicker Pulpit: you shall not think
To have my money thus, you shall not think it.
Prate any longer here, mutter again,
And J will make thy pretty Brotherly soul
Come snuffling through thy sanctified no∣strils.
Nevergood, J know was always fierce
Yes indeed sir, for now my Paunch is empty;
J'de have you know, J have an excellent sto∣match.
J will do what J can to make this flesh
To have a Combat with this furious spirit.
Ananias Goggle, do you see this Heretic
•…ow he triumphs against the Lay-preaching Brother-hood?
Go to him man, and beat him.
It is a strong Reprobate. He would sequester me
Were J not for the Cause. J will not touch him▪
He will defile my purest hands; he is
A lump of vile corruption. Breathe the other way;
Thy very breath's infectious, and it smells
As if thou had caught the Pox of the Whore of Babylon.
So sir, you dare not fight.
J will not fight. It is thy policy to have me fight,
That J might kill thee, and pollute my hands
With swinish blood. No, no, J will not fight
To make my self unsanctified.
J will dispute with thee, Nose against nose,
And valiantly J dare to snuffle with thee,
In the defence of silver-purified.
Would Plutus had no better Cham∣peon to defend him!
Then such as only snuffle in the Cause.
J would presume by my own proper valour
To make a breach into the strongest Cup∣board,
Were it as strong as Basing-house or Bristol.
Avaunt thou Synagog of iniquity,
J see thou art of the Popish tribe: Necessity
Does make thy Guts take Purgatory pen∣nonce,
Brings thee to shrift and shift, makes thy teeth observe
Unconscionable Fridays, profane fasting∣days,
With Lent and Antichristian Emberweeks.
Tic much against my conscience, my devotion
Lies toward the Kitchen. If J change my faith,
J will turn fat Presbyter or Anabaptist.
J never loved this heresy of fasting,
Plutus has put me out of Commons. Yet my Nose
Smells the delicious odour of Roast-beef.
What doest thou smell?
J say, J smell some Cavaliers Roast∣beef.
Out on thee Varlet, J warrant thoud'st fain sequester it.
If the despair of dining vex thee thus,
J can acquaint thee with a liberal Duke
That keeps an open house.
J charge thee by the love thou bear thy stomach,
By all the happiness of eating puddings,
And every Pie thou meanest to eat at Christ∣mass, To tell me who—
Now out upon thee for a roguish He∣retick!
•…is not a Christmas, tic a Nativity Pie.
That superstitious name, J know, is banished
Out of all England, Holley and Ivy too.
Why? go to Pals, Duke Humphrey wants a guest;
If his Rooms now be clean from Soldiers Horse-dung,
There you may stay and walk your bellyful:
Bid your self welcome, never pay your Ordi∣nary,
Nor say no Grace, but thank your self for hunger.
O misery of men, that J the health
And lover of my Country should thus pine
And die for want of Porridge! See you Chimney,
What sweet perfumes, what comfortable smoke
It breaths; that very smoke doth smell of Mutton.
Well, J shall die, and all the Worms will curse me
For bringing so lean a caress to the grave.
Answer to me.
What, to those narrow Breeches?
Do not profane my Breeches. For these Breeches
I tell thee were in fashion in the Primitive Church.
Answer to me.
What will you Catechise me?
Art thou a Farmer?
No, heaven forbid, J am not mad,
To live •…y Dung and Horse-turds.
Art thou a Merchant?
Faith J can walk the Exchange,
Put on an Indian face, spit China fashion,
Discourse of new-found VVorlds, call Drake a Gander,
Ask if they hear news of my Fleet of Ships
That sailed by land through Spain to the An∣tipodes
To fetch Westphalia Bacon. J can discourse
Of shorter ways to th•… Indies, spend my judge∣meant
On the plantation of the Summer Isles.
Censure Guiana Voyage, deam of plots,
To bring A•…gear by shipping unto Dover.
Then of Prince Rupert's ships, and how the Pope
May make St. Dunstan draw the Devil to the Peak,
To make him kiss his own Breech.
This can J talk with Merchants, in the close
Invite my self to Dinner at their houses,
And borrow money ne'er to be repaid
Till the return of my silver Fleet from Persia.
Now fie upon thee, hast thou no vo∣cation,
No honest calling? then art thou not a Law∣yer?
No faith, J am not; yet know a trick
To bring my neighbours into needless suits,
And undertake their actions: make um pay
For such a motion at the Dogs-head •…avern
A mark or two; disburse a piece or two
For Affulavits at the Mitre: sell um
For twenty shillings an Injunction,
VVrits of Rebellion, Chancery Decrees,
A Nisi prius, or a Latitat.
Poor souls, they have very hard words for their money.
When this is done, I sit and laugh at them:
Then they may buy a Writ of Execution
And go and hang themselves. For J feed on them
All the Term long, live with them in Va•…a∣tion,
Cheating them by Bills of Return.
Vile Rascal, hast thou no other shift?
Faith yes, sometimes
I feed on One and twenties, cheat young Heirs,
Bringing them acquainted with some cozen∣ing Scrivener,
To ease them of the burden of too much earth.
Sometimes I woe old widows, go a sui•…ring▪
Unto the thirds of an Aldermans estate▪
Sometimes prick up my self &amp; grow familiar
With the proud wealthy Citizens wanton wives,
And by the fortitude of my back maintain
Both back and belly.
O sink of sin, and boggards of cor∣ruption!
Hast thou no honest calling?
Yes J have: J know a trick to snuffle at Bell-Ally,
Rail at the Steeple-houses, and the Popish Bishops,
And the Tithe-scraping Priests, Sir-John-Presbyters.
Out on thee Villain, foe to the holy Cassocks.
J do remember thee in the Archbishops time,
Thou made me stand ith Popish pillory
With Prin and Bur•…on, only for speaking
A little sanctified treason.
But we will be revenged; we'll have him dragged
Through all the town by Alewives, and then hanged up
Upon a Sign-post, for conspiring with
Sir Giles Mompessons, in the persecution
Of innocent Tipsters.
Come, seeing he has no zeal nor ardent love,
Let's strip him naked, till he freeze &amp; grow
As cold as Charity.
What will you plunder me? whore's your warrant Ho?
Do, sanctified thieves, plunder: yet J shall live
To see my little Anabaptist come
To his twelve Godfathers, thence to the Ladder;
Where having nosed a tedious Psalm or two
The holy hemp must gird your sanctified wind-pipe,
While you in honour of the righteous cause
With a wry-mouth salute the souls at Pad∣dington,
And turn a Tyburn-Saint.
Pull off his profane and irreligious Doubler,
Anathematize his Breeches, excommunicate
His impious Shirt: there's not a rag about him,
But is heretical, full of Babylon lice,
Like the foul sinock of Austria.
So, do it if you dare: that J may live
To see your fine precise Geneva-Breeches
Hang in the Hang-mans wardrobe. Ho bear witness.
Nay faith your witness is not here: a Mandrake
Has frighted him: the hue and cry was up
It was time to trust the safety of his neck
Unto the swiftness of his heels. Come, come,
Uncase. So now Ananias Goggle
Lend me your cloak to cloak this Sycophant.
My cloak! his Romish carcass shall not be arrayed
In these pure innocent robes: shall any ba∣starts
Of the vile generation of Pope Join
Defile my cloak, that has these thirteen years
VViped my belovep nose, whose very snot
Is reverenced by the brethren? No, he may bring
These garments to the Mass, profane un there,
And make my cloak a reprobate, and commit
Adultery with the seven hills: besides,
He is an Idol; and I verily think
It were idolatry to let this cloak
Embrace a Pagan. No, good cloak, ne'er turn
Apostate from the faith of Amsterdam.
Good cloak, be not akin to Iulians jerkin:
Though thou be thred-bare, thou shalt ne'er be turned;
No, no, it is fitter Plutus have thee.
No, Plutus shall have this, '•…is fresh and new:
Your cloak is thred-bare; your too fervent zeal
Has almost made it tinder.
What, Plutus have his cloak! Oh it is the skin
Of a pernicious snake. O Popery!
A profane Cope, or the Levitical smock,
I mean a Surplice, is not more unlawful.
As it is now: But wipe your nose on it thrice,
It is sanctified; you know the brotherly snot
Has enthusiastique operations in it.
I am persuaded. Let him have it then.
But what shall be decreed of my upright shoes?
We'll hang them on his head. How his Brow-antlets
Become their furniture! By S. Hughs bones,
He looks like the very ghost of a shoemakers shop.
O swear not by St. Hugh, that canoe∣niz'd Cobbler.
Come holy brother, let us drag him hence.
Do, Scundrels, do: but if I once come a fequestring,
Isle go to Dr. Faustus, true son and heir
To Beelzebub, whom the great Devil begot
Upon a Succubus, on Midsummer Eve,
As Hell was sowing Fernseed. This D. Faustus
The Mepiastophoius of his age, the wonder
And the sole Asmodaeus of his times,
Shall by his Necromantick skill (Fortune my foe)
In the Black-art lend me his Termagant,
Old Almegroth, o•… Cantimelopus,
Or some Familiar else an hour or two.
Thence Isle to Phlegeton, and with him drink
A cup of Hells •…lapdragon, and returning
Spue fire and 〈◊〉 into Plutus face,
To roast the rottch apple•… of his eyes
With Srygian flames that I revomitize.
We fear not Dr. Faustus: his Land∣lord Luciferd
Says that his Lease with him is out of date;
Nor will he let him longer tenant be
To the twelve Houses of Astrology.
Let Dr. Faustus do his worst. Let me see if this Termagant can help you to your Clothes again.
But stay, what worm-eaten Hag is this? Holy brother, let's away to Bo-peep, we shall be seen else. Do you not perceive that old Beldam of Lapland, that looks as if she had sailed thither in an egg-shell, with a wind in the corner of her handkercher? I am not so much afraid of Dr. Faustus, as of that witch of Endor.
Hey ho! methinks I am sick with lying alone last night. Well, I will scratch out the eyes of this same rascally Plutus god of wealth, that has undone me. Alas poor woman! since the shop of Plutus his eyes has been open, what abundance of misery has befallen thee! Now the young Gallant will no longer kiss thee nor embrace thee: but thou poor widow must lie comfortless in a solitary pair of sheets, having nothing to cover thee but the lecherous Rug and the bawdy Blankets. O that J were young again! how it comforts me to remember the death of my maidenhead! Alas poor woman, they contemn old age, as if our lechery was out of date. They say we are cold: methinks that thought should make um take compassion of us, and lie with us, if not for love, for charity. They say we are dry: so much the more ca∣pebble of Cupids fire; while young wenches, like green wood, smoke before they flame. They say we are old: why then experience makes us more expert. They tell us our lips are wrinkled: why that in kissing makes the sweeter titillation. They swear we have no teeth: why then they need not fear biting. Well, if our lease of Lechery be out, yet me∣thinks we might purchase a Night-labourer for his dayes-wages. I will be revenged of this same Plutus, that wrongs the orphans, and is so uncharitable to the widows. Ho, ho, who's within here!
VVho's there?
A maid against her will this fourscore years. Goddy-godden, good father: pray which is the house where Plutus lives?
Ma•…rye follow your nose, you may smell out the door, my little damsel of fifteen,
but fifteen times over. In my pinion, this young Lass would make a pretty Maid∣mairian in a Comedy to be presented before Plutus.
Now god save all. By your leave sweet Grandsire! J will call forth some of the house.
What need that? cannot J serve the turn?
No marry can you not. Nay, as old as J am, J will not bestow my widows maiden∣head at second hand on such a frosty Nestor. J will have March or April; J scorn to com∣mit fornication with December.
Nay good Autunme, do not mis∣conceive me: J asked if J could not bear in your errand or no. But J see master Chremylus coming.
Alas good sir! J have endured the most unjust and unsufferable injuries, since Plutus has regained his eye-sight, as ever poor woman did since the days of Queen Edmund. Alas sir, life is not life without natural recreation.
How's this? some Promooter of the feminine gender!
No by my chastity, but an honest matron of Turn-bull, that have paid scot and lot there these fourscore years, yet never was so abused as now.
What abuse?
Unsufferable abuse, intolerable in∣juries.
Speak, what injuries?
An injury unspeakable.
What is it?
Alas sir, tic lying alone. O the mi∣sery of lying alone! would J had been below ground ere J had seen this minute of adver∣city. Ah Turnbul-Grove, shall J never more be beholding to thy charitable shades! Ah it was a good world when the Nuneries stood: Oh their charitable thoughts that took so much compassion on poor women, to found such zealous bawdy-houses! Had not Crom∣well been an Eunuch, he had never pursue∣ded the destruction of such places set up for such uses. It was a good world too in the days of Queen Mary: a poor woman might have desired a kindness from a lusty Friar in auricular confession. But Plutus eyes are like Baseless•…s, they strike us dead with ad∣varsity.
What ails this Skin-ful of Lechery? alas poor Granam, dost thou grieve because thou want money to go drink with thy gossips!
Ah do not mock me sir: it is love, parlous love that has so inflamed my heart with Bavins of desire, that J am afraid he will make me the very bone-fire of affection.
What meant the knavish Cupped to set this old Chark-coal on fire?
Isle tell you sir: there was a young Gallant about the town, one Neanias.
J know him.
He being a younger brother, had no lands in taile-tenure, but City-widows. He was but poor; but as fine a well-favour'd Gentleman, it did me good at heart to look on him. J ministered those things he wanted; and he recompensed my kindness in mutual love: as I supplied his wants, so he succored my necessities with all possible activity: I would not have changed him for Stamford, though he jumped the best in London.
And what did this pretty Pimp usu∣ally beg of you?
Not much: for he reverenced me wonderfully, partly for love, but more foe•… venerable antiquity. Sometime he would beg a Cloak.
To cover his knavery.
Sometimes a pair of Boots.
To exercise his horsemanship.
Sometimes a Peck or two of Corn.
For which he paid a bushel of affe∣ction.
Now and then a Kettle for his sister, a Petticoat and French-hood for his mother. Not much: all the good turns I did him in the day, the conscionable Youth requited ere midnight.
This was nothing indeed: it seems he did reverence you, (as you say) partly for
love, but more for your venerable antiquity.
Nay, he would tell me too, that he did not ask these things for his mid-night wages, but only in love. He would not endure to wear any thing, but what I paid for, out of a me•… desire to remember me.
This was infinite affection! Could he not endure to wear anything but what you paid for? It was dear love this, pretty love tricks faith; you may see, how the wanton youth was inflamed with your beauty.
I but now, the inconstant Wag has not the same measure of respect; I sent him a Custard yesterday, and he would not accept of it, because it quaked like my worm-eaten—. I sent him other sweetmeats too, but he returned me answer, that certainly J had breathed on them, for they smelt of my Gums. Moreover, he bid me despair of a night∣labourer, and never more expect him at mid∣night again. For Plutus has made him rich without me; adding withal, That once J was young: Ostend was once a pretty town. The Milesians in the days of yore were valiant: and in the days of King Henry the English were sturdy fellows at the battle of Agin-Court.
Faith, J commend the stripling for his wit. Tic none of the worst conditions. Now he is rich, he will have the best and plumpest Cockatrice of the City; when he was poor he was content with Porridge. There be many of that profession, that main∣tain themselves by hugging the skin and bones of an Aldermans widow.
I, but erst, he would have come eve∣ryday to my door.
Perchance a begging.
No, only to hear the melody of my voice.
Like enough, It could not choose but please him to hear what excellent Music your Jews-trump could make, now all your teeth are out.
If he had but seen me sad and melan∣cholly, he would have kissed me with such a feeling of my sorrow, and have called me his Chuck and Helena.
It was only to have one of Lode's Eggs to his Supper.
How oft has he praised my fingers?
It was when he looked for something at your hands.
Many a time has he sworn that my skin smelt sweeter then a Musk-cat.
He meant a Po•…e-cat: did you not believe him? It was when his Nose first smelt of Hippocrasse, or else the perfume of your white-leather was so strong, he could not en∣dure it.
O how it comforts me to remember how he would call my eyes pretty sparkling ones.
It was cause they pinckt like the snuff of a Candle. Faith the Gentleman had his wits about him: he knew how to get the old wives provision, the Viaticum she had pre∣pared to carry her to Gravesend.
Therefore, my friend, Plutus is to blame to promise relief, when he does us such intolerable damages. How do you think J can endure to lie alone, when so many sprights are walking? How shall J keep off the Night∣mare, or defend my self against the tempta∣tions of an Incubus.
Alas good Relic of antiquity! pay thy Fine and take a new Lease of Lust. Faith J pity thee; what would thou have him do if he were here?
Marry, that since J have deserved so well of him, that he doe me one kindness for another. Good old Gentlemen, either let him restore me my goods, or stand to his bar∣gain. The Conditions not performed, the Obligation is of none effect: my Lawyer re∣solves me, J may recover of him.
Noverint universe per praesentes, your Lawyer is a Coxcomb. Did he not doe his duty every night? J warrant you, he had as lieve have tugged at an Oar as a—. In my mind, he has performed his part of the Obligation.
But he promised never to forsake me as long as J lived.
No more he has not; why? thou art now dead: Thy flesh is mortified, only thy impotent lust has outlived thee a twelve month or two. Thou art but a mere Car∣kiss, nothing but Worms-meat.
Indeed grief has almost me't•…d me
into dust and ashes. Half-putrified J walk up and down like the picture of Deaths-head in a charnel-house. But see yonder's my Game∣ster, my Cock of the game: he's marching to some banquet or other: it is Sh•…ove-Tuesday with him, but Lent with me. O grief, to be bound from flesh!
It seems he is going to a feast, by his torch and garland.
Isle kiss the old Hag no more,
She has no moisture in her:
If ever I lie with a Lass ere I die,
It shall be a youthful sinner.
Give me a Lass that is young,
I ask no greater blessing:
Isle ne'er lie again with Fourscore and ten,
A carcass not worth the pressing.
I will not embrace her again,
To set the Town on a scoffing:
Isle never make more Death-widdow a Whore,
And cuckold the innocent Coffin.
Who's this? Good morrow Venus, O good morrow
Old Duck, old Helen! Tell me, sweet Helen,
How hast thou done this three thousa•…d year young Pullet!
How hast thou done ere since the wars of Troy?
Has the Cuckold Menelaus cast his 〈◊〉?
But what old goat is this? Tic Agam•…mnon.
You Agam•…mnon, is your 〈◊〉
As old as Helen? Tell me, old Helen, tell me,
When do the lecherous worms and thee begin
To act adultery in the winding-sheets?
What says my Duck; would have me go to bed?
What, my old Sweetheart! How come thou gray so soon?
Thou can not be so gray; J will not suffer't,
J will not be deceived, J will pull off
Thy cozening Periwig.
So sir: J was not gray when J gave you my Smock off my back to make you Night-caps. You swore J could not be above fifteen, when I translated my Stammel-Petticoat into the masculine gender, to make your Worship a pair of Scarlet∣breeches.
I shall never abide an Almanac while I live:
The Iulian Account's an are•…ant Coxcomb;
But the Bissextile is an arrant Villain.
J will curse every Bissextile in the County of Europe.
Tho•… could not possibly be gray so soon,
Except a hundred Leap-years had conspired
To jump together, to make thee old of the sudden.
He talks as if he had not seen you since the Conquest:
How many Jubilees past since he was last with you?
Now fie upon him! How long do you say? It is no longer then yesterday, by the faith of a woman, since he had the fruition of me, and swore J was as young as He∣cuba.
Then it is not with him as it is with others: for being drunk, he hath the use of his eyes more perfect then when he was sober.
No, the peevish fellow, now he is drunk, he sees double, and thinks me twice as old as J am.
O Neptune, and the other gray∣bearded gods,
Can you with all the Arithmetic of heaven
Number the wrinkles of this Beldams fore∣head?
These many rue•…s and furrows in thy cheek
Proves thy old face to be but Champion∣ground,
Till'd with the plough of age, well muckt with sluttery:
Tic time for thy lust to li•… sallow now.
Can any man endure to spend his youth
In kissing winters frozen lips? can veins
That swell with active blood, endure the em∣braces
Of such cold ice? Go and prepare thy coffin,
Think on thy winding-sheet. When I was poor,
Cold limbs and empty guts persuaded me
To lie with skin and bones. Necessity,
As cruel as Mezentius tyranny,
Made me commit adultery with a carcass,
A putrefied Corps, a Bawd of the Charnel∣house.
But now good dust and ashes, pardon me,
These arms shall never more embrace thy corps.
Thou stews of clay, thou mud-wall of more∣tality,
Go rot and molder; and if thy impotent lust
Must needs be satisfied, know Hell is a hot∣house,
Perchance some hot-rein'd devil may under∣take thee;
Isle lend a halfpeny to pay Charons boat-hire.
No, I will now choose me a good plump Lass,
As moist as April, and as hot as May,
Whose Damask-check shall make the Roses blush,
Whose lips at every kiss shall strike a heat
Into my veins, breathing through all my soul
An air as warm and sweet as the perfumes
That smoking rise from the dead Phoenix nest.
Now come my boon Companions,
And let us jovial be:
Thouh th Indies be the King of Spains,
We are as rich as he.
As rich as any King of Spain,
In mirth, if not in wealth:
Boy fill me then a bowl of Sack,
Isle drink my Mistress health.
My Mistress is but fifteen,
Her Lips is all my bliss:
Go tell her I will come at night,
And then prepare to kiss.
You my she-〈◊〉 may go s•…ort the while,
Or kiss your Monkey. I will take my torch,
Set her on fire, and let her smoke to Ache∣ron.
O fire, fire! shall I die no better a death then the top of Pauls-steeple?
Nay take heed how you set your torch too near her; One spark will set her a flaming, for she is made up of Saltpetre, very gun-powder well dried &amp; ready pruned, me•… touch-wood, and as dry as any tavern∣bush.
It is true, she'll quickly take; the fire of lust
Has 〈◊〉 her into tinder, some of hells brim∣stone,
But to make matches, and she i'll fit the Devil
For a whole tinder-box. Come my dainty Girl,
Let us be friends; why should we two fall out?
Sweet be not angry, I do love thee better
Then water-gruel: Come, let's play to∣gether.
Now blessing on thy heart! What play shall we play, that which we plaid at t'other night?
Here, take these Nuts.
Alas my honey, I am past cracking.
They are to play with.
What play?
Even or odd, guess you.
What shall I guess?
How many teeth there be in thy head.
Isle guess for her; perchance three or four.
Then you have l•…st, pay your nuts: she has but one,
An o're-wo•…no grinder; it is a gentle beast,
She has forgot to bite: Good innocent gums,
They cannot hurt;—No danger in her mouth,
Till she eat Braw•….—Her charitable tongue,
Like the old Rebels of Northampton-shire,
Cannot endure hedges of teeth should stand
To make her mouth enclosure.
Well sir, you may abuse me: but by Cock and Pie, (god forgive me that I should swear) were I as young as I have been, these nails that by a good token have not been pared since eighty eight, should have scratched your face till it had been a dominical one, and as full of red letters as any Ponds Almanac in Christendom, it were suitable to your prognosticating Nose. J think you are mad; would any but an O•…london or Ie∣ronymo have used a poor woman so? Do you think I will endure to be your bucking-tub to be washed with the dregs of your wit▪
He did you a curtsy, that would wash you soundly.
O by no means: why she is painted Sir.
If you should wash her, then my Ladies fucus
Would drop away; her Cirrus and Pomatum
Being rubbed off, would to the world betray
The rugged wrinkles of her slobbered face.
Take but the white-lome from this old mud∣wall,
And she will look worse then Gamaliel Ra•…sey.
Are you a Bedlam too, old frosty Squire?
Are you fourscore, and yet your wit an infant
Not come to age? Come, I will be your Guardian.
Good Mr. Neanias, sweet young master,
If you do not save me from this Medusa,
Her Gorgons head will •…urn me to a Stone∣bottle,
And then throw me at my self, to make me beat out my own brains.
Nay take her to your self, old im∣pudent Goat,
To ravish a Maid before her Sweet-hearts face,
O most inhumane! Yet you may do it for me,
J will resign my interest: so farewell.
•…uch joy unto you both. O Hymen, Hymen,
What a fine couple of sweet Loves are here,
To keep their wedding in the grave, and get
A son and heir for Doomsday—
No prithee do not think so, J swear by Venus J would have none but thee, though P•…gasus and Buccphalus came a wooing to me.
Yes you may have him: yet J can∣not leave thee
Without a tear to quench my flames of love. 
Well now farewell: live happy in his love,
Venus and Cupped bless your marriage-sheets,
And let you snort this hundred years to∣gether.
Jle grieve the while, and Sacks best virtue try,
To drown my cares: sorrow (you know) is dry.
Nay by Hecate you shall not put a trick on me thus. J have not out-lived my wits: J were mad if J would run my self in∣to another Scylla, having such a dangerous Charybdis of my own at home. Good Mr. Neanias, J did not think she had been your mistress: J will not for all the world do you such a wrong as to be your Corrival: love her alone for me.
Yes to be dor'd. Good wickedness, no more:
Do not entreat me to endure the noose;
J shall go marry her, be the fool her husband,
But you will come and kiss her; send your men,
Your Serving-men to fox me in your cellar,
While you the while shall cuckold me at home:
O what a brave Actaeon should should J be!
What have you ne'er a journeyman, or Bailey
To put her off to? or, if all fail, no Chaplain▪
I am no free-man, therefore the City-charter
Will not grant me the privilege of such harness;
Pray bear your Cap of maintenance your self.
Come leave this jesting, isle endure't no longer;
I will not let you hate this pretty Lass.
S life it may prove her death: These wanton girls
Are very subject to eat chalk and coals.
S'lld, too much grief for you, with thoughts of love,
May chance to generate the green-sicknesse in her.
Nay, I do love her dearly, wondrous dearly,
Her eyes are Cupids Grubstreet: The blind archer
Makes his love-arrows there; bright Glo∣worms eyes,
No rotten-wood out-shines their glorious lu∣stre,
Fine would J kiss her.
Faith and thou shalt my little peri∣winckle.
No, heaven me bless!
J am not worthy of such happiness.
Yet she accuses you.
How, accuses me? what heinous fault,
What sin, what sacrilege have J com∣meted
Against the relics of her martyred beau∣tie?
You mocked her, she says, you told her, The Milesians were valiant in the days of yore. Faith do not hit her in the teeth with contumelious proverbs.
Hit her in the teeth, why it is impossible:
Hit her in the gums we may, but no man li∣avenge
Can hit her in the teeth with any thing.
Jle not fight for her, take her to your self:
Pray good sir.
J reverence your age; tic your gray hairs
That are such potent suitors, it were a sin
To deny any thing to a snow-white head.
None else but only you should have obtained her;
Therefore rejoice, be gone, and stink to∣gether.
J know your meaning, you are wea∣rye of your stale Whore, you deal with her even as they doe with horses, when they are no longer fit for the Saddle, turn them over to the Carmen.
J will not live with any but with thee.
But what an Ass am J thus long to talk
With an old Bawd, that lost her maiden∣head
Above two thousand years before Deucalions flood,
Who living as long a VVhore, turn Bawd in the days of King Lute?
Nay, since you have drunk of the Wine, you must be content with the Lees.
J but her Lees are bitter, sour as Verjuyce,
Mere Vinegar, Vinegar; J will sell her
For two pence a quart, Vinegar, Vinegar, in a VVheel-barrow.
J will go in &amp; sacrifice my garland to Plutus.
Jle go in too, J have some business with Plutus.
But now J think on it, J will not go in.
My business is not much, J •…are not greatly,
If J stay with thee.
Come young man, be of good cou∣rage, she cannot ravish thee.
J believe that too.
Go in, Jle follow thee in the heels, J war∣rant thee.
She sticks to him as close as a Cockle.
Come Beldam follow me,
And in my foot-steps tread.
Then set up shop in Turnbull-street
And turn a Bawd ere thou art dead.
And when thou art dead;
This shall of thee be said,
Thou lived'st a Whore, and died'st a Bawd,
In hell the Devil's Chamber-maid.
Who's this that knocks, the door so hard! what, no body? Can they walk envy∣sible? Isle lay my life this is a piece of St. Dunstans ghost that pulls me by the Nose so? Good ghost mistake me not, J am not the Devil, J am honest Carrion every inch on me. Well, I see the doors can cry for nothing, I see no body, Isle go in again.
So ho, ho, ho, Carrion, Carrion, Carrion stay, I say stay.
Stay let my Nose alone, twill abide no jesting; Sir, was it you, that was so saucy
with my masters doors to knock them so pe∣remptorily? they shall bring an action of battery against you.
If you had not come quickly, I would have broke them open. Go run, call forth your master and mistress, the men and the maids, your self, the Dog and the Bitch, the Cat and the Kitlins, the Sow and the Pigs.
My master and mistress, the bastards their children, the men and the maids, my self, the Dog and the Bitch, the C•…t and Kitlins I will call forth: but the Sow and Pigs would desire you to have them excused, they are not at leisure. Why what's the matter?
Why Iupiter will put you all into a sack together, and toss you into Barathrum, •…errible Barathrum.
Barathrum, what's Barathrum?
Why Barathrum is Pluto's bog∣guards: you must be all thrown into Bara∣thrum.
I had rather the messenger were you know what. Mercury, why what wrong have we done Iupiter? I remember he has many a time soured our drink with his thundering, but we have done him no injury, but once I broke his shins at football in Tut•…le.
It is worse then so; you're guilty of a sin
That hell would fear to own. Since Esculapius
That Urinal, restored god Plutus eyes,
Men have almost forgot to sacrifice:
But they were wont to offer Hasty-puddings,
Spice-cakes and many dainties; nay I know
Some that have spent whole Hecatombs of Beef
To give the gods their gawdies: now they'd be glad
To eat the very brews of the pottage;
A rump or flap of mutton were a fee
For Ioves own breakfast; for a rib of beef,
Though it smelt of every Gippo's scabby fingers,
May any Scullion be chief Cook of heaven.
Men have I say forgot to sacrifice.
And shall: Beggarly Jove does not deserve it.
He never did us good: we are not beholding
To any of your lousy gods. Old Plutus,
Plutus has purchased our devotion,
Gold is the Saint we reverence.
Nay faith I care not for the other gods,
Let them go stink and starve; let Cuckold Vulcan
Go earn his meat by making spits and drip∣ping-pans,
And with his Tinkers budget and his Trull
Venus, may mend one hole and make ten for it.
Let Phoebus turn VVelsh-Harper, go a begging,
And sing St. Taffie for a Barley-crust.
Let Cupped go to G•…ubstreet, and turn Archer:
Venus may set up at Pict-hatch or Blooms∣bury;
Iuno turn Oyster-quean, and scold at Billins∣gate;
Bacchus may make a Drawer at a tavern,
Call for Canary for the man in the moon.
Minerva has been always poor: Brain∣bastards
Were never borne to many lands. Great Jove
May pawn his thunder-bolts for oaten-cakes.
For them I care not, but these guts of mine:
Is it not pity Mercu•…y should pine?
Nay now I see thou hast some wit in thy Pericranium.
VVhilome the Ale-wives and the fat-bum'd Hostesles
Would give me jugs of Ale without Excise,
Filled to the brim, no nick nor froth upon them:
Besides they'd make me Froizes and Flap∣jacks t•…o,
Feed me with Puddings, give me broken∣meat
And many dainty morsels for to eat.
O shall I never more begrease my chops
With glorious bits of Bacon! shall M•…r∣curius
Stretch forth his legs for want of Buttermilk!
Nay this injustice thou deserve to see,
For injuring those that have done good for thee.
Alack and welladay,
Shall I never the Custard see,
Which the fourth day of every month
Was consecrate unto me?
Alack and welladay,
In vain doust thou pray 〈◊〉 I fear:
The Custard is a deaf god,
And cannot so quickly hear.
If Custard cannot hear,
Come Shoulder of mutton to me,
Black-pudding also with pudding-pies,
And a mess of Furmentie.
Alack poor Mercury!
For thy case J do much condole.
Thou never shalt steal again any meal
Or Spitchcock at Hockly-u•…hole.
Come faith, since Thieving is out of fashi∣•…, (Doest remember when thou stole Apollo's Spectacles and Vulcans Crutches▪) learn to beg. Suppose I am a rich Gentle∣man, and thou a lame fellow; perchance I may be in the humour to give thee some∣thing.
Kind Gentleman, for the Loords sake bestow something on a poor lame Crepe∣ple, that has halted before his best friends upward and downward, any time this dozen years: this leg, isle stand to it, has been lame ever since the last dearth of corn, god be with it. heaven preserve your limbs, Jove keep your feet out of the setters, your legs out of the stocks, your heads out ot'h pillory, your necks out of the halters, and other such infirmity•…s poor mortality is subject to. May you never know what it is to want till you are in poverty. Good Gentlemen, take compaction on a wretched mortal, that has been troubled with a deadness in his arms, that he has not had the lawful use of his hands in picking and stealing this many hours.
Sir, sir, you must have the lash; Isle have you whipped for a vagiant person.
This is a Justice of Peace's charity: if this be that you'd be in the humour to give, •…ray keep it to your self.
Faith act a poor Soldier: men are charitable to men of arms.
A word with you generous sir. Noble sir, thou seem to be a man of worship, and J am one that have seen the face of the en∣my in my days, and ventured a bloody nose in defence of my country. Good sir, lend me a Crown till the next taking of Basing-house, and by all the cold iron about me, you shall be presently paid upon the surrender. Noble Gentleman, do not make known my no∣cessities; I would have scorned to have asked such a kindness of Hopton or Montrosse; I had rather have starved in the leaguer, and fed upon nothing but sword and buckler; and yet Hopton is a noble fellow, many a timber∣piece have J spent in his company.
What service hast thou been in?
Hot service sir, supping at the very mouth of the Martial porredge-pot, J have scaled my lips with kissing valour. Did you never hear how J routed a Regiment of Or∣monds Foot?
Never sir, how J pray?
Sir, by this good sword if it be not true, J am an arrant liar, and never saw the wars in my life. Sir, J advanced my spear, ran with a furious tilt at them, and unhorsed every man.
Of the Regiment of Foot.
You are in the right sir, it was by a metaphor. Then sir the Ensigns of my repu∣tation being displayed; a valiant French∣man, he was born at Madrid in Spain—
By a metaphor.
Challenged me the duel at Back∣sword: we met at the first thrust of the Rapier.
By a metaphor.
He shot me clean through the body.
By a metaphor still, the Rapier shot you through.
On my cr•…dit sir, it was a musket∣bullet: for when the Fort saw me have the best on it, they levelled a Canon at me ready charged.
By a metaphor, with a musket-bullet.
And shot off both my arms. That being done, J caught him by the throat with my right hand.
When your arms were off.
Drew out my weapon with my left, and cut off his head. J was proceeding to have run him thorough, but he asked my pardon, and I was merciful and saved his life.
When his head was off.
You will not believe me now, if the self same man be as live as J. Prince Rup•…rt knows what service I did at Marston-moore when J run away. But now to be contemned! O Poverty, foe to Valour!
Thy valour? Thou look as if thou had no stomach at all.
Would J had a roasted Ox to en∣counter with. J have showed my valour in Bohemia against the Imperialists, in Poland against the Turks, in Holland against the Spaniards, in Utopia against the roundheads, and is it questioned in England? J was once a fresh-water soldier, but J was seasoned at the salt Isle of Ree: there was my master∣piece of valour.
What was that J pray?
Why sir, J fought courageously; J was in all the dangerous services, and had misfortunes in all. First sir, J was drowned in the landing, had both my Legs shot off in the assault, and ran away in the retreat as all the rest did.
How? when your Legs were shot off in the assault?
What of that? have J not Wings on my Doublet?
Why the•…, you did not run, you did but fly.
Flying is running away by a Me∣taphore.
Come thou wilt get nothing by this lying warfare. Let me try the Gypsy.
From Egypt have J come
With Solomon for my guide:
By C•…iromanties J can tell
What fortunes thee betide.
A Child me begot,
Old Talmud was his name;
In Hieroglyphics he excelled,
Through Nilus ran his fame.
Come let me see thy hand,
Thou VVives hast yet had none;
But Bastinadoes at a time
About threescore and one.
Well, thou art an arrant Gypsy: at what neighbours house did thou learn this? S'foot, how came thou to know it? I had just threescore and one indeed. Well, I will give thee something: But O Mercury, my Purse! I'lutus his blessing is run out of my Pockets. I will have you hanged, you rogue. There were seven thirteen-pence-half-penies, would have paid the Hang-man for above half a dozen of you. Good Mercury, thou shalt so•… what Isle doe for thee.
Well, if you will entertain me into your family, there's your Purse again, and take heed how you meet with Gipsies.
Entertain thee? Why, what can thou doe?
Why, let me be your Porter. 〈◊〉 have a Ianus heart, though not two faces.
A Porter! can thou grumble sound∣lie at a rich mans gate to keep out the poor Almsmen? can thou bark like grisly C•…r∣berus? No, twill not do, my Master needs no surely Bandogs, we shall keep open house. The office of Porter is thrust out of doors.
Make me your Merchant.
VVee dare not: Get you to the straights of Gibraltar, we need no busy Fa∣ctors, we have wealth enough: we will have no Merchants, we shall not sleep for them at nights, They will dream of nothing but new America's, drink the Canaries, snort out La∣ra Incognita's, nose the Bermudas, ravish Virginia, talk of the fortunate Islands, or choke us up with Terra del Fogo's. No, no, I will have none of our family walk like the Antipodes with his heels upwards; if he should fall headlong into heaven, he might put out the Man in the moon's candle, and leave him to find his way to bed in the dark.
Let me be your Fool to make you merry.
A Fool! Let me see: we are all rich, and therefore likely we must have some fools amongst us. But what need that, we have as
good, we have some of them that fortune favours.
Then let me be your Juggler.
Not for Zorobabels night-cap. These Hocus-Pocusses seldom come aloft for their masters advantage. You think to pick our pockets by slight of hand, and show us a trick for our money: J do not like these feats of activity; therefore Presto be gone, we will have no Jugglers.
Then let me be your Poet: J'le make you Shows and Masques, Comedies and Tragedies, Pastorals, Piscatorial Sonnets, Canto's, Madrigals and Ballads, till you are so tickled with laughter, that you cannot stand.
A Poet! no, it is a little too beggarly a trade; and it is a solecism if wit should meet with wealth in these days. Fie upon it, I can't endure jestings, Poetical furies, J had as lieve they should break wind back∣ward. Your rank wits will abuse their betters. And for shows, rascally shows, it is pity they are not hanged for their impudence: There cannot be a gross sin in a Congregation, but some men's vinegar-brains must be a rubbing of it. J warrant if J should but marry a Towns∣mans daughter to day, they'd make an Act∣on of me by to morrow, dub me Knight of the forked Order. Poor shallow scundrels there be that never drank any Helicon above a penny a quart, and yet venture to make Ballads as lousy as themselves. Wry-mouth'd villains, who cannot answer to the question, if they should be asked how many of their empty Noddles go to the making up of a complete Coxcomb. But yet J do love a show, if it be a merry one. Well, thou shalt be our houshold-Poet, for houshold-Chap∣lains are now out of date like old Almanacs; every man can now say grace, and preach, and say prayers to themselves, or (which is better) forget to say any at all. Well, get thee in, prepare things fitting for the sacrifice. If this fellow had not good store of trades, he had missed of all preserment. Well now, this Poet shall make ballads on all the hypo∣c•…ites of the town, he shall rime all the Ana∣baptists out of their wits.
O that Plutus his eyes were scratched out! J can have no more Fees for Latitats nor Outlawries.
Nay, J am a Lad of metal, of all that but gold and silver, can make no profit of my brass nor Latin: there's no need of making more holes then one now, and that's a wicked one for my neck to slip into.
My double Toll fails me, O this grinds me to piece•….
O it is the worst stitch that was ever sowed with the needle of misfortune. O iron age, that like the Ostrich makes me feed on my own Goose!
O this false Cordwainer Plutus, that stretches the leather of my flesh on the Tree of fatality; that unmercifully puts me into the Stocks of adversity, and gives me no relief at the Last.
Nay he has made me so slender, that I can measure me by my own Yard, three quarters quarter and half nail. This crosse-leg'd infelicity, sharper then my no∣dl, makes me eat my own Cabbage.
Nothing but a general insurrection like a shooing-horn can draw on help. Let us combine and patch together.
Agreed, agreed.
It is a sign Plutus has lost his eyes, when Dull-pates grow rich: if my name had not been Dull-pate, I had lost half my prefer∣meant. It is thought J have as many Ecclesi∣astical Livings as Spalato had in England; Never a fat Benefice falls now adays, but J catch it up; J can have um now without lustful Simony, in taking Bishops kinswomen in•…o the bargain. J have often wondered how it comes about that my head is so black, but the hairs of my chin gray: A merry fellow once told me, it was because I used my chops more then my brains. Tic true indeed, I fare well, because J was born under a rich Con∣stellation,
but the learned sort under a poor Psanct. As for example, here comes the Pope, Iupiters Vicat.—bless thy wicked Holiness! thou, the Devil, Cardinal Richly•…u, and the French faction at Court, have brought all the wars into England.
Who can instruct me which is Chremylus house?
Grave reverend Father, 〈◊〉's the 〈◊〉 with you?
How does your 〈◊〉?
Ill as ill may 〈◊〉,
Since Plutus eye-sight is restored.
What is the cause of this your hey∣vines:
Doth the proud Emperor refuse to kiss
Your sacred toe? or does it vex your Bonny∣face
To lose your Peter-pence? what is the cause
Great catholic Bishop, Monarch of the Church,
The supreme Judge Ecclesiastical,
That you are thus perplexed? why do you not curse •…m
With your Bell, Book, and Candle, that molest you?
O J am dead with hunger, a saucy hunger,
With heresy as bad as Arrianisme,
Knawes on my sacred guts. J the great father
And Prince of Rome have not a crust,
Not a brown crust to know on. Iove's own Vicar,
Nay Jove himself on earth, would beg on knees
For one small piece of Sawsedge. This sad morn,
For a broiled Sprat J paun'd my triple crown,
And now for one Red-herring will J mortgage
All Peters large possessions.
Aha great Pope, can your Pontifi∣cial teeth
Be glad to gnaw upon a catholic Tripe?
Can your great metropolitan stomach feed
On a Hogs-cheek? it is strange, me▪ thinks, that you
Being the universal Bishop, should not
Have one poor porredge-pot in all your Diocese,
Never a soul in Limbo ready fried?
Is all the Roast in Purgatory spent?
Are all your Bulls devoured? faith kill a Bull,
Good Pope, a Bull, to make your Holiness Beef.
There must be meat somwhere or other sure,
Or can you open heaven &amp; hell at pleasure;
And cannot Peters Keys unlock the Cup∣board?
Why sure our Ladies milk is not all spent,
No Relics left, nor chips of the Cross to feed on?
Sure at 〈◊〉 or •…t Compostella.
None of the Capuchins at Somerset▪house▪
How can it be an't please your Holiness?
O no: since Plutus hath received his eyes,
Indulgences are grown cheap, &amp; at no price:
An absolution for a Rape made now
Is nothing worth.
Give me but one poor crust before J faint,
And J will canonise thee for a Saint.
Or let me purchase for a Mutton∣bone
Your Apostolical benediction.
A mess of Broth or rib of Beef from thee,
•…n my esteem shall meritorious be.
Nay J will have it more, such a donation
Shall be a work of supererogation.
O how J thirst!
M•… reverende Pater, cannot you drink a cup of Holy-water?
Now you that could drink Tyber dry, and more,
Cannot obtain a Jug upon the score.
Go try, they'll hardly trust you for a drop
At the Popes-head, Mitre, or Ca•…dinals-Cap,
Or any place; tic money draws the tap.
So irreligious are these ages grown,
They think it charity to rob the Clergy.
How comes it that you dare with impudence
Deny the Priests their tithes?
O, easily sir. A learned Antiquary
that has searched
The breech of Saturn for Antiquities;
Proves by a reason an infallible reason,
With bugle-horn writ in the Saxon tongue,
That neither praedial, nor personal tithes
Are due ex jure divino: and you know
The Clergy Bishops, your old quondam Pa∣trons
Are voted down too, and ever since w'have learnt
A liberty of Conscience to pay no tithes.
We hear some teach too, they are An•… christian,
Like Steeple-houses; hence we learn to be
Too cunning now for your Apostolique See.
Now worms devour that Antique∣ries nose,
And those that preach against all Steeple∣houses;
That power in papers half consumed with Moths,
To prove some absurd opinions feigned to be
Found in the walls of some old Nunnery,
But ô my guts wish for a Benedicite!
Wilt please your holiness to call a Synod?
You may chance to catch trowt•… in the Coun∣cel of Trent.
O I do smell the scent of Pipp•…n-pies.
You do indeed, your Holiness Nose I see,
Has the true spirit of Infallibility,
I find you cannot err. What would you do,
To be of our house now to have free-quarter?
I would resign my right to heaven and hell.
Ti-he-he, well said good Pope I•…∣nocent.
But that's too much, resign your heaven only,
Retain your right to hell; your title there
Is held 〈◊〉. Well now,
Stay here a while•… 〈◊〉 sing a merry song
As we to Plutus go, and I will free
Thy guts from the Purgatory of fasting.
Is this the Pope? Goddy gotten good Father.
I do not come unto thy Holiness
To beg a Licence to eat flesh on Fridays;
But I desire thy Apostolical Curse
On a young man that has abused me grossly;
May it please thy Catholicknesse, the perjured Boy
Swore to lie with me while he lived, but he
Grown rich does think to buy out perjury.
Now good your Holiness give him not abso∣lution.
Would he were here; for three penee I could sell him
A g•…neral remission of his sins:
I am almost famished for want of customers.
Go woman, fetch the Quire in for sacrifice.
(But bid them bring no Copes nor Organs with them.)
And I will get his Holiness to command him
To lie with thee this night what •…re come on it.
It is enjoined him for his penance is it not?
It is an't please your Holiness.
Any thing shall please my holiness, if you give me
But the least hopes to feed my Holiness:
Tic a lean Holiness, as the wo•…lt goes now.
Tic strange that you, the Shepherd of all Europe,
Should not have one fat Lamb•… in all your flock.
What say, if I give you a leg of Mutton?
Remission of sins, when•… ere they be.
But what if I have sworn to give thee nothing?
My Holiness shall give thee abso∣lution.
But I did but equivocate when I promised?
Isle free thee from all men•…all Reser∣vation.
But what if this same Mutton have gone through
Every Gyppo's hands?
I grant it lawful:
I doe allow traditions.
Well then, I have Remission of all my sins.
With leave and pardon for all sins hereafter.
What ere they be; though I should ravish Nuns
Under the Altar?
Tic a Venial sin.
Or kill a King?
Tic meritorious.
Cuckold my Father, Whore my natural Mother,
Grant the supremacy of the secular powers,
Be drunk at Mass, strip all the Feminine Saints
Into their Smocks, laugh at a Friars bald∣crown,
Peace in the Pixie, deny your mysteries,
Out-lie your Legend, get Pope Join with child,
Eat flesh in Lent, sit off my Confessors Ears,
Or any sin, as great as your own Holiness,
Or any of your Predecessors acted.
A leg of Mutton wipes all sins away,
So good a deed will justify.
Swear then.
I swear and grant it sub Sigillo Pis∣catoris.
A pox upon Sigillum Piscatoris,
Send it to Yarmouth, let it fish for Herrings.
Swear, J say, that is, kiss my Imperial shoe,
As Emperors do yours.—
J am Servus servorum, your servants servant.
Sans complement, like Ham—.
O that this leather of thy shoe, this leather
Could be made flesh by Transubstantiation!
J would not only kiss but eat thy Toe.
Moreover you shall swear that once a year
J shall have entire power to forgive sins
To my Comrades.
As much as J my self:
J swear and kiss your Holiness toe.
And that when J doe knock at hey∣ven gates,
The Porter let me in for nothing. Swear a∣gain.
Again J swear, by this sweet kiss he shall.
Well, tic sufficient, J will pay your Ordinary. 
Here comes the Quire prepare your voice and sing.
The Round-heads will not come, cause the Pope's here.
O fratres nostri ventr•…s siut replcti,
For empty maws are never truly laity:
To feed on meats, and drink of potionibus,
Is the only Physic for devotionibus.
Benedixit Esculapius.
Cheese-cakes and Custards, and such good placenta's,
Excel Good-fridaies, Ember-weeks &amp; Lenta's:
When belly's full, we'el go to the Cloisteribus
To kiss the Nuns and all the Mulieribus.
Benedixit, &amp;c.
I do not think you hold him for sinner,
Whose best devotion tends unto his dinner:
One glass of Sack or cup of nappy Alibus,
More virtue has then all our Decretalibus.
Benedixit, &amp;c.
J had rather cat a meal then tell a story,
Of limbo patrum or of Purgatory:
No blessings like the pleasure of the Tastibus,
No relics holier then the Venison Pastibus.
Benedixit, &amp;c.
These are the Prayers, devotions and delighta's
Of Cardinals, Popes, Friars and Iesuita's.
Their break-fasts are their Matins holy zelibus,
Their Vespertines are eating beef &amp; velibus.
Benedixit, &amp;c.
Come 〈◊〉 &amp; sorores per praesentes,
Let us go in to exercise our dentes,
Where we will sit with you and your uxo∣rebus,
To laugh at all these hungry auditoribus.
Benedixit, &amp;c.
I came into England but since this Parley∣meant sate, (the plunderers J thank them brought me hither) and J think J have had about 200000. suitors at least: nay, some great men have been ambitious to proffer me their daughters to marry. They indeed be
great ones, but J only look after Honesty now J have got my eye-sight. Never did gudg•…once at a mill-tail more greedily bite the bait, then some of um after me. Had J had th•… Palsy, Sciatica, Cough, Ague, Fever, French pox, and a whole cart-load of diseases, (as J have the Gout already, because J am rich) they would have taken me with all my faults. England (J see) is a covetous place. This morning J have received no less then forty letters to the same purpose. Above all, one Mrs. Maria Corombona Butto Fuocco woes me; as sure as can be a Venetian 〈◊〉 bred up in London, an arrant whore. 〈◊〉 her Letter. A Plato Gentilhomme d'Inghil∣terra de bone gratia, Maria butta suoccae and so forth. A pox take her! J have forty more of them in my pocket. But there is one Mrs. Honesty Cleon, an honest Scriveners daughter, (it is strange they have any thing to do with Honesty, J warrant she'll not live long) she is the mistress of my affections, for she is honest. See here she comes.
Fair Lady, fairer then the morning-skies,
Hath not young Cupped touched your amorous eyes?
I am all for golden Verses gratulation,
But must not pass by courteous salutation.
Sir, if I may confess, Loves art
No•… only touched my eyes, but heart.
Nay then the Parson straight shall do his part,
Let's in: the Gordian knot none can untwiss,
We'll tie it fast, and as we go we'll kiss.
In any state never will be foul weather,
When Honesty and Riches meet together.
Old Wealth (you see) with Honesty and Piety
Is joined in league for mutual society.
O would it were the blessing of our Nation,
They might have issue too by procreation!
But sure the Bride's past child-bearing; that's the reason
So few are honest in this age and season.
If it be a stolen match, P•…test must be taxt';
Tic certain true, the Banes were never ax't,
For he that joined their hands (for ought I hear)
He was a very honest Cavalier;
He used the Ring and Book, went not by heart,
But joined them word for word, Till death depart.
Full resolute, without Te•…s, to tie the noose:
I•… had lost his Benefice, h'had no move to lose.
I know there's many wagg•…sh Pates join force
To part this couple by a sad divorce:
We hope't will not be granted by Petition
At the Arches, Doctors Commons, or High-Commission:
〈◊〉 I do verily think there's 〈◊〉 intent
To sever them by this our Parliament.
Therefore God give um joy! Joy may they find!
This is the wish of every virtuous mind.
But wicked Rascals sing another Catch;
Pox take um hoth! Tic an unlucky match.
It is indeed for them, because twill serve
To send their Brats to Tyburn, or to starve.
Welsh Parsed y is good physic. Honest guests
We only bid to these our Nuptial feasts.
Offerings to the rich are base: yet we demand
That you pay down a Plaudit at hand.

WHat not one prodigy to 〈◊〉 thee, Rome,
And give loud warning that great 〈◊〉 come?
What not one peal of thunder to 〈◊〉,
And echo from thy seven proud hills the fame
Of my arrival? is my weight so light
It cannot force one dismal 〈◊〉 affright
And wake thy Genius? is the ground thus 〈◊〉
And Julius like an exhalation sent
From the black womb of hell, yet cannot 〈◊〉
An Earthquake in thy breast? I like, I like
Such dire forerunners. What? before my fall,
In 〈◊〉 great Forum, upon every 〈◊〉,
A bird of Night was percht in midst of day,
And when black Night her mantle did display
(As if the Stygian people had forsook
Their pitchy harbours, and possession took
Of the upper world) the Air was sill'd with 〈◊〉
Of rolling fires, and the presaging dreams
Of Citizens were broke by dismal frights
Cause by the confused noise of walking sprights:
And is my rise so full of silence?
Thunder.
So,
Now stubborn Rome I'll thunder forth thy 〈◊〉.
Caesar must be revenged, and to thy cost.
Alas thou can not bribe my wronged Ghost,
With the vain fiction of thy 〈◊〉 star;
Were I but stellified indeed I'd 〈◊〉
Thy pride with such an influence should convey
Submission through thy blond, and cast a ray
Should 〈◊〉 a Sun to 〈◊〉 the Roman world
Without a Colleague: yet this sate is hurled
Through thy own blindness on thy cursed head,
〈◊〉 with such plagues to 〈◊〉, as thy 〈◊〉
Thy butchered Julius from his soul abhorred;
My glory was, that Fortune did afford
That royal power to doe thee good I would,
And Nature heart to will the good I could.
But I was too too mild; a heavier hand
Shall make thee stoop to Sovereign command,
And 〈◊〉 the yoke, though sullied first and died
In thine own gore; a sourge shall check thy pride;
The days of Sylla shall return, and blood
Swim down thy streets in as profuse a 〈◊〉,
As ere his black 〈◊〉 made, the sword
Shall be as free as then, the Slave his Lord,
The Wife her Husband shall betray, the 〈◊〉
Thinking the vital thread of's Father spun
To a too tedious length, and that his feet
Travel too slowly to the grave, shall greet
His age with death; The Senators shall drink
Of the same cup of slaughter too, and think
The hurden easy, for, A sudden death
Is sweet to them that scorn a slavish 〈◊〉.
Each Proscripts head shall 〈◊〉 a weighty rate,
And Piety be treason to the State.
Thus, Rome, shalt thou be plagued, and among
Thy other evils lose thy sacred Tongue,
The great Patrician of the speaking Art,
Then shall thy griefs lie fettered in thy heart,
And speak no other language but of tears;
Words shall be strangled by thy stupid fears.
Now ought we to give thanks unto the Gods
That now at length the Fathers of the Public
With free unforced judgments dare lay open
The sick distempers, which 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉
The body 〈◊〉? me thinks in this
I see some gleam of liberty break forth
And promise to the State a milder 〈◊〉,
Then, since our late unbridled 〈◊〉
Usurped the 〈◊〉 heaven, we have been blessed with.
As sor my self, though now grown old and feeble
〈◊〉 my loved Countries service, I have yet
As good a heart as ever to defend her.
What though my voice did seem 〈◊〉 while suppressed?
My heart did nourish 〈◊〉 untainted love
Of the Republic, which in zealous flames
Has now discharged it self in the face of Antony
That Traitor to the freedom of his Country;
I did defen I while but a Youth, the State,
I will not now I am grown old for sake it;
I have 〈◊〉 the swords of 〈◊〉;
I will not now fear his.
Some twenty years ago I well remember
I said 〈◊〉 could not to a Consular
Be 〈◊〉; how much more truly now
May I pronounce unto an aged man?
Now may I wish for Death, yet from my heart
Two things I doe dosire, and pray for; one,
That I may leave the Roman people free,
〈◊〉 immortal Gods cannot bestow upon me
A greater blessedness: the other's this;
That all may meet with a 〈◊〉 fate,
As their deserts have been unto the State.
Your Brother Quintus Sir.
Entreat him hither.
Brother you're welcome: How does thy Pomponia,
And my young Cozen?
Both my Wife and Son
Are (heaven be 〈◊〉) as well as my best wishes
Can fancy they would have them; and my Wife
Presents her love, my Son his duty to you.
They cannot by a better messenger,
For you are Monarch of Pomponia's love,
And 〈◊〉 of his duty; these are titles
Good in Economy, but once thrust out
Make heavy hearts in State when they return;
You have not heard of Antony's proceedings
Since he departed to Brundusium?
Not one word.
I collect the Consuls drift;
But why doe I the State that injury
To style him Consul that so governs it,
That 〈◊〉 his life so, and was so 〈◊〉?
His aim I know's at those four Legions
Transported from the 〈◊〉 Province
At his appointment thither by his brother;
It were dangerous he should win them; but I have
A surer confidence in the Martial Legion,
For it has ever been extolled as much
For its 〈◊〉 to the State as 〈◊〉;
The fourth is under conduct of the 〈◊〉
Egnatuleius, a brave Citizen
And valiant man, so that I cannot doubt
But he will be partly frustrate.
Then Caesars posting to Companion
Puts 〈◊〉 in hope, it is to procure the Colonies
There resident, to side with him, against
Antonius; for you know the Noble youth
Will not bee cheeked by him. But Brother Quintus
I have some private matters: which require
A more retired conference; take a seat.
How does my fellow Academic? can
Digest my Lords discourse of Summum bonum?
It is somewhat tough, methinks; but Lours
Which hadft thou rather be? An Epicure?
A Stoic? or Peripatetic? tell me.
Why faith before I was enfranchised boy,
The Stoic would have furnished me completely,
I should have laughed a cudgel in the face,
And swore a bed of straw had been as soft
As wool, or down of Ermins. I should then
Have stood as stout as Atlas with a burden
Weighty as his upon my brawny shoulders;
But since I did with thee shake off the Name
And Nature of a slave, and serve my Lord
More for affection then 〈◊〉, I could
Sometimes methinks shake hands with 〈◊〉.
It must be so. But brother since your hast
Hinders your longer stay, let me entreat you
Philologus a while may bear me company.
With all my heart.
My love unto 〈◊〉.
I will; Farewell.
Farewell good brother Quintus.
Philologue and Lours come let's hear
How you have relished your Philosophy.
My Lord, your Lours relishes 〈◊〉,
For he is almost turned an Epicure.
An Epicure!
Not I my Lord, I told him
Virtue which in a proud conceit neglected
The due preservatives of the weaker nature,
And was estranged from that first-born 〈◊〉
Of making natures union, if'twere possible,
Immortal, by a competent cherishing
Of either part, and in an 〈◊〉
Like an Intelligence, all Soul and Reason,
Was wholly taken up with mental beauties;
Was like a table furnished with rare viands,
But not a dish prepared with Condimentall
Provocatives to make the relish kind;
For Virtue is, we know, a fruitless, 〈◊〉,
Impolisht treasure, without use and action,
Which give it taste and life, now to the use
Health, wealth and liberty are requisite,
Though not essential unto Virtues self,
That root of goodness. Thus you may see my Lord,
Lours is neither Epicure nor Stoic;
It was only the comparison which made
Your shallow-brain'd Scholastic think I was
One of the Kitchen; but were I a hog
Of Epicures fraternity, yet his brain
Should not be the Atalanta to unhead me.
Why here's no sign of Epicure in this,
It is currant and Authentic.
True, but Sir,
He harped upon another string even now.
Yet, since he is so cunning, pray my Lord
Let me be Stoical a while, and try
Whether he be sound as he pretends.
Pish, there's a face to act a Stoic with!
Make me believe the Goddess Venus thought
She was embraced by Mars, when it was young Adon
With whom she dallied. Give me one shall look
With as severe a countenance as Cato
When he unshackled his Heroic soul.
No more of him, I pray, unless you would
Make fountains of my eyes; but Lours
You have the fittest visage for a Stoic,
It shall be your part.
Then my Noble Lord,
Suppose I had engrossed the Stoic wisdom
Within my bosom, and were now brought forth
To some unheard of torture: thus I'd stand,
And thus I'd dare the utmost of their furies.
Vain Mortals, doe you think my fearless soul
Is capable of pains? why, tear this flesh
From off my bones; you touch not me: for know
This is not Lours but his robe. Extract
The very quintessence of the strongest poison,
I'll quaff it as I would divinest Nectar,
And think it but a draught of Immortality:
Cast me alive into a den of Lions,
I will embrace my destiny, and deem
The loudest accent of their spacious throats
But as a trumpet to proclaim my triumphs.
I would not bellow in Perillus engine,
But like the Swan in Tybers silver streams
Sing my own dirge with an unwrinckled note.
Nay, more then this, the disunited Heavens
Tumbling upon my head should not affright me,
Yea the confused rattling of their ruins
Should be as ravishing harmony to my ears,
As now they make in their celestial spears.
Now, Sir, suppose the anger of some tyrant
Had thrust me from the bosom of my Country,
From the embraces of a faithful spouse,
And the sweet pledges of our mutual loves,
And I were wandering in some wilderness,
Within whose gloomy shades was never heard
The Daulian minstrel, but the boding tones
Of Owls, and Night-ravens, and in every bush
Lay couched a Lion, Tiger, or a Wolf:
Would I sit musing in a dumpish passion?
And cry, O Times! O Manners! no my Lord,
A wise man does not tie his house, or home
To the tuition of one private 〈◊〉,
Nor does he bound what men their Country call
To the straight limits of one State or Kingdom;
Though Thule were the place of my Nativity,
Yet should the Gades be my country too.
I have a little world within my self,
And shall one narrow Landscape claim me hers?
Now for those petty dangers I defy them,
A wise man 〈◊〉 in his sacred front
The character of Majesty, which brutes
Though ne'er so wild and savage must adore.
As for my Wife and Children they were given me
Not for aeternity, and as good be severed
By exile as by death: had I still lived
Dividing my indulgent soul among them,
I might perhaps have seen my loving Wife
Ravished before my face, I might have seen
My Childrens brains knocked out against the stones,
And dashed in my own wounded eyes, but now
I shall not view those clouds. Thus had I been
Unhappy, had I not unhappy been.
And now my honoured Lord, with wonder hear,
How in a yet unparalleled Affliction
Your Stoic Lours would demean himself.
Suppose my Lo. — O how my heart-strings ache
To utter't! yea it makes me clean forget
The Stoic whom I personate: I say
Suppose — O hold me good Philologus.
The very thought will strike me dead — suppose
My bosom Friend, my faithful Pylades,
My second self, even my Philologus,
Were whipped clean through the streets of Rome &amp; cudgeled
Till his bones cracked again, d' ye think I'd weep?
Lift up my eyes, and cry, O cursed Heavens
Which suffer innocence thus to be afflicted!
Now, my Lord, I'd doe an Act of wonder
Which after Ages should admire; I'd down
And in the Cellar all my sorrows drown.
I'st come to this? you are a wanton Lours.
It is Stoical my Lord.
Well let it be so.
But since you think you could so sweetly sing
In the engine of Perillus; let me hear you
Out of't. for I'm persuaded you might frame
Your voice a great deal better to a song
In a far colder place.
It is true my Lord;
But I spoke like a Stoic.
Be not modest.
Begin: but let your song be sage, and grave,
Such as a Vestal need not blush to hear.
Rip up the Vices of the State, that while
You sing, my wounded heart may bleed for sorrow.
How happy was the Roman State?
When her chiefest Magistrate was raised to the fasces from the plow?
when such as Cincinnatus swayed
The helm of the Common-wealth, and made
Her proudest Adversaries humbly how
To the self 〈◊〉 yoke wherewith they used to check
The 〈◊〉 of the toiling 〈◊〉 neck?
How sacred was the Roman Name?
How 〈◊〉 was our virgin same?
When in their 〈◊〉 our bravest men
Had nothing glorious but themselves?
When he who now in quarries 〈◊〉,
〈◊〉 golden 〈◊〉 as low as Pluto's den,
Was deemed a Parricide, and had the doom
Of one who rent his Mothers sacred 〈◊〉?
How happy were we then, how 〈◊〉,
When the 〈◊〉 was possessed
Of 〈◊〉 ancient Palinures?
When Curius and Fabricius led
How Armies, which for 〈◊〉 sed
On 〈◊◊〉? then the easy 〈◊〉
Of her more temperate body soon were wrought,
〈◊〉 health with little loss of blood was bought.
But since the Asian luxury
Has 〈◊〉 into our 〈◊〉, and we
No 〈◊〉 for same in dishes 〈◊〉
Then if we had the conquest 〈◊〉
Of the 〈◊〉 Hamilears son,
Or brought 〈◊◊〉 Syphax home alive
To 〈◊◊〉 Triumphs: now a thousand pains
〈◊〉 brooding in the States corrupted veins.
The Common-wealth is full of 〈◊〉,
And each day 〈◊◊〉
Threaten the downsall of this srame;
〈◊〉 constitution is too week
To 〈◊〉 such 〈◊〉, and not break,
〈…〉 quench the 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉 thou 〈◊〉 AEsculapius mighty 〈◊〉,
And send some 〈◊〉 influence from above.
〈◊◊〉 our AEsculapius mighty, Jove,
And send some 〈◊〉 influence from above.
So here's a Song has 〈◊〉, Poetry;
O it is the language of the Gods when Virtue
〈◊〉 made 〈◊〉 theme; they prostitute the Muses,
And turn 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 a stews, that cloth
〈◊◊〉 fancies in these 〈◊〉 weeds.
Brother so soon? your countenance me thinks
Tells me your bosom travails with some news,
And fain would be delivered.
Sir, Octavius
Is with an Army at the gates.
Octavius?
Why, that's not Hannibal.
But the Citizens
Suspect a more then Panick treachery;
For those that saw the Consul and Octavius
So lately reconciled in the Capitol,
Will not believe these forces are contracted
To oppose 〈◊〉; but that covertly
Both have complotted one to aid the other
In the promotion of their aims; that Antony
May gain the Sovereignty, and Octavius
Revenge on those which slew his uncle Julius.
Carnutius, Sir, the Tribune of the people
Desires some conference with your Lordship.
Quintus,
He's a professed 〈◊〉 to Antonius,
And friend to Caesar. Bring the Tribune in.
Octavius is returned.
I, so I hear,
And brought along with him ten thousand soul∣diers.
I have explored his aims, and they are whole
For opposition of the Consul Antony
Whom he has much endamag'd.
How Carnutius?
By spies, which he has closely had about him
Still crossing and opposing his proceedings,
And with such good success, as now the Legions
Are even upon desertion of his party
Especially the Fourth and Martial.
Tribune,
Inform the people how the youth's affected,
And 〈◊〉 procure he shall be straight brought in;
For I'm persuaded, since he is returned
Antonius enemy, the provident Senate
Will not be so injurious to the State
And their own 〈◊〉, as deny him entrance,
Yea, I presume they will with glad 〈◊〉
Meet the first motion of his entertainment.
They will no 〈◊〉; Come let's dispatch my Lo.
Me thinks the admittance of Octavius,
Will much damage Antony.
I fear it,
And doubt not but he will be shortly here:
But what dost think of this young 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉?
It cannot enter Peso's head, that 〈◊〉.
To the Republic do's incite him to it.
Faith Peso my opinion's this; I doubt
The boy will prove at length another 〈◊〉.
And so think I.
Was it ever known a youth
Of his 〈◊〉 spirit, was so much devoted
Unto his Country cause without some plot
To strengthen his ambitious aims? well Peso.
I am persuaded Caesars heart and countenance
Are not Correlatives.
And I fear our Orator,
Although he think himself a profound Statist,
Is but as it were a visor, which Octavius
Covers the face of his close projects with:
Well, mark the end, these now are but surmises,
But they may prove oraculous. Let this pass.
I think if Antony come he will not stay,
You know he has determined to be Master
Of the 〈◊〉 Province.
True, he has.
Now when he's gone to Gaul, if Cicero
Advice the Senate any thing against him,
It must be our parts to oppose their counsels.
It must. I'll second you, you know 〈◊〉
Doe much by virtue of the Tribuneship.
It is true, you may doe much indeed.
The Consul
Antonius is arrived; and, 〈◊〉 Peso,
Desires your presence; to you, 〈◊〉,
He sends his love, and prays you to repair
Unto the Senate, which is newly convocated.
Peso return my love, Isle 〈◊〉 straight.
How do's my Brother Marcus Cicero?
Well my Pomponia, but would be far better
Could he once see the Common-wealth in health.
Why, husband; what have States 〈◊〉 too?
They have my Sweet, and as old fathers die
To make room for posterity, so Chance
Quits ancient States, that from their 〈◊◊〉
New ones arise. States have their several 〈◊〉
Which carry some analogy with 〈◊〉:
Their small beginnings are their infancies.
Their bold exploits to propagate their glories,
Are like the slashes of ambitious Youth;
When they are mounted to the highest pitch
Decreed them in the 〈◊◊〉,
They are arrived to a state much like
That which in us doth bear the name of Manhood.
They stand not long on this high 〈◊〉 of Glory,
But stealingly, as wee, doe 〈◊◊〉
Their sprightly vigour like a full-blown Rose
Droops and decays, they suddenly contract
〈◊〉; grow diseased, and finally
Sink down into the grave of their own ruins
The 〈◊〉 and the 〈◊〉 Monarchies
Died of a 〈◊〉; then the 〈◊〉
Of a seditious quarrel in the Humours
Striving to be predominant;
Greece of a 〈◊〉; 〈◊〉 first was caught
With an 〈◊〉 Fever, which at last
Degenerated to an Ague, and
Was quickly seconded by Death. But Rome
(Only she never felt an Ague yet,
Unless when Hannibal was at her gates)
Is whole infected with a various mixture
Of all together; she's even grown a Spittle,
An Hospital of diseases which will sink
Her glories to the first and ancient Nothing:
But may that day be leaden heeled, nor fall
Within the 〈◊〉 of this Age.
〈◊〉 Husband,
This passion is not Roman. We may raise
Our spirits with hopes of better times;
Caesar affords us comfort.
True Pomponia,
But Rome has had a long succession
Of State〈◊〉, when this 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Is cut away, another may bud forth;
Pray heaven we have no cause with that old 〈◊〉
Of Syracusa, in our fruitless wishes
To dig our Ancient tyrants up again.
Welcome from the Senate Brother, pray what news?
How were things carried?
Nothing done at all.
The Consul Antony came without all doubt
To censure Caesars doings, but his mind
It seam's was changed; for having said a little
Touching the Provinces and 〈◊◊〉,
But not a word of Caesar, he departed.
And what will follow think you?
Sure he will not
Stay long in Rome, for, as I hear, 'has sent
His Army to Ariminum, no doubt
With an intent to follow, then besides
I think he dares not stay for fear of Caesar;
For he returned though proudly, yet but weakly
With only one 〈◊〉 cohort with him.
But it is grown something late, I must entreat you
To let my Cousin Quintus guide me homeward.
He will be proud to doe you such a service.
What evil Genius 〈◊〉 me? the Fourth
And 〈◊〉 Legions sided with 〈◊〉?
For so I have received 〈◊〉;
Well 〈◊◊〉 Alba, 〈◊〉, as I 〈◊〉,
The 〈◊〉 all Legion have 〈◊〉 themselves.
I will not thus be 〈◊〉 by a boy,
A mongrel; 〈◊〉 shall a 〈◊〉 or 〈◊〉
Stop the 〈◊〉 Eagle in his 〈◊◊〉,
And heaven be scaled by a band of Pygmies.
Let Cicero call him Romes 〈◊〉 boy,
And truly golden off-spring of his Mother,
Let the whole Senate hug him, as they doe;
Yet will I 〈◊〉 and ruin all their hopes,
I'll send him naked home to his first Nothing,
And make him answer to 〈◊〉; what?
Is not the Family of 〈◊〉' 〈◊〉
Derived from Anton son to Hercules?
And shall 〈◊〉 sons of Earth confront me thus?
The stellisi'd Alcides shall not lose
The cheerful lustre of his rays, to 〈◊〉
His blood run muddy in his issues veins.
I like this spirit, 〈◊〉, me thinks I see
The world already prostrate at thy feet,
Cherish this fire: ô were it thou all 〈◊〉
Of these Heroic slames, 〈◊〉 would be
To such a Jove another Simile.
Spoke like thy glorious self: yet, Fulvia,
Passion or indiscretion may 〈◊〉 him,
But when I weigh his Actions in the balance
Of 〈◊〉 and more accurate Construction,
I 〈◊〉 he has no base or common soul,
And does as well inherit Caesars he 〈◊〉,
And 〈◊〉, as his name: beside 〈◊〉 has
The counsels of experienced heads to steer
His Actio is by; so that he's now above
The pitch of my disdain: with strong-nerv'd eyes,
Like a young Eagle, he confronts our Sun.
What 〈◊〉 so soon? 〈◊〉 an Eagle?
A Scarab rather. He an Eagle Antony?
He's but 〈◊〉 Ganymed 〈◊〉 an Eagles 〈◊〉:
The Octavian' family 〈◊〉 yet was nest
To such a kingly bird. But who I pray
Are those experienced heads you talk of? what?
Is that Tongue-valiant Cicero worth the fear
Of 〈◊〉 Antony?
No doubt but he who has of late divorc't
His Wife Terentia, and in her place
Made a young 〈◊〉 his 〈◊〉, may as soon
Supplant Antonius, and set up that boy:
O'twas great policy to exercise
Himself 〈◊〉 the weaker sex at first;
Your turn is next: the Hawk thus tries his talons
Upon some meaner pray, before he ventures
To 〈◊〉 with the Eagle or the 〈◊〉.
I think Minerva's self 〈◊〉 in thee Fulvia,
Such words as these might fire the coldest bosom,
And by strong 〈◊◊〉 a heart
Of 〈◊〉 temper, to a golden Purity.
Were young Octavius 〈◊〉 an Eagle,
And nested in the bosom of Great Jove,
I'd pluck him thence: As for that Cicero,
My fear, if I had any, should not be
Pitched on so base an object: I will make
That Inmate know what it is to write my life,
H'ad been as good have 〈◊〉 to the world
The mystic name of Rome. But let that 〈◊〉
Proceed to belch his poisonous vomit forth
At view of light; yet shall his unwashed mouth
One day repent that biting impudence.
And there may come a time when Fulvia
Shall be revenged on his wormwood jeers.
O how my entrails boil! my heart's on 〈◊〉:
Had I his damned tongue within my clutches,
This bodkin should in bloody characters
Write my revenge.
Come Fulvia, be content,
Let him triumph, and in his proud conceit
Frame to himself a conquest great as Joves
Over those sons of 〈◊〉, and parallel
His verbal thunder with the voice of Heaven,
Yet may I one day be that stronger Typhon
Shall cut the sinews of his insolence,
And place thee 〈◊〉 in this Romes Olympus.
Come kiss me Sweating, though the drowsy 〈◊〉
Have not 〈◊〉 left the bosom of his Thetis,
Yet here's no nightly shade, for from 〈◊〉 eyes
Breaks a more glorious day. I could, my beauty,
For ever dwell in thy divine embraces,
But I must leave thee, yea and that before
Aurora's first blush gilds the East; thou know
My Army is sent before unto Ariminum,
And I must follow; I will have the Province
Of Decimus 〈◊〉; I, I will, that's certain,
By fair or foul means; Julius my Colleague
Returned from Gaul so happily established,
Great Pompey's 〈◊〉 was 〈◊〉 by his Eagles.
I know an Army will be soon sent after,
And war proclaimed against me as an enemy
To the State, if once I offer violence
To Decimus, but I'm resolved, and should
The whole world rise against me, what I've said
I'll prosecute to ruin or fruition.
Only my Fulvia doe but thou 〈◊〉
My foes at home by opposite authority.
There's Lucius Peso, Lucius 〈◊〉,
〈◊〉 Calenus, Salvius, Lucius Caesar,
〈◊〉 Sulpitius too, and many others
My special friends: thou moist solicit them,
They'll not be backward in my glorious cause.
Come I'll go kiss the pledges of our bed,
And then for Mutiny; there my hopes are fed.
IS there such sweetness in 〈◊〉?
Or is it only fond opinion?
Is there such pleasure in the height
Of greatness? or is it mere 〈◊〉?
Sure if the glories of a throne
Were in their proper colours shown,
It would appear the highest place
Is pleasant only in the face;
A King is but a Royal slave,
And Rule a Vassalage more 〈◊〉;
A Scepter's but a glorious name,
A Crown the burden of the 〈◊〉
Proud front which it 〈◊〉; but Peace
And 〈◊〉 joy with full increase
Salute the cottage of 〈◊〉 Swain;
There Quiet 〈◊〉, where 〈◊〉
Doth six a scornful brow, but where
The eye of Envy's 〈◊〉, there
A thousand discontents doe dwell,
O it is a second second 〈◊〉.
Why then, O why, 〈◊〉 Rome,
Doe thy Vipers 〈◊〉 thy 〈◊〉,
To be possessors of a light
So prejudicial to the sight?
Unhappy Rome, did Julius 〈◊〉
For 〈◊〉 Tyranny?
And must 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
The aims of his Ambitious spirit?
Yet in this 〈◊〉 happy State,
That thou hast an Advocate
Dares plead thy Griefs, and to his face
Tell thy proud 〈◊◊〉 is base.
Base in his life, and 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉,
An hater of thy liberty.
O 〈◊◊〉 a Statists worth,
Let thy Matrons Carol forth
His praise, and crown his aged 〈◊〉:
Not with Laurel wreaths, but prayers.
Long moist thou live brave man, &amp; have
When dead a 〈◊〉 and peaceful 〈◊〉
Cicero.
SO now me thinks I see our 〈◊◊〉
Already 〈◊〉 with ruin; he shall know
Ambition is a precipice, and the sky.
At which he aims his 〈◊〉 to be too high.
Were it the cause though it were ground enough
To build a settled confidence upon.
An honest cause in mouth of ruin sings,
It is the good genius of a State, and brings
Down Jove himself to side with her: but more
It is Brutus whom Antonius copes with, Brutus
The Omen of whose very name, and blood
Fatal to State-usurpers were sufficient
To 〈◊〉 our drooping souls, and raise 〈◊〉
From thought of 〈◊〉. But then besides;
Three Armies have we sent to succour him;
Two under Aulus Hirtius, and Pansa,
Our late elected Consuls. Young Octavius
Have we made General of the third; A youth
Ordained by Heaven to doe his Country 〈◊〉.
And yet before this war was brought about,
What oppositions did I meet withal.
Peso withstands it, Salvius seconds him,
The Consular Calenus makes a third.
The matter is adjourned. Till at the last
〈◊〉 must be sent to Antony
To treat of Peace; A thing, in my conceit,
Of little credit to the Senators;
For what could bee more base, more full of 〈◊〉
Then to send messengers of Peace to him
Whom, but a little before they had condemned
As enemy to's Country, and Republic,
By several decrees, as 〈◊〉 Honours,
The great Rewards of the Legions that forsook him,
The Assignment of the Consuls to the wars?
As also their most ample commendations
Of Brutus and his Army, which the Province
Of Gaul did plainly intimate: moreover
There was great danger in it; for could the City
Be safe, when it should Antony immure,
Or rather Antonies within her bosom,
Which like a nest of Serpents would torment her,
And never cease to 〈◊〉 with 〈◊〉 stings
Till they had wrought a passage to the heart?
Lastly, it was not possible 〈◊〉 should
Be peace confirmed with him, for not the Senate
Nor Citizens could affect him, nor he them,
Both had condemned him, he injured both.
Well, Legates are dispatcht; yet nothing done;
Antony is still as insolent as ever:
Then must a second Embassy be entered;
And I am one elected for that service.
O Heavens! with what distempered wounded eyes
Should I have looked that Monster in the face?
Who in a public Concion had decreed
My goods unto Petissius of Vrhin,
One who but newly from the utter shipwreck
Of a no mean but rich inheritance
Was crept 〈◊〉 those Antonian rocks for 〈◊〉
My tender eye-balls never could have bom
The hated sight of Saxo, 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉,
Hostilius and Vesenius. O 〈◊〉 should
Have seen the very visage and aspect
Of Civil war it self. But this Legation
Was found at length a 〈◊〉 device and 〈◊〉
To hinder with delays the 〈◊◊〉
In preparation for the war. Yet see
A new 〈◊〉 obtruded M. 〈◊〉
Our General beyond the Alps, 〈◊〉
The 〈◊〉 by 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 peace;
Hereat the former Advocates take heart,
And plead 〈◊〉 authority of Lepidur,
As if that plea could quench the zealous flames
Which were then kindled in the Senates breasts.
But all in 〈◊〉. Our armies are launched forth
Against 〈◊〉 Arch-pirate of the State Antonius.
And now we daily with our prayers solicit
The ears of heaven to 〈◊〉 the Common-wealth
Of such a dangerous and 〈◊〉 plague,
Which like a gangrene would run 〈◊〉 and spread
To the 〈◊〉 of the body Politic:
But to 〈◊〉 down such monsters Jove has thunder,
And wee have arms to press this viper under.
Phillis come 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉.
Are the Rooms
Perfumed as I commanded?
Yes.
And all things
Done as I gave directions?
All things Madam.
Well.
But I need not be so punctual,
My Brother Marcus, as he is no stranger,
So not so curious, as our other Romans.
As for my self, I'm none of those which waste
Whole Mornings in the fruitless contemplation
Of their supposed beauties in a glass;
I have not learned to paint and 〈◊〉 my face
With borrowed colours, mine's a native grace,
And, if it please my Quintus, it is enough.
Nor am I in the list of those which spend
Their husbands faculties on loose 〈◊〉,
On rings, and bracelets, or a 〈◊◊〉
To dangle in my 〈◊〉, my Ornaments
And Jewels are the Virtues of my Quintus.
Madam, my Lord your Brother's newly entered.
Here's a triplicity of 〈◊〉
How does my little 〈◊〉
O Sir the better
To see your Stoickship in health: but, 〈◊〉,
What is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 doing?
〈◊〉 let's see.
Why, poring on a fragment of 〈◊〉
The Grandfather (as he calls him) of Historiaus
A kind of vermin he's enamoured with:
And he himself has got an 〈◊〉 humour
To be of that fraternity.
In faith!
Nay then 〈◊〉 furnish him, Most learned Tyro
Have you not heard the news?
Ha. News? What news?
Why tic reported, and that credibly.
How Atlas being weary of his burden,
As sure he well may be, and if you ever
Beheld his picture with that mighty globe
Upon his back, hee looks but sourly 〈◊〉:
Well, Atlas being weary as I told you,
To ease his shoulders, lifted up his arm,
Some say it was his right arm, some his left,
But that's not so material; you observe!
Lifting his arm above his head to keep
The Sphere a while from his back, he 〈◊〉 to thrust
His thumb into a star, and 〈◊〉 it off.
Tyro. he's misinformed; it was thus old boy.
About the time when the all-seeing Sun
Mounted the raging 〈◊〉 back, this Atlas,
This living Column of the arched 〈◊〉,
Distilling from his hot and sweating brows
As much Salt waters as might turn a Sea
Fresh as our Tiber, to a brinish sourness.
And truly, were that scorching season constant,
Well might the Nation of Philosophers
Cease their intestine broils about the saltness
Of the vast Ocean, and determine safely
The sweat of Atlas were the genuine cause.
Well Atlas sweltring, as I said, and sending
Whole clouds of vapours from his hoiling entrails,
Erects his brawny arm, and so sustains
That azure fabric, while he stoops to reach
A draught or two of Nilus in his palm;
But as he stoops, he thus behind him throws
His leg, and by ill fortune popped his foot
Into the hot Trinacrian hill; and so
(O sad dystaster!) burnt his little toe.
I thought your Mount at length would be 〈◊〉
Of a ridiculous Mouse. But what's this all?
I, there's enough at once, too much will glut you
Glut me! by Castor I'm as lank and thin
As if Chamaeleon-like I had been fed
Of nought but Air. This have I only chewed on
Since (to usurp Lours inspired Notion)
The Sun 〈◊〉 up his 〈◊〉 Teem from the
Blushing Ocean.
How the Rogue hobbles! slight he makes the Muses
Halt, and their God Apollo 〈◊〉 on crutches.
No matter Lours, you must attribute it
To the faintness of his stomach, which I'll quicken
With some supply. Stay here, while I go in,
And if I meet with an extravagant Capon,
Or some such Pilgrim, I'll direct him hither.
Well said; but Sirrah, you know what I love,
A cup of rich Falern, you Rogue, or some
Extracted Nectar of the Formian grape.
Isle furnish you immediately.
I wonder
What foolish humour Pindarus was in,
When he begun his Poems with the praise
Of that weak Element Water: slight blind Homer
Was an old Soker at it, and the Father
Of our brave Roman Laureates 〈◊〉,
Before he dipped his sacred quill in blood,
Would steep his brains in this Castalian liquor;
Drenched in this juice he could more proudly look
Bellona in the face, then ere 〈◊〉
Dipped by his Mother in the Stygian lake.
So soon Philologus?
What's here?
Why, Tyro,
The 〈◊〉 of a martyred quartered Goose.
I thought in truth this would be one of your
〈◊〉 pilgrims; for it is reported,
That 〈◊〉 have travailed on their 〈◊〉 to Rome
Even from the Marshes of the 〈◊〉.
What bird is this? it is a young Goose I 〈◊〉.
How, a young Goose?
He's one that said so rather.
No Rogue, Isle leave that title to Philosophers,
With whom the 〈◊〉 are so enamoured.
For I have read in story of one 〈◊〉,
Of your bald tribe affected by a Goose,
With such 〈◊〉 ardent zeal; that day and night
Abroad, at home, at board, and in his bed,
She would be with him: and I am persuaded
There are but few of that profession
Can leap a Span from Goose.
The Rogue's Satirical.
Nay there are Poets too of this 〈◊〉.
Know you not Anser, he who sings the praise
Of Antony in verse?
And witty too.
But it is a Partridge Tyro.
Hal a Partridge.
Come leave this prattle, he will tell you now
How Mulciber the Ferrian Prince was Hawking,
And a poor Partridge, such a one 〈◊〉 this,
Mounted in's mouth, only for sincere dread
Of the pursuing Hawk: but you young Rascal
Here's that has life in it.
Come.
Historical Tyro.
What's this?
It is wine, pure wine.
But Romulus
The Father of this City knew not wine,
Milk was his drink.
That was in Romes infancy,
Come drink you Coxcomb.
Ha, methinks it smiles
Like an ungirdled Maiden.
Are you there?
I see these scribbling. Fablers are sly 〈◊〉
There's my Lords biting Mastix Salust, 〈◊〉
Was found at the sport.
I, and I think belaboured
To the purpose for his pains.
Tic something pleasant.
It were good this Vacuum were again replenished.
Come, come let's fall aboard.
I see you Rascals, you are no Pythagoreans.
Why Tyro? w'are as still as they.
It is true.
But they to enure themselves to abstinence
Would cause a Table to be richly furuisht
With costly viands, and then sit them down
To feast their eyes upon the several dishes,
But not to 〈◊〉 a bit, for when their mouths
Had watered long 〈◊〉 the enticing dainties,
A waiter was commanded to remove,
And so with empty stomachs all departed.
A fine device to make a living Ghost on.
But Tyro, Here boy.
〈◊〉, why it is the Soul
Of History; me thinks in this small glass
I see a Volume of brave Heroes Acts
In Letters capital: here I read the Trophies
Of Bacchus fetched from the remotest India;
Here I peruse the battle of such same,
Between the Centdures and the Lapathites,
The sack of Troy, and many other things
As well recorded in this fluid Monument,
As in the strongest Adamantine tables.
I may in time make use of this sweet doctrine
My Lord by Phoebus.
So, so, I perceive
You have been at it, it is well done, but Tyro
What news from Mutiny? you 〈◊〉 ever wont
To be 〈◊〉.
None but this my Lord:
It is for a truth given out, that 〈◊〉
From the 〈◊〉 Town conveyed a Letter
To the Army of the Consuls by a Kestrel.
How weak alas, to what sinall purpose tend
The plots of State-usurpers in the end?
How are 〈◊〉 projects crossed? he thought
With 〈◊〉 and trenches to cut off intelligence
Between the Consuls and the Town, and spread
〈◊〉 o'er the surface of the neighbouring river,
Lest the swift waves should carry Brutus counsels.
But all in vain, if through the yielding Air
A winged post his embassy may 〈◊〉.
Alas, my Lord, the Town is full of uprores,
Some cry out Antony, some, Wee are undone;
Some, 〈◊〉 Brutus must be called home.
Tyro, Go see whence springs this sad confusion.
Some answer it is now too late, and others
Affirm it were best to 〈◊〉 to him for succour.
There's not a throat but hoarse with cries; An eye
But drowned in 〈◊〉 of tears. The cause I know not.
But yet I 〈◊〉.
If Antony have won the day (which heaven
And heavens all-seeing Monarch Jove forbid)
Wee are undone, there is no hope of succour
Except in Brutus, which must be 〈◊〉
Not by his coming, but our slight to him,
Unless the common voice mistakes, and danger
Be 〈◊〉 so nigh our 〈◊〉, as it 〈◊〉.
But yet 〈◊〉 soul is quiet, which was ever
Wont to: 〈◊〉 the common ills
In her 〈◊◊〉.
My Lord,
There is a rumour 〈◊〉 throughout the City
That 〈◊〉 has overthrown tho Consuls,
And is now coming with his Troops to Rome.
Great Jove defend us.
Heaven 〈◊〉 this evil.
And the Antonians within the City
Are 〈◊〉 together into 〈◊〉 court.
No doubt to broach some mischief against the State.
My Lord it is broached already; for ther's raised
Another 〈◊〉 without all doubt by those
〈◊〉 Citizens, only to divert
The concourse of the people from your Lordship,
That on the Ides of April you've determined
To 〈◊〉 the Fasces.
〈◊〉 thou art deceived,
〈◊〉 meant some Ambitious thief, or sword-player,
Or some new minted Catiline.
No my Lord;
You are the man.
O Heavens, that I who ruined
The Counsels of base Catiline, should now
Turn Catiline my self! is any man
So lost, so wicked to raise this of me?
So rash, so furious to believe it? Heavens!
Alas good Tribune, how is Cicers wronged?
I know you are, and therefore in a Concion
Before the poople have I urged your innocence,
And partly choked the rumour. I proposed
All your endeavours for the Public State
Before their censures, and the whole Assembly
Pronounced they never yet could find you guilty
So much as of a thought against the welfare
Of the Republic: but what noise is this?
Hark, the late cries are turned to 〈◊〉 me thinks.
I hear a cry of Victory in the streets.
Tyro, Go see again, my heart presages
Some sudden good.
Hark, hark, the noise increases.
I, and approaches 〈◊〉 too me thinks.
It is at the doors.
Here's one my Lord can tell you.
The Consuls (worthy Sir) have won the day.
These will inform you better.
Brother Quintus
A word or two in private. Antony
Is put to flight, but Hirtius 〈◊〉, and Pansa
Dangerously wounded; for some private reasons
Best known unto my self, I will conceal
The Consuls death, which I may doe completely,
For here's a Letter sent from Hirtius
Unto the Senate of a former victory:
This will remove suspect.
The Roman people
Wait at the door to bring you to the Capitol.
Thanks to the Gods, this day we'll dedicate
To Jove and Mars the savers of our State.
Nay Madam stay, I feel an ecstasy
Steal through my breast, and sire my pliant soul,
You shall not go without a Hymn of Victory.
〈◊〉, Clarinda, Gallu, quickly come,
Lours begin, and these shall sing the 〈◊〉.
Have you not beard the Cities cry,
How the people vent their joys
In the welcome welcome noise
Of victory?
The Capitol returns their shout again,
As if it self would 〈◊〉 their joyful strain.
Let Echo sing with long-spun 〈◊〉,
And Philmels 〈◊〉 from their lubrick throats;
Let Hills rebound,
And valleys sound
Io triumph.
The streets are filled with cheerful glee,
And the common mirth is shown
In the pleasant pleasant 〈◊〉
Of Liberty;
For now our Consuls have delivered Rome,
And the disturber of her peace o'rcome.
Let Echo sing with, &amp;c,
Great Jove we bless thy Palronage;
By whose high auspice Rome is saved
The Roman State, and kept unslav'd
From inbred rage.
And Mars we praise thee, by whose aid have stood
The Roman walls so long, though built in blood.
Let Echo sing with long-spun notes,
And Philmells carol from their lubrick throats;
〈◊〉 Hills rebound,
And valleys sound
Io triumph.
Honoured and Conscript Fathers, if those days
Appear to us with far more welcome rays
Wherein we 〈◊〉 preserved, then those wherein
To breath this common Air we first begin,
Because our safeties have a sure fruition
Of gladness, but our births a frail condition,
And that we doe our safeties entertain
With pleasure, but Nativities with pain:
How ought we then to embrace this happy light
Which has redeemed us from that sad 〈◊〉
Raised by domestic furies? yet we will not
Return unto our civil robes, till tidings
Be brought of Brutus safety, for this war
Was undertaken for his 〈◊〉 and succour,
Against those enemies of the State, and is not
Complete but with his freedom first recovered.
Although I am not Cicero of your mind
Concerning the retaining of this robe
Of war, yet I determine public prayer
Be made to all the Gods for twenty days
In the three Generals names.
Which twenty days
Publius Servilius I enhance to fifty,
Since they are granted not to one but Three,
But, M. Tullius, my opinion is
This day to put our civil garments on,
And to resume the Sage again to morrow.
And it is my judgment too.
Yes, it would be grateful
To the immortal Deities to depart
To put the Sage on from their hallowed 〈◊〉
To which we came 〈◊〉 in 〈◊◊〉
It were most enormous, and against Religion.
Then 〈◊〉 your terms are too too 〈◊〉
You brand them with the name of 〈◊〉
It is too severe a style. We will allow them
To be called wicked and audacious Citizens,
But not their Countries foes; and for this cause
The Consuls Hirtius, Pansa, with 〈◊〉
Are not to be entitled Generals.
If the Antonians are not enemies,
Then it was a great 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 them;
And if it were impiety to slay them,
How can we hope our solemn supplication,
Decreed for their destruction, should be pleasing
To the immortal Delties? But Calenus
Know I am not contented with a word
Of such a slight conceit; if any man
Will furnish me with one of deeper 〈◊〉,
I'll burned into their names; for even by those
Which spilt their sacred blonds for us at Mutiny
I know they doc deserved. As for the Consuls
And young Octavius whom we made our Chiefs,
Their brave deserts have made them Generals,
For now that Prince of out-laws is or thrown;
The very Sun was happy, which before
He hid his beams, beheld the breathless trunks
Of those dead Parricides, and Antony
For very fear with few Associates fly.
Therefore I thus 〈◊〉, That in the names
Of the Three Generals, fifty days together
Be supplications made, which I will frame
In the most ample words I can contrive.
Then for the Legions, we renew the promise
Of their rewards, which we decreed before,
Should be performed when the war was 〈◊〉:
But as for those which perished in the battle,
We will the Pensions were decreed for them
Be (as it is just and requisite they should 〈◊〉)
Paid to 〈◊◊〉, Brothers, Wives and children.
Some of the 〈◊◊〉 to our grief
But their own glory fell with Victory.
O happy death which being Natures due,
Was for their countries welfare 〈◊〉 you
〈◊〉 your glorious names from Mars, that hee
Who for the Nations good did Rome decree,
Might 〈◊〉 to have ordained you for Romes.
Fame 〈◊〉 erect you Mausolaean tombs:
Death caught in flight is backed with 〈◊〉,
Tic glorious to die with Victory;
For in the fight Mars to oblige the rest,
Is wont for pledges to select the best.
Therefore those impious foes whom you have slain,
In hell now suffer their deserved pain;
But you who poured forth your latest spirit
In 〈◊〉 Victory, shall now 〈◊〉
Those blessed fields where pious souls are sainted.
What though your lives were short? they were untain∣ted.
And the 〈◊◊〉 of your deaths shall climb
Beyond the 〈◊〉 of all 〈◊◊〉
Therefore most 〈◊〉 while you lived, but now
Most holy Soldiers it goes well with you,
Your 〈◊〉 Virtues shall not clauded lie
In the 〈◊〉 dungeon of 〈◊〉
Not your surviving 〈◊〉, but all Rome,
Senate and People shall erect your tomb;
There shall be built? 〈◊◊〉
With words engraven, whose 〈◊〉 shall present
Your deeds unto AEternity; that they
Which see that 〈◊〉 and read your acts, may say
These 〈◊〉 the men that loved their countries good,
And bought her 〈◊〉 with their dearest blood;
And 〈◊〉 for 〈◊〉 of their 〈◊〉
Have 〈◊〉 a crown of Immortality.
How wildly Fortune sports with 〈◊〉? now
She shows a face as black as Night,
〈◊◊〉 her 〈◊〉 my brow,
And 〈◊〉 Apollo's light.
VVee float upon the surface of this Main,
Now sinking into Scylla's jaws,
Anon we check our fears again
With hope and comforts 〈◊〉 laws.
The worlds great 〈◊〉, the blind Queen of Chance,
A fairer pattern never drew
Of her own inconstant glance,
Then our Native Rome 〈◊◊〉.
Alas! how did we meanwhile fear the 〈◊〉
Done in the poor Brundusium?
When Caesar with maturer hast
Strikes all those bleeding sorrows dumb.
Then what a sad confused distraction late
With horror did surprise our ears?
How each heart did antedare
A tempest in their troubled fears?
When on a sudden (〈◊〉 Jove be praised)
The welcome news of Victory
Serened those storms, and shouts are raised
Which echoed from the harmonious sky.
O may this fleeting fickle Goddess here
Securely softly sit her down,
And sleep as long as Phoebe's Dear
On towering Litmus sacred crown.
O that the wakeful Genius of this place
Would but present her with a 〈◊〉
From Lethe fetched, might make her 〈◊〉
Forget its frown, and feet their motion.
Now Rome is Mars his darling Aphrodite;
O that some Deity would set
To take them in this happy plight
A lasting 〈◊〉 net!
Listen Great 〈◊〉 with what devotion sings
The Voice of new-born liberty;
O that some God would clip the wings
Of inconstant Victory!
COme fellow Sold. cheer your drooping spirits,
Behold the camp of Lepidus. This weed
Black as my Fortunes, these unkembed locks,
This rusty long-grown 〈◊〉, this meager visage,
Emblems of my distress, might make the bowels
Of ravenous Wolves and Tigers yearn with pity,
But they are Romans, and have Roman hearts;
Come, come, the day may shine, when with 〈◊〉
We shall recount the sorrows of this 〈◊〉;
When by our fires, in bosom of our wives,
Our children too, and faithful friends about 〈◊〉
We shall discourse unto their greedy ears
Our travails through the Alps, and glory 〈◊〉 them,
How every weary step presented us
With some new precipice; how we eased our limbs
Not on the soft repose of downy beds,
But on a frigid and congealed heap
Of snowy fleeces, with some 〈◊◊〉
To be our pillow. You shall 〈◊〉 deride
The Roman pomp, and when you see an ear
Hung with a jewel, tell them it was not so
With you, when meanwhile on the Alpine 〈◊〉
Your hairs were linked with chains of dangling 〈◊〉;
What a brave glory will it be at a feast,
Amongst the abundance of the Roman 〈◊〉,
To tell them how your welcome drink was me
Not the sweet Nectar of the 〈◊〉 grape,
Or Formian wines presented in a cup
Of Gold ingrav'n with Antics, or in crystal
Prized more for its fragility 〈◊〉 worth?
But, that which once Darius so esteemed,
The muddy water of a tainted puddle
〈◊〉 with a hollow 〈◊〉 into your mouths;
And that your Viands were not 〈◊〉 oysters,
The dainties of Cercei, or wild fowl
Procured as far as from the River Phases,
But beasts whose stinking flesh would make 〈◊〉 stomach
Of your luxurious citizen disgorge,
Roots, wild fruit, and the very barks of trees.
Thus faithful Partners of my travails shall wee
Solace our selves, when these unwelcome clouds
Are blown away. I'm now to throw the Dice,
Pray heaven the chance 〈◊〉 good; Retire you something.
What discontented 〈◊〉 is this approaches
Our trenches in this mournful garb and habit?
By Mars he looks like a Memento more.
Sure I have seen thy face.
You have no doubt.
And if my eyes deceive me not, I see
Clodius and Laelius there among you, Two
That would have known me once.
It may bee so.
But if we cannot call you now to mind,
I hope you will impute it to your habit
And our forgetfulness, but not to pride,
Or scorn of misery.
No I doe not Laelius.
For I may well seem strange to 〈◊〉, who am
Grown almost out of knowledge with my self;
Yet have I not forgot my Name, which while
I was more happy was Antonius.
Alas, I know you 〈◊〉 to my grief.
But now I will not 〈◊〉 that name,
For being fallen from what I was, I must not
Make my self what I 〈◊〉 Alas I thought not,
Then when Antonius was Antonius,
Fortune would ere malign me so as make me
An eye-sore to my self. Brave Romans, here
You see a wretch thrown from the height of greatness
To feed on carrion, and, in fellowship
Of Beasts, drink water out of tainted quagmires.
Some remnants of my Army are surviving
Which have with many a weary step past ore
The rugged Alps, and here attend the sentence
Of life or ruin from your 〈◊〉.
Alas!
How's this? Antonius in a mourning habit
Close at my Trenches, and with fawning words
At parley with my 〈◊〉? Sound the 〈◊〉,
And drown this Sirens language, or w'are lost.
I had but two poor Engines by whose help
I thought the fortress of these Soldiers hearts
Might be subdued, my habit and my speech;
And one's already frustrate, tic no matter.
Though with this more then Corybantian noise
My words are swallowed, yet my miseries
Shall speak as loud as thunder in the ears
Of these relenting Romans, for I see
Tokens of pity in their looks, well here
Like a decayed statue will I stand
And speak a mute Oration, that may chance
Advance my hopes to the height of 〈◊〉 fruition.
See where he stands.
Is that Antonius?
The same, or rather not the same Antonius.
Before Jove it is pity, he's a proper man.
Me thinks he looks vile thin about the gills.
He stands by Heaven like a Mercurial Index.
Even such a meager face for all the world
Has Saturnes statue in the Capitol.
But stay, what's here, a brace of Cockatrices?
Whither so fast, my pretty mincing Damsels?
Wee must not part thus, Come, come.
Say you so?
Ha, ha, ha!
What female devil trow was it? by Jove
My ear's as hot as limping Vulcans anvil.
Ha, ha!
Now, Noble Antony, I see wee are
As much unknown to you in this disguise,
As you to us, when first you did appear
So far unlike our late renowned Consul;
But Sir to put you out of doubt I'm Clodius.
And I am Laelius.
Both come to recomfort
Your wretched fortunes.
Friends I can but thank you.
It is more then wee deserve yet.
It is as much
As my forlorn estate can now afford.
Your state's forlorn no longer then you please,
Take heart, the camp is ready to receive you.
I, and to kill the General Lepidus
If you'll but say the word.
Again I thank you,
And will not die a debtor; nay I must
Die both a debtor, and ungrateful too.
The courtesie's so great, my best endeavours
Will bee too feeble ever to requite it.
Yet shall the General Lepidus live for me,
I will not raise my fortunes by his fall.
Then Sir to morrow morning shall our camp
Expect you with your Soldiers, and the Trench
Bee levelled against your coming.
Clodius,
And Laelius the restorers of my life,
I were a foe my own happiness,
And which is more, respectless of your kindness,
If I should fa•l.
Then Antony till then
Farewell.
Farewell, farewell good Laelius.
Why now me thinks I'm Antony again;
I gratulate my Alpine travails now.
Who in a state so hopeless as was mine
Would not for such an issue feed on dogs,
Or cats, or worse then both an age together?
Well I'll unto my fellow travellers,
This news will make them frolic. Thus the day
Ushered with darkness sends the sweeter ray.
Now Caesar summon thy whole self, thou art
But yet a stripling, and must arm thy self
With providence unknown in these few years.
The Senators, those Nestors of the State,
Disturb the fair praeludium of my Glories:
They have created Decimus their General
Against Antonius, robbed me of my Triumph,
And jealous of my fortunes, closely practise
To win the Soldiers from me, but I am not
So weak a Politician, on such 〈◊〉
To part with these fair hopes: if this contempt
Be cast upon me, Antony yet living,
What would they doe if he were once extinguished?
Well I'll no longer be deluded thus.
I'll doe what Pansy on his Death-bed wished no,
Even this, acquaint my self with Antony,
And Lepidus, to whom no doubt he is joined.
Then will I send Centurions to the Senate,
To ask for me in name of the whole Army
The Consulship. If it be denied, I am determined
To march my self to Rome, and gain by force
What fair means cannot win. They who intend
Betimes to compass their wished journeys end
Must take the day before'em; so must I,
Set forth at morning of my age, and ply
My youthful sinews in this task of glory,
Crowning my spring with harvest, that the story
Of Caesars forward years, may be as bright
As others lives, and send as fair a light.
Brother, I'm much perplexed about this Caesar,
He has so fixed his hopes upon the Consulship
Ther's no removing him.
I always feared,
What the Immoderate Honours which the Senate
Conferred upon him would at length produce.
For if Antonius from deceased Caesar,
Took his occasion to usurp the State;
What hope, may we suppose, will he put on
The Author of whose confidence is not
A murdered Tyrant, but the Senates self?
And truly brother you are to be blamed
For the same flux of Honours with the rest.
Why Quintus, he deserved them and more
While he stood constant to his countries cause;
As for my self, the dignity which I
Decreed him, was but just and necessary;
For you well know the name of General,
Though it was somewhat too much for his age,
Is not convenient only, but essential
To the well governing of so great an Army.
Now since Octavius has abused both that
And other favours, it is his own ambition
And not my fault, unless I must be 〈◊〉
As guilty of another misdemeanours.
You must, if you might have prevented it,
Which moderation would have done. But now
That Caesar who (as you were wont to say)
Flowed from the fountain of your Counsels, sullies
All your intendments; for alas what good,
What profit gain we by the overthrow
Of Antony, since for reward Octavius
Requires succestion in his Tyranny?
Since he who vindicated one, begins
Himself another ill, as black as that,
And like to take a deeper root 〈◊〉 footing?
Nay, prethy Quintus, doe not aggravate.
The youth I hope is not so lost to goodness,
So desperately given, but I may win him
To have some pity on the State, to tender
The safeties of well-minded Citizens,
Especially of my beloved Brutus.
What if he will not? shall we not 〈◊〉 safe
But under his protection? Heaven defend us,
What would the noble Brutus say of this,
Should he but hear it, doe you think he would 〈◊〉
His Safety should be so demissely begged
Of him that's heir to Julius, whom he slew?
Why now you put the reins of Tyranny
Into his hand, and indiscreetly kindle
The fire already glowing in his breast.
He will raise his thoughts to fancy certainties,
And hasten to maturity what yet
Is scarce 〈◊〉 in the womb of his 〈◊〉;
When he perceives the authors of our liberty
Commended to his care, and that by you
Who have been hitherto the 〈◊〉 prop
And pillar of it. Why consider Mark
The very name of Caesar 〈◊〉 incite him
Against those which 〈◊〉 his Uncle.
Cease Good Quintus,
You 〈◊〉 me too severely.
My Good Lord,
The Centiner Cornelius, from the General
Octavius Caesar waits to speak with you.
He must be mildly handled.
As you please.
Well, bring him in.
The General Octavius
Salutes your Lordship not by me alone
But by these Letters.
Sir I must entreat you
In name of the whole Army to repair
To the Senate.
Yes Cornelius I will,
And glad I am to hear the noble Caesar
Is in good health.
Farewell my Lord.
Farewell.
Brother here's that I feared so much, there are
Four hundred Soldiers in the Armies name
Come to entreat for him the Consulship.
It is Caesars own device I fear, although
He makes it not his, but the Armies suit.
What's your advice?
Why are you doubtful brother?
Ne'er give your voice, lest what you have archiev'd
Against Antonius now degenerate
From the fair glory of a valiant mind,
To an opinion of slavish fear;
Nay worse, twill occasion to the world
To brand you with 〈◊〉, and say
Your deeds have tended not to root out Tyranny,
But rather to obtain a milder Master.
You know the times; a Magistrate is made,
Doe what he can, the common mark of slander;
The best State-pilots oft are overwhelmed
With the foul sea of an opprobrious mouth;
Their Virtues branded with the name of Vice,
Their diligence of deceit; but to consent
To this Ambitious suit for Caesar, were
〈◊〉 expose your self to a deserved censure
And such a one would taint your worthiest actions.
Sex. An. ab urb. cond. D. CC. XX. Cornelius with other Centurions and Soldiers, to the number of 400 came in the behalf of the whole army to Rome, to ask of the Senate the Office of Consul for their General Octavius Caesar.
Now, as it is the custom of Histoxians,
Let me a little descant on this business.
There is a whispring rumour, that Octavius.
Slew Hirtius in the tumult of the battle,
And poisoned Pansa at Bononia,
By his 〈◊〉 〈◊〉; now me thinks,
This sudden suit for the Consulship confirms,
At least makes more suspicious that report.
Nay more, I hear he's reconciled to Antony
Upon a sudden; this is something too.
I know not what will follow; but it is doubtful.
So, now I 〈◊〉 not, if I go and read
Two or 〈◊〉 pages of that liquid 〈◊〉
〈◊〉 to me by my Cousin 〈◊〉.
My Lords the Senators, we here are come,
〈◊〉 ask for 〈◊〉 our victorious General,
In the behalf and 〈◊〉 of the 〈◊〉 Army,
The Office of the Consul, and expect
Your present answers to our just request.
We hope 〈◊〉 Age will be no greater bar
To him, 〈◊〉 it has been before to others,
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 but yet a youth, and 〈◊〉
No more, when they were both created Consuls,
And yet the State 〈◊〉 them of 〈◊〉.
We might 〈◊〉 the examples of great 〈◊〉
And Dolabella, but we hope it is needless.
〈◊〉 speaks the language of us all.
And the whole Army, Fathers, speaks in us.
〈◊〉 is your counsel 〈◊〉?
Marcus Tullius
Our 〈◊〉 at stake 〈◊〉 my opinion.
And would be ruined should we grant the suit.
〈◊〉 palpable.
We must not give such 〈◊〉
To this 〈◊〉 Youth.
I know not one
〈◊〉 all our Order will 〈◊〉 unto it.
The Tribunes are against it.
〈◊〉 too?
I, he especially.
And I.
And All.
〈◊〉 him good Minutius.
The Senators 〈◊〉 all 〈◊〉 the Army
To be a while contented with the honours
Already he 〈◊〉 on your General,
The worth / Caesar, and the States 〈◊〉.
When they shall judge it timely and convenient
He shall, I know it 〈◊〉, have both 〈◊〉,
And other dignities with a full hand.
While others rule, yet those that 〈◊〉 obey
Are no 〈◊〉 part of the Common-wealth then they.
〈◊〉 you may keep your sentences,
〈◊〉 they nor your fair language shall persuade us
To leave the prosecution of our suit.
〈◊〉 seems the Conscript Fathers are against it;
〈◊〉 this shall doe it, if the Senate Will not.
〈◊〉 traitrous 〈◊〉 dost 〈◊〉 threaten us?
〈◊〉 this?
So boisterous? then I 〈◊〉 a storm.
A 〈◊◊〉.
〈◊〉 heavy 〈◊〉
Must we expect from Caesars Consulship
Whose 〈◊◊〉 thus check this sacred Order?
What is the Senate yet broke up Philologus?
Yes, newly Madam.
Whore's my Husband Quintus?
Gone but to accompany my Lord your Brother
Home to his house, he will be with you straight,
For so he bad me tell you.
It is enough.
Why what a piece of idle Vanity,
Is Woman to be so inquisitive?
My ear now itches, till I hear the affairs
Debated in the Senate. — I have read
A very pretty fiction now I think on it;
How the first mover, being, cause, or Nature,
Or Fate or Fortune, call him what you will,
When he first framed 〈◊〉 fondling sex of Women
In his Promethean shop, did form the Heart,
The Mind, the Soul, or whatsoere you call
That inner Pilot of this 〈◊〉 Clay,
Of strange and various matters, whence they did
Derive their as strange qualities and conditions:
A slut was formed of as foul a sow;
A subtle Huswife of a crafty fox;
A gluttonous and lazy Crone of earth;
A woman turning like a weathercock,
With the fond wind of cross and foolish 〈◊〉,
Smiling and frowning oft-times in an hour,
As false as winter sun-shine or a shower
In summer, was composed of the Ocean.
And so of all the rest, but she whose 〈◊〉
Tingle as mine with this inquisitive itch,
Had, as the Fable fancies, for her 〈◊〉
A dog; but yet me thinks I cannot find
My self in all this brood; for though I have
A fond desire to hear, yet say I little,
I bark not, mine's 〈◊〉 harmless folly which
Is never like to change me to a bitch
Is it did the Trojan 〈◊〉.
Come, Fulvia, cease these sorrows, for thy husband
Has now shook off the chains that kept him down,
The frozen Alps have brought him to a Fortune
Which may weigh down the thought of past afflictions;
He's fellow General with Lepidus,
Nay, he alone rules all, and Lepidus
Has but the naked name and title only;
And now they have repast the Alps together,
With seventeen 〈◊〉, as I am informed,
Besides ten thousand Horsemen; nay Octavius
And he are now for ever reconciled;
Here's that will add Authority to my 〈◊〉.
Octavius is our own; confirmed, 〈◊〉.
By a more natural tie then Friendship.
How!
He must now call me 〈◊〉 for the daughter
Of Fulvia is decreed his Spouse.
indeed!
I, and Octavius too has past the Rubicon,
And is now 〈◊〉 hither with 〈◊◊〉.
So Cicero I think has lost his 〈◊〉.
Now shall my Husband Antony, and I
Be for his stabbing jeers at length revenged.
Peso I thank you, all my cares are vanished.
This woman's now secure, but I 〈◊〉 eyes
Which stay 〈◊〉 at the Superficies,
But pierce to the center and the 〈◊〉 of things.
I am afraid this friendship is 〈◊〉,
And but to compass his own ends. He creeps
Into acquaintance with Autonius,
That by his aid I doubt himself may 〈◊〉
A good success to his Ambitious 〈◊〉;
As first to seat himself 〈◊〉 the Consulship,
Next to root out the 〈◊〉 Chiefs
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Cassius; but will this bee all?
Will he sit still and on this height 〈◊〉
To six the pillar of his hopes? No, no,
Ambition cannot brook Plurality.
Only one Neptune in the Sea doth 〈◊〉,
One Jove in Heaven, and but one Dis in Hell:
Heaven, Hell, and raging Sea have each but one,
And He or Antony must rule alone.
〈◊〉 good Cicero, 〈◊〉 not 〈◊〉 to you
Nor love unto Antonius that I did it,
But pure devotion to my Countries cause.
But my 〈◊〉 hate of Antony
(I now confess it) blinded my discretion,
And carried me too 〈◊〉
Unto this dangerous planting of Octavius.
It was that I feared, and therefore did withstand you.
You favoured Caesar, and maintained his youth
In opposition of Antonius,
Lest Antony should get the upper hand;
I favoured Antony, and opposed your counsels,
Lest Caesar should ascend too high a pitch;
Your aim was to beat down a reigning 〈◊〉,
Mine to keep down springing Ambition;
Yours to oppress Antonius culminant,
Mine to suppress rising 〈◊〉; both
Good in the intent, though in 〈◊◊〉.
Sure some superior power has ordered this,
And made us instruments of our own subversion;
But this afflicts me most, that these 〈◊〉
Should happen at a season so unfortunate,
When Brute and Cassius are so far remote,
Nor furnished neither to oppose such 〈◊〉.
You look, good Tribune, as if horror dwelt
Upon your brows; what tidings Apuleius?
My Lord Octavius is directly coming
To the City with an Army of 〈◊〉 Legions;
Antonius too and Lepidus are come
With mighty forces into Italy
Only with this intent, to second Caesar;
The streets are filled with tumult and 〈◊〉
〈◊〉 run about not knowing what to doe,
Others remove their 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉
Into out-villages, or stronger places
Within this City.
Heaven defend us, Cicero,
Alas we are undone.
The Senate, Sir,
Is now in consultation of some course
Whereon to pitch. Your presence is expected.
No doubt it is; but 〈◊〉 absent my self,
The Conscript Fathers may themselves 〈◊〉
What's best in this necessitating 〈◊〉
For their own safeties, I should say the States,
But there the choice is crossed; as for my self
Nothing can come amiss. I've lived too long
To see this day. The Fathers foro't to 〈◊〉
(As now they must) to the ruin of their liberty:
O it is a corrosive to my soul to think on it.
It were good you two would 〈◊〉 and take your 〈◊〉
We will, and that with speed; Farewell.
Farewell.
Wee must bee speedy Fathers. What's counsels?
It were best in my opinion to dispatch
A message to him to present him with
The Consulship.
I, that's the 〈◊〉 way.
But the Armies fired for the late 〈◊〉
How shall we stay their 〈◊〉?
We'll decree
To the whole 8 〈◊〉 so much in
As wee have promised to the two.
How say you?
Are you content?
Content! we must of force.
See what the Tribunes say 〈◊〉.
They consent,
Forced by the same 〈◊〉 as wee.
Come then, let's 〈◊◊〉 the Legates.
How will this royal City now become
A 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉! and 〈◊〉 Senators
〈◊◊〉 a 〈◊〉 prey to rav'nous talous!
Will Caesar think himself secure, while men
So 〈◊〉 addicted to the State survive?
No; Tyranny's suspicious, 〈◊〉 unhead them,
Lest happily they should be get young 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉 what news?
What news! why Caesar's Consul.
〈◊〉 are sent unto him with the offer.
Heavenst what a tide of 〈◊〉 must Rome expect,
〈◊〉 she must list the 〈◊〉 to her own head?
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 were at home now! we would loose
〈◊◊〉 blood, before our liberty.
〈◊〉 happy you, which in the Mutiny sealed
〈◊〉 up your lives! you breath not with the rest,
To taint your 〈◊〉 glories with black 〈◊〉
To your own 〈◊〉 freedom; in soft peace
Rest your 〈◊〉 souls. But 〈◊〉 we,
〈◊〉 for one 〈◊〉, now are plagued with three.
〈◊〉, the Africa Legions 〈◊〉 arrived.
〈◊〉 Quintus?
〈◊〉 it is most certain.
Nay, then we will not on such feeble terms.
〈◊〉 with our Countries freedom, Salvius come.
What have we done my Lords? given up our 〈◊〉,
〈◊〉 the shedding of one drop of blood?
Twill grow 〈◊〉 custom for Ambitious men
To 〈◊〉 the offices of State, if thus
The Consulship be made a prey to force;
Nay rather 〈◊〉 oppose and bear the assault,
〈◊〉 Decimus or Plancus come and 〈◊〉 us.
〈◊〉 fight till our lifes 〈◊〉 breath be spent,
〈◊〉 then 〈◊〉 a gap for 〈◊〉
〈◊〉 before attempted with success.
〈◊〉 was, 〈◊〉 was that 〈◊〉 once in Rome,
When her brave Worthies would not stand aghast
At such a threatened storm as this, but 〈◊〉
The 〈◊◊〉 hand of that 〈◊〉 Jove
Durst 〈◊〉 once to raise it. 〈◊〉, what
Have we let 〈◊〉 and rust 〈◊〉 glorious edge
〈◊〉 that 〈◊◊〉 or is it only
〈◊〉 prisoned 〈◊〉 the sheath? let's draw 〈◊〉 out:
Nor fail 〈◊〉 Country, but uphold 〈◊〉 cause,
While we have hearts, and hands, like true-born Romans.
Fathers you were too forward 〈◊〉 dispatch
Of your Legation to Octavius.
You will repent it.
〈◊〉. Tullius, why?
The Africa Legions are arrived.
Arrived!
Then 〈◊〉 the Messengers be called back.
Fathers, I need not urge how bright and glorious
Is zeal unto the common cause. I know
You prize it as the jewel of your lives,
And you doe well; for it is a Music which
Will, like the note of the Caystrian bird,
Stick by you till 〈◊〉 latest gasp; and then
Be your good Genius mounting to the skies
Your winged souls, where being stellifi'd
You shall with shining Optics see how weak
A nothing is, this molchill earth 〈◊〉
Poor Mortals toil so; there you shall behold
How feeble, how ridiculous a madness
Is fond Ambition. But I lose my self
In this divine and pleasing contemplation,
Come let's dispose our selves for opposition.
With all our Hearts. Heaven prosper the at∣tempt.
How's this? the Senate so 〈◊〉? well.
Cornelius take some certain Horsemen with you,
Post to the City, and assure the people,
I come not with intent to raise a tumult,
But on fair 〈◊〉 of peace; make hast before,
And I will follow with all speed I can.
So studious Quintus in such times as these?
Yes, Madam, therefore cause the times are such
Though Caesar be a youth as well as I,
Yet he is one of deeper undertakings
Then can be sounded by such heads as mine;
Pray heaven they puzzle not the piercing judgments
Of our grave Senators.
And it is my prayer,
But what is it you are reading?
It is a book
My Uncle Marcus 〈◊〉 me to peruse.
You cannot better spend your mornings 〈◊〉
Then after his praescriptions. Time's a 〈◊〉.
`A day is like a costly ring of Gold,
`And morning is the Diamond of that ring
But tell me something which your book contains
Worthy our hearing.
Madam, the whole volume
Is like a gallery hung about with pictures
Of filial piety. Here on trembling shoulders
More famed then those of Hercules, which upheld
The heavenly orbs, one bears his aged father
Through midst of flames, and so conserves that being
Which was the Spring of his. Another bears
Her on his pious back who in her womb
Bare him. Here one sustains her mothers 〈◊〉
With the same food wherewith her own first breath
Was by that mother cherished; these were 〈◊〉
In Natures heaven, and have now an 〈◊〉
Not to inhabit only but to rule.
Yet that which makes me most admire, is this,
That the mute son of 〈◊〉 should unlose
The fetters tied by Nature to his tongue,
And cry, Kill not the King.
To save our Parents
Is the first law and dictate Nature writes
In our hearts 〈◊〉 Tables, therefore did she
Articulate the 〈◊◊〉
Of his chained tongue, lest by her fault that 〈◊〉
Should want its force and vigour in the 〈◊〉.
Methinks I envy the example.
What?
Would you your father should be so 〈◊〉
That you might save him?
No, not for a world.
But who knows what this age doth travail with?
True. But the 〈◊〉 coheres 〈◊〉 You,
The heavens be thanked for it, were not 〈◊〉 dumb.
Tic a great benefit; but yet me thinks
I could incarcerate, as he freed his voice,
To save a father. I could 〈◊〉 by bridling
As great a name, as he by giving reins
To stupid nature; such an act would come
Within the verge of praise, whereas his does not
Without the internals.
Go, you make me sad.
What Genius has informed my Quintus fancy,
That he still 〈◊〉 on such examples?
Pray heaven my husband never prove an object
For him whereon to exercise this piety.
Still doe I strive against the stream, and like
A silly 〈◊〉 mount the enraged 〈◊〉,
Which i I doe not poise my actions well
Will carry me away. We thought the Gods
By their auspicious providence 〈◊〉 sent
The Africa Legions to our 〈◊〉; but
They are revolted from us, and their Captains
Taken to favour. Only one 〈◊〉
Scorning to beg life from this second Caesar
Haslike a second Cato slain himself.
And I would follow him, but that the good
And safety of my Country is my Remora.
I will for the present 〈◊〉 Octavius favour,
It cannot be a stain to 〈◊〉
Since all have don't already but my self.
Have you made peace with Caesar?
I have sued it
By mediation of his friends, and now
Wait to accost him, sure he is at hand.
He is indeed; Hark how the people shout.
Health to the worthy and victorious 〈◊〉.
Fathers I thank you.
Hail to Noble Caesar.
My Honoured Father 〈◊〉
Tic too high a Title
For M. Tullius Cicero.
Now you wrong me,
The Parent of my country must be mine.
But yet I must be bold to tell you Sir,
You have been something sparing of your 〈◊〉;
You are the last of all my Noble friends
That come to welcome my return from Gaul.
O what awounding shout was this!
Tic even as baneful as the Mandrakes note,
The shricks of damned souls, the hiss
Of Scorpions, Adders, or the Sirens throat.
Let it be strangled, it is a sound
Will wake pale death from his Cimmerian Cell,
Twill rend a passage through the ground,
And bring the Furies from their Court of Hell:
The barbarous Thracians though they sing
Their dead unto their graves, would howl to see
So black, so venomous a sting
Enter the body of their State, as we.
For these are but Sardonian soniles
Which dance upon 〈◊〉 brows; this fading mirth
Will prove an Embryon, and beguile's
When wee shall find it still-borne at the birth.
O what a golden age w' enjoyed
Under the Reverend Saturnes of the State!
But now an upstart 〈◊〉 unboyd,
Unto an age of iron gives new date.
What power this ruin on us slings?
Julius is turned his Genius, we fear,
And lent him Tityus Vultures wings
To enhance the swistnesse of his proud career
If such a little time as 〈◊〉
Full 〈◊〉 Summers have a Consul bore
Of such a growth, so 〈◊〉;
〈◊◊〉 we think alas of twenty more?
Others when 〈◊〉 this sacred way
Of 〈◊〉, they had travailed but so far,
Would 〈◊〉 them down, and sagely say,
Death was 〈◊〉 unto a Consular.
But this young Minion of 〈◊〉 chance,
Like a skie-climbing Eagle still will tower
Until he shall himself advance
Unto a Sovereign Independent power.
Heavens! if it be your sacred pleasure
To put a period to our liberty,
O let the Sceptre know some measure,
That being servile we may yet seem free.
M. T. Cicero.
NOW we are past 〈◊〉, lost sor ever.
Our new-made Consul, made indeed, but not
Elected, for Election is an Act
Of Will net Voice, of an internal 〈◊〉,
Not outward sound; this Consul, whom our fears,
Not our Consents or Votes have 〈◊〉,
〈◊〉 o'er us like a full and pregnant 〈◊〉
Ready to pour a tempest on our heads.
Our forced hands delivered him the Are
To punish State-maligners, but alas
He whets it for the necks of our preservers.
I, only I am blamed: 〈◊〉 City;
They are not 〈◊〉 honours which afflict us,
But his new-〈◊〉 friendship with Antonius,
Which was the only rock my best endeavours
Were ever pressed to avoid, lest the Republike
Should suffer 〈◊〉 upon it. I thought the way
To keep him distant with Antonius,
Was to advance him to a requisite power
Of opposition: alas we but conjecture
And guess at the events of things; our knowledge
Cannot arrive to an infallible certainty
Of the success of matters; it is a 〈◊〉
Peculiar only to the Gods, and is
Derived to us, 〈◊〉 mortals, not by nature,
But extraordinary participation.
Since therefore it is the unknown event alone,
〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 of my soul, which 〈◊〉
The seeming good appearing in my counsels,
Why am I made the mark of accusation?
But 〈◊〉 the custom of the times, I will not
Deject my self for this; the innocence
Which I am armed with is enough to raise me
From such 〈◊〉, but yet I'm 〈◊〉
For the 〈◊◊〉 of my countries freedom,
For my Dear 〈◊〉, and the Noble 〈◊〉.
The other Consul Quintus Pedius
Has published a decree wherein they're 〈◊〉
With interdiction of Fire and Water.
Of Fire and Water! can they then constrain
The fountains of our eyes to cease their course?
Brutus shall have these waters, till we have wept
Their currents dry; and then our hearts shall send
Whole clouds of vapouring sighs to feed new showrs.
But as for fire, they want it not; their 〈◊〉
Cherish the flame of an unmoved real
Unto their countries liberty, which cannot
Be quenched but with their blood; this Caesar knows,
And therefore that he may with doubled power
Oppress the heroic bravery of their spirits,
Has reconciled Antonius and Lepidus,
Those two pernicious monsters with the Senate,
And now he is returned again toward Mutiny,
No doubt to 〈◊〉 with those two plagues, and there
Contrive the ruin of the Common-wealth.
For State 〈◊〉 think of nought but blood,
when they consult tic to devour the good.
Brother, How dost?
Think my beloved Quintus
I can be healthful when the State's 〈◊〉
Whereof I am a Member?
Alas tic true,
Too true; the Common-wealth's diseased indeed,
Sick 〈◊〉 the heart, faints, can no longer stand,
Lies bedrid, and like scarce Procrustes guests
Must be distended or abbreviated
To the pleasure of her Lord the worst of thieves;
For Caesar, Antony, and 〈◊〉,
Are met together not far off from Mutiny,
And in an 〈◊〉 round environed
With a small river, without any company,
Are as I hear consulting,
What a Hell
Will this poor City he, when such a 〈◊〉,
Like Minos, Oecus, and 〈◊〉,
Sit on the life and death of her best States-men?
Tic to be feared indeed they will play Sylla's.
But who can help it? if the Gods will 〈◊〉
Destruction on us, we must not complain,
For they're above us, and it were but vain,
For who can alter the decrees of fate?
Alas we are but mortal, and the State
Of this lifes pilgrimage is full of woe,
Better die once delivered with one blow,
And in ones countries cause, then living 〈◊〉
Wounded with sight of bloody Tyranny.
Now Quintus speaks like his own virtuous self,
This language melts me into fire and air;
I am sublimed, and ready to take flight
In ecstasy from this unwieldy lump;
Come, let's retire into my garden; there
Proceed in this divine discourse, twill make
My soul disdain with Earthly mould 〈◊〉
And raise her thoughts to immortality.
How full of fare and horror is this morning?
She comes not tripping on the mountains 〈◊〉,
But moves with drooping pace, and leaden heels,
Her eye-lids are not rosy, nor her brow
Gilded with that sweet beauty it was wont;
What has she changed colours with her 〈◊〉?
Or is she sick, and so has bound her head,
In this black vail of clouds? Alas, alas,
Tic lest her eyes behold our blacker deeds.
My self, Antonius, and Lepidus
Have, like the three Saturnian brothers once,
Amongst us shared the Roman would, as if
It were our own inheritance, and now
We must complot a Tragedy; the 〈◊〉
Must be culled out; shall 〈◊〉 then die?
Alas, how piety struggles in my breast.
This mouth, this tongue which now must speak his death;
Was wont to call him Father; shall I 〈◊〉
Become a Parricide? Suppose I doe;
He that aspires to govern without check,
Must set his foot upon his fathers neck.
It is a maxim long since practised
By Jove himself upon his father 〈◊〉.
But words oblige not to a natural 〈◊〉.
I did but call him Father; and if now
I yield consent unto his death, I doe it
As he is Marcus Cicero, a stranger
To Casars blood. But Cato thought him 〈◊〉
The honoured title of his Countries 〈◊〉.
And shall 〈◊〉 ruin so great worth?
Be still my melting 〈◊〉: He must die,
And therefore because he is his Countries parent,
He that is Caesars friend must be a 〈◊〉
Unto his countries freedom, which he prizes
Above his life, and for this cause must lose it.
Shall he then die? Ambition says he must.
But piety forbids; but Piety
Must not be sided with Ambition.
It must be so. Antonius shall have Cicero,
Antonius then shall give me Lucius Caesar,
And Lepidus shall yield his brother Paulus.
Ambition thus must thought of pity smother
Even toward a Father, Uncle, or a Brother. 
 Heavens! What a dismal time is this? the dogs
As if they were transformed into wolves,
Gather together, and doe nought but howl;
And wolves as if they were changed into dogs,
Have left the woods and traverse through the streets.
A Bull was heard send forth a humane voice,
An infant newly born to speak; A shower
Of stones descended from the troubled skies;
And in the air was heard the cries of men,
Clashing of armour, and a noise of Horses,
Shrill trumpets sounds; the statues of the Gods
Sweat drops of blood, and some were touched from heaven,
Many of the Temples too are Thunder struck.
Tyro were ever known such Tragedies?
Never was imminent calamity
Threatened to Rome, but it was thus ushered, Lours.
I might allege the wretched fall of Crassus,
When such a purple flood of Roman gore
Discoloured Lucans field.
But the not yet cured dire Pharsalian blow
Shall speak for all. Rome scarce ere knew a prodigy
Which was not praevious to that bloody day,
The Sun and Moon eclipsed, 〈◊〉 flames
Obliquely darted on the Italian shore,
The Vestal fire extinct, the Native gods
Weeping; State-changing comets, monstrous births,
The groans of Ghosts from out their troubled Vrnes,
With many more.
But the Hetruscian Soothsayers
Will descant better on these things then we.
Slight thou say true, and now I think on it 〈◊〉.
We'll try if we can search what they determine,
Sure they have done by this their immolations.
You the most Reverend of Hetruscian Vates,
To whom is known the births and deaths of States,
You who by art unlock the Pole, to whom
Is made apparent fates 〈◊〉 doom
By 〈◊〉 deep 〈◊〉, or by thunder,
A hairy star or some such boding wonder,
Inform us what the angry 〈◊〉,
Threaten in these 〈◊〉 prodigies,
But be not 〈◊〉, nor shroud
Your Speeches in 〈◊〉 dark mysterious cloud,
〈◊〉 did the Sibyls and the 〈◊〉, hick Nun,
〈◊〉 your inspired Numbers evenly run
With obvious and unfolded sense, that so
We 〈◊〉 conceive the essence of our 〈◊〉.
Then fathers, 〈◊〉 your dismal fate,
Your freedom shall be lost, your state
Converted to a Monarchy,
And all be slaves but only I
What means the Aged Prophet?
Fallen down?
〈◊〉 it some 〈◊〉 ecstasy or death?
〈◊〉 brother from his clay is slowne,
And 〈◊〉 your destiny with his own.
〈◊〉 happy he, 〈◊〉 now is blessed
With a true 〈◊〉 rest,
And shall not see the tide of 〈◊〉
Which on Survivors heads will 〈◊〉.
Like our brothers Vital 〈◊〉
Who now lies before us dead,
Your twine of 〈◊〉 is broke,
And 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 expect the yoke.
What the 〈◊〉 have made
A firm decree, and he hath said,
No humane power can disanull,
Tic signed in your speaking bull.
When Romulus first founded Rome,
He 〈◊〉 his Crown by Remus doom,
And built his Monarchy in blood;
Now shall return that antique power
Not 〈◊〉 with a shower
Of that salt 〈◊〉, but a sloud.
Well, what the fates have 〈◊〉, humane power
〈◊◊〉 of 〈◊〉 to cancel; if I dye,
(As sure my 〈◊〉 must help to make the 〈◊〉)
I will dye willingly; 〈◊〉 a noble death
Not to survive ones countries liberty:
If Gods might 〈◊〉 of death, then would they die.
The Soothsayers over the dead corpse sing this Song.
1 Brother, 2 Brother, 3 Brother, 4 Brother.
Art thou dead?
Art thou fled?
Art thou gone,
All alone?
To the shades below,
To the desert cells,
Where glooing darkness 〈◊〉,
And cloudy woe;
Where ne'er was known;
A cheerful tone,
Where wretched Souls
Like Stygian owls,
Have no joy of one another?
1 Brother, 2 Brother, 3 Brother, 4 Brother.
Thou art dead;
Thou art fled,
Thou art gone
All alone,
To the groves below,
Where sacred Quires
Inspired with holy fires
In triumph go,
Where songs of mirth
Are carolled forth,
Where blessed Souls,
In Nectar bowls,
Drink and solace one another.
O Vitam vere vitalem! sed beatam etiam mortem 〈◊◊〉 be atissimam vitam aditum 〈◊〉
Most true, for did we like savage beasts
Returning to a former 〈◊〉 being,
No one part of us free from dissolution,
Death were a plague, and did not harbour in it
The sweetness which they talk of; for I think
To be, is better, though in restless troubles,
Then not to be at all; it were senseless, impious
To say the power that's 〈◊〉 of Nature,
Infused into us such a love of Union
In this compounded frame; without some blessing
In the continuance; but a 〈◊〉 cessation,
A sinking into nothing, though it pains 〈◊〉,
Yet it is no blessing, nor can properly
Be said to take our cares and sorrows from us,
Or us from them, but rather and more truly
Us from our selves. I cannot think the Gods
Were so unkind, so sparing of their blessings,
Or feebly stored, as to bestow a Nothing
On the two pious sons of Orgies,
On Agamedes and Trophonius;
For, pray, what goodness can be couched in that
Which cancels being, that is one with goodness?
But doe we live then? can I think the soul
Survives, when in an urns forgetful chest
The mournful treasure of our Ashes 〈◊〉?
See how my panting struggling soul contends
To harbour the belief! Alas, me thinks
Tic no small argument to ground our hopes on,
To see how sweetly good men entertain
The weakest motion for a future life;
To see them, how even shaking hands with death,
They are more sprightly and replete with vigour,
Yea oftentimes oraculous, as if
Something lay caged within that was not mortal,
But were new rapt with joy of better state,
And even then seizing on Divinity,
When wicked men are full of 〈◊〉
Tortured with furies, which their consciences
Present them in the ugliest shapes: is it fancy?
Or is it a fear their sullied names will stink
In the nostrils of posterity? it is neither.
For if the first; why then are not the good
Subject to the same commotions, whose diseases
And bodily distempers are the same?
But if the second; then might they be free
To whose enormous actions darkness 〈◊〉
And secret Angels have been conscious;
Therefore by this it seems that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉,
Ixions wheel, and the Tantalian fruits
Are not mere bug-bears; but some mystic Em∣blames
Of the succeeding pains of guilty souls.
Thus have I argued, yea and 〈◊〉 satisfied
My own weak reason. Yet our great Philosophers
In the discussing of this weighty matter,
Fare much like naked men in stony fields,
They can with ease beat down another reasons,
But cannot save their own, alas, from falling;
They can offend a wise 〈◊〉
Weaken his grounds, but not defend themselves.
Whither, alas, shall our endeavours 〈◊〉,
When we are 〈◊〉 in knowledge of our end?
My Lord, there's one without would speak with you
From the Triumvirs.
The Triumvirs 〈◊〉?
Yes, so he says.
O from Antonius,
Caesar and 〈◊〉. Send for Quint. to me,
For Salvius, Otho, Publius 〈◊〉,
And other of my friends, you know.
I fly.
But charge none enter till they heat from me.
From the Triumvirs? have they then 〈◊〉
A new-coyn'd office? what will now become
Of those that have the old ones? what I why have
Their Reverend heads struck off like Tarquins poppy.
Brother, how is it you are here so soon,
Since it is but now I sent to entreat your company?
A Brother should not stay till he be sent for,
When he suspects his presence will be useful;
I had some doubtful notice of this messenger
Which now within waits for admittance.
Quintus,
How I am blessed in such a careful brother!
Thus when the Argive King was vexed with doubts,
And called a council of the Grecian Peers,
Only his brother 〈◊〉 came
Of his own free accord.
It should be so,
Why had we else one father, why one mother,
If not to live like brothers?
True, good Quintus,
I could even weep to see this piety
Flow so divinely from thee, now if ever
Our states require our mutual aids and counsels.
But what dost think this messenger may bring?
No good I warrant you, perhaps our deaths
Can we expect from those three Roman 〈◊〉
A milder sentence?
Why, I will embrace it.
Father and Ruler of the lofty sky,
What way thou please lead, and grant that I
May follow with no sad or grieved blood,
Nor like an ill man bear what fits a good.
Friends, you are welcome. You shall hear anon
Why you were sent for. Now call in the Messenger.
I 〈◊〉:, Sir, say Health unto your Lordship,
Until your self confirm it, which you may
As will appear by this,
Nay good my Lord,
Give these the hearing of it, for the affair
May crave their judgments.
Then you know it.
Partly.
Read you it 〈◊〉.
No, my mouth shall never
Speak my own Brothers sentence,
This is fond,
Pray heaven it prove so.
Will you read it Salvius?
You must excuse me Cicero.
Say you so?
Then Apuleius you must be the Man.
Sir, by no means, if your own brother dare not;
Pray pardon me.
Indeed! then read it you.
No: I my Lord, 2 Nor I, 3 Nor I, 4 Nor I.
Then Marcus Tullius sit thee down and read,
No doubt, thine own proscription.
Heavens defend!
M. Antonius Imperater, Augur, Triumvir, to M. Tullius Cicero, Consular, Greeting.
〈◊〉 the Triumviri M. Antonius, M. Lepidus, and Octavius 〈◊〉 (Ventidius being chosen Consul in his room
Ventidius Consul in Octavius room,
And he Triumvir? this afflicts my soul.
are for the space of five whole years appointed with full and absolute authoriy for the re-establishment of the Common∣wealth; and you Cicero are now in my hands; yet have I so mitigated my just conceived indignation toward you, that if you will but 〈◊〉 your Orations which you call your Phi∣lippicks, compiled only out of malice and rancour against me, you shall live; otherwise —
Yours, if perverseness make you not your own foe.
You shall be soon informed which way I am resolved to take.
Isle waite your Lordships pleasure.
Friends, here you see the slender twine whereon
My aged life depends.
Too true my Lord.
Your counsel brother.
Mine is resolute.
The better, let me hear it.
This it is; —
Defy him.
Hold, I hope you will not, Quint.
Be your own brothers heads-man, that but now
Could not be won so much as read the Letter,
Lest you should speak his sentence.
Good my Lord,
Preserve your self for better times; the State
Will lose its soul, when tic deprived of you.
Twill be a breathless trunk, a liveless carcass,
When you are gone; which were the only blood
And Sinews of her liberty.
Alas!
We shall be preyed upon by ravenous Vultures,
And those insulting Eagles of Ambition.
Think but of this when 〈◊〉 arise,
Where shall we find new Cicero's to oppose them?
Where shall oppressed and wronged Citizens
Find upright Patrons, that will stick to justice,
Not fearing to incur a great ones frown?
They may as soon climb up to heaven, and bring
Astray down again; unhappy Rome!
I do confess good friends the common-wealth
Will miss a Cicero; and that my brother,
If we respect the wishes of the people,
And wan•t of the Republic, has not yet
Lived half of half his time; but if we cast
A backward eye upon his glorious actions,
Has lived a goodly age, and cannot now
Die immaturely. Look upon the state
Of present things, the downfall of our liberty,
(And heaven knows what calamities will follow)
I think you cannot be so much his foe,
As not to say, he has now lived too long.
Ah! but the public good's to be preferred
Before respects of private consequence.
But Publius, the State is now so wounded
That there's no hope of cure, and therefore may
Our old Physicians safely give it o'er;
Were he an AEsculapius that could put
New life into a State, as once that son
Of Paean did to Virbius; I should then
Blaspheme Great Jove himself, should he but aim
His triforke flames against him; but for one
Now sinking of himself into his grave,
And such a one as Cicero, in these times,
When such men's ages are but vain, what sepulchre
Can be more fit, more glorious then the same
Wherein his countries freedom lies enclosed?
If he now die, hee shall be buried
With the renowned Pompeys, son and father;
With Catulus, Petreius, and Afranius,
Yea with Antonius that brave man, unworthy
His noble stock should bear so foul a branch.
But if he live, with whom I pray wilt be
But Capho's, Saxa's, and Ventidii?
Therefore good brother, (I confess my eyes
Doe swim with tears, yet shall my words proceed
From a courageous mind) be still thy self;
To the huge volume of Antonius faults
Add one crime more, even Cicero's death; twill stick
Upon his name with a more lasting blot
Then the most heinous of his other 〈◊〉.
For should his future deeds pronounce him 〈◊〉
To the great Alexander or 〈◊〉 son,
From whom he 〈◊〉 his vain pedigree;
Should after ages wonder at his Acts,
And say, why this, and this, and this he did,
Built such a City, conquered such a Country,
Thus and thus many times 〈◊〉, with Kings
And Queens to follow his victorious chariot;
Yet, for a period to each glorious sentence,
Some honest stander by will sighing say
But he killed Cicero; 〈◊〉 shall still
Much like 〈◊〉 Vulture rend and 〈◊〉
The very heart and liver of his name,
Let Antony proscribe thee, let him Marcus,
Why, he can do it but once, and that's some comfort;
But thou shalt proscribe him unto eternity;
It is not thy proscription he 〈◊〉
But closely 〈◊〉 a pardon for his own.
Believe me 〈◊〉, it is the 〈◊〉 part
Which can be given, or taken from thee; that,
That's the true Cicero which Antonius knows
Cannot be proscribed 〈◊〉 by Cicero.
If Antony deceive, and break his faith,
(As faith is 〈◊〉 me found in such as hee)
Then thou must die. Suppose he 〈◊〉 perform 〈◊〉
Then must you live a vassal to his 〈◊〉;
Now which is to be 〈◊〉, death or fervitude,
I leave it to your self, and your own judgment.
Yet my beloved Brother, by our Loves,
By thy now well-spent three and sixty years,
By thy renowned 〈◊〉, the sacred
And (if thou 〈◊〉) the everlasting memory
Of thy admired Eloquence, by these
And all that's dear unto thee, I adjure thee
Die not confessing that thou would not die.
Friends, I am bound unto your 〈◊〉, &amp; thank you
That not affection only, which were fond,
But the Republics good, has been the 〈◊〉
Of your persuasions. Well; I promise you
I will doe nothing unbeseeming Cicero.
Frame your hopes complement by this. I shall
Dispatch the messenger my self.
Good Cicero
Remember us and Rome.
We were not born
(Tic your own saying) for our selves alone,
Our Country claims a 〈◊〉.
Farewell, farewell,
Farewell my Friends; but 〈◊〉, let me have
Your company.
You shall.
Nay then I fear.
Come Brother Quintus, 〈◊〉 hast bravely argued;
Why weep 〈◊〉
Doe you then approve my 〈◊〉
I will unsay it.
Nay, thou shalt not, can not.
Come, come, let's in, thy self shall only hear
How I will send defiance to 〈◊〉.
What 〈◊〉 thou Tyro that my Lord admits
None but his brother Quintus to the delivery
Of his reply?
I cannot guess the reason.
Me thinks he should not bar their longing ears
The hearing, if he does intend acceptance
Of the Triumvirs proffer. But I fear
He does not prize his life at such a 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉, life is precious.
But honour more;
`And what is life?
Tic Natures gift. 〈◊〉. A poor
`And worthless jewel fastened by a hair
`To the ear of vanity.
It is the fair
`And sprightly shine of this compendious world.
And from what 〈◊〉 is that lustre hurled.
The soul. La. A short lived day, a twilight sun,
`Whose fading beauties cease when scarce begun.
`But honour is a day, that knows no night,
`And ever triumphs in immortal light.
I think Antonius might have done more wisely,
And might have sooner compassed his 〈◊〉,
If he had only sent him life, without
The intimation of those harsh conditions;
For so he could not in my slender judgment,
〈◊〉 such applausive terms have contradicted
The proffered benefit of his life, and then
I am persuaded fully that my Lord
Would ne'er have let posterity have known
His hate to Antony, from whom he should
Have deigned the acceptance of a slavish breath.
Come, prethy leave, I shall despair 〈◊〉,
Now I have sealed my fate, I must expect
The second message for my head. I must?
What, may not man unlock this Cabinet,
And free the heavenly jewel of his soul?
A wise man stays not Natures period, but
If things occur, which trouble his 〈◊〉,
Emits himself, departing out of life
As from a stage or Theatre, nor passes
Whether he take or make his dissolution;
Whether he do it in sickness or in health.
Tic base to live, but brave to die by stealth,
This is the daring Stoics glorious language
I was 〈◊〉 self too of the opinion once;
But now I find it impious and unmanly.
For as some pictures drawn with slender lines,
Deceiving almost our 〈◊〉 eyes,
Affect us much, and with their subtilties
Woo us to gaze upon them, but are found
By skilful and judicious eyes to 〈◊〉
In symmetry of parts, and due proportion;
Even so the Stoics 〈◊〉 are carved
With seeming curiousness, almost forcing judgment,
And carry with them an applausive show
Of undenial 〈◊〉 verity, 〈◊〉 well scanned
They are more like the dreams of idle brains,
Then the grave dictates of Philosophers:
The wise 〈◊〉 was opinioned 〈◊〉,
For most divinely he forbids us leave
The corps due guard without our Captains license.
And to speak true, we are but Vsufructuaries,
The God that governs in us is 〈◊〉.
A Prisoner breaking from his 〈◊〉 or hold;
If he be 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 his 〈◊〉;
If innocent, 〈◊〉 even that innocence
Which might perhaps have brought him clearly 〈◊〉.
Tic so with us; our Magistrate, I mean
The power that's sovereign of this natural frame,
Has sent us (Plato says from heavenly mansions)
Into this 〈◊〉 prison; here we live,
And must not free our 〈◊〉, but patiently
Expect our summons from that sacred power
By his 〈◊〉 Death. For otherwise
We become guilty of a greater sin
Then Parricide it self, no bond of Nature
Being so 〈◊〉, as of one to himself.
The Graecians knew this, when they judged the body
Of Ajax who had slain himself, unworthy
The common rites of burial. Careful Nature
〈◊〉 fenced our hearts about with certain bones;
〈◊〉 like swords; and shall we break the guard?
〈◊〉, rather 〈◊〉 us wait the will of the heavens,
And, when we hence are warned by their Ordinance,
〈◊〉 us 〈◊〉 with glad and joyful hearts,
And think 〈◊〉 selves delivered from a gaol,
Eased of gives and fetters, that we may
Remove unto our own 〈◊〉 dwelling;
For, without doubt, that power that gave us being,
Did not 〈◊〉 and foster us for this,
That having suffered on this stage of life
Thousand 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 calamities,
Quotidian 〈◊〉, and all in Virtues cause,
We should for guerdon fall into the gulf
Of an 〈◊〉 death, and non-subsistence.
〈◊〉, rather let us cherish this belief
That there's another haven provided for us,
〈◊〉 blessed 〈◊〉 for our longing souls.
Armed with a 〈◊◊〉 of this,
Like 〈◊〉 I will 〈◊〉 my death,
And with the 〈◊◊〉 spirit resign my breath.
〈◊〉 now? 〈◊〉. O 〈◊〉, there's no remedy
〈◊〉 die we must, or save our selves by slight.
Why, if the 〈◊〉 have so determined,
Welcome the easer of 〈◊〉 woes, 〈◊〉 Death.
〈◊〉 what's the matter Quintus?
The 〈◊〉
〈◊〉 posting with a threatening speed to Rome;
They come like thunder, and are bringing with them
A bloody tempest.
Who can help it brother?
Yet we'll incline the times malignity;
The heavens must not be tempted; we are to keep
This 〈◊〉 of our lives safe from invasion;
Why did they else entrust us with it? now
That cannot be without the use of means;
We must not look to escape the jaws of Scylla,
When by our own improvident carelessness,
We are 〈◊〉 already. He that thinks
Surrounded with his enemies to scope
(As Homer fables in the Trojan war)
Enveloped with a cloud, may be deceived.
No Quintus, we will fly, or, if that word
Be, as the Stoics prattle, not beseeming
A prudent man, we will give way to the times,
We will depart.
But whither?
Whither, Quintus,
But into Macedon to my dearest Brutus?
Prethy see all things suddenly prepared;
We'll first unto my house at Tusculum;
Thence to Astyra, so to Macedon.
I have a heart dares meet a thousand deaths,
But yet my soul is grieved to see these days.
Are all my labours come to this? my watchings?
My cares and services for the public good?
The dangers which I daily have incurred
By opposition of new-springing Tyranny?
Are 〈◊〉, all my endeavours come to this,
That they now seem to have precipitated
This ruin on us, rather then withstood 〈◊〉
Unhappy Rome! the Deities decreed
This downfall of thy liberty; for never
Could all our labours have been so pernicious,
Unless there had a greater power disposed them
To this sad end; which was the sole 〈◊〉,
Whence we directed thy now shipwrecked 〈◊〉.
This sinks me in a 〈◊〉 of grief, thy Senators
Shall die like Victims, Russians be the Priests;
And thou the Altar, in their wretched entrails
A dismal horrid augury shall be written,
Even thy eternal bondage to oppression.
Are all things ready?
Yes, or will be straight,
But the Triumvirs are not with such hast
Posting to the City, as I was informed,
Yet there are certain 〈◊〉 they say
Coming as Harbingers.
Believe me Quintus,
We have the greater reason to be packing;
These are the lightning previous to that thunder,
Whereof you spake before. And lightning strikes not
The humble cottage, but the 〈◊〉 edifice.
I see the loved objects which imprint
Those characters of sadness in thy visage.
Grieve not Pomponia, Thou 〈◊〉 happy, Sister,
Thou moist remain in thine own native 〈◊〉
No Antony thirsts for thy blood, thou moist
In peace adore the deities of thy country,
Yea and the Lares of thy private house;
When such as we, must leave our ancient 〈◊〉,
Yea and our Country to a heavier woe.
And that it is grieves me brother; what 〈◊〉,
What pleasure can I take in any thing,
When my beloved Quintus is departed?
My life will not be vital. O my Quintus.
Soul of my soul.
Pomponia, doe not weep,
Tears are an ill presage to such a journey.
What 〈◊〉 the Litters ready?
〈◊〉 my Lord.
My life Pomponia, now farewell.
Nay husband,
I'll see your setting forth, I will enjoy
As long as possibly I may thy sight,
Heaven knows if ever I shall see you more.
Nay Sister, now your grief is too 〈◊〉.
It cannot brother.
Yes, for though you 〈◊〉,
Thy loving spouse shall leave behind his 〈◊〉
WHere is that ancient beauty, Rome,
Was 〈◊〉 to shine
About thy head? 〈◊〉 are become
Those rays divine?
Survey thy Fortunes, stupid City,
Look, look and know
Thyself turned monument of 〈◊〉,
A map of woe.
〈◊〉 thou art deaf; well vaunting 〈◊〉
And tell't about,
It was thy once renowned hand
Thrust Tarquin out;
Proclaim it, Citizens, that you
Did Melius quell
That Cassius and Manlius too,
Your Victims fell.
Boast this, and more, doe, but withal
With horror say,
You did it only to install
Worse plagues then they,
That you one viper of the State
Have changed for 〈◊〉;
And for a worse Triumvirate
A Monarchy.
Alas, Alas, where shall we shroud
Our wretched heads?
For this threatening pendulous cloud
Wide ruin spreads.
Our ship upon a rock is cast,
Our sail yards 〈◊〉,
The Northwind has 〈◊〉 down our Mast,
Our sheets are torn;
Our 〈◊〉 too (alas!) are lost,
Oars have we none,
And that which grieves and cuts 〈◊〉 most,
Our Pilot's gone.
What helps, weak Vessel, on this shelf
Thy birth divine?
In vain, in vain, thou 〈◊〉 thyself,
A Pontick Pine;
In vain thou invocat'st thy two
Tyndarian Gods,
They aret' anticipate such 〈◊〉
Too weak by odds.
Then since poor 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 we must
Our selves compose
To bear each rigid storm, each gust,
Each wave that flows;
O let us pray, this dangerous 〈◊〉
Doe not become
A dead sea, or a sea of blood,
And its own Tomb.
Friends, you are welcome, why so sad, I pray?
Those looks be fit not feasts; invest your 〈◊〉
In the glad livery of smiles; be merry;
〈◊〉 is the only essence of a feast.
But ah, how ill do's this dissembled 〈◊〉
Suit with my 〈◊〉, or the times? I have
Invited you this night unto a supper,
The last, for ought I know, that I shall 〈◊〉
In your 〈◊〉 companies. Tic true;
The Tribuneship was ever till this day
〈◊〉 holy and of 〈◊〉 power;
But from those men which 〈◊〉 new 〈◊〉,
What must the old expect but foul misprision?
〈◊〉 Jove 〈◊〉 come down from his Olympus,
〈◊〉 shadowing his 〈◊〉 with a veil,
But in's most God-like majesty, I think
For one Lycaon, he might now find three,
And such that would with more unheard of savageness
〈◊〉 his 〈◊〉; not with some poor infant,
But even their Mothers flesh, I mean 〈◊〉 countries,
And stead of 〈◊〉 give him blood to drink;
You know how fraught 〈◊〉 zeal unto the cause
Of the Republic, I have now 〈◊〉
And quit that 〈◊〉 of villainous Rebellion
Ant 〈◊〉 party, and have 〈◊〉 to Cicero,
The 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 was ever blessed with;
And can I hope to meet with 〈◊◊〉
Then those who's only 〈◊〉 apparition
Has made him timely seek another 〈◊〉?
Which from my soul I wish he may obtain;
Nay rather if that good 〈◊◊〉 a shower,
I must expect a tempest; for our nature
〈◊〉 more in placably a declined friend
Then 〈◊◊〉 foe. Since therefore Antony
And his two 〈◊〉 plagues are now approaching,
〈◊〉 there are Centiners arrived already,
Their fatal 〈◊〉, perhaps, to extinguish
Those careful eyes, whose restless vigilance
Has been employed in service of the State,
(As sure they come to some such bloody end)
Let me enjoy you with the same solemnity
As parting friends take leave of one another.
Yet 〈◊〉 so nothing of the 〈◊〉 mirth
〈◊〉 your 〈◊〉; let's laugh away our sorrow,
We may 〈◊〉 with 〈◊〉 sup to morrow.
Come Soldiers, Salvius Otho, as I hear,
Is frolic with his neighbours at a feast,
We'll spoil their second course. You know the price
Whereat the heads are rated by the Triumvirs.
Come follow me.
Nay stir not, 〈◊〉, be still, and keep your places,
Lest your own folly make your selves copartners
In this mans fall, which must be sudden. — Tribune.
Now for Minutius.
Nay leave me 〈◊〉, I am still Minutius
Although disguised, and if you longer stay
Those very ensigns of my Praetorship
Will soon betray me, and perhaps the Axe
Which you there carry may strike off my head.
Alas, alas, but lest our too much 〈◊〉
Prove our own Lords destruction, let's be gone.
He cannot be escaped far, that's certain.
What should the Lictors else doe here? go search.
Yet M. Tullius, with whose execution
We were most strictly charged, is 〈◊〉,
With Quintus 〈◊〉. But the Colonel
Popilius 〈◊〉, and Herennius
I hope will overtake them.
Here's the head
Of that tall Poppy.
Why, it is bravely done.
Come, there are more such Cedars to be 〈◊〉.
They say the golden and the silver age
Was then, when frugal mankind was content
With those displayed riches, which the earth
Invests her self with, and her concealed entrails
Were not rent up in quarries deep as hell,
For those pernicious world-disturbing metals;
But sure this is the age of gold and silver,
When those two precious perils, are the poles
And hinges of the world, whereon it moves;
I might perhaps with my beloved 〈◊〉
Have been secure and safe, whereas being forced
For lack of 〈◊〉 to return, each step
I take, is ready to surrender me
Into the hands of death.
O Father, Father,
Your treacherous Servants have betrayed you, come
For heavens sake, come, death, death is at your heels.
Bring his son hither, though you sind not him.
〈◊〉 returned! I wonder whore's his brother.
Himself we cannot find, but here's young Queen.
Come yongster, whore's your father quickly tel me.
O that I knew, my ever honoured Sire,
The place of thy abode, alas; or whether
Thou art yet living, or hast now breathed forth
Thy sacred spirit! for a thousand pains,
My breast all gored with 〈◊〉, hands cut with chains,
Famine, or sword, or all should never move
Me make a rupture in my 〈◊〉 love.
Cease this dissembling language, and reveal him.
Or by the Heavens thou die.
No, villainous centurion 〈◊〉 life,
If I knew where my reverend father were,
That would 〈◊〉 it soonest. Tic my wish
I may soon quit this life.
With stipes, with wounds,
With torments worse then death; impetuous pains
Shall rend thy secrets from thy stubborn breast.
〈◊〉 these are nothing, threat more &amp; 〈◊〉,
Expose me to the ravenous Lyons paw;
〈◊〉 me into some common 〈◊〉, or Dungeon,
Wind off my flesh with 〈◊〉, doe and 〈◊〉
Young Vultures with the hits before my 〈◊〉;
Yet had I hid my father, as you deem,
I never would 〈◊〉 so dear, so sacred,
So glorious a treasure.
Take him thenee,
And torture this fond elf till he confess.
Above.
O what a virtuous son have I, was ever
Such piety in so few years? he dares
The extremest of their tortures, with a spirit
Constant as Virtue's self. See how they wrack him!
My melting bowels yearn within me; oh!
Each stripe they give him cuts my very soul.
See, see, they are even weary of tormenting,
And yet the youth still firm. O Piety!
What? whore's his father? has he yet confessed?
Confessed Centurion! no I will not, cannot,
I am not Juno's Iris, that my eyes
Should reach from hence to Macedon.
To Macedon?
Why his own servants say he is returned.
Such slaves as they that would betray their master,
If he were in their clutches; may not they
Cheat thee as well?
Tic folly to 〈◊〉,
What force shall soon unbosom: speak,
Where is he?
What's that to thee? I dare the worst, Centurion,
Thy malice can inflict.
Nay then I see
I must my self chastise you; come ye weasel.
Nay hold Centurion, here I am before you,
〈◊〉 the father whom you seek for.
Ah,
What mean you father, that you thrust your self
Into the jaws of certain fate? I could
Have spit desiance in the face of cruelty.
Though she had harboured in her friendlike looks
A thousand deaths.
Indeed I doe believe it,
And let me kiss thee for thy piety;
But old unfruitful stocks must be cut down,
When their decaying, and now sapless heads
Keep off the quickening sun-beans from the young
And hopeful tenderlings which they overtop.
Suppose, my son, I had still lived, and thou
Been made a prey to their relentless rage,
I should have died too: for my 〈◊〉 loins
Are dry and barren; but in thee my son
I shall survive my self.
Ha, ha, ha!
I hope you doe not mock at my calamity.
Survive in him? I, so you shall, and both
Be ferried o'er the Stygian lake together.
What! must my son then die? what has he done, Alas?
〈◊〉 crime enough to have a life.
Then kill me first, for sure I shall anticipate
Your bloody hands, if I but see him slain.
Nay on my knees with suppliant 〈◊〉 I beg
I may die first, it is a boon I shall
Prize even above my life.
We'll soon decide you controversy, you shall die together.
Take 〈◊〉 the bodies and unhead them quickly.
A princely gift, by Jove; Popilius Laenas,
Thou hast now played the royal butcher, on;
And let Antonius bless his longing eyes
With sight of such a welcome present. Ha!
Is this that Cicero's head that thundered so
In our Tribunals? Ha! is this that mouth
Was wont to spit such lightning? or are those,
Those hands which meanwhile thumpt our Rostra so?
I, even the self same head, and mouth, and hands.
Then Antony triumph, thy foe is dead,
The trophies of his fall, these hands, this head.
Dire, horrid, bitter fates! did Rome ere see
A cruelty of such a high degree?
Whose griefs shall I first publish? thine,
Unhappy Widow? or the states? or mine?
Thine that hast lost so excellent a brother?
The States, that cannot now produce another,
So reverend a Patriot? or mine own,
That have now lost so good a Lord? I groan
Under the burden of my loss, nor can
Summon the 〈◊〉 character of Man
Into my wounded breast.
Come, Lours, come,
Expoand the series of his death; my heart
Is turned adamant, I cannot weep,
Stupidity has seized me, and me thinks
I feel a kind of pleasure in the story
Of woes complete and perfect, I am even
Transformed to a statue: Small griefs mourn,
But great ones, such as mine, much like the head
Of the deformed Gorgon, turn to stone,
And make us our own sepulchres.
Good Tyro,
Tell thou the Tragic story, for my voice
Is strangled by a throng of struggling sighs,
Crowding from out my wounded breast.
Then thus.
Departing hence we went to Tusculum,
Where hearing of these Outlawries and proscriptions,
They suddenly determined for Astyra.
So we conveyed them both into two Litters
Weak as they were alas; but on the way
Your husband calling to his sad remembrance
That at his fatal setting forth he took
But little money with him, and his brother
My Lord had scarce sufficient for himself;
He thought it best in such an urgent straight,
His brother should hold on, while he himself
Returned home to furnish him with necessaries,
And so to hast and overtake him; this
They both agreed upon, and so embracing
Tears trickling down their cheeks, they took their leaves
Of one another.
Thus departing souls
Doe bid adieu unto their fading mansions,
For never nature strove so much, as when
This honoured pair sighed forth their last farewells.
It was a sad Omen that they ne'er should meet.
My Lord being come at length unto Astyra,
Found a ship ready and embarked immediately,
And with a fair and prosperous gale of wind
Sailed along the coast unto Mount Circa,
And there he landed; but on other thoughts
He went aboard again, for it was his mind
To be conveyed by sea unto his farm
Which is by Capua; but before we landed,
Bowing securely by the pleasant shore,
Our linens swelling with the Etesian gales,
Which in the Summer season fan that tract,
A shoal of Crows came waving through the air,
As we conjectured from a little Temple
Standing upon the shore, and dedicated
To God Apollo; these most strangely crying
Lighted upon our Saleyards, with their bills
Pulling the cords, which made our heavy hearts
Presage some sinister and dismal luck
Then imminent, yet being come a land,
We brought him to his house, where he reposed
Himself a while, to see if he could sleep.
Unhappy sleep! for straight this drowsy brother,
Was seconded by his pale sister Death.
But lo, the former shoal with louder cries
Came hither also, beating against the windows,
Till some of them got in, and never ceased.
Till with their bills they had plucked off at length
The clothes wherewith his face was covered.
We, seeing this, were angry with our selves
As too too negligent of our Masters safety,
Saying we were more vile then savage creatures,
Should we still tarry in that fatal place,
And see perhaps our Lord, before our eyes
Cruelly butchered, wherefore with all speed
Partly by force, and partly by entreaty,
We cary him again unto his Litter
And so in hast departed toward the sea;
But being come into a shady wood
Which the Sun never pierces with his beams
To glad the widowed earth.
A place decreed
By fate, I think, for such a villainy;
For should the Sun have seen so foul an act,
〈◊〉 would have turned retrograde, and hid
His visage from such cruelty.
Well here,
In this same gloomy canopy of horror,
Popilius Lanes overtook the Litter.
Who, he whose cause my brother Marcus one e
Pleaded before the Judges, when he was
Accused for his fathers death?
The same.
We stood prepared to spend our dearest blood,
Before we would have seen our Master 〈◊〉;
But ah! my Lord commands us not to stir,
And to speak truth, it was in vain, foot 〈◊〉
Had armed Soldiers with him, and was followed
By other Centiners. Then, O then my Lord
Thrust out his aged head from forth the Litter,
And taking, as his manner was, his beard
In his left hand, and looking manfully
His Headsman in the face, he stoutly feed,
Come Soldier, come, strike off this head of mine.
We stood like statues with our trembling hands
Before our wretched eyes, for it would have struck
A Tiger with remorse to have beheld him.
Then 〈◊〉 with a thrice repeated stroke
Hacked off his head; there was scarce blood enough
Fell from those aged veins to stain the sword,
And prove it conscious of so foul a murder.
Thus was divided from his breathless trunk
That sacrary of Learning, where the Graces,
Graces that never had a Cytherea
To be their Mistress, moved in their right spears.
Where Harms was enthroned, that winged Patron
Of heaven-born elocution, but without
His silching Art; for that State-piracy
The bribing Science was as far from him
As Themis self; where Pallas too was lodged,
Not she that strove with Venus for an apple
On the 〈◊〉 hill, but such a one
That deemed externals but as chafe and dust,
In 〈◊〉 of inward beauties, which in form
The Intelligences of our souls, and make them
Comply with Heaven and Immortality.
Lastly, where all the Deities invested
In their divinest purities, did dwell.
As it were in a compendious Capitol.
But Cicero's reverend head was not enough;
The hands that wrote those glorious Philippics
Must be cut off too.
Those illustrious hands
Which once held up this tottering Common-wealth,
And see her on her feet, when she was falling
From her proud orb into a gulf of Fire.
That head, those hands, are both divorc't, &amp; severed
From his now moldred 〈◊〉, and no doubt
Are by this time Antonius game and sport;
For Laenas posted with them to the City.
Why, here's a story at whose sad 〈◊〉,
Democritus might change his laughing humour
And side with 〈◊〉. As for me
I cannot weep; but Lours, prethy tell me
How came Popilius to find you out?
Me thinks he could not, without information,
So shrewdly light upon the self same way
Which you had took before him; was it fate?
It was fate, that's certain Madam, it was, but 〈◊〉
There was an engine which the Destinies
Did make their agent.
Whom?
Philologus.
Philologus?
I, he betrayed your brother.
The Oracle from which he learned the mysteries
Of pure Philosophy. He, he it was
Who, being left behind us at the house,
Revealed the way we took unto the Colonel.
And whore's the villain?
Brought by Laenas hither
To be rewarded of Antonius
As for a service of egregious merit.
I, so he shall, I'll see his wages paid.
Come Tyro, since our day is set for ever,
We'll live like owls, those Citizens of Night.
Like Owls indeed, but like Athenian owls;
Thou shalt sublime thy pen, and write the life
Of our deceased Lord, that spotless life,
Which Virtue's self might mahe her meditation.
Tyro thou shalt, and I poor Lours, I
Will sit and sigh forth mourning 〈◊〉
Upon his death, he while he lived good man,
Delighted in my Muse, and now my quill
Shall consecrate his name to the Muses hill.
〈◊〉, it was nobly done, and thou hast well
Deserved that crown which circles in thy Temples.
The head of Marcus Tullius Cicero 〈◊〉
Why it is a Kingly present, Ha, ha, 〈◊〉
To me.
Rub and a good cast. Ha, ha, 〈◊〉
Bravely bowled, 〈◊〉 faith.
Come up here.
Now I'll be revenged
For your tart nipping jeers — yes Reverend Sir,
Fulvia's indebted to the State: — too long.
The no whit covetous wife of Antony,
Whom you describe without all contumely,
Owes the third pension to the Roman people.
Indeed! but does she? yes, nor will I wrong
The people of their due, the debt's thy tongue.
〈◊◊〉. I war 〈◊〉 him for barking now.
I will make better foot-ball then a bowl.
Have at 〈◊〉, (Coytes the hands to the head.)
Take them good Popilius,
And place them on the Rostra, where he vomited
His Philippics against me. Let his head
Be set betwixt his hands, twill be a brave
And goodly spectacle.
I will my Lord.
Doe 〈◊〉 stab it; give it as many wounds
As Julius Caesar had, whose 〈◊〉 murder,
〈◊〉 worm extolled as an heroic deed.
Well I must leave you for a while to meet
My Colleagues, 〈◊〉 and Octavius Caesur.
That such a paltry thing as this should make
So great a bustling in a Commonwealth?
I heard my husband once compare his lungs
To Vulcans bellows, and his head to AEtna,
His words to 〈◊〉, and this his tongue to fire.
But now I think it is quenched, 〈◊〉 burns not now;
Nay, it is as cold as stone, no thunder in it,
No lightning flies from it. Sure this is not that
Herculean tongue that lately was so weighty.
That 〈◊〉 could 〈◊〉 such Giants of the State
As it hath done to Nothing. Yes the same.
Then Fulvia march along, and 〈◊〉 fear,
Thou 〈◊〉 that 〈◊〉 upon thy silver spear.
Anger will give me strength, Bloody Antonius
Thou shalt not thus evade; as once the stout
And stern 〈◊〉 foiled the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉,
Or as the enraged Maenas armed with 〈◊〉,
With 〈◊〉 directed by inspired force,
〈◊〉 the woods, and quite distract makes gush,
The blood which she perceives not; will I rush
Upon these 〈◊〉 Cannibals; if I die
I shall enjoy my Quintus company.
Alas, alas! what foolish rage is this?
We must appeal 〈◊〉 heaven when we are wronged,
And not be our own carvers, Such State〈◊〉
Must have a 〈◊〉 to curb them. Yet 〈◊〉,
That traitrous 〈◊〉, that ungrateful 〈◊〉,
〈◊〉 not my husbands 〈◊〉,
〈◊〉 the divinest precepts of my brother,
Could keep within the bounds of faith and piety,
He, he shall 〈◊〉 if I live, 〈◊◊〉!
Cruel 〈◊〉, though thou hast unlived
My honoured husband, my beloved son,
Though thou hast slain my brother, and with him
Rent up the very groundwork of our Capitol.
And shown more cruelty to those sacred 〈◊〉
Of his dissolved corps, then Victory
Did perpetrate on the AEmathian Perseus
On the triumphed Jugurth, and King Syphax,
Or Hannibal himself, not one of whom
Was sent defective to the lower shades
With members violated, yet I come not,
Like the poor widowed Hecuba, to 〈◊〉
And tell thee to what depth thou hast 〈◊〉
The laws of goodness, and religious Nature,
Making thy self the hate of men and Gods,
Nor doe I come to beg thy infamous sword
To rip that womb whose fruit thou hast destroyed,
Though I would 〈◊〉 my destiny. No Antony,
But only to put up a fair Petition,
Whose grant will somewhat wipe away the rust
Which sullies thy bad name, and make 〈◊〉
Say thou 〈◊〉 something worthy of a Roman,
And thy renowned stock; and this it is,
By all that's 〈◊〉 unto thee, I beseech 〈◊〉
Shelter not treason, but deliver me
The villain that betrayed my brother 〈◊〉.
Philologus?
I, 〈◊〉 Sir.
Bring him forth.
Though such a treason was expedient,
Yet such a Traitor must not live.
My Lord,
You are most just 〈◊〉.
So says Lepidus.
Tic god-like equity.
Pomponia take him, he's at your disposing.
You heard that, Varlet, now you're mine again;
I'll make you 〈◊〉 to a more hellish vulture
Then that of Tityus, thou thy self shalt slice
Thy own foul flesh by morsels off, and make
Thy own gaunt entrails thy own sepulchre;
Nay it is in 〈◊〉.
For heavens sake, good my Lord.
My Lord, the Tribune Publius Apuleius
Is with his wife escaped away by flight.
No matter, my long wished for aim is won,
And Cicero slain, the whole prescription's done.

GO, and surround the shady woods, and those
High cliffs, which do impale the mountains brows
Disperse, and with your quickest speed descry
Those ragged quarries under Parnes tie
View the Thriasian vales, and banks which are
Worn by the force of rapid torrents, there
Clime up these hills, which with obdured snow
Are ever crowned. Some of you this way go
Where the high aldars into arbours tie
The woods, where those embroidered fields do lie
Which 2 Zephyr, quickening with his dewy breath
Decks with those flowers he called from beneath
Where smooth 3 Ilissus runs flanked on both sides
With Icicles, where slow 4 Meander glides
Ore the equal fields, and frets the sterile shore
Run with unprofitable waters ore.
Take you the left path, whence the woods descried
To 5 Marathon, where beasts, accompanied
With flocks of yonglings, do their stomachs right
Grown bold by the protection of the night.
Go you more Southerly, and take the way
Leads to frost-thawing 6 Acarnania.
The rock of sweet 7 Hymetus you: the small
8 Aphidnae you must visit; this Part shall
Yet rest, where the embowed Ocean doth
On 9 Suniori beat it self into a froth.
Whoever hath a soul with Glory fired
Him 10 Philalis doth call, Lo here retired
Lies the scarce Boar, the labouring Husbands fear
But too well known, now by those wounds they wear
Slip you the silent dogs, and you restrain
The impatient courage of the Molossian:
And let the struggling Cretensian Bitch
With her bald neck the stubborn Collar stretch.
But have a care that straighter couples hold
The fiery Spartan, for the dog is bold
And eager after game, the time draws nigh
The caves shall Echo back, the deep mouthed cry
Now may they, while the dawning lasts, while yet
The dew retains the figure of their feet,
The air examine with a curious guest,
And on the nose run to the holds of the beast;
While he, bowing beneath the burden, bears
The more unused, lay you the lesser snares.
The painted counterfeit, from thence will speed
The frighted Beasts, into our toils indeed
Do you a light and missile javelin shake,
But you in either hand a Boar-spear take
And so employ your might, in ambush laid
Drive you the game, by your loud cries dismayed
Headlong into our nets; and as for you
Disembowel what we happen to subdue!
Assist sacred 11 Virago, for thou art
Sole Queen of the worlds solitary part:
Thy never-erring shafts the Beasts doe slay
That drinks the 12 cold Araxes, or doth play
In frozen Ester: Cretin Harts by thee
And Lybian Lions persecuted be▪
Now lightly wound thou the flying Buck
To thee, the spotted Tiger to be struck
Proffers his breast; Thou for thy ease may take
The Buffs broad horns, or the Bulls humbled back
Whatever feed in deserts, whether they
Be known to the rich-grov'd Arabia,
Or needy Garamas, let their abodes,
Be in Pyrenean Cliffs, or Hircan woods,
They and the vagabonding Scythians bear
To thy Artillery an awful fear.
Whose Piety hath thee's Associate made,
Broke by no feet, his nets have fettered
The captived Beasts; the Cart hath seemed to groan,
Under the weight of the brave prey thereon.
Then the Dogs Snouts in blood are died, then come
The glorying Huntsmen, as in Triumph home.
Hearken, my Dogs do spend, and the hot cry
Assures me I have pleased her Deity.
I'm summoned to the woods, this way Isle take
Whereby I may the shorter journey make.
O 1 Crete, great Sovereign of the Seas that be
Replete with ships, on each side coasting thee,
All such as plough the Deep, and cut their way
Thorough these Floods, open to Assyria;
2 Why am I hostage, where I hate? or why,
Given in Marriage to my Enemy,
To be drawn out in misery and tears,
Hast thou condemned the remnant of my years?
My wandering Husband absent Theseus hath▪
Not in his Marriage, lost his wonted faith.
Champion to an 4 audacious Sultor now
The Hero stalks in the dark below;
Plucked from the throne of the infernal King
These mad-men Proserpine again will bring.
Nor fear, nor sense of shame restrain him: Thus
The glorious Father of Hippolitus.
In Hell it self endeavours to meet
With lowless pleasures and forbidden sheets.
But (ah) I am with greater weights oppressed
Not from my cares by Night or sleep releast:
The Ill is nourished, which too fast doth grow
And burns within; so vapours straitened flow
From the womb of 5 Aetna idle stands
The loom, the shuttle falls from my hands.
Now in their Temples do I take no care
To bribe the Gods with vows to hear my prayer
Nor twixt the Altars, joined with Attic Dames,
Shake in those silent Duties conscious flames.
Nor 6 with chaste Prayers, and pious rites draw near
The Goddess, that Praesides by 7 conquest here.
I rather would pursue the roused beast
My soft hand with a rugged javelin pressed.
O! whither will my vexed soul? Alas,
Why Frantic, doe I thus affect the chase?
8 My mothers crime was fatal now I prove
And in the Woods have placed my sinful Love.
Mother, I doe repent thee now. Thou took
A Bull, wild, and impatient of the yoke.
Distempered with thy ill, thy lust preferred
The Fierce Conductor of the Salvage herd▪
Yet did he something love: What God can ease▪
What Dedalus can quench such flames as these
Should he return, whose powerful Art did build
The Labyrinth my Brothers Monster held
He could not help, my case admits of none
Venus offended with the tell-tale Sun,
9 On us his off spring doth revenge the Gives
She, and her Mars sustained, who ere derives
Her self from Sol, Venus depraves her mind
None dead with Love, but Love and impious joined.
Thou wife of Theseus, and the 10 child of Jove
From thy chaste breast drive this unseemly Love:
Quench me these Flames, nor yield to such a hope
As may affright thee. He who gives a stop
And a Repulse to Love at first, hath bin
Victor, and Safe: who cherishes the Sin,
Too late denies to undergo the yoke
Himself put on: Neither am I mistook
In Princely tumors, how the stubborn mind
Scorns truth, and will not be to right inclined,
The Fates decrees are welcome, who are old
To see their end approaching grew more bold.
First wilt to oppose, nor falter in that will,
It is next to modesty to know in ill
A measure. Wretch! what wilt thou do? Ah, why
Dost thou increase thy houses infamy,
And overact thy Mother? this exceeds
Her sin, and more than monstrous be thy deeds.
For to compulsive Fate we attribute
Monsters, but sins to manners we impute
Think thou thy crime more safe and void of fear
Because 11 Theseus sees not what is acted here?
Thou art mistaken, for suppose he dwell
For ever there, doomed to a perpetual Hell.
What will thy 12 Father doe▪ thy Father aws
The Sea, and gives a hundred Cities Laws:
And Parents are quick-sighted; What will he
Wink at so horrid an Impiety?
But grant our craft, or circumspection might
Conceal it from him. What will that great Light
Of all things, Father to thy Mother doe?
What the Gods fruitful Seminator, who
As he his Thunder brandishes, doth shake
The trembling world? are these like to mistake
Can thou yet hope unseen, to keep thy crime
From these All-seeing Grandfathers of thine▪
But say the fav'ring Deities should hide
The fact, and (as it does great sins betide)
None credited thy incest: yet thou'lt find
A present pain, a self accusing mind,
With horror big, and of is self afraid,
Some unrevealed, none sin unpunished.
Bridle thy impious love, a crime which yet
No barb'rous Nation ever did commit:
To Gods, and Scythians, and those who on
Inhospitable Taurus dwell unknown.
From thy chaste breast expel these strange desires,
Thy Mother warns thee from such uncouth sires:
Shall Son, and Father have one common bed,
Thy impious womb filled with a mixed seed?
13 Well, doe; with thy illicite flames make war
Against Nature, and impose new Laws on her.
We are at want of Monsters, and of late
Thy Brothers Court (alas) is desolate!
Shall unaccustomed births the world appal
And Nature be as oft unnatural
As a Cretins shall love?
I know dear Nurse,
Your counsel's good, but I must follow worse;
Fury compels: Wittingly I stray,
Striving in vain my judgement to obey▪
So when an over-burdened ship receives
The unwelcome Buffets of encountering waves,
Vain is the Seamans toil, in spite of them
The Vessel goes with the prevailing stream.
Love reason vanquishes, and countermands
Nor will admit a Rival where he reigns,
His Kingdom is the World, he hath great Jove
Scorched with the unruly flames of Love.
Fired the breast of the stern God of war.
And the dread-thunder-forging Mulciber;
He, who in Aetna, doth for ever turn,
The glowing Embers with a spark doth burn
Phoebus himself who aims his shafts so true,
By the more skillful Boy is wounded too.
Gre•vous his power in Heaven, in Earth the same.
Lust fav'ring Vice did first this Godhood frame
And that it might the greater freedom have
The name of Deity to fury gave.
Condemned (forsooth) by Venus for to live
Thoroug• the World a restless fugitive
He, as he through the yielding air doth fly,
Fashions his troublesome Artillery;
And now this Little one so great is grown
The Gods submit to his dominion.
These Vanities were feignd: Some guilty mind
To her a Godhood, him a bow assigned.
Swelled with prosperity who flows in Vice
Not daining to admit one pleasure twice;
Lust the companion of great Fortunes waits
On him: he is not pleased with wonted cates
Firm-builded houses, nor your grosser meat.
Why doth this Pallace-haunting plague retreat
From humble roofs? a pious Love dwells there:
The Vulgar have affections void of fear.
Princes, and rich men will have more than right
When meaner men can cu•b their appetite.
Who but too much can doe, yet would that he
Could more. Consider thou thy quality
And thy returning Husbands Sceptre fear
Alas Love sways his powerful Sceptre here
And I fear no returns, none gone from hence
To the dark house of death find passage thence.
Be not too credulous, say the gates of Hell
Were shut, and Cerberus the Sentinel:
Theseus hath forced the way hath bin forbid.
Yet he perhaps would pardon, if did.
Why He was cruel to a wife was chaste
14 Antiope can testify his hast.
But grant we might appeal thy angry Spouse,
Yet who can move the stern Hippolitus?
He doth abhor the very name of wife,
And obstinately vows a single life.
Marriage he shuns, an Amazon thou knows.
Stay, he in mountains crowned with frequent snows,
Or fly he over the sharp rocks; I will
Follow him through the woods, and ore the hills.
Will he be tempted who resisted Love?
Will he chaste pleasures for unchaste remove?
Be kind to thee, for whom (perhaps) alone
He hates the sex?
With prayers he may be won.
Hoe's cruel.
Love tameth the cruel too.
He will fly.
Fly he by Sea, I will pursue.
Remember thou thy Father.
We doe call
Our 15 Mother too, to memory withal.
All woman-kind he hates.
I am the more
Secure, of being rivaled with a whore.
Theseus will come.
And 16 Pyrithous together.
Thy Father'l come.
What 17 Ariadnes Father.
By these dear breasts, by these time-dyed hairs,
And by this bosom over-worn with cares,
I pray thee have compassion on thy self.
For to desire it is a piece of health,
I have not lost all shame: Nurse I obey.
The Love I cannot rule I conquer may.
Thou shalt not suffer in thy Fame; this is
The only reason bridles my amiss.
18 My Husband will I follow, and prevent
My sin by death.
Dear Madam, some restraint,
Give to these passions▪ I the more esteem
Your life, because you do your self condemn.
Yes, dye I will: but whether halter, knife,
Or leap from Pallas tower conclude my life
I know not yet. Oh that my chastity
Can only guarded by selfe-ruine be.
What think thou me? so impotent my age
To suffer this? yet moderate thy rage.
To such as merit, and resolve to dye
Reason in vain doth urge the contrary.
Thou only comfort of my aged years,
Since so perverse, a fate thy will ore bears,
Contemn thy fame. Fame speaks not as it should
Good to the bad, and bad unto the good.
Let us aslay him, and this Nature prove,
So froward, so intractable to Love.
This labour shall be mine; Isle undertake
The Stubborn youth, and exorable make.
1 GOddess, the off-spring of the troubled flood,
And Mother to as troublesome a God,
2 The twined Cupped; with what a certain aim,
Alike immod'rate in his flames and them,
The boy his shafts doth level! the disease
Creeps through the marrow and impoverishes
With an insinuating fire the veins.
The Wound appears not in scars, but pains
Within, ransacks the very bones; this boy
To peace is a professed enemy.
Thorough the world, his shafts are nimbly thrown,
Those Coasts that first salute the rising Sun,
Or •id him last good night: those that do sweat
Under the torrid Crabs consuming heat,
And those which doe beneath the cold Bear freeze,
Peopled but with uncertain Colonies
Have felt these flames; in youth he blows the fire,
Revives age-extinguished desire
In crazed limbs, and the cold Virgins snow
Melts with a warmth her bosom doth not know.
At his command the Gods forsake the skies,
And borrowed shapes obscure their Deities.
Phoebus his harp lays by; unequal reeds
3 Gather the herd he in Thessalia feeds.
4 How often hath the cloud-dispelling Jove
Bin clothed in the meanest shapes for love?
Now like a Swan he claps his silver wings,
And sweeter than the dying true one sings.
Now like a wanton Steer in play doth take
The Royal Virgin on his humbled back,
With his oare-imitating feet he ply•s
His 5 brothers waves, and unknown Realms descries;
He breaks the Sea with his opposed breast,
Of his fair Rape, feared to be dispose.
The clear-fac'd Goddess of the night hath burned,
And over her forsaken Ch•riot turned
To her unskilful Brother; now the Sun
Doth learn to drive two horses, and doth run,
A shorter course; day rises slowly, and night,
Keeps no proportion with the wronged light
Retarded by the unaccustomed weight▪
7 Alcides hath his quiver laid aside,
And the N•maean Lions dreadful hide;
Now he the Emra•lt to his finger fits
And his neglected hair in order fits.
With gold-embroidered buskins he doth bind
His legs, his feet, in yellow socks contained,
And with that hand in which the club was born
He twists the thread, and doth the spindle turn.
Persia, and fruitful Lydia saw the skin
Of the fierce beast lye by rejected then;
And those huge shoulders, which did once support
And serve for pilla•s to the heavenly Court,
Clad in a Pall with Tyrian purple died,
The fire is sacred, (credit those have tried)
And but too potent; for as far as land
By the salt Ocean is invirond, and
The scattered Stars illuminate the Sky,
Reaches the Kingdom of this peevish boy.
Though guarded by the interposed seas,
His darts have wounded 8 the Nereides;
Nor could the Ocean quench the kindled flame,
The feathered Nation too hath felt the same,
By lust provoked; how the fierce Bull hath warred
To be the sole Commander of the Herd!
The timorous Hart his rival once in sight,
Fearless, himself addresses to the fight;
And testifies his fury with his voice.
Then the black Indies tremble at the noise,
Of spotted Tigress: Then, all white his mouth.
With rage engendered foam, the wild Boar doth
His deadly tushes whet: The Lyon when
He feels this sting of Love, his horrid mane
Tosses on high, the very forest faints
Then with the noise of her inhabitants.
The Monsters of the deep this power have proved,
Both they, and the Lucanian Ox have loved.
Nature doth claim a privilege in all,
Her yoke is universal, hate doth fall
At the command of Love, that ancient fire
Extinguished by the new one of desire,
Why should I more rehearse? it is enough
We see a Step-dames bosom not of proof
Against the Stroke of Love. What news bring thou?
Speak Nurse, and s•y, where thou halt left her now.
NO hope can salve this sore, nor will that fire
Be ever quenched which fr•nzy raises higher
Although no crackling flame, although concealed
In her close br•st, it is by her face revealed;
Her •es doe sparkle, and her sh•unke checks fly
The light. Best pleased with variety
Is her divided soul; her body feels
The motion of her troubled sprite and reels.
Now her faint limbs a dying measure tread,
And scarce her weary neck sustains her head;
Now would she resta while, but straight forbears
Forgotten sleep, and spends the night in tears:
She rises, and again is laid: She looses
Her scattered 〈◊〉, and again composes;
She varies habit, wea•y of her self,
And grows regardless both of food and health;
S• languishingly goes, her strength decayed
And from her checks the withered roses fade.
Care doth dissolve her joints: a trembling pace
She holds, not near so comely as she was.
And those same eyes, that testified her line
From Phoebus, nothing like her Grandsire shine.
Still are her cheeks with tears bedewed: so
A warm shower melts the dilated snow
Upon the cliffs of Taurus; but behold
The Court is op, where on a couch of gold
Leanes the inclined Lover, and her brain
Distempered, doth her own attire disdain.
Good maids these gold and purple garments bear
From hence, what should the Tyrian dye doe here?
Or wool, which the trees mollified rind
Yields to the Sexes? a short Zone shall bind
My loins, for expedition girt; no load
Of pearl, on us by Indian Seas bestowed,
Shall lengthen out my cares, nor will I deck
With any Carkanet my widowed neck.
No perfume my disheveled hair doth need,
Careless upon my neck and shoulders spread,
And by the wind displayed, my left shall bear
A quiver, and my right hand shake a spear.
1 Such was Hippolita, and as she guides
From frozen Tanais, and Maeotis sides
Her troops to Attic coasts, her hair collected
Into a knot, and then again rejected;
A Crescent shield guarding her side, even so
Accoutred I, into the woods will go.
Comp•in no more, gre•f doth not ease (great Q•even)
The wrete•ed. Will the fire observe a mean?
Invoke the Virgin Goddess of the wood.
H•il sacred Q•even of forests, whose abode
Alone is on the hills; alone who art
There worshipped, these dire portents avert.
Thou, the woods awful Deity: the bright
Planet of Heaven, the ornament of night,
One of the worlds alternate lamps, the trine
Aspected Hecate favour our design.
Tame this hard-hearted youth, that he may learn
To love, and with a mutual ardour burn;
Incline his cares, his breast unarme, his mind
Engraft in hers, though froward, harsh, unkind;
Let him pay Venus homage, thus thy might
Employ. So still unshaded be thy light.
Through the dispersed clouds making thy way
With thy resplendent horns: so from thy sway
2 May no Thessalian Witches thee constrain,
3 Nor thou thy honour forf•it to a Swain.
Goddess invoked, thou'st heard my prayer, lo now
I see him paying of his yearly vow.
Alone he is, wherefore are these delays?
Art must be used. Fortune gives time and place.
What tremble I? it is hard for to obey
A Crime, but he that fears a prince must lay
Conscience aside, and modesty expel,
The bashful never served a Monarch well.
THy weary steps why hither bendest thou
With such a clouded face, &amp; troubled brow,
Good Nurse? I hope my Father is not dead,
Nor Phaedra, nor the pledges of their bed.
Fear not, obsequious Fortune, on thy house,
Still waits, and still the land is prosperous.
But thou, mild as thy houses fate, to me,
Give e•r, who 'm so solicitous for thee;
Because thou thus affl•ctst thy self, whom fate
Makes wr•tched, we may well comiserate▪;
But who court danger, and themselves abuse
With needless tortures, they deserve to loose
Those blessings which they knew not how to use.
Rather in pity of thy years, thy mind
Release, and in a festive measure joined,
Advance thy torch; in wine thy sorrows drown
Enjoy thy youth, which will be gone too soon.
Now apt for all Impressions is thy breast,
Venus to young men, is a welcome guest.
Now glad thy soul: Why should thou lye alone?
Solace thy youth, but too unpleasant grown:
Sl•cken the reins, wholly to riot bent.
Nor let thy better days be thus misspent.
The Gods draw out our lives by their degrees
All 〈◊〉 them p•culiar properties.
Cheerful when young, in age reserved. Why doth
A hard restraint thus kill thy toward youth?
A large increase sh•ll crown the husbands toil,
Whose seed is tightly fitted to his soil:
And all the trees are over-grown by those
Which still uncropt preserve their maiden boughs.
Good dispositions greatest praise doe merit
When nat'rall freedom guides a noble• spirit.
Salvage, and ignorant, thou to a wife
Prefer a melancholy single life.
Dost thou think to•l a privilege? to ride
The fiery cour•er till he lose his pride,
Or try the bloody issue of a field?
When the eternal providence beheld
So many enemies to life he made
Fresh off-springs to replenish the decayed.
Go too. Let Venus of humane affairs
Dispose, who our diminished stock repairs;
Should but our youth be barren all thou sees,
After an ages standing vanishes.
Coverd' with rubbish, the uncultured land
Would lye, the sea unnavigated stand,
The empty forest; beasts, air, birds would want,
The wind being the sole inhabitant.
How many casual deaths on mankind wait,
Extinguished by the sea, the sword, dece•t!
But say that these were wanting: yet to all
For to pursue their end is natural.
Nature the guide of life, obeyed, frequent
The City then, and public meetings haunt.
There is no life more free, void of offence▪
Or nearer to the pristine Innocence,
Than what is to the woods confined, who lives
With a clear Conscience on the mountains cliffs
Is not enslam'd with avarice, nor draws
The air of seldom merited applause.
Is not with envy swelled, nor kindness blown,
Nor favourite, nor vassal to a crown.
He covets not vain honours, nor the uncertain tide
Of wealth, not hope and fear doe him divide
Him scarce the poisonous tooth of malice wounds
Nor doth he know the usual crimes of towns,
And great concourses, fears not every noise
Like guilty persons, nor invented lies;
A thousand Columes don't his roof uphold,
Nor are his rafters fastened with gold.
His Altars doe not flow with streams of blood,
Nor, with the sacred 1 meal, their foreheads strewed,
A Hecatomb of white oxen expects
The stroke of death, and bow their hundred necks.
But he the country doth enjoy, endued
With a most sweet and pleasing solitude▪
Harmless he wanders through the open air,
Nor can he any thing but beasts ensnare.
And, when with labour faint, his weary limbs
Refreshes with Ilissos Crystal streams.
Now he on banks of swift Alpheus lies,
Now thickest coverts of the wood descries,
(Where cool Lerna through her transparent spring
Shows her clear bottom,) ever wandering.
Here birds complain, there th'ancient Beech receive
Some gentle wind, and shakes her tremblng leaves
Strech•d on a winding shore he loves to take
A nap, and the bare turse his bed doth make;
Whither a fountain falls in scattered showers,
Or flying streams salute the new-born flowers
With murmuring courtship: Wildings are his food,
And strawb'ries gathered from the underwood.
Meats quickly cooked, he delights to fly
Far from the Courts excessive luxury,
Let the ambitious drink in golden cups.
With what a gust he the pure fountain sups
From his convexed palm; and sleep more sound
Securely laid on the obdurate ground.
He lewdly seeks not a retired bed,
Nor in close corners hides his fearful head:
But he doth the fresh air, and light enjoy,
And that he lives, Heaven can testify.
I verily believe those Heroes did
Live thus whom after ages Deified.
They had no thirst of gold, no sacred stones
Did limit their unknown possessions.
Bold▪ ships ploughed not the deep, to foreign shores;
But kept to their own seas, no lofty towers
And ample bulwarks did the city fence,
In arms an universal ignorance.
No engines forced the gates, no oxen ploughed
The earth; she wore no badge of servitude,
Flelds fruitful of themselves sufficed to seed
A sparing people that did little need.
Woods native riches, and some shady cave
To them unartificiall lodgings gave.
First headstrong wrath, a furious love of gain,
And lust, which in inflamed minds doth reign,
Broke this integrity, then did there come
A bloody thirst of Empire in the room.
Great men did prey upon the less, and might
Was chosen arbitrator unto right.
Then with bare hands they fought: untrimed boughs
And stones were the first weapons they did use.
The corneal was not shod with ir'n, nor tied
The soldier a long sword unto his side,
Nor horses manes crested their helmes; but vexed
With smart they took the weapons that were next.
Dire Mars invented war-like stratagems,
And thousand forms of death, hence purple streams
Defiled each land: blood died the blushing mane
Then endless crimes in every ho•se did reign:
No sin but grew a President; the child,
His Father, Brothers have their Brothers kill▪d,
Women their Husbands, wicked Mothers slew
Their infant births. What then did Step-dames doe
Nothing indeed's more mild than beasts, but this
Woman, sins ringleader and Artifice
Besets our souls, how many Cities are
Fired by her Incests, lands engaged in war,
And peoples by the ruined weight oppressed
Of their own Countries? not to name the rest:
3 Medea speaks the sex cruel.
Why.
Condemn'st thou all for ones Impiety.
I sly, abhor, curse all. Whether it from
Reason, or nature, or mere frenzy come:
I love to hate them: Water shall abide
Sooner with fire: V•ssels securely ride
In the devouring 4 Syrtes; the bright day
Sooner shall rise from the Hesperian Sea,
And wolves be mild to kids, than this my mind
Admit a courteous thought of woman-kind.
Love, the perverse oft tameth, and removes
All hatred 5 this thy Mother Country proves.
Even that fierce Nation did obey the will
Of Love, or thou had been ungotten still.
In this respect I'm glad my Mothers dead,
Because my hate is now unlimited.
As a fixed rock on every side, in vain
Assailed by waves, doth beat them back again;
So he despises what I say: but see
Where the impatient lover comes (ah me)
What Fate attends her? whither falls she?
Upon the earth her body breathless lies,
And death-like paleness doth benight her eyes▪
Madam look up, unloose your tongue, behold,
Hippolitusses arms do you enfold.
who calls me back to grief; my bosom fired
A new? how sweetly had I here expired?
But why refuse I life? courage my mind,
Try, execute what thou thy self enjoined.
Speak boldly, she, who fearfully doth crave,
Begs a denial; my worst crime I have
Acted long since. Shame comes now too late,
I've loved a sin, if in it fortunate,
A Husbands name may palliate the deed▪
Those sins are oft thought honest, which succeed▪
Go too, begin my soul. Sir, I a while desire
Your privacy: let all the rest retire.
See here is none to interrupt us; speak.
But m• sealed lips cannot the silence break.
Both urged to speech, and forced to be still.
I call you Gods to witness that my will.
Can you not speak your mind.
Great griefs are best
By silence, little ones by words expressed.
Mother give me the burden of your cares.
The name of Mother to much distance bears.
An Humbler name becomes our Love. Call us
Thy sister, or thy maid, Hippolitus.
But rather maid. I the most slavish yoke
Will wear. Command it shall be undertook.
Isle clime the frozen Pindus through deep snows
Run through the fire, and armed t•oops; expose
My naked breast to naked swords, receive
1 This Sceptre then, and let me be thy slave.
To rule becomes thee, me to obey.
It ill becomes a women's arm to sway
So great a Nation, thou who 'rt in the pride
Of blooming youth, thy Fathers people guide.
Protect thy suppliant in thy bosom hid.
Take pity on a widow.
Heaven forbid:
Madam my Father will come safely back:
•rome Styx, and those insatiate realms no track
Doth lead to the forsaken light, shall he
2 Who came a ravisher, dismissed be?
'Lesse Plut'ol sit down a tame Cuckold too.
Heavens far more equal power this will doe.
But while it yet rests in suspense, Isle please
My Brethren with all fitting offices
Protect Thee, that thou seem not widowed: I
The absence of my Father, will supply.
O credulous Lovers! O deceitful Love!
Hath he not said enough? now prayers shall move.
O pity; hear even my silence woo.
I would, yet would not speak.
What ail thou?
That which thou little thinks a step-dame should
Speak plainly and thy doubtful words unfold.
Why Love within my raging bosom fumes,
And with a cruel fire my reins consumes.
The flame which in my bowels hid remains
Thence shoots up and down my melting veins,
As agile fire over dry timber spread.
What with chaste love of Theseus thou art mad?
Thou art in the right: I love that ancient face
Which Theseus had when he a stripling was;
When first the down budding upon his chin
He saw the house the 3 Minotaur was in,
And crooked mazes the long thread up wound.
How glorious then? his hair with sillets bound,
A dainty blush over his cheek was spread,
And his soft arms were the securest bed.
Like thy Diana, or my Phoebus then;
Or rather thee: thus, thus he looked, when
He pleased his foe; thus loftily did bear
His head, but thou art something hansomer;
Thou'st all thy fathers parts; and yet against
Reason some of thy Mothers too retain'st,
A S•ythian rigour in a Grecian face;
Had thou come with thy Father in those days,
Then Ariadnes clew had sure been thine,
Thou, thou my Sister, wherefoere thou shine
In spangled •kies, a cause so like thine own
Assist; one family hath both undone,
The Father thee, and me the Son, thou sees
A suppliant Princes fallen on her knees;
Free from aspersions, innocently good;
Changed but to thee; I'm sure none else have wooed
This day to gre•f, or life an end shall bring,
Pity a Lover.
Thou Almighty King
Of Gods can thou so mildly see, so mildly hear
Her wickedness? if now the Heavens be clear,
When wilt thou thunder? let the troubled air
Now run on heaps, and day a Vizard wear.
May the reversed Stars now backwards •un.
And what dost thou, thou the irradi•te Sun
Behold thy Grand•ilds lusts? for shame lay by
Thy beams, and into utter darkness fly.
And why art thou idle Spectator turned
Great Jove, the world not yet with lightning burned,
Thunder at me; let thy quick flame consume
Me, I am wicked, and deserve the doom.
I've pl•asked my Step-dame, merit I to be
Inc•os thought? for this Impiety.
Seemed I most fit? deserves my strictness this?
O Women excellent in wickedness!
O thou in thy unbounded lusts more wild
Than was thy Mother! Sh•e only defiled
Her self, yet was the wicked the•t betrayed
By the Prodigious issue which she had;
The doubtful birth witnessed his Mothers shame
With his fierce look, from the same womb thou came
Thrice happy are they in their prosp'•os fate
Who are by fraud consumed, destroyed by hate;
Father I envy thee: this sin, this sin,
Is greater then Medeas could have been.
I know our houses Fate▪ I crave, I know
What is forbid, but cannot h•lp it tho,
Thee thorough flames, o'er rocks; the foaming deep,
And heady torrents comp•ny I'll keep.
Where ere thou goes, there frantic I will be,
Behold coy youth, again I kneel to thee.
Keep of, and touch not my chaste limbs, what now
Immodest wretch, wilt thou embrace me too?
Then shall my sword du• vengeance take; my hand
Wreathed in her hair, her shameless neck doth bend.
Bow-bearing Goddess, never blood with more
Justice was on thy Altars spilt before.
Why now Hippolitus, I have my wish:
Thou cursed my frenzy; 'bove my hope was this,
To perish by thy hand, and chaste.
Avaunt,
And live; least any thing to thee I grant,
Nor shall this steel, by thee polluted, ere
Defile my chaster side by hanging there.
What Tanais, what Maeotis, which doth pay
His waters tribute to the Pontick sea
Can wash me clean? not all great Neptunes floods
Can expiate this crime. O Beasts! O Woods!
Why so dull sulled? now the crime is known
Let us plead force and uncompelled own
The impious act. Sin is best hid by sin,
Who fear to be accused, should begin.
Whether the lewd attempt were ours or his,
Since secret, who shall be his witnesses?
Help, help, Athenians servants; the obscene
Hippolitus is ravishing the Queen;
Her with his naked sword he threatened,
And awes her chastity with fear of death.
See now he flies, and by his fearful speed
Hath left his sword, a witness of the deed.
First cheer the Queen, but let her hair still be
Thus torn, and thus disordered as you see.
These pregnant testimonies of an act
So vile, bear to the City; recollect
Your senses; Madam, Why, alas, do you,
Afflict your self, and sly the public view?
No Woman ever was from the event
Esteemed immodest, but from the assent.
SWift as a tempest doth he fly so fast
Cloud-gathering▪ Chorus doth not make such hast
A shooting Meteor doth more slowly stream,
When rapid winds fan the extended flame.
Now may admiring Fame confer on thee
The honour due to all antiquity:
For so thy beauty doth all others pass,
As Phoebe seems fairer then she was,
When at the full she doth her fire combine
With meeting horns, and all the night doth shine
Blushing she rises. and the lesser stars
Doe lose themselves in •hat great light of hers.
The evening star appears not more bright
When first he ushers in the sable night,
Now 2 Hesperus when rising from the main,
But in the morning Lucifer again.
Nor thou 3 Bacchus for ever young, thy hair
Unshorn, and vines wreathed about thy spear,
With which thou dost thy sluggish Tigress wound,
Thy horned temples with a Mitre bound,
Dost his untrimmed locks excel; nor set
Thy beauty (Theseus) on too high a rate,
Because the rumour generally goes,
That Phaedra's 4 sister thee before Bacchus chose.
Beauty thou most uncertain good, the gay
And fading treasure of a short-lived day
With winged feet how dost thou post away!
The scorching heat of summer hath not killed
So soon, the verdant glory of the field;
In the middle of the Solstice, when the night
Contracts her self, and makes more room for light:
As these fair colours that adorn the face
Are in a moment gone; no day doth pass
But may the ruins of some beauty boast,
Form is a fading thing. O! who would trust
So frail a good? use it while thou hast power,
For time doth steal away, and every hour,
Is worse than that which went before,
Why love thou deserts? beauty is I'm sure
In those untrodden paths, as unsecure
If hid from middayes h•at in woods thou be
Loose rings of 5 Naiads will compass thee,
Who choicest youths imprison in their streams:
And wanton 6 Silvans shall ensnare thy dreams.
Or if the 7 Moon thought younger than the old
Arcadians from her Starry Orb behold
That she with wonder will be six•d th•re.
Of late she blushed, nor any clouds appear
To v•il her naked Lustre, but we grown
Solicitous for the colour she was on▪
8 Our kettles beat against Thessalian sp•lls
When besides th•e, she had no 〈◊〉 else;
Thou were her only cause of stay, and she
Bu• stopped her ch•riot while she looked on thee.
Let fewer frosts but •ip thee, and the rays
Of Phoebus seldomer salute thy face,
It will excel the Parian Marble, how
That pleasing frown becomes thy manly brow!
How grave a Majesty is seated there!
Although thy neck might with the Suns compare
His flowing tresses on his shoulders spread
With which hoe's both adorned and covered:
That rugged front, becoming thee, and those
Short curls, which only Nature doth compose
Though the most warlike Gods thou might desie
And from the combat bear the Victory:
Though now, while yet a youth thou equallest,
Al•ides brawny arms, or Mars his chest.
If when thou reddest, Castor never reined
His Cyllarus with such an even hand.
If when thy finger to the loop made fast,
With all thy force thou dost thy javelin cast;
The Creta•s cannot shoot so far, who be
Esteemed Masters in Artillery,
Or Parthian like, direct thy shafts on high
And no•e return unblouded from the sky;
But in her bowels sixth, doe make the bird
Thy prey which in the middle region for it.
Yet (search all ages records for their fate)
The fair have s•ldome proved fortunate.
Some milder God prot•ct thee, and may thou
Live till thou be deformed, so aged too.
What dare not vexed women do? what snares
She to entrap the guiltless youth prepares,
Her cheeks she doth be•ew; her head undresses,
And seeks belief, in her disordered tresses.
All guile is comed by woman, but who's he,
That in his face s•ch marks of Majesty
Doth bear; his head erected with that state?
How like Hippolitus he is! but that
His cheeks do such a ghastly paleness wear,
And such a filth doth clothis flagging hair.
See Theseus self returned to Earth is there.
AT length returned from nights gloomy coasts
And th Pole which shadows the imprisoned ghosts
How light offends mine eyes; now is the corn
1 Triptolemusses gift, the fourth time shorn;
Four Aequinoctials now hath 2 Libra seen;
While I uncertain of my Fate have been,
Betwixt the Ills of life and death divided. I
Retained this part of life, when I did lye
Buri•d my sense remained. Great Hercules
Dragging the 3 dog from hell did finish these
M•series, and brought me thence, but now it wants
The prop of strength, my tired courage faints.
And my legs tremble; what ado had I
To come within the prospect of the sky,
From Phlegethons Abyss! the toil did seem
Alike to sly from death, and follow him
But stay, what sudden out-cryes pierce mine ears?
Speak some one: In my gates, complaints, and tears,
And sorrow in variety expressed?
Indeed fit welcomes for a hellish guest.
Phaedra resolves to dye; she doth despise,
Our bootless tears, and even now she dies.
What cause of death? why die? now I am come?
Even that doth hasten her untimely doom.
Thy doubtful speech some great thing doth pre∣sage
Speak plainly, whence proceeds so wild a rage?
In her own bosom she conceals that,
To dye determine▪d, none must know for what;
Forward, good Sir, forward, the business might
Crave your best speed.
Open the door there straight.
O Partner of my bed, dost thou receive
Me thus? This all the welcome I must have;
Lay by this sword; restore my troubled sense,
And say, what fury doth persuade thee hence.
Alas great Theseus, by thy Sceptre, by
The toward hopes of thy Posterity,
By thy return, and me now dost permit
Me here to die.
What cause requires it?
The benefit were lost the cause once known.
Why none shall hear it but my self alone.
Dost thou mistrust thy Husband? never fear
My breast will prove a faithful Treasurer.
Conceal thou first, what thou would have con∣ceal'd
Yet shall all means of dying be withheld
From thee.
The willing can't want means.
Relate,
What crime thou with thy death would expiate.
Why that I live.
Cannot my tears prevail?
That death is welcomest which friends bewail.
Well she is obstinate; but I will force
What she conceals with torments from the Nurse.
Load her with ir'ns, stripes shall make her betray
What ere she knows.
Now I will tell you, stay.
Why dost thou turn away thy face, and seek
To hide the tears, which trickle down thy cheek?
Thee, thee, Father of gods, and thee from whom
Our thou•es first Original did come,
Days brightest Lamp, I call to witness how
I neither to his prayers, nor threats did bow,
And yet my body did his force sustain,
But with my blood, Isle wash it clean again.
Say who hath been the ruin of our fame?
One whom then little thinks.
Tell me his name,
This sword will tell you, which he left, afraid
To be attached by the alarmed guard,
Oh me! what crimes, what monstrous crimes doe I
Behold? rough with the little Imagery,
The Every hilt with those Illustrious 1 signs,
Which glorify the Action Nation shines,
But how escaped he?
Why these can say,
With what a fearful speed he fled away.
OH sacred Piety! O King of Gods,
And thou who rul'st the 1 second Lot, the floods
What rage possessed this impious brat? did Greece,
Taurus or Colchian 2 Phases teach him this?
His deeds declare his line, and he hath showed
Whence he first sprung by his degenerate bload.
Those mad Viragos marriage do despise,
And weary of their long kept Chastities
Turn Prostitutes at last. O cursed root,
Which when transplanted bears no better fruit!
Yet even they fly Incest; an innate
Shame doth keep Natures laws unviolate.
Now whore's his feigned austerity, desire
To imitate the ancients rude attire,
Strictness of manners, gravity of look?
O juggling life, how art thou still mistook?
The foulest •whole wears the serenest face.
The Impudent doth blush, Strife seems at Peace,
Sin wears the robes of Piety, Deceit
Applauds truth, and the effeminate
A rigid abstinence doe counterfeit.
Thou the fierce Virgin Sylvan were thou then
Reserved for this? must thy sins write thee man?
And in thy Fathers bed? now on my knees
I humbly thank the careful D•ities
That I did kill Antiope: least thou
Had in my absence forced thy Mother too.
Fly vagabond to unknown Realms, although
Thou to the worlds remotest countries go,
Severed from Earth by interposing seas;
Or should thou dwell in the Antipodes,
Or hide thy self in the obscurest hole,
Beyond the Kingdoms of the Northern Pole;
The seat of snow and winter left behind,
And the cold blasts of that loud-threatning wind;
Yet, yet the sword of vengeance should thee find.
I will pursue thee every where, search places
Remote, Landlocked, abstuce, confounding mazes,
And ways inexplicable; and where force
Cannot arrive, Isle reach thee with a curse.
Dost thou know whence I came? great 3 Neptune gave
Me Power three times to ask what I would have,
And sealed his promise by the Stygian s•oud,
Behold how sorrowful a boon I would.
No more let him behold the light, but go
From his wronged Father to the Ghosts below.
To me thy Son a hated pity show▪
This 4 last gift never had bin asked, if I
Were not oppressed by such an injury.
When in the womb of Hell, where D is did roar,
And threatening Pluto stormed, I forbore.
Make good thy promise now, why dost thou stay?
Why hast thou still so undisturbed a Sea?
With wind-contracted clouds, put out the light
Of Stars, obscure the Heavens, and masque the night;
Pour out thy Seas, drive all thy Monsters hither,
Call from the Deep the waves retired thither.
O Nature Mother to the Gods and Jove
Who sway the bright Olympus, who doest move
The Stars scattered in their swift O• be, and force
Even those wand'rers to observe a course,
And on their hinges turnst the 1 Pol•s; Why art
Thou always busied in the heavenly part?
Still ord'ring those Celestial Forms? why dost
Thou take such care that now the winters frost
Sold strip the woods, and then ago•t▪ adorn,
Them with fresh shades; that now the parched corn
The rage of the hot 2 Lion should endure,
Which the more temperate Autume doth mature?
But why hast thou, who these dost regulate,
And move the Spears poised with their proper weight
So little care of man: nor dost provide
That good the good, and ill the ill betide.
Mortals doe follow the blind guide of chance
Whose hood winked bounty doth the worst advance.
The holy perish in the crafty toils
Of lust: The Court is governed by wiles.
The people love to give the wicked power,
And as soon hate whom they doe now adore.
Dejected virtue reaped but a small
Reward for doing well; the chaste doe fall
Under the curse of want: while potent vice
Is crowned for his famed Adult•ies.
Vain Modesty: and empty Fame!—but stay,
What doth the breathless Nuncius hast to say,
And sadly stopping, what sinister Chance
Figures he in his woeful Countenance?
O The sad Fate of Servants! Why am I
The messenger of our calamity.
Speak thy news boldly; custom thou shalt find
For all afflictions hath prepared my mind.
My tongue refuses the sad office.
Say, What fresh
Mis-fortunes our declining house oppress?
Ah me, your Son is dead.
I wept, my Son
Long since: now but a ravsher is gone.
But speak the manner.
Why as he forsook
The City, painting hatred in his look,
Away he flies with redoubled speed,
And quickly harnesses his lofty Steeds,
Their mettled heat, he with the curb allayes,
And divers things un•o himself he says;
Curses your throne, oft on your name doth call
And fiercely shakes his slackened reins withal;
When suddenly the Sea did roar and swell
Up to the Stars; not any breathing gale
Did crisp the floods; no thunder tore the air,
The Sea it self raised a tempest there.
Sicilian Seas are with the South-wind less
Disturbed, nor half that fury doe express
When 1 Chorus rains, stones tumbling up and down
And with white spume doth high 2 Leucates crown.
A hill of waves big with a Monster fled
Unto the shore to be delivered.
Nor is this tempest for the ships prepared
But for the land, the Sea rolls thitherward
With a main speed; nor can we guess what she
Should labour with; what uncouth Prodigy
Earth would show Heaven, a new 3 Cyclas did
〈◊〉 4 E•culapius Temple now was hid,
And the famd rocks of Scyron, and with these
The land, straightened betwixt two neigh'bring Seas.
While these amazed we seek, behold the Main
Doth roar, and all the rocks resound again;
Whose tops are sprinkled with the waves, which he
Sucks in, and spouteth forth Vicissively.
So through the Ocean as the whirlpool roams
A globe of water from his nostrils comes.
Anon this mountain bursts, and to the shore
Brings something worse, than was our fear before,
The Sea doth follow where the Monster lead,
And overwhelms the land, we shook with dread.
What was the shape of this prodigious beast?
He like a Bull erects his seagreen crest,
And virid front: tosses his mane, his ears
Pricks up, and party coloured horns he bears:
Such as might both the conduct of the herd
Become, and the Seas Issues he appeared:
His e•es do sparkle, and he vomits flame:
His neck curled like the Ocean whence he came,
His open nostrils snort aloud: his chest
And dewlap in tenacious Moss are dressed:
His ample sides with red are spotted, then
Ends in a Monster; his huge slimy train
Dragged after him, in far•hest Seas those Whales
Have such which swallow up the obvious sails.
Earth trembles with the load: astonished fly
The scattered cattle, nor are followed by
The affrighted Pastor, beasts the forest clear;
And all the Huntsmen are half dead with fear.
Only Hippolitus unmoved remains,
And his amaze• St•eds with straighter reins▪
Encouraged by his wel-known voice retai•s.
Tow'rds Argos lies a steep and craggy way,
Which all the neighbouring Ocean doth survey:
Here this vast bulk doth whet himself, and act
In jest first, what he doth intend in fact.
But when he felt his rage increase, and had
Now long enough with his own fury plaid;
Away he flies, scarce any print remains,
And just before the trembling chariot stands.
Your Son ne'er changes colour, but doth rise
With angry looks, and thus aloud he cries;
I shall not easily be afraid of this;
To conquer Bulls 5 hereditary is.
But straight his disobedient Steeds, their load
Did carry thence, and having mist the road
They followed as their fury lead, and ore
Uueven rocks the jolting Chariot bore.
He, as a skilful Pilot takes care
In a rough Sea to keep his Vessel fair,
And with his art beguiles the waves; doth guide
His horses, now he draws their mouths aside
With the strained bit, and now the scourge he uses;
Nor all the way his foul companion loses:
Now side by side, he keeps an equal pace:
Now right before; and terror brings each ways.
But here the flight doth end; just in the way
Stands the horned Monster of the Sea.
Th'affrighted Steeds then lost all rule, and strove
To run down headlong from the rocks above;
Rising before they cast your Son, who, as
He fell, within the reins entangled was,
Which wound about his body, and the more
He struggled held him faster then before.
They with the empty Chariot run, this known
As their fear guides; commanded now by none
So feeling a strange weight, and scorning that
Day was committed to a counterfeit,
Hurried through the air, the Chariot of the Sun
Shook from his seat the unskilful 6 Phaeton
His blood besmears the fields: his head the rocks
Doth beat, and Brambles tear away his locks;
Sharp stones dis-figure his fair face, and by
Whole troops of wounds, his hapless form destroy.
The swift wheels drag, his dying limbs at last
His corps on an erected stake is fast.
Struck through the middle of his groin, a while
He staid his chariot fixed on a pile;
His steeds made a short halt, but quickly they
At once both broke their Master, and delay.
Then briers and thorns his half-dead body tear,
And evr'y bush, a piece of him doth wear.
His woeful servants are disper'st to find,
Where his blood marks the way, he thus dis-joynd
Hippolitus; the howling Beagles go
In go•st of their dissever'd Master too.
Nor all their diligence as yet completes,
The Corps, is this the honour beauty gets?
Who now, Partner, and heir unto a Crown,
As bright as any Constellation shone;
Is gathered to his Urn in pieces now
O Nature, but too prevalent art thou.
What ties of blood dost thou on Parents lay,
Which we, even against our wills, obey!
Whom dead I wished, now dead I weep for,
None.
Enough can weep, for what themselves have do•e.
Mortals abide no greater curse, than when
Constrained to wish what they unwish age•.
Why do you weep, if you retain your hate?
Not that he's dead, but that I cause his fate.
HOw fickle is the state of man! the poor
Doe not the fiercest storms of chance endure;
She strikes them with her lightest strokes, they be
Crowned with content though in obscurity;
A homely cottage doth the eyelids close
With a secure and undisturbed repose.
Those lofty towers near neighbours to the sky
Receive the East and South-winds battery;
The rage of the tempestuous Bores, and
The showr-accommpanied Chorus stand.
The humble valley is but rarely struck
With thunder, when great 1 Caucasus hath shook
And 2 Ida trembled. 3 Jove himself afraid
Of the sealed heavens, hath earth his refuge made.
Plain homely roofs, and vulgar habitations
Have no extraordinary alterations,
When Kingdoms totter, on their crazed foundations
Fortune doth fly with an uncertain wing,
And none can boast he hath her in a string.
He who redeemed from eternal night
Again enjoys the comfort of the light,
Now weeps his return from Hell, and here
Meets a greater cause of grief than there.
Pallas, whom we to reverence are bound
That Theseus freed from the Stygian sound
Again reviews the Heavens; 〈◊〉 Virgin thou
Art not beholding 4 to thy U•cle now:
The greedy Tyrant hath his number still.
What voice of weepings this? what bloody Scene
With a drawn sword prepares the frantic Queen.
WHat fury doth possess thee? why this sword
Wherefore about a body so abhorred
Are these complaints and tears?
On me, on me
Pour forth thy wrath hard hearted Deity;
On me let loose thy Monsters, whatsoere
Tethys doth in her hidden bosom bear:
Whatever do in farthest Seas remain
Embraced by the unstable Ocean.
Oh Theseus ever fatal to thine own!
Now thy return thy Father, and thy 1 Son,
Have purchased with their lives; still thou thy house
Destroy'st with Love or hatred of thy 2 Spouse;
Oh my Hippolitus, and doe I view
Thee thus? and must I be the Author too?
What 3 Scinis, what 4 Procrustes, what new kind
O• 5 double-visag'd Cretin bulls, confined
〈◊〉 6 Daedalian Labyrinths, scattered
T•y li•bs? Oh! whither is thy beauty fled?
〈◊〉 those eyes my stars! what, dead? Oh stay,
A while, and hear me what I have to say.
My language shall be chaste; this sword shall thee
Into my bosom stabbed, revenge of me,
And death shall make me be Phaedra no more,
As my impiety did once before;
Then will I follow thee through all the streams
Of Hell, through Styx, and channels filed with flames,
Let me appease thy Ghost, here 7 take this hair,
Which thus from the disordered sleece I tear.
Though in our wills unequal, we may try
An equal fate; if chaste, to Theseus dye:
If not, unto thy love; what shall I climb
My Husbands bed defiled by such a crime?
Or was this sin undone, only that I,
The abused Vindicator should enjoy
Of an unviolated Chastity?
O Death, the only cure of Love, who best
A broken Modesty recementest
To thee I fly: open thy quiet breast.
Athenians hear, and thou a Father worse
Than I a Stepdame, what I did rehearse
Was false and wicked; forged in my distracted
Bosom: thou'st punished; a sin unacted.
By my incestuous guilt, guiltless and chaste
He fell, now thy deserved praise thou hast.
This sword shall pierce my impious breast, and bring
My blood to thy wronged Ghost an offering.
What thou should doe now thou hast lost thy son,
Learn of a Step-dame: Fly to 8 Acheron.
You dark jaws of 9 Avernus, and you caves
Of 10 Tenarus▪ with you forgetful waves
Of 11 Lethe, grateful to the wretched, you
〈◊〉 lakes assist to o•erwhelm me too;
Load me with everlasting plagues, come now
You monsters of the deep; whatever thou,
12 Proteus hast hidden in the utmost womb
Of the Ocean, and even that •cean come,
And me glorying in such a crime convey
To the dark by•ome of the profound sea.
And thou too prone a Father to my wrath,
Now I deserve to dye, by a strange death;
I have dispersed my Son, and while afraid
To leave a false offence unpunished,
Acted a true; what fourth lot can I try?
13 Heaven, Hell, the sea by my Impiety
Are filled, already in each portion known
Am I: Was my return for this alone?
The way to light unstopped to show me these
Sad and ingeminated obsequies?
Widowed and childless I that might at once
Kindle two funeral piles, my wives and sons?
O thou to whom this dismal light I ow,
Return me back unto those shades below.
But, Impious, I doe now in vain prefer
Forsaken death; cruel Artificer,
Who find out new ways of blood, and death,
Now find a curse thy sin which equalleth.
Pines humbled to the earth by force, at their
Release, my body shall in pieces tear,
Or I will jump from Scyrons rocks. I've seen
Worse judgements, what their sufferings have been
Girt with a mote of fire. I know what pains,
And future mansion for my self remains.
Make room you sinful Ghosts; thy endless toil
Upon these shoulders lay, and rest the while
Faint 14 Sicyphus: let that false river slip,
When almost caught from this deluded lip.
Let 15 Tityus vulture leave him, and for food
Prey on my Liver still, to pain renewed.
Rest my Pirithons Father, while I, bound
Unto thy Wheel, keep the perpetual round.
Gape Earth, receive me Hell, receive me: this
A juster voyage for me thither is;
My Son I follow: fear not thou, who sway
That Ghostly Empire; my intent is chaste.
In thy Aeternall house receive me then,
Now never to escape from thence again▪
The Gods are not so much as moved with prayer;
But when I ask a crime, how quick they are!
Now pay the rites of funeral, and morn,
These limbs you see so misrably torn;
You will have time enough to weep.
O bear
Hither those relics I esteem so dear.
Give me that burden, and those limbs, but too
Irreverently gathered by you.
Art thou Hippolitus? thou art, the deed
I doe confess, and I thy Parricide,
Least I should sin but once, and that alone,
Did call m• Father when I slew my Son.
See his Paternal Legacy. O rage
Which thus unp•opposed my declining age!
Let me embrace these limbs, and what is yet
Remaining in my bosom cherish it;
Join these dissected members and digest
Those parts in order which be thus displaced,
Here put his right hand, here his left, once skilled
In moderating of those reins it held.
This mark in his left-side, I know how great
A part have I to weep unfound as yet.
Hold out my trembling hands, and you restrain
My thirsty cheeks your ample showrs of rain,
While to my Son I count his limbs, and mold
His body new. This piece no shape doth hold
At all, with wounds so mangled it is unknown
What part it is, but sure I am it is one.
Here in this void, although not proper place
It shall be laid: Is this that Heavenly face
Humbled a Stepdames p•id? that Beauty come
To this? O Gods how cruel is your doom!
Oh bloody fury! to thy Father thus
Come thou, and by my wish Hippolitus?
Here take my Sires last gift that I should bear
Thee oft; mean while we'll burn these members here
Open the morning Court, and with loud cries
Let all the Town the funeral solemnise.
Look you to th'Royall Pile; search you about
The Fields to find what yet is wanting out,
Give her the burial of a ditch, where laid,
May earth lye 17 heavy on her Impious head.

SAcred to your Delight
Be the short Revels of this Night;
That Calm that in yond Myrtles moves,
Crown all your Thoughts, and Loves:
And as the fat all Yew-tree shows
No Spring among those happy Boughs,
So be all Care quite banished hence
Whiles easy Quiet rocks your Sense.
We cannot here complain
Of want of Presence, or of Train;
For if choice Beauties make the Court,
And their Light guild the Sport,
This honoured Ring presents us here
Glories as rich and fresh as there;
And it may under Question fall,
Which is more Court, This, or White-Hall.
Be it so. But then the Face
Of what we bring fits not the Place,
And so we shall pull down what ere
Your Glories have built here:
Yet if you will conceive, that though
The Poem's forced, We are not so;
And that each Sex keeps to it's Part,
Nature may plead excuse for Art.
As then there's no Offence
Given to the Weak or Stubborn hence,
Being the Female's Habit is
Her own; and the Male's his:
So (if great things may steer by less)
May you the same in looks express:
Your Wear is Smiles, and Gracious Eyes;
When ere you frown it is but disguise.
ANd if you see not Women plead, an judge,
Raise, and depress, reward, and pu∣nish, carry
Things how they please, and turn the Politic door
Upon new hindges very shortly, never
Believe the Oracle.
Could I see it it would prove
An Antidote against old Age, and make me
Grow younger still without Expense or Art.
You sin past pardon Rhodia, if you doubt it.
The plot's most firm and strong.
The Means advised.
The carriage hitherto successful; we
Gain daily to our side.
Doe they come in?
As to a Marriage; Offer money, Plate,
Jewels, and Garments, nay the Images
Of their Male-Gods.
The very name of Rule
Raises their Bloods, and makes 'em throw their Wealth
Away as heartily, as if they were
Young Heirs, or old Philosophers.
Why then,
There's one care saved Cosmeta.
What's that pray?
I was preparing strong Preservatives
Against our Lords came home, for fear of fainting
At their Arrival.
They'd have smelt indeed
Of Labour, Sweat, Dust, Man, and Victory.
And such gross Rustic scents, that a Court nose
Without the patience of a Stoic, could not
Have possibly endured them,
I believe
They'd have increased the Bill, and some would weekly
Have died of the Lords Return from the Cretin War:
What growth's your Plot of Madam?
O it ripens
Past expectation! See, Besides our selves
Eleven Court. Ladies on the Roll already;
Hyantha then sends word, that ten, or twelve
Very substantial Countrey-Ladies have
Subscribed three days ago.
My Province here,
The City-wives, swarm in, strive, and make means
Who shall command their Husbands first.
And then
Of Country Gentlewomen, and their eldest daughters,
More than can write their Names; It is now past danger.
But, Madam, how'l you gain the men at home?
For that brace &amp; half of Courtiers there, Ganyctor,
Lerinus, and Iringus, they are mine,
Fast in the Net, if I but pitch it only.
Look where they come, pray swear 'em present∣lie.
I'Ll give 'em but my hand to kiss, and twill
Bind 'em as fast, as if it were the holiest
Of the best Sibyls Leaves.
Favour your tongues;
Let's lie in Ambush here a while, and listen
What they discourse of.
Why of Women I warranty'.
Peace Rhodia, peace, close sweet Pandena, close!
Lerinus, this hath been the worst Spring that
I ever knew.
Faith it has', for Flora
Still challenged it before, but now Bellona
Hath got the time: Roses and Violets were
The fruit of the Season formerly, but now
Laying, and raising Sieges: Building up
And pulling down of Castles; Manning, and
Demolishing of Forts have signed the Months.
Where beauteous Ladies slumbered, &amp; were guarded
By the enamoured Lizards (as if Cadmus
In envy had reserved some Serpents teeth
And sown 'em there) hard watchings and rough Guards
Fill and make up the field.
Most smoothly said,
And like a Cowardly Poet.
There's a fear
The Women too will rise at home.
Their fingers
Itch to be tamp'ring with the wheels of the State.
It is very well my Lord Olyndus then
Is left at home.
How does his Lordship now?
Still angry that his Majesty would not let
His Sickness go against the Enemy?
He finds the hardest Wars at home, he hath
Visits, and Onsets, that molest him more
Than all his griefs. He now complains of health;
The eager Ladies do besiege him hourly,
Not out of love so much, as want of men;
Any thing now, that wears but Breeches only,
Is plotted, and projected for as much
As a new Fashion, or an Office 'bove Stairs,
They do call this their time of Persecution,
Swear they are living Martyrs.
Then the Punishment
Must make 'em so; I'm sure the cause will never.
A man is striven for as eagerly
As the last loaf in a great depth of Famine.
You won't believe what I shall tell you now;
Pandena and sweet Rhodia at this instant
Both love me, hate each other, eager Rivals;
The one enshrines her Melons in pure Crystal,
And as the fruit doth ripen, so her hopes
Of me doe ripen with it—
Monstrous fellow!)
The other counts her Apricots, and thinks
So many kisses grow there; lays 'em naked
And open to the Sun, that it may freely
Smile on her vegetable Embraces.
Good! do you hear this, Madam?)
Peace and let him on.
The one presents me, and the other presents me
Gums, Spicknard-boxes, Fruits, and early Roses,
Figs, Mushrooms, Bulbi, and what not? I am
More reverenced than their Houshold-God, and taste
Their store before him still.
Close yet for my sake.)
And proud Cosmeta—
Nay you must hear't out too.)
She, that, if there were Sexes 'bove the Moon,
Would tempt a Male Idea, and seduce
A Separate Hee-Substance into Lewdness,
Hath smiled, glanced, winked, and trod upon my toes,
Sent smooth Epistles to me, whom I let
Pass unregarded, as a suing Beauty,
And one that makes my triumph up—
Fair Ladies
You make my Triumph up in that I see you.
What? have you been at the VVars then Cap∣tain?
Madam
I've stood of the shore, and wished well to our Fleet.
If that be all, pray how comes so much Crest,
And Scarf, and Boot to be misplaced on you?
Is it not a time of War, dear Lady?
You follow
The times then, though you won't the Camp.
It is fit
We should be in the Field-fashion however.
Because you intend the VVars at home perhaps.
Troth the beleagering of you, Lady, will
Hardly deserve the name of a Siege; you'll yield
So easily on the first approach.
You doe
Mistake her, Sir, she means, that you intend
To take great Towns at home—
Demolish Castles,
And high-built Pies at once—
Gain Sconces twixt
The first and second Course—
And in the virtue
Of the large Cretin Jar kill men at Table.
No Lady, we do stay at home to make 'em.
The Wars indeed 'll exhaust the Kingdom much.
And fit tic that should some way be supplied.
You won't corrupt me, Madam? pray forbear.
No, Sir, I will not do the State that harm;
For the Corruption of one Coward must
Needs be the Generation of another.
I'll warrant th'Issue will be truly valiant.
And how so Captain Stay-by-it?
Madam, he
Can neither fight nor speak: I'll tell you how.
That you're a Coward, Sir, is granted: Thus then;
Either your Father was valiant, or was not.
A very sure division, Lady, that.
If he were valiant, and you a Coward,
It is your Sons course next to be valiant;
But if he were not valiant, and that
You are a Coward of a Coward, then
Your Lineal Issue must be valiant needs,
Because two Negatives make an Affirmative.
A most invincible Argument!
This shall not
Serve I assure you, say what ever you will
You shall not reason me to your Bed-side.
No, Sir.
Not though we send you Melons?
Ripened Hopes?
Apricots, Figs?
Vegetable Embraces.
And smooth Epistles? Go you vile abusers
Of what you cannot compass; because you nourish
Desires, you will discharge the sin on us.
Ladies you're much deceived: had you the Apho∣rismes
Of you are perfect, that each word should go
With a design, that not an Eye should be
Lift up, or cast down without mystery—
Could you force sighs, feign passions, manage looks,
Season your jests, speak with a Manner still—
Should you consult a Decade of Chambermaids,
And sadly advise with your Crystal Oracles,
In which Attire your Beauties would appear
Most strong; in what contrivance your sweet Graces
Would be most fierce, and overcome Spectators,
You should not have one look to quench the fire.
You shall be Vestals by compulsion still—
You shall make Verses to me ever I've done;
Call me your Caelius, your Corinnus, and
Make me the Man of the Book income Romance,
And after all I will not yield.
You're got
Into a safe field of Discourse, where you
〈◊〉 sure, that Modesty will not suffer us
To answer you in a direct line.
You were
Wont to go whining up and down, and make
Dismal Soliloquies in shady Woods—
Discourse with Trees—
And Dialogue with Eccho's—
Send Messages by Birds, make discreet Thrushes
Your trusty Agents twixt your Loves and you—
Which Loves you called Nymphs—
When indeed they were
Milkmaids, or some such Drudges. This your rating
And pricing of your selves, and standing off,
Comes not from any bettering of your Judgements,
But from your Mouth's being out of taste.
Pray y' what
Employment are you fit for?
Isle assure you
None about you.
Their whole Employment is
To go Ambassadors twixt retired Ladies—
To ask how this great Ladies Physic wrought—
Give an account of the virtue of her Drugs.
Make perfect Audit of the Tale of sighs
Some little Dog did breath in his first sleep:
Go you Reproach and Refuse of your Country.
You speak most valiantly Heroic Lady.
Pray Venus you permit the Lords to rule
The Common-wealth again, when they come home
Know Sir, they shall not—
And you shall consent,
Aid, and assist us in it in spite of you,
Willing or ••willing, ell's one.
We'll leave you.
Your Company grows dangerous.
It is half Treason
To hear you talk.
Before you it is very safe.
You'll never dare to engage your selves so much
In the Army, as to inform the King of't.
Come,
Let us away too.
We will vex 'em through
All sorts of Torment, meet 'em at each Corner,
Write Satyrs, and make Libels of 'em, put 'em
In Shows, &amp; Mock-Shows, Masques, &amp; Plays, present 'em
In all Dramatique Poetry: they shall
Be sung in the Markets, we'll not let 'em rest
'Till themselves sue to be of the Female Covenant.
BUt hold, here comes Eumela.
Lady Secretary
Unto our future State, God give you joy.
You bestow Offices, as City Mothers
After their Travail, do give Flowers between
Their House and Juno's Temple, to the next
They meet, or as you do your Ribbons, to
Entangle, not Reward.
Then you are Wise
And Politic still—
Of the Male-faction Lady?
And you will suffer by Prescription still?
But to be serious now; what do you do?
That which you would, if you should come to Rule:
Wake, Sleep, Rise, Dress, Eat, Visit, and Converse,
And let the State alone.
You're very short.
Indeed I am some what now in haste; I'm going
To meet a pair of Ladies, that would willing
Keep their own Sex, and not turn Lords.
You mean
and Malthora, those that are
Sad now, that one day they may be in History
Under the name of Turtles.
What Dialect may
Those Ladies grieve in? Doric or Ionic?
Doe they make Verses yet?
Their Manners are
A kind of Satyr upon yours; though they
Intend it not, the people read 'em so.
Because they have laid aside their Jewels, and so
Blinded their Garments—
Because they eat their sweet-meats
In a black Closet, they are counted faithful,
The sole Penelope's of the time, the Ladies
Of the chaste Web in the absence of their Lords.
Your sadness would be such perhaps, if you
Would take the pains to show the Art of Mourning.
Is there another way of grieving then?
This is not grief, but stands to be thought grief:
They are not of such vaunting popular sorrow;
Their Tapers are not died in dismal hue,
And set in Ebon Candlesticks; they wear
No sad black Sarcenet Smocks, nor do they smutch
Their women, to be served by mourning Faces;
This were to grieve to Ostentation,
Not to a real friendship.
Is there friendship
Think you twixt man and wife?
You'll say, perhaps,
You, and your Husband, have not been friends yet.
Madam, you prophecy.
I might be thought to have done so,
Had I foretold a truth to come, but this
Is History already.
If they do not this,
Nor wear the day out in a hood winked 100m,
Where there's no living thing besides the Clock,
Nor yet take Physic to look pale, what doe they?
They grieve themselves, their Doctor grieves not for them:
They do that in the Absence of their Lords
That you would in the Presence of your own.
You see we look as fat, and fair as ever—
Your Kitchen's warm, your Box, and Pencils fail not.
—We are as long in dressing as before—
And have the same Romances read, the same
Letters brought to you, whilst you're doing it.
—Sleep, and take rest, as then, and altogether
Speak as much wit as we did before the wars.
And to as little purpose.
Fie Eumela!
That you should be so obstinate, as to hear
Wealth, Honour, Pleasure, Rule, and every good
Knock at your door, and yet not let 'em in.
Madam, I know my Looking-glasse wo'n't show
The altering of the State, when it presents
The changes of my Face, and that I cannot
Order the Kingdom, as I do my Hair.
Yonder's your business; Madam, there are three
Sad things arrived, two Ladies and a Lute.
But shall I write you down before you go
The thirteenth in the Roll of the Asserters
Of Female Liberty?
If Liberty be the thing
You so much stand for, pray you give me mine;
I neither grant, nor yet deny; I will
Consider.
We dismiss you, Madam, then
Unto your serious Counsel.
Fare you well.
OCome, Eumela, thou dost know, without thee
Our thoughts are Deserts, Rocks, and Sands, and all
That either Nature's absent from, or hath
Reserved unto her self alone.
I bring you
Noise, Trouble, Tumult, and the World; but if
There were that power in my worthless presence,
That I could cast a day upon your thoughts,
You should not think of Places that are sacred
To Night, and Silence: Visits still, and Feasts
And the whole Ring and Throng of Mirth should stir
In your delighted Souls.
Prithee Eumela
Is there no secret ancient Grove, that hath
Stood from the birth of Nature to this time,
Whose vast, high, hollow Trees seem each a Temple,
Whose paths no curious Eye hath yet found out,
Free from the Foot and Axe.
If I could tell you
It were found out already.
Hast thou read
Of any Mountain, whose cold frozen top
Sees Hail in the Bed, not yet grown round, and Snow
In the Fleece, not Carded yet, whose hanging weight
Archeth some still deep River, that for fear
Steals by the foot of't without noise.
Alas!
These are the things, that some poor wretched Lover
Unpitied by his scornful Shepherdess
Would wish for, after that he had looked up
Unto the Heavens, and called her Cruel thrice,
And vowed to dye.
I prithee pardon me;
I live without my self.
But I have read
Of a tall secret Grove, where loving Winds
Breathing their sighs among the trembling Boughs,
Blow Odes, and Epods; where a murmuring Brook
Will let us see the Brother to our Sun,
And shew's another World there under water.
Prithee let's go, and find it out, and live there.
Our Ancient Poet Linus somewhere sings
Of some such thing.
Thou always dost deceive us;
Thou told us of an Echo too, and when
Thou brought'st us to it, thou had put Philaenis
Behind the Wall, to give us all the Answers.
Yes, and thy bringing in my Father's Dwarf
With Bow and Wings, and Quiver at his back,
Instead of Cupped, to convey us Letters
Through the Air from hence to Crete, was but a trick
To put away our sadness. But I had
Almost forgot what we came for, I prithee
Take up the Lute there, and let's hear the Ode;
That thou did promise us; I hope it is sad.
TO carve our Loves in Myrtle rinds,
And tell our Secrets to the Woods,
To sen̄d our Sighs by faithful Winds,
And trust our Tears unto the Floods,
To call where no man hears,
And think that Rocks have Ears▪
To Walk, and Rest, to Live, and Dye,
And yet not know Whence, How, or Why;
To have our Hopes with Fears still checked,
To credit Doubts, and Truth suspect,
This, this is that we may
A Lover's Absence say.
Follies without, are Cares within;
Where Eyes do fail, there Souls begin.
Thou art a harmless Siren fair Eumela.
It is very true indeed; thou feed at once,
And dost correct our follies: but were thou
As we, thoud'st do the like.
For Love's sake tell me
Why should you seek out Groves, where the bright Sun
Can make no day, although he throw upon 'em
Whole floods of Light, Places where Nature will
Be blind in spite of Him? Why should you fancy
Caves fit to write sad Revelations in?
Or why a Lover stretched on shaggy Moss
Between two Beds of Poppy to procure
One Minut's slumber?
These, Eumela, are not
The Journeys but Digressions of our Souls,
That being once informed with Love, must work,
And rather wander, than stand still. I know
There is a Wisdom to be shown in Passions;
And there are stayed and settled griefs: I'll be
Severe unto my self, and make my Soul
Seek out a Regular Motion, towards him
Whom it moves to, and thou shalt shortly see
Love bleed, and yet stoop to Philosophy.
MAdam I must away; Olyndus yonder
Is hasting towards me.
Farewell Eumela,
Be ever happy.
And may some good God
Cherish thy Loves, as thou dost cherish others. 
My Lord Olyndus, what's your business to me?
Virtuous Eumela, you must doe me the favour
To give this Letter into the Princess's hands
With all the speed and secrecy you may.
I carry with me Night, and wings my Lord.
O my Olyndus, were there not that thing
That we call Friend, Earth would one Desert be,
And Men Alone still, though in Company.
GIve me my Javelin; hangs my Fashion right?
Three Ladies say thou? So! go fetch 'em in now.
What? goes the Tilting on I mentioned? Is there
No Just, nor Tournament yet granted out?
You're well appointed Madam.
How I hate
That Name of Madam, it befits a Chamber:
Give me the words of the Field, such as you'd give
To fairer Ladies pricking o'er the Plains
On foaming Steeds. But I do pardon you.
Shows not this Scarf and Fashion far more comely,
Than paltry piebald Ribbons, and young Bodkins?
You wear a rigid Beauty, fierce Delights.
Your Pleasures threaten, and your stubborn Graces
Tempt, and defend at once.
Why now y' are right.
And what say thou, my little Noon-tide shadow?
My trusty Pygmy?
Now indeed, and truly—
Hell of these simpering Protestations!
Thou sinful Inch of short Mortality,
Give Ear to my Instructions: here I swear
By the Sacred Order of my Lady-Errantry,
If thou effeminat'st thy discourse once more
With these precise, minced, Little▪Sisters-Vows,
Thy breath is forfeit.
By that bloody Fashion—
I there's a Wench, spit from the mouth of Ma∣vors
Bellona was thy Nurse.
—And that fierce Javelin,
I'd rather see a Plume o'rshade your back
With a large, generous Carelessness; than a bunch
Of fiddling Feathers hang before you, just
As modest fig-leaves do in naked Pictures.
Thou little 'Vantage of Mankind, thou Grain
That Nature put into the Scales to make
Weight to the World, thou take me very much.
The Sable Fan, which you wore last upon
Your white Lawn-Apron, made you show just like
The Ace of Clubs, with a black spot in the middle.
Why how now little Mischief? is it not knavish
And waggish, like a very Page of the Court?
What use do you mean her for?
Have you not read?
To summon Knights from th'tops of Castle walls.
I fancy those brave Scythian Heroines;
Those Noble, valiant Amazons like you.
Nature did show them only as my Types.
There's nothing wanting but adventures: We
Shall quickly now requite the Errant Knights
That help distressed Ladies to their wishes.
I'll disobliege our Sex. If that you find
Any imprisoned, or enchanted
Tell him Machessa's his deliverance.
Said I Machessa? Hold! that word Machessa
Sails through my Lips with too small breath. I'll have
A Name that Mouths shall travel with: let's see?
We'll put a Prologue to it: So! I have it;
It is concluded—Monster-quelling-Woman-
Obliging-Man-delivering-Machessa,
She, She is his deliverance: tell him so.
Do she that can; I would you'd change your Name;
It is longer than your Self, and if it were
Some three foot shorter, it were as high as I am.
See who it is knocks; you do not know your Office;
Bellona, hear my Name, and send Adventures.
THe Courtiers Madam; work for us! remember.
Pray stand aside as soon as we begin.
Save you Machessa.
I've a Name besides,
By which I mean Posterity shall know me;
The word is grown: it is Monster-quelling-Woman-
Obliging-Man-delivering-Machessa.
Sweet Monster-quelling-Woman-ob-and so forth-
Wee've brought a business to you.
Valiant Captain,
What is the Affront that's most in fashion now?
why doe you ask me Lady?
Because you're wont
To receive most, and so can tell the newest;
Which now perhaps you come to have redressed.
What is the strength of the Subject think you Sir?
Why what know I?
Who should Sir, if not you
That have so oft been beaten by all sorts,
And all degrees of men?
Which Lady now
Sends you most Favours?
Which most Melons?
Which
Most Gums, and Spikenard Boxes?
Who presents you
With the best Figs?
The plumpest Bulbi?
You,
And you, and you; you will not worry me?
By your Periwig, Captain, but we will.
By your
False Teeth we will.
And your glasse-Eye we will.
For Jove's sake, Madam.
S'heart I'm not breath-proof.
Alas, we have not begun yet.
Let's beseech you.
We will not be beseeched.
Think upon Rest,
As a past pleasure of your youth—
You shall not
Be idle quietly in the Presence Chamber.
You shall not tell lies in quiet to the Waiters.
Nor, when you've done, share in their meat in queen∣et.
We'll meet you at the Bath—
You shall not wash
Without disturbance.
At the Theater too—
You shall not misconceive good Comedies
Without vexation—
And at Flora's Park.—
You shall not cheat at little Horse-races
Without discovery.
In the Temple then—
You shall not kneel in quiet at the Altars—
We'll hearken, and observe—
You shall not have
So much free time, as to appoint a meeting
With her kneels next y'—
If that you're bid to Supper—
We'll stay you, though you've got a warrant to
Ride post to eat.
Good Madam, be content.
And if you're set—
Hell, and Furies—
You
Shall rise, and prove perfidious to the hot
Crammed Fowl upon your trencher.
We'll subscribe—
Are you content?
And when you're weary of
All this—
We'll doe all this again.
We'll keep you,
As they doe Hawks—
Watching until you leave
Your wildness, and prove inward.
Hear y'Madam—
We will subscribe.
Come quickly then, lest that
We take a toy, and will not let you.
Stay.
The Gods have destined this should be the first
Of my Adventures—go—you're free.
Our thanks
Will be too small a Recompense.
The Deed
Will pay it self; Virtue's not Mercenary:
Or, if it be, mine is not. So; I do
Begin to come in Action now. To do
And suffer, doth engross whole Nature, and
I will engross both them; I'll set all free,
But only Glory; her I'll Captive lead,
Making her Trumpet only sound my Name,
That is, the Sexe's. I am all their Fame.
How goes your Business on?
Virtue and Fortune
Join in it both.
Eumela is come over,
Hath undertook the Machine, and hath promised
To bring it to that pass, that neither Queen,
Nor Princess shall gainsay't. Florina, and
Malthora both have given in their Reasons,
Which I have answered, and convinced.
If that
It come to any danger, let me know it.
Eumela welcome; does your business thrive?
Too fast.
What? have you sent to the Ports?
Ell's safe.
Machessa's ours you say—
Yes, and Philandra.
Cleora and Earina busy Sticklers,
Oenone and Hermione sent as Emissaries
To try the farther Cities—Parry hath
A pretty stroke among the Privy Chamber.
You've lost no time.
Nor will, Cosmeta—
Psecas, and Dorcas, Cloe, and Plecusa,
Phillis, and Glauca, swore this morning all
As I was dressing.
On what Book I pray?
On the Greek Epigtams, Madam, or Anacreon,
I know not which: they bind alike.
What hopes
Have we of the Women of Lapythia?
How stand the Dames of Salamin affected?
Why Lycas sent to give them a fair Largess
Of Loaves and Wine, &amp; then, whiles that well cheers 'em,
Eugenia brings 'em a most promising Answer
From some corrupted Oracle, and so leads
The superstitious Souls to what she pleases.
This is a ground, a thing supposed. The Plot
Is wholly now upon Florina, there
It knits, and gathers, breaks, and joins again;
She's Wise, and Noble—we must find a way
Not thought on yet to gain her.
But the Queen
And Princess—
They perceive the business ripens,
That it doth move the limbs, and can for need
Shift, and defend it self, and therefore doe
By me make promise of a general meeting
As soon as may be: in the mean time, we have
Full leave to gather any Contributions,
Gold, Silver, Jewels, Garments, any thing
Conducing to maintain the Public Cause.
Goddess Eumela!
Go, fall off, the Princess
Is at hand—I'lgoe mingle Counsels.
Eumela you are come most opportunely.
This to your Highness from my L. Olyndus.
You're happy that your Love is with you still,
That you can see, and hear, and speak to him.
Venus doth favour you more than the whole
Kingdom Eumela; Mars for her sake's kind to you.
I must confess it happy: but Olyndus
Cannot be brought to think it so; he fears
His sickness will by some be construed Love;
Which, if his Valour in his Country's danger
Durst give the upper hand, even at the Altar,
Though Venus did her self look on, he would pull
Out of his Breast, and cast aside, as some
Unhallowed part of the Sacrifice.
His King
Hath found him truly valiant. Ever I open
This Paper, you must state one Point, Eumela,
Suppose me busy in the holy Rites
Of our adored Venus: if by chance
I cast mine Eye upon some Princely visage,
And feel a Passion, is the Goddess wronged?
Or the Religion less?
Our Loves what are they
But hourly Sacrifices, only wanting
The press and tumult of Solemnity?
If then in the heat and Achme of Devotion
We drink a new fiame in, can it be ought
But to increase the Worship? and what Goddess
Was ever angry that the holy Priest
Increased her Fires, and made 'em burn more clear?
True, but suppose the Face then seen doth never
Appear more after, is not that a sign
The Goddess is displeased?
That it a while
Appears not, is to cherish, not extinguish
The Passion thence conceived: as Persecutions
Make Piety stronger still, and bring the Afflicted
Unto the glory of renowned Martyrs.
But is there then no hope but that? Alas!
This man perhaps might perish in some War
As now (But O ye Gods avert the Fate!)
And then the unhappy sighing Virgin fall
From that her feigned Heaven.
It cannot be;
Venus destroys her Deity, if she show
And then delude: she will not lose what once
S•' hath made her own; She that knits hearts by the Eyes,
Will keep the knot fast by their Intercourse;
If you have once but seen, and loved, permit
The rest unto the Deity. Will it please
Your Highness to peruse the Letter? it is
Of moment I presume: why blush you Madam?
And, while I ask you, why look pale?
Eumela,
The supposition's truth; lately, thou know,
I did assist at Venus Sacrifice;
He, whom I saw, and loved, saw, and loved too,
And now hath writ—but let Olyndus tell him
I will not see him, though he were the Soul
Of all Mankind.
I will.
Hear me—yet if
He have a true undoubted Friend, he may
send him, I'll meet him in the Myrtle Grove,
And tell him more.
I will obey.
But stay—
And yet that's all.
I go.
The Soul doth give
Brightness to the Eye, and some say, That the Sun,
If not enlight'ned by the Intelligence
That doth inhabit it, would shine no more
Than a dull Clod of Earth: so Love, that is
Brighter than Eye, or Sun, if not enlight'ned
By Reason, would so much of Lustre lose
As to become but gross, and foul Desire;
I must refine his Passion; None can woo
Nobly, but he that hath done Nobly too.
YOur Highness here alone?
But so long only
As gives you leave to ask. What? sad Florina?
I'd thought your Soul had dwelt within it self,
Been single a full presence, and that you
Had set your self up your own Trophy now
Full of true Joy.
Tic hard to cast off that
That we call Passion, we may veil, and cloud it,
But't will break out at last. True Joy is that
Which now I cannot have.
How so Florina?
True Joy consists in Looks, and Words, and Letters,
Which now an Absence, equal to Divorce,
Hath wholly barred us of.
Looks, Words, and Letters!
Alas they are but only so much Air
Diversely formed, &amp; so the food of that
Changeable Creature; not the Viands of
True constant Lovers.
But, if I see not,
Is not my Joy grown less, who could not love
'Till I first saw? and if I hear not, can
I have the perfect Harmony of pleasure,
Who something ow to words that I first yielded?
Who ever yet was won by words? we come
Conquered, and when we grant, we do not yield,
But do confess that we did yield before.
But be those Senses some Contentments, Madam,
You must not yet make them the great, and true
Essential Joy that only can consist
In the bright perfect Union of two Spirits.
But seeing those Spirits cannot work, but by
The Organs of the Body, it is required
That (to the full perfection of this Joy)
Bodies should be near-Neighbours too.
I must
Confess that I subscribe unto the Princess,
And somewhat too to you: the Presence may
Convey, and fill, and polish Joy; but yet
To see, or hear, cannot be Joys themselves.
And where this Presence is denied, the Soul
Makes use of higher, and more subtle means,
And by the strength of thought creates a Presence
Where there is none.
Alas! how we doe lose
Our selves in speculation of our Loves,
As if they were unbody'd Essences!
I would
Eumela now were here; She would tell us, All
Is the same Joy, as Love from sight, or thought,
Is the same Love; and that Love's turning to
Either of them, is only but a Needle
Turning to several points, no diverse flame,
But only divers degrees of the self-same.
Come Madam let's away and seek her out.
NOt see me, say you, though I were the Soul
Of all Mankind?
They were the words returned—
But if he have a true undoubted friend,
•nd him, I'll tell him more.
Have I deserted
•y Country, now in danger, where I had
•ook Honour Captive, and for ever fixed her
•s an Intelligence unto my Sword,
•o move and guide it? have I scorned my Fortunes,
•nd laid aside the Prince? have I contemned
•hat much prized thing called Life, and wrestled with
•oath Winds and Floods, through which I have arrived
•ether at last? and all this not to see her?
Doth she betray, or undisguise you to
•he State? Doth she forbid you, Sir, to love?
•ffection is not wanting, where it is wise;
•he only doth forbid you that you see her.
Only forbid me to be happy, only
•orbits me to enjoy my self; What could
•he more, were I her Enemy? Olyndus
•ast thou at no time told her, that there was
• Cretin called thee Friend?
Why do you ask?
Perhaps She hath found this way to send for thee.
Though I have thought it worth the boasting, that
•haristus is my friend, yet by that Word,
•acrid to Noble Souls, I never had
•o much access to tell her any thing,
Much less my Friendship.
Thou shalt go Olyndus.
When my eyes see her, yours do; when I talk,
Tic you that talk; we are true friends, and one,
•ay that one interchanged; for I am you.
It is true thou art my friend, so much my friend,
That my self am not more my self, than thou art:
•f thou dost go, I go—But stay—Did not
•thou say mine eyes were thine? thou did: if that
•e so, then thou must love her too, and then—
Olyndus thou must stay.
She loves you so,
(As my Eumela doth inform me) that
No humane Image can deface the Print
That you have drawn in the Tablet of her Soul.
If that she loves me so, why then she must
Love thee so too; for thou and I are one.
Why then, Sir, if you go your self, the issue
Will be the same however, so, when she
Loves you She'll love me too.
We are both one
In hearts and minds Olyndus: but those Minds
Are clothed with Bodies. Bodies that do oft—
I know not what—yet thou hast an Eumela,
A fair Eumela trust me—Thou must go—
But use not any Language, Gesture, Looks,
That may be construed ought above Respect;
For thou art young and Beautiful, and Valiant,
And all that Ladies long for.
When I prove
So treacherous to my Friend, my self, my fair
Eumela, mark me with that hateful brand
That Ignominy hath not discovered yet,
But doth reserve to sear the foulest Monster
That shall appear in Nature.
I believe thee:
Yet something bids me still not let thee go.
But I'll not hearken to it; though my Soul
Should tell me it were not fit, I'd not believe
My Soul could think so.
How resolve you then?
Do what thou wilt. I do believe—and yet
I do—I know not what—O my Lucasia!
O my Olyndus! divers ways I bend,
Divided twixt the Lover, and the Friend.
MMay't please your Highness, Madam—
I have a friend so much my self, that I
Cannot say he's absent now, yet he hath sent me
To be here present for him: we interchange
Bosoms, and Counsels, Thoughts, and Souls so much,
That he entreats you to conceive you spake
To him in me; All that you shall deposit
Will be in safe, and faithful Ears; the same
Trust you expect from him, shall keep your words,
And the same Night conceal 'em: it is Charistus
The noble Cretin.
When you said your Friend,
The rest was needless; I conceive him all
That makes up Virtue, all that we call Good
Whom you Olyndus give your Soul to; yet
I'd rather court his Valour, than his Love,
Did he shine bright in Armour, call for Dangers,
Eager to cut his way through stubborn Troops,
Even this my softness, armed as he, could follow
And prompt his Arm, supply him with fresh Fury,
And dictate higher dangers. Then when Dust
And Blood hath smeared him (a disguise more worthy
Of Princes far, than that he wears) I could
Embrace him fresh from Conquest, and conceive him
As fair as ever any yet appeared
To longing Virgins in their Amorous Dreams.
Fury could never from the Den of danger
Awake that horror yet, that bold Charistus
Durst not attempt, stand equal with, and then
Conquer, and trample, and contemn.
Revenge
And Hate I do confess, may sometimes carry
The Soul beyond it self to do, and suffer:
But the things then are Furious, not Great,
And sign the Actor Headlong, but not Virtuous.
He that can do this, Madam, and Love too,
Must needs be virtuous; that holy Flame
Clean and untainted, as the fresh desires
Of Infant Saints, enters not Souls that are
Of any foul Complexion. He that Loves,
Even in that he Loves, is good: and as
He is no less an Atheist, that denies
The Gods to be most happy, than the Man
That dares Affirm there are no Gods at all;
So he's no less an Heretic, that shall
Deny Love to be Virtuous, than he
That dares Affirm there is no Love at all.
But he hath left his Country now, when that
Her Wealth, her Name, her Temples, and her Altars,
Her Gods, and Liberty, stand yet upon
Th'uncertain Dye; when Danger calls his Arm,
And Glory should arrest his Spirit there;
And this to Court one, whom he knows not, whether
She may think Virtue a mere Airy word,
And Honour but a blast, invented to
Make catching Spirits dare, and do high things.
That you are Virtuous, is a knowledge, that
All must confess they have, but only those
That have not Eyes: For if that Souls frame Bodies,
And that the Excellence of the Architect
Appear in the perfection of the Structure,
Whether you have a Soul enriched with virtues,
Must be a blind Man's doubt: Nature dares not
Thrust out so much deceit into the World;
It would make us not believe her works were meant
For true firm Pieces, but Delusions only.
Though I must not agree to you, to pass by
What you have said, If I were Virtuous,
You must confess him so far ignorant yet,
As not to know whether I'd Love, or no.
This Knowledge is of more Extent than the other.
For being that to be loved is the Effect
Of your own words, you must love all men's Loves
As a Confession of your Graces, that
Your selves have drawn from them. That which your Beauty
Produces, is a Birth as dear unto you,
As are your Children.
Should there more than one
Love us (if this hold) we must love them too,
And so that Sacred Tie that joins the Soul
To one, and but to one, were but a Fable,
A thing in Poetry, not in the Creature.
One is your Trophy: and he Loved as That
The Rest but Witnesses: thus Princes, when
They Conquer Princes, though they only count
Those Names of Glory, and Renown, their Victory,
Take yet their meaner Subjects in, as fair
Accesses to their Triumphs, who, although
They are not the main Prize, are some what yet
That doth confirm that there was worth, and force,
To which the Main did justly yield.
Be it then
That I do love his Love, I am not yet
Bound to accept it in what shape soever
It doth appear; the Manner, Time, and Place
May not be relished, though the thing be liked.
For these he doth expect your Dictates, with
As much Religion, as he would the Answers
Of Sacred Oracles, and with the same
Vow of Performance.
You must tell him then.
He must go back, and there do Honourably;
Succour his Country, cheer the Soldier, fight,
Spend, and disburse the Prince, where ever he goes,
Get him a Name, and Title upon Cyprus.
I will not see him 'till he hath Conquered, till
He hath rid high in Triumph, and when this
Is done, let him consider then, it is
My Father, &amp; my Subjects, and my Kingdom
That he hath Conquered.
I am an Agent only,
And therefore must be faithful.
But withal
To show that I reject him not, you may
Tell him, that being he hath such a friend,
Whiles he is absent I will love Olyndus
Instead of him.
But that my Friend is in me
I should have deemed it Sacrilege, to have had
A thought like that suggested. My Charistus,
Were he not something careful in his Love,
(I will not call him Jealous) were beyond
The Lot of Man: I must not tell him all,
Some may be hid; yet how shall I unriddle
The Mystery of this Answer? But the knots
That Love doth tie, himself will only find
The way to loose—
—And here Charistus comes.
Souls once possessed, as his, are most impatient,
They meet what they should stay for.
Dear Olyndus,
Pardon that I expect not, but make hast
To intercept my Doom Others perhaps
May wait the punctual Minute, and observe
The just and even Period: but Charistus
Doth love too slow, when time, and Sun can bind him
Unto a regular Motion.
Would you had
Been there your self! would you had drunk in all
The Looks, Words, Graces, and Divinities
That I have done! I'm like the Priest that's full
Of his inspiring God, and am possessed
With so much rapture, that methinks I could
Bear up my self without a Wing, or Chariot,
And hoverc'r the Earth, still dropping something
That should take root in Kingdoms, and come up
The Good of people.
Let me ask thee then
As we do those that do come fresh from Visions,
What saw thou there?
That which I see still, that
Which will not out; I saw a Face that did
Seem to participate of Flames, and Flowers;
Eyes in which Light combined with Jet to make
Whiteness be thought the Blot, and Black hereafter
Purchase the Name of Innocence, and Lustre.
The whole was but one solid Light, and had I
Not seen our Goddess rising from the Floods
Portrayed less fair, less Goddess, I had thought
The thing I saw, and talked with, must have been
The Tutelar Deity of this our Island.
That I should let thee go! that I should be
So impious to my self, as not to break
Her great Commands, and so become a Martyr
By daring to be happy against her will—
But on Olyndus.
You may think this
The Height, the Acme, and the All of her:
But when I tell you, that She hath a Mind
That hides all this, and makes it not appear,
Disparaging as it were, what ever may
Be seen without her, then you'll thus exclame;
Nature, thou were o'rseen to put so mean
A Frontispiece to such a Building.
Give me,
O quickly give me the whole Miracle,
Or presently I am not.
Think, Charistus,
Think out the rest, as it is, I cannot speak it.
Alas! what should I think?
Conceive a Fire
Simple and thin; to which that Light we see,
And see by, is so far impure, that it is
Only the stain, and blemish of the World;
And if it could be placed with it in one
And the same Tablet, would but only serve
As bound and shadow to it: Then conceive
A Substance that the Gods have set apart,
And when they would put generous Motions
Into a Mortal Breast, do take the Soul
And couch it there, so that what ever we call
Virtue in us, is only but a Turning
And Inclination toward her from whom
This Power was first derived.
What present God
Lent thee his Eyes, and stood blind by, whiles thou
Did gaze, and surfeit on these Glories?
Others
Do Love the shape, the Gesture, and the Man,
But She the Virtue. Mark Charistus. She
Says She could Court you ringed about with Dangers,
Dote on you smeared, and stiff with hoftile Blood,
Count and exact your wounds, as a due sum
You are to pay to Valour; All which when
I told her was in Love, she said I did
Present a spark, when she desired a full
And glorious Constellation—to be short,
She says you must go back, do honourably,
Get you a Name upon the Cyprian Forces;
And bids when you have done all this, consider
It is her Father, and his Subjects, and
His Kingdom that you conquer—
And her self
That I shall lose by doing so. If I
Return, and Crete be Conquered, then She will
Count me Spoil, and Luggage; and my Love
Only a Slave's Affection. If I Conquer,
And Cyprus follow my Triumphant Chariot,
My Love will then be Tyranny: and She,
How can she light an Hymeneal Torch
From her loved Countries Flame? I am rejected,
Charistus is a Name of scorn.
What Fates
Dare throw that Name upon my Friend? To show
That she rejects you not, because there is
That Trust, rat Faith, and that Confusion of
Charistus and Olyndus twixt us, in the mean
While he is absent, tell him, saith she, that
I'll love Olyndus in his stead.
How! Man
The hast dealt dishonourably. This the Light?
And this the Fire that makes that Light a stain?
This I foretold my self: my good Charistus
Let not your Anger carry you beyond
The bent of Reason; can I give account
Of others Passions? did I first conceive
The words my self; then speak'em?
O ye Gods!
Where is the Faith? where the Olyndus now?
The hast been a Factor for thy self: I'd thought
I'd sent a Friend, but he's returned a Merchant,
And will divide the Wealth.
Far be that Brand
From your Olyndus! far from your Lucasia!
She hath a Face hath so much Heaven in it,
And this Olyndus so much Worship of it,
That he must first put on another Shape,
And become Monster, ever he dare but look
Upon her with a thought that's Masculine.
Peace Treachery! I am too cold; my Anger
Is dull and lazy yet. I'll search that Breast,
And dig out falsehood from the secret'st Corner
In all thy Heart, here, in the very place
That thou hast wronged me.
There is nothing here
That my Charistus knows not. 'Pray you open,
And search, and judge; and when you find all true,
Say you destroyed a Friend.
It is your Art
I see to woo, but I will make you speak
Something that is not Flattery.
Olyndus
Ne'er loved the Man as friend yet, whom he did
Feat as an Enemy. 'I is one part of Valour
That I durst now receive, conceal, and help you,
Here in the Bosom of that State, which hath
Cast out a spear into the Cretin Field,
And bid you War.
Thou hast already here
Betrayed my Love; thy falsehood will proceed
Unto my Person next. I'd thought I'd been
Clasped in Embraces, but I find I am
Entangled in a Net.
You're safe as in
The Bosom of your Father, take this Veil
Of Passion from your Eyes; and you'll behold
The same Olyndus still.
The same Deceiver,
The same false perjured Man. Draw, or by Heaven,
That now should Thunder and revenge my wrongs,
Thou shalt dye sluggishly.
Recall your self,
And do but hear—
What words a Coward will
Fawn on me with, to keep an abject life,
Not worth the saving.
Witness all ye Gods
That govern Friendship, how unwillingly
I do untie the Knot.
Draw quickly, lest
It may be known I am the Cretin Prince,
And so my juster Fury be not suffered
To scourge a timorous and perfidious Man.
Though thou stand here an Enemy, and we have
The Pledge of all the Cretin State, yet know
Though all our Island's People did look on,
And thou proclaim'st thy self to be the Man,
They should not dare to know the Prince, until
I'd done this Sacrifice to Honour.
So!
I have not long to stay amongst Mortals now,
And then you may search all those Corners that
You talked of in my Heart. But if you find
Ought that is falsehood towards you, or more
Than reverence to Lucasia, may I want
The Honour of a Grave—Hear O ye Gods,
(Ye Gods whom (but a while) and I am with)
Lucasia is as spotless, as the Seat
That you prepare for Virgin Lovers!
I
Have wronged thee, my Olyndus, wronged thee much,
But do not chide me; there's not life enough
Left in me to make use of Admonition.
If you survive, love your Lucasia; twill
Make your Olyndus happy; for the good
Of the surviving Friend, some holy men
Say, doth pertain unto the Friend Departed.
Virtuous Lucasia! and had thou Olyndus
Not been so too, my Gods had fought for me;
But I must dye—Olyndus.
Heaven forbid
That my Charistus perish! I have only
Strength left to wish: If I can creep yet to thee
I'll help thee all I can.
And I will meet thee;
Let us embrace each other yet. The Fates
Preserve our Friendship, and would have us equal,
Equal even in our Angers: we shall go
Down equal to the Shades both, two ways equal,
As Dead, as Friends. And when Lucasia shall
Come down unto us (which the Heavens forbid
Should be as yet) I'll not be Jealous there.
O Me! Good Heavens! had you the Balsam, Lady,
Now that you told me of, it would do somegood.
This is Olyndus, that the honoured Stranger;
Brave Spirits are a Balsam to themselves:
There is a Nobleness of Mind, that heals
Wounds beyond Salves—look not, but help Philaenis,
Gather the Weapons, and the rest up quickly;
Where two are wronged, I ought to succour both.
MAdam, ne'er fear your Dream, for that is only
The relics of your day-time thoughts, that are
Preserved by'our Soul, to make a Scene in the Night.
Have you not dreamed the like before?
Yes thrice.
Why then Paestanus now hath perished thrice,
Or else y' have sometimes dreamed in vain.
Eumela,
I told her this, and that her troubled Sleep;
Were one Love still waking.
We'll divert
This anxious fear. Reach me the Lute Eumela.
Have you not heard how Venus did complain
For her beloved Atones? The young Poet,
That was desit'd to give a Language to
The afflicted Goddess, thought her words were these.
VVAke my Atones, do not dye;
One Life's enough for thee and I.
Where are thy words? thy wiles?
Thy Loves, thy Frowns, thy smiles?
Alas in vain I call;
One death hath snatched 'em all:
Yet Death's not deadly in that Face,
Death in those Looks it self hath Grace.
It was this, it was this I feared
When thy pale Ghost appeared;
This I presaged when thundering Jove
Tore the best Myrtle in my Grove;
When my sick Rose-buds lost theïr smell,
And from my Temples untouched fell;
And it was for some such thing
My Dove did hang her Wing.
Whither art thou my Deity gone?
Venus in Venus there is none.
In vain a Goddess now am I
Only to Grieve, and not to dye.
But I will love my Grief,
Make Tears my Tears relief;
And Sorrow shall to me
A new Atones be.
And this no Fates can rob me of, whiles I
A Goddess am to Grieve. and not to Dye.
Madam, they say it was in this very Grove
The Goddess thus complained.
HOw now Philaenis?
Are you turned Sewer to the Lady-Errant?
Lady I'm sent to wipe away the Blood
From these two Myrtles.
Bless me! what Blood Philaenis?
I hope the Song will not prove ominous.
It is fit we have some Wars at home too, else
My Lady would have no employment left.
What Wars? whose Blood?
A pair of froward Lovers,
Olyndus, and the Stranger, fought, it seems,
Here till they almost killed themselves: and when
Neither did fear, but both did faint, it seems
Olyndus leaned there, and the Stranger there,
And with their Bloods besmeared the Trees a little;
We did not think your Highness should have seen it.
Is this Olyndus way of mingling Souls?
Is this the Others Interchange of Breasts?
O Heavens! durst your Olyndus thus?
O Heavens,
And O ye Gods too! durst that other this?
Did he then stay behind for this Eumela?
And did he leave his Country to destroy
One worth it all, here in our very Bosoms?
H' has ruined one, whose like if Nature will
Show to the World again, she must lay up,
And gather, till she hath store enough of Graces
To throw into the World.
Olyndus stood
As high, and brave as he, his Enemy had
But this advantage of him, that he was
A Cretin, as by Birth, so too in Faith.
Were he the Birth of some unshelter'd Cottage,
He were yet fairer in the Eye of the World
Than ever Olyndus could have been, in that
He was a Princess's thoughts; it was I that loved him.
Although the Name of Princess be upon you,
And signs you Dread, and Sovereign, yet I must
Tell you that Love's a Princess too in me,
And stamps as much Heroic Majesty
Upon my Thoughts, as Birth hath done on yours.
Though, as a Princess, I could make thy Love
And thee forgotten Names, yet I depose
My self, and am thy Equal.
It is no need
That you descend, Love carries up Eumela
To be as high as is her Princess, and
In this sad Fate places her equal with
Her Dread Lucasia.
Hear, hear this brave man!
And if thou liv'st revenge it on Olyndus.
And thou the Spirit of my dear Olyndus,
Be thou still worthy, still thy self. Speak thou
O Nature, was there not the same clay knead
To make our Hearts? did not the same Fire kindle
Our Souls? and thou, O Love, was it not the same
Metal that wounded both? you must not count
The Princess into the worth of your Affection;
Love when he balances the Hearts that come
Under his Power, casts not in their Births,
Fortunes, and Titles.
Would some powerful God
Would change our Persons, and make thee Lucasia,
And me Eumela, that I might avow
The justice of my Love in spite of State.
Forbear Eumela.
It is the Princess speaks.
Nor Prince, nor Subject speaks, but Love in both.
HEre's one can tell you all.
Say, good Machessa,
How doth the Stranger?
Lives Olyndus yet?
Both live, but wounded much, yet hopes of both;
For they are Friends, and as their Minds have closed,
Their wounds may shortly too.
How fell they out?
I heard the Stranger, Madam, thus confess,
As our Olyndus did embrace him; Thou
Were honourable, my Olyndus, ever;
But I was foul, and Jealous: then Olyndus
Fell on his Neck, told him it was only heat,
And strength of Love; and vowed he'd never tell
The cause and ground of the Quarrel: but the Stranger
Swore by his Gods, and Altars, that he would
Go find, and tell, and ask the Deity
Forgiveness first, then him—I heard no more
But only sighs from either.
It was too much—
That I should throw away my grieffor one
That durst have such a thought! Charistus, you
And I are both deceived in one another;
And, poor Olyndus, dearly hast thou paid
For both our Errors—
—Machessa, as you love me
Be careful of Olyndus, for the other—
My care hath been more than he's worth already—
Eumela,
The Princess is much troubled, pray heaven your freedom
Did not offend her Highness.
I hope it did not:
Madam, if too much Love made me forge;
And pass the bounds of Duty, humbly, I beg
Your Graces pardon, beseeching you t'impute
My folly to my Passion.
Call it not Passion,
It was Reason to Contest: Love's Kingdom is
Founded upon a Parity; Lord, and Subject,
Master, and Servant, are Names banished thence;
They wear one Fetter all, or, all one Freedom.
There was some Spirit spake within me, it was—
Alas! excuse it not: all that do Love,
In that they love, are equal, and above none,
None, but those only whom the God denies
The honour of his Wound—Eumela, hear me,
Charistus is grown foul, and thy Olyndus
Is now my Martyr, for my sake he bleeds,
And I, for this, will make Charistus know,
That he, who doubts his Friend, is his own Foe.
MY Lady Martial, and the rest Mercurial,
Woman's the Gem of Heaven, in which Na∣ture
Hath carved the Universe in less Characters;
A Piece of such Invention, and such Art,
That, where as in one common lazy Mold
Made for dispatch, she casts, and thrusts out Men,
As some things done in haste, she may be said
To build, and send forth us; yet (howsoever
It comes about) in all foretimes and Ages
Councels and Sonnets have excluded us,
Thinking us like those finer Wits, which spin
Themselves into such subt'le Fancies, that
They are too Curious to be employed,
Being as far from Service, as from Grossness:
But this hath been from Error, not from Trial:
Grant me their Composition stronger, grant me
Their Bodie's ruder, and more fit for Wars,
Which some yet here do happily contradict,
I cannot yet conceive, why this should bind us
To be their Slaves; our Souls are Male, as theirs.
That we have hitherto forborne t'assume
And manage Thrones, that hitherto we have not
Challenged a Sovereignty in Arts, and Arms,
And writ our selves Imperial, hath been
Men's Tyranny, and our Modesty. Being then
Nature did mean us Sovereigns, but cross Fate
(Envious of her, willing that nothing should
Be perfect upon Earth) still kept us under;
Let us, in the name of Honour, rise unto
The pitch of our Creation. Now's the time;
The best and ablest men are absent, those
That are left here behind are either Fools,
Or Wise men overgrown, which is all one
Assert your selves into your Liberty then,
Stand firm, and high, put these good Resolutions
Forth into Action: then, in spite of Fate,
A Female Hand shall turn the Wheel of State.
Inspired Addressed!
Most divine Addressed!
If that you relish this let Mistress Speaker
On to the rest.
On, on, on, on, on, on!
Most Willing, most Agreeing, most Potent,
And most free Ladies, &amp;c.—
It is fit all things should be reduced unto
Their Primeve Institution, and first Head;
Woman was then as much as Man, those Stones
Which Pyrrha cast, made as fair Creatures as
Deucalion's did: that his should be set up
Carved, and Adored, but hers kept down, and trampled,
Came from an ancient Injury; what Oracle, and
What voice from Heaven commanded that?
Most true!
Observe that Ladies.
Sibyl's Leaf by Juno!
He that says Woman is not fit for Policy,
Doth give the Lie to Art; for what man hath
More sorts of Looks? more Faces? who puts on
More several Colours? Men, compared in this,
Are only Dough baked Women; not as once
Maliciously one called us Dough-bak'd Men.
It is no single
Voice; the whole Sex speaks in her.
Some few yet
Do speak against our Passions, but with greater;
Rail at our Lightness, but it is out of Humour;
Rather Disease than Reason; they being such
As wipe off what they spit. For Heaven forbid
That any should vouchsafe to speak against us
But rough Philosophers, and rude Divines,
And such like dull Professions. But wee I now
Show them our Passions are our Reasons Edge,
And that, which they call Lightness, only is
An Art to turn our selves to several Points.
Time, Place, Minds, People, all things now concur
To re-estate us there where Nature placed us:
Not a Male more must enter Cyprus now.
No, nor an Eunuch, nothing that hath been
Male heretofore.
No, nor Hermophrodite;
Nothing that is half Male. A little Spark
Hath often kindled a whole Town; we must
Be cautelous in the least.
That then they may not
Regain the Island, all the Havens must
Be stored, and guarded.
Very fit they should.
Next to the Havens, Castles out of hand
Must be repaired, Bulwarks, and Forts, and Sconces
Be forthwith reared.
It is time we were about them.
Arms then must be bought up, and Forces raised;
Much, much is to be done—
Why let Machessa
About it straight.
I see agreeing Minds,
Your Hearts and Courage very ready, but
Where is the Nerve and Sinew of this Action?
Where shall we have the Money to do this?
We'll give our hair for Cordage, and our finest
Linen for Sails, rather than this Design
Shall be once dashed for want.
There's much already
Come in—
And more doth daily.
Hearts and Purses
Concur unto the Action.
We have Notes
Of the particular Contributions.
Her Majesty would have you read 'em, that
She may know what to trust to.
From the Temple
We do expect ten dozen of Chalices,
But they are hid, or else already gone—
This is not what you have, but what you've not.
We tell you this, that you may not take it ill,
That we had not borrowed some of the Holy Plate.
Well then, to what we have—First from the Court
Ten Vessels of Corinthian Brass, with divers
Pieces of Polyclet, and Phyd•as,
Parrhasius, Zeuxes, and Protogenes,
Apelles, and such like great Master-hands.
Statues, and Pictures do but little good
Against the Enemy.
Pray y' hear it out:
Rich Cabinets then, which, though they do contain
Treasure immense and large, have nothing yet
Within them richer than themselves.
What hold they?
Pearls, Rubies, Emralds, Amethysts, and Sapphires,
Crysolits, Jaspers, Diamonds, two whereof
Do double the twelfth Care: besides Sparks
Enough to stick the Roof of the Banqueting House,
And make it seem an Heaven.
Well, on Cosmeta.
Twelve standing Goblets, two more rich and massy,
The one bears Bacchus sitting on a Vine,
Squeezing out Purple liquor, The other hath
Silenus riding on his patient Beast,
And Satyrs dancing after him. More yet,
Twelve other less engraven with less Stories,
As Loves, and Months, and Quarters of the year,
Nymphs, Shepherds, and such like—This from the Court.
What from the City?
Purple Robes, and Furs
In great abundance—Basins and large Ewers,
Flagons, and Dishes, Plates, and Voyders, all
Rich and unwieldy. And besides all this,
Gold Chains, and Caudle-Cups innumerable.
The Contribution's much—
But yet not ended—
Twelve City Ladies send us word, they have
Twelve Iron Chests, and rib'd with Iron too,
Wherein they do suspect there lies a Mine,
That hath not seen the Sun for six Olympiads.
Let 'em be got in suddenly; we must
Be hot and eager in our undertakings.
The VVealth's enough; the East was overrun
By the bold Macedonian Boy with less.
VVas't not Machessa? But I pray you nothing
From the poor Country Villagers?
Very little;
Hoop-rings, and Childrens VVhistles, and some forty
Or fifty dozen of gilt-Spoons, that's all.
Let it be hastily delivered all
Into her Majesties Treasury.
Under favour,
We think Machessa would be very fit
Both to take in, and to disburse.
It is not
For any private Interest that She asks it,
But for the Public good.
Perhaps. But yet
The People will think better, if it be
Entrusted in a Subject's hand, and Hers
Especially who never had a Husband—
No, nor a Child as yet.
Why be it so;
You shall dispose't Machessa.
I consider
The trust you give me: see the weight, and Nature,
The Price and Moment of the Cause; Know next
My Order binds me not to be endowed
With any Wealth or Utensil, besides
My Steed, my Habit, Arms, and Page; To which
When I prove false, let him that weaves my Story
(Whether he be a Courtier, or perhaps
A Scholar that writes worse) bring me no higher
Than to scratched Faces, and such Suburb brangles.
Truth is the Essence of our Order, we
Who are Errants cannot deceive and Be.
Let us away: though the Male-Gods may frown,
The Female part of Heaven is sure our own
Noble Machessa all your deeds I see
Tend to the Scope of Honour.
Were she seated
Upon the top of some high craggy Rock,
Whose Head were in the Country of the Thunder,
Guarded with watchful Dragons, I will climb,
And ravish her from thence, to have my Name
Turned o'er from Age to Age, as something that
Ought to outlive the Phoenix, and dye only
With Men and Time.
Though you Court Danger thus,
I hope you will not scorn bright Glory, if
She come an easier way.
I look to her,
Not to her Clothes, and Habit.
Will you be
Famous in History then? fill swelling Volumes
With your sole Name? be read aloud, and high
In the Cyprian Annals? and live fresh upon
The Tongue of Fame for ever? will you stand
High on your Steed in Brass, and be at once
The stop of Strangers, and the Natives Worship,
By one fair Peaceful Action?
Brave Eumela,
To say I'll do it is lazy; it is done.
It is the Queen's suit besides,
And She shall thank you.
Honour is my Queen,
And my Deeds thank themselves. But say, Eumela,
Quickly, what is it?
Why only send this Wealth,
That's put into your hands, unto the Army,
And so defeat this folly that they here
So eagerly pursue.
By Heaven I'll first
Scatter the Ashes of my Ancestors,
Burn and demolish Temples, or pull down
The Statue of our Goddess, whiles her self
Stood with the proudest thunder to defend it;
You ought to thank me, that you have popos'd it,
And yet still live.
But pray you reason it.
Follies of idle Creatures! who ever heard
Of Ladies Errant yet that stood to Reason?
But you that brag of Books, and Reading, and
I know not what unnecessary Learning,
Tell me, did brawny Hercules, who wand'red
In the Lion's skin, and Club, or well-set Theseus
That trod his steps, ever do the like?
No. Women
Ne'er came to such a pitch of danger yet
As to be banished all: then who ever trusted
Theseus, or Hercules with ten Drachmas? who
Could know their Minds that way? This single deed
Will make Machessa go beyond his Pillars,
And the other's Fame. They quelled but single Robbers,
You will defeat thousands of Rebels. They
Helped some poor Village, or some Town perhaps,
You will redeem a Nation.
Thousay'st something;
But I shall break my faith
To whom? to those
That have before broke theirs unto their Prince?
They'll curse me too.
As bold Machessa hunts not
The Praise of People, so she can contemn
Their Curse, when she doth well. Consider too
Nations will curse you more if you assist 'em.
But it is against my Order to deceive.
It is more against your Order to assist
Rebellious Persons against their King. Besides,
Doth not your Oath enjoin you to relieve
Distressed men? who more distressed now
Than is the King, and the Army? fear not words;
You are not Treacherous unto them, but faithful
Unto your self. Why stands this Helmet here?
Why do you wear this Fashion? to what use
Carry this Javelin?
Not to help women; no,
Men are my Oath. All shall be sent Eumela,
The King must have it: we'll be famous—
But
You must be secret 'till it all come in.
And you'll assist me in the sending of't?
Take you no care for that, it is done.
But will
The Queen not take it ill?
It is her great fear,
You'll scarce be brought to yield it up. Away,
Go, and delude 'em on, y' are safe, and may
Deceive in Conscience now.
Bellona bless thee!
But how shall we now convey it to 'em?
—Heav'n's of the Plot! No fitter men. Jove bless me!
My Lord Philondas, and my Lord Paestanus!
This your appearance to me's like the first
Appearance to a new admitted Priest,
And I am quite as doubtful now as he,
Not knowing whether 't be my fancy, or
The God, that makes the Vision.
Dear Eumela,
Thou know we do appear to Ladies still
In very flesh and blood. Though we may talk
Of spiritual Love, my Lord, and I, you know,
Could ne'er creep in at Key-holes yet; I'm sure
We pay for the opening of the doors, Eumela.
My Lord you make Paestanus blush.
I hope
I am not so ill bred Eumela.
Troth
The Camp hath spoiled you both. The Cretin Ladies
They say are far beyond our Cyprus Dames.
Yes to cleave Logs, and carry Burdens.
But
I mean for Beauty.
In whose Eyes, Eumela?
In the Town-Buls?
They say the Gods have changed
Shapes, to come down, and visit 'em.
It was that
They might be like 'em then.
For Jove could never
Be a fit Husband for 'em, till he had
Got horns, and hoofs.
Saw you no Children there?
What then Eumela? had not you read of Creatures
That have Conceived by the Air?—
Don't think of any
Such thing as man? The Wind and Sun Eumela,
Get all the Children there; that makes 'em bluster,
And rage so furiously when they are old.
Come, we lose time; where is Malthora prithee?
Answer him not; by Venus, these young Husbands
Are as impatient as a hungry Courtier,
Or a rich Heir come newly to his Means;
Do you hear me ask for Florina yet?
It is not in fashion, Sir, to love your Lady—
At least you ought not to profess it.
I
Dare swear, though none professes less, yet none
Loves more than you my Lord.
It is in the dark then;
Day-light and Love are two things. But, Eumela,
What do they do for Men now we are absent?
Do they take Physic, or else Pray?
My Lord,
Their Griefs are in your places.
Have their sighs
Got Limbs, and Bodies? Can their sadness give 'em
Comfort at Midnight?
They possess it with
A kind of sweetness, are so tender of it,
That should they part with it, they'd think they had
A second loss.
How can they pass away
Their time with that?
Why it is as necessary
To them as Friend, or Confident:
But tell me
How does Malthora bear it?
Sir, she finds
That solitude in her self, that others do
Look for in Deserts.
Come my Lord, let'sgo
And help 'em to sigh for us.
They're to come
Hither my Lord: pray stand behind these hangings
Till I discover the whole Scene; In quickly.
Here, here they come.
BLess me Eumela! I
Must get me Men's apparel, and go see
How all things stand abroad; I did but close
Mine Eyes, and presently me thought the Ghost
Of my Paestanus did appear before me,
Wounded, and bloody, and as soon as I
Went to embrace him, vanished into air.
You are so fearful, Madam, and do fancy
Danger and death so strongly, that if he
Were at this instant present here before you
You'd not believe your Eyes. Madam Florina
What's that you look on so?
It is, Eumela,
The Picture of my Loved Philondas, as
He had his Armour on, (and O the Heavens
That he should ever be in such a Habit)
But Fates would have it so; it was young Protogenes
Took it before he went. Me thinks it sometimes
Doth move, and alter Colour, and endeavour
To get loose, and come out.
Have you the Picture
Of your Lord Madam too?
Yes here, Eumela,
Drawn by the same hand: is it not very like him?
Methinks they're neither true: I've both their Statues,
Though not in Armour, and as I remember
They don't agree with them.
Pray y' let's examine
To pass the time a while.
I've newly put 'em
Both into Habits, and me thinks they look
So fresh, and lively, that I might mistake 'em,
But that I know they're absent; look you here.
Does not this look more like Philondas far,
And this more like Paestanus than the Tablets?
You must not come too near: I'll leave y' a while
To view, and judge.
Good Heavens! my Lord Philondas!
My dear Paestanus!
I am come you see
A pretty jant here to fulfil the longing
Of a young Novice-Husband.
The first day
That Hymen joined us, brought not truer joy
Unto my Soul than this.
MY Lords, the Queen
Is come to make a visit to your Ladies:
What will you do?
Go and conduct her in.
Now Madam? does your Husband vanish, when
You offer to embrace him?
O Eumela
He's gone already. This his short appearance
Is only as the appearance of a Star
To one that's perishing in a Tempest.
It is
Only to let us die with some more Comfort.
Were they to stay Eumela—
This disjoining
Of Bodies, only is to knit your hearts;
You'll form their Pictures in your Thoughts perhaps,
And once or twice more look behind the Hangings.
Peace good Eumela! here's the Queen.
CHaristus,
Heir to the Cretin Kingdom lost say you?
Yes, and suspected to lye hid in Cyprus.
And this is that doth stop the War?
This, and
The Equality of Forces.
Do our men
Awake, and rouse themselves?
Rich noble Spirits,
And Minds that have kept Altars burning still,
To Glory break out daily, she wing how
Peace and Religion did not sink, but calm 'em:
This blast will swell 'em big, and high, and make 'em
Ride Conquerors o'er the Floods.
They do not sleep then?
No, nor watch lazily; the World will see,
He, whose blessed goodness hath kept War from us,
Hath not took Courage from us too; When his
Sad studied Councels did remove the danger,
They did not then remove the Mind. The Arm
Of this days Cyprus, if provoked, will strike
As deep as Cyprus six Olympiads backwards,
And the unquiet Cretin shall appear
But as he did of old, our Exercise,
More than our Foe: a people that we suffer
To breath, and be, to keep our selves in breath.
What doth the King?
More than the meanest soldier,
Yet still comes fresh from Actions: his Commands
Are great, but his Examples greater still.
With his uncovered head he dares the Thunder,
Slights hail and snow, and wearies out a Tempest,
Then after all he shakes himself, and gives
Rain, as the Heavens did before, but with
A more serene Aspect. He doth exact
Labour, and hardness, hunger, heat, and cold,
And dust, as his Prerogatives, and counts them
Only his serious Pleasures; Others Wars
Are not so manly as his Exercises,
And pitched Fields often are more easy service
Than his mere Preparations.
It is enough;
You've spoke a Composition, so made up
Of Prince and Soldier, that the admiring World
May imitate, not equal. Come, my Lords,
I have a business to employ you back with.
I must confess, had not this Action been
Tainted with private Interest, but born
From zeal unto the Public, then it might
Have been read Valour, as it is, it will
Be styled but Fury.
Madam it had then
Been only Valour, now it is Love and Valour.
Where those Religious Names, King, Country, Father,
Are trampled over, can you call it Valour?
If trampled o'er for you. To hazard all
These holy Names, of Subject unto King,
Of Prince to Country, and of Son to Father,
And whilst I spared to shed the smallest drop
Of Blood, that might be once called yours, to have
That ignominious Name of Coward hurled on me,
And take up all their Places; what else is it
But to esteem your self a Prize, that doth
Absolve me from all these, and make me stand
Above the rate of mortals.
Father, Country,
State, Fortunes, Common wealth, they are Names that Love
Is not concerned it; that looks higher still,
And oversees all these.
It is not Love then;
For that, as it is Valiant, so it is
Just, Temperate, Prudent, summons all those Noble
Heroic Habits into one rich Mass,
And stamps them Honour.
But that Honour is
A Valour beyond that of Mortals, striving
Who shall possess most of this Mole-hill Earth.
That Honour is a Justice, that doth see
Measures, and Weights, Axes, and Rods below it.
A Temperance not concerned in Meats, and Wines.
A Prudence that doth write Charistus now
A better Patriot, than the sober'st Statesman
That plots the good of Crete.
If he that cares not
For things, be thence above them; if he sees
More nobly, that doth draw the Veil before
His Eyes to Lower Objects, then Charistus
Soars high, and nothing scopes him.
Fair Lucasia,
I am not so immodest, as to challenge
The least of these my self: but yet in that
I love your Virtues, they are all mine own.
And yet you feared I was another, whom
I durst not publicly avow. Do y'think
My Love could stould stoop to such Contrivances?
Or if I meant a subject of such worth,
I needed to pretend a Prince?
It is not
Lucasia's Love, that dares not call the Eye
Of Day to try it: But where Love's engaged
To such a Treasure as your self, what can
Be thought secure? It stands and watches still,
And fears it's very helps; could any love
Lucasia and be careless, it were a fault
Would make him not deserve her.
Could you then
Think I could be so impious unto Love
As to divide Eumela and Olyndus?
Or else so treacherous unto Friendship, as
To part Eumela and my self? Being Hearts
Are Temples, and both sorts of Love most Sacred,
To have wronged either had been Sacrilege
Worthy the horridest Thunder.
Love drinks in
All that may feed suspicion, but is deaf
To what may clear it; it is engaged so much
To the Object, that it views the Object only,
And weighs not what attends it.
Where the Heart
Offends, you blame the Passion. Love it self
Is never indiscreet, but he that Loves.
Wisdom and Love at once were never yet
Permitted to a God, I must not then
Presume they meet in me. If Love admits
Discretion, if it Ponder, and Consider,
Search, and Compare, and Judge, and then Resolve,
It is Policy, not Affection: give it Eyes,
Counsel, and Order, and it cease. What
Though it first brake from out the Chaos? it was
To make another in the Creature. Distance,
Figure, and Lineament are things that come
From something more Advised; Love never leads,
It still transports. The Motions which it feels
Are Fury, Rapture, Ecstasy, and such
As thrust it out full of Instinct, and Deity,
To meet what it desires.
Alas I it self
Hath Eyes, but it is our Blindness that doth veil them:
If Love could not consist with Wisdom, then
The World were governed by one general Malness.
It is not denied but that we may have Wisdom
Before we Love, as men may have good Eyes
Before they fix them on the Sun: but dwell they
A while upon it, and they straight grow blind
From those admired Beauties.
But if Love
Do not consider, why then doth it fear?
Why doth it form Chimaeras to it self,
And set up Thought against Thought? why is 'c alike
Tortured with Truth, and Falsehood? why afflicted
As much from Doubts, as Certainties?
This is
Not from Distrust, but Care; Love is not perfect
Till it begins to fear. It doth not know
The worth of that it seeks, unless it be
Anxious, and troubled for it: And this is
Not any thought of Blemish in the thing
It loves, but only Study to preserve it.
Who puts a Snake amongst Flowers to preserve 'em▪
Or who pours Poison into Crystal that
It may be kept from cracking? Jealous
What art thou? thou coldest not come down from Hey∣v'n;
For no such Monsters can inhabit there.
Nor can it spring from Hell; for it is born
Of Love, and there is nought but Hate.
Pray y' tell me
Who joined it unto Love? who made them swear
So firm a Friendship?
The same Deity
That joined the Sun and Light, the same that knits
The Life and Spirit.
These preserve each other:
But that doth twine and wreath it self about
Our growing Loves, as Ivy bout the Oak;
We think it shelters, when (alas!) we find
It weakens, and destroys.
It is not Jealousy
That ruins Love, but we our selves, who will not
Suffer that fear to strengthen it; Give way
And let it work, twill fix the Love it springs from
In a staid Center.
What it works I know not,
But it must needs suppose Defect in one,
Either Defect of Merit in the Lover,
Or in the Loved, of Faith; you cannot think
That I give Others Favours, when your self
Boast such a store of Merits.
O Lucasia,
Rather than be so impious as to think
That you want Faith, I must confess a want
Of Merit in my self; (which would there were not.)
And being it is so, I was compelled
To fear lest one more worthy than my self
Might throw me from my happiness. Consider
That you are born to enrich the Earth, and then
If you will have one Love and not be Jealous,
You must convert your Eye upon your Eye,
Make your own Heart Court your own Heart, and be
Your self a servant to your self.
But doth not
This Passion cease at last?
It cease to
Disturb, but still remains to quicken Love;
As Thunder cease when 't hath purged the Air,
And yet the Fire which cause it still remains
To make it move the livelier.
Were it quiet,
What Hand, Charistus, would More sweetly move
The Orbs of this our Island? who fetch in
More frequent Conquests? and who more become
The Triumphs than your self?
Believe Charistus
Dreams; Errors, false Opinions, slippery Hopes,
And Jealous Fears are now his Spoil, his Captives,
And follow Love's Triumphant Chariot, which
His Soul sits high in, and o'rlooks the vain
Things of this lower World.
Lucasia did
Only retire, not fly; Let's to the Grove,
And by the Consummation of our Loves
Under those Myrtles (which as yet perhaps
Preserve the blushing Marks of those your Angers)
Appease the offended Goddess.
This your Union
Will make your Kingdoms join; Cyprus and Crete
Will meet in your Embraces.
Our Hearts are
Love's ord'nary Employment: it is a Dart
Of a more scattering Metal that strikes you;
When he wounds Princes, he wounds Nations too.
LAdy Machessa, opportunely met.
What store of Arms prepat'd?
The Country's laid;
Spits, Andirons, Racks, and such like Utensils
Are in the very Act of Metamophosis;
Art is now sitting on them, and they will
Be hatched to Engines shortly.
Pray y' how doth
The Muster-Roule increase?
As fast as Chloe
Can take their Names; we shall be all great Women.
Pray y' what Reward shall you and I have Lady?
Why I will be the Queen of the Amazons,
And thou of the Pigmies.
I, but who shall place us
In the Amazonian, and Pigmean Throne?
Who but our Swords Philaenis? when we have
Settled the Government here at home, we will
Lead out an Army against those Warlike Dames,
And make 'em all our Vassals.
These left handed
Ladies are notable Politicians.
The King of Monomotapa you may
Be sure will be your Enemy, or else
The Book deceives me. But the Agags they
Will sure be for you.
Who may the Agags be?
Why a black ugly People, that do turn
The inside of their Eye-lids outward, that
They may look lovely; if they catch the Amazons,
They sowce 'em straight, as we do Pig, by quarters,
Or else do pickle 'em up for Winter Salads.
How did you come by all this Knowledge Phil?
You are a learned Page.
Lady, do y' think
I never read to the Women in the Nurs'ry?
But will you lose one of your Breasts? tic pity
That your left Pap should be burnt off.
Why Girl?
What use will there be of it?
To give suck.
You must go seek out some brave Alexander,
And beg some half a dozen of Children of him,
Or else you'll be no true bred Amazon.
Must they have Macedonian Fathers then?
I think the Amazonian Queen doth swear
To no such Article when She is Crowned;
But ord'narily they do so; yet however
Your Grace may send for the three Courtiers,
That you delivered from these Ladies here,
They would be glad to be employed in any
Such State-affairs. But I'd almost forgot
The Pigmies Conquest.
Have you read of them too?
Though some say that their Souls are only stopped
Into their Bodies, just as so much Quick-silver
Is put into hot Loves, to make 'em dance
As long as the heat continues; yet, believe it,
They are a subt'le Nation, a most shrewed
Advising People.
How'i you then subdue them?
By Policy, set Hays, and Traps, and Springs,
And Pitfals for 'em. And if any do
Dwell in the Rocks, make holes upon the top
As deep as Cups, and fill 'em up with Wine;
You shall have one come presently, and sip,
And when he finds the sweetness, cry Chin, Chin:
Then all the rest good Fellows straight come out,
And tipple with him till they fall asleep;
Then we may come and pack 'em up in Hampers,
Or else in Hand-baskets, and carry 'em whither
We please our selves.
A notable Stratagem!
You'll never leave your Policies Phil.
But yet
We must draw out some Soldiers however.
There's no great need of soldiers; Their Camp's
No larger than a Ginger-bread Office.
And the Men little bigger.
What half Heretic
Book tells you that?
The greatest sort they say
Are like stone-pots with Beards that do reach down
Unto their knees.
They're carried to the Wars then
As Chickens are to Market, all in Dorsers,
Some thirty Couple on a Horse.
You read
Only Apocryphal History. Believe me
They march most formally: I know it there will
Be work enough for Soldiers.
We'll train up
All the young Wenches of the City here
On purpose for this Expedition,
A•d't shall be called the Female War.
I fear
They won't be strong enough to go against 'em;
They have an Enemy doth vex 'em more
Than Horse or Man can.
Who, the Cranes you mean?
I'll beg a Patent of Her Majesty
To take up all that fly about the Country,
For the Pigmean Service
I, but who
Shall's have to Discipline 'em so, that we
May fly 'em at them off our fists?
They fly
In a most war-like Figure naturally:
However we may have a Net cast o'er
The Artillery Yard, and send for the Gentleman
That bridles Stags, and makes 'em draw Caroches,
He will exercise 'em in a Month or two,
And bring 'em to it easily.
We must carry
Six or seven hundred of Bird-Cages
And Cony-Coopes along with us.
For what?
To imprison Rebels, and there feed 'em up
With Milk, and Dazy-roots. I will so yerk
The little Gentlemen.
You must not play
The Tyrant o'er the Wretches.
You shall see
How I'll behave my self. This foreside blow
Cuts off thrice three, this back-blow thrice three more,
This foreright thrust spits half a dozen of 'em,
Bucklers and all, like so many Larks with Sage
Between them; then this down-right cleaves a stubborn
Two-footed Rebel from the Crown of the head
Down to the twist, and makes him double forked
Like a Turn Stile, or some such Engine. Others
I'll knock pall-mall, and make the wretched Caitiffs
Measure their length upon their Mother Earth,
And so bestride 'em, and cry Victory.
And what'l you do, when you are seated in
The Throne, to win your Subjects Love Philenis?
I'll stand upon a Cricket, and there make
Fluent Orations to 'em; call 'em Trusty
And Well-beloved, Loyal, and True Subjects,
And my good People: Then I'll mount on Horseback,
Shew'em my little Majesty, and scatter
Five or six hundred single pence among 'em,
Teach 'em good Language by cleft sticks, and Bay-leaves,
And Civilise 'em finally by Puppet-Plays.
Most studied, and advised!
The heart of Wisdom!
And Soul of Policy!
Come little Queen,
We'll go and make her Majesty acquainted
With all the Plot; twill take her certainly.
was all the Treasure shipped?
All, but the Pictures,
And Statues, they are reserved. I saw the Luxury,
And wealth of Cyprus sail. The Soldier doth
By this time gaze upon it.
The news, Charistus,
Of your Adventures here, I dare presume
Hath joined both Armies now. Me thinks I see
The Cyprians standing here, the Cretins there,
And, in a space between them, both Kings meeting
In a most strong Embrace, and so provoking
Clamours and shouts from both sides, and a joyful
Clattring of Weapons.
Beauteous Queen, your Virtues
Are greater far than Fame; and you your self
Greater than them! Though Gold and Purple do
Adorn your head, yet you have Wove your self
Far richer Diadems from your Royal Acts,
And made your self Immortal by producing
Immortal things. But though your wreath of Virtue
Hath made what ever the sun beholds in all
His course enamoured by you, yet if I
May pull one single one from out the rest,
There's none, for which you have more Altars raised
Unto your Name, than for that Noble Love,
Whose flames you keep still burning in your self,
And cherish in all others.
Sir, you have Conquered
A Princess, and in her a Queen: I am
The addition to your Triumph. We ow much
To you Olyndus.
I can challenge nothing
But my Charistus Friendship. It is to him
You ow these seeds of Peace. Although his Father
Appeared so tender of him, that when he
Came hither secretly to view the Rites
Of Venus, which Lucasia then performed,
The aged Man hasted to the Oracle
To know what Fortune should attend his Son,
And, for an unexpected answer, did
Banish those Priests for which our King now fights:
Yet for all this, even in this heat of danger,
H'hath made another Venture, and the Kingdom
Now grieves his second loss.
Do you know the answer
That the God gave to his enquiring Father,
For which the King did banish all the Priests?
I may repeat it now, the Event assures me
It meant you no Misfortune. It was this;
Charistus shall his Country save,
If he become his Enemies Slave.
I hope the Event will not fulfil it.
It is
Fulfilled enough to make an Oracle true.
I hope you have no Enemies, and for Slave
The Gods avert it!
He's Lucasia's Servant,
There's that fulfilled; Cyprus is now reputed
The Enemy to Crete; but as for true
And real Enemies to you Charistus,
The World hath none so Barbarous; your Virtues
Have under this disguise showed so much Prince,
That they betrayed you still to any Eye
That could discern.
Honoured Olyndus, you
Out do me still. Friends should be always equal:
You must take off, and pare your Virtues, that
You may go even with me. I ow much
To you, Eumela, too.
Her service hath
Preserved the Kingdom, and refounded Cyprus.
Two Scepters are her Debtors.
But, Eumela,
You might have told me sooner, that Lucasia
Began to feel a Passion; you ne'er knew
That I destroyed true virtuous Loves; it is
A pleasure to me to perceive their Buddings,
To know their Minutes of Increase, their Stealths,
And silent Growings; and I have not spared
To help, and bring them on.
You have so favoured
Agreeing Souls, that all the World confesses
Your own is perfect Harmony. But where
The God is Blind, should not the Creature be
Silent, and Close? That which is bred by whispers
Would dye if once proclaimed.
If it were any,
It was a fault of Trust; it is more Injustice
To betray secret Love, than to make known
Counsels of State. Cupped hath his Cabinet,
To which, if any prove unfaithful, he
Straight wounds him with the Leaden Shaft, and so
They live tormented, and dye scorned.
No more;
It is well: I meant not to Accuse, but Praise.
Have you set some to watch, and signify
The King's Return?
Three peaceful Courtiers,
Lerinus, and Ganyctor, and Iringus,
Desired that they might bring the News, and so
Are gone unto the Port.
My Ladies, you
I hope will clear up now.
I have too much
Joy to express it.
Could you see my heart,
You'd view a Triumph there.
ANd't please your Highness
There are three Ladies wait without, who, if
You have a vacant Ear, are come to inform you
Of something near concerns the State.
The old
Vexation's busy still—Pandena and
Cosmeta, and the other—are they not?
Tell 'em they may come in—How shall we do,
Eumela, now to stop their Clamour?
It is easy;
There's nothing yet provided; the Return
Of the King being now so sudden, twill amaze 'em,
And make 'em kneel for mercy to you, if
You do but threaten to disclose the Plot.
YOur business Ladies?
Please you to dismiss
Those Faces that have Beards?
Fear not, they shall not
Betray your Counsels.
Please your Highness then,
There's fear that our Design will come to nought,
Our Trust is falsified.
How so?
We came
To ask Machessa about VVeapons, and
She presently demands, how many cases
Of Knives, what Forks we have, Tosting, or Carving?
Talk we of Swords, she asks what Crisping Pins
And Bodkins we could guess might easily be
Raised through the Common-wealth?
We spake of Armour,
She straight replies, send in your steel Combs, with
The Steels you see your Faces in, we'll quickly
Convert 'em into Greaves, and Gorgets.
If
This be not treason against the Female State,
Believe not Policy, nor me.
Why she
Was your own choice; you cried her up as one
That having neither Child, nor Husband, would
Take to her self the Commonwealth as both.
We do suspect your sadness sweet Florina.
And your retir'dness too Malthora, (as
Demure as you stand here) is deep engaged.
Nor is Eumela free.
Whence do you gather it?
Pray y' why those Myrtle wreaths? why your Gates dressed?
And your Doors Crowned?
In hope our Lords will shortly
Enter, and Crown 'em more.
Most evident!
Can there be bolder Falsehood? Did we not
Agree to keep out Husbands from our City
And our Minds too? And yet behold there are
Garlands and Flowers prepared; and they to be
Received as Lovers. Husbands are at best
But a sad kind of pleasure; one good Look,
And a Salute's enough at any time
For the Good-man of the Family.
Pray y' allow
Affection more Expressions; Love doth cease
To be, when that it breaks not out into
Those signs of Joy; as Souls cease to be Souls
When they leave off to show their Operations.
This is no time for vain Philosophy,
We are to have a fine State of it shortly,
When Ladies once begin to utter Axioms,
And raise a Faction against the seven Sages.
ANd't please your Highness, three Ambassadors,
Sent from the Cretin State, do crave admit∣tance.
Usher'em in.
There's life you see in the business;
Let's yet be true. The fame of our Exploit
Already makes us sought to. There's an Honour
Not usual too l'th' Number of 'em; when
Arrived there three before from the same State?
And't please you, let Pandena, Rhodia, and I,
Manage their Entertainment?
Do so.
It shall
All be to th'honour of the Female State.
Prepare your self Pandena; here they come.
MOst Gracious, most Renowned, and most Beauteous.
Pray y' be not troublesome; We're taken up
VVholy with the Affairs of the Kingdom now.
When will your Ladyship have a Vacancy?
You are Impertinen; True Politicians
Do never use to answer on the sudden.
It is not now as heretofore; the times
Are grown more wise, and more reserved; there are
Matters on foot far greater; you must wait—
You are Ambassadors.
We should not think so,
But that you're pleased to tell us so; your usage
Hath a far different Dialect from your Tongue.
Were there not Women in your Kingdom fit
For this Employment? I perceive your State
Is utterly unfurnished, that it cannot
Send forth three Female Agents.
It is not, Madam,
The custom of our Master to commit
His Kingdom's secrets to a piece of Crystal;
That were not to Negotiate, but Betray.
You shall meet Women here, that are not Crystal,
Those that will find out you, and hide themselves.
You shall not need the help of an Interpreter
When we give Audience; Speak what Tongue you will
You shall be understood, each one of us
Hath more than one.
We easily believe it,
Though you should speak none else besides your Native.
Pray stand you by, and wait a while.
We obey.
Now will they think the better of us; it is
The way to bring our selves in Credit by
Neglecting of 'em thus. I'd have 'em know
We were to be saluted at their coming.
Their State is very unhappy, that it is
So unprovided: I believe these are
The very wisest in the Kingdom; for
They have no Manners.
You guess rightly, Madam;
The greatest Counsellors and Lawyers scarce
Know how to make a Leg.
ARm, arm, arm, arm,
The King, and Lords are within sight. Here Madam,
Pray take my Sword, and Helmet.
Worthy Gentlemen,
Doy' come to proffer aid from the Cretin King
To help us against the Men?
No Ladies: we
Come but to tell you that the King is Landed,
We are your fellow-Subjects.
Fellow-Villaines
Among your selves. Eumela, we may thank
You for all this.
But Sister of the Sword,
Great Lady Stickler—
Be patient pray y' a while—Take you this Hell∣met,
And you this Fashion Sir, and you this Lance;
Ambassadors still must be dismissed with Presents.
Where is our Plate?
Our Wealth?
Our Jewels?
Folly!
Did not my Order bind me to assist
Distressed men?
Who would ever trust a Woman?
The Queen will give y' a fair account.
It is no
Time to debate things now. The truth is, all
Was shipped, and sent the King, as one great Present
From all the Cyprian Women. If you do
Desire that he should know how it was raised,
For what intended, by what means diverted,
I'll bid him spare his thanks, and tell him it was
Not Bounty, but Misfortune that directed
This vast Supply to him.
We hope your Highness
Will be so Gracious to us, as to let us
Make the best use yet of our Evils. Twill
Be something, if that, which was meant Sedition,
May now be took for Contribution,
And we esteemed Relievers of the Army.
I do engage my Royal word, you shall
Be put in the Annals as good Members of
The Cyprian Commonwealth. But hark, the noise!
The Horses, Trumpets, Priests! They come! stand off.
ACT. V. SCEN. VIII.
APollo, who foretell'st what shall ensue,
None speaks more Dark than thou, but none More true;
If Heard, Obscure; but yet if Seen, most Bright;
Day's in thy Visage, in thy Sayings Night.
Day's in thy Visage, in thy Sayings Night.
Venus makes good what he Decrees,
And Love sulfils what he foresees,
Thus Gods help Gods, thus Mortals ow
Much to the Baize, much to the Bow.
Much to the Baize, much to the Bow.
Phoebus as Present shows us future things,
Our Trivets Counsel give, our Trees teach Kings,
And whilst our Oracle instructs the State,
What ever the Priest shall say the God makes Fate.
What ever the Priest shall say the God makes Fate.
What are your Trivets to Loves wings?
They Teach, but these do Conquer Kings:
Venus to Fate adds all the bliss,
She that makes Doves, makes Kingdoms kiss.
She that makes Doves makes Kingdoms kiss.
Thus then the Myrtle and the Baize we join.
And in one Wreath Wisdom and Love Combine.
I never reigned till now. You needed not
Have sent that Ample Treasure; I had all
Wealth in your Loves. Come, Great Din•machus,
As they joined Voices, so let us join Hearts.
Sir, your Embraces vanquish far beyond
Your Sword, though happy; you march Conqueror
More by a Glorious Peace, than if your Arm
Had scattered Deaths still as you passed; your Throne
Grows hence; you've gained what ever you have not ruined;
Your Power rules Cyprus, but your Fame the World.
Hate only is between the Ignoble, when
The Good dissent, tic only difference,
••malice; Virtue flames in both, and so
•••…hmust the other Love; their Discords are
More blameless than the Embraces of the Bad;
It is to stand off, rather than bear a Grudge.
And if they fight, when ever they do lay down
Their VVeapons, they lay down their Anger too.
As we affect then to seem good, and are so,
Let one Oblivion wrap up what hath past
On either side.
But I must first ask Pardon;
I've wronged a Deity. Great Apollo, be
Thou still propitious. Here I do restore
Thy Blameless Priests. What was but only Darkness,
I thought Contrivance; and the Priest not Loyal,
Because the God was pleased to be obscure:
But now the Event lends light to that, and Me;
And my Charistus doth his Country save
By being thus become his Enemi's Slave.
Peace rest upon 'em both; Apollo spoke it,
And Venus hath performed it.
As they joined
To make us happy, so let us pay back
United Thanks, and join their Deities in
A double Feast. It is not Men's Lot only
To need each other; even the Powers themselves
Give and take help. Affection brings about
What Counsel cannot. Thus the Gods have lent
Love unto Wisdom for an Instrument.
THough we well know the Neighbouring Plain
Can strike from Reeds as high a Strain,
And that the Scrip, and Crook
May worst our Poet's Book;
Like Fairies yet we here could stay
Till Village Cocks proclaim the Day:
And whiles your Pleasure is the Theme,
Feed and keep up the Dream.
But Sleep beginning now to shed
Poppies on every Bed,
Love stayed his hands, and said our Eyes
This Night were made his Prize:
And now (instead of Poppies) flings
These wishes on you from his wings.
The Calm of Kingdoms new made Friends,
When both enjoy their Hopes, and Ends,
The like in you Create,
And make each Mind a State:
The thoughts of Princes, when they do
Meet Princes to coin Princes too,
Possess your Breasts with Fire and Youth,
And make each dream a Truth:
The Joys of Friendship after Fight,
Of Love's first happy Night,
Of Lords returned, make you still greet,
As when you first did meet.
And, quited thus from Grief and Fear,
Think you enjoy a Cyprus here.

It would wrong our Author to bespeak your Ears;
Your Persons he adores, but Judgement fears:
For where you please but to dislike, he shall
Be Atheist thought, that worships not his Fall.
Next to not marking, it is his hope that you
Who can so ably judge, can pardon too.
His Conversation will not yet supply
Follies enough to make a Comedy;
He cannot write by the Poll; nor Act we here
Scenes, which perhaps you should see lived elsewhere;
No guilty line traduceth any; all
We now present is but conjectural;
It is a mere guess: Those then will be too blame,
Who make that Person, which he meant but Name.
That web of Manners which the Stage requires,
That mass of Humours which Poetique Fires
Take in, and boyle, and purge, and try, and then
With sublimated follies cheat those men
That first did vent them, are not yet his Art,
But as drowned Islands, or the World's fifth Part
Lye undiscovered; and he only knows
Enough to make himself ridiculous.
Think then, if here you find nought can delight,
He hath not yet seen Vice enough to Write.
WE're made my Boys, we're made; me
thinks I am
Growing into a thing that will be
worshipped.
I shall sleep one day in my
Chain, and Scarlet
At Spittle-Sermon.
Were not my wit such
I'd put out monies of being Mayor.
But O this brain of mine! that's it that will
Bar me the City Honour.
We're cried up
Of the sudden for the sole Tutors of the Age.
Esteemed discreet, sage, trainers up of youth.
Our house becomes a place of Visit now.
In my poor judgement it is as good my Lady
Should venture to commit her eldest son
To us, as to the Inns of Court: he will be
Undone here only with less Ceremony.
Speak for our credit my brave man of War.
What Meane-well, why so lumpish?
Pray y' be quiet.
Thou look as if thou plott'st the calling in
Of the Declaration, or the Abolishing
Of the Common-Prayers; cheer up; say something for us.
Pray vex me not.
These foolish puling sighs
Are good for nothing, but to endanger Buttons.
Take heart of grace man.
Fie you're troublesome.
Nay fare you well then Sir.
My Father still
Runs in my mind, meets all my thoughts, and doth
Mingle himself in all my Cogitations,
Thus to see eager villains drag along
Him, unto whom they crouched; to see him hauled,
That ne'er knew what compulsion was, but when
His virtues did incite him to good deeds,
And keep my sword dry—O unequal Nature!
Why was I made so patient as to view,
And not so strong as to redeem? why should I
Dare to behold, and yet not dare to rescue?
Had I been destitute of weapons, yet
Armed with the only name of Son, I might
Have outdone wonder. Naked Piety
Dares more than Fury well-appointed▪ Blood
Being never better sacrificed, than when
It flows to him that gave it. But alas,
The envy of my Fortune did allow
That only, which she could not take away,
Compassion; that which was not in those savage,
And knowing Beasts; those Engines of the Law,
The even kill as uncontrolled, as that.
How doe I grieve, when I consider from
What hands he suffered! hands that doe excuse
The indulgent Prison; shackles being here
A kind of Rescue. Young man tic not well
To see thy aged Father thus confined,
Good, good old man; alas thou 'rt dead to me,
Dead to the world, and only living to
That which is more than death, thy misery:
The Grave could be a comfort: And shall I—
O would this Soul of mine—But Death's the wish
Of him that fears; hoe's lazy that would dye.
I'll live and see that thing of wealth, that worm
Bred out of splendid muck; that Citizen
Like his own sullied Wares thrown by into
Some unregarded corner, and my Piety
Shall be as famous as his Avarice;
His Son whom we have in our Tuition
Shall be the Subject of my good Revenge;
I'll count my self no child, till I have done
Something thats worth that name: my Brain shall be
Busy in his undoing; and I will
Plot ruin with Religion; his disgrace
Shall be my Zeals contrivement; and when this
Shall stile me Son again, I hope twill be
Counted not wrong, but Duty. When that time
Shall give my Actions growth, I will cast off
This brood of Vipers: and will show that I
Doe hate the Poison, which I meanet' apply.
NOw help good Heaven! it is such an uncouth thing
To be a widow out of Term-time—I
Doe feel such aguish Qualms, and dumps and fits,
And shakings still an end—I lately was
A wife I do confess, but yet I had
No husband: he (alas) was dead to me
Even when he lived unto the world; I was
A widow whiles he breathed; his death did only
Make others know so much. But yet—
How now?
So melancholy sweet?
How could I choose
Being thou were not here? the time is come,
Thou'lt be as good unto me as thy word?
Nay, hang me if I ever recant. You'll take me
Both wind and limb at the venture, will you not?
Ay good Chuck, every inch of thee, she were
No true woman that would not.
I must tell you
One thing, and yet I'm loath.
I am thy Rib,
Thou must keep nothing from thy Rib, good Chuck;
Thy yoak-fellow must know all thy secrets.
Why then I'll tell you sweet.
Heaven defend!
It is true.
Now God forbid; and would you offer
To undo a widdow-woman so? I had
As leive the old Vintner were alive again.
I was not born with it I confess; but lying
In Turkey for Intelligence, the great Turk,
Somewhat suspicious of me, lest I might
Entice some of the Seraglio, did command
I should be forthwith cut.
A heathen deed
It was: none but an Infidel could have
The heart to do it.
Now you know the worst
That you must trust to, come lets to the Church.
Good Mr Hear-say, Nature ne'er intended
One woman should be joined to another.
The holy blessing of all wedlock was
T'encrease and multiply, as Mr Christopher
Did well observe last Sabbath. Isle not do
Any thing against Gods word. I do release you
Of all your promises, and that it may not
Be said you lost by loving me, take this.
Perhaps I may get you a contribution
Of the women of the Parish, as I did
The broken-bellied-man the other day.
Seeing you needs will cast me off▪ let me
Entreat this one thing of you that you would not
Make me your Table-talk, at the next Gossiping.
Indeed I pity thee poor thing, or rather
I pity thee poor nothing. Good Lieutenant
How dost thou? Thou art mindful of thy Promise?
What else my jolly wench?
Good sweet Lieutenant
Give me but leave to ask one Question of you,
Art thou entire and sound in all thy limbs?
To tell the very truth, ere now I've had
A spice of the Pox, or so; but now I am sound
As any Bell (Hem) wast not shrill my Girl, ha?
I do not ask thee about these diseases;
My question is whether thou'st all thy parts.
Faith I have lost a joint or two; as none
Of our Profession come off whole, unless
The General, and some sneaks.
My meaning is
Whether that something is not wanting that
Should write thee husband.
Ne'er fear that my wench;
Dost think the King would send me to the wars
Without I had my weapons? Eunuchs are not
Men of employment in these days; his Majesty
Hath newly put me on a piece of service;
And if I ever come off (which I doe fear
I shall not, the danger is so great) brave Widow
We'll to it and get Commanders.
If you can
Leave me, I can leave you: there are other men
That won't refuse a Fortune when it is proffered.
Well, I must to his Majesty, think on it;
So fare thee well. Thine to his very Death,
That is a Month or two perhaps, D. Slicer.
Kind Master Shape, you are exceeding welcome.
Here hath bin Mr Hearsay, and Lieutenant
You may guess at their business, but
I hope you think me faithful.
I believe
The memory of your Husbands ashes, which
Scarce yet are cold, extinguishes all flames
That tend to kindling any Love-fire: It is
A virtue in you, which I must admire
That only you amongst so many should
Be the sole Turtle of the Age.
I doe
Bear him in memory I confess; but when
I doe remember what your promise was
When he lay sick, it doth take something from
The bitterness of Sorrow. Woman was
Not made to be alone still.
Tender things
At seventeen may use that plea; but you
Are now arrived at Matron: these young sparks
Are raked up, I presume, in sager Embers.
Nay don't abuse her that must be your Wife;
You might have pity, &amp; not come with your nicknames,
And call me Turtle: have I deserved this?
If that you once hold merits, I have done;
I'm glad I know what's your Religion.
What's my Religion? it is well known there hath
Been no Religion in my house ever since
My Husband died.
How now sweet Shape? so close
Alone w' your Widow.
Sirs dare you believe it?
This thing, whose prayer it hath been these ten
Years, that she may obtain the second tooth,
And the third hair, now dotes on me, on me
That doe refuse all that are past sixteen.
Why faith this was her suit to me just now.
I had the first on it then. A Coachman, or
A Groom were fitter far for her.
You doe
Honour her too much to think she deserves
A thing that can lust moderately, give her
The sorrel Stallion in my Lords long stable.
Or the same coloured Brother, which is worse.
Why Gentlemen—
Foh, foh! she hath let fly.
Doe y' think I have no more manners than so?
Nay faith I can excuse her for that: But
I must confess she spoke, which is all one.
Her breath would rout an Army, sooner than
That of a Cannon.
It would lay a Devil
Sooner than all Trithemius charms.
Hark how
It blusters in her nostrils like a wind
In a foul Chimney.
Out you base companions,
You stinking Swabbers.
For her gate, that's such,
As if her nose did strive t'outrun her heels.
She's just six yards behind, when that appears;
It saves an Usher Madam.
You are all
Most foul-mouth'd knaves to use a woman thus.
Your plastered face doth drop against moist wea∣there.
Fie, how you writh it; now it looks just like
A ruffled boot.
Or an oyld paper Lantern.
Her nose the candle in the midst of it.
How bright it flames? Put out your nose good Lady
Your burn day-light.
Come up you lousy Raskals.
Not upon you for a Kingdom good Joane,
The great Turk, Joane—the great Turk.
Kiss him Chuck,
Kiss him Chuck opened mouthed and be revenged.
Hang you base cheating Varlet.
Don't you see
December in her face?
Sure the Surveyor
Of the highways will have to do with her
For not keeping her countenance passable.
There lies a hoar frost on her head, and yet
A constant thaw in her nose.
She's like a piece
Of fire-wood, dropping at one end, and yet
Burning in the midst.
O that endeavouring face!
When will your costiveness have done good Madam?
Do you not hear her Guts already squeak
Like Kitstrings?
They must come to that within
This two or three years; by that time she'll be
True perfect Cat: They practise before hand.
I can endure no longer, though I should
Throw off my womanhood.
No need, that's done
Already: nothing left thee, that may stile thee
Woman but Lust, and Tongue; no flesh but what
The vices of the sex exact, to keep them
In heart.
Thou art so lean and out of case
That it were absurd to call thee Devil incarnate.
You are a dry Devil troubled with the lust
Of that thou hast not, flesh.
Rogue, Rascal, Villain,
Isle show your cheating tricks I faith: all shall
Be now laid open. Have I suffered you
Thus long in my house, and ne'er demanded yet
One penny rent, for this? Isle have it all,
By this good blessed light I will.
You may
If that you please undo your self, you may.
I will not strive to hinder you. There is
Something contriving for you, which may be
Perhaps yet brought about, a Match or so;
A proper fellow; it is a trifle, that;
A thing you care not for I know. Have I
Plotted to take you off from these to match you
In better sort, and am used thus? As for
The Rent you ask, here take it, take your money;
Fill, choke your gaping throat. But if as yet
You are not deaf to counsel, let me tell you
It had been better that you ne'er had took
It may stop some proceedings.
Mr Hearsay,
You know you may have even my heart out of
My belly (as they say) if you'll but take
The pains to reach it out; I am sometimes
Peevish I doe confess; here take your money.
No.
Good Sir.
No, keep it and hoard it up.
My purse is no safe place for it.
Let me
Request you that you would be pleased to take it.
Alas it would only trouble me; I can
As willingly go light, as be your Treasurer.
Good Mr Slicer speak to him to take it,
Sweet Mr Shape, join with him.
Nay, be once
O'rerul'd by a woman.
Come, come, you shall take it.
Nay Faith you shall; here put it up good Sir.
Upon entreaty I'm content for once;
But make no Custom of't; you doe presume
Upon my easy foolishness; it is that
Makes you so bold: were it another man
He ne'er would have to doe with you. But mark me,
If ever I find you in this mood again,
I'll dash your hopes of Marriage for ever.
GOd save you Tutors both.
Fie Andrew, fie;
What kiss your hand? you smell, not complement.
Besides, you come too near when you salute.
Your breath may be discovered; and you give
Advantage unto him you thus accoast
To shake you by the hand, which often doth
Endanger the whole arm. Your Gallant's like
The Crystal glass, brittle; rude handling cracks him.
To be saluted so were to be wounded.
His parts would fall asunder like unto
Spilt Quicksilver; an Ear, an Eye, a Nose
Would drop like Summer fruit from shaken Trees.
For the same reason I'd not have you dance.
Some Courtiers, I confess, doe use it; but
They are the sounder sort, those foolish ones
That have a care of health, which you shall not
If you'll be ruled by me. The hazard's great,
It is an adventure, an exploit, a piece
Of service for a Gentleman to caper.
A Gallant's like a Leg of Mutton, boiled
By a Spanish Cooke; take him but by the one End
And shake him, all the flesh false from the bones,
And leaves them bare immediately.
I would
Not be a leg of Mutton here.
I saw
In France a Monsieur, only in the Cutting
Of one cross Caper, Rise a man, and come
Down, to the amazement of the standers by,
A true extemporary Skeleton;
And was strait read on.
Sure this man,
Good Tutor, was quite rotten.
See how you
Betray your breeding now! quite rotten! it is
Rottenness perhaps in Footmen, or in Yeomen,
It is tenderness in Gentlemen; They are
A little over-boyl'd, or so.
He is
A Churl, a Hind, that's wholesome; some raw thing
That ne'er was at London: One in whom
The Clown is too predominant. Refined
People feel Naples in their bodies; and
An Ach in the bones at Sixteen, passes now
For high dissent; it argues a great birth.
Low bloods are never worthy such infection.
Ay, but my Father bid me I should live honest,
And say my Prayers, that he did.
If that
You cannot sleep at any time, we do
Allow you to begin your Prayers, that so
A slumber may seize on you.
But as for
Your living honost, it were to take away
A trade in the Common-wealth; the Surgeons
Benefit would go down: you may go on
In foolish chastity, eat only Salads,
Walk an unskilful thing, and be to learn
Something the first night of your wife; but that's
To marry out of fashion.
Here's no Proofs,
No Doctrines, nor no Uses. Tutor I
Would fain learn some Religion.
Religion?
Yes to become a Martyr, and be pictured
With a long Labell out of your mouth, like those
In Foxes Book; just like a Juggler drawing
Ribbon out of his throat.
I must be gone.
Obedience is the first step unto science;
Stay and be wise.
Indeed I dare not stay
The Glitter works you sent to purge gross humours.
Being you will not take your Lecture out
Good morrow to y' good Andrew. This soft fool
Must swim in's Fathers wealth. It is a curse
That Fortune justly makes the City's lot,
The young Fool spends what ever the old Knave got.
SIr let me tell you this is not the least
Of things wherein your wisdom shows it self,
In that you've placed your Son in this good sort.
Nay nay, let me alone to give him breeding;
I did not hold the University▪
Fit for the training up of such a Spirit.
The University? 't had been the only way
To have took him off his courage, and his metal,
He had returned as Slaves doe from the Galleys,
A naked shorn thing with a thin docked top,
Learnedly cut into a Logic mode.
A private Oath given him at first Entrance
Had sworn him Pilgrim unto Conventicles;
Engaged him to the hate of all, but what
Pleases the stubborn froward Elect.
But we
Following another Model doe allow
Freedom and courage, cherish and maintain
High noble thoughts—
Set nature free, and are
Chemists of manners—
Do instruct of States—
And Wars: there's one, look on him—
Doe but view
That searching Head—
The very soul of Battle,
True steel.
H' hath been an Agent some few years
(A score or so) for Princes, and as yet
Doth not write forty.
I confess I can
Discover the Entrails of a State perhaps,
Lay open a Kingdoms Paunches, show the bowels
And inwards of a Seigniory or two;
But for your deeds of Valour, there is one,
Although I speak it to his face, that can
Write a Geography by his own Conquests.
H' hath fought o'er Strabo, Ptolomy and Stafford;
Travelled as far in arms, as Lithgoe naked.
Born weapons whither Coriat durst not
Carry a shirt or shoes. Jack Mandevil
Ne'er sailed so far as he hath steered by Land;
Using his Colours both for mast and sail.
I'd thought h' had been Lieutenant.
That's all one.
I've worn some Leather out abroad; let out
A heathen Soul or two; fed this good sword
With the black blood of Pagan Christians;
Converted a few Infidels with it.
But let that pass. That man of peace there hath
Been trusted with Kings Breasts—
His name is heard
Like Thunder, and that mere word, Slicer, hath
Sufficed unto victory.
He's close,
Reserved, locked up. The secrets of the King
Of Tartary, of China, and some other
Counsels of moment have been so long kept
In's body without vent, that every morning
Before he covers them with some warm thing
Or other you may smell 'em very strongly;
Distinguish each of them by several scents—
A grove of Pikes are rushes to him, hail
More frights you, than a shower of Bullets him—
The Dutch come up like broken beer; the Irish
Savour of Usquebaugh; the Spanish they
Smell like unto perfume at first, but then
After a while end in a fatal steam—
One Drum's his Table, the other is his Music.
His Sword's his Knife, his Colours are his Napkins▪
Carves nourishing Horse, as he is used to do
The hostile Paguim, or we venison: Eats
Gunpowder with his meat instead of Pepper,
Then drinks o'er all his Bandoleers, and fights—
Secrets are ranked and ordered in his belly,
Just like Tobacco leaves laid in a sweat.
Here lies a row of Indian secrets, then
Something of 's own on them; on that another
Of China Counsels, covered with a lidd
Of New-found-land discoveries; next, a bed
Of Russia Policies, on them a lay
Of Prester-Johnion whispers—
Slights a tempest;
Counts lightning but a giving fire, and thunder
The loud report when heaven hath discharged.
H' hath with his breath supplied a breach.
When he's once fixed no Engine can remove him.
It would be a Policy worth hatching, to
Have him dissected, if it were not too cruel.
All states would lye as open as his bowels.
Turkey in's bloody Liver; Italy
Be found in's reins; Spain busy in his Stomach;
Venice would float in's Bladder; Holland sail
Up and down all his veins; Bavaria lie
Close in some little gut, and Ragioni
Di Stato generally reek in all.
I see my Son's too happy; he is born
To be some man of Action, some Engine
For the overthrow of Kingdoms.
Troth he may
Divert the Torrent of the Turkish rule
Into some other Tract; damme up the stream
Of that vast headlong Monarchy, if that
He want not means to compass his intents.
The Turkish Monarchy's a thing too big
For him to manage; he may make perhaps
The Governor of some new little Island,
And there plant Faith and Zeal: But for the present
M'ambition's only to contrive a Match
Between Sir Thomas Bite-figg's only Daughter,
And (if I may so call him now) my Son;
Twill raise his Fortunes somewhat.
We have got
One that will doe more good wed's tongue that way
Than that uxorious shower that came from Heaven,
But you must oil it first.
I understand you
Grease him i'th'fist you mean: there's just ten Pieces,
It is but an earnest: If he bring about,
I'll make those then a hundred.
Think it done.
OUr life methinks is but the same with others;
To cousin, and be cozened, makes the Age.
The Prey and Feeder are that Civil thing
That Sager heads call Body Politic.
Here is the only difference; others cheat
By statute, but we do it upon no grounds.
The fraud's the same in both, there only wants
Allowance to our way: the Common-wealth
Hath not declared her self as yet for us;
Wherefore our Policy must be our Charter.
Well managed Knav'ry is but one degree
Below plain Honesty.
Give me villainy
That's circumspect, and well advised, that doth
Colour at least for goodness. If the Cloak
And Mantle were pulled off from things, it would be
As hard to meet an honest Action as
A liberal Alderman, or a Court Nun.
Knowing then how we must direct our steps,
Let us chalk out our paths; you, Shape, know yours.
Where ever I light on Fortune, my Commission
Will hold to take her up: I'll ease my silken
Friends of that idle luggage, we call Money.
For my good toothless Countess, let us try
To win that old Emeried thing, that like
An Image in a German clock, doth move,
Not walk, I mean that rotten Antiquary.
Hee'i surely love her, because she looks like some
Old ruined piece, that was five Ages backward.
To the great Vestry wit, the Livery brain,
My Common-Councell Pate, that doth determine
A City business with his gloves on's head,
We must apply good hope of wealth and means.
That griping Knight Sir Thomas must be called
With the same lure: he knows to a crum how much
Loss is in twenty dozen of Bread, between
That which is broke by the hand, and that is cut.
Which way best keeps his Candles, bran or straw.
What tallow's lost in putting of 'm out
By spittle, what by foot, what by the puff,
What by the holding downwards, and what by
The extinguisher; which week will longest be
In lighting, which spend fastest; he must hear
Nothing but Moieties, and Lives, and Farms,
Copies, and Tenures▪ he is deaf to th'rest.
I'll speak the language of the wealthy to him.
My mouth shall swill with Bags, Revenues, Fees,
Estates, Reversions, Incomes, and assurance.
He's in the Gin already, for his Daughter
She'll be an easy purchase.
I do hope
We shall grow famous; have all sorts repair
As duly to us, as the barren Wives
Of aged Citizens do to St Antholins.
Come let us take our Quarters: we may come
To be some great Officers in time,
And with a reverend Magisterial frown,
Pass sentence on those faults that are our own.
It is destined, I'll be valiant, I am sure
I shall be beaten with more credit then,
Than now I do escape. Lieutenant hast
Bethought thy self as yet? hast any way
To make my Sword fetch blood?
You never yet
Did kill your man then?
No.
Nor get your Wench
With child I warrant?
O Sir.
You're not quite
Free of the Gentry till you've mart one man
And made another: when one fury hath
Cried quit with t'other, and your Lust repaired
What Anger hath destroyed, the Titles yours,
Till then you do but stand for it.
Pox! who'd be
That vile scorned Name, that stuffs all Court-gate Bills?
Lieutenant thou may teach me valour yet.
Teach thee? I will inspire thee man. I'll make
Thy name become a terror, and to say
That Have-at-all is coming, shall make room
As when the Bears are in Procession.
Hark hither Franks—
That's good, but—
How think now?
Nay he will pay you large—lie.
Pay, what else?
Make him believe the Citizen's his Guest.
The Citizen that he is his.
Concluded;
Would you fight fair or conquer by a spell?
I do not care for Witchcraft; I would have
My strength rely merely upon it self.
There is a way that I ne'er showed it yet,
But to one Spaniard, and it was wondrous happy.
Think me a second Spaniard worthy Sir.
Then listen. The design is by a dinner;
An easy way you'll say, I'll say a true;
Hunger may break stone walls, it ne'er hurts men.
Your cleanly feeder is your man of valour.
What makes the Peasant grovel in his muck,
Humbling his crooked soul, but that he eats
Bread just in colour like it? Courage ne'er
Vouchsafed to dwell a minute, where a sullen
Pair of brown loaves darkened the dirty Table;
Shadows of bread, not bread. You never knew
A solemn Son of Bagpudding and Pottage
Make a Commander; or a Tripe-eater
Become a Tyrant: he's the Kingdoms arm
That can feed large, and choicely.
If that be
The way, I'll eat my self into courage,
And will devour valour enough quickly.
It is not the casual eating of those meats,
That doth procure those Spirits, but the order,
And manner of the meal; the ranking of
The dishes, that does all; else he that hath
The greatest range would be the hardest man.
Those goodly Juments of the Guard would fight
(As they eat Beef) after six stone a day;
The Spit would nourish great Attempts: my Lord
Would lead a Troop, as well as now a Masque;
And force the Enemies sword with as much ease
As his Mistresses Bodkin: Gallants would
Owe valour to their Ordinaries, and fight
After a crown a meal.
I do conceive
The Art is all in all. If that you'll give
A bill of your directions, I'll account
My self obliged unto you for my safety.
Take it then thus. All must be Soldier-like;
No dish but must present Artillery.
Some military instrument in each.
Imprimis six or seven yards of Tripe
Displayed instead of the Ensign.
Why, you said,
Tripe-eaters ne'er made Tyrants.
Peace Sir, Learners
Must be attentive and believe. Do y' think
We'll eat this? it is but for formality;
Item a Collar of good large fat Brawn
Served for a Drum, waited upon by two
Fair long black Puddings lying by for drumsticks;
Item a well grown Lamprey for a Fife;
Next some good curious Marchpanes made into
The form of Trumpets: Then in order shall
Follow the Officers. The Captain first
Shall be presented in a warlike Cock,
Swimming in whitebroth▪ as he's wont in blood;
The Sergeant Major he may bustle in
The shape of some large Turkey; For my self,
Who am Lieutenant, I'm content there be
A Bustard only; let the Corporal
Come sweating in a Breast of Mutton, stuffed
With Pudding, or strut in some aged Carpe,
Either doth serve I think. As for Perdues
Some choice Sous'd-fish brought couchant in a dish
Among some fennel, or some other grass,
Shows how they lie in the field. The Soldier then
May be thus ranked. The common one Chicken,
Duck, Rabbit, Pigeon. For the more Gentile,
Snipe, Woodcock, Partridge, Pheasant, Quail will serve.
Bravely contrived.
That weapons be not wanting
We'll have a dozen of bones well charged with marrow
For Ordnance, Muskets, Petronels, Peters;
Twelve yards of Sausage by instead of Match;
And Caveari then prepared for wild-fire.
Rare Rogue! how I do love him now me thinks.
Next we'll have true fat, eatable old Pikes;
Then a fresh Turbot brought in for a Buckler,
With a long Spitchcock for the sword adjoined;
We'll bring the ancient weapons into play.
Most rare by heaven.
Peaches, Apricots,
And Malecotoons, with other choicer Plums
Will serve for large sized Bullets; then a dish
Or two of Peas for small ones. I could now
Tell you of Pepper in the stead of Powder,
But that it is not in fashion amongst us Gallants;
If this might all stand upon Drum heads, it would
Work somewhat better.
Will it so? then we will have 'em
From every ward in the City.
No I'm loath
To put you to such charge: for once, a long
Table shall serve the turn; it is no great matter.
The main thing's still behind: we must have there
Some Fort to scale; a venison pastie doth it:
You may have other Pies instead of outworks;
Some Sconces would not be amiss, I think.
When this is all prepared, and when we see
The Table look like a pitched Battle, then
We'll give the word, Fall too, slash, kill, and spoil;
Destruction, rapine, violence, spare none.
Thou hast forgotten Wine, Lieutenant, wine.
Then to avoid the gross absurdity
Of a dry Battle, cause there must some blood
Be spilt (on the enemies side I mean) you may
Have there a Runlet of brisk Claret, and
As much of Elegant, the same quantity
Of Tent would not be wanting, it is a wine
Most like to blood. Some shall bleed fainter colours,
As Sack, and White wine. Some that have the itch
(As there are Taylors still in every Army)
Shall run with Rhenish, that hath Brimstone in it.
When this is done fight boldly; write your self
The tenth or 'leventh Worthy, which you please,
Your choice is free.
I'll be the gaming Worthy;
My word shall be Twice twelve; I think the dice
Ne'er mounted any upon horseback yet.
We'll bring your friends &amp; ours to this large dinner:
It works the better eaten before witness.
Beware you say it is yours: Confession is
One step to weakness, private Conscience is
A Theater to valour. Let's be close.
Old Credulous, and his Son, and Mr Caster
Shall all be there.
But then they will grow valiant
All at my charge.
Ne'er fear't; th'unknowing man
Eats only Flesh, the understanding Valour;
His ignorance in the mystery keeps him coward:
To him it is but a Meal; to you it is virtue.
It shall be kept here.
No fitter place; there is
An old rich Clutchfist Knight, Sir Thomas Bitefig,
Invite him too; perhaps I may have luck,
And break his Purse yet open for one hundred.
A Usurer is somewhat exorable
When he is full: He ne'er lends money empty.
Discreet, and wisely done; I was about
To have prompted it.
Stout Mr Haveatall
Lets be sworn Brothers.
Pox! thou fear Isle beat thee
After I've eaten. Dost thou think I'll offer't?
By my next meal I won't: nay I do love
My friends how ever: I do but think how I
Shall bastinado o'er the Ordinaries.
Armed with my sword, Baton and foot Isle walk
To give each rank its due. No one shall scope,
But he I win off.
You shall have at least
Some twenty warrants served upon you straight;
The trunck-hose Justices will try all means
To bind you to the Peace, but that your strength
Shall not be bound by any.
Surgeons will
Pray for your health and happiness, you may
Bring 'em to be your Tributaries, if
You but deny to fight a while.
My teeth
Are on an edge till I do eat; now will
I cousin all men without opposition.
I feel my strength increase with very thought on it.
Sword, sword, thou shalt grow fat; and thou Baton
Hold out I prithee, when my labour's done,
I'll plant thee in the Tower-yard, and there
Watered with wine thou shalt revive, and spring
In spite of Nature with fresh succulent boughs,
Which shall supply the Commonwealth with Cudgels.
Thou I first meet after this meal I do
Pronounce unhappy shadow; happy yet
In that thou'lt fall by me. Some men I will
Speak into Carcass, Some I'll look to death,
Others I'll breath to dust, none shall hold back
This fatal Arm: The Templers shall not dare
T'attempt a rescue; no mild words shall bury
My splitted spitchcock'd—
Oliv'd, hashed—
Dri'd, powdered.
Roasted fury.
IF what I speak prove falss, then stigmatise me.
I nas not what you mean; Depardieux you
Snyb mine old years, Sans fail I wene you bin
A Jangler, and a Golierdis.
I swear
By these two Janus heads you had of us,
And your own too, as reverend as these,
There is one loves you that you think not on.
Had be, none pleasance is me ylaft,
This white top writes my much years, I wis
My fire yreken is in Ashen cold,
I can no whit of dalliance: If I kissen
These thick stark bristles of mine beard will pricken
Ylike the skin of Hownd-fish. Sikerly
What wends against the grains is lytherly.
Me thinks you're strong enough and very lusty,
Fit to get heirs; among your other pieces
Of age and time, let one young face be seen
May call you Father.
Wholesome counsel! but
The world is now full Tykel sykerly;
It is hard to find a Damosel unwenned;
They being all Coltish and full of Ragery,
And full of gergon as is a flecken Pie.
Who so with them makes that bond anon
Which men do clypen spousaile, or wedlock,
Saint Idiot is his Lord I wis.
This is
No tender and wanton thing, she is a stayed
And settled widow, one who'l be a Nurse
Unto you in your latter days.
A Norice
Some del ystept in age! so mote I gone
This goes aright, how highteth she say you?
Mrs Joane Potluck, Vintner Potluck's widow.
Joane Potluck Spinster. Lore me o thing mere
Alouten, what time began she brendle thus?
On Thursday morning last.
Y' blessed Thursday,
Ycliped so from Thor the Saxons God.
Ah benedicite I might soothly said,
Mine mouth hath itched all this livelong day
All night me met eke, that I was at Kirk;
My heart began quip full oft. Dan Cupido
Sure sent thylke sweven to mine head.
You shall
Know more if you'll walk in.
Wend you before me,
Cembeth thy self, and pyketh now thy self;
Sleeked thy self; make cheer much Digne good Robert:
I do arret thou shalt acquainted bin
With Nymphs and Fawny, and Hamadryades;
And yeke the sisterne nine Pierides
That were transmued into Birds, nemp'd Pies,
Metamorphosers, wat well what I mean.
Tic is as Jolly now as fish in Seine.
CAn I lie hid no where securely from
The throng, and press of men? must every place
Become a Theater, where I seek shelter?
And solitudes become markets, because I'm there?
Good Sir, I know your tricks: you would entrap;
This is your snare, not your request.
Take heed,
He's noised about for a deep searching head:
Isle pawn my life it is a trick.
Leave off these Gins,
You do not do it handsomely; you think
You've met with fools I warrant.
On my life
A spy, a mere informer.
As I hope
For fortunes, my intentions are most fair.
A Gamesters Oath: he hath some reservation.
Yet did I think you true—
By all that's good,
You do me wrong to think, that I'd wrong you.
When I lay Agent last in new Atlantis
I met with what you now desire, a strange
New way of winning, but yet very sure.
Were not the danger great I'd—
Do you think
I will betray my self, or you, whom I
Esteem above my self? I have as yet
One hundred left; some part of which—
Faith Sir,
These times require advice; if it should come
Unto the Councels ear once, he might be
Sent into other Kingdoms, to win up
Monies for the relief of the State, and so
Be as it were an honest kind of Exile.
If I do ever discover may I want
Money to pay my Ordinary, may I
At my last stake (when there is nothing else
To lose the game) throw Ames Ace thrice together.
Isle give you forty pound in hand—
I may
Show you the virtue of 't, though not the thing;
I love my Country very well. Your high
And low men are but trifles: your poised Dye
That's ballasted with Quicksilver or Gold
Is gross to this—
Profer him more I say.
Here's fifty—
For the bristle Dye it is
Not worth that hand that guides it; toys fit only
For Clerks to win poor Costermongers ware with.
You do not come on well.
Here's threescore—
Then
Your hollowed thumb joined with your wriggled box,
The slur, and such like are not to be talked of;
They're open to the eye. For Cards you may
Without the help of any secret word,
Or a false hand, without the cut or shuffle,
Or the packed trick, have what you will your self;
There's none to contradict you.
If you please
But to instruct me here is fourscore pound.
Do y' think it is money I esteem? I can
Command each Term, by Art as much as will
Furnish a Navy. Had you but five pound
Left you in all the world, I'd undertake
Within one fortnight you should see five thousand.
Not that I covet any of your dross,
But that the power of this Art may be
More demonstrably evident, leave in
My hands all but some smaller sum to set,
Something to stake at first.
He will tell you all
If you but seem to trust him.
Here I'll lay
Down in your hands all but this little portion,
Which I reserve for a Foundation.
Being you're confident of me, and I
Presume your lips are sealed up to silence,
Take that, which I did never yet discover;
So help you Fortune, me Philosophy.
(I must entreat your absence Mr Shape.)
I do presume you know the strength and power
That lies in Fancy.
Strange things are done by it.
It works upon that which is not as yet.
The little Aethiop Infant had not been
Black in his Cradle, had he not been first
Black in the Mothers strong Imagination.
It is thought the hairy Child that's shown about
Came by the Mothers thinking on the Picture
Of Saint Iohn Baptist in his Camels Coat.
See we not Beasts conceive, as they do fancy
The present colours placed before their Eyes?
We owe pied Colts unto the varied horsecloth;
And the white Partridge to the neighbouring snow.
Fancy can save or kill; it hath clos' up
Wounds when the Balsam could not, and without
The aid of salves; to think hath been a cure.
For Witchcraft then, thats's all done by the force
Of mere Imagination. That which can
Alter the course of Nature, I presume
You'll grant shall bear more rule in petty hazards.
It must, it must, good Sir I pray go on.
Now the strong'st fancies still are found to dwell
In the most simple; they being easiest won
To the most firm belief, who understand not
Who it is they do believe. If they think twill
Be so, it will be so; they do command,
And check the course of Fortune; they may stop
Thunder, and make it stand, as if arrested,
In its mid journey: If that such a one
Shall think you'll win, you must win; it is a due
That nature pays those men in recompense
Of her deficiency, that what ever they think
Shall come to pass. But now the hardest will be
To find out one that's capable of thinking.
I know you can produce an Instrument
To work this your design by. Let me owe you
The whole and entire curtsy.
I've one
Committed to my custody but lately,
The powerfull'st that way, I ever found yet;
He will but think he shall be abused in such
A Company, and he's abused; he will
Imagine only that he shall be cheated,
And he is cheated: All still comes to pass.
He's but one pin above a Natural: But—
We'll purchase him; I'll take up for it; old Simon
Shall have my Farm outright now: what's a piece
Of dirty Earth to me? a clod? a turf?
Because I see your freer nature's such,
As doth deserve supplies, I'll do my best
To win him or a while into your service.
If I should strive to pay you thanks, I should
But undervalue this great curtsy.
Sir, give me leave to think &amp; worship. Stay;
First will I beggar all the Gentlemen
That do keep Terms; then build with what I win.
Next I'll undo all gaming Citizens,
And purchase upon that: the Foreman shall
Want of his wonted opportunities,
Old Thomas shall keep home I warrant him.
I will ascend to the Groom Porters next.
Fly higher Games, and make my mincing Knights
Walk musing in their knotty Freeze abroad;
For they shall have no home. There shall not be
That pleasure that I'll balk: I'll run o'er Nature;
And when I've ransacked her, I'll weary Art;
My means I'm sure will reach it. Let me see
Twill yearly be—By Heaven I know not what—
Ne'er think to sum it, it is impossible;
You shall ne'er know what Angels, Pieces, Pounds,
These names of want and beggary mean; your tongue
Shall utter nought but millions: you shall measure,
Not count your moneys; your revenues shall
Be proud and insolent, and unruly;
They shall increase above your conquered spendings
In spite of their excess; your care shall be
Only to tame your riches, and to make them
Grow sober, and obedient to your use.
I'll send some forty thousand unto Pals;
Build a Cathedral next in Banbury;
Give Organs to each Parish in the Kingdom;
And so root out the unmusicall Elect.
I'll pay all Soldiers whom their Captains won't;
Raise a new Hospital for those maimed People
That have been hurt in gaming; Then build up
All Colleges, that Ruin hath demolished,
Or, interruption left imperfect.
'Twil
Never be done I think, unless you do it.
Provide the wealthiest Gamesters, there's but one
Thing that can do us wrong, Discovery.
You have no enemy, but frailty.
Night
And silence are loud names, compared with me.
I see the tide of Fortune rolling in
Without resistance. Go, be close, and happy.
Upon my Conscience now he cheated me;
I could have never lost it else so strangely.
What is a paltry cloak to a man of worth?
It barred men only of the sight of your body:
Your handsomeness will now appear the better.
He was as like our Mr Shape, as could be;
But that he had a patch upon his Cheek,
And a black beard, I should have sworn it were he:
It was some body in his clothes I'm sure.
Some cunning Cheater upon my life won
His cloak and suit too.
There it is for certain.
Pies take him, doth he play for cloaks still? Surely
He hath a Fly only to win good clothes.
The Pox and Plague take all ill fortune! this
The second time that he hath cheated me:
My very best suit that I had!
How now?
What lost your cloak, and suit? A jest I vow;
I vow a pretty jest: 'odsnigs I guessed so;
I saw him have it on; it made him look as like you,
As like you—It is a Rogue, a mere Decoy.
A Rogue, a mere Decoy? and yet like me?
Nay hold, I mean he is a Rogue, when that
He hath his own clothes on. D'y' think that I
Would call him so, when he is in your suit?
No more of that good Andrew, as you love me
Keep in your wit.
Speak Tutor, do I use
To quarrel? speak good Tutor.
That wit Andrew
Of yours will be the undoing of you, if
You use't no better.
Faith I thought I might
Have broke a witty jest upon him, being
I've lost my cloak.
True, but he has lost his too:
And then you know that is not lawful wit.
Here's Mr Credulous, and old Sir Thomas,
They have some business with you.
Bring 'em in.
My business lies not here Sirs, fare you well.
For Gods sake don't you tell old Simon on it now.
GOd save you good Sir Thomas.
Save you Sir.
You're welcome Mr Credulous.
Come hither;
Whither do you steal now? what? whore's your cloak?
Going to foils even now, I put it off.
To tell you truth he hath lost it at Doublets.
With what a lie you'd flap me in the mouth?
Thou hast the readiest invention
To put off any thing—thou had it from
Thy mother I'll be sworn; 'tnere came from me.
Peace as you love your self; if that the Knight
Should once perceive that he were given to gaming,
It would make him break the match off presently.
Sr Thomas here's my Son; he may be yours,
If you please to accept him.
Father don't
Give me away for this: try me once more.
I like his person well enough, if that
You'll make him an Estate convenient.
He hath more in him Sir than he can show;
He hath one fault, he's something covetous.
Mary a very commendable fault.
He is descended of no great high blood:
He hath a House, although he came of none.
His Grandfather was a good Livery man,
Paid scot and lot, old Timothy Credulous
My Father, though I say it that should not.
I don't regard this thing, that you call blood:
It is a mere name, a sound.
Your Worship speaks
Just like your self; me thinks he's noble,
That's truly rich: men may talk much of Lines,
Of Arms, of Blood, of Race, of Pedigree,
Houses, Descents, and Families; they are
But empty noise God knows, the idle breath
Of that puff nothing Honour; Formal words,
Fit for the tongues of men that ne'er knew yet
What Stem, what Gentry, nay, what virtue lies
In great Revenues.
Well and pithy said,
You may work on my Daughter, and prevail,
For that young stripling: It is a foolish wench,
An unexperienced Girl, she'd like to have been
Caught by Sir Robert Littleworths Son, if that
I had not banished him my house: a youth
Honest enough I think, but that he's poor;
Born to more Name than Fortune.
He is safe
For ever wooing. I have laid his Father
Out of harm's way; there's picking meat for him:
And God knows where he's gon; he hath not been
Seen this long while; he's sure turned vagabond;
No sight of him since the Arrest of his Father.
Andrew address your self too good Sir Thomas.
'Slid Father you're the strangest man— I won't.
As God shall mend me you're the proudest thing—
Thou can not complement, but in Caparisons.
What's that to you? I'd fain say something yet;
But that I can't my losses do so vex me.
Come think not on it my Boy, I'll furnish thee.
Sir, though—
Nay, to it I say; help him Sir, help him.
Sir, though without my cloak at this time—
To morrow I shall have one—give me leave
Barely to say—I am your servant Sir—
In hose and doublet.
I'll do what you told me.
Take heed: if that you do it he will guess you're given
To idle spendings, and so cross the match.
I will invite him as to my self.
Do so.
Sir Thomas, if you'll please so far to grace us,
As be a guest to morrow here, we shall
Study hereafter to deserve the favour.
Although I do not use to eat at Ord'naries,
Yet to accept your curtsy, good friends,
I'll break my wonted custom.
You shall have it
With a free heart.
If I thought otherwise,
I do assure you, I'd not venture hither.
HArrow alas! I swelt here as I go;
Brenning in fire of little Cupido.
I no where hoart yfeele, but on mine head.
Huh. huh, huh, so; ycapred very wele.
I am thine Leek, thou Chaser eloquent;
Mine head is white, but o mine tail is green.
This is the Palyes where mine Lady wendeth
Saint Francis, and Saint Benedight,
Bless this house from wicked wight,
From the Night-mare and the Goblin,
That is hight good fellow Robin.
Keep it from all evil Spirits,
Fairies, Weasels, Rats and Ferrets,
From Curfew time
To the next prime.
Come forth mine Duck, mine Bryd, mine honycomb.
Come forth mine Cinnamon.
Who is it that calls?
A Knight most Gent.
What is your pleasure Sir?
Thou art mine pleasure, by dame Venus brent;
So fresh thou art, and therewith so lycand.
Alas! I am not any flickering thing:
I cannot boast of that slight-fading gift
You men call beauty; all my handsomeness
Is my good breeding, and my honesty.
I could plant red, where you now yellow see;
But painting shows an harlot.
Harlot, so
Called from one Harlotha Concubine
To deignous Wilhelme, hight the Conqueror.
Were he ten Williams, and ten Conquerors
I'd have him know it, I scorn to be his Harlot.
I never yet did take presse-money to
Serve under any one.
Then take it now.
Werme kiss! Thine lips ytaste like marrow milk;
Me thinks that fresh butter runs on them.
I grant well now, I do enduren woe,
As sharp as doth the Titius in Hell,
Whose stomach fowls do tyrant ever more,
That heighten Vultures, as do tellen Clerks.
You've spoke my meaning, though I do not know
What it is you said. Now see the fortune on it;
We do know one another Souls already;
The other must needs follow. Whore's your dwelling?
Yclose by Aldersgate there dwells one
Wights clypen Robert Moth; now Aldersgate
Is hotten so from one that Aldrich hight;
Or else of Elders, that is, ancient men;
Or else of Aldern trees which growden there;
Or else as Heralds say, from Aluredus:
But whence so ever this Yate ycalled is
There dwells Robert Moth thine Paramour.
Can you be constant unto me as I
Can be to you?
By Wooden God of Saxons,
From whence comes Wensday, that is Wodensday,
Truth is a thing that ever I will keep,
Unto thylke in which I creep into
My Sepulchre; I'll be as faithful to thee,
As Chanticleer to Madam Partelot.
Here then I give away my heart to you,
As true a heart as ever widow gave.
I Robert Moth, this tenth of our King
Give to thee Joan Potluck my biggest crumpe Ring▪
And with it my Carcass entire I bequeathen
Under my foot to Hell, above my head to heaven:
And to witness that this is sooth,
I bite thy red lip with my tooth.
Though for a while our bodies now must part,
I hope they will be joined hereafter.
O!
And must we part? alas, and must we so?
Sin it may be no bet, now gang in peace.
Though soft into mine bed I gin to sink
To sleep long as I'm wont to done, yet all
Will be for nought; I may well leg and wink,
But sleep shall there none in this heart ysink.
SO now the Mortgage is mine own outright;
I swear by the faith of my Body now
It is a pretty thing, of my corporal Oath
A very pretty thing. Besides the house,
Orchards, and Gardens: some two hundred Acres
Of Land that bears as good Country corn,
For Country corn, as may be.
As I'd have it.
How now good friend ! where dost thou live? dost thou
Know Caster's Farm?
Yes Sir; I fear it is gon:
Sure Caster's Farm is cast away.
A jest!
Good troth a good one of a Country one;
I see there's wit there too. Then thou dost know it.
I am afraid I shall not know it long;
I shall lose my acquaintance.
'Snigs another!
A very perilous head, a dangerous brain.
God bless my Master, and the Devil take
Some body else.
Um! that's not quite so good
As the other two; that some body else is me:
(Now you shall see how he will abuse me here
To mine own face) why some Body else good Brother?
The rich gout rot his bones; an hungry, old,
Hard griping Citizen, that only feeds
On Heyrs and Orphans goods, they say must have it:
One that ne'er had the wisdom to be honest;
And's therefore Knave, because it is the easier Art.
I know he hath not given half the worth on it.
It is a mere cheat.
'Slid Brother thou hast paid him
To the utmost, though he hath not paid thy Master.
Now is my wit up too: this Land I see
Will make men thrive in the brain.
Would he were here,
Who ever he be, I'd give him somewhat more
Into the bargain: a base thin-jaw'd sneaksbill
Thus to work Gallants out of all. It grieves me
That my poor Tenement too goes into the sale.
What have I done? now wit deliver me.
If he know I am he, he will cut my throat;
I never shall enjoy it: sure it was
Your Masters seeking friend; he would ne'er else
Have had to doe with it; he that bought it is
A very honest man; and if you please him
Will deal with you. I may speak a word
In your behalf: 'twont be the worse for you.
I'm going Sir unto him; do you know
Where I may find him?
What if I am he?
I am afraid he is not half so honest
As you do seem.
Faith I'm the same; I tried
What metal thou wast made of: I perceive
Thou wilt not flinch for the wetting; thou may be
My Bailiff there perhaps.
And 't please your Worship.
So now the case is altered.
I do know
It was my Masters seeking, you would ne'er
Have had to do with 't else. He sent me to you
For the last hundred pound, by the same token,
That you invited him to the eating house.
(O this simplicity! he does not know
Yet what an Ordnary means.) I was now coming
To have paid it in.
I'll save your Worship that
Labour an't please you: let me now begin
My Bayliffeship.
'Snigs wiser yet than so.
Where is thy Master?
Sir, my Master's here
I thank my stars; but Mr Caster is
At an Horse-race some ten miles off.
Why then
I'll stay till he returns; twill be by dinner.
Your best way's now to send it; if by chance
The race go on his side, your Worship may
Fail of your purchase.
'Snigs and that's considerable.
Here, here, make haste with it; but ever thou goosed
Tell me, is it a pretty thing?
Of my corporal Oath,
A very pretty thing: besides the house
Orchards, and Gardens, Some two hundred Acres
Of Land that bears as good Country Corn,
God give you luck on it.
Right as I did say,
Even word by word. But prithee stay a little;
What Meadow ground's there? Pasture in proportion?
As you would wish Sir; I'm in haste.
Nay Bailiff
But one word more, and I have done; what place
Is there to dry wet linen in?
O twenty
To hang up clothes, or any thing you please.
Your Worship cannot want line-room. God be with you.
But this once and—
I must be gone—The Race.
Little think thee how diligent thou art
To little purpose. 'Snigs I pity him;
What haste he makes to cheat himself! poor fool!
Now I am safe the wretch must pardon me
For his poor Tenement; ell's mine. I'll sow
One ground or other every month with Peas:
And so I will have green ones all the year.
These Yeomen have no Policy i'th'world.
PRay y' entertain your self a while, until
I give my Mistress notice of your presence.
I'd leave a book with you, but that I see
You are a Gentleman: perhaps you'll find
Some pretty stories in the hangings there.
Thank you sweet-heart.
(A very proper man)
If it lye in me to doe you any pleasure,
Pray you Sir use me, you shall find me ready.
I make no doubt of that: these Implements,
These chamber Properties are such ripe things,
They'll fall with the least touch. From twelve to twenty
They think that others are to sue to them;
When once they've past these limits, they make bold
I cannot say to woo, that's something modest,
But ask downright themselves.
Leave us Priscilla,
And wait without awhile.
Fair Mistress pardon
The boldness of a stranger, who uncivilly
Thus interrupts your better thoughts.
May I
Demand your business.
Under favour thus.
Not to use farther circumstance fair Virgin,
(And yet less fair because Virgin) you are one
That are the thought, the care, the aim, the strife,
I should not err if I should say the madness
Of all young men; all sighs, all folded Arms,
All o'r-cast looks, all broken sleeps are owed
Only to you.
I'm sorry I should be
A trouble unto any: if I could
Afford the remedy as well as now
I doe your grief, assure your self that cure
Shall be the birth of my next Action.
That cure is my request. If that this were
Mine own suit, I had used no circumstance.
Young Master Credulous a proper man
(For sure he shall be rich) one whom the whole
List of our City-Virgins dote on—you
Conceive the rest I know.
Alas, what ails him?
I'll not be slack to doe him any good.
It is in your power. He is very much
If you will know it—But sure you will not grant
If I should tell you—
If you thus presume
That I am hard, you only ask denial:
Your expectations crossed except you fail.
If you will know it then, he is in love.
I pity him indeed poor heart: with whom?
Even with your beauteous self.
It is not well done
To scoff one ne'er did injure you.
I vow
By all that's good, by your fair self, I am
As tender of you as that blessed one is
Who ever he be that loves you most. If I
In any case abuse you, let me be
More miserable than Little-worth.
Is he become expression? is his Fate
The period of ill wishes? sure he never
Deserved so ill from you.
I don't reflect
Upon his ruined Fortunes, but your coldness.
And sure I may call him unhappy, whom
You doe neglect.
That man, where ere he be,
Is happier than your self; and were he here,
You should see him received and your self scorned.
I doe not think so Lady; sure you would
Make more of me than so. I'll bring the man,
And so confute you.
It may be I might
Love you the better something for that Office,
If he might enter here.
Nay I could tell
You'd cast him off: alas you need not hide it,
I have it from himself.
Doth he think so?
Could I but see him—
If his sight can bring
But the least joy unto you (as perhaps
You'll take some pleasure in his misery)
You shall enjoy it.
I doe fear you promise
Only to raise my hopes a while, and then
To triumph in their Ruin.
That you may
See how my breast and tongue agree, I'll leave
This Ring with you till I return again.
My Littleworth! fool that I was: could I
Not all this while perceive it was thee? why did thou
Defer my joy thus long by suffering me
To stand in the Cloud?
Alas! I guessed I'd been
Infectious to thee now; that thou would look
On a disease more mildly than on me:
For Poverty is counted a contagion.
I call this kiss to witness (which I wish
If I prove false may be the last to me
Which friends pay dying friends) I ne'er will be
Others than thine.
I like the vow so well,
That the same way I'll seal my promise too.
If I prove not as thou (that is most constant)
May this kiss be, that I may wish it worse,
Than that which is due to departing souls▪
The last that I shall take from thee. I am
Sen there, but yet unknown to them that send me,
To be another Spokes-man. The man is
That foolish Son of Mr Credulous:
Thou must pretend some liking▪ it was thy Father
Granted me this access to win thee for him;
Be thou no way averse. 'T shall be my care
So to bring things about, that thou shalt be
Mine by consent in spite of misery.
Be secret, and Love prosper thy design.
Happy that man that meets such faithfulness.
I did not think it had been in the Sex.
I know not now what's misery. Peace: my Fair
Is hallowing the Lute with her blessed touch.
COme, o come, I brook no stay:
He doth not love that can delay▪
See how the stealing Night
Hath blotted out the Light,
And Tapers do supply the Day.
To be chaste is to be old,
And that foolish Girl that's cold
Is fourscore at fifteen:
Desires do write us green,
And looser flames our youth unfold.
'T cannot be her, her voice was ne'er profaned
With such immodest numbers.
See the first Taper's almost gone,
Thy flame like that will straight be none;
And I as it expire
Not able to hold fire.
She loses time that lies alone.
It is the breath
Of something troubled with Virginity.
O let us cherish then these Powr's
Whiles we yet may call them ours:
Then we best spend our time,
When no dull zealous Chime,
But sprightful kisses strike the Hours.
What dost thou mean?
Only to please you Sir.
Sweetest of things was it thou? In faith I guessed
It would be no others melody but yours.
There have been many of your sex much given
Unto this kind of music.
Sappho was
Excellent at it: but Amphion he
He was the man that out-did all; it is said
Of him, that he could draw stones with the sound
Of his sweet strings. I'd willingly arrive
At some perfection in the Quality.
I do acknowledge your desires most prone.
This for your trouble.
I am not mercenary,
Your acceptance is reward enough.
You have it then.
Beauty go with you Sir.
YOur welcome friends, as I may say—
You do forget.
— That am a guest as well as you.
Most noble sons of Fortune, and of Valour,
You grace us with your presence: you must pardon
Our small provision.
No variety here
But you most noble guests, whose gracious looks
Must make a dish or two become a feast.
I'll be as free as it were mine own.
Who thinks
On any thing that borders upon sadness
May he ne'er know what's mirth, but when others
Laugh at his sullen wrinkles.
We will raise
A noise enough to wake an Alderman,
Or a cast Captain, when the reck'ning is
About to pay.
Hang thinking, 'snigs I'll be
As merry as a Pismire; come let's in.
Let's march in order military Sirs.
That's well remembered most complete Lieutenant
COme my most noble order of the club.
Because none will else, let's make much of our selves.
His letter may procure a Dinner yet.
Cheer up Sir Kit, thou look too spiritually:
see too much of the Tith-pig in thee.
I'm not so happy: Kit's as hungry now
As a besieged City, and as dry
As a Dutch Commentator. This vile world
Ne'er thinks of Qualities: good truth I think
'T hath much to answer for. Thy Poetry
Rimewell, and thy voice Vicar Catchmey, and
Thy Law too Bagshot is contemned: it is pity
Professions should be slighted thus. The day
Will come perhaps, when that the Commonwealth
May need such men as we. There was a time
When Cobblers were made Church-men, and those blacked
Smutch'd Creatures thrust into white Surplisses,
Looked like so many Magpies, and did speak
Just as they, by rote. But now the Land
Surfeits forsooth. Poor Labourers in Divinity
Can't earn their great a day, unless it be
Reading of the Christian burial for the dead:
When they even for that reason truly thank
God for thus taking this their Brother to him.
Something profane Sir Christopher.
When I
Level my larger thoughts unto the Basis
Of thy deep shallowness, am I profane?
Henceforth I'll speak, or rather not speak, for
I will speak darkly.
There's one comfort then
You will be brief.
My briefness is prolix;
Thy mind is bodily, thy soul corporeal;
And all thy subtle faculties are not subtle,
Thy subtlety is dullness. I am strong.
I will not be conceived by such Mechanics.
I do conceive you though Sir Christopher,
My Muse doth sometimes take the selfsame flight.
Pauci, pauci ques aequus amavit.
But Quadragessimall wits, and fancies lean
As ember weeks (which therefore I call lean,
Because they're fat) these I do doom unto
A knowing ignorance; he that's conceived
By such is not conceived; sense is non-sense
If understood by them. I'm strong again.
You err most Orthodoxly sweet Sir Kit.
I love that though I hate it: and I have
A kind of disagreeing consent to it.
I'm strong, I'm strong again. Let's keep these two
In desperate hope of understanding us.
Riddles, and Clouds are very lights of speech:
I'll veil my careless anxious thoughts, as it were
In a perspicuous cloud, that I may
Whisper in a loud voice, and even be filent
When I do utter words; words did I call them?
My words shall be no words, my voice no voice;
My noise no noise, my very language silence.
I'm strong, I'm strong: good Sir you understand not.
Nor do desire; it is merely froth, and barm,
The yest that makes your thin small Sermons work.
Thou hold thy peace most vocally. Again.
I hate this Bilk.
Thou love because thou dost hate.
Thy injuries are Courtesies. Strong again.
Good Simpson use not this your Asses jaw-bone.
Thou'st got my love by losing it; that earnest
Jest hath regained my soul. Simpson was strong;
He killed a thousand with an Asses-jawbone.
And so will I. 'st, 'st—good friend d'y'hear?
Here is a letter friend to Mr Meanwell.
Any Reversions yet? nothing transmiss'd?
No gleanings James? no Trencher Analects?
Parley a little with your stomachs Sirs.
There's nothing so ridiculous as the hungry:
A fasting man is a good jest at any time.
There is a Gentleman without, that willed me
To ask if you'll admit of him among you,
He can't endure to be in good company.
You're merry James; yes by all means good James;
Admit quoth he? what else? pray y'send him in.
Let's be resolved to fail out, now then he
Shall have the glory to compose the Quarrel,
By a good dozen of pacificall Beer.
Bag. Agreed, agreed.
My Coat allows no Quarrel.
The Colour bears't if you'll venture the stuff,
The tenderness of it I do confess
Some what denies a grappling.
I will try,
Perhaps my Spirit will suggest some anger.
Save you boon sparks: will it please you to admit me?
Your Worship graces us in condescending
To level thus your presence humble Sir.
What may I call your name most reverend Sir?
His name's Sir Kit.
My name is not so short,
It is a trissyliable, an't please your Worship:
But vulgar tongues have made bold to profane it
With the short sound of that unhallowed Idol
They call a Kit. Boy learn more reverence.
Yes, to my Betters.
Nay friends, do not quarrel.
It is the holy cause, and I must quarrel.
Thou Son of Parchment, got between the Standish
And the stiff Buckram bag: thou that moist call
The Pen thy Father, and the ink thy Mother,
The sand thy Brother, and the wax thy Sister,
And the good Pillory thy Cousin removed,
I say learn reverence to thy Betters.
Set up an hour-glasse; he will go on until
The last sand make his Period.
It is my custom,
I do approve the Calumny: the words
I do acknowledge, but not the disgrace.
Thou vile ingrosser of unchristian deeds.
Good Israel Inspiration hold your tongue;
It makes far better Music, when you Nose
Sternolds, or Wisdoms Meeter.
By your leave
You fall on me now Brother.
It is my cause,
You are too forward Brother Catchm.
I
Too forward?
Yes I say you are too forward
By the length of your London measure Beard.
Thou never could entreat that respite yet
Of thy dishonesty as to get one hair
To testify thy Age.
I'm beardless too;
I hope you think not so of me?
Yes verily,
Not one hairs difference twixt you both.
Thou violent Cushion-thumper, hold thy tongue,
The Furies dwell in it.
Peace good Sir Kit.
Sir Kit again? Thou art a Lopes; when
One of thy legs rots off (which will be shortly)
Thou'lt bear about a Quire of wicked Paper,
Defiled with sanctified Rhythms,
And Idols in the frontisepiece: that I
May speak to thy capacity, thou'lt be
A Balladmonger.
I shall live to see thee
Stand in a Play-house door with thy long box,
Thy half-crown Library, and cry small Books.
By a good godly Sermon Gentlemen—
A judgment shown upon a Knot of Drunkards—
A pill to purge out Popery—The life
And death of Katherine Stubs—
Thou wilt visit windows;
Me thinks I hear thee with thy begging tone
About the break of day waking the Brethren
Out of their morning Revelations.
Brave sport In faith.
Pray y'good Sir reconcile them.
If that some Justice be in the Ordinary now
He will bind them to the peace for troubling him.
Why should he not good Sir, it is his office,
Now it is o'this side; o for a pair of Cudgels!
Peace Inkhorn, there's no music in thy tongue.
Thou and thy Rime lye both; the tongue of man
Is born to music naturally.
Thou thing,
Thy belly looks like to some strutting hill,
O'er shadowed with thy rough beard like a wood.
Or like a larger Jug, that some men call
A Bellarmine, but we a Conscience;
Whereon the lewder hand of Pagan workman
Over the proud ambitious head hath carved
An Idol large with beard Episcopal,
Making the Vessel look like Tyrant Eglon.
Profane again Sir Christopher I take it.
Must I be strong again? thou humane beast,
Who'rt only eloquent when thou say nothing,
And appear'st handsome while thou hid'st thy self,
I'm holy because profane.
Courageous Raskals,
Brave Spirits, Soldiers in their days I warrant.
Born in the field I do assure your Worship:
This Quarrelling is meant and drink to them.
Thou lie. Bag. Nay then I do defy thee thus.
And thus I am prepared to answer thee.
For the good Sts. sake part them; I am blind,
If that my Spectacles should once miscarry.
Caitiff, this holy instrument shall quail thee.
And this shall send thee to thy cousin furies.
I feel a film come o'er mine eyes already,
I must look out an Animal conductive,
I mean a Dog.
Pray y'beat not out his eyes in
Another hands.
Most strongly urged.
Your words
Are merely wind. James ho! what James! some beer.
They're mastiff Dogs, they won't be parted Sir,
Without good store of Liquor.
I will souse them.
Drink to 'em Sir, if that you'll have 'em quiet.
Is that the way? here's to you my friends; a whole one.
Were it not for that good Gentleman you would smoke for it.
Had I not vowed some reverence to his presence.
Thou had been nothing.
Before Mars I was dry:
This valour's thirsty: fill to my Antagonist.
No, mine own dish will serve: I'm singular.
Few vessels still do well; I carry this
To drink my beer, while others drink their sack.
I am abstemious Rimewel: I hate wine
Since I spake treason last in the Cellar. Here
Give me thy hand, thou child of fervency.
Did thou mistrust thy spectacles?
It was no anger, it was a Rapture merely.
Drink, and excuse it after. James your help.
Come Man of voice keep time while that I drink.
This moisture shall dry up all injuries,
Which I'll remember only to forget;
And so hereafter, which I'm wont to call
The future now, I'll love thee stubbornly.
Your beer is like my words, strong, stinging gear.
Here little Lawyer, let's be friends hereafter;
I love this reconcilement with my heart.
It is the best deed that ever I did: O my conscience
I shall make a good Justice of the Peace,
There had been bloud-shed, if I had not stickled.
More blood been spilt I warrant than beer now.
That Inkhorn is a deadly dangerous weapon:
It hath undone one quarter of the Kingdom.
Men should forgive; but thou art far, yea far
From it O Bagshot; you're in love with hate;
Bless me! I see the Fiend still in his looks;
He is not reconcilable with drink;
He will never love truly, till he eat with me.
The nature of his Spirit asks meat:
He hath a Woolf in's breast; food must appease him.
Cold meat will doe it, will it not?
Any thing—
That may employ the teeth.
Go James provide;
You are not merry yet.
To satisfy you
In that point, we will sing a Song of his.
Let's have it; I love these Ballads hugeously.
The Song.
THen our Music is in prime,
When our teeth keep triple time;
Hungry Notes are fit for Knels:
May lankiness be
No Quest to me.
The Bagpipe sounds, when that it swells.
Chor. May lankiness, &amp;c.
A Mooting Night brings wholesome smiles,
When John an Oaks, and John a Stiles,
Doe grease the Lawyers Satin.
A Reading-Day
Frights French away,
The Benchers dare speak Latin.
Chor. A Reading, &amp;c.
He that's full doth Verse compose;
Hunger deals in sullen Prose:
Take notice and discard her.
The empty Spit
Ne'er cherished Wit.
Minerva loves the Larder.
Chor. The empty Spit, &amp;c.
First to break Fast, then to dine,
Is to conquer Bellarmine:
Distinctions then are budding.
Old Sutcliffs Wit
Did never hit,
But after his Bag-pudding.
Chor. Old Sutcliffs Wit, &amp;c.
Most admirable; a good eating Song.
Let us walk in, and practice it; my Bowels
Yearn till I am in charity with all.
A Christian resolution good Sr Christopher.
SWeet Sir I am most passionately yours,
To serve you all the ways I can. Priscilla.
Very well Penned of a young Chambermaid,
I do conceive your meaning sweet Priscilla:
You see I have the happy fortune on it;
A night for nothing, and entreated too.
Thou dost not know how I do love thee; let me
Make use of this, thou'lt have the like occasion.
Thou art the fawningst fellow Slicer—Meanwel
Hark here.
For Gods sake be contented Sirs;
I'm flesh and blood as well as you. Lieutenant,
Think on your Suburb Beauties; sweet Intelligencer,
I will by no means bar you of your Lady.
Your sin I assure you will be honourable.
Pox o'your liquorous lips; if that she don't
After this sealing forty weeks deliver
Something unto thee as thy act and deed,
Say I can't Prophecy.
If I don't serve him
A trick he thinks not of—
Did mark how he
Did apply himself to the Knight all dinner?
I am afraid he plays the cunning Factor,
And in another name woes for himself.
Let it go on; let it work something farther
It is almost ripe enough to crush; he hath not
Crept high enough as yet to be sensible
Of any fall.
Now is the time or never.
This night you know he and his Doxy meet;
Let me alone to give them their goodmorrow.
If that we carry things but one week longer
Without discovery, farewell London then;
The world's our own. He ne'er deserves to thrive
That doth not venture for it. Wealth's then sweet
When bought with hazard. Fate this Law hath set;
The fool inherits, but the wise must get.
MY Name's not Tribulation,
Nor holy Ananias:
I was baptised in fashion,
Our Vicar did hold Bias.
What, how now Mr Credulous? so merry?
Come let's be mad; by yea and nay my Son
Shall have the Turkish Monarchy; he shall
Have it directly: the twelve Companies
Shall be his Kickshaws.
Bashaws Sir you mean.
Well Sir, what if I do? Andrew the great Turk!
I would I were a pepper corn if that
It sounds not well: dost not?
Yes, very well.
I'll make it elle: Great Andrew Mahomet,
Imperious Andrew Mahomet Credulous,
Tell me which name sounds best.
That's as you speak 'em.
Oatemeleman Andrew, Andrew Oatmeleman.
Ottoman Sir you mean.
Yes Ottoman.
Then Mrs Jane, Sir Thomas Bitefiggs Daughter,
That may be the she Great Turk, if she please me.
The Sign of the half Moon that hangs at your door,
Is not for nought.
That's the Turks Arms they say;
The Empire's destined to our house directly.
Hang Shop-books, give's some Wine, hay for a noise
Of Fiddlers now.
The Great Turk loves no Music.
Doe's he not so? nor I. I'll light Tobacco
With my Sum-totals; my Debt-books shall sole
Pies at young Andrew's Wedding: cry you mercy;
I would say Gentlemen the Great Turks Wedding.
My Deeds shall be sliced out in Taylors Measures;
They all employed in making Mrs Mahomet
New Gowns against the time; hang dirty wealth.
What should the Great Turks father do with wealth?
'Snigs I would fain now hear
Some fighting News.
There's one will furnish you I warrant you.
Pox!—Plague!—Hell!—Death!—
Damned luck!—this it is!—
The Devil take all Fortunes: never man
Came off so▪ quite and clean defunct by Heaven—
Not a piece left.
What all your Ord'nance lost?
But one to bear, and lose it! all the world
Was sure against me.
'Snigs how many fell?
He threw twice twelve.
By'r Lady a shrewd many.
The Devil sure was in his hand I think.
Nay, if the Devil was against you, then—
But one for to be hit in all the time—
And that too safe enough to any ones thinking;
'T stood on eleven.
'Slid a mighty slaughter;
But did he stand upon elev'n at once?
The Plague take all impertinencies, peace.
These Soldiers are so choleric there is
No dealing with 'em; then they've lost the day.
It was ten to one by Heaven all the while.
And yet all killed at last? hard fortune faith.
What news from Bruxels? or the Hague? d' y' hear
Ought of the Turks designs?
I'll make thee news
For the Coranti Dotard.
Ay, the Coranti,
What doth that say?
O hell! thou foolish thing
Keep in that tongue of thine, or—
Good now peace,
He's very furious when he's moved.
This it was.
You must be venturing without your Fancy-man.
What Officer's that Fancy-man, Lieutenant?
Some great Commander sure.
Pox! let it go;
I'll win't again: it was but the Relics of
An idle hundred.
'Snigs and well remembered.
You did receive the hundred that I sent you
To the Race this morning by your man, my Bailiff?
Take him away, his wine speaks in him now.
Godsnigs the Farm is mine, and must be so.
Debate these things another time, good friends.
Come, come, have Patience. Od's my life away.
There's Mr Haveatall is mad; he will spit you,
If he but know you are a Usurer.
A plot, a plot to take away my life and Farm.
Fight as I live with any one. Lieutenant
Do not come near me now, nor yet thou Caster;
It works, before Mars it works; I'll take my walk,
And if I do find any one by Jove—
What's he foxed too? some drunken Planet reigns
And works upon the world; Provide my fancy
God Noble Patron: I'll win soberly,
I itch till I have beggard all the City.
Till that you have undone your self you mean. En.
Ey save you both: for derne love sayen soothly Mo.
Where is thylk amebly, Franklin, cleped Meanwel?
Hoe's gone abroad.
Lere me whylk way he wended.
He is gon o'er the fields.
To the Knights house.
Why laugh you every del? so mote I gone,
This goes not aright; I dread some Coven.
Now will he meet with Haveatall; there'll be
A Combat worthy Chronicle. Let's go
And see how this grave motion will bestir him.
what, no man yet march by? who ever comes next
I'll give him onerap more for making me
Stay here so long.
So so here h'is; how shall
I do to know where he be a Gentleman,
Or Yeoman or Serving-man? I think
I'd best suppose him all, and beat him through
Every degree, and so I shall not wrong him.
What? who goes there?
Waes heal thou gentle Knight.
Waes heal thou gentle Knight? speak what art thou?
Speak quickly doe: Villain know thou not me?
Now by my troth I know not your Name;
Whiter I shall call you my Lord Dan John,
Or Dan Thomas, or Dan Robert, or Dan Albon:
I vow to God thou hast a full fair chine;
Upon my faith art some Officer.
Have you the pox Sir? speak.
No.
No? nor yet
An ach in your Bones!
No.
No? why then you are
No Gentleman; Lieutenant Slicer says so.
This cudgel then serves turn.
You will not foin?
I will not foin, but I will beat you Sir.
Why intermete of what thou hast to done;
So leteth me alone, 't shall be thy best.
I fancied you a beating; you must have it.
You shall not say but I will show you favour.
Choose where you will be hacked with my sword,
Or bruised by my Baton.
Dre not thy true,
And poignant Morglay out of Shete. Lo thus
Eftsoons Sir Knight, I greet thee lowting low.
Done lower yet.
Rues on my gray hairs.
Yet lower: so, then thus I do bestride thee.
Tubal the son of Lamech did yfind
Music by knocking Hammers upon Anvils;
Let go thine blows, thylke Art is no complete.
Dost thou make me a Smith thou Rogue? a Tubal?
Harrow alas! flet England, flet England:
Dead is Edmond.
Take that for history.
O brave Lieutenant now thy dinner works.
I nis not Edmond Ironside God wot.
More provocation yet? I'll seal thy lips.
A twenty Devil way! So did the Saxon
Upon thylke plain of Serum, done to death
By treachery, the Lords of merry Englond
Name esur Saxes.
Villain dost abuse me
In unbaptized language? do not answer;
If that thou dost, by Jove I'll strangle thee.
Do you make mouths you Rascal thus at me?
You're at dumb Service now: why, this is more
Unsufferable than your old patched gibberish;
This silence is abuse. I'll send thee to
The Place of it, where thou shalt meet with Oswald,
Vortigern, Harold, Hengist, Horsey, Knute,
Alared, Edgar, and Cunobeline.
Thus, thus I sheath my Sword.
Redoubled Knight
Enough, it is thy foe doth vanquished lie
Now at thy mercy, mercy notwithstand,
For he is one the truest Knight alive,
Though conquered now he lie on lowly ground.
Thou ow'st thy life to my Lieutenant, Caitiff.
Breath and be thankful.
I reche not thine yeft;
Maugre thine head, algate I suffer none,
I am-thine lefe, thine dear, mine Potluck Jon.
FAirest of things—tralucent creature—Hang me
If I do know what's next.
This meant to me?
Fairest of things— tralucent creature— rather
Obscured Deity—It is gone again.
Lady will you eat a piece of Gingerbread?
You might have better manners than to scoff
One of my breeding.
Hark; indad I love you.
Alas!
I vow I burn in love, as doth
A penny Faggot.
Hey ho!
And I shall
Blaze out Sir reverence if ye do not quench me.
Indeed now?
Though I say it that should not say it,
I am affected towards you strangely.
Now who'd have thought it?
There's a thing each night
Comes to my Bedshead and cries Matrimony,
Matrimony Andrew.
God forbid.
It is
Some Spirit that would join us.
Goodly, goodly.
Then do I shake all over.
Doth it so?
Then shake again.
I pray you now.
Then cry
〈◊〉 of things—tralucent creature—rather
Obscured Deity, sweet Mrs Jane,
I come I come.
Sweet Sir you are deceived:
I'm but her woman; here she comes her self.
Now as my Father saith, I would I were
A Cucumber if I know what to doe.
Why how now Pris? who's that that uses you
So lovingly?
Fairest of things—it is one
Tralucent Creature—it is—Ay that it is
One—
That would willingly run out of doors,
If that he had but Law enough.
I say—
Nay be not afraid: here's none shall doe you harm.
It is one that brought his Pigs to the wrong market.
You keep your woman here so fine, that I
Had like to have made a proper business on it
Before I was aware. If any thing
Doe prove amiss, indeed-law you shall be
The Father on it. But know tralucent Creature
I am come off entire, and now am yours
Whole, Andrew Creaulous, your servants servant.
Methinks you contradict your self: how can you
Be wholly mine, and yet my servants servant?
I doe but complement in that (I see
Downright's the best way here) if thou can love
I can love too. Law thee there now. I'm rich.
I use not to look after riches; it is
The person that I aim at.
That is me;
I'm proper, handsome fair, clean-limb'd: I'm rich.
I must have one that can direct and guide me;
A Guardian rather than a Husband; for
I'm foolish yet.
Now see the luck on it Lady
So am I too In faith.
And who ever hath me
Will find me to be one of those things which
His care must first reform.
Do not doubt that;
I have a head for Reformation:
This noddle here shall do it. I am rich.
Riches create no love; I fear you mean
To take me for formality only,
As some staid piece of housholdstuff perhaps
Fit to be seen among other ornaments:
Or at the best I shall be counted but
A name of dignity; not entertained
For love but State; one of your train, a thing
Took to wipe off suspicion from some fairer
To whom you have vowed Homage.
Do not think
I've any Plots or Projects in my Head,
I will do any thing for thee that thou
Can name or think on.
Pray you try him Mistress,
By my Virginity I think he will flinch.
By my Virginity (which is as good
As yours I'm sure) by my Virginity
If that we men have any such thing (as
We men have such a thing) I do believe
I will not flinch. Alas! you don't know Andrew.
Can you obtain but so much respite from
Your other Soverains service, as to keep
Your Eye from gazing on her for a while?
If I do look on any woman, nay,
If I do cast a sheeps eye upon any
But your sweet self, may I lose one of mine:
Marry I'll keep the other howsoe'r.
I know not how I may believe you; you'll
Swear you ne'er cast a glance on any, when
Your eye hath baited at each face you met.
Blind me good now: being you mistrust, I will
Be blinded with this handkerchief; you shall
See that I love you now. So, let me have
But any reasonable thing to lead me home,
I do not care though 't be a Dog, so that
He knows the way, or hath the wit to enquire it.
That care Sir shall be mine.
I doubt not, but
I shall be in the Chronicle for this,
Or in a Balled else. This handkerchief
Shall be hung up in the Parish Church instead
Of a great silken flag to fan my grave:
With my Arms in it, portrayed in good blew thread
With this word underneath: This, this was he
That shut his eyes because he would not see.
Hold who comes there?
One Sir to lead you home.
Who? Tutor Meanwell?
Yes I do commit you
Unto your trusty friend, If you perform
This vow we may—
I'll say your sentence out,
Be man and wife.
If you'll do something else
That I'll propose.
Pray make your own conditions.
You'll promise me you'll not be jealous of me?
Do what you will I'll trust you.
never hire
Any to tempt me?
By this light (I would say
By this darkness) I never will.
Nor mark
On whom I laugh?—
No.
Nor suspect My smiles,
My nods, my winks?—
No, no.
Nor yet keep count
From any Gallants visit?
I'll ne'er reckon;
You shall do what you will.
You'll never set
Great Chests and Forms against my Chamber Door,
Nor pin my smock unto your shirt a nights,
For fear I should slip from you ere you wake?
As I do hope for Day I will not.
Give me
Some small pledge from you to assure your love;
If that you yet prove false, I may have something
To witness your inconstancy. I'll take
This little Ruby: this small blushing stone
From your fair finger.
Take it Sweet: there is
A Diamond in my Bandstring, if you have
A mind to that I pray make use of't too.
In troth a stone of lustre, I assure you
It darts a pretty light, a vegetable spark;
It seems an Eye upon your Breast.
Nay take it,
For loves sake take it then; leave nothing that
Looks like an Eye about me.
My good Andrew,
Because of thy resolution, I'll perform
This office for thee. Take my word for it, this
Shall ne'er betray thee.
Farewell honest Jany,
I cannot see to thank thee my sweet Jany.
Tutor, your hand good Tutor, lead me wisely.
Take comfort man; I have good news for thee:
Thine eyes shall be thine own before next morning.
Hoe's a good friend of mine, and I presume
Upon your secrecy.
O Sir—the Deed
By which it came was not more close. D'y'think
I would undo me self by twitting? it were
To bring the Gallants all about mine Ears,
And make me mine own Patient. I'm faithful,
And secret, though a Barber.
Nay, but hear me;
Hoe's very modest: it was his first attempt
Procured him this infirmity; he will
Be bashful I am sure, and won't be known
Of any such thing at the first; you must
Be sure to put him to it.
Let me alone,
He knows not yet the world I do perceive.
It is as common now with Gentlemen,
As it is to follow fashion; only here
Lies the difference, that they keep in this
A little longer. I shall have so much
Upon your word Sir?
If you do perform
The cure by that time (twenty pieces Sir.)
You are content?
Yes Sir.
It shall be done
According to your own prescription.
Sit down I pray you Sir, this Gentleman
Is a good friend of yours.
Indeed he is
A very honest man as any one
Can wish to deal with verily.
Believe it
He loves you very well.
I am most ready
To do him any service truly; pray you
Good Brother don't delay me, I'm in haste.
Indeed, and truly, verily good Brother;
How could these milk-sop words ever get him company
That could procure the Pox? where do you feel
You grief most trouble you?
I'm very well.
What mean you Brother?
Nay, be not so modest;
It is no such heinous fault, as that you should
Seek thus to hide it: mere ill fortune only—
Surely you do forget your self.
Come, come,
He told me you'd be shamefaced; you must be
Wary hereafter.
(I do perceive
He is a little mad indeed; the Gentleman
Told me so much just as I came along)
Yes, yes, I'll be wary, I'll take heed,
Come pray y' dispatch me.
So, I like you now.
It is the custom of most Gentlemen
Not to confess until they feel their bones
Begin to admonish 'em.
You are in the right:
Good friend make haste; I've very urgent business.
Not rashly neither; Is your Gristle sound?
Me thinks it is very firm as yet to the touch.
You fear no danger there as yet Sir, do you?
No, I'll assure you. (He must have his humour;
I see he is not to be crossed.)
When did you
Feel the first grudging on it? it is not broke out
In any place?
No, no: I pray y' dispatch me.
These things desire deliberation;
Care is required.
Good Brother go t'your Chest.
How can I know what Med'cines to apply,
If that you tell me not where lies your grief?
Nay good now let me go.
I must not Sir,
Nor will not truly: trust me you will wish
You had confessed and suffered me in time,
When you shall come to dry burnt Racks of Mutton,
The Siren, and the Tub.
So now enough;
Pray fetch me what you promised.
Are you wild,
Or mad? I do protest I ne'er did meet
A Gentleman of such perverseness yet.
I find you just as I was told you should.
I lose the taking, by my swear, of taking
As much, whiles that I am receiving this.
I will not hinder you, if that you do
Prefer your gain before your health.
Well then
I pray you tell it out; we Tradesmen are not
Masters of our own time.
What would you have?
What would I have? as if you did not know;
Come come leave jesting now at last good Brother.
I am in earnest Sir.
Why, I would have
My money Sir, the twenty pieces that
The Gentleman did give you order now
To pay me for the Velvet, that he bought
This morning of me.
O! the Gentleman—
You should not make a laughing stock good Bro∣there
Of one that wrongs you not; I do profess
I won't be fubb'd ensure your self.
The Gentleman!
Oh! oh! the Gentleman! is this the cure
I should perform? truly I dare not venture
Upon such de sperate Maladies.
You are
But merrily disposed?
Indeed they are
Too high for my small Quality; verily
Perhaps good Brother you might perish under
Mine hands truly; I do profess I am not
Any of your bold Mountebanks in this.
You're still disposed—
To laugh at you good Brother.
Gulled by my swear, by my swear gulled; he told me
You had a small infirmity upon you,
A grief of youth, or two; and that I should
Have twenty pieces for the cure. He asked you
If that you were content, you answered yes.
I was in hope I'd gained a Patient more;
Your best way is to make haste after him.
Now could I beat my self for a wise fool
That I was, thus to trust him.
B'w'y' Brother.
Before God a good one. O! the Gentleman.
Whiles early light springs from the skies,
A fairer from your Bride doth rise;
A brighter Day doth thence appear,
And make a second morning there:
Her blush doth shed
All o'er the bed,
Clean shamefaced beams
That spread in streams,
And purple round the modest air.
I will not tell what shrieks, and cries,
What Angry Dishes, and what ties,
What pretty oaths then newly born
The listening Taper heard there sworn:
Whiles froward she
Most peevishly
Did yielding fight
To keep o'er night
What she would have proffered you ere morn.
Fair, we know, maids do refuse
To grant what they do come to lose.
Intend a Conquest you that wed;
They would be chastely ravished.
Not any kiss
From Mrs Pris,
If that you do
Persuade and woe.
Know pleasure's by extorting fed.
O may her arms wax black and blew
Only by hard encircling you:
May she round about you twine
Like the easy twisting Vine;
And whiles you sip
From her full lip
Pleasures as new
As morning Dew,
Let those soft Ties your hearts combine.
God give you joy Mr Meanwell. God give your
Worship good morrow.
Come let's be going.
Hold, a blow I'll have,
One jerk at the times, wrapped in a benediction
Of the Spouses teeming, and I'll go with you.
NOw thou our future Brother,
That shalt make this Spouse a Mother,
Spring up, and Dod's blessing on it.
Show thy little sorrel Pate
And prove regenerate
Before thou be brought to the Font.
May the Parish Surplice be
Cut in pieces quite for thee,
To wrap thy soft body about;
So twill better service do
Reformed thus into
The state of an Orthodox Clout.
When thou shalt leave the Cradle,
And shalt begin to waddle,
And trudge in thy little Apron;
May thou conceive a grace
Of half an hours space,
And rejoice in thy Friday Capon.
For an error that's the Flocks
Name Mr Paul, but urge St Knox;
And at every reformed Dinner,
Let cheese come in, and preaching,
And by that third Course teaching,
Confirm an unsatisfied Sinner.
Thence grow up to hate a Ring,
And defy an offering:
And learn to sing what others say.
Let Christ-tide be thy fast,
And lent thy good repast:
And regard not an Holy day.
Lay hold on them; lay hold on them I say:
I'll hamper them.
Hell take your headlong zeal;
You must be jerking at the times forsooth.
I am afraid the times will scope, and we
The men of them shall suffer now the scourge.
Let none escape.
It was godliness verily:
It was a Hymn I warbled.
Thou dost lye,
It was no Hymn, it was a Song. Is this
Your filthy Rendevow? you shall be taught
Another tune.
I do beseech you show
Merciful cruelty, and as it were a kind
Of pitiful hard heartedness. I'm strong.
I'm glad you told me so, I will provide
Your Ward accordingly. Drag 'em out both.
Let me but send to the Ordinary.
You shall not,
The Ord'nary hath sent to you: No Bail,
I will take none. I'll suffer no such sneaks
As you, t'offend this way. It doth belong
T'your Betters Sir.
Here's a sufficient Man
I do assure you, take my word for that.
This staff was made to knock down sin. I'll look
There shall be no Advowtry in my Ward
But what is honest. I'll see Justice done
As long as I'm in office. Come along.
NOw that I have made even Girl, with Heaven.
Though I am past the worst, and I perceive
My dinner only grieved me, yet because Life's
Frail, and uncertain, let me counsel thee,
It is good to be before hand still. First then
I charge thee lend no money; next serve God;
If ever thou hast Children teach 'em thrift;
They'll learn Religion fast enough themselves.
Nay, do not weep but hearken. When Heaven shall
Please to call in this Weary Soul of mine,
Be not idle in expense about my Burial;
Buy me a shroud, any old sheet will serve
To cloth corruption; I can rot without
Fine linen; it is but to enrich the Grave,
And adorn stench, no reverence to the dead,
To make 'em crumble more luxuriously.
One Torch will be sufficient to direct
The footsteps of my Bearers. If there be
Any so kind as to accompany
My body to the Earth, let them not want
For entertainment, prithee see they have
A sprig of Rosemary dipped in common water,
To smell to as they walk along the streets.
Eatings and drinkings are no obsequies.
Raise no oppressing Pile to load my Ashes;
But if thou'l needs be at charges of a Tomb,
Five or six foot of common stone engraved
With a good hopeful word, or else a couple
Of capital letters filled up with pitch,
Such as I set upon my Sheep, will serve;
State is not meet for those that dwell in dust.
Mourn as thou please for me, plainness shows
True grief: I give thee leave to do it for
Two or three years, if that thou shalt think fit.
Twill save expense in clothes. And so now be
My blessing on thee, and my means hereafter.
I hope Heaven will not deal so rigidly
With me, as to preserve me to the unmelcome
Performance of these sad injunctions.
GOod health unto you Sir.
I have the more
By reason of the care you took in sending
A Confessor unto me.
I? a Confessor?
Sure there is some design, some trick or other
Put on you by those men, who never sleep
Unless they've cheated on that Day.
I hope
You do mean your Partners my good friends?
They ne'er deserve the name of friends, they do
Covet, not love. If any came from them,
It was some Vulture in a holy habit,
Who did intend your Carcass, nor your safety;
Indeed I know not of't, I've all this while
Appeared another to you than I am.
Perhaps you know me now. I'm he whom you
Pleased to forbid your house, whom Mr Credulous
Takes leave to stile lost man, and Vagabond.
That I forbad you Sir my house was only
In care to my Daughter, not in hate to you.
That I frequented it without your leave,
Was both in love to you, and to your Daughter;
That I have all this while lived thus disguised,
Was only to avert the snare from you,
Not to entrap you; that you might not be
Blinded by those, who like to venomous Beasts,
Have only sight to poison; that you might not
Ruin your Daughter in a complement.
This may be your plot, and this discovery
Feigned only to secure your own designs:
For 't cannot sink into me that they durst
Make mirth of my repentance, and abuse
My last devotion with a Scene of Laughter.
They dare beyond your thought. When parted
this
Your Confessor?
You could not choose but meet him,
He is scarce yet at home.
If that you dare
But venture with me home, I'll almost promise
I'll make it plain they've put a trick upon you.
Though every step were so much toward my
grave
I'd tread them o'er with comfort that I might
Discover this religious villainy.
COme my good Vulture speak what prey?
what mirth?
What income my dear holiness? what sport?
Give me the Chair; imagine me the Knight
(When I sit down,) and (when I stand) the Confessor.
Thus I come in peace to thy soul good Son,
(Tic you must give it Father; I am ill,
I'm very ill; sit only now for Heaven.
My Soul would fain be flying, were it not for
A Sin or two that clogs her.) But for a sin
Or two that clogs her? take heed, don't so near
Your last deliverance play the Sophister
With Heaven. A sin or two? why, I've heard say
You're wont to screw your wretched Tenants up
To the utmost farthing, and then stand upon
The third Rent Capon. Then he answers me
In the small dolfull tune of a Country wench
Examined by the Official, for the mischance
Of a great belly caught at a Whitsonale;
(I could not help it.) Then it is your costome
When you invite, to think your meat laid out,
You write your Beef disbursed, are wont to call
For the return of 't just, as for a debt;
(True.) That two Chimneys ne'er yet smoked at once
In all your Buildings; (All most true.) That you
Are wont to keep an untouched Capon, till
Corruption makes it able to walk out
And visit the Barn Door again: I could
Say much more, but I'd rather have you
Come so much nearer pardon, as t'accuse
Your self by your own mouth.
How grave the Rogue was?
(I'll do 't as strictly as mine Enemy.)
I cannot hold; I'll break in as I am,
And take my vengeance whiles my furie's hot.
Repress it Sir a while; h' hath but begun.
Then thus he dralls it out. (I do confess
I've been addicted to frugality.)
Son do not mince; pray call it Covetousness.
(Imprimis It hath ever been my custom
To ride beyond an Inn to save my horse meat.
Item, When once I had done so, and found
No entertainment, I beguiled the children
Of their parched peas, my Man being left to that
We make the emblem of mortality:)
What? grass you mean? (or sweet Hay which you
please.)
Me thinks this 's truly coming to a Reckoning,
He doth account for's sins with Item so.
(Item I've often bought a Cheapside Custard,
And so refreshed my soul under my Cloak,
As I did walk the streets.) Cloaking of sins,
Although they be but eating sins, I do
Pronounce most dangerous. (I find this so,
I'd almost lost mine Eyes by it being justled.)
O thou rich soul of Roguery.
(Moreover
I once sung Psalms with Servants where I lodged,
And took part with 'em in their lovely Relics;
Truly my soul did lust, they were Temptations.)
What sing that you might eat? It is the sin
O'th'Brethren Son; but that their Relics are
Whole widows houses.
O thou preaching Devil!
(Item I entered into a Chandlers shop,
And eat my bread in secret, whiles my man
Fed on the wholesome steam of Candle seaweed.
Item, which grieves me most, I did make bold
With the Black Puddings of my needy Taylor;
Satan was strong, they did provoke me much.)
Wretch that I was to trust my bosom to
One so exactly bad, that if the book
Of all men's lives lay open to his view
Would meet no sin unpractised by himself.
I will rush in.
Good Sir keep close a while,
I see no tears, no penitential tears.
(Alas! I cannot weep, mine Eyes are Pumice.
But Alms I hope may yet redeem.) Alms given
In a large manner Son. (Won't fifty pounds
Wipe off my score?) If doubled't may do something.
(Can I be saved no cheaper? take this then
And pray for me.) With that I thus dismissed him.
Blessed Son, for now I dare pronounce thee blessed,
Being thou'st powered thus out thy soul— The wolf!
The wolf! 'sfoot peace, we're in the noose:
We are betrayed, yon's Meanwell and the Knight—
Truly he is as good a man as any
I ever yet confessed—don't look that way—
A very honest charitable man,
Full of sincerity, and true devotion.
Patience it self would now turn furious,
Let's for some Officers.
Discovered all!
Religion is unlucky to me.
Man!
Perfidious man! there is no trust in thee!
I never liked this Meanwell; I did always
See treachery writ in's forehead: I well hoped
H'ad been in Prison with his wench.
leave railing.
Along with me. There is left one way more;
The Cat may yet perhaps light on all four.
what gone? upon my life they did mi∣struck.
They are so beaten that they smell an Officer,
As Crows do Powder.
Watchman call you forth
The Mistress of the house, Imprimis, for
They have their lurking hole near hand most certain.
Denuncio vobis gaudium magnum,
Robertus de Tinea electus est in saddam Hospitalem,
Et assumit sibi nomen Galfridi.
Joy comes to our house. I Robert Moth am
Chosen into thylk Hospital seat▪
Thylk Basin of Jon Potluck, Vintners Widow▪
And do transmue my name to Giffery.
New foysons bin ygraced with new Titles.
Come buss.
Fie! Mr Giffery I swear
You make my ashamed before all this Company.
Sir, if you be the Master of this house,
You've harboured here a company of cheating Villains,
Which we are come to apprehend.
Pray y' look,
Search every Corner, here's no cheats. I'm sure
The house was clear before your Worship entered.
Make fast the Doors for fear they do escape.
Let's in and ferret out these cheating Rakehels.
It is very certain they are not in the house.
They had no time to get away.
Why then,
It may be being they are such cunning Fellows,
They have the trick of going invisible.
There's no place left unsearched but Pots and
Mouseholes.
They're either gone or in the House that's certain.
That cannot be; the Doors were shut I'm
sure,
And so they could not get out; the Rooms then are
All searched, and so they cannot be within.
I'll lay my neck to a farthing, then they're vanished.
Sunk like the Queen, they'll rise at Queenhive
sure.
Most certain these are two of them: for this▪
Old Knave, I'll take my Oath that he is one.
Confess, confess, where are your other Comrads?
I am as honest as the skin that is
Between thy Brows?
What skin between my Brows?
What skin thou knave? I am a Christian;
And what is more, a Constable; what skin?
You are mistaken friends.
I cry you mercy.
The Constable may call you any thing
In the Kings name upon suspicion.
We're cheated friends; these men of the Ordnary
Have gulled us all this while, and now are gone.
I am undone. Ne'er let me live if that
I did not think the would gull me, I perceive
Fancy doth much; see how it is come to pass.
Where is my Son God bless him? where is
Andrew?
Pray God they have not taken him along;
He hath a perilous wit to be a cheat;
He'd quickly come to be his Majesties Taker.
I took one Andrew Credulous this morning
In dishonest Adultery with a Trull.
And if he be your Son he is in Prison.
Their villainy of my life. Now as I am
A Freeman and a Grocer, I had rather
Have found forty pounds; I pray go fetch him.
I'm sorry that your Son takes these lewd courses;
He is not fit to make a Husband of.
Do not condemn before you hear. I'll warrant
Though he be guilty yet hoe's innocent.
Hent him, for dern love Hent him; I done dread
His Visage foul, yfrounct with glowing own.
I come to excuse my ruder usage of you.
I was in drink when that I did it: it was
The Plot of those base Knaves, I hear are gone,
To teach me valour by the strength of Wine;
Naming that courage which was only fury.
It was not wilfully.
I do not reche
One bean for all. This Buss is a blive guerdon.
Hence Carlishnesse yferre. It is a sooth saw,
Had I but venged all mine harm,
Mine Cloak had not been furred half so werme.
Now Sir you shall hear all. Come Andrew tell me,
How came thou hither?
Truly Mr Meanwel
Told me that I should meet with Mrs Jane,
And there I found her Chamber-maid.
D'y' see?
Your Chamber-maid Sir Thomas; out you whore.
Take heed what you say Father, shoe's my wife.
I would you're in thy grave, then it were the better
Fortune of the two.
Indeed this reverend Man
Joined us in the Prison.
Marriage is a Bond,
So no place fitter to perform it in.
Send for my Daughter hither, we'll know all.
What are you Sir?
A workman in the Clergy.
Yes, this is one I took at the Window singing,
With these three other vagrant Fellows here.
I was in body there, but not in mind,
So that my sin is but inchoately perfect,
And I though in a fault did not offend,
And that for three reasons. First, I did yield
Only a kind of unwilling consent.
Secondly, I was drawn as it were by their
Impulsive gentleness. Mark Sir I'm strong.
Thirdly, I deemed it not a womans-shambles:
Fourthly and lastly, that I sung was only
An holy wish. Once more Beloved.
Peace!
You've said enough already. How came you
To sing beneath the Window?
Mr Hearsay
Told us that Mr Meanwell was new married,
And thought it good that we should gratify him,
And show our selves to him in a Festennine.
That Rascal Meanwel was the cause of all,
I would I had him here.
Why? this is he,
Sr Robert Littleworth his Son, he hath
Disclosed their villainies; he is no cheat.
God save you Mr Credulous; you have
Forgotten me perhaps, I'm somewhat changed,
You see your lost man's found; your Vagabond
Appears at last.
Go, you are a gibing scab:
Leave off your flouting; you're a beardless Boy;
I am a Father of Children.
And your Son
Will be so shortly, if he have not ill luck.
To vex you more, that hundred pounds you sent
To Mr Caster, Shape in the habit of
A Country fellow gulled you of.
That Rascal;
Thou show thy wit to abuse an old man thus.
As God shall mend me I will hamper thee.
Thou'st been disguised here all this while, thou hast;
Would I were braid in mine own mortar, if
I do not call the in Question the next Term
For counterfeiting of the Kings Subjects.
Come away from him Sirrah, come along.
There's a Trunk they've left behind; I have
Seized it for you; so that you'll be no loser.
If you can find a way whereby I may
Reward this curtsy of yours, I shall
Confess my self engaged doubly to you,
Both for the benefit and its requital.
The appearance of your Daughter here suggests
Something to ask, which yet my thoughts call boldness.
Can she suggest yet any good, that is
So expert grown in this flesh Brokery?
O do not blot that Innocence with suspicion,
Who never came so near a blemish yet,
As to be accused. To quit you of such thoughts
I did receive a tempting letter from
That Strumpet that's gone out (as sin is bold
To try even where no hope is) I made promise,
But to secure my self, and withal sound
The affections of young Credulous unto
Your virtuous Daughter, told him he should meet her
Where I agreed to meet her Chambermaid.
The blame must all be mine.
It is her deliverance.
She hath escaped two Plagues, a lustful fool.
I dare not challenge her I do confess,
As a reward due to my service, and
If you deny her me, assure your self
I'll never draw her from obedience:
I will not love her to procure her ruin,
And make my affection prove her Enemy.
You speak most honestly, I never did
Think ill of your intents, but always gave
A testimony to your life as large
As were your merits. But your fortunes are
Unequal, there's the want.
What's there defective
Love shall supply: True, Mr Credulous
Is a rich man, but yet wants that which makes
His riches useful, free discretion.
He may be something in the Eye of the World;
But let a knowing man that can distinguish
Between Possessions, and good parts, but view him,
And prize impartially, he will be rated
Only as Chests, and Caskets, just according
To what he holds. I value him, as I
Would an Exchequer, or a Magazine.
He is not virtuous, but well stored, a thing
Rather well victualled then well qualified.
And if you please to cast your Eye on me,
Some moneys will call back my Fathers Lands
Out of his lime-twig fingers, and I shall
Come forth as gay as he.
I'll strive no longer
For fear I seem t'oppose felicity.
If she'll give her consent you're one.
It is
The voice of Angels to me: I had thought
Nothing in all the store of nature could
Have added to that love, wherewith I do
Reverence that name, my Father, till that you
Spoke this.
I know your former Loves; grow up
Into an aged pair, yet still seem young.
May you stand fresh, as in your Pictures still,
And only have the reverence of the Aged.
I thank you for your pains Mr Constable,
You may dismiss your Watch now.
A pox on it!
That after all this ne'er a man to carry
To Prison? must poor Tradesmen be brought out
And no body clapped up?
That you may not want
Employment, friends take this I pray and drink it?
Sir, when you're cheated next we are your servants—
LYe thou there Watchman; how the knave that's
looked for
May often lurk under the Officer!
Invention I applaud thee.
London air
Me thinks begins to be too hot for us.
There is no longer tarrying here, let's swear
Fidelity to one another, and
So resolve for New England.
It is but getting
A little Pigeon-hole reformed Ruff—
Forcing our Beards into th'Orthodox bent—
Nosing a little Treason against the King;
Bark something at the Bishops, and we shall
Be easily received.
No fitter Place.
They are good silly People; Souls that will
Be cheated without trouble: One eye is
Put out with Zeal, the other with Ignorance,
And yet they think they're Eagles.
We are made
Just fit for that Meridian: no good work's
Allowed there; Faith, Faith is that they call for,
And we will bring it 'em.
What Language speak they?
English, and now and then a Root or two
Of Hebrew, which we'll learn of some Dutch Skipper
That goes along with us this Voyage; Now
We want but a good Wind, the Brethrens sighs
Must fill our sails. For what old England won't
Afford, New England will. You shall hear of us
By the next Ship that comes for Proselytes.
Each soil is not the good mans Country only;
Nor is the lot his to be still at home:
We'll claim a share, and prove that Nature gave
This Boon, as to the good, so to the knave.
WE have escaped the Law, but yet do fear
Something that's harder answered, your
sharp Ear.
O for a present slight now to beguile
That, and deceive you but of one good smile!
It is that must free us; the Author dares not look
For that good fortune to be saved by's Book.
To leave this blessed soil is no great woe;
Our griefe's in leaving you, that make it so.
For if you shall call in those Beams you lent,
It would even at Home create a Banishment.

Where in the name of Priscian hast thou been, thou sanguine syring-man?
Oh this wicked world! I'll tell you Sir the sto∣rye: This cap you see (pointing to his head) covers a cruel wound. I yesternight met with a crew of those, who talk of heaven, and of a place of torment, to whom when I began to preach our Doctrine, one of the company with a pewter pot struck me upon the head with all his might.
Alas poor Dose, there's no such strong necessity for to divulge our Doctrine in all companies.
That men should be such fools, to pinion their own arms, tie their own legs, and propose such strange nothings to themselves, on purpose for to keep themselves in awe. When would they but perceive their happiness, both this world and the next is solely theirs; nor can they lose their way although they would.
No more of this at present (my dear Dose) thou know,
 though by our only sacred Laws, every mans wife must be at his friends use, yet Pigwidgin the Tailor thwarts our custom; he is content to rant with other women, but to expose his own Spouse he denies; now have I plotted for to circumvent him: Thou know we meet anon at Sychophantios, where while (as is our use) we drink and roar, step thou home and bring thence some sleepy potion, which I'll infuse into his cup: so while he steeps, I'll use his wife before him, twill be rare sport.
With all my heart, it is a work meritorious: we must sometimes save souls against their wills! Oh here are all the Gang.—
How now Pan, where hast thou been my dear Pan∣dorses.
My much admired Master, I am but now come from my sad employment, I am so wearied and tyred with ran∣ting it, that I am not my self, so consequently yours.
Why, what hast done for our infernal grace? prithee report, do they increase and multiply?
Most reverend Devil, I have obtained in your behalf the choice of all the Town, as Citizens wives, and others that will be led away, and there improved much.
I must confess my most obsequious Ningle, thou hast behaved thy self and our affairs with admirable diligence, and for thy pains, thou shalt obtain my favour for thy gains.
Pray Sir your approbation.
I have surveyed the Universe, as France, Spain, and Italy, yet cannot parallel the Renters of this our English Climate; I've blinded them with pleasures of this world, by putting on a mask of Religion to maked no sin, that makes my proselites run headlong down to the infernal lake, where Cerberus transports them to their supposed joy, where yet at last, into infernal flames at length they're cast.
A good reward for such servants.
But prithee Pan, let me see how they improve, let's have one merry Jig before we depart.
Please you great Sir you shall.
Come away, make no delay, of mirth we are no scanters,
Dance and sing all in a Ring, for we are Jovial Renters.
Let fearful souls refuse their bowls,
And tremble for to tipple:
Let moon-men fear to domineer,
And halt before a Cripple.
Come away, make no delay, of mirth we are no scanters,
Dance and sing all in a Ring, for we are Jovial Renters.
No hell we dread when we are dead,
No Gorgon nor no Fury:
And while we live, we'll drink and—
In spite of Judge or Jury.
Come on my Boys, receive your joys,
And take your fill of pleasure,
Shoot for shoot, away let's doo'r,
But we must have our measure.
All lie down, as in a swovvn,
to have a pleasing Vision.
And then rise with bared thighs,
Who'd fear such sweet incision?
About, about, ye Jovial rout,
Dance antic like Hob-gobblins;
Drink and roar, and swear and whore,
But yet no brawls or squoblings.
Come away, make no delay, of mirth we are no scanters,
Dance and sing all in a Ring, for we are Jovial Renters.
How like you these mad pranks of these our Jovial Crew?
Most exquisitely well performed, I have not known the
 like, let them go on, and for their hire, I will reward them with eternal fire.
What means this horrid noise? sure it is some dire pre∣sage of these our horrid actions, yet I hope my dear Associates, this is but the praeludium to our mirth, let's now to Sychophan∣tios.
Where we will drink sweet Wine and strong To∣basso, till we become immortal, there's Philosophy for you.
Away.
Black night put on thy thickest mists, and try
For to abscond us from Joves piercing eye.
Gossip, if I am not on fire to be acquainted with some of this new Sect, may I want silver-lace for my next pet∣ticoat, and be enjoined not to wear so much as a Buckingham∣shire edging upon my smocks.
And so have I Mrs. Idlesby, without doubt they are a rare Society, lead heavenly lives, nothing but acting good for one another, drinking love-healths, and amorous departments.
They are the only people: O what a put•e• our Di∣vines do keep for honesty, honour, and virtuous life! not to make Minotaurs of our gentle husbands; no mirth, no due re∣freshment must be had, save what our impotent husbands will allovv: I am resolved to be of their Religion, and go to heaven the nearest way.
A match, then vvee'l be Convertites together: this very day the prime of all the gang, the chief'st Theologists, and vvorthiest festers of all that zealous Tribe are met together at Sychophantios house, the lime-hound Tavern, shall we go to 'em?
With all my heart, Iovve my life unto thee for the motion, let's away.
The breeches are my own, henceforth I'll rant.
No way but this to be predominant.
Drawer (he knocks) whore's your Master Sirrha?
At hand quoth pick-purse.
Fill me all the empty vessels in the house, I'll except none, with pure and sparkling Racy.
Chamber-pots and all Sir?
Out Rogue, jeer me! 
Oh, oh, oh!
What's the matter Noble Gentlemen?
This Rogue your servant here—
Sir, I am much obliged unto your love, that you would deign to castigate him; what wine wilt please this ho∣nour'd company to have brought in, and eke what quantity?
It would be too tedious and too troublesome, to drag a But of right Canary hither, fill us some twenty Gallons of rich Sack, let lights adorn the room in every angle, a pound of right Varina, and a gross of shining pipes, fit for a females touth.
Twenty Flagons—twill not amount to thimble fulls a piece, thirty will serve to give the onset with.
A little wine, will mike's a little rant,
But seas of Sack will not suffice us scant,
when we would reach the highest pitch of mirth.
Your humble servant, the wine proposed shall wait you presently.
Kiss close, kiss close my hearts, each suck Nepenthe from his females lips, until our Nectar do approach.
Alll joys wait on this jovial company, this in obedi∣ence to your just commands.
Rare Sychophantio, you are the best Steward to Venus that ever filled quart pot.
Ha! ha! ha! Steward to Bacchus you mean Asinego, but
 Wine and Venery are so near allied, it was but a slight mistake: now drink like Dutchman (while we sing Paeans to the plump cheeked god) let's tipple till we have swallowed down their Charter, that for the future, when men quaff profoundly, they may be said to drink like us: Here Mrs. Pigwidgin, to our next procreation.
Hum, hum, hum!
A health to Mrs. Wriggle, as second to our Master; I pro∣pose it.
I thank you fellow-creatures, I'll serve either of you soul and body. 
Lovely Mrs. All-prate, in this I cele∣brate the creatures health, who now is plowing on the angry main, whose saddle I supply, he will thank me for it.—
Mrs. All-prate. He were a devil else: Here's to thee dear Violentus, this will enable thee against next perfor∣mance, you were faultringly feeble in the last.
Mrs. Crave drink. Here's old drinking to me, have I a dogs face that I'm so neglected?
Better this Town were buried in the Sea: here dear Mrs. Crave-dri. my best endeavours ever wait upon you.
Mrs. All-prate. Here sweet Mr. Dose: Ha! whore's Mr. Dose.
Apostatus Perhaps gone to evacuate: see hoe's come.
I am the rar'st Ranter
Of all the whole crew Boys,
And he that denies it,
I'll prove him a Jew Boys,
For roaring; and whoring,
You know I speak true Boys.
Fit to be Tutor to a Tribe: here fellow-creature, here's a whole slash to thee.
I'll pledge thee, were it to him they call old Rug:
Put off your hats Gentlemen.
The Devil's an Ass like thee, and not worth drinking to: strike high ye sons of Orpheus and Orion.
A Hall, a Hall:
What power may us daunt,
While we sing roar and rant, 
A fig for the talkative rabble.
We know what we do,
And to heaven we'll go
Spite of the Watch, and the Constable.
There's but one Religion,
The Turk with his Pigeon,
No man shall be punished for's Vices;
All those that deny
With us to comply
Are Caterpillars and Cockatrices.
What more can be craved,
We all shall be saved
Though our lives are never so vicious.
What ever we act
It is an heavenly fact,
And for our salvation auspicious.
Come some man or other,
And make me a mother,
Let no man fear for to board me:
Come as many as will,
I give 'em their fill,
And thank 'em for that they afford me.
Come any strong Rogue
That would fain disimbogue,
Let's mingle, and try who's the strongest,
I fain would comply
With him that dare vie
To stand to his tackling the longest.
Come my brethren of the Base Viol, some whim, some ayre, some catch. Fiddler The best and newest Sir in Town.
Now let us stay, and ne'er knock off till the envious day
Shall disturb us.
No Constables staff, must hinder our quaff,
It is the reckoning alone that can curb us.
 Let's mingle in mirth, and drink till our Noses
Are brighter then Berry, and redder then Roses,
He only can rant whom Canary disposes.
This must go round, do off your hats till the pavement be crowned With your Beavers:
A red-coated-face frights the Sergeant and his Mace, And the Constable trembles to shivers.
Then in state march your faces like some of the Quorum,
When the whores do fall down, and the Vulgar adore um,
And their Noses like link-boys run shining before um.
Call, call aloud, and ne'er cease till the pots together crowd In Battalion;
Let our tippling make known, we came from the Town,
By the vulgar y•leped Westphalia.
Let the Bar-boy go sleep, and the Drawers leave roaring,
Our looks shall account for them and a morning,
When such pimples that rises shall have a quart scoring.
Excellent! did this Minerva take flight from John Taylors, or Martin Parkers brain.
From neitheir Sir, an utter Barrister fathers 'em, which makes some laugh, that the fool should be so ambitious to rock the Cradle.
Sweet Mrs. All prate, I grow proud beneath the Navel, and must needs crave your aid with an &amp;c.
Sir, I am none of your Jigging girls, who will play with a∣ny babble, I am sufficiently acquainted with the flatulence of your Nerve.
Mum, mum.
Here's a health to all our friends in Kent, let her pledge me that dares make the Beast with two backs before the whole Society.
By all the fl•sh on my back, a cordial motion, the work is pious we attempt, twill add to the audacity of our Brethren.
Rare rare, here dearest fellow-creatures, I mean you that walk in Atones Gardens to gather flowers once a month, more Wine there.
I come Sir, the Devil choke ye, ye rude Rogues, I must think of some way to be revenged for my broken pate.
Enter Sychophantio.
Honoured Gentlemen; here are two handsome Females with∣out, that desire admittance into your company.
Let 'em come in, let 'em come in, I know the parties very well.
Conduct 'em to us; two handsome women say thou?
Some of our own Society sure.
Or else desire to be.
The Wine dies upon our hands.
You shall find it lively enough anon Sir, to the lulling of all your sickly senses.
I shall observe it strictly Sir: excellent opportunity; In•e be revenged on all for one mans folly.
Assist me Bachus in this quaint Vagary,
As thou expect'st the sale of thy Canary.
Welcome ye lovely pair: your amiable aspects do proclaim you come as friends for to associate us; treachery cannot lurk under such looks, where Cupped and the Graces love to lodge.
Excellent creatures! Oh my bodkin troubles me.
They rival Venus, mother Dione, Juno her self, or fair Astioche.
These faces are unknovvn to me, yet welcome fellow-crea∣tures.
Idlesby, Know holy crevv, the fame of your fair lives, having once reached my ears, set me a longing to be made one of your blessed Society, more then when I was big with my Son Toby, and needs must eat a piece of roasted Bacon: be pleased to name me one of your Associates, and I dare challenge Superiority above an Eastern Queen.
She speaks my thoughts, and my desires.
They've certified enough, what need prolixity?
Drink to the two beauties, and then imitate them with mem∣bers of our bodies.
Drink deep my hearts for joy of this new Union.
And let the stream of the strong Indian weed involve us as we sit in the clouds.
So this was punctually performed: this (my pair of Beauties) is the first gradual step to your un∣ting; come fellow-creatures now unto our Ceremo∣niece.
The Song.
Round round all in a ring,
Fellow-creatures let us sing:
Here are two that come to be
Annexed to our Society:
By Pluto's Crown, Proserpines hair,
Cerberus yell, Alecto's chair,
By Epicurus happy life,
And Mescaline, Claudius wife;
By Ʋenus Gloves, and Lais paint,
By Iezabel our chiefest Saint:
By Goats desires, and Monkeys heat,
Spanish flies and stirring meat,
By the vigour of an horse,
By all things of strength and force,
By Alcides back of steel,
By Ioves escapes, Omphales wheel,
We adopt these happy pair,
Of our Liberties to share:
Arise, arise, blessed souls, and know,
Now you may rant, cum privelegio.
Now having finished this pious work, let's drink deep healths unto the happy solace, we of the shirt may find with these two Sisters.
What ho! some Wine and more Tobacco there.
Here Gentlemen, now Rhamnusia aid me in my revenge, vovvd for my broken scull, that which Dose gave me for to spice Pig∣widgins cup, I've mix amongst all this wine—ha—those two faces I have
 seen ever now in milder company: he spies Idlesby and Doe-little! Ostrange, they two turned Renters! I'll presently acquaint their hus∣bands vvith't:
Drink deep my Rogues until you fall asleep,
A guard I'll fetch, your persons safe to keep.
Me thinks vv'are dull, quite lost unto our liquor: this quart I'll svuallovv: now fair Mrs. Idlesby and Doe-little, to those dulcet joys we shall make ours the time we mingle limbs.
It is almost midnight—come, we lose time.
I wonder Pigwidgin holds up so long, art sure Spolario gave it him?
O doubt it not, there's plummets hangs upon my eye-lids, I hardly can keep open the casements.
Goodnight Brethren of the ranting humour, I must needs snore a while:
Enter Spolario with the Constable, and the Watch.
Not a word to my Master—
Never fear it, the State shall give thee thanks for this discovery: I charge you my friends in the Kings Name, cry mercy in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, to endeavour to awake these persons as well by kicking as pinching, and other laudable means, according to the Statute.
1. Watchman: Sir it is in vain, they have drunk themselves dead, or else (as the wise man saith) are dead drunk.
Noble Mr. Constable, What's the matter here?
Matter quoth you? Sir you keep a disordered house; the State shall know it: for ought I know these men and women here have drunk their lives away.
Isle assure you Sir they had not above a pottle of Sack amongst 'em, I wonder at the accident.
Call me a hackney vessel hither, Isle have them (drunk or dead as they are) to Finsbury, twill be a piece of extraordinary justice: every man take one of these on his back (pay your selves for your portage with what you find in their pockets) lay them in seemly ranks within the coach, and guard them hence to Finsbury.
2. VVatchman. It shall be done Sir.
Tother quort my hearts; this health deserves, the highest celebration. What all asleep! drunk as I live.  Ha! this room is strangely altered since last night. The Rogue Sycophantio has put a trick upon us.
What want you Sir?
Want say thou? prithee what place is this? whore's Sycophantio?
This, my friend, is Finsbury, a receptacle of thieves, debtors, and drunkards: I am the Keeper of the place.
Here's a miracle: prithee how came we here?
A coach Sir brought you hither, and a Constable.
So ho, so ho, so ho! He wakes the rest
Sweet sister, I am not now disposed for dalliance; another time Isle doubly do my duty.
What ho! They have drank Laethe sure, some Poppy or Mandragora: W'are all undone: A Constable and his Watch (like saw∣cy Devils) have given us transportation to this Goal, we know not when nor how.
Mercy on me; where are are we now?
Then fill more wine, it makes us divine;
Here's a health to Thomas the Tinker.
Ha! What stable's this?
O Mrs. Doe-little! w'are all undone.
Peace fool; are we not all Renters? That  very epithet is of force enough to protect us against our husbands violence. This Rogue Spolario has spoiled us all.
You should have followed my advice, and done the task I did prescribe your self.
O Pigwidgin, what will become of us!
What are you?
As you are, Renters.
Renters? Bias, yes Renters, our women are all in com∣mon.
 We drink quite drunk together, share our Oaths,
If one mans cloak be rent, all tear their Clothes.
If you are one with us, you will subscribe unto these several Articles.
Good Sir let's hear 'em, we are pliant boys.
Imprimis, That you believe you are the best servants to heaven, when you roar loudest, drink deepest, swear profoundest, whore the oftenest, swear the execrablest, and rant the highest. Bias. very good.
Item, That you acknowledge your selves obliged to prostrate each man his wife to the use of his fellow-creature, and are so far from loathing the form of the act, that you would renounce and disclaim her, in case she deny a compliance. Item, That you have taken an Oath to Bacchus (having solemnly sworn over a quart of Canary) to be drunk at least five times a week, and to use your utmost endeavours to convert all out of the faith, to our manner of life and worship.
All this we were long since sworn to, and to give you full sa∣tisfaction in that point, the females here of your Society must go along with us for satisfaction.
I hope Wriggle thou wilt not go along with these.
Oh husband it were a sin for to deny 'em, we'll be a while in private with our new Brethren.
Sirs, though our Laws allovv an equal share to all of our So∣ciety with their women, we first must be assured you are of us.
No more dispute, they must along.
Must, they shall not Sir.
We Citizens are exposed to lead strange lives,
When we are forced to fight for our own wives.
They fall together by the ears, the Renters are soundly beaten; and their women carried off.
Dear Mr. Clink, you have extremely obliged our gratitudes: good Sir, what have you done with the other gang?
En clapped um altogether in one room; they are strange fell∣lows, and may be well called Renters; they have uncloath'd themselves unto their shirts, and their apparel they have laid to gage for strong
 drink and Tobacco: they drink healths, and swear and roar, as if they felt no cold, each with a pair of irons on his heels.
You use our fellow-creatures too severely, but it is not in our powers to help the matter: let us entreat you dearest Sisters all, to foal∣low Mr. Clink to the next room; we will begin with these two Ladies first, and so with all of you by turns.
Come Ladies
To'ther go naked for their pleasures, you
Shall for my profit be as naked too.
Now thou vile strumpet, dost thou know this face?
My husband! Oh I am undone.
Impudent whore, is this your zeal to goodness, to journey eve∣rye morn ever six a clock unto S. Antholins to hear a Lecture, with a great Bible of Geneva print; your Table-book too, to take Sermon notes?
Take heed Sir what you do, I am a Ranter.
Yes whore, I find thou art.
I can rant too for a need,
These are but fillips, I should make thee bleed.
Oh, oh! dear husband.
This punishment is too poor for their deserts: you huswife I'll not beat, or spurn, I will do more then that: these clothes I gave you, come uncase, uncase.
You minion must participate her fate.
For heavens sake husband pardon me.
Thou art beyond the bounds of absolution.
En go together, these would cumber you: now you are fitter to dance Lavaltoes.
Can you be so hard hearted?
Yes I'll assure you, no you are a right Ranter.
Here I for ever take my leave of thee: nay, no whining now: see here are all your fellow-Caco-Oxmons—
Go, go, mingle your selves amongst 'em, it is but in vain to tire me with Petitions.
I'll get me a new Mate, but I'll beware whom I wed for thy sake, whom I durst once have sworn to be most virtuous.
 Enter Apostatus, Violentus, Asinego, Dose, Robustio, Minks, Fulsome, and all the She-Ranters in their shirts and smocks, a Bea∣dl with a whip, and other Officers.
March faster Gentlemen Renters, march faster; I have others that wait to be dispatched as well as you.
O Apostatus, what shall we do!
Doe? be as thou art in show, a man, and bear affliction pa∣tiently.
Oh Sir, but when affliction comes like a fury, with a Whip in her hand! Oh it is a sore trial; would I had never learned the Art of Ran∣ting.
Here Sir, take this She-Ranter in amongst the rest.
And this too, she is one of the Society, though of a younger date.
The more the merrier, I am resolved to Rant it to the last.
Farewell sweet Idlesby; now we must part,
Lash my wife well prithee, I'll pay thee for it.
Written by S. S. Gent.
Licensed and Published according to Order:

SInce that the Apes and Parrots of the Stage,
Are filenc'd by the Clamours of the Age;
Like Cones forced to feed on Bran and Grass,
(The true Disciples of Pithagoras)
Whose Copper-Lace, and Copper-Noses once
Made them to think themselves great Prester-Johns:
You'll (sure) have cause to praise, and thank that man
Can make each Thief a complete Roscian:
Then much good do it you (Sirs) fall to and eat,
You ne'er had cheaper (perhaps) better meat.
The Argument of the first Act. Hint's wily Cousinage of a Merchant at Bristol, leaving him prisoner in a Port-Mantle.
Drink deep my brave boys of the Bastinado
Of Stramazons, Tinctures, and •lie-passata's,
Of the Carricado, and brave Enb ocada,
Of Blades and Rapier-Hil•s: of surest guard
Of the Vincentio, and Eurgonian Ward:
Have we not bravely tossed this bumbast-foil-button.
Win gold, and wear gold Boys, it is we that merit it,
Come, let's share.
I, I, each man as he deserves.
If each man claim no more then he deserves.
There will be a precedence for pelf
Monstrum horrendum: it were incongruous.
No fractions my dear Myrmidons,
Stand firm to your old form of Discipline.
But Sir, must all our judgments mump and set,
And rest upon this kickshaw Marmoset:
This Athens Ape because he can simpringly
Yaul Auditors humanissimi.
True (Latro)
He's the mere Sponge that sucks up all our gain;
A very Tumbrel stuffed with —
Whom we preserve, as Witches their Familiars,
With prodigal expense of our own blood.
Non laedere
sed ludere,
Non Lane
sed linea,
Non ictus
Sed nictus
potius.
Pox of your cunning canting tongue
That beastly language merits more then halter.
The Ax or stigmatising —
No more my Stern Co-partners in ill,
Skilful Surveyors of High-wayes and Hedges,
Grammaro must not thus be cudgeld (Sirs) his orisons must make way for our souls, when by sinister chance we leave the earth. Learn∣ings that general Soul which Plato saith,
Fixes the world; we must make much of him.
Sol latet in herbs.
My anger goes down with the Sun (Sir,)
Come; all shake hands, — my habit  Dear Spolario, Are all our. Horses, and our Arms in safety.
They feed like Pluto's Palfreys under ground,
Our Pistols, Swords, and other surniture
Are safely locked up at our Rendezvous.
He lingers strangely —
Did he assare you confidently he would come.
Should death (Sir) meet him or his Fathers Ghost,
They'd hardly th'wart his Journey; I perceived him
Wrapped in so mirthful an Astonishment,
He scarce could frame an Answer to my Message;
The Ape did chatter to himself
Like to some bill-patcht door, whose entrails have
Spewed out their Tenant, oh I ravished him,
He would come.
Are the Gaggs fixed, and all the Gives in readiness.
They are.
Be gone.
Peace here be multiplied.
You are most welcome (Sir)
I see you'll make the STRANGE ADVENTURE yours
Sir, I have ever held it plety to gratify my friends on good conditions, here is five thousand pounds; five thousand more shall be your own whon I have viewed the goods.
You are most nobly honest;
Drink (Sir) a hearty glass.
What's this a Masque?
A Matachin, you'll find it.
Awe, Awe, Awe.
Bear his two servants
Amongst their fellow beasts in the Ostrey:
Take that Westphalia-Gammon-Clove stuck-face,
And box him up within that Leather Engine.
Awe, Awe, Awe.
This bag belongs to Capt. Martius,
who with his Dagger often hacks his sword,
And with whole Culverin raging oaths doth tear
The Vault of Heaven, spetting in the eyes
Of Nature, natures loathsome blasphemies:
Five hundred pounds in gold it lately boasted,
This old Extortioner shall return the sum,
And think he cheaply is a Libertine:
Transport him hence into that Captains Chamber;
This Key will give you entrance.
There place this putrid piece of parsimony.
Anon we'll share our Coin, and suck our Sack.
Still be propitious juggling god, thy shrine
I'll lade with Hecatombs of spotted Kine:
For roguing Virtue brings a man defame,
A pack-staff Epithet, and scorned name.
The Argument of the second Act. Hind feigning himself a great Lord, putting some of his Train in∣to rich Liveries, and storing his and their pockets with Gold, grows very intimate with a brave and noble Lady, whom at once he deprives of the inestimable jewel of her honour, toge∣there with much treasure.
TUsh! Pluto's wrath Proserpin can melt,
So that thy Sacrifice be freely felt:
What cannot Juno force in bed with Jove,
Turn and return a Sentence with her love:
Well! plainly thus; Slight, Force, are mighty things
From which even all, all earthly glory springs.
If Virtues self were clad in humane shape,
Virtue without these might go beg and scrape:
The naked truth is, a well-cloath'd lie,
A nimble quick-pate, mounts to dignity;
By force or fraud, that matters not a jot,
So massy wealth may fall into thy lot.
Quote gratis grate; and I dare aver
That Hiadolgo the Astrologer
Is a right honest man — All hail my Sovereign.
Prithee no Jibs,
Thou know my plot upon fair Infortunia;
A wealthy widow; nay, a beauteous widow;
A Lady of high birth, and great perfection,
Be thou my conduct and my Genius,
My wits inciting sweet-breath'd Zephirus;
Some Verses, some Verses, my Helliconian Harper,
Women are strangely taken with strange words.
Totum in toto, Sir, I have fitted you I faith,
I was fain to devour one whole page out of Ovid,
Three large sized sentences out of Catullus
One Axiom out of Hero and Lender;
And a whole stanzao out of Venus and Atones,
Ere I could hit upon a right strain of poesy;
But at length I hammered them out.
pray mark me,
Fairest piece of well-form'd earth,
Urge not this your haughty Birth,
The power which you have over us lies,
Not in your race but in your eyes
Should you no Honey vow to taste
But what the master Bees have placed
In compass of their cells, how small
A portion to your share would fall;
The sap which at the root is bred
In Trees through all the Boughs is spread,
But virtues which in Parents shine
Make not like progress through the line:
It is not from whom, but where we live,
The place does oft those graces give
Great Julius on the Mountains bred,
A Flock perhaps, or Herd had led;
He that the world subdued had been
But the best Wrestler on the Green;
It is Art and Knowledge which draw forth
The hidden seeds of native worth,
They blow those sparks and make them rise
Into such flames as touch the Skies.
Smile but on me and you shall scorn
Henceforth to be of Princes born.
They are most incomparable;
It was well remembered for to urge my breeding;
My birth I'm sure would Butcher all my hopes.
Thou see how bravely I am clad (my boy)
In speaking garments, speaking pockets too.
The Lord Port Rich (Grammario) is my name:
Go thou, and give that paper to the Lady,
Sing in her ear like to the amorous Lute,
Set forth my name in a Stentorian tone;
Isle second thee my self in person presently:
Be gone.
Isle do my utmost (Sir)
It is a high, brave thing to have th'repute
Of complete villain, perfect, absolute. 
Sir, your Lord no doubt is every way accomplished:
And Isle assure you, finds far more regard
From me, in the reception of this paper,
Then any personage of honour hitherto
Could ever boast, though earnestly endeavoured.
Madam, if you did know who seeks your love,
You would — he comes himself.
Madam, I hope my boldness shall find pardon,
And my affectionate zeal plead my excuse.
Distribute those few Diamonds, and Pearl Bracelets
Unto the Ladies that attend this Excellence.
My Lord your honour sets too high a rate
Upon so mean a beauty as is mine
You are sole Empress of all worth,
Command my state, my person and my life.
Your honour is too courteous to your handmaid,
Please you, this night, to let your presence grace
My homely Table, your honours candor must
Apologize for my rude entertainment.
Excellent creature, ever command your vassal.
Lights there for my Lord; lights — 
They are all gaged and bound.
As safe as my Lord Hind in his mistress arms.
Are they in bed together?
To my knowledge,
We shall soon part their strugglings.
Thieves, thieves, 
Thieves,
Murder, murder.
What saucy devils interrupt our joys?
What mean these clamours, speak upon your lives?
Alas! my Lord the house is robed.
Oh, I am quite undone —
You see how we are sanguin'dore
Fighting for to prevent such outrages:
My leg is almost cut in sunder, oh —
Be not discomforted (dear Lady)
Every man mount his steed, and take his Arms;
My self too, will along: accursed mischance;
To horse, to horse; you Lady to your bed.
Oh me! 
Why this is bravely done my Bullies;
Thus do the Gods sell all for industry,
And what's not got by hell-bred Villainy?
Conscience they talk on; conscience is free,
Worst conscienc'd men, these times, best thrivers be;
Is it please the Thra••an Bores to blow
So turns our airy conscience to and fro. 
The Argument of the third Act. Hind and his Comrades disguising themselves in Devils habits, terrify the Country people, and rob an Alderman of the City of York.
It were well for the great Grandees of the earth
(My fellow Furies) were there no worse Fiends
In pitchy Bara thrum then we: Oh how
The Bores and Bumpkins of this Shire do dread us
No less then twelve already are run mad.
Me thinks I like my transmutation well,
Only my tail is too, too troublesome —
Front nulla Fides
Mistagogus, What mean these prodigies?
Where is your vice or virtues habits now?
For sustine pro nuns doth bend his brow.
You (Parson) now are in your native weeds,
Black best becomes your swarthy function
Whose Doctrine (for the most part) damns more souls
Then Lucifer by all his stratagems.
Oh, our Scout comes merrily.
A prize, prize, a prize —
The news?
The Indies sally toward us;
An Alderman of York quite gilded o'er,
His servants and his horses groan with gold,
Are journeying this way.
Couch close, my doughty deviss,
Lets seize upon them with as winged hast
As real Demons at the hour of death
Hurry a vicious soul to Tartarus.
Who would not be a Devil for an hour,
To be a man of money twelve months after —?
The Alderman (poor wretch) begged for his soul;
His innate guilt; fear of assured damnation
Made him forget petitioning for his pelf.
Quoth he, I smell sulphur, and reeking brimstone.
Soot, stinking soot: Oh hell, how hot art thou!
S•ulto um plane sunt omnia.
An ass in's foot-cloth; it is no sin to gull him;
He I thank heaven that his own chain did not choke him,
And praise the devil for's deliverance:
He'll soon recover all by his collusions,
Abatements, stoppels, inhibitions.
Heavy paced jade, dull pated jobbernoul,
Quck in delays, checking with vain control
Fair Justice course, vile necessary evil,
Smooth seeming saint, yet damned incarnate Devil.
Well said my man of art, and mystic science:
I know this Alderman and his Lawyers case;
I feed him one, and he cudgeld my case,
For which I vowed revenge, and have perfotm'd it.
Now every one resume his pristine form;
Our next sconce lies in Kent; thither lets hie.
Me thinks I feel a civil war within me,
Egging me on for to proceed from this,
And get the substance of celestial bliss;
My soul oft calls his Parliament of sense,
But still the guilty have pre-eminence:
For my souls better part so feeble is,
So cold and dead is, my Sinder•sis,
That shadows by odd chance sometimes are got;
But oh! the substance is respected not.
Come let's away. 
The Argument of the Fourth Argument. Hind And his associates disguised like Beggars, rob a wealthy Citizen of London, and his two friends, near Hogsden.
Are we not finely fitted (fellow mendicants)
For a days prentiship to the begging trade?
O sad account! we that were wont to speak
In smoke and thunder, STAND — UPON YOUR LIVES,
Must now petition for a piece of coin.
Tut,
Our begging is like that the Persians used
Of old unto their eager God of fire,
When with a flaming torch they did descend
Unto some river, and protest to quench
Th'a spiring God, in case he did deny
To grant their wishes. Oh, I have it ad unguem,
The Bard of Bednal green was nothing to me,
Eo Claudus, et Aegrotus sum,
This is the garb men of my cloth must take to,
Since every Sales-man writes himself Sacer dos.
Stand close, and obsecrate with Rhumatick eyes,
Here comes the Patron we must plunder.
A fine morning this is.
Oh that my wife had born us company; good soul, she loves to hear the Cuckoo sing, especially in the winter.
So does mine, indeedla.
Bless your good worships in your minds and your bodies, at home and abroad,
 in bed and at board, 
No troubles toss ye,
Nor no hare cross ye;
No succubus ride ye,
No false fire guide ye; Please to distribute your charity amongst a company of poor maimd men—
Deprived of their limbs for the cause of their Country, whose legs and hands remain as Trophies, in France, Spain, Are gone and Apulia.
In Turkey, in Russia, in Naples and Muscovia
In the Adriatic and the Bal•ec Seas.
Supposito la sequitur qu idlibet,
For your own sakes whose rewards shall be glorious,
Extend with liberal minds, and willing hands,
What both becomes your oppulency, and our indigence.
Hey day! What bold beggars are these?
What Country men are they? They speak all several Languages.
They are men of China I think.
Truly friends the times are so hard, and we so burdened, that verily, yea and nay, we are scarce able to furnish our wives with a com∣petent number of silk gowns, lawn smocks, gold laces, beaver hats, sell∣ver hilted fans, Flanders laces and other necessaries, without which, all ho∣nest men know we cannot subsist.
He speaks truth my brethren.
Zounds what dogs are these— Come ye counterfeiting Coxcombs Discover, discover:
 you (Merca∣tor) brought forth 6. hundred pounds to expiate a debt you owe at Hogsden here.
Take all (Sir) so you'll spare my life.
Alas, id rather overthrow thy wife.
What do ye linger ye pair of Puttocks? Come, lighten, lighten.
Oh Lord (sir!)
Wo and alas!
Now each man lay his hand upon his mouth:
Mum, not a word upon your lives.
Away my Blades, this must we do for gain,
Since as the ancient Sages truly tell,
"Tic better ne'er to be, then not be well.
The Argument of the Fifth Act. The Scots King being overthrown at the battle of Worcster, accepts of Hinds conduct (knowing how well he was acquainted with the Country) who carries him safe away. (Ut aiunt.)
Me thinks (Sir) you do seem in this disguise,
Like lightning in the Keldar of a cloud:
Your visage (Sir) is not least legible,
There is a Libel in your very dress.
Well sung the Roman Bard, that all things sublunary
Of worth do hang on very slender strings.
Nothing's more ticklish then the state of Kings:
Tall Caedars oft are torn up by the roots
By blustering Bores, when the humble shrub
Sits safe, exalting to behold their ruin.
I know as well all bodies politic
As those are humane, have their Dates and Deaths.
The Romans first had Kings, whose rule took end
In Yarquins fall; Consuls then sate at helm,
Swaying the Argoser of all the world,
Until Augustus leaped into the throne,
Making all stoop to single sovereignty:
Thus have all things terre strial their Dates,
The greatest Emperors, and greatest States,
The Lamps of Heaven, the Planets change above,
The Sun from his Diurnal Arch doth move;
Ayre doth sometime to fire or water run,
And fire an earthly habit doth put on,
That men asleep, rocked by felicity,
That vainly dream here of Eternity,
May wake and see, since humane and Divine
Things taste mutation, it is nor strange it is Mine.
(Sir) Ime acquainted well with all these parts;
All England is, but as More fields to me,
Make me your guide (Sir) and ne'er doubt your safety;
For though to others I have been untrue,
Let me be hanged if I prove false to you. 
Our Authors Invention would not admit delay,
But strait produced new Plots, t'inlarge this play;
And thinking to write what's fancy had commended,
One comes and tells him, Hind was apprehended:
Whereat amazed he bids his friend adieu,
And forth he's gone, to inquire if the news be true.

HEaven whore's thy Vengeance?
Can thou endure this Mockery?
We thank you all. But why Aga∣thocles
Appears such trouble on thy brows, are we
Unwelcome to thy wishes?
How Sir! Pardon me.
Who dares say you are?
You are my King,—Is it not so Gentlemen?
The Rays that from your Brothers Diadem
Gilded this Kingdom are put out, and now
From you our rising Sun, we must expect
A Virtual fervor. Obedience is my safety.
My wishes! trifles, what may you not
Command?
If you but will, my life is not my own.
One frown may Rivet me, I am designed
To be but what you please, and when, no
longer.
I am your poor Submissive.
You Misconstre
The power of Kings, they dare not but be just.
That Crown can ne'er sit fast that takes it's rise
From others ruin.
Out Imposture—
My Lords I could have wished
The Peoples and your Loves had spared
this solemnity
Until another time, a time that might
Have proved more fit for Triumph; for
though Heaven
Hath wreathed our Brows with Victory, our
thoughts
Are not at peace.
Nor ever will be till
By their continual motion they have
brought
All into Public ruin.
The Care of the Common safety
O'rwhelms our Joy and makes it seem un∣seasonable.
Repose after so long a toil of War would bee
Perfume unto our Senses, but we must not
Prefer our own before the Peoples quiet.
Machivell thou art an Ass, a ve∣rye
Ass to him
My Lords, you are my witnesses,
The Public wrong, and not Ambitious
hopes
Of Government, Obliged me to this
Quarrel
(The Peoples and not mine) against my
Brother;
The Justice of which cause gave us Success.
Heaven knows, had he not bin their En∣my,
I should have emptied every vein I have
To have served him. Nature and Duty held
Strong Conflicts in my blood, Nature pro∣moting
One while my Brothers right, until my
Duty
Unto my Country with Diviner Reason
O'reame me, and discovered the sad Scene
Of a sinking People, and a rising Tyrant.
Does Heaven hear this, and pu∣nisheth
not?
For my part, my Lords,
Though the affection of the People Circles
My Temples with a Crown, I shall not
wear it
Longer than they 'steem me worthy.
Most singular Prince.
Most singular Devil.—
My Lord Arch-Bishop,
You are the Church's Vine, and we the
Elm
Of the Common-wealth, our flourishing E∣states
Depend on one another; by Heaven's hand
We are Contracted, and must share all
fortunes,
Or good, or bad. The Jewels of a Crown
Retain not Lustre longer than they have
Virtue from th'Church, and that she's glo∣rios;
Nor can she be so longer than we are so,
Her strength and welfare doth consist in ours.
Let not this sudden change
Possess her with a fear of her Eclipse.
Sh'as a Protector now, that will expose
His life a Sacrifice to preserve her Purity.
We shall not be remiss to satisfy
What lies on our part towards her, and
what
From her belongs to us we need not inti∣mate,
You have a Sense my Lord, can reach at things
And their Necessities.
My Duty shall not be wanting, my
gracious Lord.
The Church-man will turn Pan∣der
to him.
My Lords,
W'are not insensible of the Peoples burden
By keeping up our Armies, but necessity
That makes men Act what they would not,
Compels it;
We are not yet secured against the Malice
Of our late vanquished Brother, there's a
faction
That waits an opportunity to befriend him,
Beside his hopes in Italy; those clouds over,
We doubt not but a fair day will give birth
Unto the Peoples happiness and ours.
In the mean time my Lords be it your Care
To stop the current of their Cries, and keep
Us fair in their opinion.
As Hel's Projector.
Down, down big heart, thoul't hang me
else.
My Lord,
Let Reason moderate your Passions,
They are two violent, and may prove your
Enemies.
Mazares wants not Hands.
Nor I a Heart
To dare his worst; oh Epecides
I have lived too long to see this day.
My Lords, we know
Crowns are but glorious burdens, and the
weight
Requires more heads than one to bear it up.
You are the approved Pilots of the State,
Acquainted with all Creeks, and Rocks
where danger
Hides his destroying-head, and wisely can
Steer her, should the Malice of a Foreign
Foe
Swell to a Tempest, or Malignant breaths
At home threaten her Ruin; on your faiths
Depends ours and her safety.
Most gracious Sir,
You have out-done even Expectation? and
The Beams of Virtue that shoot from you
Out-shine the Glory of your Diadem,
And bind our lives unto your Fortunes.
May we own our lives no longer
Than they perform those offices of Duty
Your Virtues do Command them to.
We owe much to your Loves,
And shall engross a time to pay the Debt
Your Merits call upon us; we'll divide
The happiness, if any wait upon
A Crown, amongst you.
When hoe's warm in's Seat,
They shall as little dare to claim his Pro∣mise,
As the poor Crane his reward from the
Lyon,
When hee had pulled the Bone out of his
throat.
Restrain your self,
Ther's little Revenge in words, but words
may be
Revenged, be advised.
May never Care breed feavors
in your blood,
Nor troubles raise a Palsy in your Sceptre;
May still Success attend your Enterprises,
And Conquests beget Conquests, till you
write
Your Self the Worlds great Monarch.
May Heaven's eye
Keep Sentinel while you repose, that no
Traitorous Attempts may reach your Sa∣cred
Person.
Now may the Groans of dying
men, the cries
Of Widows, Orphans, and deflowered Fire∣gins,
Together with his Brother's wrongs conti∣nually
Keep him awake, till with distracted rage
(For want of Rest) he doth become his own
Dire executioner.
What means this? Agathocles?
I have bin at my Prayers too.
We thank you, and shall
Endeavour to deserve so far,
You shall not have Cause to repent them.
I believe no less.
Lead on my Lords,
With upright Care we shall discharge our
trust;
Kings are no longer Kings, than they are
just.
My Lord Epecides, a word,
The King may spare us two; I may presume
We are as little needed as regarded.
If that thy looks deceive me not, thou art
Yet free from this disease, this Itch of Ho∣nor,
Which so transforms us into Servile flat∣tery.
Art swelled with lofty thoughts?
They reach no higher
Than the Public good, which they devout∣lie
wish,
Though want a power to Compass.
You are honesty it self;
And to thy Bosom as my Sanctuary,
My Soul shall fly to ease it self of what
Would burst me to keep longer.
My Lord, you may
Be confident I have a Soul as big
With Grief as you, that fain would be de∣levered,
If Reason would turn Midwife.
False Cleander
Hath made the Field drunk with his Coun∣tray's
blood,
To set up an Usurper.
It is pretended
The Peoples Pressures and continual Cal∣morse
Enforced the War.
Kindled by the fire
Broke from Mazares bosom, whose Am∣bitious
Desire of Rule, bred the ill humours in
The easily corrupted Multitude,
Who, led by their pernicious hopes, that he
Would bring on better days, gave breath
unto
Their Monstrous fury, and like a deluge,
Brake forth and sank the Fortunes of E∣vander:
That he poor Prince, having no other Arc
Of Preservation than his Innocence,
And faith he had in's friends, did fly to them
Whose shelter served him but for a short
time,
For they with him at last were overwhelmed.
But Epecides be thou confident,
Though Hell hath furthered the Usurpers
Plot,
And smoothed it with success, Vengeance
will reach him.
Though heaven be slow it's punishment
is sure.
Hear but Cleander,
Philistus, Adulanter, and the rest,
And they will tell you Providence and
Justice
Sate on their Weapons points to punish
Tyranny;
And that our Kingdom by Mazares wisdom,
Will flourish in a far better Estate,
Than in Evanders time.
Ambition wants not snares
To Catch Vulgar Credulity, and carry
On their Designs clear to the end they
aim at.
They are the Canes and Trunks through
which the Usurper
Speaks to promote his purposes, and blast
All good in's Brother, and Eclipse his
right.
Is not Planetius, the first bold Traitor,
Of Mona made Provincial? Is not Cle∣ander
As big with hopes and Expectation?
Does not Philistus fawn, and Court to out
Missellus the Provincial of Vallis de Noto.
Credit such Sycophants?
Missellus is Noble,
And if Mazares look not well about him,
Evander may have an after Game to Play,
Missellus was his Creature.
Where ever he be,
Though fortune left his Party, he retains
A Mind invincible.
No question but
The State was much distempered, and E∣vander
Was not without his faults.
People disposed for Change,
Survey the Vices of their Prince through
Optics
That rather multiply than lessen them:
And what is in themselves but Criminal,
Is in their Prince held horrid, as the Symp∣tome
To the disease of Tyranny.
And dare correct;
That in their Prince they would not in
themselves
Have taken notice of.
But allow there were
Some things might grieve the People; Wise
Experience
Gives us to know that in the lopping of
Trees,
The skilful hand prunes but the lower
Branches,
And leaves the Top still growing to Ex∣tract
Sap from the Root, as meaning to Reform,
Not to Destroy. I tell thee Epecides,
The Excess of what was good in Prince E∣vander,
Might Stock the barren breast' of the Usur∣per.
Men never rate their goods so
highly
As when they are robed of them. It is some ease
To our afflictions, that we can thus vent
Our Griefs to one another, for we must
Despair of other remedy.
Very true,
If we continue Children, and adore
The Rod corrects us, kiss it till we smart
for it,
Enthrone base Fear in Valours royal Seat,
Let it Lord o'er our Spirits, till our blood
Forsake its heat, and become Ice: But if
We do retain the Glory of our Ancestors,
(Whose Ashes will rise up against our
dullness;)
Shake off our Tameness, and give way to
Courage,
We need not doubt (inspired with a just
rage)
To break the necks of those that would
yoke ours.
I but—
Those Buts destroy us; are you
willing
To sit in the dark and never see the Sun;
With a besotted Patience see your goods
Rifled, and your Inheritance tan from you,
Unless you to secure his quiet will
Part with your own, and by compliance
banish
The peace your Conscience yet is happy in?
You know my Spirit's not so chill
But I would know a way, prescribe you one
That's passable, I shall not only run
My Fortunes with you, but make all the
friends
And nearest Allies I have as ready minded
To do you service.
To a Resolved Mind
Nothing seems difficult—Archias has a
Noble gallant Spirit.
What then?
Hee ever was a friend to Virtue,
and's of Mazares line too.
Unfold the Mystery.
What would you say if—he's
wellbelov'd and active.
Doe you suspect me?
No, but hold here's some upon
us.
Which is the Lord Philistus or
Cleander, either will serve.
What is your business?
I've Letters to the King.
Whence came you?
From Messina.
How fares the Lord Planetius?
His Honour is in health, I'd fine
be discharged.
What news, what news, we'll
bring you to the King.
Extreme good Gentlemen, the
late Tyrant after his defeat going for Ita∣lie,
was surprised by some of Tyche, in the
Province of Val•s de Noto, killed, and cast
into the River; a death too good for him.
So Sir—
Oh forbear—But hear me friend
is this news certain?
My Lord Planetius the Provinci∣all
of Mona had it so Sir, and he hath sent
the same unto the King▪ I can say no more
on it Sir, please you to bring me to those
Gentlemen.
Ther's enough in Court to show
you, you may walk thither Sir—
I could have done that without all
this doe Sir—
Passion's too much your Enemy.
Dog! a death too good for him?
What think you now on th'busi∣ness
you were upon?
I am beside my self, my Courage
leaves me,
And Reason tells me now I must be tame.
The King—
Were not the Villains found.
I do not know and't please your
Majesty.
The King seems to be troubled at this
News.
Isle change my Note—it is like they were,
For w'heard the Provincial of Vallis de
Noto had
Appointed the death of some body.
He did but Justice then; Oh Phi∣listus
And you my honoured Lords, our Greases
want utterance;
He was our Brother, though our Countries
Enemy,
And they have tan away a part of us
That sent him hence; It was a Deed
(though Heavens
Just hand was in it) we cannot but Lament.
Your Pardon Supreme powers.
Most pious Prince.
Blame us not my Lords. We say
again
He was our Brother, and We cannot stop
The Course of Nature.
Can this he real!
He was a Gracious Prince, ther's
the truth on it.
I could weep too for him.
How you Villain?
Why the King is not offended
with me I hope? alas I have Nature in me
too, good, Virtuous Prince, Evand•r.
Hast thou a mind to be hanged?
How! Is the Wind at that door.
No Sir, not for ever a dead Prince in Chri∣stendome;
your Majesty may spare your
tears, for in truth and verity he was but
so, so.
Friend did not say
That the Actors were punished by Missellus.
So I heard an't like your High∣ness.
Tic strange
Planetius writes not so, but it's very likely;
Missellus has in many things been seen
Ready and Active for him, and no doubt
Would now—
Come, Come, Missellus grows
too popular,
Your Majesty may think on some more faithful.
We guess your meaning—
Philistus,
We shall dispatch you upon some affairs,
As soon as we can shake this sadness off,
And our Mind's fit for business.
It becomes my Duty to wait your
Highness pleasure.
Fellow attend our Secretary for
a Confirmation of the Provinciallship of
Mona to Planetius.
Come my Lords.
Begone so soon my Lord? you're
hardly entered
My Father house. Though the entertainment
comes
Short of your Merits, My Lord, believe it
you're welcome
To poor Harmonia.
You are rich in all that's good,
And that's a Dower Queens would be glad
to boast of.
Since thy descent to love me, I'm exalted
Above a Monarch's happiness.
And part so soon?
You have some other Mistress whose heaven
Depends upon your Visit.
Pretty Jealousy,
How sweetly it becomes her; Believe me
dearest,
By the blessed hopes I have in thee, Not any
Beauty in Cicily (if there can any be
Besides thy self; for in thee is the full
Perfection of all Beauty met) has part
Of the least thought of mine.
You shall not go though yet.
Thy Father—wilt thou now Li∣cense
me to go;
I'll see thee ever the Sun be six hours old∣er.
My Lord Archias you have ho∣nour'd
me
Exceedingly by this your Visit. I hope my coming
Does not remove you hence.
My good Lord,
Excuse me I beseech you, did not Business
Of much Concernment call me hence, I
should
Account that time well spent wherein I might
Serve you and your fair Daughter.
Pleasure your self my Lord.
I am your Lordships Servant—adieu
Sweet.
Harmonia,
I guess this Young Lord loves thee,
His often Visits promise some such business;
But I'd not have you Countenance it.
Why I beseech you Sir?
You have bin pleased to lavish forth his
praises
Beyond the Common Character; I've heard
you say
(With Pardon Sir) hee had much Virtue
in him.
And has so, but he cannot bring
his Heart
T'affect this King, although he be his Kins∣man.
That is no Crime worthy my No∣tice
Sir,
Much less my disrespect. Pray give me
leave
To use him but with that Civility
Becomes the Education of your Daughter.
My intents
Fly higher to advance thee, if I live,
And that the King perform his Royal word,
(As that he dares not but doe) thou shalt
stand
In Competition with a Queen for Great∣ness.
Mazares is too weak a Politician,
To think my vast Soul can bee hemmed
within
The Circle of a Province, when a King∣dome
Will scarce contain it. No, I do but take
This as a Spot of Earth to what I aim at.
I mean to Match thee Girl unto some
Prince,
By whose Assistance I'll reach the Ascen∣dent,
The Royal Seat Harmonia, And then
Wee are thy Princely Father: Dos't not
Noise
Rarely my Girl, the very Sound inspires
My Soul with flames of Majesty—Go on
Cleander,
'Till Neighbouring Princes wondering at
thy Fate,
With trembling Scepters dread their own
Estate.
PHilistus sir,
Sit Adulanter—who waits
there?
We an't like your Grace.
Bring us Wine,
Wee are disposed to drown our Brothers
Memory,
And its appendent Sorrows in a full
Bowl of rich Wine.
Done like your Princely self.
What should we
Contract our Youth to Cares for, waste the
heat
Beats in our agile veins, and draw upon
Our head a Snowy-Perrywig before
Age claims it? We are resolved to make
Our blooming Years no Prey for Melan∣choly.
You are our Sun, and we the In∣fant
Plants
That take life from you; when your Brow
is Clouded
We droop and Pine, as wanting heat; your
Highness
Now shows your self in Glory; and our
heads
That lately were pressed down with discon∣tent
Look up to bless the Change.
Your Highness put
Us all in fear you would Convert your
Court
Into a Monastery.
Ha, ha, ha, into a Mouse-trap ra∣there.
Philistus to thee.—Fellow let not
any
Enter the Presence if thou regard'st thy
safety.
It is hoped our Subjects, will allow us a
time
Of Mirth after our toil for them.
Whether they will or not, your
Majesty has power to take it.
How ever we seemed to take our
Brothers death,
'Thas brought on our security, for such
As durst before speak loud and big, now
dare not
Be seen to Whisper against us.
Tic a point of Policy,
High as your Highness safety to keep them
At such an Awful distance; ther's Epe∣cides
—
A Close and cunning Sophister,
he carries
A fire within him scarce to be discerned.
Agathocles comes not much short
of him.
He has a daring Soul, and does
attract
The lewd Licentious People, as the fire
That draws ill Vapours to it, but w'are re∣solved
He and the rest of's Insolent Crew shall
meet
Our Justice if they Submit not.
Your Majestie's brow
Is too serene, something of Wrath there
seated
Would seem far better.
Wher's our Secretary.
Call the Kings Secretary
Hast done the Patent we gave
Order for?
It is ready for your Majesties
Signing.
Give us Ink,—so—Philistus,
We have Just cause to doubt Missellus faith
too,
And therefore will remove him, and on thee
Confer the honour. He is seated like
A Thorn in th'Heart of Cicily, and must be
Cut off lest he spread farther, and do gore
us.
Take this as earnest of our Love to thee,
Whose Loyalty we are assured of.
Fame
Shall spread your Royal Bounty through the World,
And may leave to Be when I forget
To be your Highness Servant.
Cleander had
Our promise for it, but We do know him
one
Of an inconstant Spirit, full of Spleen;
A Mind high and unbounded, and to drive
On his own ends, will enter into League
With Turk or Devil; therefore tic not
safe
For us to lay a trust of so high consequence
On such a frail foundation, One whose
faith
Complies with every Wind, and strikes
his Sails
With every Tide and Change. But
You drink slowly.—Come to thy
Good Journey.
The King is private.
I must speak with him.
Who's that so loud there?
The Lord Cleander.
Tell him it is not our pleasure to
be spoke with.
My Lord you hear the King.
My Business is of Concernment,
I will enter—How's this? surrounded
With his Flatterers; tic like to be
A State well governed.
Sir, you are Uncivil.
What mean you Royal Sir?
You're saucy, We say again you're
saucy.
How?
How durst you bee so inso∣lent?
I have deserved Sir better lan∣gauge
from you.
My anger is too strong for my Obedience,
And will have the upper hand. I come
To claim your Royal word—I am Clean∣der
Sir,
Whose hand did seat the Crown upon your
head Sir.
Provoke us not.
Good my Lord for your own
safety.
You see the King is moved.
Moved! By heaven i'll move him
worse, tell me I'm Insolent.
And we shall punish it, if you go
not the sooner.
I will not hence, and you shall
hear me.
Go, you're impudent.
Am I so Sir?
You did not tell me so, when I did waste
Whole Nights, and spent my Spirits, to se∣duce
The People t• your Party, and lost my
blood
To serve you. I was not then—
Stir not in me
An Anger that will shake thee.
Whose head, whose heart, whose
hand appeared till mine,
To make you what you are?
If we be King, Sir you shall feel
there is
A power belonging to it. Wher's our
Guard?
Take him away.
I beseech your Majesty.
Effeminate Lord, I scorn to own
a life
At thy Petitioning. Tyrant do thy worst.
Is this the reward for all my services—
Sit with your crew of Vaulters, and Con∣trive
To turn your Citadels to dancing schools
Or Stews fit for your purpose, till the
Soldiery
Like to a sudden Tempest scour your foal∣lies,
And whip you to Repentance.
Away with him.
Come my Lord.
Yes I shall go—Ungrateful
Prince,
May all thy Brothers—
Stop's mouth—away with him.
So we are rid of the Screech Owl, did you
ever hear
Spleen better vented; All the Physicians of
Palermo could not discover his disease bet∣la
than he has don't himself.
And were I as your Majesty, I'd
cure him
By th'head for it.
It is not safe yet, but if this
Tame him not,
We shall fly higher,
The Serpent spent at me too.
We'll have the venom from him
or his life for it.
Hee has a Daughter of that Beau∣tie,
would thaw a Stoick's bosom,
She carries the Quintessence of Youth a∣bout
her.
Art thou acquainted with her?
Though I am not, I want not Con∣fidence,
If that may serve your Majesty.
Is she composed for Mirth?
She bears a fame for Virtue.
What should we do with her then?
she is no Match for us.
If your Majesty have a Mind to
her
I'll batter all her Virtues with your Glo∣ries;
And 'less an Host of Angels come to
Guard her,
She shall not pass my purchase.
When you Storm her let not a Re∣pulse
or two
Make you draw off your Siege, the third
Assault
Constrains her to Surrender.
I am not my Lord
To learn the Art of Courtship, I have more
Designs than one upon her.
We do like
The Law Lycurgus made, and will Ordain
The like amongst us; why should Youth be
Curtailed
Of that delight Nature intended it?
Men's Wives shall have the liberty to choose
A friend to play the Husbands part some∣times.
Does your Majesty intend to
Marry?
Marriage is but a Church Di∣vise,
that would
Prefer sobriety amongst the Virtues,
A stale unsavoury thing; when as Vari∣ety
Gives life to every Sense, and doth beget
An Appetite, when tother smothers it.
Adulanter try thy Skill, We shall reward
it.
I warrant she's your Majesties.
Come Philistus,
We'll bring thee on thy way, and lest
Missellus
Should prove stiff Necked, and not yield
his Obedience
To our Commands, our General shall
send
With thee 5000. men to force Admittance.
Leontium, Tyche and Neapolis
Stand fast to us, and will assist you if
The Siracusians should stand out.
Your Majesty does enrich me with
your Bounty.
Adulanter, We shall find employ∣meant
worthy
Thy liking in Palermo; We will have
Thee near us.
Your Highness Vassal.
It is fit,
Royality should maintain them which up∣hold
it.
He is my Kiug, his Brother's death
hath made
His Title good, and I must bring my heart
Down to Obedience.
Then you begin to cool.
I'm not Convinced in Consci∣ence
that it is lawful
T'oppose the power now o'er us, since the
hand
Of Heaven is in it, whose high Decrees we
ought not
To question or dispute.
A happy Morning
To the Noble Lord Archias.
The like to your Honours.
You heard the news?
What is it my Lord?
Philistus is made Provincial of
Vallis de Noto.
How likes Cleander it?
He's otherwise Provided for,
Committed
Upon displeasure Mazares has taken against
him.
That's news indeed.
What Cleander, the Magazine of
Policy,
Is he blown up? Mazar•s only Atlas
That shouldered him into the Throne.
This is some State Gin, some trick
Politic.
Believe it it is true.
How can Mazares be without him?
Oh my Lord,
Mazares used Cleander as the Lame
Do their supporting Crutches, that's no
longer
Than as they need 'em; when that they
are able
To walk alore, they cast 'em from 'em.
Ha, ha, ha, I'm glad on it with all
my heart.
Mazares never Acted a thing as yet
So near Commendable justice, Fair Astrea
May give it a just Plaudit.
But Consider,
If such who have ventured their part of
Heaven
To do him service, are not free from his Tie∣ronnie,
Where rests our safety?
It is high injustice
So to reward him.
In the survey of Politickes,
Dost find a Traitor otherwise rewarded?
Stands it with thy Discretion, to let loose
A Tiger, when you have moved him into An∣ger?
No, it is a way both safe and full of Justice
To Chain such Danger up; had he done
otherwise,
He had bin fitter rather to have ruled
A Sheephook than a Sceptre.
Come you are too bitter,
Think on Cleander's Age, and lend your
aid.
He should have known more ver∣tu
in his Youth,
And then his Age had now bin Tempest
proof.
For my sake good my Lord, and
for his Daughters.
I, now my Lord you speak, you
are concerned in it.
Your own, and all our freedoms
are concerned in it.
Shall we pay Duty and Obedience
To him, who does instruct us to Rebel
By his own President? are we to learn
How he Obtained the Sceptre? or want we
Sense
To feel how he employs it? was it not
His own insinuating Tenet to
The People, (against his Brother,) That
the Virtue
And Justice of the Prince were the only
Bonds
That bound the People to him, and when
he
Should violate either, they were tied no
longer?
Are we not Freemen then?
Highly requisite.
Where is the Common Right?
Our Just Inheritance? bought with the
blood
Of our Indulgent Ancestors? whose Va∣lore
Bounded the Royal Power so, it durst
not
Spread beyond the Acts of Piety and Ju∣stice.
See what Love, and Women
can do!
My Lord Archbishop you are hap∣pily
come
To Contribute your advice.
My honoured Lords,
The safety of your Persons frees my Soul
That lately was a Slave to fear, and Jea∣lousy.
I Churchman, it was your Fears,
and Jealousies,
Heaved first at our foundation. Cicily had
bin
Clear from infection, had not your hot
lungs
Spent the Contagion. It was you gave
Reins
To the Licentious People, that Like No∣groes
Shot their envenomed Darts at the Rays of
Majesty,
Whose careful heat did warm i'm.
You mistake,
Wee aimed at no such thing, but to dis∣charge
Our Duties to our Country.
And you've proved
The most undutifull'st of all her I will∣drone.
And finding now the ends of your Ambiti∣on
Of being Cardinal is clear laid open,
By which your Pride is like to be Obscured,
You do begin to belch forth fresh Sedi∣tion,
And Create new Distempers, because Ma∣zares
Will not do what you'd have him.
I come not Sir
To bandy words, the World knows what
I did
Was in Relation to the Churches Peace,
How ever you term it; But so full of Poi∣son
I find the Gilded Pills of his Professions,
That plainly I must tell you without fear,
I heartily do wish those hands that were
Employed to Seat him o'er us, had bin used
To put him in his Grave.
Or bin lopped off
Before they had Contracted such an ill
Upon our Country:
Ther's no time too late
To launch the Ulcer and give ease unto
The groaning People, if my Lord Agathe∣cles
Will call to Mind his death, that whets the
Instrument,
Whose Precious Memory will give life to
all
Our undertakings.
Come, my Lord, I'll have
The Bishop and you reconciled. We'll to
Cleanders house, where the poor Lady
Mourns
Her Fathers Absence, there we will Con∣sult
On some way to Obtain his and our Free∣doms.
Let not the Church-man be in it,
and then
Doubt not but we shall make all right again.
This is her walk, I hope you doe
not faint
At the Design, now it is so near attempting
Yes I warrant you, as though
she were the first Wench we have had Oc∣cession
to make use of.
Why what do you take us to be?
Milksops, I tel you Sir, we are Gentlemen
in the first place, Soldiers in the second,
and men in the last place.
Good reason the last should take
place of the first then; but stay,
Yonders the Bird for which we wait, I'll
try
If she will come to hand, if not, your Net
Shall noose her into Tameness—stand
close.
Hail Madam, Heaven's Epitome, on whose
Blessed smiles the happiness of Kings de∣pend,
Pleasure and health attend you.
I thank you Sir,
But here it is unseasonable where sorrow
Has it's Predominance.
I bring you Comfort,
If you but please to honour the Address
With kind Acceptance.
Has my Ruthless fortune
More Miseries to heap on me, that she
Presents me with such shadows of her fa∣four?
The King, to whom your Father's
life is forfeit,
Throws both it, and his own into your lap
If you will be so wise as to receive 'em.
Could I express a thankfulness
beyond
The Duty that I owe 'n my Prayers for
him,
It should fly to him, pray be pleased to
teach me
The way to it.
Fame has bin busy
In giving to the King an Estimate
Of your Perfections, whose high Value
fills
The Exchequor of his Breast, and it is your
Love
Must free the Heart your Bounty has sub∣du'd.
I'm ignorant of your meaning.
To be his Mistress.
Or in plainer Terms, which shows
the truth on it,
To be his Whore.
Fie; that is too Common;
Consider Madam, he that Courts you is
Your King, who may Compel where he
entreats,
And you will forfeit your Allegiance if
You should deny him.
To the Gods I should,
Durst I presume to Grant it; if my Fa∣there
Must not enjoy his life, but on the Terms
Of my dishonour, th'duty that I ow
To Heaven and Goodness will Implead a∣against
The Bonds of Nature, which can Challenge
but
The life it gave, and that I'll offer up
To Ransom his.
That will not serve the turn,
You must to Court.
I'll first go to my grave.
Nay then adieu Complement, and
to your business fellows.
What mean you?
To hide your Blushes Madam.
Help, help, help.
Stop her mouth.
I am o'rcome in Reason, and do
Crave
Your Lordships pardon.
My Lord you have my Heart
At your disposing.
This Reconcilement's handsome.
So, the field's our own, take up your
Bag and Baggage, March fair and soft∣lie,
When wee come to Court we'll share the
Booty.
A Plague upon it, down with your load,
and make an Honourable Retreat.
It was Adulanter—what's this, It
moves,
Your help my Lords,—Ah! it is Harmo∣nia.
What Monstrous Stratagem had
they upon her?
Air is a Blessing, oh, let me
have more on it.
Dear Madam speak your wrongs,
and wee will right you,
If the best blood in Cicily can do it.
My life, and Honour, (far more
precious) were
Designed for Slaughter.
How Madam! by whom?
By him who, should protect the
Innocent,
The Lawless King; whose Causeless wrath
upon
My Father, nothing could appease unless.
I made sale of my Virtue, and my Youth
To satisfy his Lust,
Whose fire we'll quench
With his own blood; be confident Harmo∣nia
Thy Father shall outlive his Power and
Cruelty.
If we take not this edge off, We
shall have
Our Wives and Daughters made the Sub∣jests
of
Our scorn and shame, and be squeaked out
in Ballads
For honourable Cuckolds, Princely Pan∣ders.
Whose Soul is so besotted to his fear
He can contract it to a Minutes Patience?
Not I.
Nor I; sure he does think the Gods
Are all asleep, or have forgot to punish.
Hence Patience, thou Fools virtue;
I'll shake off
Thy Coldness, with the Witchcraft of Obe∣audience,
Who have so long kept me in Cells of Sla∣very
I could not see the Glory of my Freedom.
We'll kindle all our Vigour •t
thy flame,
And teach our knees to Pay their homage
to
No Power but thine; My Lords if that wee
be
All of one Mind, cry, long live Archias.
I wait not for that Dignity believe
me,
All my Ambition is to free this Lady
From the ghastly fears that haunt her, and
give liberty
Unto her happiness, by her Fathers Free∣dome.
Which to Achieve (my Lord) re∣ceive
the Power
Heaven and We offer you; Monreall is
Your own already.
And the Agrigentines
Proclaim you in my Voice their lawful
King.
And all the Citizens in Palermo
speak
The like in me—Long live Archias.
Long live Archias.
My Lords forbear, Mazares lives.
Abhorred of the Gods, and it is
but Justice
To take him off.
Heaven fit me for the trust
You a throw on me, and now Harmonia,
Sweet Empress of my Soul, receive thy
Archias,
Who must not know a Joy but what thou
shar'st of;
Cleander freed, Wee shall request your
hand,
To join our hearts, My Lord.
Where Virtue keeps
Her Court, the Gods are Guests; your
Choice is Heavenly.
I was even now the wretched'st of
all living,
And now am lifted to a happiness
That Queens would kneel to purchase—
My Dear Lord.
My Heaven on Earth.
Think on your Business Sir,
The perfecting of that gives length unto
Your Amorous Days.
Whose flourishing we wish.
My Lords, my thanks, with your
advice I move,
No Engine is so powerful as your love.
The finest coming'st Lady that
your Highness
Could wish to meet withal, and rarely
handsome.
And did accept our proffer?
As Greedily
As Bees suck sweetness from the fragrant
Stock
Of Flora's Early bounty.
I'm all flame,
By Heaven not one of them shall scope my
fury.
Nay, I think I had like to have
Mauled two of them,
Had not the Church man with his Club∣law
Precepts
Beat down my Resolutions.
Damb his Daubing,
Hee is that Knack, Religous-Mounte∣bank,
A Box of frenzied-zeal which he applies
On all Occasions, to all sorts of sores,
And wrecks the Patient with more fear and
Torment
Than Hell it self can put him to.
A Coat
He wears that has bin turned seven times.
Which wee will turn o'r's Ears,
and then turn them
Oppose our Pleasure; Hee, and all the
rest
Of his Confederates shall know we wear
Our Crown not for a Cipher, and our Scep∣la
Shall prove a scourge to them; they have
awaked
A fury that no Prayers can allay.
Haste to the Governor Icelis, tell him
It is our will Cleander's Spirit leave
The World with speed and privacy. Pro∣claim
Our Cockbrain'd Cousin, and the Piebal'd
Church-man,
Agathocles and Epecides Traitors;
And such as shall take them five thousand
Talents.
So violent I grow in my desire,
I must enjoy it or set all on fire.
Pursued by my bad Fate, whose
Cruelty
I knew would not admit of any Mean
Should it once seize on me, I struck my self
Into Disguise, by whose Obscurity
I came to Tyche, there, gave out my hand
Had killed Evander, at which, some that
were
My Enemies gave tokens of their Sorrow;
Others, who thought their Rising not se∣cure
'Less by my Irrecoverable fall,
Highly applauded me. At last a Rem∣nant
Of my poor friends, Resolved to pay their
last
Service unto my Memory, though with
The loss of their Estates and lives, did
lay
Plots to destroy me as the horrid Murthe∣rer,
And I, not daring to open my self
To them, for fear I should let in the fury
Of my stern Adversaries, did steal away
With the Nights silence.
Though the beginning of
This Story melts my Soul, Yet Prove∣dence
Is seen in the winding up, which did di∣rect
Your Highness hither, where you're as se∣cure
From danger as your thoughts are in your
Bosom.
We doubt it not.
You dead, what can Mazares
Pretend to keep his Armies up? this, I'll
Possess the People with, and stir them to
Propose their straight disbanding, which if
Granted,
The Course of Fate is turned, and he left
Naked,
And shelterless from any Storm may hap∣pen.
On tother side if he denies it, then
Th'incensed People like a sudden Earth∣quake
Removes him, were his Pride more Moun∣tanous
Than are his Vices Monstrous; thus on all
sides
I'll hem him in, so he shall know no way
To scope your Vengeance; be but pleased
to suffer
Under this Cloud awhile, and you'll ap∣pear
More glorious to your Peoples eyes and
hearts,
When time presents a fitness for discove∣rye.
Thou art our faithful Counsel∣lore,
and We
Next to the Gods do ow our Self to thee.
We are not far from Syracuse, this
Passage
Is the direct line to it, as the Map speaks.
My Lord, I hope your Honour will
not show
Your self so much a Stranger to Designs
Of War, as to give them the advantage
of
A Parley, but rush suddenly upon them,
And like a Torrent we'll bear all before
us,
Ther's Soldier in it.
It is too rash advice
And must be slighted; Missellus is a Per∣son
That Roughness will not work upon.
My Lord,
He is no Coward, and his Honor's linked
Unto his life, he that will seek the one,
Must venture for the other, or lose both.
If my desires effect but what they
aim at,
I care not when, or how, it is purchased.
Haste you with the Kings Letter to Missel∣lus,
Tell him it is my desire to keep the League
Of friendship twixt us, and without a bus∣sle,
Which may let forth some blood, have him
Surrender;
Tell him, it is no displeasure that the King
Has tan against him, that occasions his,
But to give ease unto his Age, and draw
Him nearer him at Court, where he shall
find
The service of his Youth, in's latter days
Crowned with a peaceful Laurel, and con∣tent
Ad length unto his years.
I go my Lord.
Thimistius, March fair and softly,
we shall be
Too soon upon i'm else; this cannot but
Insinuate a faith into him, to
Give way to my Admittance, since the of∣fer
Carries so full a sense of fairness in it.
My Lord, hoe's not to learn this
Principle,
Where Princes call back Honours done, the
life
Is the next thing in Question.
Let the Fates
Contrive their worst against it, if Anton∣la
Bring us supplies from the Provincial
Of Mona, we will fire it but we'll have it.
Well, my Lord, the Craft's in
the Catching.
Dost come to dare me Fellow?
I conceive
With favour of your Excellence, the Terms
Are very Civil, and no danger in i'm.
I shall reward his Subtle Mode∣sty
If I but get him here, as I will you
The worthy Messenger, take's head off.
You dare not?
Thou art mistaken friend; away
with him.
Oh that I could with as much ease de∣stroy
All th'barbarous Enemies of my wronged
Sovereign.
Make strong the Gates and Walls, and let
the Fort
Hexapile be stoutly Manned, we'll be
Prepared to whip the Boy and's Company.
The Gates are shut against us.
What think you now on it?
Beat a Parley.
How's this? Philanders head?
Which you might have preserved
upon his shoulders,
Had you given but regard unto my Coun∣sell.
But you are Lordly-wise, and cause you
can
Batter a Ladies fort with your fine Rheto∣rick,
You think the Town's your own, and men
are bound
To bend unto your Complement, or trust
The Glass of your deceit.
It is fine, affronted
By Greasy Buff and Biscuit.
Some strong Water
To keep the thing from fainting, poor
Young Man,
How pull he looks upon it.
Take thy reward.
Our Colonel slain.
Were there more living of his
saucy Nature
I'd send them after him; Antanter what
Says the Provincial?
He will do nothing Sir
Without a Warrant from the King, hee
says
He does believe there will bee no such
need,
Missellus will resign upon fair Terms.
But you see how it is?
I do indeed,
And sorrow that I see it—How came
Thimistius
By this his death?
That Lord's hand did it.
How?
Come, we will venture with the
Men we have
To scale the walls.
We will not scale Sir.
So,
You will not, very good; do you see this
head Sir?
And that body too Sir.
Let me have better Language or
by Heaven
I'll make you as tame as these.
You cannot Sir.
How?
It is not all
The strength you have in Feather or Per∣fume
Can fright me Sir; Your Amber Brace∣lets
carry
Not half the Terror of Chained shot, nor
is
Your Title Lord a Bulwark to defend you.
You're a Rascal.
Come Soldiers March with me.
Not a Man stir,
Ther's satisfaction to be given for
The life of that brave Man, which I will
have
Or pay my own.
Gallant Major.
I shall not spare to give you Sir
your due.
I'll not be backward in rewarding
it.
You are Pot-valiant (Sir) it seems.
It is past the Art of Man to make
you so;
I am a Soldier Sir.
And must be beat
Into Civility, I'll make you know
There is a difference twixt us.
True indeed,
You can out-talke me.
How do you Sir?
You shall know by and by Sir—
I am lost.
Farewell thou Tyrant over Wo∣mans
flesh.
Take up Thimistius body, it shall have
An honourable burial, as for his
Let it remain a sport for th'Siracusians.
The King I know will run besides him∣self
To hear on's Minions loss, but you I hope,
My friends and fellow Soldiers, will wade
with me
Through all the Lakes of danger.
We'll never leave you.
Bravely resolved, and I will die
with you.
They are marched away; what's here
Philistus body,
Our late Competitor? Why here's revenge
Strangely effected! See the fate of Tray∣tors!
How wonderfully Heaven does bring a∣bout
Their Punishment! that like to Cannibals
The one doth eat the other; bring it in;
My hate ends with his Life, and now my
Charity,
Though he deserved it not, will give him
burial.
Their Envy is Invincible, and the
People
Time's Shittle-cocks) do bring unto your
Gates
The hideous Shape of danger.
My deceit
Shall Rock that Monster into sleep, had
it
More eyes than Argos.
It is impossible,
The Agrigentines have thrown off Obe∣audience;
Monreall is revolted; All your Castles
And strongs holds in Palermo are delivered
Into their hands; the Magistrates join with
them.
Go use thy best Endeavours Adieu∣lanter
To appease the People, turn right Courtier,
promise,
And we'll perform at Leisure.
Your Highness
I hope is not in Earnest; I go amongst 'em!
Have you a Mind to have my Brains beat
out?
I am your Pimp they say, (Sir,) am so ha∣ted,
The very Boys throw Turap tops at me.
Alas poor Adulanter, we we will blow
This Storm away ne'er fear it, Let our
Guard
Be doubled, till we can send to Her mocra∣tes
To bring his Forces hither: If the Tray∣tors
Come not too suddenly upon us, We
Will turn the poisoned Darts they'd throw
at us
Against their own Bosoms, They do play
with fire
Till it Consume 'em.
They like Moales have worked
In darkness all this while, to set the King∣dome
In such a flame that might both Perish you
And all your friends.
Fire sooner may dissolve
The Adamant, the Parched Negroes strike
Through the Battlements of Heaven. Wee
are above
The reach of Malice, Fortune is Obliged
To wait upon our Merit, and our Influ∣ence
Can in a breath dispierce their proud De∣signs,
As Winds divest the Trees of Leaves. Let
fear
Dwell among Fools 't shall have no Har∣bore
here.
Leave it to me, I'll do the business
Gentlemen.
It is not discretion to expose your
Person
So unconcerned in this; it is we, the Peo∣ple,
Whose wrongs infer the Cause.
Which I must manage.
You've made me your Protector, and Re∣vinegar,
Which I'll perform, did Gloomy Magic
Guard him;
Or were he wrapped in Air, or hid in some
Dark Cavern of the Earth, my Heart
grown big
Like Dire Revenging Thunder would
make through
The bodies of them both to find him out.
Our lives shall wait on yours
through dangers mouth.
An Archias, an Archias.
They have surprised the Guards,
and are upon us.
Haste to the Winner, leave us to
our Fortune,
Provide for thy own safety, We are armed
With Resolution to o'rcome the worst
The Fates can throw upon us; leave us,
leaev us.
They'll hang me Sir, and I've no
Mind at this time
To such a death.
Trifle not away
The time, they will not; go, leave us.
Well, If I chance to swing, pray
Heaven I may
Have Heart enough to bear it.
Injurious Fate, for all the pride
thou take
In my destruction thus I will embrace thee.
Mischiefs like waves tumble o'er one ano∣there,
To beat themselves upon me, and they are
welcome;
This passes me through all. Poor ignorant
souls
That start at Death, and think him terri∣ble!
His shape appears to me worthy the Cour∣ting;
And like my Friend I kiss him; on this
Point
He shows himself most lovely, decked with
all
The Ornaments of honour Fame can give
him.
Thus I salute thee, thus again I greet
thee,
And thus I offer up a heart unto thee:
A heart, thy Terror cannot tame, it is
Love
Of thy sweet fellowship o'rcomes me, not
A fear to meet thee, that, my Soul dis∣deigns.
Mazares dwell not on delays, be high
In thy Resolves, as thou hast lived so die.
Oh, I have prevented you.
And I
Envy thy death in that I lose
The glory of saving of thy life.
Which must have lasted
But Pageant-like two days upon your Tri∣umphs,
And my shame bin perpetual.
Do you find
Any remorse within you? does the wrongs
You've offered to the Gods in pulling down
Their Temples and their Altars work up∣on
you
Any show of repentance?
Thou Church-Glow-worm,
Who dost pretend a heat of Zeal, yet art
Colder than th'Alpes in Charity, if proved,
My Enmity to thee gives strength unto
me,
And I could—but ô I fail, this my
death
Shall prove a Monument to my Glory—Farewell.
Here is another of the crew.
Hang him up.
Who me Sir? I ne'er dreamt of ill
against you, have prayed as heartily for you
as for any Man living; for I may speak a
proud word, I never prayed in my life. I
hope my mother brought me up better than
so, to be hanged.
Let me beseech your pardon for
him, alas
He is not worth your Justice, and may
prove
Useful hereafter—to me
Noble Father,
For so wee must bee taught to call you,
you
Have greater power upon us than this
Grant;
It is yours as soon as asked.
Heaven bless the King.
Take up Mazares body, his rites
over,
The next thing wee shall doe, is to per∣form
Our Vows made to the Gods, and take
Harmonia
Your Daughter to our Bed.
And the next thing
That follows is thy death, I must be King.
VVEE'l have the Temples of
the Gods repaired,
And their neglected Altars smoke with
S•crifices.
A glorious Piece of Piety.
The Citizens
Who for their Duty to Evander were
Banished by the late Tyrant, straight called
home;
And to Hermocrates with his Accomplices
Who did assist Mazares, a free Pardon.
A blessed beginning.
We will have the burden
The Kingdom now groans under by the
Soldierly
Be taken off.
The Gods will dwell amongst
us.
My Lords I shall endeavour to
reduce
This rude and discomposed Soil into
A Tempe of Delight, where sweet Harmonia
Shall be the only Queen.
It will become me
To be but then your Servant.
Sweet thou know
I am beneath thy Courtship, and the inte∣rest
I have in thee is holy.
May you flourish
Together like the Plants the Sun gives
life to.
Will your Highness
Think on Antanter?
Oh his Modesty
Works much upon us, we could chide our
self
In that we have abused it, by neglect
Of his so just and reasonable a suit.
As for the other, his Competitor,
A black Cloud of Debauchness and lewd
Vices
Eclipse his Valour, and gives us Occasion
To look upon Antanter as more worthy
Of such a Charge, whose Virtue is our
Warrant.
Kings in bestowing Favours should bee
nice,
And rather punish than Encourage Vice.
Adulanter.
My Lord.
Wilt tell me one thing, and bee
just.
Rip up my heart my Lord, if I
dissemble.
How stands thy affection to this
King?
As clear as—
Mine is not, be free, I love
thee,
And thou hast found I do.
I have indeed,
I ow my life unto you, you may take it,
For that's the thing you aim at.
You are deceived,
Twill benefit me nothing; come, I know
Thou can not love him, thou hast lost a
Master
As far beyond him, as pure Substance is
Beyond Corruptible; and though he did
Me some ill offices, his Memory is
Still dear unto me.
Oh my Lord, my Lord.
By all the Gods I lie not, and to
be
More plain with thee, I could wish Archias
Were ready for the Earth.
If that your Lordship
Be real, I would it were no worse.
If he were dead, my Daughter I
would Govern,
And thou should govern me.
Oh fie, my Lord.
I do protest wee would divide the
Kingdom
Betwixt us, she (poor thing) would think
it happiness
Enough for her to eat, sit, and be quiet:
Whereas the Managing of high affairs
Should pass through us, through us Adieu∣lanter.
Hum, hum.
Whose knee dares own a stiffeness?
whose Obeisance
To Adulanter dare be wanting? when
Thou Frown, who dares but trembble?
When such a thing shall come to
pass quoth a—
Dost make a question on it, when
now it lies
Within thy power to Compass.
How, in mine?
Art thou not my by means raised
near his Person?
One of the Bed-chamber? how easy it is
To cut is throat.
The sight of my own blood,
Has ever bin a Terror to me.
True,
That's Natural, and yet no Courage wan∣ting
To draw a Sea of blood from any other;
The Colour is most precious for the sight,
And sweetly Cordial to the Man that tastes
it.
Nay I confess I'd rather see of the
two
Another blood than mine.
It is justly spoken.
Would thou be King alone?
Hum—I care not much.
Thou shalt be so, be but thy self,
and show
Thy Courage in this Enterprise: I'll Mar∣rye
Thee to my Daughter.
Shoe's a pretty thing,
By Heaven I shall be damned for her.
I'd rather
Thou should possess her than the Fool
that has her;
And I, thy fellow servant once, will then
Become thy humblest servant, truly faith∣full.
You puff me up Sir, tell me how
I shall
Contain my self.
Not within any limit
Less than a Kingdom.
How shall I obtain it?
Why, as you'd kiss your hand, to
kill the King;
It is but making the Guard Drunk, or so.
And I'm as good at that as any li∣avenge;
My Lord I will be drunk too boot, for
then
I have most Courage.
Backed with Night and silence
You cannot want it; when you have done
the Deed
Strike towards the Back stairs, there I will
wait you,
And Shelter you a while, 'till the bright
Morn
Salutes your happiness.
My Lord, it is done;
I am as Mad as a March hare upon it,
Methinks I have him here, and there all∣ready,
You will hear more to morrow.
Silly Ass,
That only art employed to carry me
Unto my bliss, thy self unto destruction;
Hoe's held an Animal has no Deceit
In these times to make his own Fortunes
Great.
Heaven and good Angels guard
you both.
Good rest
To you my Lord.
Lights for the Lord Archbishop.
Did the King call for me?
Not in our hearing.
Come, praised be Heaven there is
no danger lurking, what need we wait? it is
better for the state of our bodies to fall
down into the Wine seller, and there bid
defiance to the Devil and ell's works.
A Match, a match.
The Mask did keep the King up
longer than
His usual time.
It was a handsome thing,
And well performed, all happiness wait on
you.
Peace keep with your thoughts my
Lord, Good night.
Lights there.
I have encountered with most of
the Wines
In the Kings Seller to beget me Cou∣rage,
Yet I'm as Cold to it as a Cowcumer
I was not made for fighting, one loud snort
Destroys me and my Enterprise: It is
Dark
As is the Act I go about; were it light
I should not have the heart to kill a Pig.
I must turn on my left hand (when it is
done)
To the back stairs, where there is a Trap-door
That will receive me. I do not like
These backward doings, pray Heaven I be
not
Transported so with fear I do mistake
My right hand for my left, and so be trapt.
I cannot say in sober sadness—but with
your leave Sir;
Hoe's fast, yet dreams not on it, now! that
one blow
May do it! I dare not stand the second—
Oh, oh, oh.
What disturbs thee sweet, speak to
me,
Oh, her breasts are cold as snow-balls,
She grows stiff. Lights there—wher's
our Guard?
No Attendants, not one Man—
Hear me, are you all—
The King's disturbed.
How fares your Highness?
Bring your lights this way—Ah!
The Bed swims in a Sea of Blood—Har∣money.
The Queen is Murdered.
The King Murdered! how!
Look here Cleander, her's a sight—my
Senses
Wander I know not whither.
How! my Daughter
Harmonia the Essence of my life.
Can no man find the Murth'rer,
wher's the Guard?
Dead drunk in the Wine-seller.
This is the Murderer, then seek
no farther;
I will have justice, oh my cursed Fate.
How's Grief transports him.
Can you blame him?
H'has lost a Daughter this Age cannot
Parallel.
The Murderer not found yet?
This does appear like such a Mon∣ster.
His hire is paid, his Neck is broke.
It is Adulanter, where found you
him?
The Trap door near the back stairs
we found open, which has not bin these
ten years before, and we suspecting searched
the place and found him.
And is he found? let him be Car∣bonadod,
To Breakfast his Confederate the Devil.
Or Pickle him in boiling Lead to get
The Fiend a stomach; Oh you Gods, you
Devils,
Heaven, Hell, I will call all of you to que∣stion.
Let's follow him with Circumspe∣ctive
care,
This is the first step to the Hill, Despair.
Thou shalt no longer insult o'er
my faculties
Unprofitable Grief; I'm not Designed
To end my days with thee, but must un∣load
My self of thy dull burden; were the
whole
Stock of Woman lost in my Harmonia,
'T should not exact or draw a tear from
me.
Shall I retreat now, that have Charged so
fairly
At th'bosome of a King? no, on Cleander,
Perfect thy work, dis-seat him, make thy
self
Lord of his fortunes, by thy Glorious Con∣quest.
My Resolution's fixed as is the Center,
Which Fate cannot remove; King thou must
down,
Two heads cannot be impaled within one
Crown.
But to my former shape; these are Court∣spies,
I must not trust i'm. Good health to your
Lordships,
You now do show the sweetness of your na∣tures,
In time of heaviness, ther's virtue in
A Visit.
Would ours might bring you
Comfort.
The King is so infected with his
sorrow,
Advice is lost to cure him. All his Study
Is to preserve the Memory of your Daugh∣la,
Which because he will not lose, he makes her
shadow
His Idol, to the which he offers up
His Morn and Night Oblations.
How should I
Behave my self then? my Grief should as
far
Exceed his, as my loss transcended his.
Your loss was great.
Great do you tell me! Great!
I cannot think the ill was meant
to her,
Rather unto the King.
The Guard
Upon Examination said that Adulanter
Was drunk when he left them, but what—
Pray tell me no more on it, it is not
pleasing, I may be quiet
In my own house I hope.
We came not Sir
With an intent to raise your Anger, but
To allay your sorrow with our best advice.
You may go home and advise up∣on it;
tell me of comfort, and advice?
Nay good my Lord you may take
pet and hang your self if you please, it is all
one to us
Teach me to tame a Tiger when
his fierceness
Ranges for Prey, and forbids Opposition;
Empty the Ocean and fill it again;
To breath life into Clay—Tell me of
Comfort?
Come let's leave him, alas it is his
Torment
To hear her named—We take our leaves
my Lord.
Why farewell you—so, they are
gone,
I had no better way than to Rave them
hence.
Oh, are you come Sir, why so long first?
Goud faith, gif I had rid the Deel
and spult the weamb other would,
I cud a
mead na mare heast. Kim away Sir, what's
your Will an pleas your Honour?
They say you have great skill.
Very Muckle Sir; I ha not ben a
Poles-Screamer this twenty years far
nought.
I do not love the King.
Reight weel Sir, nor I by my saw
what wud you toll him Sir?
I would be rid of him.
Woll your Honour be a Hearse or
a Mere?
Away, I'd be quit of him.
Awe Sir, your honour wud be quite
au him! be me saw, ye fall, but whelk
way me Loord an place yoor honour?
I'd have him poisoned.
Poisoned! be me saw I kahn dew
that brawly, I lord it fra Bough-wha-nan
Sir.
And hee was an excellent King-killer.
He has a Picture of my murdered Daugh∣la,
On which he pays his early and late kisses,
Not for the Love hee bears her Memory,
But to deceive Revenge.
Awe Sir! she fall buss him deed
a me saw,—woll
Ye shaw me toll her Sir.
I'm glad to see the spirit of a Scot
So resolute, it stars not at the Murdering
Of the Fools Idol, King.
Awe King Mon! dee'l awe me saw
bet I, au me Countramen ha poisoned thra
better Kingdoms as this, au gif I sud now
for awe King the Deel au me few lugg's.
Thou art a brave fellow, and it is
pity such
Desert should suffer; come along with me.
When thou hast done, I'll make an end of
thee.
I thought it then high time to o∣vertake
His Mounting-pride, and Level 't with the
Earth;
And not to let him grow more fruitful in
His sin, and overtopping Insolence.
It was a Deed Antanter that de∣serves
To live in the Mouth of Fame, that after A∣ges
From thence may learn not to fear bug∣bear-greatness.
Thimistius body I gave burial, and
Left tothers to Miselluses disposal.
It was no small sport to him, but
it was strange
Planetius should deny Assistance to him.
I do believe Missellus and he held
A Correspondence, but for what end
I cannot reach.
He is not to be trusted;
If this distemper once would leave the King
Thou would not think it a Miracle to see
Me in Planetius Seat. Now Epecides
How fares the King?
Oh Gentlemen, our hopes
That promised a Growing-happiness
From his indulgent Beams, One Mi∣nut
has
Destroyed for ever.
How do you mean my Lord?
The King is poisoned.
How Poisoned! Poisoned?
There is a secret Devil lurks a∣mong
us,
Who holds Intelligence with Hell to blast
Our Kingdoms Peace and Comfort; see,
they come.
The Flames of Aetna are not fierce
to mine,
Each faculty conspires my Torment; oh
I burn, I burn.
Great Sir, be not an Enemy
Unto your Being, take this as—
Away,
You may as well give Physic to the dead,
As to his Heart whose agony exceeds
The sense of Ease; I am resolved to take
No more of your vain helps; leave me I
pray.
My most Gracious Sovereign,
I have a heart too weak to bear the burden
Of so much Wo, your sufferings bear me
down
Beneath the hope of Comfort.
Spare thy Grief;
Harmonia treads the Milky way, and I
Must through this fire, be purified to meet
Her and the Joys she brings me.
Does none hear
By whom, or how these Miseries should
come?
Trouble not your self (my Lord)
I freely Pardon
And will reward the Doer, so declare it▪
For he has taken pains to send me to
The Place I so much longed for; I do
charge you
(If my last words may win Obedience from
you)
Straight to Proclaim this; fain I would sa∣lute
Him ever I die, that was so kind unto me.
Unheard of Charity.
My Lord from ou
I have conceived in Specie the joys
I must receive hereafter; those sweet O∣dours
Perfume my Spiritual sense, and strength∣then
that,
Although my Temporal decay and perish.
Here is a Scotch Apothecary that
confesses—
Art thou the Villain?
Au the mickle Duel—god gin
the King wud go me bet even half ooer
toll live bet I cud speak—awe—Deeth
thau limmer loon—awe, awe—
My Lord it was rashly done, wee
might have found
Where the ill vapour rests begets these mis∣chiefs,
And who set him on work.
The Devil, who else?
And he has paid hem's wages.
Cleander.
The King calls Sir▪
I feel my vitals fail me, Oh Cle∣ander
I shall see my Harmony, thy blessed Daugh∣la,
Ever forty Minutes pass, I must bequeath
thee
A Legacy of Care, this drooping King∣doom.
My Lords I hope the love you ever bore
me
(Though Heaven denies me time to Merit
it)
Will now express it self in the approving
Him I present to you, a dying Man
Who has no ends upon you, nor the King∣doom,
Farther than your perpetual flourishing.
I beseech your Grace,—alas—
You hear me Lords.
We do Sir, and accept the choice
You've made,
With more than willingness.
You have not spoke for me.
Nor me.
I am at rest, farewell.
Hoe's dead.
And I
His weeping Monument remains till Fate
Translates my better part to a better State.
These are fine turning times, I
wonder when
Twill come to my turn to be King, I have
A Heart as fit, and large, and dare as far
Adventure for it as any, But the Fates
Of Soldiers serve to Promote others ends,
Which done, they do forget we ever were
friends.
Your words sound like the Ore∣cle's,
as full
Of truth, and plainer to the Intellect.
How sweet and freely Rome en∣joyed
her self,
'Till she submitted to the Power and pride
Of one mans Rule? Tell me what good did
ever
Kings bring unto our Country, that wee
might not
Have purchased without i'm? Ills they
have
Almost incredible; Our Coffers emptied,
To fill their Treasury, and maintain their
Riot.
And wedded to perpetual Slavery.
For when one Tyrant falls another Rises
From his Corrupted Loins, that proves
far worse
Perhaps than did the former, So that wee
Must never hope for better, but be Armed
With Patience to endure the worst.
Suppose
We would allow of Kingly Power, where is
The Man descend from that Race? Clean∣der
He was but one of us the other day;
And sure we are not of so tame a brood,
But to think We deserved as well as he.
Why should not you Icetis, or Hipparinus
Rule, or thou, Epecides, or my self?
W'are of as good a Mould, and have as
much
T'elate us, as his Worship.
Very right.
And have as great an Interest in the Peo∣ple
And Common-wealth; this of Necessity
Must breed Con•usion amongst us, this Ex∣ample
Kindles in every Man desire of Rule,
Which to Archieve, how perilous so ever
The Attempt may prove, they'll leave no
means unsought,
Till their irregular Sense, spurning at Or∣der,
Turns all into a Chaos.
Who can tell
But this Intruder was the efficient Cause
Of his own Daughters ruin, and the Kings.
It was a notable piece of Policy
To kill the Apothecary and prevent Con∣fession.
What's your advice?
To join with us,
And take the Peoples Yoke off from the Tie∣ronnie
Of Kings hereafter.
And to have our Country
Governed by three or ten, as did the To∣mans.
Who shall continue but a Year in
Power,
And then successive Pat•iots be chosen,
Who shall have Power to punish in their
time
T•e Crimes their Predecessors did commit
During their time of Rule.
So shall the People
Not be to seek for Justice, but find ease
Unto their grievances, and the vile Minds
Of Avaricious and Ambitious Men
Be either punished, or else Rebated.
It cannot but content the People
highly,
It is Copied from so fair a President.
And with you, and for you, and
them, we'll spend
Our lives and fortunes.
We will do the like
With you, and for you, and thus linked to∣gether,
We dare Contemn Cleander's Power.
And blow
His Glorious hopes into the Air.
Be sudden,
And we may take the Serpent in his Cell;
But our delays may give the Monster time
Of coming forth, and strength to over∣come
us.
We will possess the People with
the Glory
Of their long hidden liberties, with pro∣mise
Or Restoration, if it lies within
The power of friends, Money, or life to
Compass.
He that's besotted to his fear, or
Ease,
Will make his Patience prove his worst di∣seas.
Return m• Obedience to the King
Evander.
And this unto Missellus, tell him I
With all the force that Mona can afford me
Will wait upon his H•ghness and himself
At Erix.
I shall my Lord.
How am I
Bound to the Gods for their superlative
goodness,
That here an offering of Mercy meets me
By their Dictation; I whose Treachery
Unto my King Merits severest Justice,
Am punished with a Revengless Pardon,
Which is indeed my Torment, that I
should
Ever have bin so wicked against a Prince
Deserves so much good from me, but my
Soul
Henceforth shall cleave fast to this Prin∣ciple,
"The longer growth Diseases do endure,
"The more the Grief, more famous is the
Cure.
Traitors, hands off, it is Sacri∣leg
to use
The Person of your King with such Irreve∣rinse.
Our King—ha ha ha.
We'll make you sing another
Song.
Have I deserved so ill, that none will
give
A Death more honourable to me?
Thou hast lived
Base, and must basely die.
Forgive me Heaven,
And you bright Stars whose Lustre I Ec∣clipse
Here, to shine brighter there, Plead not a∣against
me,
But be as Merciful as you are Innocent.
Were thou the death of Archias
and thy Daughter?
Ambition was, to which I gave con∣sent.
And now you see the Pinnacle
from which
You must be tumbled down, away with
him.
Yet hear me.
Confession's ti'd to Destiny, you
shall with us.
You see the desperate effects that
wait
On this thing called Monarchy, because
It carries a continuance, and all
Men Naturally have an Ambition to
Make great their line, and families by suc∣cession;
When ours doth blunt the Edge of such Re∣solves;
And no Man, were it not for the Common
good,
Would entertain the Office, being rather
A Place of care than Profit, in the which
Men must so square their Actions, they
may be
Able to stand the Peoples questioning,
When as their time of Government's ex∣pir'd.
It is not so with Monarchy, Kings
may
Commit what Outrages they please up∣on
The People, and none dare so much as
think
They have done ill.
If you please to walk that way
You may see Cleander swinging for his life.
Oh by all means let's go.
It may be he may confess some∣thing
more.
My Peoples troubles do afflict me
more
Than all the wrongs and injuries they've
done me:
The Gods had lost their Attribute
of Just,
Had they not punished them with these
Convulsions,
Whose fits direct their Sense unto the rue∣in
They've brought upon themselves now at
their doors.
Good Heaven divert it, I shall be
more Chary
In spilling of their blood than of my own;
And I shall think it greater honour to
me
(In purchasing my own) to have my Tem∣ples
Surrounded with a peaceful Garland
than
Obtain it by the Victory and Slaughter
Of my poor Subjects.
It is your mercy Sir,
With which you overflow—here is Plane∣tius.
I offer at your Highness feet a life
That has long since bin forfeited.
The which
I give thee back; live to deserve my favour.
I would I could recover so much
time,
As I have lost, to ad unto the days
I'm yet to spend, to serve you, this your
Mercy
Does come so near the temper of the Gods,
Fame cannot but record it.
Has our Subjects
The knowledge that we live?
I did dispierce it
Through all the parts of Mona:
And how took they it?
Miraculously; but so, I might dis∣cover
Their Joy was unexpressible.
We'll have
Our Pardon (as we March) Proclaimed to
all
Will come in to us; Clemency not force
Befits a King, Rigour makes People worse.
Heaven bless the King▪ March
Gentlemen.
It is brave to be a King, his spy∣rit's
low
And base as Earth, that knows not how to
use
The Power the Fates have put into his
hands▪
And will accept of less; damn annual
Rule,
Shall I who dare do more than kill a thou∣sand,
Be Subject to the questioning of ten?
The People have put me in power, and I
Will make my best advantage on it; it is
But Justice to break faith with faithless
Men.
Give me the Nod that strikes a trembling
in
The stiffe-neck'd People, and does make
'em keep
A distance and a duty; ther's no Glory
Like being Singular, hence idle honesty
That sleep thy time away, and art adored
By none but empty Sculls and tattered Jar∣kins;
There's no such thing as virtue in thy
Rags.
That, we prize to be virtuous and good
Merits its Estimation. Welcome Greatness,
Virtue resides with thee. My hopes by this
Are by Antanter perfected, hoe's here;
Now my best Genius tell me how much
I stand indebted to thee, is it done?
Done to a hair Sir, We surprised
'm suddenly,
Trussed up the Magistrates to whom y'ad
promised
Such glorious freedom, who did curse and
swear
At Death and Destiny. The Forts and Ca∣stles
Are all our own, and now we safely may,
Cry with one voice, long live Agathocles.
How shall I make requital for
this Project
Which thou hast more than formed, per∣formed
so bravely?
I will Create thee Arch-Duke of Palermo,
And when I die, will leave the Kingdom to
thee.
But give me leave I pray Sir—
In whose Power
Lies it to make me Duke?
In mine, whose else?
Am I not thy King.
Pray who made you so?
The Gods.
Pray which of them? Have I bin
Idle.
No, Dear Antanter no; It was thy
hand
Directed by the Gods that made me King.
Then it was my hand directed by
the Gods
That made you King.
Right, right Antanter.
And now my hand directed by the
Gods,
Will you un•King?—take him •nto your
Charge.
How?
Very right Sir, Charity begins
At home, and I'm not such an Ass to stand
To your reward, when I can pay my self.
What dost thou mean?
To be what you would be,
That is, a King,
A King? of what?
Of better men than thou art—it is
a wrong
Unto our Honour to hold Parley with thee.
Off with his Head; It is a Death more No∣ble
Than you bestowed upon Cleander Sir,
Or Ordered for Icetis, or the Magistrate.
But do you hear Sir King.
Obey our Will—
And Sir, say you're well dealt with▪
Hell take you
And your dealing too; Heaven is thus just
With such as fall from Virtue to their Lust.
So, he is gone, fallen in the Trap
he laid
For th'Magistrates, whom I have but se∣cured,
Till they allow my Power, or dye by it.
The Title King's indifferent to me,
Give me the essential part, and let the
shadow
Vanish, and be forgot. What had this Lord
More in him of a man, to draw Obedience
Than I, except his Title? and that had not
Virtue enough to save him from my wrath.
It is not birth, or blood, but thou dear In∣strument,
That can defend, offend, raise or dis-seate
High Potentates, and make a Beggar great.
Be thou auspicious Armed Mars to me,
And I'll adore no other Gods but thee.
The General hearing of these di∣stractions,
Has dr•wn his Army this way, and puts in
For title to the Kingdom.
Though he was
My General once, I'll scourge him into du∣tie,
And make him know his distance, we will
meet him.
Leave what force you can possibly allow
Here, to secure the People and the Gar∣sons
Now in our Custody, lest they Revolt,
Or become Mutineers, Hermocrates
Shall find as tuffe a business on it, as ever
The Wars afforded him; Give double pay
To such as will come in to us, and leave
His Party, since, that I am in, I'll through,
Though the Kingdoms treasury bleed for it,
and lean famine
Feed on the People, 'till there scarce are
left
The Image of a Man alive; it were base
Now to Retreat; fear gives a Coward
place.
Is it possible Antanter dares do
this.
Agathocles is beheaded, Hipparinus
With th'rest of the Magistrates of Palermo
and
The Governor Icetis are secured.
The Forts and Castles all are in his Power,
And has surprised the Treasury.
A brave fellow:
How long thinks he to keep this? I do won∣der
Missellus or Planetius stir not about it:
But they indeed are such known enemies
To one another, neither of them dare
Peep forth, lest tother be upon his back.
I know your Excellence will be
the Man
Must make the Soldier flourish and be
happy.
I and Atanter are the only Men
I see must go to Cudgels for it.
Alas,
Our force will scatter his, as Northern winds
Disperse the leaves in Autumn.
But he has
The advantage by the Treasury, and Mo∣ny
Will purchase Men, and friendship.
Victory
Will draw them all to us, I hope there is
not
A Man amongst us so in love wed's life,
But he will sacrifice it for your Excellence;
What say you Gentlemen?
Our lives are his.
I thank you fellow Soldiers;
Armed with you,
I dare Oppose the Destinies. He down,
The Guerdon of our Conquest is a Crown.
How poor and bare's this Pro∣vince
made? we scarce
Can get Provision for our Men and H•rs.
But we are near the City of Mon∣real,
An that was wont to abound with all Pro∣vision.
Have you informed the Archbi∣shop
and the Magistrates
That we are drawing towards them,
We have
By by your Express, and wonder that wee
hear
No sooner from them.
Disobedient Guilt
Throws me thus low for Mercy.
Here, rise up
Distracted shame so overcomes
me Sir,
I cannot look your Highness in the face.
Return unto your Virtue, and
we shall
Be happy in your friendship. Epecides
How dost thou relish us?
As I would Sir,
The Author of my Being, Peace, and hap∣pines.
My Soul has wandered all this while, and
now,
With you, it is returned to its first Stati∣on.
But what has brought thee to
Monreall? tell me.
After Cleander's death, my friend
Agathocles,
Whose breast I thought had bin so Manned
with Virtue
Ambition could not batter it, complied
With the Soldiery, of which Antanter was
The Chief, to put the Magistrates to death.
No sooner that Antanter had secured
The Forts and Castles, and made all his
own,
But he begins to fall off from his Bargain
With the new King, and to himself does
give
A Law to take his head off, and indeed
No Man could promise to himself a safety,
Unless he did submit unto his Power,
To which I knew I could not bend my
Heart,
And therefore for self-Preservation made
Bold with my Lord Archbishop.
What is that
Antanter, whose Audaciousness is so
Destructive to our Peace?
He was an Officer
Under Hermocrates Mazares General.
And now they both are tugging
to undo
The Kingdom, and from eiders Ruin to
Raise to the Victor Glory.
Ah poor Cicily,
How hast thou been beaten and banded to
Promote the ends of turbulent Spirited
Men?
My Lords while they are striving for the
Mastery,
What if we fell upon them?
Very requisite.
Let us bee private in it and do it suddenly,
But first we'll have a Baiting at your house.
You Highness will enrich me
with the favour.
Have I singled thee?
Sir know you're Saucy,
We use to keep at distance with such fell∣lowes.
It is likely; to come near us may
prove dangerous.
Fellow you have greater honour done
thee now
Than e'• the Wars bestowed on thee, thou
grappl'st
With no less than a King.
Of Kitchen stuff.
I'll make thee do thy duty.
That's to beat you.
What will you take Sir for your Kingdom,
now?
Your Head and Quarters Sir to
fix on the Gates.
And this next touch to boot.
'sDeath, I think
've fooled away my Courage;
How do you now Sir?
As well as ever I did Sir—have I
reached you?
Your Arm's to short, and your
Aim worse;
By Heaven,
Had thou Indented with the Fates to live
But for a Minute longer, thus I'd cancel it
And thus I meet thy Resolution.
Give Order for the Magistrates
Enlargement.
Ah, how my Fate afflicts me with
fresh Torments?
Evander living?
Whose Injuries lie heavy
Upon our Souls; most gracious Sir how ever
Our lives have been disturbance to your
Kingdom,
In Death with you and it we sue for Peace;
Forgiveness Royal Sir.
We come not to
Possess our own with thoughts to bee Re∣veng'd▪
Or if we did, you have escaped it, Heaven▪
Forgive you as we do.
May never Foreign
Or home-bred Jars wither your Peaceful Laurel.
And thus our Enmity does end;
thy hand.
Thy cheek—farewell.
Plenty and Peace perpetually
dwell among you—
Two as brave Spirits
As ever Cicily bred.
The Magistrates are here Sir.
Hipp. At your feet, Royal Sir we fall.
Rise in our favour.
Your Mercy has no President.
Heaven make you stronger in your
faith and duties.
Hereafter to us, what is past We Pardon.
All the lowering Aspects of Malig∣nant
Stars,
That lately threatened ruin to this Kingdom,
Are at your Glorious Presence sunk be∣neath▪
Their primitive Conceptions.
Take up those bodies.
My Lords, with your assistance we must do
A cure upon the Kingdom, in the seating
Its dislocated joints; we shall not take
Notice hereafter who amongst you have
Had hands in her impairing, out receive you
With no less favour than the rest, not
doubting
But that the smart you have felt by these
Changes,
Will draw you home to Constancy, and the
Wool
That has so violently been taken from
Your Sheep, for want of an Indulgent
Shepherd,
Make you prize one the better.
May Heaven transform our
shapes when our hearts change
Then are we strong enough to
Combat Fate,
And Cure the wounds thus made upon the
State.

