THe Title of our Play, A Ioviall Crew,
May seem to promise Mirth: Which were a new,
And forced thing, in these sad and tragic days,
For you to find, or we express in Plays.
We wish you, then, would change that expectation,
Since Ioviall Mirth is now grown out of fashion.
Or much not to expect: For, now it chances,
(Our Comic Writer finding that Romances
Of Lovers, through much travel and distress,
Till it be thought, no Power can redress
The afflicted Wanderers, though stout Chivalry
Lend all his aid for their delivery;
Till, lastly, some impossibility
Concludes all strife, and makes a Comedy)
Finding (he says) such Stories bear the sway,
Near as he could, he has composed a Play,
Of Fortune-tellers, Damsels, and their Squires,
Exposed to strange Adventures, through the Briers
Of Love and Fate. But why need I forestall
What shall so soon be obvious to you all:
But wish the dullness may make no Man sleep,
Nor sadness of it any Woman weep.
IT has indeed, Friend, much afflicted me.
And very justly, let me tell you, Sir,
That could so impiously be curious
You tempt a judgement on you; to give ear,
And Faith too (by your leave) to Fortune-tellers,
Wizards and Gipsies!
I have since been frighted
With it in a thousand dreams.
I would be drunk
A thousand times to bed, rather then dream
Of any of their Riddlemy Riddlemies.
If they prove happy so: If not, let it go;
You'll never find their meaning till the event,
If you suppose there was, at all, a meaning,
As the equivocating Devil had, when he
Cozened the Monk, to let him live soul-free,
Till he should find him sleeping between sheets:
The wary Monk, abjuring all such lodging,
At last, by over-watching in his study,
The foul Fiend took him napping with his nose
Betwixt the sheet-leaves of his conjuring Book.
There was the whim, or double meaning on it.
But these fond Fortune-tellers, that know nothing,
Aim to be thought more cunning then their Master,
The foresaid Devil, though truly not so hurtful:
Yet, trust 'em hang em. Wizards! old blind Buzz∣zards!
For once they hit, they miss a thousand times;
And most times give quite contrary, bad for good,
And best for worst. One told a Gentleman
His son should be a man-killer, and hanged for it:
Who, after proved a great and rich Physician,
And with great Fame in the University
Hanged up in Picture for a grave example.
There was the whim of that. Quite contrary!
And that was happy, would mine could so deceive my fears.
They may: but trust not to it. Another Sche∣mist
Found, that a squint-ey'd boy should prove a notable
Pick-purse, and afterwards a most strong thief;
When he grew up to be a cunning Lawyer,
And at last died a Judge. Quite contrary!
How many have been marked out by these Wizards
For fools, that after have been pricked for Sheriffs?
Was not a Shepheard-boy foretold to be
A Drunkard, and to get his living from
Bawds, Whores, Thieves, Quarrellors, and the like?
And did he not become a Suburb Justice?
And live in Wine and Worship by the Fees
Racked out of such Delinquents? There's the whim on it.
Now I come to you: Your Figure-stinger finds,
That both your Daughters, notwithstanding all
Your great Possessions, which they are Co-Heirs of,
Shall yet be Beggars: May it not be meant,
(If, as I said, there be a meaning in it)
They may prove Courtiers, or great Courtiers wives.
And so be Beggars in Law? Is not that
the whim on it think you? you shall think no worse on it.
Would I had your merry heart.
I thank you, Sir.
I mean the like.
I would you had; and I
Such an Estate as yours. Four thousand yearly,
With such a heart as mine, would defy Fortune,
And all her babbling Soothsayers. I'd as soon
Distrust in Providence, as lend a fear
To such a Destiny, for a Child of mine,
While there be Sack and Songs in Town or Country.
Think like a man of conscience (now I am serious)
What justice can there be for such a curse
To fall upon your Heirs? Do you not live
Free, out of Law, or grieving any man?
Are you not th'onely rich man lives un-envied?
Have you not all the praises of the Rich,
And prayers of the Poor? Did ever any
Servant, or Hireling, Neighbour, Kindred curse you,
Or wish one minute shortened of your life?
Have you one grudging Tenant? will they not all
Fight for you? Do they not teach their Children,
And make 'em too, pray for you morn and evening,
And in their Graces too, as duly as
For King and Realm? The innocent things would think
They ought not eat else.
Tic their goodness.
It is your merit. Your great love and bounty
Procures from Heaven those inspirations in 'em.
Whose Rent did ever you exact? whose have
You not remitted, when by casualties
Of fire, of floods, of common dearth, or sickness,
Poor men were brought behind hand? Nay, whose losses.
Have you not piously repaired?
Enough.
What Hariots have you tan from forlorn Widows?
What Acre of your thousands have you racked?
Good Friend, no more.
These are enough, indeed,
To fill your ears with joyful acclamations
Where ever you pass: Heaven bless our Landlord Oldrent;
Our Master Oldrent; our good Patron Oldrent.
Cannot these sounds conjure that evil spirit
Of fear out of you, that your Children shall
Live to be Beggars? Shall Squire Oldrent's Daughters
Wear old rents in their Garments? (there's a whim too)
Because a Fortune-teller told you so?
Come, I will strive to think no more on it.
Will you ride forth for air then, and be merry?
Your counsel and example may instruct me.
Sack must be had in sundry places too.
For Songs I am provided.
Yet here comes one brings me a second fear,
Who has my care the next unto my children.
Your Steward, Sir, it seems has business with you.
I wish you would have none.
I'll soon dispatch it:
And then be for our journey instantly.
I'll wait your coming down, Sir.
But why, Springlove,
Is now this expedition?
Sir, It is duty.
Not common among Stewards, I confess,
To urge in their Accounts before the day
Their Lords have limited. Some that are grown
To hoary hairs and Knighthoods, are not found
Guilty of such an importunity.
It is yet but thirty days, when I give forty
After the half-year day, our Lady last.
Could I suspect my Trust were lost in thee;
Or doubt thy youth had not ability
To carry out the weight of such a charge,
I, then, should call on thee.
Sir, your indulgence,
I hope, shall ne'er corrupt me. Ne'rtheless,
The testimony of a fair discharge
From time to time, will be encouragement
To virtue in me. You may then be pleased
To take here a Survey of all your Rents
Received, and all such other payments, as
Came to my hands since my last Audit, for
Cattle, Wool, Corn, all Fruits of Husbandry.
Then, my Receipts on Bonds, and some new Leases,
With some old debts, and almost desperate ones,
As well from Country Cavaliers, as Courtiers.
Then, here Sir, are my several Disbursements,
In all particulars for your self and Daughters,
In charge of House-keeping, Buildings and Repairs;
Journeys, Apparel, Coaches, Gifts, and all
Expenses for your personal necessaries.
Here, Servants wages, Liveries, and Cures.
Here for supplies of Horses, Hawks and Hounds.
And lastly, not the least to be remembered,
Your large Benevolences to the Poor.
Thy charity there goes hand in hand with mine.
And, Springlove, I commend it in thee, that
So young in years art grown so ripe in goodness.
May their Heaven-piercing Prayers bring on thee
Equal rewards with me.
Now here, Sir, is
The balance of the several Accounts,
Which shows you what remains in Cash: which ad∣ded
Unto your former Bank, makes up in all—
Twelve thousand and odd pounds.
Here are the keys
Of all. The Chests are safe in your own Closet.
Why in my Closet? is not yours as safe?
O, Sir, you know my suit.
Your suit? what suit?
Touching the time of year.
It is well-nigh May.
Why what of that, good Springlove?
O, Sir, you hear I am called.
Fie Springlove, fie.
I hoped thou had abjured that uncough practice.
You thought I had forsaken Nature then.
Is that disease of Nature still in thee
So virulent? and, notwithstanding all
My favours, in my gifts, my cares, and counsels,
Which to a soul ungrateful might be boasted:
Have I first bred thee, and then preferred thee (from
I will not say how wretched a beginning)
To be a Master over all my Servants;
Planted thee in my bosom; and can thou,
There, siight me for the whistling of a Bird?
Your reason, Sir, informs you, that's no cause.
But it is the season of the year that calls me.
What moves her Noats, provokes my disposition
By a more absolute power of Nature, then
Philosophy can render an account for.
I find there's no expelling it; but still
It will return. I have tried all the means
(As I may safely think) in humane wisdom,
And did (as near as reason could) assure me,
That thy last years restraint had stopped for ever,
That running sore on thee, that gadding humour:
When, only for that cause, I laid the weight
Of mine Estate in Stewardship upon thee;
Which kept thee in that year, after so many
Summer vagaries thou had made before.
You kept a Swallow in a Cage that while.
I cannot, Sir, endure another Summer
In that restraint, with life: it was then my torment,
But now, my death. Yet, Sir, my life is yours:
Who are my Patron; freely may you take it.
Yet pardon, Sir, my frailty, that do beg
A small continuance of it on my knees.
Can there no means be found to preserve life
In thee, but wandering, like a Vagabond?
Does not the Sun as comfortably shine
Upon my Gardens, as the opener Fields?
Or on my Fields, as others far remote?
Are not my Walks and Greens as delectable
As the High-ways and Commons? Are the shades
Of Siccamore and Bowers of Eglantine
Less pleasing then of Bramble, or thorne hedges?
Or of my Groves and Thickets, then wild Woods?
Are not my Fountain waters fresher then
The troubled streams, where every Beast does drink?
Do not the Birds sing here as sweet and lively,
As any other where? is not thy bed more soft,
And rest more safe, then in a Field or Barn?
Is a full Table, which is called thine own,
Less curious or wholesome, then the seraps
From others trenchers, twice or thrice translated?
Yea, in the winter season, when the fire Is sweeter then the air.
What air is wanting?
O Sir, you've heard of Pilgrimages; and The voluntary travels of good men.
For Penance; or to holy ends? but bring Not those into comparison, I charge you.
I do not, Sir. But pardon me, to think Their sufferings are much sweetened by delights, Such as we find, by shifting place and air.
Are there delights in beggary? Or, if to take
Diversity of Air be such a solace,
Travel the Kingdom over: And if this
Yield not variety enough, try further:
Provided your deportment be gentile.
Take Horse, and Man, and Money: you have all,
Or I'll allow enough.
O how am I confounded!
Dear Sir, retort me naked to the world,
Rather then lay those burdens on me, which
Will stifle me. I must abroad or perish.
I will no longer strive to wash this Moor▪
Nor breath more minutes so unthriftily,
In civil argument, against rude wind,
But rather practise to withdraw my love
And tender care (if it be possible)
From that unfruitful breast; incapable
Of wholesome counsel.
Have I your leave, Sir?
I leave you to dispute it with your self.
I have no voice to bid you go, or stay:
My love shall give thy will pre-eminence;
And leave the effect to Time and Providence—
I am confounded in my obligation
To this good man: His virtue is my punishment,
When it is not in my Nature to return
Obedience to his Merits. I could wish
Such an Ingratitude were Death by th'law,
And put in present execution on me,
Yo rid me of my sharper suffering.
Nor but by death, can this predominant sway
Of nature be extinguished in me. I
Have fought with my Affections, by the assistance
Of all the strengths of Art and Discipline
(All which I owe him for in education too)
To conquer and establish my observance
(As in all other rules) to him in this,
This inborn strong desire of liberty
In that free course, which he detests as shameful,
And I approve my earths felicity:
But find the war is endless, and must fly.
What must I lose then? A good Master's love.
What loss feels he that wants not what he loses?
They'll say I lose all, Reputation.
What's that, to live where no such thing is known?
My duty to a Master will be questioned.
Where duty is exacted it is none:
And among Beggars, each man is his own.
Now fellows, what new from whence you came?
The old wonted news, Sir, from your Guest∣house, the old Barn. We have unloaded the Bread∣basket, the Beef-Kettle, and the Beer-Bumbards there, amongst your Guests the Beggars. And they have all prayed for you and our Master, as their manner is, from the teeth outward, marry from the teeth in∣wards it is enough to swallow your Alms; from whence I think their Prayers seldom come.
Thou should not think uncharitably.
Thought's free, Master Steward, and it please you. But your Charity is nevertheless notorious, I must needs say.
Meritorious thou meantst to say.
Surely Sir, no; it is out of our Curats Book.
But I aspire no merits, nor popular thanks, It is well if I do well in it.
It might be better though (if old Rental, whom you allow to talk, might counsel) to help to breed up poor men's children, or decayed labourers, past their work, or travel; or towards the setting up of poor young married couples; then to bestow an hundred pound a year (at least you do that, if not all you get) besides our Masters bounty, to maintain in begging such wanderers as these, that never are out of their way; that cannot give account from whence they came, or whither they would; nor of any be∣ginning they ever had, or any end they seek, but still to strowle and beg till their bellies be full, and then sleep till they be hungry.
Thou art ever ripening at those poor people! they take nothing from thee but thy pains: and that I pay thee for too. Why should thou grudge?
Am I not bitten to it every day, by the six-footed blood-hounds that they leave in their Litter, when I throw out the old, to lay fresh straw for the new comers at night. That's one part of my office. And you are sure that though your hospitality be but for a night and a morning for one Rabble, to have a new supply every evening. They take nothing from me indeed, they give too much.
Thou art old Randall still I ever grumbling, but still officious for 'em.
Yes: hang 'em, they know I love 'em well enough, I have had merry bouts with some of 'em.
What say thou Randall?
They are indeed my pastime. I left the merry Griggs (as their provender has pricked 'em) in such a Hoigh yonder! such a frolic! you'll hear anon, as you walk nearer 'em.
Well honest Rental. Thus it is. I am for a journey. I know not how long will be my absence. But I will presently take order with the Cooke, Pantler and Butler, for my wonted allowance to the Poor; And I will leave money with thee to manage the affair till my return.
Then up rise Rental, Bailey of the Beggars.
And if our Master shall be displeased (al∣though the charge be mine) at the openness of the Entertainment, thou shalt then give it proportiona∣bly in money, and let them walk farther.
Pseugh! that will never do it, never do 'em good: It is the Seat, the Habitation, the Rend∣vous, that cheers their hearts. Money would clog their consciences. Nor must I lose the music of 'em in their lodging.
We will agree upon it anon. Go now about your business.
I go. Bailey? nay Steward and Chamber∣lain of the Rogues and Beggars.
I cannot think but with a trembling fear
On this adventure, in a scruple, which
I have not weighed with all my other doubts.
I shall, in my departure, rob my Master.
Of what? of a true Servant; other theft
I have committed none. And that may be supplied,
And better too, by some more constant to him.
But I may injure many in his Trust,
Which now he cannot be but sparing of.
I rob him too, of the content and hopes
He had in me, whom he had built and raised
Unto that growth in his affection,
That I became a gladness in his eye,
And now must be a grief or a vexation
Unto his noble heart. But hark! I there's
The Harmony that drowns all doubts and fears.
A little nearer—
FRom hunger and cold who lives more free,
Or who more richly clad then wee?
Our bellies are full; our flesh is warm;
And, against pride, our rags are a charm:
Enough is our Feast, and for to morrow
Let rich men care: we feel no sorrow.
No sorrow, no sorrow, no sorrow, no sorrow.
Let rich men care, we feel no sorrow.
The Emperor hears no such Music; nor feels content like this!
Each City, each Town, and every Village,
Affords us either an Alms or Pillage.
And if the weather be cold and raw
Then, in a Barn we tumble in straw.
If warm and fair, by yea-cock and nay-cock
The Fields will afford us a Hedge or a Hay-cock.
A Hay-cock, a Hay-cock, a Hay-cock, a Hay-cock,
The Fields will afford us a Hedge or a Hay-cock.
Most ravishing delight! But, in all this
Only one sense is pleased: mine ear is feasted.
Mine eye too must be satisfied with my joys.
The hoarding Usurer cannot have more
Thirsty desire to see his golden store,
When he unlocks his Treasury, then I
The equipage in which my Beggars lie.
Our Master, our Master! our sweet and com∣fortable Master.
How cheer my hearts?
Most crows, most capringly.
Shall we dance, shall we sing, to welcome our King?
Strike up Piper a merry merry dance
That we on our stampers may foot it and prance,
To make his heart merry as he has made ours;
As lustick and frolic as Lords in their Bowers.
Exceeding well performed.
It is well if it like you, Master. But wee have not that rag among us, that we will not dance off, to do you service; we being all and only your servants, most noble Sir. Command us therefore and employ us, we beseech you.
Thou speak most courtly.
Sir, he can speak, and could have writ as well. He is a decayed Poet, newly fallen in among us; and begs as well as the best of us. He learnt it pretty well in his own profession before; and can the better practise it in ours now.
Thou art a wit too, it seems.
He should have wit and knavery too, Sir:
For he was an Attorney, till he was pitched over the Bar. And, from that fall, he was taken up a Knight of the Post; and so he continued, till he was degree∣ded at the whipping-post; and from thence he ran resolutely into this course. His cunning in the Law, and the others labour with the Muses are dedicate to your service; and for my self, I'll fight for you.
Thou art a brave fellow, and speak like a Commander. Hast thou born Arms?
Sir, he has born the name of a Netherland Soldier, till he ran away from his Colours, and was taken lame with lying in the Fields by a Sciatica: I mean, Sir, the strapado. After which, by a second re∣treat, indeed running away, he scrambled into his Country, and so escaped the Gallows; and then snapped up his living in the City by his wit in cheating, pim∣ping, and such like Arts, till the Cart and the Pillo∣rye showed him too publicly to the world. And so, begging being the last refuge, he entered into our so∣ciety. And now lives honestly, I must needs say, as the best of us.
Thou speak good language too.
He was a Courtier born, Sir, and begs on pleasure I assure you, refusing great and constant means from able friends to make him a staid man. Yet (the want of a leg notwithstanding) he must tra∣vel in this kind against all common reason, by the special policy of Providence.
As how, I prithee?
His Father, Sir, was a Courtier; a great Court Beggar I assure you;
I made these Verses of Him and his Son here.
A Courtier begged by Covetise, not Need,
From Others that, which made them beg indeed.
He begged, till wealth had laden him with cares
To keep for's children and their children shares:
While the oppressed, that lost that great Estate
Sent Curses after it unto their Fate.
The Father dies (the world says) very rich;
The Son, being gotten while (it seems) the itch
Of begging was upon the Courtly Sire,
Or bound by Fate, will to no wealth aspire,
Though offered him in Money, Clothes or Meat,
More then he begs, or instantly must eat.
Is not he heavenly blessed, that hates Earth's Treasure
And begs, with What's a Gentleman butt's pleasure?
Or say it be upon the Heir a curse;
What's that to him? The Beggar's ne'er the worse.
For of the general store that Heaven has sent
He values not a penny till't be spent.
A Scribble, a Scribble!
What City or Court Poet could say more then our hedge Muse-monger here?
What say, Sir, to our Poet Scribble here?
I like his vain exceeding well; and the whole Consort of you.
Consort, Sir. We have Musicians too a∣mong us: true merry Beggars indeed, that being within the reach of the Lash for singing libellous Songs at London, were fain to fly into our Cove, and here they sing all our Poet's Ditties. They can sing any thing most tunably, Sir, but Psalms. What they may do hereafter under a triple Tree, is much expected. But they live very civilly and gentily a∣mong us.
But what is he there? that solemn old fell∣low, that neither speaks of himself, nor any body for him.
O Sir, the rarest man of all. He is a Pro∣phet. See how he holds up his prognosticating nose. He is divining now.
How? a Prophet?
Yes Sir, a cunning man and a Fortune-tel∣ler: it is thought he was a great Clerk before his decay, but he is very close, will not tell his begin∣ning, nor the fortune he himself is fallen from: But he serves us for a Clergy-man still, and marries us, if need be, after a new way of his own.
How long have you had his company?
But lately come amongst us, but a very ancient Strowle all the Land over, and has travelled with Gipsies, and is a Patrico. Shall he read your For∣tune Sir?
If it please him.
Lend me your hand, Sir.
By this Palm I understand,
Thou art born to wealth and Land,
And after many a bitter gust,
Shalt build with thy great Gransires dust.
Where shall I find it? but come, Isle not trouble my head with the search.
What say, Sir, to our Crew? are we not well congregated?
You are A Iovial Crew; the only people Whose happiness I admire.
Will you make us happy in serving you? have you any Enemies? shall we fight under you? will you be our Captain?
Nay, out King.
Command us something, Sir.
Whore's the next Rendezvous?
Neither in Village nor in Town:
But three mile off at M•1•-d•wn.
At evening there I'll visit you.
COme, come; away: The Spring
(By every Bird that can but sing,
Or chirp a note) doth now invite
Vs forth, to taste of his delight.
In Field, in Grove, on Hill, in Dale;
But above all the Nightingale:
Who in her sweetness strives t'out-doe
The loudness of the hoarse Cuckoo.
Cuckoo cries he, Jug Jug Jug sings she,
From bush to bush, from tree to tree,
Why in one place then tarry me?
Come away; why do we stay?
We have no debt or rent to pay.
No bargains or accounts to make;
Nor Land or Lease to let or take:
Or if we had, should that remove us,
When all the world's our own before us,
And where we pass, and make resort,
It is our Kingdom and our Court.
Cuckoo cries he &amp;c.
So, now away.
They dream of happiness that live in State,
But they enjoy it that obey their Fate.
I Am overcome with admiration, at the felici∣tie they take▪
Beggars! They are the only people, can boast the benefit of a free state, in the full enjoyment of Li∣bertie, Mirth and Ease; having all things in common and nothing wanting of Natures whole provision within the reach of their desires. Who would have lost this sight of their Revels?
How think you Ladies? Are they not the one∣lie happy in a Nation?
Happier then we I'm sure, that are pent up and tied by the nose to the continual steam of hot Hospitality, here in our Father's house, when they have the Air at pleasure in all variety.
And though I know we have merrier Spirits then they, yet to live thus confined, stifles us.
Why Ladies, you have liberty enough; or may take what you please.
Yes in our Father's Rule and Government, or by his allowance. What's that to absolute free∣doom; such as the very Beggars have; to feast and revel here to day, and yonder to morrow; next day where they please; and so on still, the whole Coun∣try or Kingdom over? ther's Liberty! the birds of the air can take no more.
And then at home here, or wheresoever he comes, our Father is so pensive, (what muddy spirit so ever possesses him, would I could conjure't out)
that he makes us even sick of his sadness, that were wont to see my Ghossips cock to day; mould Cocklebread; dance clutterdepouch; and Hannykin booby; bind bar∣rels; or do any thing before him, and he would laugh at us.
Now he never looks upon us, but with a sigh, or tears in his eyes, though we simper never so sanctify∣edly. What tales have been told him of us, or what he suspects I know not; God forgive him, I do; but I am weary of his house.
Does he think us Whores trow, because some∣times we talk as lightly as great Ladies. I can swear safely for the virginity of one of us, so far as Word and Deed goes; marry Thought's free.
Which is that one of us I pray? your self or me?
Good sister Meriel, Charity begins at home. But I'll swear I think as charitably of thee: And not only because thou art a year younger neither.
I am beholden to you. But for my Father, I would I knew his grief and how to cure him, or that we were where we could not see it. It spoils our mirth, and that has been better then his Meat to us.
Will you hear our motion Ladies?
Psew, you would marry us presently out of his way, because he has given you a foolish kind of promise: But we will see him in a better humour first, and as apt to laugh as we to lie down, I warrant him.
It is like that course will cure him, would you embrace it.
We will have him cured first, I tell you: And you shall wait that season, and our leisure.
I will rather hazard my being one of the De∣vil's
Ape-leaders, then to marry while he is melan∣cholly.
Or I to stay in his house; to give entertain∣meant to this Knight, or t'other Coxcomb, that comes to cheer him up with eating of his cheer: when we must fetch 'em sweetmeats, and they must tell us, Ladies, your lips are sweeter, and then fall into Courtship, one in a set speech taken out of old Bri∣tains Works, another with Verses out of the Acade∣my of Complements, or some or other of the new Po∣etical Pamphletters, ambitious only to spoil Pa∣per, and publish their names in print. And then to be kissed, and sometimes slaver'd—faugh.
It is not to be endured. We must out of the House. We cannot live but by laughing, and that aloud, and no body sad within hearing.
We are for any adventure with you, Ladies. Shall we project a journey for you? your Father has trusted you, and will think you safe in our comp∣ny; and we would fain be abroad upon some pro∣gress with you. Shall we make a fling to London, and see how the Spring appears there in the Spring-Gar∣den; and in Hide-park, to see the Races, Horse and Foot; to hear the jo•kies crack; and see the Ada∣mites run naked before the Ladies?
We have seen all already there, as well as they, last year.
But there have been new Plays since.
No: no: we are not for London.
What think you of a Journey to the Bath then?
Worse then to other way. I love not to carry my Health where others drop their Diseases. There's no sport in that.
Will you up to the hill top of sports, then, and Merriments, Dovors Olimpicks or the Cotswold Games.
No, that will be too public for our Re∣creation. We would have it more within our selves.
Think of some course your selves then. We are for you upon any way, as far as Horse and Money can carry us.
I, and if those means fail us, as far as our legs can bear, or our hands can help us.
And we will put you to it. Come aside Me∣riel—
Some jeer, perhaps to put upon us.
What think you of a Pilgrimage to St. Wini∣srides Well?
Or a Journey to the wise woman at Nant∣which, to ask if we be fit husbands for 'em?
They are not scrupulous in that, we having had their growing loves up from our Childhoods; and the old Squire's good will before all men.
Me. Ha ha ha—
What's the conceit I marvel.
Me. Ha ha ha ha—
Some merry one it seems.
And then, sirrah Meriel— Hark again—ha ha ha—
How they are taken with it!
Ha ha ha—Hark again Rachel.
Some wonderful Nothing sure. They will laugh as much to see a swallow fly with a white fea∣there imp'd in her tail.
They were born laughing I think.
Me. Ha ha ha—
If it be not some trick upon us, which they'll discover in some monstrous shape, they cozen me. Now Ladies, is your Project ripe? possess us with the knowledge of it.
It is more precious, then to be imparted upon a slight demand.
Pray let us hear it. You know we are your trusty servants.
And have kept all your councels 'ever since we have been Infant Playfellows.
Yes, you have plaid at all kinds of small game with us; but this is to the purpose. Ha ha ha—
It seems so by your laughing.
And asks a stronger tongue-tie then tearing of Books; burning of Samplers; making Dirt-pies; or piss and paddle in it.
You know how, and what we have vowed: to wait upon you any way, any how, and any whi∣there.
And you will stand to it?
I, and go to it with you, wherever it be.
Pray tell' t'em, sister Rachel.
Why Gentlemen—ha ha— Thus it is— Tell it you Meriel.
O, is that all?
You are the elder. Pray tell it you.
You are the younger. I command you tell it. Come, out with it They long to have it.
When?
When?
In truth you must tell it, sister, I cannot. Pray begin.
Then Gentlemen stand your ground.
Some terrible business sure!
You seemed even now to admire the felicity of
Beggars.
And have engaged your selves to join with us in any course.
Will you now with us, and for our sakes turn
Beggars?
It is our Resolution, and our Injunction on you.
But for a Time, and a short Progress.
And for a spring-trick of youth, now, in the season.
Beggars! What Rogues are these?
A simple trial of our Loves and service!
Are you resolved upon it? If not God bw'y'. We are resolved to take our course.
Let yours be to keep council.
Stay, stay. Beggars! Are we not so already?
Do we not beg your loves, and your enjoyings?
Do we not beg to be received your servants?
To kiss your hands, or (if you will vouchsafe)
Your lips; or your embraces?
We now beg,
That we may fetch the Rings and Priest to marry us.
Wherein are we no Beggars?
That will not serve. Your time's not come for that yet.
You shall beg Victuals first.
O, I conceive your begging progress is to ramble out this summer among your Father's Te∣nants; and it is in request among Gentlemen's Daugh∣ters to devour their Cheese-cakes, Apple-pies, Cream
Custards, Flapiacks, and Pan-puddings.
Not so, not so,
Why so we may be a kind of civil Beggars.
I mean stark, errant, downright Beggars, I, Without equivocation; Statute Beggars.
Couchant and Peasant, Guardant, Rampant
Beggars.
Current and vagrant—
Stockant, whippant Beggars!
Must you and we be such? would you so have it?
Such as we saw so merry; and you concluded Were th'onely happy People in a Nation.
The only Freemen of a Common-wealth;
Free above Scot-free; that observe no Law,
Obey no Governor, use no Religion,
But what they draw from their own ancient custom,
Or constitute themselves, yet are no Rebels.
Such as of all men's Meat and all men's Money
Take a free part; and, wheresoever they travel.
Have all things gratis to their hands provided.
Course fare most times.
Their stomach makes it good;
And feasts on that, which others scorn for Food.
The Antidote, Content, is only theirs.
And, unto that, such full delights are known,
That they conceive the Kingdom is their own.
Before Heaven I think they are in earnest: for they were always mad.
And we were madder then they, if we should lose 'em.
It is but a mad trick of youth (as they say) for the Spring, or a short progress: and mirth may be
made out of it; knew we how to carry it.
Pray Gentlemen be sudden.
Hark, you hear the Cuckoo.
We are most resolutely for you in your course.
But the vexation is how to set it on foot.
We have projected it. Now if you be perfect and constant Lovers and friends, search you the means. We have puzzled 'em.
I am glad on it. Let 'em pump.
Troth a small stock will serve to set up with∣al. This Doublet sold off of my back, might serve to furnish a Camp Royal of us.
But how to enter or arrange our selves into the Crew will be the difficulty. If we light raw and tame amongst 'em (like Cage-Birds among a flight of wild ones) we shall never pick up a Living, but have our brains pecked out.
We want instruction dearly.
O here comes Springlove. His great Benefa∣ctorship among the Beggars might prefer us with Au∣thority into a ragged Regiment presently. Shall I put it to him.
Take heed what you do. His greatness with my Father will betray us.
I will cut his throat then. My noble Spring∣love, the great Commander of the Maunders, and King of Canters, we saw the gratitude of your loyal Subjects, in the large Tributary content they gave you in their Revels.
Did you, Sir?
We have seen all with great delight and ad∣miration.
I have seen you too, kind Gentlemen and Ladies; and over-heard you in your quaint design, to new create your selves out of the wordly bless∣sings, and spiritual graces Heaven has bestowed upon you, to be partakers and Co-actors too, in those vile courses, which you call delights, tan by those de∣spicable and abhorred Creatures.
Thou art a Despiser, nay a Blasphemer
Against the Maker of those happy Creatures.
Who, of all humane, have priority
In their content. In which they are so blessed
That they enjoy most in possessing least.
Who made 'em such, dost think? or why so happy?
He grows zealous in the Cause: sure he'll beg indeed.
Art thou an Hypocrite, then, all this while?
Only pretending Charity; or using it
To get a Name and Praise unto thy self;
And not to cherish and increase those Creatures,
In their most happy way of living? Or
Dost thou bestow thine Alms with a foul purpose
To stint their Begging, and with loss to buy
And slave those free souls from their liberty?
They are more zealous in the Cause then we.
But are you, Ladies, at defiance too
With Reputation, and the Dignity
Due to your Father's House and You?
Hold thy peace, good Springlove,
And, though you seem to dislike this course, and reprove us for it,
Do not betray us in it: your throat's in question.
I tell you for good will. good Springlove.
What would thou have us do?
Thou talk of the House.
It is a base melancholy House.
Our Father's sadness banishes us out on it.
And, for the delight thou take in Beggars and their
brawls, thou can not but think they live a better
life abroad, then we do in this House.
I have sounded your Faith: And I am glad I find you all right. And for your Father's sadness, I'll tell you the cause on it. I over-heard it but this day in his private Discourse with his merry Mate Master Hearty. He has been told by some Wizard that you both were born to be Beggars.
How. How!
For which he is so tormented in mind, that he cannot sleep in peace, nor look upon you but with hearts grief.
This is most strange.
Let him be grieved then, till we are Beggars,
We have just reason to become so now:
And, what we thought on but in jest before,
We'll do in earnest now.
O, I applaud this resolution in you; Would have persuaded it; will be your Servant in it. For, look ye Ladies: The Sentence of your Fortune does not say, that you shall beg for need; hungry or cold necessity. If there∣fore you expose your selves on pleasure into it, you shall absolve your destiny nevertheless, and cure your Father's grief. I am over-joy'd to think on it; and will assist you faithfully.
A Springlove! a Springlove!
I am prepared already for the adventure.
And will with all conveniences furnish,
And set you forth; give you your Dimensions,
Rules and Directions: I will be your Guide,
Your Guard, your Convoy, your Authority.
You do not know my Power; my Command
In the Beggars Commonwealth.
But how? But how, good Springlove?
I'll confess all. In my Minority
My Master took me up a naked Beggar;
Bred meat School; then took me to his Service;
(You know in what good fashion) and you may
Collect to memory for seven late Summers,
Either by leave, pretending Friends to see
At far remote parts of the Land, or else,
By stealth, I would absent my self from service,
To follow my own Pleasure, which was Begging,
Led to it by Nature. My indulgent Master
(Yet ignorant of my course) on my submission
When Cold and Hunger forced me back at Winter,
Received me still again. Till, two years since,
He being drawn by journey towards the North,
Where I then quartered with a ragged Crew;
On the high way, not dreaming of him there,
I did accost him, with a Good your Worship
The Guest one small penny to a Creeple;
(For here I was with him) and the good Lord
To bless you, and restore it you in Heaven.
Ha ha ha.
My head was dirty clouted, and this leg
Swaddled with Rags, the other naked, and
My body clad, like his upon the Gibbet.
Yet, He, with searching eyes, through all my Rags
And counterfeit Postures, made discovery
Of his Man Springlove; chid me into tears;
And a confession of my forespent life.
At last, upon condition, that vagary
Should be the last, he gave me leave to run
That Summer out. In Avtumne home came I
In my home Clothes again and former Duty.
My Master not alone conserved my Counsel;
But lays more weighty Trust and Charge upon me;
Such was his love to keep me a home-Man,
That he conferred his Stewards place upon me,
Which clogged me, the last year, from those Delights,
I would not lose again to be his Lord.
A Springlove, a Springlove.
Pursue the course you are on then, as cheer∣fully
As the inviting Season smiles upon you.
Think how you are necessitated to it,
To quit your Father's sadness, and his fears
Touching your Fortune. Till you have been Beggars
The Sword hangs over him. You cannot think
Upon an Act of greater Piety
Unto your Father, then t'expose your selves
Brave Volunteers, unpressed by common need
Into this meritorious Warfare; whence
(After a few days, or short season spent)
You bring him a perpetual Peace and Joy
By expiating the Prophecy that torments him.
It were worth your Time in painful, woeful steps,
With your lives hazard in a Pilgrimage,
So to redeem a Father. But you'll find
A Progress of such Pleasure (as I'll govern't)
That the most happy Courts could never boast
In all their Tramplings on the Countries cost;
Whose envy we shall draw, when they shall read
We out-beg them, and for as little Need.
A Springlove! a Springlove!
Follow me, Gallants, then, as cheerfully As—(hark!) we are summoned forth.
We follow thee.—
Well, go thy ways. If ever any just or cha∣ritable Steward was commended, sure thou shalt be at the last Quarter-day. Here's five and twenty pounds for this Quarters Beggar-charge. And (if he return not by the end of this Quarter) here's order to a Friend to supply for the next. If I now should venture for the commendation of an unjust Steward, and turn this Money to mine own use! ha! dear Devil tempt me not. I'll do thee service in a greater Matter. But to rob the Poor! (a poor trick) every Church-warden can do it. Now something whispers me, that my Master, for his Stewards love, will sup∣ply the Poor, as I may handle the matter. Then I rob the Steward, if I restore him not the Money at his return. Away Temptation, leave me. I am frail flesh: yet I will fight with thee. But say the Steward never return. O but he will return. Perhaps he may not return. Turn from me Satan: strive not to clog my conscience. I would not have this weight upon it for all thy Kingdom.
Remember, Sir, your Covenant to be merry.
I strive you see to be so. Yet something pricks me within, me thinks.
No further thought, I hope, of Fortunes tell∣tales.
I think not of'em. Nor will I presage,
That when a disposition of sadness
O'rclouds my spirits, I shall therefore hear
Ill news, or shortly meet with some disaster.
Nay, when a man meets with bad tidings,
why
May not be then compel his mind to mirth;
As well as puling stomachs are made strong
By caring against Appetite?
Forced Mirth though is not good.
It relishes not you'll say. No more does Meat
That is most savoury to a long sick stomach,
Until by Strife and Custom it is made good.
You argue well. But do you see yon'd Fellow?
I never noted him so sad before.
He neither sings nor whistles.
Something troubles him.
Can he force Mirth out of himself now, think you?
What speak you of a Clod of Earth; a Hind?
But one degree above a Beast, compared
To the aëry spirit of a Gentleman?
He looks, as he came laden with ill news,
To meet me on my way.
It is very pretty.
Suppose the Ass be tired with sadness: will you dis∣burden him
To load your self? Think of your Covenant to be merry
In spite of Fortune and her Riddle-makers.
Why how now Rental! sad? whore's Spring∣love?
He's ever in his Care. But that I know
The old Squire's virtue, I should think Springlove
Were sure his Bastard.
Here's his Money, Sir.
I pray that I be charged with it no longer.
The Devil and I have strained curtsy these two hours about it. I would not be corrupted with the trust of more then is mine own. Mr. Steward gave it me, Sir, to order it for the Beggars. He has made me Steward of the Barn and them, while he is gone (he says) a Journey, to survey and measure Lands abroad about the Countries. Some purchase I think for your Worship.
I know his measuring of Land. He is gone his old way.
And let him go. Am not I merry Hearty?
Yes; but not hearty merry. There's a whim now.
The Poor's charge shall be mine. Keep you the Money for him.
Mine is the greater charge then.
Knew you but my temptations and my care,
You would discharge me of it.
Ha ha ha.
I have not had it so many minutes, as I have been in several Minds about it; and most of them dishonest.
Go then, and give it to one of my Daught∣ers to keep for Springlove.
O, I thank your Worship—
Alas poor knave! How hard a tasque it is to alter Custom!
And how easy for Money to corrupt it.
What a pure Treasurer would he make!
All were not born for weighty Offices.
Which makes me think of Springlove.
He might have tan his leave though.
I hope he's run away with some large Trust,
I never liked such demure down-look'd Fellows.
You are deceived in him.
If you be not it is well. But this is from the Covenant.
Well Sir. I will be merry. I am resolved
To force my Spirit only unto Mirth.
Should I hear now, my Daughters were misled
Or run away, I would not send a sigh
To fetch 'em back.
To'ther old Song for that.
THere was an old fellow at Waltham Cross,
Who merrily sung when he lived by the Loss.
He never was heard to sigh with Hey-ho:
But sent it out with a Haigh trolly lo.
He cheered up his Heart, when his Goods went to wrack,
With a heghm boy, heghm, and a Cup of old Sack.
Is that the way on it? well, it shall be mine then
My Mistresses are both abroad, Sir.
How? since when?
On foot, Sir, two hours since, with the two Gentlemen their Lovers. Here's a Letter they left with the Butler. And there's a muttring in the House.
I will not read, nor open it; but conceive
Within my self the worst, that can befall them;
That they are lost and no more mine. What follows?
That I am happy: all my cares are flown.
The Counsel I anticipated from
My Friend, shall serve to set my Rest upon
(Without all further helps) to jovial Mirth;
Which I will force out of my spleen so freely,
That Grief shall lose her name, where I have being▪
And sadness, from my furthest foot of Land,
While I have life, be banished.
What's the whim now?
My Tenants shall sit Rent-free for this twelve-month;
And all my servants have their wages doubled;
And so shall be my charge in House-keeping.
I hope my friends will find and put me to it.
For them I'll be your Undertaker, Sir.
But this is over-done. I do not like it.
And for thy news, the Money that thou hast,
Is now thine own. I'll make it good to Springlove.
Be sad with it and leave me. For I tell thee,
I'll purge my house of stupid melancholy.
I'll be as merry as the Charge that's under me
The Beggars, Sir. Do'e hear 'em in the Barn?
I'll double their allowance too; that they may
Double their Numbers, and increase their Noise:
These Bear not found enough: and one (me thought)
Cried out among 'em.
By a most natural Cause. For there's a Doxy
Has been in labour, Sir. And it is their Custom,
With songs and shouts to drown the woman's cries.
A Ceremony which they use, not for
Devotion, but to keep off Notice of
The Work, they have in hand. Now she is in
The straw it, seems; and they are quiet.
The straw! that's very proper there. That's
Rental's whim.
We will have such a lying in, and such
A Christening; such up-sitting and Ghossipping!
I mean to send forty miles Circuit at the least,
To draw in all the Beggars can be found;
And such Devices we will have for jollity,
As Fame shall boast to all Posterity.
Am I not merry Hearty? hearty merry?
Would you were else. I fear this over-doing.
I'll do it for expiation of a crime
That's charged upon my Conscience till't be done.
What's that? what says he?
We will have such a Festival month on it,
Randall—
Sir, you may spare the labour and the cost:
They'd never thank you for it. They'll not endure
A Ceremony, that is not their own,
Belonging either to the Child, or Mother.
A month Sir? They'll not be detained so long
For your Estate. Their Work is done already:
The Bratling's born, the Doxey's in the Strummel,
Laid by an Autum Mort of their own Crew,
That served for Mid-wife: and the Child-bed wo∣man
Eating of hasty Pudding for her supper,
And the Child part of it for pap
I warrant you by this time; then to sleep;
So to rise early to regain the strength
By travail, which she lost by travail.
There's Rental again.
Can this be?
She'll have the Bantling at her back to more∣row That was to day in her belly, and march a foot-back with it.
Art there again, old Rental?
And for their Ghossipping (now you are so nigh)
If you'll look in, I doubt not, but you'll find 'em
At their high Feast already.
Pray let's see 'em, Sir.
HEre, safe in our Skipper, let's cly off our Peck,
And bowse in defiance of the Harman-beck.
Here's Pannum and Lap, and good Poplars of Yarrum,
To fill up the Crib, and to comfort the Quarron.
Now bowse a round health to the Go-well and Com-well
Of Cicely Bumtrincket that lies in the Strummel.
Now bowse a round health to the Go-well and Com-well
Of Cicely Bumtrincket that lies in the Strummel.
Here's Ruffpeck and Casson, and all of the best,
And Scraps of the Dainties of Gentry Cofe's Feast.
Here's Grunter and Bleater, with Tib of the Buttry,
And Margery Praetor, all dressed without sluttry.
For all this been Cribbing and Peck let us then,
Bowse a health to the Gentry Cofe of the Ken.
Now bowse a round health to the Go-well and Com-well
Of Cicely Bumtrincket that lies in the Strummel.
Good Heaven how merry they are.
Be not you sad at that.
Sad Hearty, no unless it be with envy
At their full happiness. What is an Estate
Of Wealth and Power, balanced with their Free∣doom,
But a mere load of outward complement?
When they enjoy the Fruits of rich Content?
Our Dross but weighs us down into Despair,
While their sublimed spirits dance in the Air.
I have not so much Wealth to weigh me down,
Nor so little (I thank Chance) as to dance naked.
True my Friend Hearty, thou having less then I,
(Of which I boast not) art the merrier man:
But they exceed thee in that way so far,
That should I know, my Children now were Beggars
(Which yet I will not read) I must conclude,
They were not lost, nor I to be aggrieved.
If this be madness, it is a merry Fit.
Tour out with your Glasiers, I swear by the Ruffin,
That we are assaulted by a quire Cuffin.
Hold! what d'e mean, my Friends? This is our Master,
The Master of your Feast and feasting-House.
Is this the Gentry Cofe?
Lord bless his Worship. His good
Worship. Bless his Worship.
Now, bounteous Sir, before you go,
Hear me, the Beggar Patrico;
Or Priest, if you do rather choose,
That we no word of Canting use.
Long may you live, and may your Store
Never decay, nor balk the Poor:
And as you more in years do grow,
May Treasure to your Coffers flow;
And may your care no more thereon
Be set, then ours are, that have none:
But as your Riches do increase,
So may your hearts Content and Peace.
And, after many, many years,
When the Poor have quit their Fears
Of losing you; and that with Heaven
And all the world you have made even,
Then may your blessed Posterity,
Age after Age successively,
Until the world shall be untwin'd
Inherit your Estate and Mind.
So shall the Poor to the last day,
For you, in your succession, pray.
It is a good Vote, Sir Patrico: but you are too grave. Let us hear and see something of your merry Grigs, that can sing, play Gambols, and do Feats.
Sir, I can lay my Function by,
And talk as wilde and wantonly
As Tom or Tib, or Jack, or Eel,
When they at Bowsing Ken do swill.
Will you therefore deign to hear
My Autum Mort, with throat as clear,
As was Dame Anisses of the Name;
How sweet in Song her Notes she'll frame,
That when she chides, as loud is yawning,
As Chanticlere waked by the dawning.
Yes, pray let's hear her. What is she your wife?
Yes Sir. we of our Ministry,
As well as those of the Presbyterie,
Take wives and defy Dignity.
A learned Clerk in verity!
By Salmon, I think my Mort is in drink.
I find by her stink; and the pretty pretty pink
Of her Nays, that half wink,
That the tippling Feast, with the Doxy in the Nest,
Hath turned her brain, to a merry merry vain.
Go Fiddle Patrico, and let me sing. First set me down here on both my Prats. Gently, gently, for cracking of my wind, now I must use it. Hem hem.
THis is Bien Bowse, this is Bien Bowse,
Too little is my Skew.
I bowse no Lage, but a whole Gage
Of this I'll bowse to you.
This Bowse is better then Rom-bowse,
It sets the Began a giggling;
The Autum-Mort finds better sport
In bowsing then in nigling.
This is Bien-bowse &amp;c.
So so: your part is done—
How find you, Sir, your self?
Wondrous merry, my good Hearty.
I wish we had, in all our store,
Something that could please you more.
The old or Autum-Mort's a sleep;
But before the young ones creep
Into the straw, Sir, if you are,
(As Gallants sometimes love course fare,
(So it be fresh and wholesome Ware)
Dospos'd to Doxy, or a Dell,
That never yet with man did Mell;
Of whom no Upright man is taster,
I'll present her to you, Master.
Away. You would be punished. Oh.
How is it with you, Sir?
A sudden qualm over-chils my stomach. But twill away.
See, in their rags, then, dancing for your sports,
Our Clapper Dugeons and their walking Morts.
You have done well. Now let each Tripper
Make a retreat into the Skipper;
And couch a Hogs-head, till the dark man's past;
Then all with Bag and Baggage binge awast.
I told you, Sir, they would be gone to morrow.
I understand their canting.
Take that amongst you.—
May rich Plenty so you bless,
Though you still give, you ne'er have less.
And as your walks may lead this way:
Pray strike in here another day.
So you may go, Sir Patrico—
How think you, Sir? or what? or why do you think at all, unless on Sack and Supper-time? do you fall back? do you not know the danger of relapses?
Good Hearty, thou mistake me. I was think∣ing upon this Patrico. And that he has more soul then a born Beggar in him.
Rogue enough though, to offer us his what-d'ecalts?
his Doxies. Heart and a cup of Sack, do we look like old Beggar-niglers?
Pray forbear that Language.
Will you then talk of Sack, that can drown sighing? will you in, to supper, and take me there your Guest? Or must I creep into the Barn among your welcome ones?
You have rebuked me timely; and most friendly.
Would all were well with him.
It is with me.
For now these pounds are (as I feel them swag)
Light at my heart, though heavy in the bag.
IS this the life that we admired in others; with envy at their happiness?
Pray let us make virtuous use of it: and re∣pent us of that deadly sin (before a greatet punish∣meant then Famine and Lice fall upon us) by steering our course homeward. Before I'll endure such ano∣there night—
what? what would thou do? I would thy Mistress heard thee.
I hope she does not. For I know there is no altering our course before they make the first mo∣tion.
Is it possible we should be weary already? and before their softer constitutions of flesh and blood?
They are the stronger in will it seems.
How now Comrades! ripening already at your Fullness of Liberty? Do you complain of ease?
Ease call thou it? Did thou sleep to night?
Not so well these 18 months I swear; since my last walks.
Lightning and Tempest is out of thy Litany.
Could not the thunder wake thee?
Ha ha ha.
Nor the noise of the Crew in the Quarter by us?
Nor the Hogs in the hovel, that cried till they drowned the noise of the wind? If I could but once ha dreamt in all my former nights, that such an affliction could have been found among Beggars, sure I should never have travelled to the proof on it.
We looked upon them in their Jollity, and cast no further.
Nor did that only draw us forth (by your favour Vince) but our obedience to our Loves, which we must suffer, till they cry home again. Are they not weary yet, as much as we dost think Springlove?
They have more moral understanding then so. They know (and so may you) this is your Birth∣night into a new world. And we all know (or have been told) that all come crying into the World, when the whole World of Pleasures is before us. The World it self had ne'er been glorious, had it not first been a confused Chaos.
Well: never did Knight Errants in all Ad∣ventures,
merit more of their Ladies, then we Beg∣gar-errants or errant Beggars, do in ours.
The greater will be your Reward. Think upon that. And show no manner of distaste to turn their hearts from you. You're undone then.
Are they ready to appear out of their privy Lodgings, in the Pigs Palace of pleasure? Are they coming forth?
I left 'em almost ready, sitting on their Pads of straw, helping to dress each others heads (The ones eye is the tothers Looking-glass) with the pret∣teased coil they keep to fit their fancies in the most graceful way of wearing their new Dressings, that you would admire.
I hope we are as gracefully set out. Are we not?
Indifferent well. But will you fall to practise? Let me hear how you can Maund when you meet with Passengers.
We do not look like men, I hope, too good to learn.
Suppose some Persons of Worth or Wealth passing by now. Note me. Good your good Worcester∣ship, your Charity to the Poor, that will duly and truly pray for you day and night.—
Away you idle Rogue, you would be set to work and whipped—
That is lame and sick; hungry and comfort∣less—
If you were well served—
And even to bless you and reward you for it—
Prithee hold thy peace (here be doleful
Notes indeed) and leave us to our own Genius. If we must beg, let's let it go, as it comes, by Inspiration. I love not your set form of Begging.
Let me instruct ye though.
Have a care, good Meriel, what hearts or limbs soever we have, and though never so feeble, let us set our best faces on it, and laugh our last gasp out before we discover any dislike, or weariness to them. Let us bear it out, till they complain first, and beg to carry us home a pick pack.
I am sorely surbated with hoofing already though, and so crupper-crampt with our hard lodging, and so bumfidled with the straw, that—
Think not on it. I am numbed in the bum and shoulders too a little. And have found the difference between a hard floor with a little straw, and a down Bed with a Quilt upon it. But no words, nor a sour look I prithee.
O here they come now; Madam Fewcloaths, and my Lady Bonnyrag.
Peace, they see us.
Mer. Ha ha ha.
We are glad the Object pleases ye.
So do's the Subject.
Now you appear the glories of the Spring,
Darlings of Phoebus and the Somers heirs.
How fairer, then fair Floras self appear
(To deck the Spring) Diana's Darlings dear!
O let us not Acteon-like be struck
(With greedy eyes while we presume to look
On your half nakedness, since courteous rags
Cover the rest) into the shape of Stags.
Mer. Ha ha ha— Wee are glad you are so merry.
Merry and lusty too. This night will we lye together as well as the proudest Couple in the Barn.
And so will we. I can hold out no longer.
Do's the straw stir up your flesh to it, Gentle∣men?
Or do's your Provender prick you?
What! do we come for this? laugh and lye down
When your bellies are full. Remember, Ladies,
You have not begged yet, to quit your Destiny:
But have lived hitherto on my endeavours.
Who got your suppers, pray, last night, but I?
Of dainty Trencher-Fees, from a Gentleman's house:
Such as the Serving-men themselves, sometimes,
Would have been glad of. And this morning now,
What comfortable Chippings and sweet Buttermilk
Had you to Breakfast!
O it was excellent! I feel it good still, here.
There was a brown Crust amongst it, that has made my neck so white me thinks. Is it not Ra∣chel?
Yes. You ga'me none on it. You ever covet to have all the Beauty. It is the ambition of all younger Sisters.
They are pleased, and never like to be weary.
No more must we, if we'll be theirs.
Peace. Here come Passengers. Forget not your Rules; and quickly disperse your selves, and fall to your Calling—
Lead the Horses down the Hill. The heat of
our speed is over, for we have lost our Journey.
Had they taken this way, we had overtaken 'em, or heard of 'em at least.
But some of our Scouts will light on 'em, the whole Country being overspread with 'em.
There was never such an escape else.
A search for us perhaps. Yet I know not them, nor they me, I am sure. I might the better beg of 'em. But how to begin, or set the worst leg forwards, would I were whipped if I know now.
That a young Gentlewoman of her breeding, and Heir to such an Estate, should fly from so great a Match, and run away with her Uncles Clerk!
The old Justice will run mad upon it I fear.
If I were to be hanged now, I could not beg for my life.
Step forwards, and beg handsomely. I'll set my Goad in your breech else.
What shall I say?
Have I not told you? now begin.
After you, good Springlove.
Good, your good Worships.—
Away you idle Vagabond—
Your Worships Charity to a poor Crytur welly starved.
That will duly and truly prea for ye.
You counterfeit Villains, hence.
Good Masters sweet Worship, for the tender mer∣cy of—
Duly and truly prea for you.
You would be well whipped and set to work, if you were duly and truly served.
Did not I say so before?
Good Worshipful Masters Worship, to bestow your Charity, and— to maintain your health and Limbs.
Duly and truly pray for you.
Be gone, I say, you impudent lusty young Ras∣calls.
I'll set you going else.
Ah the goodness of compassion to soften your hearts to the poor.
Oh the Devil, must not we beat 'em now? stead—
Nor show an angry look for all the skin of our backs. Ah the sweetness of that mercy that gives to all, to move your compassion to the hungry, when it shall seem good unto you, and night and day to bless all that you have. Ah ah—
Come back sirrah. His Patience and Humility has wrought upon me.
Duly and—
2. Not you sirrah. The t'other. You look like a sturdy Rogue.
Lord bless you Masters Worship.
There's a half-penny for you. Let him have no share with you.
I shall never thrive of this Trade.
They are of a Fraternity, and will share, I war∣rant you.
Never in our lives trooly. He never begged with me before.
But if Hedges or Hen-roosts could speak, you might be found sharers in Pillage, I believe.
Never saw him before, bless you good Master, in all my life. (Beg for your-self. Your Credit's
gone else.) Good Hea'ne to bliss and prosper yea.
Why dost thou follow us? Is it your office to be privy to our talk?
Sir, I beseech you hear me. (S'life what shall I say?) I am a stranger in these parts, and destitute of Means and Apparel.
So me thinks. And what of that?
Will you therefore be pleased, as you are worthy Gentlemen, and blessed with plenty—
This is Courtly!
Out of your abundant store, towards my relief in extreme necessity, to furnish me with a small parcel of Money— five or six pieces, or ten, if you can presently spare it.
Stand off.
I have spoiled all; and know not how to beg otherwise.
Here's a new way of begging!
Quite run out of my Instructions.
Some High-way Thief of my conscience, that forgets he is weaponless.
Only to make you merry, Gentlemen, at my unskilfulness in my new Trade. I have been an∣other man in my days. So I kiss your hands.
With your heels do you?
It had been good to have apprehended the Rakeshame. There is some mystery in his Rags. But let him go.
You found your legs in time, I had made you halt for something else.
Master Oliver, well returned; what's the mat∣la, Sir?
Why, Sir, a counterfeit lame Rogue begged of me; but in such Language, the high Sheriffs Son of the Shire could not have spoke better; nor to have borrowed a greater sum. (He asked me if I could spare him ten or twenty pound.) I switched him, his Cudgel was up. I drew, and into the Wood he escaped me, as nimbly—But first he told me, I should hear from him by a Gentleman, to require satisfaction of me.
We had such another begged of us. The Court goes a begging, I think.
Dropped through the Clouds, I think; more Lu∣cifers travailing to Hell, that beg by the way. Met you no news of your Kinswoman, Mistress Amie?
No. What's the matter with her? Goes her Marriage forwards with young, Master Talboy? I hast∣en'd my Journey from London to be at the Wed∣ding.
T'was to ha'bin yesterday morning; all things in readiness prepared for it. But the Bride, stolen by your Father's Clerk, is slipped away. We were in quest of 'em, and so are twenty more, several ways.
Such young Wenches will have their own ways in their own loves, what Matches soever their Guardians make for 'em. And I hope my Father will not follow the Law so close to hang his Clerk for stealing his Ward with her own consent. It may breed such a grudge, may cause some Clerks to hang their Masters, that have 'em of the hip of injustice. Besides, Martin (though he be his servant) is a Gen∣tleman. But, indeed, the miserablest Rascal! He will grudge her Meat when he has her.
Your Father is exceedingly troubled at their
escape. I wish that you may qualify him with your Reasons.
But what says Talboy to the matter, the Bride∣groom, that should have been?
Marry he says little to the purpose; but cries outright.
I like him well for that: He holds his humour. A miserable wretch too, though rich. I have known him cry when he has lost but three shillings at Mum∣chance. But, Gentlemen, keep on your way to com∣fort my Father. I know some of his Man's private haunts about the Country here, which I will search immediately.
We will accompany you, if you please.
No, by no means: That will be too pub∣lique.
Do your pleasure.
My pleasure, and all the search that I intend, is, by hovering here, to take a review of a brace of the handsomest Beggar-braches that ever graced a Ditch or a Hedge side. I past by 'em in hast, but some∣thing so possesses me, that I must— What the Devil must I? A Beggar? Why, Beggars are flesh and blood; and Rags are no Diseases. Their Lice are no French Fleas. And there is much wholsommer flesh under Country Dirt, than City Painting: And less danger in Dirt and Rags, than in Ceruse and Satin. I durst not take a touch at London, both for the present cost, and fear of an after-reckoning. But Oliver, dost thou speak like a Gentleman? fear Price or Pox, ha? Mar∣rye do I Sir: Nor can Beggar-sport be inexcusable in a young Country Gentleman, short of means, for ano∣there respect, a principal one indeed; to avoid the
punishment or charge of Bastardy: There's no com∣muting with them; or keeping of Children for them. The poor Whores, rather than part with their own, or want children at all, will steal other folks, to tra∣vel with, and move compassion. He feeds a Beggar∣wench well that fills her belly with young bones. And these reasons considered, good Master Oliver— s'lid yonder they are at peep. And now sat down as waiting for my purpose.
Heart here's another delay. I must shift him. Dost hear honest poor fellow? I prithee go back presently: and at the hill foot (here's sixpence for thy pains) thou shalt find a Footman with a Horse in his hand. Bid him wait there. His Master will come presently, say.
Sir, I have a business of another nature to you. Which (as I presume you are a Gentleman of right Noble Spirit and Resolution) you will receive without offence; and in that temper as most proper∣lie appertains to the most Heroic natures.
Thy Language makes me wonder at thy Per∣son. What's the matter with thee? quickly.
You may be pleased to call to mind a late affront, which, in your heat of passion, you gave a Gentleman.
What, such a one as thou art, was he?
True noble Sir. Who could no less in Ho∣nor, then direct me, his chosen Friend, unto you, with the length of his Sword, or to take the length of yours. The place, if you please, the Ground whereon you parted; the hour, seven the next more∣ning: Or, if you like not these, in part, or all, to make your own appointments.
The bravest Method in Beggars, that ever was discovered! I would be upon the bones of this Rogue now, but for crossing my other design, which fires me. I must therefore be rid of him on any terms. Let his own Appointments stand. Tell him I'll meet him.
You shall most nobly engage his life to serve you, Sir.
You'll be his Second, will you?
To do you further Service, Sir, I have under∣taken it.
I'll send a Beadle shall undertake you both.
Your Mirth becomes the bravery of your mind and dauntless Spirit. So takes his leave your Servant, Sir.
I think, as my Friend said, the Court goes a begging indeed. But I must not lose my Beggar-wen∣ches.
 Oh here they come. They are delicately skinned and limbed. There, there, I saw above the ham as the wind blew. Now they spy me.
Sir, I beseech you look upon us with the fa∣four of a Gentleman. We are in a present distress, and utterly unacquainted in these parts; and there∣fore forced by the Calamity of our mis-fortune, to implore the Curtsy, or rather Charity, of those to whom we are strangers.
Very fine, this!
Be therefore pleased, right noble Sir, not only valuing us by our outward Habits, which can∣not but appear loathsome or despicable unto you, but as we are forlorn Christians; and, in that estimate∣on, be compassionately moved to cast a handful or two of your Silver, or a few of your Golden Pieces
unto us, to furnish us with Linen, and some decent Habiliments—
They beg as high as the Man-beggar I met withal! sure the Beggars are all mad to day, or be∣witched into a Language they understand not. The spirits of some decayed Gentry talk in 'em sure.
May we expect a gracious Answer from you Sir?
And that as you can wish our Virgin Pray∣ers to be propitious for you.
That you never be denied a Suit by any Mi∣stress.
Nay, that the fairest may be ambitious to place their favours on you.
That your Virtue and Valour may lead you to the most honourable Actions; and that the Love of all exquisite Ladies may arm you.
And that, when you please to take a wife, may Honour, Beauty, and Wealth, contend to en∣dow her most with.
And that with her you have a long and pro∣sperous life.
A fair and fortunate Posterity.
This exceeds all that ever I heard, and strikes me into wonder. Pray tell me how long have you been Beggars; or how chanced you to be so?
By influence of our Stars, Sir.
We were born to no better Fortune.
How came you to talk thus, and so much a∣bove the Beggars Dialect?
Our speech came naturally to us, and we ever loved to learn by wrote as well as we could.
And to be ambitious above the vulgar, to
ask more then common Alms, what ere men please to give us.
Sure some well disposed Gentleman, as my self, got these Wenches. They are too well grown to be mine own, and I cannot be incestuous with 'em.
Pray Sir your noble bounty.
What a tempting lip that little Rogue moves there! and what an enticing eye the tother. I know not which to begin with. What's this a flea upon thy bosom?
Is it not a straw coloured one, Sir?
O what a provoking Skin is there! that very touch inflames me.
Sir, are you moved in charity towards us yet?
Moved? I am moved. No flesh and blood more moved.
Then pray Sir your Benevolence.
Benevolence? which shall I be benovolent to; or which first? I am puzzled in the choice. Would some sworn Brother of mine were here to draw a Cut with me.
Sir, Noble Sir.
First let me tell you, Damsels, I am bound by a strong vow to kiss all of the woman sex I meet this morning.
Beggars and all Sir?
All, all. Let not your coyness cross a Gentle∣mans vow, I beseech you—
You will tell now.
Tell quoth a! I could tell a thousand on those Lips— and as many upon those. What life resto∣ring breaths they have! Milk from the Cow steams not so sweetly. I must lay one of 'em aboard; both if my tackling hold.
Mer. Sir. Sir.
But how to bargain, now, will be the doubt. They that beg so high as by the handfuls, may ex∣pect for price above the rate of good men's wives.
Now, will you, Sir, be pleased?
With all my heart, Sweetheart. And I am glad thou know my mind. Here is twelve-pence a piece for you.
Me. We thank you, Sir.
That's but in earnest. I'll Jest away the rest with ye. Look here—All this. Come, you know my meaning. Dost thou look about thee, Sweet lit∣tle One? I like thy care. There's no body coming. But we'll get behind these Bushes. I know you keep each others Counsels—Must you be drawn to it? Then I'll pull. Come away—
Me. Ah ah—
Let's beat his brains out.
Come leave your squealing.
O you hurt my hand.
Or cut the Lechers throat.
Would you be hanged? Stand back. Let me alone.
You shall not pull us so.
O do not hurt 'em, Master.
Hurt 'em? I meant 'hem but too well. Shall I be so prevented?
They be but young and simple. And if they have offended, let not your Worships own hands drag 'em to the Law, or carry 'em to Punishment. Correct 'em not your self. It is the Beadles Office.
Do you talk Shake-rag: Heart yond's more
of 'em. I shall be Beggar-mawl'd if I stay. Thou say right, honest fellow, there's a Tester for thee.
He is prevented, and ashamed of his purpose.
Nor were we to take notice of his purpose more than to prevent it.
True, politic Springlove, it was better his own fear quit us of him, than our force.
Look you here, Gentlemen, twelvepence a piece
Besides fair offers and large promises. What have you got to day, Gentlemen?
More then (as we are Gentlemen) we would have taken.
Yet we put it up in your Service.
Mer. Ha ha ha. Switches and kicks. Ha ha ha—
Talk not here of your gettings. We must quit this Quarter. The eager Gentleman's repulse may arm and return him with revenge upon us. We must therefore leap Hedge and Ditch now; through the Briers and Mires, till we scope out of this Liberty, to our next Rendezvous; where we shall meet the
Crew, and then, hay toss and laugh all night.
As we did last night.
Hold out, Meriel.
Lead on, brave General.
What shall we do? They are in heart still. Shall we go on?
There's no flinching back, you see.
Besides, if you beg no better then you begin, in this lofty Fashion, you cannot scope the Jail, or the whip, long.
To tell you true, it is not the least of my pur∣pose, to work means for our discovery, to be released out of our Trade.
Stay, here come more Passengers. Single your selves again, and fall to your Calling discreetly.
I'll single no more. If you'll beg in full cry I am for you.
I that will be fine; let's charm all together.
Stay first and list a little.
Be of good cheer, Sweetheart, we have escaped hitherto: And I believe that all the Search is now retired, and we may safely pass forwards.
I should be safe with thee. But that's a most lying Proverb, that says, Where Love is, there's no Lack. I am faint, and cannot travail further without Meat; and if you loved me, you would get me some.
We'll venture at the next Village to call for some. The best is, we want no Money.
We shall be taken then, I fear. I'll rather pine to death.
Be not so fearful. Who can know us in these Clownish Habits?
Our Clothes, indeed, are poor enough to beg with. Would I could beg, so it were of Strangers that could not know me, rather then buy of those that would betray us.
And yonder be some that can teach us.
These are the young couple of Run-away Lovers disguised, that the Country is so laid for. Observe and follow now. Now the Lord to come with ye, good loving Master and Mistress, your blessed Cha∣rity to the poor, lame and sick, weak and comfortless, that will night and day—
Duly and truly pray for you. Duly and truly pray for you.
Pray hold your peace, and let me alone. Good young Master and Mistress, a little Comfort amongst us all, and to bless you where ever you go, and
Duly and truly pray for you. Duly and truly—
Pray do not use me thus. Now sweet young Master and Mistress, to look upon your Poor, that have no relief or succour, no bread to put in our heads.
Would thou put Bread in thy Brains?
No Lands or Livings.
No House nor home; nor covering from the cold; no health, no help but your sweet Charity.
No Bands or Shirts but lousy on our backs.
No smocks or Petticoats to hide our Scratches.
No Shoes to our Legs, or Hose to our Feet.
No Skin to our Flesh, nor Flesh to our Bones shortly.
If we follow the Devil that taught us to beg.
Duly and truly pray for you.
I'll run away from you if you beg a stroke more. Good worshipful Master and Misteres—
Good Friend forbear. Here is no Master or Mistress. We are poor Folks. Thou see no Worcester∣ship upon our backs, I am sure. And for within, we want as much as you, and would as willingly beg, if we knew how as well.
Alack for pity. You may have enough. And what I have is yours, if you'll accept it. It is wholesome Food from a good Gentleman's Gate— Alas good Mistress— Much good do your heart. How savourly she feeds!
What do you mean; to poison your self?
Do you show Love in grudging me?
Nay, if you think it hurts you not, fall too. I'll not beguile you. And here, mine Host, something towards your Reckoning.
This Beggar is an Angel sure!
Nothing by way of bargain, gentle Master. It is against Order, and will never thrive. But pray, Sir, your reward in Charity.
Here then in Charity. This fellow would never make a Clerk.
What! All this, Master?
What is it? Let me see it.
It is a whole silver three-pence, Mistress.
For shame, ungrateful Miser. Here Friend, a golden Crown for thee.
Bountiful Goodness! Gold? If I thought a dear year were coming, I would take a Farm now.
I have robed thy Partners of their shares too. There's a Crown more for them.
Duly and truly pray for you.
What have you done? less would have served. And your Bounty will betray us.
Fie on your wretched policy.
No, no good Master. I knew you all this while, and my sweet Mistress too. And now I'll tell you. The Search is every way; the Country all laid for you. It is well you staid here. Your Habits, were they but a little nearer our Fashion, would se∣cure you with us. But are you married, Master and Mistress? Are you joined in Matrimony? In heart I know you are. And I will (if it please you) for your great bounty, bring you to a Curate, that
lacks no License, nor has any Living to lose, that shall put you together.
Thou art a heavenly Beggar!
But he is so scrupulous, and severely precise, that unless you, Mistress, will affirm that you are with Child by the Gentleman; or that you have, at least, cleft or slept together (as he calls it) he will not marry you. But if you have lain together, then it is a case of necessity, and he holds himself bound to do it.
You may say you have.
I would not have it so, nor make that lye against my self for all the World.
That I like well, and her exceedingly.
I'll do my best for you however.
I'll do for thee, that—thou shalt never beg more.
That cannot be purchased scarce for the price of your Mistress. Will you walk, Master?— We use no Complements.
By enforced Matches Wards are not set free
So oft, as sold into Captivity:
Which made me, fearless, fly from one I hate,
Into the hazard of a harder Fate.
SHe's gone. Amie is gone. Ay me she's gone, And has me left of joy bereft, to make my moan. O me, Amie.
What the Devil ails the Fellow trow? why! why Master Talboy; my Cozen Talboy that should have been, art not ashamed to cry at this growth? and for a thing that's better lost then found; a Wench?
Cry! who cries? do I cry; or look with a crying Countenance? I scorn it; and scorn to think on her, but in just anger.
So, this is brave now, if it would hold.
Nay it shall hold. And so let her go, for a scurvy what d'e call it; I know not what bad enough to call her.— But something of mine goes with her I am sure. She has cost me in Gloves, Ribands, Scarfs, Rings, and such like things, more than I am able to speak of at this time—Oh.
Because thou can not speak for crying. Fie Master Talboy, again?
I scorn it again, and any man that says I cry, or will cry again And let her go again; and what she has of mine let her keep, and hang her self, and the Rogue that's with her. I have enough; and am Heir of a well-known Estate, and that she knows—And therefore that she should slight me, and run away with a wages-fellow, that is but a petty Clerk and a Serving-man. There's the vexation of it—Oh there's the grief, and the vexation of it—Oh—
Now he will cry his eyes out! You Sir. This life have I had with you all our long journey; which now is at an end here. This is Master Oldrents house, where perhaps we shall find old Hearty, the Uncle of that Rogue Martin, that is run away with your Sweetheart.
I it is too true, too true, too true. You need not put me in mind on it—Oh—O—
Hold your peace and mind me. Leave your bawling, for fear I give you correction. This is the House I say, where it is most likely we shall hear of your Mistress and her companion. Make up your face quickly. Here comes one of the Servants, I sup¦pose.
Shame not your self for ever, and me for company. Come, be confident.
As confident as your self or any man—But my poor heart feels what lies here. Here. I here it is, O—
Good morrow, Friend. This is Squire Old∣rents House, I take it.
Pray take it not, Sir, before it be to be let. It has been my Masters, and his Ancestors in that Name, above these three hundred years, as our House Chronicle doth notify; and not yet to be let. But as a Friend, or stranger, in Guest-wise, you are welcome to it; as all other Gentlemen are, far and near, to my good Master, as you will find anon when you see him.
Thou speak wittily and honestly. But I pre∣thee, good Friend, let our Nags be set up: they are tied up at the post. You belong to the Stable, do you not?
Not so much, as the Stable belongs to me, Sir. I pass through many Offices of the House, Sir. I am the running Bailey of it.
We have rid hard, hoping to find the Squire at home at this early time in the morning.
You are deceived in that, Sir. He has been out these four hours. He is no Snail, Sir. You do not know him, I perceive, since he has been new moulded. But I'll tell you, because you are Gentle∣men.
Our Horses, good Friend.
My Master is an ancient Gentleman, and a great House-keeper; and pried for by all the Poor in the Country. He keeps a Guest-house for all Beg∣gorse, far and near, costs him a hundred a year, at least; and is as well beloved among the Rich. But, of late, he fell into a great Melancholy, upon what, I know not: for he had then more cause to be merry than he has now. Take that by the way.
But good Fiend, our Horses.
For he had two Daughters, that knew well to order a House, and give entertainment to Gentle∣men. They were his House-Doves. But now they are flown; and no man knows how, why, or whi∣there.
My Dove is flown too. Oh—
Was she your Daughter, Sir? She was a young one then, by the Beard you wear.
What she was, she was, do ye see. I scorn to think on her—But I do—Oh.
Pray hold your peace, or feign some mirth, if you can.
Let her go, let her go. I care not if I
have her, I have her or no. Ha ha ha— Oh my heart will break— Oh—
Pray think of our horses, Sir.
This is right my Master. When he had his Daughters he was sad; and now they are gone, he is the merriest man alive. Up at five a Clock in the morning, and out till Dinner-time. Out again at af∣ternoon, and so till Supper-time. Skis out this a∣way, and skis out that away. (He's no Snail I as∣sure you.) And Tantivy all the Country over, where Hunting, Hawking, or any Sport is to be made, or good Fellowship to be had; and so merry upon all occasions, that you would even bless your self, if it were possible.
Our Horses, I prithee.
And we, his Servants, live as merrily under him; and do all thrive. I my self was but a silly Lad when I came first, a poor turn-spit Boy. Gentlemen kept no whirling Jacks then, to cozen poor People of Meat. And I have now, without boast, 40. l. in my Purse, and am the youngest of half a score in the House, none younger then my self but one; and he is the Steward over all; his name is Master Spring∣love (bless him where ere he is) he has a world of means: And we, the Underlings, get well the bet∣la by him; besides the Rewards many Gentlemen give us, that fare well, and lodge here sometimes.
O! we shall not forget you, Friend, if you re∣member our Horses, before they take harm.
No hurt, I warrant you: there's a Lad walk∣ing them.
Is not your Master coming, think you?
He will not be long a coming. He's no Snail, as I told you.
You told me so, indeed.
But of all the Gentlemen, that toss up the Ball, yea and the Sack too, commend me to old Ma∣ster Hearty; a decayed Gentleman; lives most upon his own Mirth, and my Masters Means, and much good do him with it: He is the finest Companion of all: He does so hold my Master up with Stories, and Songs, and Catches, and t'other Cup of Sack, and such Tricks and Jiggs, you would admire— He is with him now.
That Hearty is Martins Uncle. I am glad he is here. Bear up Talboy. Now, Friend, pray let me ask you a question.— Prithee stay.
Nay, marry I dare not. Your Yawdes may take cold, and never be good after it.—
I thought I should never have been rid of him. But no sooner desired to stay, but he is gone. A pret∣tie humour!
Gentlemen, my Master will be here even now, doubt not: for he is no Snail, as I told you.
No Snayle's a great word with him. Prithee
Talboy bear up.
 Here comes an∣other gray Fellow.
Do you stand in the Porch, Gentlemen? the House is open to you. Pray enter the Hall. I am the Usher of it.
In good time, Sir. We shall be bold here, then, to attend your Masters coming.
And he's upon coming; and when he comes he comes apace. He is no Snail, I assure you.
I was told so before, Sir. No Snail! sure it is
the word of the House, and as ancient as the Family.
This Gentleman looks sadly, me thinks.
Who I? not I. Pray pardon my looks for that. But my heart feels what's what. Ay me—
Pray walk to the Buttry, Gentlemen. My Office leads you thither.
Thanks, good Master Usher.
I have been Usher these twenty years, Sir. And have got well by my place, for using Strangers respectfully.
He has given the Hint too.
Something has come in by the by, besides standing Wages, which is ever duly paid (thank a good Master, and an honest Steward) Heaven bless 'hem. We all thrive under 'em.
 O here comes the Butler.
You are welcome, Gentlemen. Please ye draw nearer my Office, and take a morning Drink in a Cup of Sack, if it please you.
In what please you, Sir. We cannot deny the courtesy of the House, in the Masters absence.
He'll come apace when he comes. He's no
Snail, Sir.
Still it is the House-word. And all the Ser∣vents wear Livery-Beards.
Or perhaps you had rather drink White wine and Sugar. Please your selves, Gentlemen; here you may taste all Liquors. No Gentleman's House in all this County, or the next, so well stored (—make us thankful for it.) And my Master, for his Hospi∣tality to Gentlemen, his Charity to the Poor, and his bounty to his Servants, has not his Peer in the
Kingdom (—make us thankful for it.) And it is as fortunate a House for Servants, as ever was built up∣on Faery-Ground. I my self, that have served here, Man, and Boy, these four and forty years, have got∣ten together (besides something, more then I will speak of, distributed among my poor Kindred) by my Wages, my Veils at Christmas, and otherwise, to∣gether with my Rewards of kind Gentlemen, that have found courteous entertainment here.—
There he is too.
Have, I say, gotten together (though in a dan∣gerous time I speak it) a brace of hundred pounds— Make me thankful for it. And for losses, I have had none. I have been Butler these two and thirty years, and never lost the value of a Silver Spoon, nor ever broke a Glass—Make me thankful for it. White Wine and Sugar, say you Sir?
Please your self, Sir.
This Gentleman speaks not. Or had you ra∣there take a Drink of brown Ale with a Toast, or March Beer with Sugar and Nutmeg? or had you rather drink without Sugar?
Good Sir, a Cup of your Houshold-Beer.
I fear he will draw down to that at last.
Here, Gentlemen, is a Cup of my Masters small Beer: But it is good old Canary, I assure you. And here's to your welcome.
And welcome the Cooke says, Gentlemen. Brother Butler, lay a Napkin, I'll fetch a Cut of the Sirloin to strengthen your patience till my Master
comes, who will not now be long, for he's no Snail, Gentlemen.
I have often heard so. And here's to you, Ma∣ster Cook—Prithee speak, Master Talboy, or force one Laugh more, if thou can.
Sir, the Cook drinks to you.
Ha ha ha—
Well said.
He is in the same Livory-Beard too.
But he is the oldest Cook, and of the ancient∣est House, and the best for House-keeping, in this County, or the next. And though the Master of it write but Squire, I know no Lord like him.
And now he's come. Here comes the Word before him. The Parson has ever the best sto∣mack. I'll Dish away presently.
Is our Master come, Sir Domino?
Est ad Manum. Non est ille testudo.
He has the Word too in Latin. Now bear up
Talboy.
Give me a Preparative of Sack. It is a gentle Preparative before Meat. And so a gentle touch of it to you Gentlemen.
It is a gentle Offer, Sir; and as gently to be taken.
About with it, my Lads. And this is as it should be.— Not till my turn, Sir, I. Though, I confess, I have had but three Morning-draughts to day.
Yet it appears you were abroad betimes, Sir.
I am no Snail, Sir.
So your men told us, Sir.
But where be my Catchers? Come, a Round. And so let us drink.
A Round, a Round, a Round, Boys, a Round.
Let Mirth fly aloft, and Sorrow be drowned.
Old Sack, and old Songs, and a Merry old Crew,
Can charm away Cares when the Ground looks blew.
Well said old Hearty. And, Gentlemen, well∣come.
Ah—
Oh mine ears! What was that, a sigh? And in my House? Look: has it not split my Walls? If not, make vent for it: Let it out: I shall be stifled else.
He hopes your pardon, Sir: his Cause consi∣der'd.
Cause? Can there be cause for sighing.
He▪has lost his Mistress, Sir.
Ha ha ha. Is that a Cause? Do you hear me complain the loss of my two Daughters?
They are not lost, I hope Sir.
No more can be his Mistress. No Woman can be lost. They may be mis-laid a little: but found again, I warrant you.
Ah—
Odds my life! He sighs again: And means to blow me out of my House. To Horse again. Here's no dwelling for me. Or stay: I'll cure him, if I can. Give him more Sack, to drown his Suspirations.
Sir, I am chiefly to inform you of the Dis∣aster.
May it concern me?
Your Nephew Martin has stolen my Fathers Ward, that Gentleman's Bride that should have been.
Indeed, Sir.
It is most true—
Another Glass of Sack. This Gentleman brings good news.
Sir, if you can prevent his danger—
Hang all Preventions. Let 'em have their Destiny.
Sir, I should have had her, it is true— But she is gone, do ye see? And let her go.
Well said. He mends now.
I am glad I am rid of her (do ye see) before I had more to do with her—
He mends apace.
For should I have married her before she had run away, do ye see: And that she had run away (d'e see) after she had bin married to me (do ye see.) Then I had been a married Man without a Wife (do ye see.) Where now she being run away before I am marri∣ed (do ye see) I am no more married to her, do ye see, then she to me, do ye see. And so long as I am none of hers (do ye see) nor she none of mine (do ye see) I ought to care as little for her, now she is run away (do ye see) as if she had stayed with me, do ye see.
Why this is excellent! Come hither Hearty.
I perceive it now; and the reason of it; And
how, by Consequence (do ye see) I ought not to look any further after her.
 But that she should respect a poor base fellow, a Clerk at the most, and a Serving-man at best, before me, that am a rich man, at the worst; and a Gentleman, at least, makes me— I know not what to say—
Worse than ever it was! Now he cries out-right.
I know not what to say—What to say— Oh—
Then I do, Sir. The poor base Fellow, that you speak of, is my Nephew: As good a Gentleman as your self. I understand the business by your Friend here.
I cry you mercy, Sir.
You shall cry no Mercy, nor any thing else here, Sir; nor for any thing, here, Sir. This is no place to cry in: Nor for any business. You, Sir, that come on business—
It shall be none, Sir.
My House is for no business; but the Belly-businesse. You find not me so uncivil, Sir, as to ask you from whence you came; who you are; or what's your business. I ask you no question. And can you be so discourteous, as to tell me, or my Friend, any thing like business. If you come to be merry with Me, you are welcome. If you have any business, forget it: You forget where you are else. And so to Dinner.
Sir, I pray let me only prevail with you but to read this.
Spoil my Stomach now, and I'll not eat this fortnight.
While he reads, let me tell you, Sir. That my Nephew Martin has stolen that Gentleman's Mi∣stress, it seems, is true. But I protest, as I am a Gen∣tleman, I know nothing of the matter; nor where he or she is. But, as I am the foresaid Gentleman, I am glad on it with all my heart. Ha, my Boy Mat. Thou shall restore our House.
Let him not hear, to grieve him, Sir.
Grieve him? What should he do with her; teach their Children to cry?
But I do hear you though; and I scorn to cry, as much as you, do ye see, or your Nephew either, do ye see.
Now thou art a brave fellow. So, so, hold up thy head, and thou shalt have a Wife, and a fine Thing.
Hang a Wife; and Pox of your fine Thing (do ye see) I scorn your Fopperies, do ye see.
And I do hear thee, my Boy; and rejoice in thy conversion. If thou can but hold now.
Yes, I can hold, Sir. And I hold well with your Sack. I could live and die with it, as I am true
Talboy.
Now thou art a tall Fellow; and shalt want no Sack.
And, Sir, I do honour you (do ye see) and should wish my self one of your Household Servants (do ye see) if I had but a gray Beard, do ye see? Hay, as old Master Clack says.
Well, I have read the business here.
Call it not business, I beseech you, Sir. We desie all business.
I marry do we, Sir. Do ye see, Sir? And a
Hay, as old Master Clack says.
Grammercy Sack. Well, I have read the Matter here written by Master Clack. And do but bear up in thy humour, I will wait upon thee home.
 Hark! they knock to the Dresser. I have heard much of this old od-ceited Justice Clack: And now I long to see him. It is but crossing the Country two days and a nights Journey. We'll but dine and away presently. Bear up, I say, Master Talboy.
I will bear up, I warrant you, do ye see, Sir— But here's a grudging still—
HEre's a Wedding with a witness, and a Holy-day with a hoigh. Let us out of the noise, as we love our ears.
Yes: and here we may pursue our own Dis∣course, and hear one another.
Concerning, Springlove and your self, Mistress
Amie.
Well, Ladies, my confidence in you, that you are the same that you have protested your selves to be, hath so far won upon me, that I con∣fesse my self well-affected both to the Mind and Person of that Springlove. And, if he be (as fairly you pretend) a Gentleman, I shall easily dispense with
Fortune.
He is, upon our Honours.
How well that high Engagement suits your Habits.
Our Minds and Blood are still the same.
I have past no affiance to the other,
That stole me from my Guardian, and the Match
He would have forced me to: From which I would
Have fled with any, or without a Guide.
Besides, his mind, more clownish than his Habit,
Depraved by Covetousness and Cowardice,
Forced me into a way of misery,
To take relief from Beggars.
From poor Us.
And then, to offer to marry me under a Hedge, as the old Couple were to day, without Book or Ring, by the Chaplain of the Beggars Regi∣meant, your Patrico, only to save Charges.
I have not seen the Wretch these three hours, whither is he gone?
He told me, to fetch Horse and sit Raiment for us; and so to post me hence: But I think it was to leave me on your hands.
He has taken some great distaste sure: For he is damnable jealous.
I, did thou mark what a wilde look he cast, when Springlove tumbled her, and kissed her on the Straw this morning, while the Music plaid to the old Wedding-Folks?
Yes, and then Springlove, to make him mad∣der, told him, that he would be his Proxy, and mar∣rye her for him, and lie with her the first night, with a naked Cudgel betwixt 'em, and make him a King of Beggars.
I saw how it angered him. And I imagined then, and before, that there was more in Springlove, then downright Beggar. But though he be never so good a Gentleman, he shall observe sit time and distance till we are married.
Matrimony forbid else. (She's taken.) But while we talk of a Match towards, we are mist with∣in in the Bride-Barn among the Revel rout.
We have had all the sport they could make us, in the past passages.
How cautious the old contracted Couple were for Portion and joincture!
What Feoffees, she being an Heir of four∣score, (and seven years stone-blinde) had, in trust for her Estate.
And how carefully he secured all to himself, in case he outlived her, being but seven years older then she. And what pains the Lawyer of the Rout here, took about it.
And then, how solemnly they were joined, and admonished, by our Parson Vnder-hedge, to live together in the fear of the Lash, and give good ex∣ample to the younger Reprobates, to beg within Compass, to escape the jaws of the Justice, the Clutch of the Constable, the Hooks of the Head∣borough, and the biting blows of the Beadle. And, in so doing, they should defy the Devil, and all his Works, and after their painful Pilgrimage in this life, they should die in the Ditch of Delight.
O but Poet Scribble's Epithalamium.
To the blind Virgin of fourscore,
And the lame Bachelor, of more,
How Cupped gave her Fies to see,
And Vulcan lent him Legs:
How Venus cause their Sport to be
Prepared with buttered Eggs.
Yet when she shall be seven years wed,
She shall be bold to say,
She has as much her Maiden-head,
As on her Wedding day.
So may some Wives that were married at six∣teen, to Lads of one and twenty.
But at the Wedding-Feast, when the Bride bridled it, and her Groom saddled it. There was the sport, in her Mumping, and his Champing; the Crew scrambling; our selves trembling; then the confuse∣on of Noises, in talking, laughing, scolding, sing∣ing, howling; with their Actions, of snatching, scratching, towsing and lousing themselves, and one another—
 But who comes here?
O, Ladies, you have lost as much Mirth, as would have filled up a week of Holy-daies.
I am come about again for the Beggars life now.
You are. I am glad on it.
There is no life but it.
With them there is no Grievance or Per∣plexity;
No fear of war, or State Disturbances.
No Alteration in a Common-wealth,
Or Innovation, shakes a Thought of theirs.
Of ours you should say.
Of ours, he means.
We have no fear of lessening our Estates;
Nor any grudge with us (without Taxation)
To lend or give, upon command, the whole
Strength of our Wealth for public Benefit:
While some, that are held rich in their Abundance,
(Which is their Misery, indeed) will see
Rather a general ruin upon all,
Then give a Scruple to prevent the Fall.
It is only we that live.
I'm glad you are so taken with your Calling.
We are no less, I assure you. We find the Sweetness of it now.
The Mirth, the Pleasure, the Delights. No Ladies live such Lives.
Some few, upon necessity, perhaps. But that's not worth g'rammercy.
They will never be weary.
Whether we seem to like, or dislike, ell's one to them.
We must do something to be taken by, and discovered, we shall never be our selves, and get home again else.
I am yours for ever. Well, Ladies, you have mist rare Sport; but now the Bride has mist you with her half-half eye; and the Bridegroom, with the help of his Crutches, is drawing her forth for a Dance, here, in the opener air. The House is now too hot for 'em. O, here come the chief Revellers. The Soldier, the Courtier, the Lawyer, and the Poet,
who is Master of their Revels, before the old Couple in State. Attend, and hear him speak, as their Endue∣ctor.
HEre, on this Green, like King and Queen,
(For a short truce) we do produce
Our old new-married Pair.
Of Dish and Wallet, and of Straw-pallet,
With Rags to show, from top to toe,
She is the ancient Heir.
He is the Lord of Bottle-gourd,
Of Sachell great, for Bread and Meat,
And, for small Pence, a Purse.
To all that give, Long may you live
He loudly cries: But who denies
Is sure to have his Curse.
Well said Field-Poet. Phoebus, we see, inspires As well the Beggar, as the Poet Laureate.
And shines as warm under a Hedge bottom, as on the tops of Palaces.
I have not done yet. Now this is to incite you to dance.
PRepare your selves, like Faëry Elves,
Now in a Dance to show,
That you approve, the God of Love
Has many Shafts to's Bow:
With Golden head, and some of Lead,
But that which made these feel,
By subtle craft, was sure a Shaft
That headed was with Steel.
For they were old; no Earth more cold;
Their Hearts were Flints entire;
Whence the Steels stroke did sparks provoke,
That set their Bloods on fire.
Now strike up Piper; and each Lover here
Be blithe, and take his Mistress by the Goll.
That's no Rime, Poet.
There's as good Poetry in blank Verse, as Meetre.
Come, hay! the Dance, the Dance. Nay we'll have the old Couple in, as blind and lame as they are.
What will you so?
Well hobled Bridegroom!
Well groped Bride!
Hay lusty. Hay Holy-day.
Set 'hem down; set 'em down: They have done well.
A ha! I am lustier than I was 30. years ago.
And I, than I was threescore past. A hem, a hemh.
What a night here's towards!
Sure they will kill one another.
Each with a fear the tother will live longest.
Poet, thou hast spoken learnedly, and acted bravely. Thou art both Poet and Actor.
So has been many famous men. And if here were no worse, we might have a Masque, or a Comedy presented to night, in honour of the old Couple.
Let us each man try his ability Upon some Subject now Extempore.
Agreed. Give us a Theme; and try our Act∣on.
I have already thought upon it. I want but Actors.
What Persons want you? what would you present?
I would present a Common wealth; Utopia, With all her Branches and Consistencies.
I'll be Utopia; who must be my Branches?
The Country, the City, the Court, and the Camp. Epitomised and personated by a Gentleman, a Mer∣chant, a Courtier, and a Soldier.
I'll be your Soldier. Am not I one? ha!
And am not I a fashionable Courtier?
But who the Citizen or Merchant?
I.
And I your Country Gentleman.
Or I.
Yet to our Moral I must add two Persons,
Divinity and Law.
Why la you now. And am not I a Lawyer?
But whore's Divinity?
Mary that I know not. One of us might do that, if either knew how to handle it.
Whore's the old Patrico, our Priest, my Ghostly Father? He'll do it rarely.
He was telling Fortunes even now to Coun∣try Wenches. I'll fetch him—
That Patrico I wonder at: He has told me strange things in clouds.
And me somewhat that I may tell you here∣after.
That you shall be my Bride?
I will not tell you now.
Well: but what must our Speeches tend to? what must we do one with another?
I would have the Country, the City, and the
Court, be at great variance for Superiority. Then would I have Divinity and Law stretch their wide throats to appease and reconcile them: Then would I have the Soldier cudgel them all together, and overtop them all. Stay, yet I want another person.
What must he be?
A Beggar.
Here's enough of us, I think. What must the Beggar do?
He must, at last, overcome the Soldier; and bring them all to Beggars-Hall. And this, well acted, will be for the honour of our Calling.
A Scribble! A Scribble!
Come, whore's this Patrico, that we may begin?
Alack and welladay, this is no time to play. Our Quarter is beset. We are all in the Net. Leave off your merry Glee.
You begin scurvily.
Why what's the Matter?
Binge awast, binge awast. The Quire Cove and the Harmanbeck.
We are beset indeed. What shall we do?
I hope we shall be taken.
If the good hour be come, welcome by the grace of good Fortune.
Beset the Quarter round. Be sure that none escape.
Lord to come with you, blessed Master, to a many distressed—
Hill. Duly and truly pray for you.
Mer. Good your good Worship, duly and truly, &amp;c.
A many counterfeit Rogues! So frolic and so lamentable all in a breath? You were acting a Play but now: We'll act with you. Incorrigible Va∣gabonds.
Good Master, it is a Holy-day with us. An
Heir was married here to day.
Married! Not so I hope. Where is she? It is for an Heir we seek.
Here She is Master— Hide your selves in the Straw—the Straw. Quickly into the Straw—
What tell thou me of this? An old blind
Beggar-woman. We must find a young Gentlewoman-Heire among you. Whore's all the rest of the Crew?
Slipped into the Barn and the Bushes by: but none can scope.
Look you to that, and to these here.
Into the Straw, I say.
No, good Springlove. The Ladies and we are agreed now to draw Stakes, and play this lousy Game no further.
We will be taken, and disclose our selves. You see we shall be forced to it else. The cowardly Clerk has don't to save himself.
Do you fear no shame, Ladies?
Dost think it a shame to leave Begging?
Or that our Father will turn us out to it again?
Nay, since you are so resolute, Know, that I
my self begin to find this is no course for Gentle∣men. This Lady shall take me off it.
Make but your Protestations good, and take me yours. And for the Gentleman that surprises us, though he has all my Uncles trust, he shall do any thing for me to our advantage.
If, Springlove, thou coldest post now to thy Tyring-house, and fetch all our Clothes, we might get off most neatly.
A Horse and six hours Travel would do that.
You shall be furnished, doubt not.
She's escaped, or is invisible. You Sir, I take to be the chief Rogue of this Regiment. Let him be whipped till he brings forth the Heir.
That is but till he stinks, Sir. Come, Sir, strip, strip.
Unhand him, Sir. What Heir do you seek, Master Sentwell?
Precious, how did my hast oversee her? O Mistress Amie! Could I, or your Uncle, Justice
Clack, a wiser man than I, ever have thought to have found you in such company?
Of me, Sir, and my company, I have a story to delight you: which on our March towards your House, I will relate to you.
And thither will I lead you as my Guest. But to the Law surrender all the rest. I'll make your peace.
We must fare all alike.
I have forgiven you. Provided that my Niece be safely taken; and so to be brought home. Safely, I say, that is to say, unstained, unblemished, undishonour'd; that is to say, with no more faults, criminal, or accusative, than those she carried with her.
Sir, I believe—
Nay, if we both speak together, how shall we hear one another? you believe her Virtue is Are∣more of proof, without your Council or your Guard; and therefore you left her in the hands of Rogues and Vagabonds, to make your own Peace with me. You have it. Provided, I say (as I said before) that she be safe, that is to say, uncorrupted, undefiled; that is to say—as I said before.
Mine intent, Sir, and my only way—
Nay, if we both speak together, how shall we hear one another? as I said before. Your intent, and your only way, you would have said, was to run away with her; and that by her only Instigation, to avoid the tie of Marriage with Master Talboy; that is to say, to shun the Match, that I had made for her; that is to say, rather to disobey me, than to displease her self. Wherein (although she did not altogether transgress the Law) she did both offend and preju∣dice me, an Instrument; nay, I may say, a Pillar thereof. And you, in assisting her, furthering, and conveying her away, did not only infringe the
Law, in an unlawful Departure from your Master, but in a higher point; that is to say, Top and top-Gal∣lows high. I would ha found a Jury should have found it so.
But Sir, an't please you.
Must we then both speak together? Have I not born with thee, to speak all thou please in thy defence? Have I not broke mine own Rule, which is, to punish before I examine; and so to have the Law the surer of my side? And dost thou still persist? Hold your own peace; or, as I am a Justice of the Kings, I will unsay what I said before, and set a Cur∣rat Lex at you, Sirrah, that shall course you up the heavy Hill. Oh, is your Tongue fallen into your Leg now? Do not you know I have acquitted you? Pro∣vided— As I said before. Go your way in, and see that the Gentlemen, who, I think, were got in Sack, christened in Sack, nursed with Sack, and fed up to gray hairs with only Sack; see, I say, that they want no Sack. My Son Oliver (I thank him) has brought me a pair of such Guests.
O Master Sentwell! Good News?
Of beggarly news, the best you have heard.
That is to say, you have found my Niece a∣mong the Beggars. That is to say—
True, Sir Oliver, I found her—
Now if we both speak together, who shall hear one another?
I thought your desire was to be informed.
I can inform my self, Sir, by your looks. I have taken a hundred Examinations in my days of Felons, and other Offenders, out of their very Countenances; and wrote 'em down verbatim, to
what they would have said. I am sure it has served to hang some of 'em, and whip the rest.
Justice Clack still! He must talk all. His Clack must only go.
But to the point. You have found my Niece. You have left her at your own House; not only to shift her out of her Disguise, but out of her shame, to come nearer me, until I send her pardon.
Most true, Sir. But the Company she was in—
Again! Do not I know the Company? Beg∣gorse, Rogues, Vagabonds, and Hedge-birds.
But do you know whom, or how many we have taken? and how the rest escaped?
A needless knowledge. Why should we take more than her self? Or how could you take those that could escape?
Sir, the old Gentlemen within, sent me to wait upon you. Without you (they say) they need not my Service.
Tell 'em then, I'll wait on 'em presently.
But Sir, we have taken with her such Beg∣gorse, such Rogues, such Vagabonds, and such Hedge∣birds (since you call 'em so) as you never knew, or heard of, though now the Countries swarm with 'em under every Hedge, as if an innumerable Army of 'em were lately disbanded without Pay. Hedge∣birds said you? Hedge Lady-birds, Hedge Cavaliers, Hedge Soldier, Hedge Lawyer, Hedge Fiddlers, Hedge Poet, Hedge Players, and a Hedge Priest among 'em. Such we have taken for the Principals. But to see how the
Multitude escaped us; was more sport than pity. How, upon a Watch-word given, they in the instant vanished by more several ways than there were legs among 'em; how the Creeples leaped over Pales and Hedges; how the Blind found their way tho∣row Lakes and Ditches; how a Doxy flew with two Children at her back, and two more, perhaps, in her belly—
A Hedge Priest have you taken, say you?
Yes, Sir, an old Patrico, an ancient Prophet, to tell Fortunes, and cozen our poor Country Peo∣ple of their single Money.
Sir, Master Oldrents, in that he enjoys not your company, begins to doubt of his welcome.
Who led him into that doubt? I, or you that brought him hither?
Sir, his own desire, and love to you, brought him hither. I but showed him the way.
You reason fairly. Tell him I come.
Pray, Sir, be pleased to do so: for he says—
Nay, if we both talk together—
Who shall hear one another.
But are there Players among the apprehended?
Yes, Sir. And they were contriving to act a Play among themselves, just as we surprised 'em, and spoiled their Sport.
Players! I'll pay them above all the rest.
You shall do well in that; to put 'hem in stock to set up again.
Yes, I'll put 'em in Stocks, and set 'em up to the Whipping-post. They can act Justices, can they? I'll act a Justice among 'em; that is to say, I will
do justice upon them; that is to say—
Pray Sir, be not severe, they act Kings and
Emperors, as well as Justices. And Justice is blind they say: you may therefore be pleased to wink a little. I find that you have merry old Gentlemen in your House, that are come far to visit you. I'll undertake that these Players, with the help of their
Poet; in a device which they have already studied, and a pack of Clothes which I shall supply 'em with, shall give your Guests much content, and move compassion in you towards the poor Strowles.
But you know my way of Justice (and that's a sure way) is to punish 'em first, and be compassion∣ate afterwards, as I find 'em upon their Examine∣tion.
But for your Guests sakes, who (I know) do favour and affect the Quality of Actors very much, permit 'em, Sir. It will enlarge your Entertainment exceedingly.
And perhaps save me the expense of a Ren∣let of Sack the while. Well, Sir, for that Respect, and upon your undertaking that they shall please, I will prorogue my Justice on the Rogues. And so to my merry Gentlemen, whom I will prepare to see their Interlude against after Supper. But pray, Master
Sentwell, as you have found my Niece, look to her, and see her decently brought home.
In her own best Apparel. But you must pro∣rogue your displeasure to her too.
I will do so, until my scarce welcome Guests be gone.
Sir, my Master sends you word, and plainly,
that without your Company, your Entertainment stinks. He has commanded me saddle his Nags, and away to night. If you come not at once, twice, thrice, he's gone presently, before Supper; He'll find an Host at an Inn worth a hundred of you.
Good friend, I will now satisfy your Master, without telling him he has a saucy Knave to his Man.
Thank your Worship.
Do you hear, Friend, you serve Master Old∣rents.
I could have told you that. And the best House-keeper my Master is of any Gentleman in the
County he dwells in; and the best Master to a man, as I, the worst of twenty, can say for him, and would be ashamed to say less.
Your name is Randall.
Forgi' me! Are you so wise? you are too young to be my Godsire. And I hope not old enough to be a Witch. How know you, that I am Randall? were you ever at my Masters House in Nottingham∣shire, or at Dunghilford, where I was born?
No. But I have Notes to know you by.
I was never twelve mile from thence in my life, before this Journey. God send me within ken of our own Kitchen smoke again.
Your Masters Stewards name is Springlove.
Master Springlove, an't please you. There is not an honester Gentleman between this and the head of him. And my heart's with him, where ever he is. Know you him too?
Yes, and your Masters Daughters too.
Whew.
And that they are all from home, your Ma∣ster knows not where.
Whew, whew. Know you that too?
Yes, and the two young Gentlemen that are with 'em, Master Vincent, and Master Hilliard.
Whew, whew again. You know 'em all, I think. But know you where they all are?
Even here by, at my own House.
Whew—
And they knowing that your Master is here, and Master Hearty too—
Whew, whew.
And your self too. They directed me to find you, Randall, and bring you to 'em.
Whew, whew, whew, whew.— Why do we not go then?
But secretly. Not a word to any body.
Mum— Will you go then?
O, Master Oldrent's man. Pray let me in∣treat you into the Buttery.
Will you go, Master Gentleman?
Indeed it is my Masters desire, and he com∣manded me.
Now, when it's Supper-time did he? to fill my belly with thin drink to save his Meat? It's the manner in Churls Houses. Will you go, Master
Gentleman?
In truth my Master is so merry with yours within—
Shite of your Master. My Master's Steward's a better Man. I'll to him, at this Gentleman's House, and all the rest. Whew, whew.
Randall, you forget.
Mum again then. Why would you not go then?
The man's as mad as his Master. The stran∣gest strangers that ever came to our House.
Well, Martin, for confessing thy fault, and the means thou made whereby she is taken, I am friends with thee. But I shall never look upon her, or thee—but with grief of mind, however I bear it outwardly. Oh—
You bear it very manfully, me thinks.
I, you think so, and I know so— But what I feel, I feel. Would one of us two had never both seen one another.— Oh—
You speak very good sense, Sir. But do's my Master continue his merry humour with the old Gentlemen within.
Yes. Justice Clack's Clack go's as merrily as any.
Well said, Sir. Now you speak merrily too. But I could say somewhat that would still him. And for your comfort, I'll tell you. Mistress Amie is fallen in love with one of the Beggars.
Then have I nothing else to do, but to laugh at thee as long as I live. Ha ha ha— To let a Beggar cozen thee of her. Ha ha ha. A Beggar! I shall die merrily yet. Ha ha ha.
A hay Boys, a hay. This is right; that is to say, as I would have it; that is to say—
A Beggar. Ha ha ha—
Ha ha ha—
A hay Boys, a hay. They are as merry with∣out, as we were within. A hay, Master Oldrents, and Master Hearty! The virtue of your Company turns all to Mirth and Melody, with a hay trololly lolly lolly. Is it not so, Master Hearty?
Why thus it should be: How was I deceived! Now I see you are a good Fellow.
He was never so before. If it be a Lightning before Death, the best is, I am his Heir.
Ha ha ha—
Again, Boys, again; that is to say, a hay Boys, ah hay—
What is the Motive of your Mirth, Nephew
Martin? Let us laugh with you.
Was that spoke like my Friend, Hearty? Lack we Motives to laugh? Are not all things, any thing, every thing to be laughed at? And if nothing were to be seen, felt, heard, or understood, we would laugh at It too.
You take the loss of your Mistress merrily, Master Talboy.
More merrily than you will take the finding of her. Ha ha ha— A Beggar! Ha ha ha—
Can I be sad to find her, think you?
He thinks you will be displeased with her, and chide her.
You are deceived, Master Talboy; you are wide, Master Talboy; above half your length, Ma∣ster Talboy. Law and Justice shall sleep, and Mirth and good Fellowship ride a Circuit here to night. A
hay, Master Oldrents, a hay Master Hearty, and a hay Son Oliver, and a hay Nephew Talboy, that should have been, and a hay, my Clerk Martin, and a hay for
the Players. When come they? Son Oliver, see for Master Sentwell, that is no readier with his new Com∣pany.
Players! Let us go see too. I never saw any
Players.
This is the first fit that ever he had of this Di∣seas. And if it be his last, I say, as I said before. I am his Heir.
But is there a Play to be expected, and acted by Beggars?
That is to say, by Vagabonds; that is to say, by strolling Players. They are upon their Purgation. If they can present any thing to please you, they may escape the Law; that is (a hay) If not, to more∣row, Gentlemen, shall be acted, Abuses stripped and whipped, among 'em; with a hay, Master Hearty, you are not merry.
 And a hay Master Sentwell, where are your Drammatis Personae; your Prologus, and your Actus Primus, ha? Have they given you the slip, for fear of the Whip? A hay.
A word aside, an't please you.—
I have not known a man in such a Humour.
And of his own finding! He stole it, indeed, out of his own Bottles, rather than be robed of his Liquor. Misers use to tipple themselves so.
He do's so out-do us, that we look like staid men again, Hearty; fine sober things.
But how long will it last? He'll hang him∣self to morrow, for the Cost we have put him to.
I love a Miser's Feast dearly. To see how
thin and scattering the Dishes stood, as if they feared quarrelling.
And how the Bottles, to scope breaking one another, were brought up by one at once!
How one of the Serving-men, untrained to wait, spilt the White-broth!
And another, stumbling at the Threshold, tumbled in his Dish of Rouncevals before him.
And most suitable to the Niggardliness of his Feast, we shall now have an Entertainment, or
Play, presented by Beggars.
Send 'em in, Master Sentwell.
Sit Gentlemen, the Players are ready to enter. And here's a Bill of their Plays. You may take your choice.
Are they ready for them all in the same Clothes? Read 'em, good Hearty.
First, here's The two lost Daughters.
Put me not in mind of the two lost Daugh∣ters, I prithee. What's the next?
The vagrant Steward.
Nor of a vagrant Steward. Sure some abuse is meant me.
The old Squire and the Fortune-teller.
That comes nearer me. Away with it.
The Beggars Prophecy.
All these Titles may serve to one Play, of a Story that I know too well. I'll see none of them.
Then here's The merry Beggars.
I, that; and let 'em begin.
The Players are coming in: And Mistress Amie and your man Martin, are to be Actors among 'em.
A hay then for that too. Some merry device sure.
 Hark! the Beg∣gorse Hoboys. Now they begin.
See, a most solemn Prologue.
TO Knight, to Squire, and to the Gentiles here,
We wish our Play may with content appear.
We promise you no dainty Wit of Court,
Nor City Pageantry, nor Country Sport:
But a plain Piece of Action, short and sweet;
In Story true. You'll know it when you see it.
True Stories and true Jests do seldom thrive on Stages.
They are best to please you with this though, or a hay with a Whip for them to morrow.
Nay, rather than they shall suffer, I will be pleased, let 'em Play their worst.
See our Patrico among 'em.
That offered you a Doxy in the Barn.
Your Children's Fortunes I have told,
That they shall Beg ever they be old.
And will you have a Reason why?
It is Justice in their Destiny.—
Justice, ha! Are you meddling with Justices already?
Your Grandfather, by crafty wile
Of bargaining, did much beguile
A thriftless Heir of half the Lands
That are descended to your hands.
And, then, by Law, not Equity,
Forced Him and his Posterity
To Woe and shameful Beggary.
That was no fault of mine, nor of my Children.
But our fore-fathers Debts and Crimes,
Although forborne till future times,
Are not so paid. But what needs more,
I wish you happy in your Store.
Dost note this, Hearty?
You said you would be pleased, let 'em play their worst.
It begins my Story, and by the same Fortune∣teller that told me my Daughters Fortunes; almost in the same words. I know him now. And he speaks in the Play to one that personates me, as near, as they can set him forth.
How like you it, Sir? You seem displeased. Shall they be whipped yet? A hay, if you say the word.
O, by no means, Sir; I am pleased.
Sad for the words of a base Fortune-teller? Believe him! Hang him. I'll trust none of 'em. They have all Whims, and double double meanings In all they say.
Whom do's he talk or look like, now?
It is no matter whom. You are pleased, you say.
Have you no Sack in the House? am not I here? And never without a merry old Song?
Old Sack, and old Songs, and a merry old Crew,
Will fright away Cares when the ground looks blew.
And can you think on Gypsy Fortune-tellers?
I'll think as little of 'em as I can.
Will you abroad then? But here comes your Ste∣ward.
Bless me! Is not that Springlove?
Is that you, that talks to him, or that Cocks∣comb I, do you think? Pray let 'em play their Play: the Justice will not hinder 'em, you see; he's asleep.
Here are the Keys of all my Charge, Sir. And
My humble suit is, that you will be pleased
To let me walk upon my known occasions, this Summer.
Fie! Can not yet leave off those Vagancies?
But I will strive no more to alter Nature.
I will not hinder thee, nor bid thee go.
My own very words at his departure.
No matter. Pray attend.
Come, Friend, I'll take your Council.
I've striven with my self to alter Nature in me,
For my good Masters sake; but all in vain;
For Beggars, Cuckoe-like, fly out again,
In their own Notes and Season.
Our Father's sadness will not suffer us To live in's House.
And we must have a Progress.
The assurance of your Loves hath engaged us
To wait on you in any course.
Suppose we'll go a begging.
We are for you.
And that must be your Course, and suddenly,
To Cure your Father's sadness; who is told
It is your Destiny: Which you may quit,
By making it a trick of Youth and Wit.
I'll set you in the way.
But how? But how?
My Daughters and their Sweethearts too. I see
The scope of their Design; and the whole drift
Of all their Action now, with joy and comfort.
But take no notice yet. See a Whim more of it.
But the mad Rogue that acted me, I must make drunk anon.
Now! are you all resolved?
Agreed, agreed.
You beg to absolve your Fortune, not for need.
I must commend their Act in that. Prayed let's call 'em, and end the matter here. The purpose of their Play, is but to work my Friendship, or their Peace with me; and they have it.
But see a little more, Sir.
My Man Randall too! Has he a Part with 'em?
They were well set a work, when they made me a Player. What is that I must say? And how must I act now? Oh! that I must be Steward for the Beggars in Master Steward's absence; and tell my Master, he's gone to measure Land for him to purchase.
You Sir. Leave the work you can do no bet∣la (I can forbear no longer) and call the Actors back again to me.
With all my heart. And glad my Part is so soon done.
Since you will then break off our Flay:
Something in earnest I must say;
But let affected Riming go.
I'll be no more a Patrico.
My name is Wrought-on—Start not. But (if you
Desire to hear what's worth your best attention,
More privately) you may draw nearer me.
Hear no more Fortunes.
You shall give me leave.
I am Grandson to that unhappy Wrought-on,
Whom your Grandfather, craftily, wrought out
Of his Estate. By which, all his Posterity
Were, since, exposed to Beggary. I do not charge
You, with the least offence in this. But, now,
Come nearer me: for I must whisper to you.
I had a Sister, who among the Race
Of Beggars, was the fairest. Fair she was
In Gentle Blood, and Gesture to her Beauty;
Which could not be so clouded with base Clothing,
But she attracted Love from worthy Persons;
Which (for her meanness) they expressed in Pity,
For the most part. But some assaulted her
With amorous, though loose desires; which she
Had virtue to withstand. Only one Gentleman
(Whether it were by her Affection, or
His Fate, to send his Blood a begging with her,
I question not) by her, in heat of Youth,
Did get a Son, who now must call you Father.
Me?
You. Attend me, Sir. Your Bounty, then,
Disposed your Purse to her; In which, besides
Much Money (I conceive by your neglect)
Was thrown this holy Relic. Do you know it?
The Agnus Dei that my Mother gave me
Upon her Death-bed! O the loss of it
Was my sore grief: And, now, with joy, it is
Restored by Miracle! Do's your Sister live?
No, Sir. She died within a few days after
Her Son was born; and left him to my care;
On whom, I, to this day, have had an eye,
In all his wanderings.
Then the young Man lives!
Here with the rest of your fair Children, Sir.
My Joy begins to be too great within me!
My Blessing, and a Welcome to you all.
Be one another, and you all are mine.
We are agree on that.
Long since. We only stood till you shook off your Sadness.
For which we were fain to go a begging, Sir.
Now I can read the Justice of my Fate, and yours—
Ha! Justice? Are they handling of Justice?
But more applaud great Providence in both.
Are they jeering of Justices? I watched for that.
I so me thought. No, Sir. The Play is done.
See, Sir, your Niece presented to you.
What, with a Speech by one of the Players?
Speak, Sir: and be not daunted. I am favourable.
Then, by your favour, Sir, this Maiden is my Wife.
Sure you are out of your part. That is to say, you must begin again.
She's mine by solemn Contract, Sir.
You will not tell me that. Are not you my
Niece?
I dare not, Sir, deny it, we are contracted.
Nay, if we both speak together, how shall we hear one another?
I must disprove the Contract.
That is my part to speak.
None can disprove it. I am witness to it.
Nay, if we all speak—as I said before.
Hear me for all then. Here are no Beggars (you are but one, Patrico) no Rogues, nor Players: But a select Company, to fill this House with Mirth. These are my Daughters; these their Husbands; and this that shall marry your Niece, a Gentleman, my Son. I will instantly Estate him in a thousand pound a year to entertain his Wife; and to their Heirs for ever. Do you hear me now?
Now I do hear you. And I must hear you. That is to say, it is a Match. That is to say—as I said before.
And must I hear it too—O—
Yes, though you whine your eyes out.
Nephew Martin, still the Child with a Suck∣bottle of Sack. Peace, Lamb; and I'll find a wife for thee.
Now, Patrico, if you can quit your Function,
To live a moderate Gentleman, I'll give you
A competent Annuity for your life.
I'll be, withal, your faithful Beads-man; and Spend my whole life in Prayers for you and yours.
And now, Clerk Martin, give all the Beg∣gorse my free Pass, without all manner of Correct∣on? that is to say, with a hay get 'em gone.
Are not you the Gentleman, that challenged me in right of your Friend here?
Your Inspection's good, Sir.
And you the Gentleman (I take it) that would have made Beggar-sport with us, two at once.
For twelve pence a piece, Sir.
I hope we all are Friends.
Now, on my Duty, Sir, I'll beg no more, But your continual Love, and daily blessing.
Except it be at Court, Boy; where if ever I come, it shall be to beg the next Fool-Royal's place that falls.
A begging Epilogue yet would not be,
Me thinks, improper to this Comedy.
Though we are, now, no Beggars of the Crew,
We count it not a shame to beg of you.
The Justice, here, has given his Pass free
To all the rest, unpunished; only we
Are under Censure, till we do obtain
Your Suffrages, that we may beg again;
And often, in the Course, We took to day,
Which was intended, for your Mirth, a Play;
Not without Action, and a little Wit,
Therefore we beg your Pass for us and It.

It is for certain, the people at last have found a head, to whom Clytus is joined; and I fear will follow the Revenge with as little mercy as the King showed his brother, our dead Ma∣ster, the Royal Ortho; whose invasion though we neither counselled, nor assisted, yet such is the fate of Courts, when the People Arm against their Princes; which we have sadly proved, who now suffer that punishment which was meant to the Authors of that unnatural War.
Is the Spanish Prince arrived at Naples? is there a ground for that report?
Most certain; led on by Clytus, Their descent in Sicily found no resistance; the people were so generally disaffected with the pre∣sent Government they willingly consented to put themselves under the prince's protection; This news has awaked the King, till then lost in security; and now too late he finds the fire he despised has taken hold of his Palace. The prince Leopoldo is absent too; A person of that Piety and Virtue, but that he is the cloud that shadows our young King, and unjustly possesses his right, I could join with the world in worship of him; and it was indeed his Interest, joined with his noble Sisters, which these late years has kept the people quiet;
But the prince and Palantus being absent in these late disorders, our Friends have taken hold of the occasion, and prevailed so far, that the people are now Armed in the Name of our long lost prince; which hope, joined with their hatred of the present Government, has begot a danger. The King cannot resist, but it is thought he will be forced to leave Naples, and seek a safety in Capua, that place in my Opinion being fittest to make his general Rendezvous. This news was the cause of my sending for you, that you might avoid the present danger which the prince Leopoldo and Palantus his Army may bring, who are now upon their march towards Naples, and must pass through your Forest, where your abode, during these troubles, will be most unsafe; and to prevent a mischief, pray let me counsel your self, and the Children, to retire hither this Even∣ing. Where did you leave them?
A hunting, in which they both delight; Books, and that, are their great diversion; and I am glad to find their Affections so Innocent, and minds so ready still to take fire at any great Ex∣ample they meet in Story: I left them this morning in chase of a wild Bore; nor is Phillora less masculine in her Spirit then P•llidor, but far from cruel, or Barbarous; I have wondered to see her give such wounds, and then lament them; she has indeed overcome all the Niceties of her Sex, and yet retains the softness of her Na∣ture; and though she loves to be one still in all our Sports, yet a modest, innocent, and most gentle assuredness attends all her Actions.
Nature and Sex are but materials that custom works upon; and both Sexes are Effeminate, or Warlike, as they are bred;—but no more of this: time is too precious; Now or Never we must regain our Country, Prince and Liberty; Clytus, our Friend, is already joined with the Spanish Prince, and Com∣mands in Naples; The Castles are in his hands, declared for the survying heirs of the dead Ortho, and with his our Forces shall this day join; and if the gods have enough revenged that rash Act of our unfortunate Master, We, the remnant of his friends, that this sixteen years have suffered all kinds of Calamities for his fault, may yet hope to return to our Country. In the mean time, Cleon, let some diligent spy follow the Princes Army, and learn (if it be possible) his intentions, and observe his motions, numbers, and Affections of his Soldiers.
That my tame Satyr shall do; he is crafty, and seems simple, armed with his Club he shall mingle with them; hoe's ac∣quainted too with all the Fasts of the Forest, secret paths and Caves, and can, in spite of their swiftest horses, make a retreat; the poor wretch dotes upon my Girl; and if she'll but promise to sing, or play to him, there is no danger, for her sake, he will not at∣tempt; but I must return ever they miss me.
Farewell, the Gods guide our honest intents; it is not for Re∣avenge, but justice, that we strike.
PHillemon, are those returned we sent to mingle themselves with the multitude, to try, if it were possible to learn the cause of their taking Arms so suddenly.
Some, Sir, are returned, all report the same substance in different language, great oppression, no Justice done upon com∣plaint; But the great cause is, the pretended pity they ought to have upon their Countrymen, whose long miseries they publicly lament, whilst others proclaim the joyful news, that their young prince Ge∣norio lives, who long since was mourned, as part of his Fathers ruin, whose Injuries to your Majesty, though they were of the highest nature, yet being a Brother, I could have wished they had not found so severe a Justice.
He fell not by any Act of Cruelty that we ought to blush for.—War, that War which he most unjustly waged, as it was his crime, proved his punishment too. Sicily was the Conquest of our Father; In which I served him, and with my Blood entitled my self to that Crown which, at his death, was by my Fathers will conferred upon me; Naples was my Brothers birth-right; yet the gods witness with me, neither my wishes nor commands were guilty of his or his Childrens death, which to this hour my soul laments; And if the kinder fates have preserved them, as they pretend; May all miseries find me, and pursue me to my Posterity, if I shall not with joy carry these gray hairs to Sicily, and deliver Naples into their hands, being the undoubted right of their Father.
This Piety, Sir, I am confident had long since produ∣ced a happy Peace, could their Party have given faith to it; but their guilt, and doubt of such a goodness has now bred this Civil War; which the desperate condition of their banished Nobility I fear will make use of. Clytus is certainly with them, and now Commands the Castles where he hath declared the young King Genorio, and his Sister, the Princess, Phidamira living, with which Joy the people are possessed; and your Majesty must look upon that Joy as your Enemy; For I cannot believe the re∣port true, though I confess I wish it; it is but a pretence, to set the people against your Majesty, and gain a power to work your ruin; to prevent which, my Counsel is, that your Majesty immediately proclaim Genorio King, and pardon to all if they can produce him, and require a cessation of Arms till the people be satisfied, whether your Majesty or their In∣tentions be most Ingenuous, in restoring the young King to his Right.
Arcus, what news? Thy looks are full of trouble; How dost thou find the people inclined?
To the ruin, Sir, of your self and Family; they call the Prince and Princess Dissemblers, and Betrayers of their Trust, your Majesty Usurper, Tyrant, and Murderer of your Brother and his Children. Pardon, Sir, this blunt relation; my gratitude for the freedom I have found makes me unwilling to flatter your Ma∣jesty into a Ruin.
How does this agree with Clytus his proclaiming their Prince Genorio King?
Alas, Sir, Reason, Justice, nor Honour, you must not look for in this Beast the Multitude; it is all Back and Belly, no Breast, no room for a Heart; All Slave when commanded; All Lust when they have power; they are full of Rage and Wine; Treason and Novelty are the things they worwip: A Slave of the same Gally where I was Prisoner gave me this Paper; it is a Decla∣ration the Spaniards and Confederates have dispersed, where∣in the Cause and Resolution of this War is most maliciously set down, and I fear finds too much faith among the people; they have intelligence too abroad; some (when I was there) came from Capua, that assured them they had no time to lose, for the Prince Leopoldo was upon his March, and would within two days be in sight of the City, upon which they purposed immediately to attempt the Palace; In short, my fear for your Majesty appre∣hends the worst that Malice and Treason can act upon your self and royal Family.
Therefore consider, Sir, whether your strength either in the place or number of your Friends, be able to resist this Torrent till the Prince can come to give you aid; and if not, take counsel with your safety, and make retreat to Averse, it is in the way to Capua, whither your friends shall have private order to repair; it is in the Princes way too, whose coming is much sooner than they feared.
Your Majesties safety has no time to spare; this night you must prepare for Flight or Defence; I have those in readiness shall deliver your Orders for either as it shall be re∣solved.
What to resolve I know not; My heart scorns to appre∣hend these Villains; yet when I consider what Stakes they throw for, how little they can lose, and what they may win, who knows how Fortune may assist the daring of such Villains? My dear Bell∣lamira, and Leopoldo too, their Fates are woven in this Thread of mine, else they should find, old as I am I have not lost one grain of that courage that gave me conquest in my youth. Prithee find my Bellamira, she must this night prepare to depart with me. I dare not venture to leave her here; All her Guards of Beauty, Greatness, or Virtue, are but idle nothings when they meet the bar∣barons
force of Treason in a raging Multitude: Have you seen her lately, Philemon?
Yes Sit, but so afflicted since the Invasion of the Spaniard, and Revolt of Sicily, she hath scarce eat or slept, and with pain endures the conversation of her Friends; her mind and fears are still bent upon her Dream, the thought of which she now trem∣bless at, and apprehends it as a prophetic Vision sent by the Gods to us to denounce these miseries.
It was odd, but my innocence makes me secure; and yet I dare neither believe nor despise it; for though Dreams be the common Issue of Sleep, and are in relation to the thoughts we have been most affected with the day before, or take their Births from the Humours that are most predominant in our Constitute∣once, yet men may reasonably and piously believe the Gods both do and have by those strange ways sometimes darkly foretold their Designs; which makes me neither believe nor contemn all Dreams.—But no more of this, the night and Bellamira, if habitat like her sex, will be unsafe and incommode; therefore desire her to make use of a Disguise, and for my sake cheerfully to endure this first difficulty of our adverse fortune; her Jewels may be use∣full too, if she can convey them with her: this and my blessing, good Philemon. Come Arcus, you must to my Son this night, and acquaint him with our Resolutions, and that the Rendezvous will be at Averse; whose strength and provisions I dare rely upon as well as the faith of him that commands.
WHat thinks Fidelia, were my fears vain or no? Is it not visible the Gods in their care foretold our ills? Is not the Stranger landed, and doth not the Dust fly in our faces? It was too true an Exposition the good Hermit made of my Dream, who told us, that kicking the Sand at us would prove a dangerous Rebellion in the People. O Fidelia, my soul is full of horror, yet all mine own miseries do not at all deject me; but for my Father, his loss, I must confess, brings a weight of sadness I can∣not bear.
To deny your cause of grief will but make your anger join, and give new wounds to your mind; that fatal Dream I have not dared to read, my nature is too superstitious; yet my curiosity would fain know what Stars rule your Highness fortune, to which mine is tied, and by a nearer interest, Madam, than your goodness yet imagines.
No, Fidelia, though (I confess) thy modest hiding of a Passion has been very discreet, yet all the shadows thou could in∣terpose have not obscured it so, but my grief and kindness have both seen it; and though I cannot be happy my self, yet tic my joy in the
midst of these afflictions I have a power left to give thee some peace of mind; turn not away, I will not put thee to blush the rest; only thus much, live assured, if I can serve thee, thou shalt be happy in the wished friendship of thy Palantus; and that thou moist give faith to what I say, at thy leisure read this Paper—It is  my Dream expounded; in that thou wilt find my Fate; and I confess with a clear soul, and as much innocence as the sleeps of Children, I love that fatal figure, that something without a name, that kind nothing is all the business of my mind; In my sleep he rescued me, me thoughts he saved my honour in a time of dan∣ger when my heart was desperate; and though a Dream the fear has still dwelt here, and a kindness for him, which makes me pre∣fer him before all but honour; cease to wonder, for that shadow is all my conversation, all my joy, and all my misery; Is it not a strange Passion that the Gods have sent me for one I never saw but in my Dream, the similitude of nothing? yet this advantage we have of others, we are secured from jealousy; for as Fate has hid him from my eye, so a kind power has set me free from the envy or fear his love may bring; by night he makes his visits still; like the Egyptian Apis in a Dream he comes; the soft-foot'd God of Sleep is only Witness to our Love.
Since your Highness has been pleased to break this silence, giving thousand joys I never hoped for, take the secret of my heart; it is Love, Madam, so much more than I can master, it is more than I can tell, and that makes me fear such a Present as Pa∣lantus his Love, when he shall find only a Shadow for his Rival, may gain an easier Victory than your Highness fears; nor do I blame Palantus for loving your Highness, it is his greatest virtue to do it; and my crime to tell you so; because I know though it is an ho∣nor to have you there, yet it is the business of his heart to hide it; and ere I can have his friendship, his faith must be blasted; for Inconstancy is the first step to any possibility of my being happy; yet he has ever paid me a Civility; and though I cannot boast his love, yet he has made me believe he was not displeased that I love him.
Come, dry thy eyes, and calm thy breast; for though he should prove unkind I'll be faithful still; and if Palantus will hope to act any thing pleasing in my eye, he must pursue his friendship to Fidelia; for I believe, with the most excellent Bellessa, that Faith and Constancy are so much lovelier in both Sexes, than any other Beauty that I should expect from a gallant Woman; she should sooner spoil her face, than break her faith; and this I shall tell him; who if he be the gallant Palantus: the world esteems him, he knows all that Beauty can hope for; nay, all it aspires to is but to create a faith, and bind the heart it loves; and when Beauty and Love have done their best they make but one constant Friendship. Nay, Fidelia, how many fair faces do stories mention that could not make one constant Love, though it has been still the business of Youth and Beauty?
Those Ages, Madam, wanted the divine Bellamira's mind
to finish that great work, whose Friendship will be the envy of the whole world, and may it never want the pity you have showed me; &amp; as your Scholar I shall pursue Palantus with a modest heart, &amp; teach him the virtue of a faithful Lover, a mystery known but to few men.
Faith is such a strange good, it is neither valuable nor communicable beyond two; I mean the Faith of Love; a galiant man cannot be twice faithful; who would be twice, was never once a Lover.
Why are so many Women pleased, then, to gain a servant that was another?
Such women are fit for the Friendship of such of men, and knows not what a nothing they have won; for instead of a Friendship she only gains a dead carcase of one that might have been a Lover; And such women, Fidelia, are guiltier then the men, who must be either foolish or wicked; For Honour is deaf to their prayers, and blind to their tears; who can say nothing that ought to prevail where there is Virtue.
Unless it be to plead the power of her Beauty that has made him break his faith to another; quitting Empire there for chains else where.
I tell thee, Fidelia, such a wretch that durst hope a reward from me for such a crime, I should look upon him as one that threw dirt upon my Fame, and my scorn should tell him so; for he who has impudence enough to plead that guilt for me∣rit, I shall believe, will never care to be innocent.
Oh, Madam, let me kneel to you; And though I cannot accuse Palantus of broken Faith, yet his dissembled pity makes me beg when he bows before this shrine, and pleads rewards from your Breast, for scars received in others service: O let your Ju∣stice revenge me upon him and in the afflictions of your frowns, teach him to feel those pains he inflicts upon others.
Rise, Fidelia, and believe Palantus can never deserve this; he knows me too well to venture his Passions beyond his thoughts; and I will rather be unjust to him, then prove unkind to thee; and when thy griefs have let thee collect thy thoughts, this secret I gave thee even now, must remove all thy feats; for know, I have a guest here lodged by Fate, and so proud he will dwell alone and reign sole Monarch of this Breast; And trust me, gentle Fidelia, I am proud too, and scorn a part or corner of a Heart; and he, who ere he be that will be mine, must bring an entire Friendship no divided breast, a Province will not satisfy me; It is a solitary Heart that affects crowds of Lovers; In love alone is best com∣pany, absolute or nothing in a Heart, if I be one.
Those that err having such a guide must fall unpitied; O Madam, did I hope this sad day such joy as this? No, no, this change of my condition confirms me in the uncertainty they build upon that trust to Fortune, who afraid to be thought she loves any one thing long, made me fear she had now designed my Ruin; whom she so long indulged with the Friendship of two such persons as your Highness and Palantus, to show it was she,
not Virtue raised me; I cannot yet pretend to the least of your Highness favours, being but the youngest child of Love and Fortune; and can plead but from your pity no interest, nor no inheritance in eiders blessings.
Fortune nor Love shall make me forsake thee; and for Love, though I find his venom in my Mind, yet this truth I dare proclaim, that god hath no partial customs to difference his Children by. Love has not elder Rights, all are his Heirs that Love with Faith and Honour: This strange madness that afflicts my Mind, call it what you will, Love or madness, to dote upon a shadow, though it hath depth and stream enough to bear me with it; Yet all this Tempest in my Mind has raised no Billows there; no faulty desires, nor dangerous vanity waits upon my Love: This shadow of one, is all men to me; like wealth con∣tracted into Jewels, so I bear the precious load here.—See who  knocks.—What news, my Lord, from my Brother? His ab∣sense at this time was most unfortunate; He hath interest with the people; But Fate rules all; are the people in a Body still?
Yes, Madam, and I can give little hope of better days, till the sword decide the difference; The Prince and Palantus are upon their March this way, but the disorders are such we dare not attend his coming; for the King is informed that the people will this night force the Palace, how easy it will be to do it I will not counsel the King to make a trial especially when we consider the consequence; His guards, though faith∣full, are too few to conquer, and too many to sacrifice; There∣fore the King has resolved with them to make his retreat this Evening to Averse, whose strength and affections he dares rely upon, it is in the way the Prince must march; to whom notice is already gone, and private instructions to those that are faithful in this Calamity, to make that their Rendezvous.
The Gods are still with us; and to dispute their Actions; were to incense them, our obedience prevails more then complaints. What are his Majesties Commands to me? How shall I dispose of my self in these disorders?
The King, whose chief fear and trouble is your Highness safety, desires your Company this night with him in some disguise, to prevent any accident; to which your Person (as your self) may be subject; habitat like a boy, he thinks will be best he knows; it will seem strange to your Highness to change your Sex; but his command and necessity will be excuse for both.
My obedience shall in all things possible serve his will; A mans habit! I have none, you must provide it, who shall go with me? Has the King appointed any?
In this, and all difficulties, my Life and Fortune shall be proud to bear a part; And though I know I shall blush to see my self in that habit; yet to bear a share in your Highnesses For∣tune is an Honour I shall always covet.
Welcome, Dear Fidelia; may thy kindness to me be as successful, as I prophecy thy Love will be; We now begin to tread
that path, which though it be full of thorns and horror, yet it leads Fidelia to Love and Honour.
THe Woods are full of armed men; Troops of gallant youths pass by me without regard; Me-thoughts a scorn flew from every generous Heart and sparkling Eye, to see such sloth and degenerate youth lie hid in this peaceful shape of mine, when all the world is in Arms; And my Heart tells me, it were as easy to circumvent them, as a Lyon; and as little danger to kill their Tyrant Prince, as to strike a Boar with this trusty spear; Leopoldo, he is their General; They say his Father killed our king, murdered our Princes, and banished my Father, who has often bid me hate him; And now it were easy with a well aimed Arrow to lay his Pride upon the earth in the height of all his glories; such a quarry would make a Hunts-man proud, and find matter fit for story; But down, down all thoughts of my Revenge till he bids strike who knows why and when it is fit; till then, be quiet, all the troubles of my Heart be gone; and here let Pollidor rest contented in this Cave, where thou were bred and born; Here we live unknown, un-envied, and as free from danger as the glory of this world; This Cave none will fight for sure; it was the Habitation of a Satire, and he has given us leave to possess it; it is the Charity of a kind of Beast, whose Love to my Sister is beyond the faith of men, and strange as any accident in our Fortune; She sent him home from hunting with the Venison we killed; and under the notion of serving her the poor Beast is to all of us a Servant.
There's no body within, yet all things are in order, and all absent; I cannot but wonder where they should be thus late.—Oh, here  comes one can resolve me. How now, where is my Sister, and your Master?
For the bright Maid, she is gazing, like one that were planet-struck, upon those new kind of men that fill the Woods; I never saw a Mind so soon reconciled to her fears; at first sight she shrunk, and leaned to me till she blushed, and then bent her brows and bow too, and then gazed again; They laughed to see her in this disorder, but she pursues them still, without regard to my cries or prayers; and walks as if her Mind were grown greater from the sight: And though my business calls me hither, I was loath to leave her, for fear they should hurt her; Prithee, good Master, seek
her, and chide her home, you will find her by the great plains side; where the sacred Oak with the Trophies stands.
Well, I'll seek her; and if my Father returns and ask for me, tell him whither I am gone
I love them not, yet I dare not hurt them; for my Love says, she shall die if they be hurt, else I would poison them, I know a root will do it; But I love the Maid, so sweet a Flower never decked Pan's Garland; her Voice charms the wildest Breast, and her touch cures all wounds but those of the Mind. This Cave was mine, by Birth mine, Ages we have lived in it; It was Pan's gift of old, yet I gave it to my Love but to smile upon me; My Sire was worshipped in these woods, and lies buried un∣der yon Altar; I cry sometimes when I miss him; seven tedious  winters have I waited, in hope they would give me the Maid; so long though a child she has seduced my Mind: There is a hidden power in her Eyes, that makes me fear and love to see her; I can∣not live out of her sight; and yet Famine is not so insupportable as to see and not enjoy her. This bottle they drink of, it is a pre∣cious liquor; and when I converse with it it makes me bold, and therefore it is forbidden me; I'll taste it though, and fill it up at the Brook; I can sleep too in spite of Love, when my Mind is charmed with this.
FRom Gaietta we are assured of a considerable force to Join with us to morrow; And it is believd we shall find the King about the Forest; for the Prince and he are met; and what number, Clytus, do you judge their Army to be now they are united?
The Scouts speak of many thousands more then the King expected, or I believed would follow his Fortune; but all makes not two thirds of our present Army, besides those of Gaietta, which will this night lodge in the Forest.
Was it for certain, the Princess Bellamira fled in Boys Habit, as was reported?
For certain; and I confess I cannot but lament her part in this Calamity; for she hath ever born a Mind full of Honour, and upon all occasions been ready to assist them that misfortunes made fit for her Charity.
But she gave an unhandsome answer to my Prince, whose Love in a proffered Marriage (mentioned by chance by a friend, as a means to compose the present troubles, in Policy as well well as Civility) might have found a handsomer denial then the upbraids of Traitor and Usurper.
Observe him, Roderigo.
Ha! does your mind run that way? is that the fair pre∣tence of restoring our lost Princes? this I doubted before, but it was too late to prevent it.
Her pride may fall into my power, and then I shall give an answer like her message; till then let us intend our business, which a woman shall never be with Almanzor.
Roderigo, a word.—Now you find the Decla∣ration was well designed, and before they shall find a power to dis∣prove the truth whether their Prince be in our power or no, I will make these Traitors cut themselves. This Clytus is a villain, and begins to grow cold, he likes not the marriage with the Princess; therefore strike that string no more.—Clytus, how do the people take the news of their young Kings safety?
With joy, Sir; and with impatient longing they expect the sight; and it is my opinion twill be the best way to produce him this day, and present him to the Army; if we should delay their expectations, perhaps we may lose their affections and their faith too; and then we have only armed and drawn together a multitude that may, for their revenge, join with the enemy; who when he shall hear of their discontents will not neglect to play the best of his Game; it is therefore again my counsel to lose no time, but produce the King.
It is his own desire not to be discovered till things be set∣led, at least till the Castles and strong places be surrendered, for the better security of his person.
Besides, it is now most dangerous to produce him; his enemies and Fathers murderers being in arms, and ready to di∣spute his title by a day of Battle; in which if he miscarry he is not only lost in this, but in all future hopes of a revenge: but if Gaietta will receive him, and a Garrison for his safety, or you Clytus give up the Castles in Naples for his use; then the Prince shall upon his word and honour produce your King; else, till the Battle be over, without breach of faith, he cannot expose his friend to such a visible ruin.
If the people will be satisfied with this, I am; Sir, you know by the contract, Naples was to be in my command, which I pos∣sassed in right of my Master; Sicily (as it was agreed) was resigned to you; and if I refuse, now, to deliver the Castles of Naples, it is not to keep out my King that makes me do it, but to be sure who shall be my King when I have done it; for it is no question, Sir, when you have the strength of the Kingdom in your hands, and an Army master of the Field, it is most easy to show who shall be King of the Country; but if you are a Prince in soul as well as fortune, you will scorn to deceive our trust; and if there be foul play in your heart, small and despicable as our Force are, we shall yet with that venture to call you Enemy.
How now? what's the news?
The party that pursued the King last night are beaten in, and the commanded men that were sent to the Pass at Capua are cut off by a party of the Kings, who now appears upon the hills, where he possesses the places to his most advantage; and the Officers ex∣pect your Highness Orders.
Come Clytus, let no jealousy nor fear afflict thee; but take the word of a Prince, I shall be fair and real in all things. Eve∣rye man to his command; and (if it be possible) join with those of Gaietta; I confess I did not expect to be called to the Battle, it was my fear they would fly us; and, but that I believe their de∣spair rather then courage makes them seek us, it would startle me; but here let us part like fellows in arms, and men of one interest, faithfully act our parts. (Genorio King) that's the word; and if a misfortune find us, let Mole be the R•ndevouz, from whence we may retreat to Gaietta.
I never feared an enemy before, nor till now doubted a day of Battle: these traitors that are joined to us, methinks I see a curse even in their looks; how can the gods fight for treason? would they were all sunk.
This I feared; but to prevent it was not possible; that the young King lives may be truth, but that he is either in his power or knowledge, I fear is as false as he is; but I am now too far engaged; else he should find Clytus drew his sword upon another account then to make Almanzor King.
AN Army!—I never saw so glorious a sight before.—There is a beauteous horror in it, Their very looks command fate; where dares there be any thing so bold, as to declare it self an enemy to such a body, if the soul be answerable to the limbs? sure, Armies are the pride of nature, and her enemies too. There is a strange sweetness in their Music; yet their Trumpets curdles my blood, and my heart's grown too great for my breast; this Cottage grows too narrow for my mind.
See where she is.
Oh Father, I have seen the Army; it is the most bewitch∣ing sight the Sun ever showed my eyes; there is at once a beauty
and a terror in it, and makes me love and envy those that com∣mand such things; how came you to leave being a Soldier? me-thinks death only should have made a separation twixt you and such a body; it moves with such a Majesty I was afraid at first; but now the awe is not unpleasing, my fear is turned into wonder and admiration; did Pollidor imagine it such a thing? this is the first my Brother ever saw.
It is so, Phillora; but I have read of many.
So have I, dully and coldly described; of their Battles too ill fought and worse painted in story, presented still by their fears, or partiality of some weak Historian, who delivers them still in their crimes and miseries, like love known only by the scars, while the crafty happy ones (as they say) jealous of their wealth and envied blessings, conceal their coveted happiness; and methinks we might do something worth story in this ap∣proaching day, that foretells so much honour to them that dare meet this storm; and I know not what it is that prompts me, but my heart longs to see what fate attends this Army; will my Brother go?
When thou shalt know, gentle Phillora, who commands this Army; what Tyranny, Oppression, Usurpation it protects; and that no hand there but wars against the gods, thou wilt then hate and loathe them which thou now admire, who guard that great ill man that destroyed his Brother, killed his Children, and now usurps his throne, to revenge which the people are armed, and now has forced him to defend his ill-got greatness; to side with whom is no less then to war with heaven: but these as too distant and ge∣neral ills I will not oppose. But when thou shalt call to mind thy Fathers banishment, withering here under his oppression; thy self and Pollidor buried in these obscure Woods, that owe to the world a better account of their days then this solitude can pay, you will then find other thoughts; yet I am pleased to see this impatience in thy mind; but the time is not yet ripe, in which upon a just and honest cause, your swords and minds will have use of your best resolutions to bear your parts. The business is laid, and in Gaietta our Scene lies; but till these troops are past pray, let us retire and lye close till our friends, which are their en∣mies, appear; and then we'll join, to their destruction. The Prince Leopold I hear commands the Army.
Is it not our King, and the Prince, you speak of, Sir?
Yes, but Murder and Usurpation hath made him so.
And may we fight against him? sure it is a strange justice you would seem to put in execution; sure such crimes were not appointed to punish crimes; do you believe it such a fault in him to defend himself against a Brother, then turned enemy? and no sin in us to arm against our King, whose succession is undoubted now his Brother is dead, fallen under a ruin he made himself; for I have heard you say, he was slain in Battle; why did you then de∣fend him no better? it is vain to think what heaven thought not
just then in the person of the King (who you would have me be∣lieve thus wicked) should punish their own act in the person of the innocent Prince: but suppose the King as guilty as you would make him; what has the Prince done, then a Child? why do you war with him? whose virtue neither your rage nor hatred can deny; for to my self you have often given him divine honour; Oh, Sir, your silence is more noble then your hate; and lest I may be seduced to lose my loyalty, or my duty, in this dispute, I'll retire.
This is a language I cannot but wonder at, from Phillora; have the injuries of a Father no greater place? is all my care and love paid with this unjust sense of my misery?
Sir, those grounds you laid of truth and piety in my heart when I was young, that seed bears this fruit; would you have me to obey your passion, hate my King, and prefer your anger before all the gods you made me bow too? and not only wish, but join in the ruin of the Prince, who your soul knows has no guilty share in the least of our misfortunes? you know, Sir, there can be no interest but honour that moves me to say this, for the Prince is one I never saw.
What crimes must he act ere you believe him guilty? go, court with your youth and beauty those armed troops which you thus dote upon, follow till your dishonour hath made you a quar∣rel; there are those will not ask twice the pleasures they can force.
This from Pollidor, for desiring to be worth his love! I rather expected to have found that fire which age hath quenched in our father, should have inflamed thy generous breast to have joined with me in the search of honour; methinks thou should be ashamed to look on, and see these Armies bleed, and with a revenge thou dare not take.
You are angry, Phillora; you would not thus mistake my kindness else.
My anger is to see Pollidor can consent, with shame, to lye hid in this glorious day of danger, and endure this private life, and thus sleep away thy days, when honour is upon the wing, and Armies striving to catch her; who hovers over the world, search∣ing only some glorious front to light upon; do's fear or pale envy hold thee back? if thou think thy self a gallanter man then the Prince, prove thy fate upon him; it is womanish to shoot at him with wishes, or hope to blast his youth with curses; if my words wrong thee lead the way, give me the lye in that motion; or blush∣ing follow me; while a Girl leads Pollidor to arms and honour.
Needs Phillora more Arguments that I love her! if she do's, let her read this patience.
What means this fury? will you expose your self to dan∣gers, only to be talked of? what honour can you hope in this at∣tempt? come Phillora, let us retreat, and upon our knees make our war; an old man and a maid must find their ends in prayer.
I find other thoughts fire my mind; Fortune thy coy Deity I will worship; and if thou smile I'll build thee Altars; if not, when I am old, and my mind grown heavy, then I'll listen to
those dull Customs that our thoughtless Sex obey, which perhaps will lead me to the quiet privacy of this place; but I have yet too much fire, Sir, to be enclosed by Custom, or Pale fears. Woman, and all those nice follies, and shaking heart, that use to possess our soft Sex, as things unknown and unpractised, I put off with my Coats; and thus, as I was wont to search the Game, so will I hunt my fortune; The spoilers of thy herds I have often made my prey: A Bore or a Lyon I start not at, you have taught me know they were created my Inferiors; and with these spears we have not only made them our sport, but our food too; That I am a woman is no fault of mine, which Custom (a second and better Nature) has, (I thank you) redeemed, by giving me great thoughts, and weeding out, by your philosophy, all the little low affections that would choke our minds, and learned me to despise all the fond false Doctrine that cunning men would insinuate into us, designing all our Sex their Slaves.
Your anger, Phillora, comes in still, to justify all your errors; yet give me leave to say your Anger's more naked then any other passion; for angry women, like drunken men, are neither to be va∣lued, nor punished; which privilege ever I would plead, I'll suffer the penalty of any crime both those faults are subject to.
No, Pollidor, it is not anger, but my reason that speaks this; my eyes and heart are open, and the things I see those I speak; In∣terest nor hope of any flattery shall bind my tongue; Tell not me our Sex cannot modestly be angry, and that a maid enraged is an uncomely sight; that wounds add not to her beauty either given or received, We must only frown, forsooth, or lament our Injuries. Hence with all those Impostures, and such whose folly or faint souls will be subject to this Doctrine; while the several passions of your Rage or Lust impose upon us, who like your chained slaves must not only submit our selves and honours, but our Reason too, refer∣ring all our griefs and Injuries to the justice of the gods; which when Pollidor sees Phillora suffer, let him and all mankind despise me, and stamp slave upon my forehead.—Honour, thou Deity of both Sexes, Thou male and female virtue, let thy power look friendly on my youth; Guide my feet this day to follow my heart in the paths thou lead, and I will have—A glorious life, or else a handsome grave.
Will you leave us then, and thus throw behind you all the kindness of a Father and a Brother? has the place no tie upon your grateful Nature? has my love and conversation (besides a Brothers Interest in your blood) gained no place in Phillora's heart?
Yes, yes, ever dear Pollidor, they have, they have; and know, I leave not this place, because my fond will arrects a change, nor am I ungrateful to this place in which thou taught me those rules of Love and Honour, whose great Examples (though yet no Lover) I now begin to imitate; and Pollidor shall find me ready to pay all those debts when Love and Honour calls; and for this dear Cave, this beloved Cell, thus I take a sad and kind Farewell; with tears I part from thee; and for the blessed protection we have found in thy
our retreat to this hill, from whence we fled yesterday, must breed some doubt of the cause; for it must seem strange to find themselves sought by those men to day which fled them last night; Besides, your Highness knows, Their Army is composed of divers Interests, which will make them jealous of each other; and rea∣sonably enough apprehend we have some intelligence in their Army, which time can only satisfy, and may join to them the doubtful part, which expect but the fortune of a day, to declare for the Conqueror; We can hope no more then we are; every day will increase them, both in number and repute; therefore my counsel is, to offer them Battle, while we are in lust, and hope of victory; delay will but abate the Soldiers hearts, and then it is easy to master the Limbs.
I confess, you have reason; and Arcus shall return my sense of it to the King, and desire him to send my Sister, and the Baggage to Capua, there to attend our success.
What says your Letters?
They mention some disorders among the Rebels in Na∣ples; But this fatal Paper makes their Army dangerous; it is my Sisters dream expounded by the old Hermit, it is sent me by Fide∣lia; there read her letter, thou wilt find something that concerns thee, whilst I rest me here.
Your Highness walk by the Sea-side in a quiet Evening.
Signifies, the peace and security drawing to an end will be
Interrupted by the inconstancy of the People; For the Evening
Signifies the conclusion of a happiness.
And the cloud that landed a Knight in Foreign habit, who
Kicked up the sand in your Faces, in a dangerous proportion;
Signifies a foreign Invasion, which discontents will
Countenance; for Raising the dust is raising the people, whose
Hieroglyphique Sand and dust are, Flying in your Faces, is
Rebellion, which knows no bound, nor respect;
Your being angry, and not able to revenge the injuries,
Foretells this Rebellion will be powerful.
The flying from the Dust, and loss of the King, in it;
My fears apprehend his loss in this Rebellion;
Your succour in a wood, where shepherds beat down the dust, with boughs.
Signifies a happy relief in the faith and loyalty of the Country
People. Trees, being the Hieroglyphique of Loyalty.
And the extravagant desires of the Shepherds, who importune the
Prince and your Highness to the marrying of two Trees, affirming
Else that the dust and danger would return again,
Signifies, that by some Miraculous manner your Highness
Must fix the peoples hearts.
How now! what dost thou seek! who gave thee this wound? why this fear and wonder?
Seed of gods, or the god of War himself, what ever thou be, Thus I adore thee, thus I implore thy aid; tell me but where thy Altars stand, I'll haste and fetch a Lamb, and sacrifice him to thee, my great deliverer.
Rise poor wretch, and cease to fear, or worship; there's neither due here; We are mortal as thou art; yet if any In∣jury threaten thee, we will protect thee; how the poor wretch trembles! prithee, Palantus, help to draw the Arrow; how came you by this Shot?
From a fair and cruel Foe, Divinest, A maid of heavenly Form, brighter then the Evening Star, lovely as the Syrinx our great gods Paramour, straight as young hazel wands, or the Corneal Darts by Diana thrown; and far the Nymph out-shines all her train.
Well, and what of her? The poor thing loves.
Love? yes, yes, love, so they call my pain; it is a grief grows here—Beloved of—gods, here, I sucked the Venom at my Eyes; and my old Master says twill never be cured.
And is it troublesome, your pain?
Troublesome? The Plague or Famine, or the wilde Wolfs tooth, wounds not like it; My mind is all afire.—Great, and blessed, did thy happy soul never feel the thirst that beauty breeds?
Never; and I wonder how thou come thus miserable; by my life, Palantus, he tells me more of Love and his power then some Poets feign.
Never Love? Why what do you do all day? how do you spend your thoughts? My very Dreams are Love, my Sinews shrink when she frowns; sure shoe's a Witch, there's such Magic in her Eyes; My flock I'll pawn against a Dog, you will like and love her too, it is such a Divine form; it is not thy Army, nor thy Arms can guard thee from her.
Dost thou know her? what is she?
Yes, yes, in this wood she lives, and hath done from her mothers breast; her father and her brother are my masters (but I serve none but her,) My Sire gave them his Cave to live in, we were bred to∣gether, and yet unkind she seeks to destroy me.
Who are her Father and her brother?
Strange men, and hold strange Opinions, of Names and Places, of pains for ever, Divinest, and talk of Gods, and their rods, above Pan and his punishments; which wilde things too they threaten, of being nothing, Master, and yet last ever, and call all that I desire, by nature taught, a fault.
What urged her to wound you thus?
I found her sleeping in yonder Grove, and would have stolen a kiss; seven Summers here have I worn this wistful fire in my suffering breast without a hope of rest, and yet she threw me from her, called me Beast, and bent her Bow; yet I have seen her kiss her Brother's Dog a thousand times.
I swear she's very unreasonable to despise thee, and be so kind to a Dog.
But I hanged him for it.
'T was wisely done to remove your Rival; but you forget your wound, does it not smart?
The unkindness does, and she's ungrateful too; for would I have sought a Maid amongst our own kind, she that has the curledst Horns and crooked'st Thighs would have been proud of me; for, despised as I am, there is no subject of our Master Pan can hunt, climb, or out-run me, none surer with his Bow or Dart, none feller with his Club, or bolder in his heart, allied to Pan; my breast too is broad, smoother hoofs, nor wealthier fleece clothes no Satyr's things; these unshorn Curls from my birth I wear, they cut theirs (Master) that are poor; these gilded Horns were hers too, the first fruits of her brow, an earlier Musen none casts than she, and thousands wait upon her smile; but she'll have none but me, that pine for this cruel scorn.
Has she a Father and a Brother, say you?
Yes, great Master, and here they live, converse with none; sure some sad misfortune or great guilt hangs upon them, for they are always sad.
How do they spend their time?
They read and hunt, I taught them: we have this day slain a Bore and a Lion, divine Phillora wears the Spoil: Their Fa∣there too is old, and gray as Winter, but stout as young Lions, wise as Oracles, pious too as Pan's Priest; he has been injured, he says, by a King of men; I hear him talk of mighty things—But hark, I hear her Horn, with that she calls her Brother; I dare not see her  eyes, I can charm all rage but hers: Fool that I was, I taught her to resist my Philtres; and now if you protect not I am lost, her heart threatens destruction.
Step behind, let me meet your danger.
This way I'm sure he took, he cannot fly far, my Arrow found him; for by his lustful blood I have tracked him to this place—I see the Villain.
How they gaze upon each other! thus did I look, thus wonder, and then grew sick in my mi•••• her eyes are fixed, she minds me not; I'll seek my safety first▪ and then dispute my Crime.
Ha! do you glory in this wile? but know, it is only de∣ferring of thy doom.
Gentle Maid, may we know the reason of this War?
Nought, great Master, but my loving her.
If that be a Crime, where have you seen that dull thing that either could or would be innocent? By all the divers troubles of my mind, one sight of that divine form has surprised a strength here that never feared a women's power till now—Here  fair one, where never power of beauty dwelt before.
Ha! Why do I gaze thus?—What have I seen?—Is it a God or a Man?—Such a Figure my eyes never saw before—How far he out-shines my Brother!—The Pride and Opinion of my self too, those withered Leaves I feel fall from my heart—There's no such Glass as perfect Excellence in others for Pride to see and hate her self in—O that I had been born blind, or could tear these Traitors out that thus have robbed me of my content and peace of mind, to both which Farewell for ever—What is it that stops me? Something calls me back, my fond heart would  gaze again. Do, do, and be fit for pity, drink deep of that delici∣os Poison, so are you past remedy; yet if you bet ler me fly and inflame the world; Love and Desire, your winged fire here I feel, yet glory not in my ruin; for it is but a poor Shepherdess breast, and no wonder if a God oppress it.
She is gone, and all joys go with her.
And all my fears; yet I love even that anger in her eyes.
It was a strange accident, who can this Maid be? it is some delusion sure.
The Prince is troubled; pray Sir, leave your wonder, and strive to divert your thoughts: This figure calls to mind the Shepherd in the Princesses Dream, the Sex only differs.
There's more than ordinary accident in this; See how his eyes are fixed. I'll speak to him; Sir, Sir, your Highnesses mind is so intent upon this Girl you do not hear the Trumpet, Sir, whose call tells us, Something like Danger threatens; something worthy your presence, and your thought calls away.
Did thou see her Palantus? The Arcadian Nymphs that boast their sable eyes, white-wristed Juno, Venus, or the Goddess that Woods affects, no nor the Virgin-Deity, she that bears both Shield and Spear, and has eyes that farther wound, yet all their united Graces (though we bow to them) out-shine not this Flower of the Wood; And thou God of hearts stop this Fate, either call back or bless thy flying Dart; cure mine, or touch her heart.—Come hither, dost thou know this Maid, and the place of her abode?
Yes, yes, I know thy pain too, feared of men; there's a Fever in thy breast, a fire that all the Herbs in the Wood
cannot cure, nor Streams of these Meadows quench.
I must find this Maid though thousand Difficulties op∣pose; it is the very Figure in my Sisters Dream.—O Bellamira, thy prophetic soul has foreseen all our Troubles both of mind and body.
Pray, Sir, forget not the business that now stays for us, two Armies in Battalion, two Kingdoms in dispute, your Fathers safety, your Life and Honour, all at stake; will you throw all these by to follow a fantasy, the shadow of a shadow, one like to no∣thing, seen in another Dream? Me thinks these Dangers and Du∣tie which are at hand should remove all those light thoughts from your heart; Pardon this freedom, Sir, it is my affection speaks.
Prithee Peace, Father and Sister are empty names, Virtue and Honour, and all the Gods must fly Leopoldo, or make my way fit to the enjoying this lovely Maid: My soul is sick, I know not of what Disease, but sudden and deadly as the Plague; The Infect∣on struck me, Honour and Virtue be still Leopoldo's Guides, and cease to take pleasure in opposing his happiness with your difficul∣ties; it is not the distance else between a Crown and a Shepherd shall divide us.
Art thou a Prince?
Yes, and one, if thou can serve in my love, will make thee happy; my soul longs to enjoy the friendship of this lovely Maid.
Enjoy her? She will not be touched, Heavens, Fire, and Time, will be touched and stayed as soon as she, if she thought you imagined such a hope.
Thou mistake me, I dare as soon attempt my Fathers life as stain her chaste bosom with any faulty desires.
Away Dissembler, I see thy aim; thou a Prince? It is false; Whore's the virtue that set thee above a world of men? Thou art the Satire, sure; though thou hast cast thy Horns and Hoofs thou art more a Beast than I. Fool that I was, did I kneel to thee, Abuser of the Gods; Most ingrate, did they give thee this form and power to betray men, and pollute Virgins? Defend me! thou Wretch, would thou make me accessory to the abusing of the thing I love better than my soul, or thou love thy self?
Hold, fond Beast, hold, and be gone; your honest igno∣rance, Sir, defends you.
And so it shall do still against such impious Greatness; if I durst but see my Love I'd home, and tell her what a Villain a Prince may be. 
Why in such haste? I'll ease you of your Club; Have you found a remedy for your arm yet?—This strange Accident a∣mazes all my thoughts; This Wretch too, to find such a noble anger upon a thought of force being offered to his Love: There's nothing in this day but miracle; something, sure, great and high as the persons designed in this Tragedy, the Gods are busy to deliver to the world; for it is no common birth that Nature and Nations thus labours with, which makes me with patience bear those throws
that afflict my heart, whose desperate love, though a lo ser of all those hopes I had at stake, makes me resolved silently to look on, and see this Game plaid.
Prithee, Arcus, let our Rival go; and when thou see the maid tell her, if I out-live this day I'll find her, and doubt not my love shall be less commanded then I would my self be obeyed; here, bind his arm in this Scarf, Arcus; and then haste to my Si∣ster, tell her she must instantly for Capua; and assure the King I  will not fail to make good this hill.—Love and arms that have so often met, smile on your Priest that has seen what my soul can ne'er forget.
If my heart can judge she loves this Gay Man, then she'll be glad of this Scarf, I'll give it her and she shall forgive me; when I can please her my heart rejoices; but she ne'er thinks of poor little me but to grieve my heart. 
THis strange chance that Arcus relates makes me fear some sudden issue of my Dream; he describes a Maid, whose beauty took my Brother in an hour when his heart was most opposite to love; and by the habit and the place only her sex differs; for his description most lively paints that shadow which my Dream has thus long enjoyed; ye gods, if it be your will in Riddles still to wrap your secrets, we mortals can only say Amen. But why do I let this lesser thought fill my breast; when Countries ruin and the death of my dear Father (the great part of my fear, or ought to be) past by unmourn'd? sure there is a reason for this fault; this weakness has its cause; something that my mind does yield to, prevails; yet I find not my Reason overcome, though there's something in this gentle fear I know not what to call it: I never yet felt love by what I observe of him in others; yet I begin to fear he's knocking at my breast, and would fain get in; sure it is he, for I was never till now so near being a Lover as the fear of it. But I must still these noises in my thoughts; for a Virgins innocence is so coy, so jealous, and so gentle too, she need not take the pains to beat it from her heart; she may think that and her peace away. Therefore, Bellamira, wisely in time correct thy thoughts, and suffer them not to play with this dangerous god, lest the sport prove ear∣nest, lest the child thou play with grows too strong for Rea∣son; and from innocent thoughts becomes unruly passions. Fidelia, though she knows all but my fears, yet I now begin to blush, because there is something like my Love, whilst it was  in shadows only; I was confident, there being nothing in Nature to accuse me but this, though a Virgin like my
self, yet it is something now that my passion builds upon; and that newness, though no fault, is yet unconquered in my mind; and I cannot yet tell her this new stranger thought, though she know all the other secrets of my heart.
Arcus says, since he left the Prince he saw a Shepherd in age and clothes so like the Maid, that he believes it must be her Brother; and from this sight concludes your safeties near; for why should we find the evil part, and not the good prove true, of that fa∣tal Dream?
Ha! what coldness is this?—What trembling?—What paleness? this confusion of mind, what means it?—This joy and fear, this mingled nameless passion, of all passions com∣posed.—What art thou, or what would thou be?—Why this violence on a Maids heart?—Be but honour, and wear what danger, what form, thou wilt command, and I'll obey thee.
She's strangely troubled; I never saw her thus before: Madam, has my news displeased you?
No, no, Fidelia; my heart has troubles which thy joys to find some ease for me has overseen, whilst the greatest and saddest part of that fatal Dream; the King, Fidelia, the good, the kind, the valiant old King, my friend and Father, must in this dust be lost; remember that; what joy then can a safety bring when we cannot hope our victory at a less rate then his precious life?
Your pardon, Madam; the Princes love, and strange pas∣sage of the Satyr, your interest, and hope of future good, made me forget that piety and pity was due to the King.
Prithee, Fidelia, love, but do not pity us; for my part, though their ruin threaten, yet I despise a pity; nor is it due to my fortune; for I am not miserable so ordinary a way, as to be relieved with so cheap a remedy; and were the King safe thou should find me resolved, though not contented; and other joy then that resolution I cannot promise to my self; yet if I could be satisfied with such joys as affect others, I might esteem my self blessed; But my mind, Fidelia, is too severe to be taken with such shallow happiness as I see most women pursue, who affect the noise and vanity of the world, whose bubbles deceive and slave the most of women.
See, Madam, here's Arcus; let him now describe the Maid, whose beauty he said was equal to all that ever his eye saw.
Pardon me, Madam; my heart and reason make one exception.
Arcus is kind to beauty, and where ere he meets ad∣mires it; but what do's the noble Arcus think is beauty? if his eyes choose what is valued in his Country, there's nothing amongst us he can approve of.
It was our curse to be born in that Country, Ma∣dam; and that slavery which at first I lamented, I now rejoice
in as the means to make me able to distinguish between good and bad; for beauty, it is my contrary, what is not like me is beauti∣full; this is the shame and brand of nature; the curse of an incensed deity lives in our black.
You're cruel to the colour; and I rather think, like divine Bellessa, beauty, afraid of injuries, or in revenge of that inconstan∣cy she has found in men, hath thrown off red and white; and to live safe from the vanity and perjury of both sexes hath made this re∣treat into black for her security.
Madam, the story of our change is common; and the Poet tells whose curse we bear in our faces; no such reason as your Highness in your goodness imagines, whose charity would persuade us we might yet find acceptance when we loved; but it is too sad a truth, that for the sin of one coy Daphne all our Nation mourns; that froward Girl incensed Apollo's rage, and in re∣avenge of her scorn thus he brands us all, lest our Coun∣trey should again boast a face, that he might love; yet this good I find from my black; all people boldly praise me; and it is such an impossibility to believe any body can love it, that even your Highness will venture to defend it, and safely may; for twill beget no mans jealousy nor women's envy.
But if Arcus will find the Prince, and tell him how fain his Sister would see him before the Battle, and certainly in∣form himself whether these two Shepherds are really in nature, or only walking Dreams.
Bellamira will owe him more then praise, or thanks can pay.
It was his Highness Order I should expect him here, yet I shall not fail to obey your command, though betwixt this and the Prince the enemy has placed a Guard which I must pass through; for to go about I fear will be too long for your Highness to expect my return.
No, it is enough, we will expect his coming; I did not know there was a danger in the Pass; nor will we venture Ar-Arcus, whose faith shall be reserved for greater trusts then to be thrown away upon this common one; if I doubted his heart or love to my Brother, he should go; and I'd prefer my curiosity be∣fore him; but to let Arcus see I value his faith, I shall still preserve him as he has done it.
Madam, now I beg upon my knees your commands; and either you doubt my heart or faith, whose readiness to serve you you shall find as constant as my colour; my life and free∣doom I value only as the gift of your generous Brother; and your goodness has made me such a continued happiness, and so far above my merit, I am fain to trust to the report of others ere I can believe I was ever miserable; my birth in my Country I am not ashamed of, though I am of my fortune; to redeem which, if your Highness shall fear to command or expose me, I shall rather think you doubt, me then that you have any fears for me. For know, Madam, I cannot be satisfied, nor
count my self a grateful receiver of this freedom, but when I ex∣pose that and my self to serve you.
When I have a danger worthy of him he shall be sure to find the trust, and my prayers with it: but since my Brother de∣sires it, whose love has sent him about me, pray expect him here; for this Letter says, you and old Philemon must accompany us to Capua; and should you miscarry, our sex and ignorance of the place may throw us into many dangers.—Sure there is more in this man then his humble heart yet shows: such guests as honour, faith and courage would not lodge in so mean a Cottage as a private slave, unless benighted, or to avoid storms. Good heaven, what fortune do we see dealt to some men, as if justice had no power nor voice in heaven!—Well, Arcus, if we live to see this storm blown over, I shall very unwillingly be denied a better knowledge of your for∣tune; for it is not this cloud, nor this night that hangs upon thy forehead; nor those chains thou lately put off can hide thy mind; it still shows something too great for those misfortunes to pretend to.
Heaven hide his mercies when I hide a thought from the divine Bellamira; my story, Madam, when your Highness has leisure to wonder at the averseness of fortune, and would allay your own joys, then you shall know it: for that is a story has tasted of all kind of changes; and my miseries shall serve for your diverse∣on, Madam; in which nothing lies heavier upon my heart then the loss of a friend; which since my being a slave in Cyprus I could never hear of; and by me you may learn what custom can; do for my heart has of late been so beaten with afflictions they are grown natural to me.
See, see; Arcus, who is come to decide the difference? Oh, my Brother! what new strange misery is this! Arcus has filled my heart with fear and wonder; the truth of my dream makes me tremble too, with the apprehension of the Kings danger.
O Bellamira, my distracted soul is grown weary of this habitation; the new and many strokes that fortune has given of late makes me even turn coward, and yield to her malice; me∣thinks all she can do, or virtue hope for, is not worth the dispute; I would I had lost all she aims at so I were dead, or in some place forgotten and unknown to any but the gods.
I will not compare my griefs with my Brother's; but sure if I did you'd pity me, and not add your troubles to them; I hear you have seen a Maid in the Woods, and such a beauty as the Court never showed you; and I have got a Lover too, I was sending now to acquaint you with the person, and his propositions. I can conclude this war without a stroke, at least the Spanish Prince tells me so: it is only marrying him, and quitting my Father; and dear Leopoldo; this is all I am to do, and I shall prove how much he loves me even in this my desperate estate.
This from the false usurper? what answer sent you back?
I bad the Messenger return him, I never saw that man I would marry, nor any one whose company I preferred before my
Brothers; but if there were a necessity, and my choice free, the meanest Gentleman in all his Army that wore a sword, and had not lost his honour, my soul would prefer before him, even in this height of all his pride and power, that could believe my heart so degenerate to let it self be embraced by the destroyer of my Country, and murderer of my Family.
Spoke like my Sister, I never hated an enemy before; had love or ambition fairly armed his men, or desire to have got fame upon us, such a choice honour would have pleaded for; and I could have fought with him, and loved him too: but this treacherous pride and covetousness are too low things and too mean instruments for the gods to use, even when they have de∣creed a Monarchs ruin. Thunder, Famine, Sword or Pesti∣lence, are nobler far; sure we shall blush at our fall from this mean hand.—See, Fidelia's engaged, let us leave her; I have something to tell thee ere I part; it is a new secret, Bellamira; but the richest of my heart.
You'll find nothing but truth in what I have said; that she loves, or at least fears so, is as certain as that she can∣not love you, which Love and Fortune both has sent to afflict you in revenge of that scorn you have paid my friendship.
The figure of something seen in a Dream! the shadow of a shadow! this is a fate as aerie as mine own, as hopeless, No∣body, or a Shepherd! as impossible are her desires as mine; this being as much below her merit, as she's above mine.
Who knows their fate? their desperate passions make mine possible; I know it is not common nor scarce ho∣nourable in Maids to woo; yet, methinks, I may tell him that I love, if there be no more ill in the word then my desires or thoughts aim at; I am sure I may with innocence enough, and when I have told him so, if I lose a grain, or grow less in any one good, if I pluck one beauty from a Virgins mind, let how∣lings find me, and may my crimes in sad repentance unpitied fall in showers upon my cheeks; therefore armed with my innocence I am resolved to prove fate further; for to the virtuous and the fairly daring Fortune still holds out unlooked for success; and if mine be like my love, it must prove better then my hopes.
You are sad, Fidelia; is the Prince ready to depart?
Will you not go in and resolve your self? I know there is one from whom you will take a most unwilling leave.
Alas, Fidelia, there needs no circumvention to know all the secrets of my heart; ask and take them, for the gentle Fi∣delia mistakes her friend, if she thinks I have any wish that has a blush attending it; nor did I ever hide my desires from her, but in kindness, being loath to let her see a sight might trouble her.
I cannot speak to him, my heart's too big to beg for love.—Farewell, Palantus; live and love all, but—(twill not out.) 
Stay, gentle maid; it is true I love, I will not lye to thee, nor dare I tell her whom I love; that truth, yet my wishes
as no less innocent, then my hopes desperate; and I wear the fire here, Fidelia, without a fault, and shall do till I am earth; Yet my own despairs wound me not so much as Fidelia's, when I con∣cider her and Fate; and if thou wilt have patience thou shalt see me revenge thee on my self, decreed to such a misery as will not let me take the pleasure of making thee happy, nor my self; Yet I conjure thee, Fidelia, strive with thy Passion; and now thou know my Heart, let us smile some time when we meet each other; a sullen sad Love looks as if it mourned some past sin, or struggled yet to con∣quer some ill design.
Malice and jealous Lovers make more serious search then death; and what I told you even now was my fears rather then my wishes in thy Fortune; for know, my Heart is too full of Friendship for Palantus to wish against him: And farther, though I know all his desires are designed rewards for another, and thou would see thy wishes enjoyed by one thou can not question, (being Rivaled by a shadow,) yet I cannot blame thy Love; For Bellamira is an Excellence fit for Heaven to co∣vet: Nor doe's Palantus rejoice in those Excellencies more then I, though her graces are to me as so many Enemies. Thus Fide∣lia, though despised, will preserve her self fit for better Fortunes, by bearing this with Honour.
Sure there cannot be such a punishment in store for loving Bellamira as thy kind fears apprehend; And since we have touched this string, whose harsh sound I have long avoided for thy sake; Yet give me leave to say, Heaven and my Friend can witness, I never made any vows to Fidelia; what I have done for her, let the gods prove propitious to them and make us happy yet. And therefore, in Justice, you cannot call me inconstant, or abuser of your Love. Gratitude (if it were not too like vanity to say so) is all I ever could pay to thee; Not that I would not have given more, but it was all I had left; This fatal fire sent for my punishment, I fear, is either Child or Parent of that little god; for till then, I never knew or scarce believed there was such a power; nor did your own Heart desire a return of Love more then I have longed to give it you; For I know, Honour in all the heights of excellence produces nothing more glorious then a handsome Friendship: Other Virtues have him in pieces, but entire Honour is in the perfect Love of two; which since we cannot enjoy as we wish, yet you cannot accuse me of a crime which you have confessed your self; Gentle Fidelia, though not at the same Altar, yet I bow to the same power that leads thee in chains; nor will I be so bar∣barons as to employ thy Love to advance my wishes with Bella∣mira, nor fear from thee such injustice as to do ill Offices: Let our Friendship pity each other, and while we love with Honour leave the rest to Fate; and thou shalt find, though Love be binld, since he has brought us to this precipice, (I prophecy) he will lend us his wings to save us.
See, see, my Friend, how pleasing Truth is; when thou
dissemble even now, and hid'st thy Love; Thy words came out unwillingly, and their harsh sounds were forced through thy teeth, as if thy Tongue had hauled them to suffer for some crime they had committed: But now there's Music in them; and though the Tune be sad, yet it is well set; and our Souls sometimes af∣fects the serious and the grave, as well as the jolly triumphant noise of victory; And since Palantus values my Friendship, and looks with pity upon my sufferings, my Soul is at peace; for can he do this and not love? What is that but Love? Give me this, and take all the world besides: My Soul has not another wish in store, but that my Friend may find his, and I a pardon for a fault he shall not know until I have redeemed it; The Princess Bellamira too shall beg it for me.
What fault can you be guilty of to me that needs a Mediator? Is there a power beyond our Faith with each other? Come, Fidelia, though our parts be hard, yet we have a fair field to act in, and if friends looking on• and I miss my part, prompt me Love, and Fidelia's Heart.
I'Ll drink no more of this poisoned Juice; it is full of mad∣nos, Rage, and Lust; I lost my Reason and my legs too, and but darkly; yet remember what I did; good Master, calm her Mind, and make my peace, I dare not see her else.
It was the Prince Leopoldo, sure; he says they called him Prince, the accident is full of mystery; The gods laugh still at the wisest actions men design without them.
Yes, yes, Leopoldo, and Prince, so they called him; I thought he would have wronged my Love; if he had, lame as I am, my club should have pash'd his skull.
The Prince, men say, is gallant; My Father that hates them all for's Masters sake, yet calls him the just Leopoldo: And valiant all the world delivers him; sure he cannot then do a base Action; Yet his sudden passion may want reason to counsel him; and listening to his blood and power, who knows how that may prompt him to seek his end upon a Shep-herds Daughter? I'll find Phillora, and from her know all the Truth; Her wonder and silence makes me fear she loves.
She gazed, he says, and stood dumb; then changed co∣lore, and with fixed eyes lost her self in thoughts, till he cut her bow-string undiscerned. Come let us find her.
Sir, my thoughts upon this accident have been work∣ing long, but what to wish or fear, I know not; They have both
Honour, and that secures me from the apprehension of a great misfortune; though my Reason cannot hope the least happiness from their passion.
Let's lose no time in finding her, nor take notice, when she comes, that we have heard of this accident; get her things made up, and we will away to Gaietta; she's too modest to say she loves him; and we must be so discreet as not to see she's troubled, when she's once in Gaietta, the object being removed; she will not forget him; it is the first gay sight she has seen, and that works upon her fancy: But she has youth enough to out∣grow greater blows then this; Yet I confess, my Heart, since my Master dyed, never felt such divided thoughts as this passage has begot; let us haste and find them.
I'll stand the forked lightning sooner then meet her now she's displeased; my flesh trembles to remember she was an∣gry; either let her forgive me, or I'll be gone; I'll serve you no more if she frowns; It is for her sake I am a slave, my Soul has pleasure in obeying her.—See where she comes, hide me, earth, from that anger that fills her Mind; I'll not let you go till she for∣gives me.
They bowed to him and called him Prince; Ye gods, what need has he of such Additions? But Fortune will be Fortune still, lavish to some, and niggard to others, disposing her blessings like her blind self; What need had that Person (his moderation and his parts) of Titles, as if those virtues were not enough to give him rule over the world.
Phillora, come, dispatch; we have staid here till it is late; for you know we have a long walk to Gaietta.
How came you so incensed against your poor Lover? Fie, Phillora, could you be so displeased with a poor creature who knows no better then to be happy when he can? One not born subject to the Laws of Honour as we are. Nature was his Parent and his Mistress, she teaches no other Lessons; and yet, for your sake, he has bound in strict chains his blood and desires, and a thousand times hazarded his Life to meet your dangers; And could you be so cruel to intend his death for one fault? Overcome with wine too? Come, pray let me make his peace.—Come hither. 
I dare not till she forgives me, and calls me hers again.
Forgive thee? yes, with all my Soul I forgive thee, and beg thy pardon, poor thing; How full of fear he is of me that had forgot him?
I pray dress his arm.
I shall, Dear Pollidor, and then I have other wounds to cure; First, let me see this, so.—Go fetch me some of the pot of Balsam thy Father taught us to make; Here, prithee take this Bow and Quiver; I'll give them thee for being so ready to exe∣cute  my Anger upon my poor Lover, and burn them if thou wilt.
Do, and I'll give thee this Scarf, the Prince gave it me.
The Princes Scarf? did he give it thee?
Yes, Divinest. But what care I for him, or it, but to please  thee? take it, and forgive me—All the gods bless thee, fair and gentle; may all that wrong thee bleed like me, In heart too, and find my wounded mind; Shall we go, this night, for Gaietta, Master, I'll put up the Pies we made; But I'll destroy the bag that holds my enemy, that baneful Liquor; I'll spend all my Arrows on that damned skin, and let his blood out as fast as he did mine.
And when you have done haste to yonder hill, and dili∣gently observe which way those Troops bend their march that pass the wood; as soon as you return we'll be gone; come Phillora; you are sad, he is not dangerously hurt.
I am glad I mist my aim; And I would there were no more danger in my wounds, then I wish, or fear, in his.
Your wounds, Sister, where are you wounded?
Come nearer, Pollidor, thou art my brother, my dear brother,  until this hour, the only sharer with this good old man, in all the wishes and joys of my heart; this morning I had no wish, no hope, no joy, beyond us three; Your good was all I prayed for then. But—
But? What dear Phillora?—Ye gods! it is too true, I fear what the poor Satyr said, he knew by himself She was in Love, and having felt the sickness confidently describes the disease; how Nature and Honour strive in her wounded Breast! but I must not seem to indulge her passion, there being no possibi∣lity she should be happy; Nor can I, if I would be angry with her; My Counsel I'll give her gently, and use a Brothers Interest to prevail.—Let not Phillora wonder at my silence when she weeps; Tears and Sighs, in thy Fortune, cannot pass by me, but with pain and amazement, what ails my Sister, why do's she hide her Eyes?
Oh that I had been blind this day, then I had not seen that god walking amongst mortal men; his Eyes, Pollidor, wound like the Pestilence; here, here it struck me, I cannot bear the pain, nor would not willingly be cured.—It is either Love, or death, or both; For both bear darts, and sometimes death has (they say) used loves Bow; if ever, now he has borrowed it; for I find a strange sadness here, sadness even to death, Pollidor.
Oh poor Phillora, this news flew before thee, but we hoped thy wounds were not so dangerous, nor their pains so great, as to make thee cry out for help; dost thou know, who it is whose eyes have poisoned all thy peace?
The man I know not, But excellent, sure, above the rest; his looks appeared as if he had some great place in General Fame; Prince they called him too, and like Mars he moved.—In his looks you might have read him a King of men.
But when Phillora knows this is that Prince Leopoldo she has heard my Father so often mention, she will then remember what hatred is due to him, and not heap sorrow upon her Fathers head by loving his Enemy.
Leopoldo? was it the Prince Leopoldo? then I am mi∣serable not that he deserves our hate, for my soul tells me; he has no guilty share in our misfortunes; Did my Father know him when he reviled him? could Pollidor know and curse Leopoldo? sure you never saw him, did you?
Never I, nor wish not, but to take my Revenge upon him.
That's not kindly answered, and I dare swear now thou never saw him, else his looks would have reconciled thee; it is not possible such a Noble Countenance should have an Enemy in thy breast; it is it self too generous; If this be the Prince Leopoldo believe the choice my heart has made; it is my first Election, find him out, make acquaintance with him; if then thou can find in thy soul to hate him I'll never see him more, But rather die then not comply with my Brothers wishes. Oh Pollidor, see and know him, and thou wilt find a prodigal Star reigned at his birth; prince and power are Crutches fit for wicked men to lean upon, whse lame souls will fall without such helps; his very looks Command; Thou wilt find great things writ in his Eyes, and hee must bee a Prince wheresoever hee will but deign to Reign.
I find your weakness has yielded too far for me to have a power over your passion: yet if you do love him, you ought not to hate me, nor expose my Honour rashly; But no more now, it is late, and we must haste to Gaietta.
To Gaietta?
Yes, to Gaietta, our safety and our business calls us thither, change of Faces too, may make you forget him.
No, Pollidor, I have no such waxen heart; I confess I am wounded, the Venom of a Lovers Eye has stung my heart; I know too, it is the common remedy, to decline the Object; but I scorn to be healed that Common way; let the Scorpion cure the Scorpions poison; had I never seen the Prince, Not to see him were good counsel; but having seen him, who can behold any other object? my mind carries his figure here; I must blind my reason too, ever I can lose the sight of that bright Star of Honour who now beckons us to come.—Hark, now he calls, now fly to him and Honour, they have but one habitation; Follow me, dear Pollidor,  Follow, and learn by him how to conquer with perfect honour, and from me to be overcome by Leopoldo, with no less glory. To stay here, and have our Virtues chained up in Solitude, shows but a passive virtue, only the Courage of Slaves and Beasts; and they will exceed us too in such a tame Courage that glo∣ries only in what they can endure. The great trial of great hearts is seen in both Fortunes; who stoops to either Fate of Prince or Slave is not perfect; come, and see the Prince la∣boring himself like the god of War through these dangers; op∣posing their Treason with surprising glories; see every look speaks; whose every motion has more grace and Beauty, and binds me more then his Face; Yet his words were full of Love; and though I will not say I deserve it, Yet I am confident I have all
that honour could give, in so short a warning; and I will not doubt but my Love has credit with his Heart, for greater sums then Phillora desires of Fate, to make her happy. Follow, and be witness of this Truth; see him only, if you then condemn me, I'll yield.
Stay Sister, Phillora, I am past my reason; whither  will you go? will you thrust your youth into the dangers of the licentious Soldiers? retire, only for this day, into our peaceful Cave, where we will, with my Fathers Counsel, resolve what is to be done in this Extremity.
Have I not been buried all my life here, and beg but one day to live? give me but this day, and here inter me again.
Phillora, I have with grief and amazement heard thee, and now shall cease to wonder that our counsel cannot prevail, since you have thus thrown off the modesty of your Sex; For this confident avowing of your Love is so immodest, that I fear your Phillora will give sooner then he asks; That I love thee Heaven witness; and that I am not deaf to Love Thy Mother (whose Ghost will scorn thee,) witness for me; nor do's thy youth know that God. It is true Love, of it self, is innocent, and the gods have given it for a tie a∣amongst men, and it is the greatest Blessing, even to the happy'st Fortunes; A Beauty in the best minds, if not corrupted. Else That, as all good things in Excess, are ill. Consider then what it is you attempt. A Prince, and your Fathers Enemy; One By the Stars set out of your reach; If Honour then be your guide, what can you expect to be (but what I ab∣whore to name?) Are you not born private issue? A Shepherds Daughter? can that condition hope any thing but to become some vile thing, despised by him, before enjoyed, and by all, af∣la? Have you a reason to urge against this? if not, let my truth find place.
Scorn me? The Gods we both bow to will revenge me then. A Shepherds daughter? A Herds-mans Child? the banished Issue of a poor Forester? What if this be so? yet we bow to the same Altars, Worship the same gods, and draw the same free Air; do's he scorn all his Subjects? if not, why me? I ask him nothing; is it a fault to love my Prince? If it be, it is no general Crime; Witness the sad Cause of these Wars; and if my Father did not lend a more Parti∣all ear to his Anger then to my Love he would not now Command me to hate my Prince, nor longer cherish that only crime that stains his Story; That low passion makes us miser∣able; or can you doubt me so fallen from virtue, so aban∣don'd by all the gods, as to forsake all their Sacred Rules, to become a prostitute, or such a Child as to give up all their rights to the first Temptations of my heart? Oh, Sir, re∣serve your censure till I have played my Part in this unfinished Story, and you shall find I build not my happiness on any other grounds but those of honour; And if the Prince prove Master
of all those Excellencies I believe in him, they shall be no Argue∣meant to make me wicked; but if he prove short of those fire∣tues, you shall find me scorn him, and pity my self; and if his virtues have no power to tempt me, I am certain his vices shall not; It is the Deity in the Prince, not the Man, Phillora stoops to; and when my Father, or dear Pollidor, can bring such an Argument against my Love, as to show me Prince Leo∣poldo acting one thought less then his part, less then a Prince, you shall see Phillora prompt him, and Act something more then woman.
Could I be confirmed he loves, my fears, I con∣fess, would vanish for there's no such guard to honour; as per∣fact Love.
I am sure I love, and that shall save me; and I hope he loves; for why should he flatter me? By your own ill rule, if his heart were as wicked, as you would have me believe him, sure he had power enough, he needed no such darkness, as a pretended Love to act a mischief in.
Poor girl, If all that had said, or swore it, had been Lovers, or the half of those that have sealed it with their Oaths, tears, or bloods, our Stories, Phillora, would not have been so full of the mischiefs of that God whose barbarous fires have thrown ruin and destruction into that peace that inhabits amongst the gods them∣selves.
Nay, of all the herd, The talking Lover, Sir, should find least Faith; the angry and the jealous Lover are to be preferred be∣fore him; and it was a great truth of him that said, it is with Lovers as with those that work in Tapestry; they see not the piece until it be done; so he that can describe his pussion, and tell how much, the why, the where, and the when he loved, and what throws and pains his heart felt, is awaked from his Dream, he could not else make a description of a way he never travelled; and he that has trod loves paths once exactly, may be a good guide to another Passion, but never good Lover himself; after such a Journey.
When I shall love, give me a Maid with a Virgin passion, and ignorance in Love; that sets out at the Eye, and rests in the heart; Your talking Lover, that strives to gain Love by the Ear, aims at low pleasures, impatient of deser∣avenge great ones, and loses his Arrows; Where there is Ho∣nor, Love needs no such guide as the tongue, to find out Love; nor company, to tell his story to; Love and a Lover are to each other all the world; they cannot be alone, their thoughts are able to people the world.
Oh, gentle Pollidor, talk on, chide me thus, and I'll be silent; how came you to know this great mystery of Love?
For thee, Phillora, I have felt a passion, equal to all that Poets feign, and yet never felt one uneasy thought till this hour.
O my Brother! dearer yet than my self; this kindness has tied thee to my soul, preferred before all but the Prince, second to none but Leopoldo O turn not away from me, but hear the truth I speak: If what I utter be not Reason, yet it is Love: a Fire∣gins first and chaste passion for a most excellent object now in dan∣ger, pursued by treason, and bleeding for the faults of others: O let me do something to help him. I see that smile, now your heart laughs at me; it is true, I draw a weak Bow, but Love will guide the Arrow: I know I hunt all this while impossible things, yet for my peace of mind let me beg, Pollidor will be so kind as to foal∣low me this day; what though I lose my self in some hand∣some high Attempts, should thy Sister die, there would be Fame, though no Victory; and if I live there will be time enough to return hither, and in this private life lament my ambitious passi∣on, and here learn to level my thoughts at something low as my fortune.
It is then too late to counsel; Reason I see has lost his force; All I have to say is, Have you any kindness left, by which I conjure thee, for my sake, defer this business but this day.
No more, for Charity no more; I grant you have reason, but I am mad; Alas, you sue to me as if I had power over my self; Find the Reason I have lost, and restore it, and Pollidor shall find me the same governable tame Phillora I was yesterday. But as it is, you may as soon expect I should sleep when I am bidden, or leave to remember Pollidor. I know I am mad, and must plead that Madness, which now must instead of Reason prevail with thee: In desperate Diseases, and with mortal wounds, where no∣thing can do good, nothing can do hurt: I am that person, so sick, so wounded. Thy Sister hath at her eyes drank mortal Poison: Here in my heart I bear the wounds Apollo himself complained he could not cure; since then in Art and Nature there rests no hope, I conjure thee in kindness let me again drink the pleasing Venom in, and refuse not to thy unfortunate Sister (since she can∣not live happily) the satisfaction only of choosing this way to die.
Dry thy eyes, and far, far away be that sad hour; Look up Phillora, thou hast overcome me; Reason, Safety, and Revenge, all but Honour, I freely give to thy Passion, and with a Brothers tender heart I'll serve thee. Ye Gods, what Fruit this fatal bitter Root will bring I know not; I'm sure it is planted in our richest ground. Come, lead the way, and since Love thus lays violent hands upon our hearts, and will force us in this public day to play our parts, let us obey his Messengers, and thou shalt find how dear Phillora is to me, whose Peace I'll hunt through the world with faith and truth to Fame or Death.
And if thou find thy Sister made like the common frame of women, in whom a sickly weak honour inhabits, such as want the counsel of Friends, or the poor remedy of Spies, to preserve fit for thy love, let my Brother despise me for ever.
I am confirmed, and thus will seek our fortunes in this day
with minds prepared for all kind of chances. And you Monarchs of the World, Fame and Honour, what though we bring no Troops of armed men to court you, yet look down with justice upon our actions, and ye shall find we have not lost one grain of that virtue the Gods were pleased to give us.
My soul takes fire at thy words; and though Pollidor be no Prince, but a kind of Plant bred and nourished in the Woods, yet I have seen him act what the best of Princes need not blush to imitate; and I prophecy, though he now begins to build without materials, Fortune will supply him; and Princes looking on shall wonder why Pollidor was a Shepherd, and their People wish him a Prince seeing him act such things as we sacrifice to in others; then shall the story of kind Pollidor out-last his Marble, and die only with the world.
It is in vain to resist this Passion; yet if the Prince's love prove noble, greater and weightier interest than they imagine may yet hang upon this day; but the time is so distracted, and so short, I cannot listen to the call of those things that concern us most; for they are gone, and I must follow; Love and Innocence protect them.
RAvack's stay makes me apprehend some danger, the Are∣mies are both in the Woods, and my fears are more for him and those dear Pledges of Fortune; should they miscarry, all our faith would find but a sad conclusion; Clytus too confirms my jealousies of the Spanish Prince, that he means some foul play, by his desiring to marry with the Princess Bellamira; his first con∣fidence to promise the People to produce their long lost and sup∣posed dead Prince begot my fears; but it was no time then to dis∣cover the falsehood of that Promise, because it did our business; for it armed the People,, and shall finish our work too; for before they can be undeceived, or question the truth of that Promise, we'll have played our Game; for if we overcome Leopoldo their anger's nothing; if Leopoldo overcome us, that nor all the world shall win me to survive that day. Cleon, we must keep a strong Guard this night; and leave order, if Ravack comes, though it be late, that he be let into the Ports, let the Galleys lie loose; and feed your men well, that we may be ready upon all occasions that are presented; I fear the Spaniard, but we must not seem to mistrrst him; yet let all the Officers know Clytus is the person they are to follow, if he and the Prince of Spain dispute; give this intelligence your self, it is not safe to trust it to a common Messenger, lest our fears wrong the Prince.
I shall obey, our Forces are this Evening joined with Clytus, it is a brave Body; and trust me, the King's looks with a mind not less daring; it is true, their number is not so great as
ours, yet their virtues may be equal; for the Gentry fills his Troops, and such whose Fortunes depend upon the Court; in that lies their odds; and it was in my opinion no policy to to take away their Retreat to Capua, twill but beget a desperate Charge; for now their flight can promise no safety; many will do more in such a necessity than Honour would have prompted them to.
It is too late to give that Counsel now, but let us be rea∣die to do our parts when Fortune calls; our Rests are up too, and to Justice I yield my part who knows my heart is honest.
CLytus welcome; Are your Troops joined with those of Gaietta?
Yes, Sir, and we have already received a Visit from the Enemy, we have taken some Prisoners that assure us that the King, Prince, and Princess, are all in the Army.
Why then we shall do all our work at once; I hate delays, let Fortune give me my Answer quickly, whether a Monarch or a Slave;—If my Stars have in this Fate this Crown, This day it is  mine; if not, there's a hope lost.
If you could produce the person of our King, my pro∣phetick soul tells me the day were ours; such a signal Victory would make all their hearts turn Coward; the justice and avenge∣ance they must expect from his injuries would wound farther and deeper than either Sword or Spear.
Make it safe by Conquest for him, and my life to gage I'll bring him to you; but if his Friends will not give one blow for his safety, I fear he will not be persuaded to trust their jealousy; but this is wide of our business—Roderigo!
It is so, do, whisper, the Gods hear you, still I have ac∣quainted Negro with my fears, and he, I'm certain, will not be cir∣cumvented; it is for our own interest we fight as well as yours, ere we see the King, else you should stand alone for Clytus.
This though it be policy, Sir, is neither honest nor gallant; besides, I cannot be such a Fool as to believe Clytus durst say these things, but that he is sure of his Army, who you see has possessed yon Hill, and stand in a manner divided from us: Take heed how you anger him lest you tempt him to be wise and honest; it is ea∣sly done; but standing still, or joining with the King, or if he will look on, he's secure in the advantage of the place, and may laugh at us that must labour for him; and when we have destroyed each other, how easy twill be for him to give Laws to both we shall quickly find. It is my counsel to dissemble still; it is true, one blow with this Dagger does it; but what good can you derive from that mischief? when the Battel's over; if you can strike him securely it may signify something, but till then let us
bear him fairly: it is late, and the King's men are advanced alrea∣die, and we must not let them take such courage as twill give them to find us unwilling to fight.
Come, Clytus, every one to his charge.
I fear no Enemies; if my Friends be true, I'll look to my Enemy my self; and I'll have a care of false Friends too; Rode∣rigo, I shall, and yet I'll fight well to day.
See, Sir, my fears are true, upon my life he's jealous; something and quickly must be thought upon, and wisely too, ei∣there to confirm him, or remove him hence; but Fortune, if that Trumpet sounds what I believe, it will perhaps take the work in∣to her own hands, and we may see the Traitor fall in his own snare—Hark, Sir, it is a Charge.
Away then, Give the Word round, Command all to march.
FArewell Palantus: this day is set to decide our hopes or fears; Love be thou propitious, and I shall not fear the rest; the King has his ancient virtue still, his courage, and will command the Battle himself; my Charge lies this way, let us embrace and part, and this day strike, to be always free from such a danger as this false pretence which now hath armed these Traitors.
Pray Sir, let Arcus attend the Princess in her journey to Capua, Philemon is old; and though his courage be great it is but ill guarded; if I might attend that service he should not have that envied Office.
Nor would thou grant it me, if thou knew my mind,—I shall not fail to wait upon her Highness; but I believe till  those Troops of Clytus be forced from yonder Hill, it will not be safe for us to pass, for we are still subject to his parties; and we must expect he will not let us pass free unspoke with; and if once we be taken it is a great blow to your Highness affairs, as appears by the Spaniards Propositions of Marriage; for though he promise to give a King, his business is to get a Queen, and by that Interest of Blood ally his success unto the Crown; which Curse Heaven with thy Fires forbid, or give Arcus leave with his Dagger to re∣move.
Hark, they receive the Charge; Away, our Place and In∣terest is first this day, and Honour tells us it ought to be so in dan∣ger too.
URge them: how Roderigo? the aged King acts won∣ders above man; how the stubborn rock broke our charge; he has many wounds, and in revenge of them his men fight, such resolution I never saw among so few men.
How I abhor that traitor Clytus, that could so barb∣rously charge his King!
He is a villain, but his hand's useful in this work; haste to him and second him in his charge; I'll once more prove the Princes temper; he has a name in Arms, and I long to grapple with him.
NO, no more, Palantus, it is enough, Fate has run his cir∣cle; here my greatness begun, and here it ends; in a Bat∣tle, I set out King, and in a Battle end; the sword gave me my honour, and to the sword I have again surrendered it: and I pri∣thee tell my Son, if he survive the day, and fortune smile, which yet I despair not, (for his virtue must meet greater dangers then these) command him to search out the truth of the Spaniards de∣clarations; and if he can find my Nephew, let him restore the Crown; it had been my voluntary act, had not that traitor Clytus crushed all our intentions; the rest were beaten, I saw them stag∣ger; their Officers and Prince retreated, till Clytus false and stout with wicked troops of our own Countrymen charged us, fools and wicked that could not in such an act believe how great a sin their valour was.
Oh, Sir, do not take such hasty leave from your poor and miserable friends; what shall we do when you are gone?
Thy faith, Palantus, will redeem to story the long lost gratitude of Favourites; and it is one joy to me I never was decay∣ved where I trusted; I find a blindness that foretells the way I am to go: farewell, be happy for thy kindness to thy old Master, who without trouble dyes, embraced by the arms of him whom he loved; thy faith was always welcome, but in death most precious; and I prithee fail not to give my blessing to my dear Bellamira, whose dream is made good in this my fall; and to let thee see all thy care did not hide from my eyes thy modest passion for Bellami∣ra, here from my dying hands take this Legacy; I have worn it as a relic many a day, love it as well as I did, and death can only part ye; could I have loved her less, or consented to see her acting of a
deed I could not justify, long since thou had had my consent to have been happy; but she was ever my dear Bellamira; and I know Palantus though he loved, yet his mind had honour too, and would not see her go less to satisfy his passion. But it grows late, and I find my blood waste apace.—Hark, we are pursued; save thy self, leave me, faithful Palantus.
Oh, Sir! do not bid me believe you love me, and com∣mand me this, at least not wish I should obey you: this treasure of  my life I keep as my soul, and but this shadow have no friend: could you refuse to drink of this fatal cup that treason and murder have prepared, at the rate of my life I'd buy your place. But see, while I talk, death is making his pale unwelcome visit in my Masters noble heart, the seat of a thousand virtues.—Oh! he  is gone, set for ever in this cloud; this object and this loneness how dismal it is! none but death and I at a Kings Tragedy; but it is just, I had his trust alone, alone his love, his favour, without a Rival, but not without a Nations envy; here I'll stay, here the Conqueror shall find his victory had not power to make me fly to save a short loathed life, and lose my place in story.—Ye gods,  that see these wounds, arm all your vengeful hands, and strike the traitors quick into the earth that thus have brought his sacred head with violence to the grave; may their torn Carcasses never find a grave; see, see this reverend head that you have spared; the double tie of King, and old, found no reverence, nor his gray hairs protection; no friends had they here that had in hey∣ven no enemies; such was his piety that treason and murder were fain to arm against him, to second time, that great enemy of man and nature, who could not alone destroy this sacred Pile, whose ruins I shall not have power to mourn, unless I can save these relics from the malice of those traitors that pursue us; I'll take off his robe and mine own too; and if I can pass for some pri∣vate Soldier I'll scope with my load.
Who are you? disarm, and bind him.
We must ask that of you; the day has given you power to appoint us fates.
What is he you defended?
One that an hour since would have fought with thee, or any man alive; it was my Father; may thine again never bless his  eyes with a sight of thee, whose ambition has set his in blood.
Thy faith shall plead for thee, though thy curses has struck me more then any danger I ere saw. Roderigo, behold a great example of faith and fortune; how pious that young
man looks in his wounds, and how lovely in his sorrow!
And how black we look that cause them! my soul ab∣horse my part of this conquest, I never pitied an enemy before: in∣deed we never met a gallant one till now; and had not their own swords fought against them, we had not stood here now to mourn their sufferings; how I hate that traitor Clytus! he called me in the Battle, and bad me witness what he did for his young King. Vile∣lain, some old curse will find thee for it.
Well, what's next to be done? the Prince stands still, and Palantus's Troops are rallied.
It was a gallant fellow their Chief; I saw him charge to second the King, when Clytus broke him, but since he was not seen.
Sir, the Officers expect you; Clytus is pressed by the Prince, and calls for horse to second him.
Away with him to my Quarter, let him receive no in∣jury. 
Come, friend, shall we be jogging? you have a kind enemy you see.
His humanity has won me strangely; if I live to see the Princess she shall know how handsomely he gave his character, both of the King and Prince. His general too is a brave fellow; with what scorn and hatred he mentioned that traitor Clytus, the cause of all these miseries; that villain laid this Scene of war and death.
Come dispatch, dispatch.
Witness heaven, how unwillingly I part from this dear load; and friend, if thou wilt return and give this old man a grave, and but tell me where you lay his body, poor as I am in fortune, I shall find something to reward such piety.
When you are safe we'll talk of that.
Let's go through the wood upon the left hand, and there we shall have time to examine his Pockets.
This way, this way, Pollidor, I see the storm bonds; all their wicked force is bent to destroy the best of men. 
Hold, Phillora.
Will you yet retreat, and not with idle passion fondly pursue a lost man? you see the day is lost, you see the gods the ju∣ster side have taken, the enemy has all in chase; and if we stay we must expect the same fate that follows their impiety; it is ridicu∣lous, this love, that thus with madness you pursue; can you ima∣gin it possible that these swords can redeem the day? you see in kindness to your grief we have given up our Reason, and our re∣avenge; and, for your sake, struck even against our hearts, and all that kindness begets but a wilfulness in you.
I find my Brother has but dissembled then, and Pollidor has no sense of the pain he never felt, nor kindness for Phillora; he could not else thus harshly rub her wounded mind: but take heed this despised power thou now contemnest, do's not in vengeance arm some unequal dart against thee; this mornings Sun found my breast as free as thine, proud too as my Brother, both of my form and liberty, and at as high a rate I prize my freedom; yet one sight of his eyes has burnt them all to ashes; and I prophecy those several virtues that now lye idle in your breast, shall but make love a triumph when those torches of thy eyes shall take fire from that star, to whose beauty fate and love have decreed thy pain.
Alas, Phillora, here's none that chides thy passion; counsel we may; we only tell thee, Love and Honour were born twins, and will endure neither separation nor competitors; you must not divide those friends, together they act great and glory∣os things; the mind that possesses them is scarce mortal, but if you separate that cordial, you'll find too late, Love is but the poi∣son; excellent in medicine when prepared and allayed with ho∣nor, and but prepares the way; it is good, Phillora, at opening the door to let the Treacle in; so much of the venom Love is good as serves to fire the mind with great thoughts; but honour (child) must direct his feet; he will neither find else, nor know his home.
Oh, be not thus cruel, Sir, to wound me with your reason; my sick eyes cannot see the light; have mercy upon me, and let me go.
You must not go; it is kindness to be cruel: your passi∣on grows to madness; and it is folly, not friendship, to listen to your prayers; you must not pass.
I shall force my way either through thine, or my own heart.
Come, pass here; make thy way through my heart, or and it made by grief, ungrateful and unkind Phillora, to see all my love and care thrown behind thee, like the despised things of the world; go, Phillora, follow thy passion, give to a stranger, of∣fer to the pride of one that perhaps will not accept thy present, that love, for nothing which thou would not pay unto a Bro∣there: but when thou return here thou shalt find me dead; for know I will not out-live thy honour: go wretched Maid, give that innocence which thou shalt never find again; that innocence for which, this day, thou stood'st the envy of thy time, and wilt hereafter fall below a common pity, cruel, blind, ungrateful and unkind Phillora.
Oh Pollidor, Pollidor, thou hast struck me to the soul; un∣grateful, and unkind! any thing but that, that was cruelly urged, witness my broken heart, to which thy unkind kindness has given its mortal wounds: farewell, Pollidor; be thou happy though I might not.—
She is not well, she looks pale; Phillora, dear Phillora, look up; see thy Brother in tears, beg thy pardon; it is the heavens
fights in this passion, and their wills must not be disputed; speak kindly to her and heal her mind.
Alas, Sir, how easy it is for me to speak kindly, heaven knows that sees my heart; Phillora, Sister, unlucky Maid, once more pardon the harsh expressions of a Brothers grief, whose love and kindness mistook the way to express it self; all my design was to have recommended reason as a companion for thy love, for love alone is but a passion, and a blind one; Dear Phillora, much care and pains goes to make him a virtue, and then honour must be his parent, and his issue too; this is all I had to say, and this I would fain should have been reason; but thy love shall prevail hereafter; and dear Phillora cease now to be sad, and angry with thy Brother, or to believe me so barbarous as to dispute against that god of passion, but as I fear him thy enemy:—Or think me such a stranger to thy heart as to doubt Phillora's honour; what I have said was only to prompt thy mind, which I found this day so busy obeying of thy love, I was afraid, during this civil war in thy mind, some watchful enemy passion might surprise that strength which I am confident no assault, or siege can win.
Ever loved, but never dearer to my heart then now! Oh, let me rest upon thy breast, and hide my blushes there! yet my soul covets no faulty thing; it is no whisphers, nr midnights darkness that I seek; no corner to tell my story in; no guilt hangs upon my heart, my mind and desires are as bright as the days guide, as pub∣lick as Leopoldo's name, I dare avow my love of him; shall we be∣cause the gods frown add misery to those which they afflict, who, we know, suffer for others crimes? and join with treason to wound the man my soul admires? no Brother, he is my Prince; and let heaven speak to him in thunder, while I obey and follow him to his Grave, or throne; whiles my heart weeps over the one, but never envy him the least glory of the other.
There are armed men entered the Wood; haste, dear Mi∣stress, and follow me, or we are lost. The Princes party flies in every place; the enemy pursues us close.
The gods protect the Prince.
Here I left her, there's the Satyr; whore's my Daughter?
Now gone into the Woods.
What makes you stay behind, what is it you gaze on?
A man lies a dying here in the bush, he groans and stirs still.
A man, where?
Come, leave him, prithee Master, he's but ill company now, and going a worse journey; and if we stay, perhaps, we may be sent upon the same errand.
Is there any life? help, hold up his head, he breathes and stirs; it is long since I saw this face, yet there are lines in it my me∣mori  retains, it is he.—This confirms me, Heaven I accept this of∣fer; sure some great work is designed in this chance; I'll bear him to our Cave, but first I'll take off his Ring for fear the enemy meet us; come, help to take him up.—Little hast thou deserved this charity from me; but I'll not upbraid thy ashes; if I can recover him of his wounds we will find a way to make him useful to us, at least secure him for hindering our designs.
Carry him to the Cave; and if he be a friend let me alone to cure him.
I Do not like these villains whispering, they have made me leave the road; sure they design some mischief in this wood; should I seem to fear, that might encourage them in their villainy.—How now, What whisp'ring's this?
What we have done already is more than we can an∣swer; let us search his pockets, and deliver him to the guard at the foot of the Hill. 
Villains, this violence shall cost you dear.
Ha! This is no small bird, such feathers few of your kind wear.
Search farther; Here's a Jewel too, and papers, those we shall not use.
If they find my picture too I'm lost, my Soul cannot endure that separation; What would you have more, have you not taken all already?—Hell take your loathed Souls.
Oh, this is it; A picture, what have we here? Golden Houses for shadows? 
It is so, a picture only, after all the rest of your Injuries, restore but that and I'll freely forgive you; take the case too, only the picture again; if you have any humanity you will not deny it; it is to you of no use, but to me the dearest jew∣el of my life; It is of a friend, whose Memory I adore; set any rate upon it and I'll purchase it; it is your own Interest I propose.
Keep our counsel and you shall have it, upon our words we'll restore it; But if you tell any Tales, or complain to the General of this visitation of your pockets, then down goes Dagon, nothing saves your Saint; here she shall lie safe till we find you a man of your word; till then, take a civil leave of her, and let's be gone.
Without you will restore it I'll not stir one step.
Come, come; if you consent to go in all together, we'll afford you the cutting into quarters, and do it at four.
Villains, you'll dearly repent this Insolence.—Pray, (and heartily) I get not my hands loose; twill be sad to some of you ever if I be free.
Come, fret and curse at home, till we repent.
OH Arcus, it was she, there's nothing like her; She is an original, I saw her and the poor Satyr too; la∣boring in our cause, she acts above a mortal power; My Hearts a fire till I know her Fortune; she had the scarf on I gave the Satyr; My Father and Palantus are both wounded, and both missing; Haste and try, if possible, in this general mischief, to save some remnant of our family: Find my Sister, conjure her to haste to Capua, and there ship for Rome; whither (if I can reach my ends) I'll with diligence repair.
Alas, Sir, I fear she's lost, and so will you be too if you thus pursue your passion; Consider, Sir, how many thousand lives and fortunes hang upon your precious days.
Lost! Heaven sleeps not sure, nor will so negligently part with such a Jewel; And Nature, kind Nature, that has care even of Plants, and waits so diligently upon every Season, think thou, Arcus, she would mind a Bird or Tree and neglect these? No, no, she'd sooner spare the Sun, the Pride of her workmanship, then suffer such a blow; it would wound her deeper then her opposites of Sword, Plague, and Famine, though waited on by death; Hark, we are pursued; some brave Enemy that would bring a gallant Revenge, or a handsome death, would make me smile upon my Fortune; But I talk, and thou art here still, my Sister will be lost; Fly, Arcus, fly, ere it be too late to counsel her.
Alas, Sir, what sullen Starr rules you? Why would you have me leave you? Why do you choose to fall alone? Do you think I am of so low a spirit, or so base as to leave my Prince in danger, and seek my own safety? Go, and I'll follow you throughout all the world; but if I leave you, Heaven curse me.
We are all lost then; for I am resolved to find this Maid ere I think of safety; I saw her enter this wood. Oh, Arcus, it is a strange wonder of her Sex; It is a gallant Mind dwells in that private Breast, and blessed is he shall find a Friendship there, yet my Love shall cut-vie his; For he that is her equal, is mercenary, and proposes to himself her for his reward, which I cannot without injuring her or Leopoldo; which ere I will do, thou shalt see me fly where my despairs will carry me, and converse with Beasts or Trees, envying the life of Plants, whilst I despise my own.
Oh Sir, let me beg once in my days to be believed; and lest my fears prove fatal, by her whose fair eyes you love best I beg you'll at lest quit this habit and your order, and for a time strike sail to fortune in this storm; you'll sink a brave vessel else, and lose a noble fraught.
How? And fall a private man? Pluck from my self my Honour? No, Arcus, thou shalt see me frown, and meet the worst of Fortunes; For I dare die, as well as live a Prince; And here, with all the Triurnio, and glorious distinctions of a Prince, thou shalt see me fall a crowned sacrifice to Love and Fortune.
Sir, Wisdom as well as Courage is allowed us in all our accidents of this life; and to be wilful in our miseries upbraids the gods, and looks as if we would glorify our selves: Besides, if you desire to be capable of enjoying her own wishes in this habit, and like your self, it is impossible. Leopoldo, This day was your happiness; But Leopoldo now can promise nothing but misfortunes; your misery is the desire of all men. The busy Ambition of the Enemy hunts nothing but the greatness of the Prince; In which time a private man may escape; Besides, the the Maid will sooner listen to your words when you stand in a level with her, then when she sees such a desperate height as is be∣twixt her and her Princes Love.
Ha! What hast thou said? It is Truth he urges, and I submit to thy Reason in hopes to find it successful;—Thus I consent to a disguise, which this public Character cannot wear.—  Here, Arcus, take this envied Character from my afflicted Breast; This shows how dangerous these distinctions of Honour are, and how vain men are that seek them.—Poor and safe; could great∣nos believe that truth! how happy might we be whose sad expo∣rience I now must prove? Would I could lose my self to all the world, but thee Bellamira, and this Maid.
Come, Sir; who knows but this stooping a little to For∣tune may make her kind, and take it for satisfaction for all the scorns your Virtue has thrown upon her; trusting still to Ju∣stice, and aspiring to that title rather then the fortunate Leopoldo: Hark, Sir, the noise draws this way; in this woods thickness we may hide our selves, and let the danger pass.
Lead the way, but with how ill a will I yield to Fortune, the gods witness; Love, it is thy power more then any argument of fear or hope prevails with me.
It is sure a party of the Enemy that pursues us, but these woods are thick, and we are now near home.
It was the Prince, I know his clothes; His royal slave was with him too, a mark not to be mistaken.
If the Satyr overtook him he is then retired to our Cave, to enjoy the welcome news of the Kings safety, which if his age de∣niece not, I can promise.
How fain I would believe the Prince safe too in this time of penurious hope! that he lived, were all I would ask: Alas, I saw him fall amongst his enemies; and since that sad hour can give my heart no news of his safety; I would fain speak with him, and tell him only how innocent and faithful a passion my heart labours with. Could he then be so barbarous as to scorn me?
No, no, gentle Maid; Heaven (if thy rage have a curse yet left in store) throw it upon me if I scorn thee.
It is the Prince; and thus upon my knees I fall to him, in virtue, courage and all that's excellent, a Prince; all but these miseries are his own: Oh Sir, that you are safe is all my joy; and let not the Prince be angry to find a fond Girl hunt his greatness, who begins to fear her self his evil Angel; you were never happy since I saw you.
Fair and dear; what interest in this days chance engaged your virgin hand? why dost thou not fly before our misfortunes crush thee?
Oh Sir; gods and men will fight your cause, and all that have heard of Leopoldo (but this band of wicked ones) would dye for you; and if my life could save a hair of that generous head, I'd dye as quietly as little birds in their Nests; for I shall never find a joy but in serving you; and it is one great blessing we have saved the King.
The King!
By the appointment of the gods, I hope, he fell into my hands, faint and full of wounds, known by this signet upon his fin∣ger; for it is long since my age left wandering in the splendid paths of Courts; he is now in our Cave, where he is safe and private; and I hope a blessing in his cure; and if your Highness will vouch∣safe to put your royal head under that humble roof till this storm be over, we shall think our selves blessed in the occasion.
No more, no more; my life and all that ever was price∣os I value less then this news; in spite of mischief I grow happy, since I have found a faith here; for I heard your discourse even now, the joy it gave me may your soul never wish in vain; may I not know your name?
Phillora, Sir, I am called; Daughter to this good old man; here in these woods I had my birth and abode; I have a Brother too, dear as mine eyes; he's now bleeding in your Highness cause, ambitious to be in wounds, allied to your miseries; heaven bless him when he fights your Battles, and curse them that fight against you.
It is the prettiest and the gallantest innocence that ever
my eyes saw; ye gods, such another excellence but my bright Mistress sure the earth shows not; how my heart pities the dispa∣rity of her birth, that forbids them to equal the gods in happiness!
Gentle Phillora, is there no hope to find your love has cha∣rity for my passion, as well as value for some other object?
Find the means, Sir, to satisfy that question; let the Prince and honour search it, and if I deny, at the rate of my life, to pur∣chase it, let no mercy find me.
Oh Phillora, name not those tyrants, honour and opine∣on, that still persecutes mankind, and impose their severe laws up∣on our hearts; what have Lovers to do with them, or they with us? we will love beyond their Rules, and suffer beyond their ex∣amples, till there be nothing left for us to imitate; and then we will our selves become examples; and to love like us shall be the next ages rule; and Phillora, all ages wonder.—Yet, methinks, in midst of my despairs honour holds out a light, which though it be afar off, it guides me to something that I may hope.
Hope, Sir! why not? all that is honourable; and your virtue will overcome the rest of fate; there's nothing lays such vi∣olent hands upon generous minds as to see a Lover despair of being happy: and this doubtful looking upon your wishes, whatever they be, shall make me give sooner then the greatest Argument your va∣nity can propose; there is a kind of Magic in the eye of a lan∣gushing despair, that good nature cannot see without pity, and yields sooner to it then presumptuous confidence, or force.
Yet force has been successful, and many have outlived it.
None, where there was honour.
Will you then deny the fame of those maids that lust and force have injured?
If they out-live it unmindful of a just revenge, I shall.
Would you be so cruel to kill the man should thus speak his passion, when this Idol, honour, you adore, has stopped all other possible ways to his desire?
Ha! it was not well urged.
If this be serious, I have yet a power to save her honour.
Do you doubt it, Sir? would I live famed here, or dye to  become a star in heaven? so sure I would kill all that's mortal, if this spear could reach him.
Why, it is not for fear of the gods then that you are ho∣nest? for, sure, murder is worse then rape, and in this you declare there is something you prefer to them. Suppose I should now by the advantage I could find abuse this opportunity, would you kill me?
The gods forbid; no, Sir, when I find the Prince start back from virtue, and so far quit his own Rules of goodness, that have gained him the surname of Just, and for my sake become a Ravisher, I shall quickly let him see how I hate such a tempter; for when I find my innocence too weak to defend my honour I shall at least find honour enough to defend my innocence; and I will al∣ways dye worthy your love, Sir, when you shall refuse to let me live
so; nor is death faulty then, but like a friend to virtue, finding op∣pressed arms in her defence; and strikes, not to destroy Phillora, but to rescue her honour.
Upon my soul thou would, thou excellent and single in thy goodness; come near old man, and record my vows, that if thy Daughter be but gently born, here I'll fix my heart; either hers or never women's, so heaven and earth assist me.
Oh hold, Sir, call back that vow; be still my Prince, while I follow and admire you as far as fame finds faith, or passage; but to be yours will make me blush for ever, and the guilt will al∣ways deject me.
By my love, by beauty, innocence, and all that's fair, by truth it self, or Phillora (which is all these) I swear, thy honour and my vow I'll most religiously preserve; and if my life be blessed by thy embraces, thou shalt command more in that day then I would beg now; do not doubt my faith nor your power, which nothing but your fears can lessen.
The gods say, Amen.
Rather all the gods forbid such Hymens should attend your blessed day; let me first sink forgotten into my little grave, ere I become the subject of such a curse.
Is this Phillora's friendship?
Do I refuse this for want of love? no, Sir, when that comes in question my life is ready to clear the doubt; I know I have nor birth, nor parts to pretend a fellowship to Crowns; the sin and guilt of such an act would sink me lower then your passion has done you; let me be still your subject with my innocence; let your Reason love me as well as your passion, lest I lose your love and your value both; for in unequal Hymens beauty will find but a short reign. For Princes grow ashamed of their faults; and the gods protect me from such misery as your deposed love.
Will Phillora thus cruelly punish my love? thus, for fear of a possible ill, to make me certainly miserable?
Alas, Sir; my love in all its kindness speaks to you; and when you forget your self you ought to be punished for that act more then for your crimes to others. I am sure I shall be severer far when you offend so then when you injure me; for witness hey∣ven, Leopoldo is still most precious in my eyes. Oh, Sir; rather haste to repair the ruins of this day; you were never overcome, till now, and sink faster amongst your friends then in the Battle; and I that would dye to serve you, in this command you would make me the destroyer of my Prince.
It is resolved, I will be thine, or else a single life fate shall not deny me.
Ye gods, what do I hear and see? my glad heart is big with joy.
I hear a noise of weapons.
Alas, Sir, we have talked away our safety; I fear new dan∣gers, or separation, worse then death.
Yet if we can regain the wood, I'll guide you to my Cave.
Oh Phillora, it is in vain, they are upon us.
Yield thee, wretch, or this bold attempt shall cost 
 thee dear; thy safety is in yielding.
It is he, and we are alone; heaven, thou art kind.
The villain has wounded me again; such a courage in a wretch, and of a beaten party, I never found.
There, take your length on that earth your ambition thought to enslave; see how one handful of it has checked that in all thy glory; my heart has not malice nor baseness enough to strike thee upon thee ground, nor leisure to consider thy fate, until I have found my dear Phillora; sure these woods have paid his debt.
These woods are so thick, and the Rogues fly like deer in them; it is in vain to pursue 'em, where left you the Prince?
I saw him not, Sir.
Nor I.
Nor you? ye dogs, where did you leave him?
We saw him not, Sir, since we left the party.
Roderigo, here, thy hand, prithee.
Ha! wounded, and upon the ground!
My hurts are slight, by chance of war only; and it was a gallant fellow, who ere he be, that gave them.
Beat all the woods and plains, he cannot escape; what was he?
Seek him, but upon your lives wrong him not; it is but a private person; but I dare say, a bolder soul tried not his fate this day.
This is he, Sir; we knew him by your Highness sword.
It is so, use him kindly, and carry him to my quarters. If thy Prince had fought thus well this day he had not been mis∣sing now in Battle.
My Prince fought better then the proudest of you; my Prince stood the last danger of the field, and scorns to fly; he's either dead, or worse, in chains; nor can you boast your victory, which you ow to our own swords; it was Clytus, not Almanzor, beat Leopoldo.
Away with him to the Quarters.
We'll through the woods again, and try what ballast he bears in his breeches.
Make haste, and meet us at the hill by the wood side.

NO Mutiny Friend, the Day being ours, our Swords have given us Title to all you have.
Your Throat is mine too, and be still while he geld your Pocket, or I shall spoil your Drinking.
Can you answer this to your Officer? He commanded you to see me safe to his Tent, else no such base hands as yours should have had power to have bound me.
Come Sir; these hands are as proper to pick your Pose∣ket as the best in the Army, What's here? A Chain, by my faith,  and Gold too.
Do ye hear, Brother, no pocketing; lay all down, fair play, and when we have done, divide.
Yes, yes, what's that? A Jewel? Is it right?
If it prove false we'll have his—in the room; this was no small Fool.
And his Ransom will be no Bauble, and let me alone to use him ill enough to make him hasten it.
Let me go, and I'll pay it, to either, and by all the Gods swear secrecy.
Ha! hum!
What is it he says?
Something that carries reason if we durst trust him.
D' ye hear? either trust him and let him go, or cut his Throat; for if he lives to see the Prince, he'll tell what he has lost; and then we must not only restore all, but put fair for hanging.
And it would be a sad business to change this Gold chain for a halter; My Friend, turn to the Tree and pray, for I am resolved not to lose one link of this chain for your span of days; How fine my Girl will be when she has it on!
Just as fine as mine, twill burn your fingers else; that as the rest must be divided.
No, no, it is pity to spoil it; take you his Clothes in consideration of half; Come Friend, dispatch this matter.
Villain, wilt thou rob me and murder me too? Take heed, thy wants may plead for the one, but no excuse will save thee 
 from that vengeance that sees thee if thou shalt act the other; The Blood thou shed'st in the heat of battle may find some excuse, as drawn from an Enemy, though Treason brought thee there.
Nay, nay, no sentences; Pray, if you can, or die, overseen, and say you were fairly advised; twill be so, indeed it will; I cannot afford it cheaper, will you dispatch?
Villain!
Yet here you do it, I shall make bold with this.—(Half is my right, and I'll have it.)
It may be so, but I shall see you prove that right ere I quit it.
Hell that gave a Mind to men full of Avarice, and corrup∣ted Souls, Lust for wealth, send Discord the fruit of that cursed metal to fill their Hearts.
Let it go. 
I will not.
So, so, that blow will be revenged, I hope; I have a weapon in my boot, could I come but to use it; I might gain my freedom by this strife.—It is done, now I am free; But here it is known, let me get within reach of them; Hold, as you are Soldiers, hold, do not strive for trifles at the rate of lives too.
Stand you off, or I shall spoil your expectation; You had hope a good from this, but you are cozened: keep off, or I shall find a spare thrust shall do your business.
For wishing your good?
A pox on your Charity and your baubles; I would you been both hanged when I met with you; the Rogue has hurt me.
If that Villain scopes me I am strangely cozened.
I am wounded too, will you divide yet? And not let him laugh at both; he's like to be our Heir and Executor if we agree not.
I am content; We are Friends, and thou shalt have half; Here's my Hand, and let's dispatch him.—Oh, he has killed me.
Ye gods, that thus have armed in defence of my Inno∣cency, to you I acknowledge this strange deliverance; I am free, but whither to go to keep that liberty, you that miraculously have sent it direct me too; I would find Phillora, but I know not where to seek her known and pursued in this habit, though not for the Prince, yet as an Enemy, will be dangerous.—ha! see what fate presents in this Extremity; it is a Periwig, why not use it, and change habits with this Soldier, and so attempt to pass as one of them? it must be so, my wounds will be my excuse too, for being behind my Fellows; Thus, like an Enemy to my self I'll prove a Friend, and from these bitter flowers this honey gather; and by Fortune made equal to my love, safely enjoy the conversation of that maid, in this private habit, which was refused as Prince, when fortune frowned.—I start not at this misery at all; nor will I  upbray'd the gods for these afflictions, it is the common fate of the best of Princes; no story but is filled with these blots of Treason, and the certain Vengeance that pursues 'em; And who ever he be that will venture into the troubled Seas that Empire Sails in must set out with a mind resolved for all fortunes; Princes are but men, and when they have resolved wisely let them Act with Honour, and leave the rest to Fate.
GOod heaven, what a day was this! My soul trembles to retain the sadness in my thoughts; the cries and groans still fill my Ears, The wounds and death that lies in thousand places are still before my eyes; The horror of so many kinds of Entrances for death makes my soul sad, to think any man can be proud of conquest when they consider at what a Rate of misery and Cruelty it is purchased; Oh Fidelia, the sad means and La∣mentations that the deceived hopes will breed from the fate of this day!—slaughter yet flying over the Field, waited on by death, who visits the Innocent, the Coward and the valiant, none can refuse him. Yet nothing is fuller of wonder then mine own part, who, this day, the thought of a friends danger would have begot a tear from, yet now am forced to tread upon the blood, and suck in at my Nostrils the souls of wretched men, whose last thick breath hath filled the Air.
Pray, Madam, cease to weep, and employ all your pa∣tience to resist the violence of this storm; your Innocence will save us all.
Oh Fidelia, This horror, nor the divers dangers of the times, is the load my soul shrinks under; it is the loss of my Royal Father, and poor Leopoldo, that bows me to the Earth; yet, in midst of these miseries and fears my eyes abuse me, if I saw not this day in the battle that fatal Figure my dreams have thus long conversed withal.
It was sure the same the Prince met this morning.
No, no, I saw her too; this was not unlike her, in habit, I confess I have laboured with my grief, and the weak∣nos of my Sex, thus far, to see if fate would guide me once more to his sight.
I pray be pleased, Madam, to repose here, whilst Arcus and myself see what horse those were that entered the wood.
If there be in nature such a blessing as you imagine, I shall yet smile; for my heart tells me his sight concludes our miseries; yet what can be stranger then the things we have seen and suffered this day? how our fears have reconciled us even to this habit!
We have not leisure to consider those lesser things now; Yesterday I should have blushed to let Fidelia see what is now ex∣posed to the view of dommon men; Behold the power of Parents, whose command hides all, and my obedience is as modest as my Coats; but when I consider my mind, and what fate imposes upon me, thus to pursue a flying shadow, ye gods behold, and pity a Virgin wooing, and a Virgin armed; stranger things then these no maidens fortunes know; Yet if I should see him, I can do any thing sooner then tell him that I love (and that too I fear) sooner then leave to do so.
From one that has felt the same sting pray take a little counsel, and resolve not what you will do, or say, until you see him; for to hope to be wise, thus far before, in business of Love, is Madness; The heart only prepares love a perfect well-come; They are too much themselves that can speak sense; at such a time your worst Lover will tell his Tale best.
No more, no more, it is a Riddle, all; The wise man is not sure to read it, nor is it impossible to the Fool.
I am yet afraid we are not safe: for the Enemy pursues us in all places, and therefore let us retreat into this wood; yet whi∣there should we fly but from our selves, that carry our griefs along with us?
This sword too, if all feared it as I do, though by mine own side, Repehtance cannot make this day so Innocent as my fears would have preserved it; Behold ye powers, A maid, whose feeble prayers could not reach your throne, thus upbraids ye; &amp; as a more powerful weapon draws her Sword; your anger thus has armed our Sex, which has still been taught, Maids can so little glory gain in fights, that they can scarce be modestly angry.
Treacherous and Injurious men give us a dispensation; and nothing is more lawful nor modest then those wounds a Virgin gives in defence of her Honour.
Alas, Fidelia, armed women have as far out-shot their mark as cowardly men fall short of theirs; fighting women can add so little to their Fame themselves, that it is scarce for their honour to be sought for; and if men cannot add to women's fame by fighting, (which is their Idol virtue,) sure we catch at Shadows when we draw their Swords: and to speak really, that women's ho∣nor
that must be held by a Sword is not worth a Swords cure; For who has once been doubted may be innocent, but never fully cleared; for such a doubt, if it do's not stain, yet it dyes the minds of the best friends; Men, reasonable enough, fear there was some∣thing called, some looks or words, some motion, that beckoned him to come, and made her subject to the boldness of that Sex; some negligence that bad him hope a Surprise, ever the boldest durst at∣tempt such a fort as a modest mind; if there had not been some intelligence within, or at least the guards of virtue sleeping, they durst not (I say) hope; And this is my guilt, who, in my sleeps, have given up that mind and heart to a shadow, in my Dreams, that waking defended it self against the world; and now the Con∣querour insults.
Oh Madam, leave to rapine at a Fate you cannot change; but calmly obey the gods; your virtue was not wont to dispute their wills; Remember, Madam, you have much to expect from hey∣ven ever  you can reap your wishes; and obedience is the only well∣come price Mortals can pay.
Sure I am not stubborn, Fidelia; Obedience is all I plead; for I am so far from refusing what they command, that thou see I follow a shadow because they sent it; and I believe all these desires but so many calls, so many becknings to come, which I shall cheerfully Obey; I know there must be some divine providence shut up in that Figure, some hidden secret some knot in fate that heaven has appointed my mortal hand to untie; It cannot be they should pick me out of a Nation only to make me miserable; No, no Fidelia, it is but to make our joys taste the sweeter, that they pass them through these difficulties and fears.
Now I prophecy we shall be happy; and give me leave to say, your former doubts have been one cause of these sufferings; for to doubt their power or mercy is the great sin; for when men dare confine the gods to the capacities of their narrow minds then they cleave the Air with Thunder, and in some high Example speak their Anger; hark, I hear a noise of weapons, we have talked away our safety.
Haste, haste, Madam, or we are lost; this cursed colour of mine is known to be one that fought on the princes side to day; This brand of shame, not only sent to be my curse, but yours; fly, and I'll kill my self, and let them believe I died of wounds in the battle, it is only me, me that they pursue, and what wretch is he, would live, when he might die, to serve?
Hold, Arcus, thy faith shall live to be admired, as I have a
life and Honour, if thou lay the least violent hands upon thy self, here I'll stay, and expect the worst of Fortune.
Fly then, for Heavens sake.
We have lost the way, and know not where to go.
Enter this wood, Madam, that though we find not the Prince we may not lose each other.
Innocence! whore's thy home? Alas, she has none! Inno∣cence as restless is as her Servants, sent upon Journeys, as Fortune, or Oppression pleases; no certain place assigned her, They wander still over the Earth; Courts and Temples are but Inns to virtue, where she lodges for a Night, but early next day she must be gone.
It is sad, the while, when the Palaces of Princes, nor Em∣per (beyond which the ambitious Sword aspires not) cannot la∣minate her wandering steps, nor the Temples Sacred Odours breathe air pure enough for her to live in. But these sad contemplations are not proper now; leave them, Madam, and seek a safety, for fear of worse evils then we have yet met.
Heaven I obey, and but follow, where thou lead the way.
PUrsue them, Roderigo, they hide in every Bush, victory and smiling Fortune beckons us to come.
It is a sullen kind of Courage that despair and anger gives 'em; they have defended themselves to this place, with a strange daring, and a kind of miracle in success.
It is but this desperate handful that remains.
IT is the Princes party that disputes the hill, I saw the slave, I cannot be mistaken dear Pollidor, I know the Moor; my Imagination, nor my Love, which so oft you have upbraided, can∣not change colours, Politer.
See my Reason, Blood, All I have freely given to your Passion; Follow thy Fate; for since my Father's satisfied, I shall without dispute obey you; though his news surprise me, being not apt to believe the Prince though he offered marriage; but hey∣ven has time to punish and reward.—hark, I hear the noise of wea∣pons, step into this Wood, and see what it means. 
Fly, Madam.
O whither, Fidelia?
See, see the Slave I spoke of, and certain they must be Friends to the Prince.
The odds makes the rest our Enemies, and honour calls Swords to their party. Stand, What are you?
We are two that would fain be Friends to thy Fortune what ere it be. O Fidelia, this is the same fatal Figure again.
The Word?
Bellamira.
Pass that way while we endeavour your safety here.
How they tremble! their fears lie heavy upon them; some secret bosom-sin which they are loath to part with makes the fear of death worse than death.
This way, Fidelia; it is the Deity that in visions made his visits here, I cannot be mistaken, Love and Fate have stamped the Figure in my virgin-minde, let us follow and tell him so.
Stay, Madam, Whither will your distracted griefs transport you? if you be discovered you are lost for ever; your Honour too calls you back; when Women pursue how full of blushes are the most innocent actions?
But if he goes ere I speak to him my soul will wither still in the fear that this should be a Dream too. O Fidelia, it is a cruel Fate that forces me to these precipices; Is there no possibility to be happy, but we must lose some grains of our value? Has Ho∣nor no Holy-days? Is her service all toil of mind and body, no reward? Are Chains and Slavery the sole marks she desires to be known by? All Sting, all Thorns, no Roses, no Flowers, no Ho∣ney? Why should Man endowed with a reasonable mind sacrifice to such an Enemy for such shadows as these?
Alas, Madam, is this a time to dispute the power and will of Heaven? Let us seek a safety first before new dangers find us.
No, Fidelia, I fear no new danger; could I find a cure for this old wound I would despise all the Conqueror, either with
Sword or Chains could bring; Why should his youth by fate be made so fit for my love, and then be set so far out of my reach? See how he hunts for honour, how greedy of my dangers, only as they are glories; for he knows not me; his gentle Sister too faith∣full by his side without fear of wounds seeks them with more fury than we tremble at the thought, and gives the lie to all that we have said this day, giving and receiving wounds; Yet a Virgin, in whom no stains nor blush can dwell; What would these two have been? What stories would they have made if Fate had set them free, unfettered into the world! What parts would they have acted, had not these Minds been hedged in and confined with private births! Had not that cloud hung o'er 'em, who could have beheld the brightness of that Virtue which shines through their humble Fortune? And since my Dreams were not safe from his shadow one∣lie, what would the real Figure do? Oh Fidelia!
Why these tears? Why this grief, when you ought to re∣joyce? This day has removed a seven years doubt, the fears of an Age are blown over in this one object; That it was a shadow is now removed; there rests only fitness now to complete your hap∣pines; Heretofore you were to wish a being to your Love; now when your great Heart can descend to meet a private virtue your may be happy. Remember, Madam, your Dream, and how strange a cure was appointed to heal this troubled Age, the marry∣ing of a Tree; and see the sacred plants, the health and wealth of the Forest, designed for that great work.
To Love and Fate I bow; and what they shall appoint most readily I shall submit to.
The night will suddenly join in our security; This way, Madam, we must expect the faithful Arcus.
THis Girls passion makes my life a burden to me; but for love of her that's dearer than my self this Sword should with a kind wound release me, that I should see her dote upon the Son of him that ruined us, my self too hunting their dangers, and in our blood write our selves Friends to what we hate—What have we here? a poor youth slain, and a Picture by him, of his  Mistress sure; what may be miserable is still so; I never yet knew that blind froward, humoursom Deity; Fortune omit a mischief that lay in her power; this Wretch that had but one thing dear to him, and was no doubt precious himself in the eyes of some∣body. See how early her malice has found her youth, and cut him off in his first dangers; while to me she has this day afforded a mi∣raculous  Victory only to vex me; had I been unwilling or afraid to die she would have sought death for me; but finding me weary of life she aids me still against my wishes that has no business here—Ha! What does my eyes behold? I dream sure—Ye Gods
What is your will? Why this strange way to new miseries? What kind of Curse is this you have sent me? it is the sacred Figure sure of some Deity profaned and ravished by this Wretch, whose Sacrilege has from Heaven met a punishment—O speak, speak, di∣vine Spirit, command me and I'll revenge thee. 'I will not speak, it is some Witchcraft sure—I'll fly and call help from Heaven—What is it that pulls me back? I feel something oppress my breast,  my thoughts grow too great and powerful for Reason to com∣mand: This Disorder is not unlike Phillora's love, thus she descry∣bed him. O thou art a Prophetess, I fain would go, but without this strange new acquaintance my heart says no.
It was the same my heart told me, I knew the Moor; O Pol∣lidor, this was fortunate; to rescue the Princes Friends, he minds me not. Pollidor, Brother, what is that his eyes are fixed upon? a Pi∣cture—Pollidor, Brother! Heaven, what ails he? It is a Picture, and of a lively form, divinely graced. Do, start, and sigh, and  change colour; that paleness shows the fright and alarm his heart has taken at those eyes: Heavens you are just; and Love, if ever a virgins heart given freely to thy power found grace, be propitious to my prayers, and feed the flame thou hast kindled in his frozen breast, till thy great name has filled his mind, and sick with love let him taste that bitter Cup he made me drink so deep of, insensi∣ble of the pain he never felt—So, so, does your heart grow too big for your breast, while your ears are deaf, and your eyes blind  to all other objects? Yes, yes, talk on, she'll hear thee as thoudidst me. So, so, now thy mind has business of it's own—Pollidor, what, talking to thy self? 
Phillora, Sister.
Ne'er cast this from you, in vain thou think to be rid of it; a cunning and a great Master has graved it with a powerful hand in thy heart, try thy Philosophy now, forget her, Pollidor; See what Lethe can prevail; haste to Ga•etta; try if some new Figure, some fresh object can relieve thy mind; Does Pollidor now begin to find there was something like Reason I said to day; O Pollidor, I was thy wonder to day, but thou wilt be mine to morrow, and thy own for ever.
Enough, enough, Phillora, unless thy heart hunt revenge; remember it was but mistaken kindness; I then was a stranger to love, and therefore ought to be forgiven if I mistook thy passion; but what can thou plead, after having made acquaintance with the God, if thou despise his Priest? Have but patience, and thou
shalt reap all thy revenge, and with innocence of thy heart be pleased with it, and see thy Brother miserable even to pity.
No, Pollidor, it is far from me to seek Revenge against thee; yet I must confess I cannot be sorry to see thee a Lover, twill po∣lish thy heart; it was too harsh, too severe before, a knotty rough∣nos hid much of that beauty which now will shine when this passi∣on shall illustrate it; Love will weed thy mind, and prune all that barbarous wildness that wanted sense for others pains; and thenthy awaked honour and armed thoughts will defend Love and thee against the world, and make thee, if it were possible, more welcome to Phillora.
Come near Phillora; Does not thy heart find a decay of my love? Hast thou not mist, this hour, the diligent mind that was employed, solicitous for thy good only?
Not I, me thinks Pollidor is as kind as ever, and much more lovely in this passion than in all the reason thou were so proud of.
Why then I fear,—she, this divine figure remains alone  still, though my heart be gone to find her alone, as when the dead, cold hand of her murdered Lover held her, and none but I, (wretched I) feel this fatal change; sure there's Magic in it, how could itbe made? my mind is tied to it, no other thoughts can find a place; hunger and thirst I feel not but what the drought of longing love begets, and that (I fear) will lick up all the warm blood that circles my heart.
No more, no more; let us first attend our safety, and at leisure seek a remedy for this ill, the Enemy pursues us close.
Tell not me of safety, an Enemy at my foot is not so pleasing a sight as this; though it be full of despair, it is a poisonous fire, Phil∣lore, that's crept in at my eyes, it burns here, and the pain is beyond that which Poets describe Lust, Ambition, or Famine by. Yet my vain heart would fain promise it self something of happiness and pleasure from this strange thing. Victory nor Conquest is not half so welcome to my heart as this object; no such music as the har∣money of this face; it has smoothed my brow, and calmed my heart; all forms of past affection, either of love or hate, are cancelled, all the impressions of former joy or anger one sight of this has de∣stroyed; those eyes have even melted my soul, and Pollidor lies ready to receive what form she'll impose.
The Gods have heard my prayers since Pollidor is become a Lover, and I shall now hope my words will again be Reason.
I love thee, Phillora, but thou art not half so handsome as this; Prithee do not leave me, lest I forget thee and my self too: for all the world will vanish from my mind beholding this; I have already lost my anger, and can forgive Leopoldo and the King, so she'll but smile. O that the divine hand that framed thee had but given thee a tongue too; it is all thou want to beget a worship, yet we'll carry it home, and set it upon Diana's Altar.
All but Sacrilege I'll join in; take heed, Pollidor, how you incense the greater Deity; remember how the youthful God has revenged himself, remember; I say, and tremble.
It cannot be they should be true gods; flies play with 'em and worms destroy them; when they fall we are fain to raise them; I cannot worship my own creature, it is a contradiction to make my god; but suppose what thou believe, would Pallas, Uenus, Juno, Minerva, or the rest of that glorious number, affect such odd poor forms as we adore at home, and give to a mortal this divine frame? See, see if there be not mercy in her eyes, calm peace in that brow, innocence and justice in those fair hands; is there grace that men could wish, or women envy, that grows not in this face; is it not one it self, or rather all the Graces? and therefore kneel.—Thou  art a Virgin Phillora, here lay thy hand upon this Virgin turf, which never crooked Plow deflowered, and by you chaste spring, whose sacred streams with fruitful embraces circles you flowery Meads, never to worship any other of her sex, nor shall any but our selves have leave to sacrifice, lest we pollute her shrine with common vows, which I know will displease her, for she cannot be thus excellent but she must be particular, and constant too; for constancy and particularity show the minds chastity; every fro∣ward Girl taught by custom can keep her body chaste, but the mind is seldom so: vanity, Phillora, has a thousand ways to tempt a women's mind, and nothing like love and honour guard it.
Should I now be as deaf to your reason as you were to mine, and deny all those truths of Love and Honour; what could Pollidor say when he should see me dote upon another face, and forget the Prince?
I'd say a woman that out-lives her love has out-lived her honour, and is from that minute to be esteemed but as her carcass, and the moving figure of such a perjured woman but the shadow of what she was, which some licensed Demon has usurped to dispatch his business here on earth in; and such a looseness stains both the fame and figure, the guilt will cast such a poisonous stench that ages cannot waste it; like treason it taints the blood, the grave cannot hide the deformity; a broken heart will out-last the Mar∣ble or the Epitaph.
From thee I'll learn to love, be thou my guide; while thy great heart leads the way, who follows thee and Love can never stray.
No Phillora, if I dye ere I see the substance of this sha∣dow, I conjure thee bury me in this fatal place; and on my Tomb engrave my fate, that the world may know here was enterr'd the betwitch'd Forester; this was he that equalled Echo, and rivaled Narcissus, unless that goddess (who ere she were) that listened to Pig∣millions tears, would now look down on wretched Pollidor, and lend a life to this beloved shadow; Love let it be thy act, then find thy eyes, that with one sight of her I might pay thy bounty; but then take heed thy youthful deity do's not become my Rival, as she has done the gods in worship.
This deliverance had all the favourable gods to friend; my disguise will hide me from the curious eye of all, since it is too poor and low to call the search of jealousy or envy upon me; but to think of saving my self till I know what fortune is befallen Phil∣lore is a thought I cannot let enter my heart, possessed with care and fear for her.—Ha! it is she; what sight is this? a man in her arms!  they are kind too: see she leans upon his breast; I'll strike the vile∣lain to the earth.—Sure it is some Phantasm: she refused my love when it was accompanied with the offers of sacred Hymen; and yet my soul tells me it is not possible there should be such a curse de∣signed me as to love a false heart; they are blinded, sure, with their passion, else they could not choose but see me; stay, he speaks to her; I'll observe, but fatally, if she be false; which my heart trem∣bless to believe.
Oh my Pollidor, keep it as the treasure of thy life; it is a jewel I would not part with for the world, the gods have sent it, keep it and love it; and now pursue thy fate, and heaven witness how much I love and pity Pollidor.
Ha! my heart! what do I hear and see?
Keep it? yes, as I would my Reason or my Soul; this shall be my Buckler against all but thy fair self, whose friendship I'll prefer before Empire; and if thou smile Fortune has no sting: these two lessons I have quickly learned, Phillora, the unfortunate, and the Lover; and they are two parts, if thou frown, that I must act for ever.—Love, thy Army would be numerous, could thou  to the world show this Commission; our passion must be happy for the matter and the end is noble, though the subject be yet a mystery.
It is her picture, she has given it him; my soul is on fire; and though I cannot hope to enjoy my love, my revenge is still in my power.
Villain, restore it; restore it upon thy life, and quickly. 
What art thou? why dost thou commit this outrage? who sent thee? why dost thou pursue him, and not regard my words?
Let me kill the villain.
The villain will not be killed, Sir.
Hold, fond wretch; though that Jewel be by him prized above his life, consider what a vain thing it is in thee for a shadow thou know not thus to sacrifice thy self, and hazard the beco∣ming one amongst the shadows; why dost thou frown upon him, and look with rage on one thou know not? what, is it for ava∣rice thou would have it? deliver it, and take a better value then thy poor hopes can promise.
Dear Phillora, cease to sue to the villain, let me come;
Death, dost thou think I shall not win when I play this game; where wilt thou venture my sword if I lose her?
I do not doubt thy success, but it is base for both of us to destroy him; and my love for Phollidor is such, I will not see him hazard that rich heart against a common sword.
False and cruel.
Besides, it is some poor Soldier of the enemy, whose wants have engaged him, and for a reward he'll restore it.
No, fond Girl; I'll give thee my part of the earth first, and the short span of days the gods have left here I'll waste ere that villain shall boast his victory o'er my Master that sent me hither.
Thy Master? who's thy Master? who sent thee?
Love and Fortune, blind Guides I fear.
What's thy business hither; for heavens sake unriddle thy anger, speak; what would thou have?
And speak quickly.
From the Prince Leopoldo, who now lies weeping out his drops of life in red tears on yonder hill; and even with his last breath mourns the loss of thee, if thou be Phillora, calling on thy name; for love of whom, slowly and unwillingly, he becomes a star, that art giving away thy self into another arms.
The Prince Leopoldo dye! oh where! guide my desperate feet to that sad place, and thou shalt see how vain his fears are by the haste this heart will make to meet him; for charities sake, for the Princes sake, upon my knees I beg, restore his Picture, and let us go.
What should I believe?
What villain gave the Prince his wounds? could he look upon him and strike?
False and fair have a thousand ways to kill; and there is more danger to Leopoldo in those eyes then in his sword; whose frowns nor anger have any terror, it is an idle rage; and thy passion only dangerous to thy self.
Death, shall I be injured and despised too? sure I am not so weak an enemy as to be beat with words?
Oh my fate, Fortune I defy thee now; dost thou grudge me the mourning for the Prince?
Dog, treacherous dog, this odds made thee so brave.
See, Sir, here are two of those that rescued the Princess Bellamira, who in boys habit we surprised, together with Arcus the Moor.
And what are these?
We are nothing, at least not worth telling now, ask thy self what we are; foolish fortune has given thee the power of disposing
fools we are that might have looked on and would not, and now pay for playing others Cards.
It is yet my joy I served the Prince, and saved his Sister; and know, Tyrant, if my faithful heart could redeem him, I could know no misery after it.
What is he there?
A villain, one of thy own train; but had not her fond pity saved him, I had paid his score.
You took one prisoner before from me; but ere you get loose your self you shall pay both scores.
Roderigo, did ever see a more graceful couple; there is something of greatness in their looks I have not seen in persons of their rank. Prithee answer me calmly; what ye are this ha∣bit speaks you are no Soldiers.
The unhappy issue of one chaste bed, the children of a poor Forester bred and born in these woods, led to this fatal day by chance, and kindness to this luckless Girl, who till this hour has always been all my care; but love, curious love has found my mind business of its own.
Ha! what do I hear, Brother to my Love, and I wretched villain have ruined them.
Convey them safe to Capua.
Yes, Sir; we'll see them safe, I warrant you.—Some∣thing I must do like an enemy until I can prove a friend, this day's full of fate.—Come Sir, will you march?—Had not my jea∣lousy blinded me I might have seen a Brother in his face, and the fatal figure in my Sisters Dream.
At last the cloud's dispersed; and now we may see clear, free and round about a full victory, such a sullen game I never plaid, and had they been of one mind, this had proved a black day.
How I abhor the very victory treason brings us!
If Bellamira had not escaped, the whole work had here found an end; but if that scornful fair one fall into my hands she shall see how I can act her part, whom my anger and revenge pur∣sues more now then my love did heretofore.
Your Highness is in passion, else this anger to a Lady of her birth and virtue is so unlike the rest of your character, I am con∣fident you would not own it; for to me she stands much greater in esteem for that answer, then if she had shrunk with her fears and  sudden change of fortune, and should have listened to your propose∣tions; for consider her part that was born Daughter to a King, now subject to an invading enemy, the destroyer of her Father, ruiner of her Country, to receive from him in the height of displea∣sure and anguish of her mind a proposition seconded by force of arms; it had been strange if she should have sent a better answer.
All these Arguments are against her; for she saw my kindness such, as when she was fallen into my power I offered from being a Subject to make her a Queen.
Subject? Sir, that's beyond your contract to make any of this Nation your Subjects.
Is it beyond the sword, Clytus? I know no other Law nor Contract.
Yes; and now in your greatest glory I dare tell you so; And know, there is not a man amongst us, but will fall upon those swords you owe this victory to, ere yield themselves your Subjects; You will find Naples scorns to acknowledge any other King then their own: And here, in the name of all those that sent me, whose Loyalty sixteen years banishment and oppression could not weary, no nor the virtue of those most generous Princes Bellamira, and Leo∣poldo; whose miseries though we lament, yet they had not power to seduce our Loyalties; therefore do not hope to fright us into slavery.
Clytus, you are in Passion, and too sudden with the Prince, and your fears most unreasonable.
That. Your answer will clear; Know, in the Name of them whose General I here stand, I again require performance of conditions. In the first place, the delivery of all prisoners into my hands; Then, that this night our young King be produced and crowned; which Ceremony being past, your Highness will please to Command your Army to retire towards Calabria; where, with all convenience which we shall provide, they may pass for Si∣cily; and according to conditions leave to us our King and the quiet possession of all those Dominions, that belonged to his Royal Father, the unfortunate Ortho; Sicily being by us abandoned to your Highness as it was agreed; though I confess my Heart bleeds to think our ills had no other remedy, nor this diseased State could admit of no gentler cure then the hewing off these branches, as Leopoldo and Bellamira, from the royal stock to save the Tree.
Clytus, I have stood silent long, and wonder rather then Patience bred that Attention to this new kind of Language from you. Whore's the Oppression, Treason, and Tyranny; The wrongs to gods and men; whore's the usurper against whom your Flattery and dejected looks and folded Arms? These po∣stirs and these words were Clytus his, when he sought my aid; Clytus, there, strove to persuade we were appointed by Heaven the scourge of these mischiefs, and made it appear that Fate had named me in a Dream seven years since to your scornful Princess; In which I was pointed at, and the whole success of this war most Prophetically foreseen; How often has thy Flattery called me that stranger that she saw land in that calm Evening; This, that foreign habit that kicked up the dust in their faces? And see the King and Prince, all lost in that dust, the disaffected people. And now I know my strength, and see your Hearts, I will not march one foot farther, until the Princes and Castles are delivered to me as rewards of
this victory; Nor shall you see your King till I think fit to trust you, lest he find you as false as I have done; which I shall be yet able to punish in your greatest Pride and strength; For the Prison∣ers, poor and contemptible as they are, (for I know only of two Shep-herds) yet since demanded thus unhandsomely, not one hair of their heads shall be delivered; nor dares Clytus fetch them.
Either produce the King, and perform the Articles you swore to, or we shall find a power will be too strong for perjury.
Perjury! 
Yes, Perjury.—Death, have we refused the Bro∣there of our King, to be usurped over and governed by a stranger? No, Leopoldo, if any stranger must be our Fate, thy Starr shall guide us; whose noble Breast, this day, I robed of his honoured Order, and forced like a private Soldier to fight for his safety; yet then, had not thy odds rescued thee, or his noble Mind given a protection, thy proud Heart had found a Justice some worse Na∣ture must pay; It was he that gave thee thy Life; that Life thou so insult with over the ruins of his Father, which (slave and Villain as I was, to join in laying those sad loads of grief upon his great Heart) I'll redeem, or die in the attempt, if you delay this night to produce the King. Your Answer.
It is here, double Traitor; here in this sword, and in  the field, I'll make thee read it when it is written in thy blood.
That Traitor, though Truth, shall cost thee dear; Perjured Prince.—March.
Heaven, thy Hand still! Clytus, my Soul forgives thee; Honest and gallant; and what I thought crime is but virtue in thee, and loyalty to thy Master; and I'll find a way to tell thee so if thou persist: This quarrel may give us power to strike once more for our Revenge;—Almanzor's full of thoughts; this quarrel must be fa∣tal, they have both too much Courage to bear such injuries as these.
Now, Sir, has your passion had the full swinge are you deep enough in dangers? Have you Enemies enough? If not, we had best seek for more.
It is better to know, then doubt of a foe; I saw him false from the first hour he had possession of the Castle; this is but pretence; A few wretched Prisoners, only a pretence to pick a quarrel now the work's done; It was my curse to trust a Traitor; yet if we had not mist the Princes the Castles had been no losses.
Sir, it is now no time to talk of why-nots; this night we must expect some attempt from them, their business is done, the King is slain, the Prince too, for ought we know, his Clothes and order being found upon the ground; the people too are armed in their defence, and expect we should produce their King; which abused hope We cannot expect they should forgive; and we are to believe this party that have defended themselves thus long against the King will never yield to our power by any argument but the Sword: Besides, you may gather from Clytus what the rest intend, whose Forces are drawn apart towards Naples,
and those of Gaietta remain still upon the pass; and can if we op∣press them, upon occasion, retreat or join when it is to ruin us.
What's to be done then? I am all rage; The Villain Clytus has robed me of all my hopes.
You must resolve to fight with one of them this Even∣ing, whilst divided, else to morrow twill be a double business; if not, march immediately to Capua, secure the Harbour, and this night dispatch a Galley for Sicily for supplies, and therein send the prisoners; for I believe them of more worth then they appear, by the earnest demand of Clytus.
Give order then, that we may be ready to march. Fortune, if thou smile upon this Action I shall yet have time enough to make ready a Revenge for the Villain Clytus; whose falsehood in a fatal hour has thrown me from all my hopes of Love and victory. 
This Clytus shall know.
How now, the news!
Sir, pursuing the Enemy in the wood I have lodged some persons of quality; who, by their lamentations for the King and Prince Leopoldo, I know must be of that party; Two of them are remarkable, a Satyr and a Moor.
Speak softly, tic they. The Princess Bellamira, I know by that Moor; Roderigo take a choice party and let us fly to this remedy: Fortune, I no sooner called upon thy name, but thy kind Deity has sent a medicine for my Mind, a cure for all my ills; Lead the way, and for this chance thy reward shall exceed thy hopes; Come, Roderigo, now we may smile again; Bellamira will weigh down the scales, and make our Revenge full.
A few will do it, the quieter the better, for this wood is full of paths and caves, and there's no hunting of them unless we could do it by the scent like dogs.
Sure some sullen star pursues this girl; I'll follow too, and make it sad to some.
It was done like Clytus, and tomorrow we'll second thy words; let the men be well fed to night, and a Dona∣tive distributed for this days service.
My Children, Clytus, had they many wounds?
No, nor any dangerous; oppressed with multitude we took them, and they are now his Prisoners; But this night, I fear, they will be sent away, and the rather that I was earnest for their delivery; And I believe we are deceived all this while; for I am confident the delivery or discovery of our young King is beyond his power, and only a pretence to engage the people.
No matter, that pretence has done our work, and now
Calmly, Clytus, and resolved let us proceed: now we have the game in our hands take heed of rashness or security, which may be as dangerous as his despair; let us in, and resolve with the King what we shall do, and to whom, ever ye go, let me present you both; his pardon and blessing will prosper the work. Kings are their Countries Parents, and heaven never blessed that people whom a good King cursed.
MAdam, we'll look out, if you please, and see what we can learn abroad.
Shoe's lost, shoe's lost, I'll eat no more; a curse on all their heads that fetched us from our quiet home.—Let me go, what  are you to me, or I to you, I loathe your hated sights, it is your mis∣chiefs we mourn, my dear Mistress lived quiet here till your impious visit; Innocence, peace, and Love filled every Circle of the Moon till you and mischief came and robed us of our peace; Wounded in mind and body, my Love, and her gentle Brother, rage like Dogs, by the Suns poison stung, and robed of Reason, hunt out your dangers, and Death, I fear; and I that have but these poor Rags of Nature, See how I am torn with following you;—Hell on both your causes I have lost my love, and know not where to seek her, but here in my wounded mind; my heart has her still; would she had ne'er stayed beyond this fold; if she die I'll starve my self, I will, and poison you; I will, by Pan I will, you shall not out-live my Love.
Quick and silently into the Cave, for there are some en∣tred the Wood; what they are I know not.
I'll not go in, but stay and tell them where you are, un∣less you give me my love, or show me where you have hid her, that I may worship her grave.
Shoe's not dead, man, shoe's in the Woods only, and to morrow we shall find 'em.
To morrow? why it is not night yet; Cramps and Aches find me, and the Murrain eat my Flocks, if I will eat or sleep till I find her; all Night, and not know where my Love is?
Go in then, and defend these people who thou know she loves, for she'll die if they be hurt.
Shall we seek her when we have done? I'll not strike a Dog else.
See they come, defend this pass, and then we'll seek her.
Yield, and let me bind thee, or I'll posh thy Scull.
So, so, follow me, and save the Princess; what, art thou lame?
The Rogue has hurt me with this foolish thing; a Bee's sting is worse, and yet I am lame.
NO resistance, but patiently expect what the prince com∣mands, or you are dead.
What Prince, Villain? Either be a friend, or enemy; give us our Freedom, or with thy Sword perfect that Treachery thou hast begun with the worst of mischiefs; Kill us, any thing rather then be subject to the impious rage of that insolent Conqueror.
Ha, Comrade! whore's the Prince? here are two of the birds I promised him, the rest are flown.
They are so, Traitor, that thus art armed with success; stare not, but defend thy self; Fly, Madam, to any safety; if this service prove successful, thank me hereafter; if not conceal me, what ever you see me do.
Madam? It is the Princess Bellamira, sure.—Villain, thou'lt live to repent this Act.
Thou shalt not, if I miss not my aim.
Hold, it is enough; my faults are powerful, and Treason alone is weak, I am lost.
This wretch had given up all our hopes to the Invador, had not my fate been above him.
Soldier, which way went Roderigo?
That way in pursuit of the Enemy,—Why not, in this disguise, strike him dead and secure all? why not? because it is base, and unworthy of Leopoldo; treachery has no Argument strong enough to justify it, success cannot do it; I'll follow him, defy him, and as Leopoldo take a full revenge, or give him a perfect victory, —Nay, then I strive against my Stars; Yield, Leopoldo, stoop to Fortune, War no longer against that froward Deity, bent to thy ruin; poor Bellamira, something I must do, and by appearing still a violent enemy may gain a power to serve her; Sir, do you not know this Prisoner? it is the Princess Bellamira, the same that the Shepherds took from us.
It is not possible, this the modest Princess, fighting in Breeches? sure it is one of her Pages.
What I am is as heaven appoints, who has delivered me over to your barbarous power; what I was this morning is now no argument, since they are pleased to withdraw their blessings; yet in all conditions I can despise the insolent Almanzor, prince only in power, slave of Fortune, blessed by chance, like her undeser∣avenge children, who claim neither by virtue nor merit what they hold.
You are angry now, and I laugh; and since you would not be a Queen, try if you can avoid being a Slave; and all those graces of that Magic form which once I loved, all those Flowers of Youth and Beauty my hate shall look on, and see wither in a scorned servitude, under an envious and cruel Mistress, who will make my love to thee as great an affliction as thy scorn hath rendered it my heart; for she loves as violently as thou hottest, to whose re∣avenge I'll give my interest up.
The same impious barbarous Almanzor still, upon whose power I'll look with scorn, it cannot be long lived; thou art too wicked to be long our Rod; for thy threats, they move me no more then thy promises; Thou know I would not sell my ho∣nor for the first, nor be frighted from it by the last; for know, when I will be free, (which yet I will not be) it is not all thy guards can keep me; and to heighten thy rage, know, it is no cold frozen Na∣ture, no aversion to Loves gentle passion, makes me despise thee; For never Virgins breast had more love in it, that had no more ho∣nor then Bellamira; and I rejoice to suffer for thy Rival, and he shall know it, that thy envious soul may gnaw thy heart, which, if thou love, twill do, when thou shalt see me die for him that's o'er∣come, and despise thee though a Conqueror.
Away with her to the Castle, and upon your lives secure her, I shall have my time too; what success, Roderigo? 
It is in vain to hunt them; that Satyr and the Moor are a pair of Devils, stout, and subtle; I'll not undertake such another chase, for their skins; they are all flown, but whither I know not; only one boy, I left him crying and shaking in a bush.
That Boy we have, and with him all our hopes; that in Boys habit was the scornful Bellamira; and now Clytus, and his in∣solent Abettors will stoop again, if my heart can be brought to re∣council it self to her, whose injurious words have again enraged it so that Ambition, Love, nor Interest can scarce make me dissemble my hatred of her.
If you be certain it is the Princess, away with her this night, or with the morning Flood, for Sicily, together with the rest of your Prisoners; leave me to make good Capua until I hear from you; besides, when you and they are gone, they must treat; for to fight signifies nothing; for if they beat us (which is uncertain too) yet they advance not to their end; for Leopoldo being dead, and she next Heir, dissemble, flatter, swear you love, any thing to appease her mind, marry her and confirm your Conquest.
It is resolved this night privately we'll depart, and in the interim order the affairs here to your direction.—Dissimulate∣on be thou my Friend while I banish hence this idle passion Love, and make room for the more noble Ambition, thou Guide of Princes, Love, that precious nothing, that dear I know not what, that makes us find a difference between a Mistress and other wo∣men. Farewell for ever blind unbodied Boy, that's proud to be∣come both Poison and Medicine to the mind, the wounder and the wound, where he can find a faith; else an indifferent common cheap companion for all (but Death) from King to Beggar;—  Here he would have imposed Laws, here threatened Darts, unless I would fondly have worshipped him. Fool, that were made the Slave of Nature! and so thou shalt still be to Almanzor when ere thou dare appear charmed by my scorn, and this thy perfect Cha∣racter; till thou hast tamed her mind, and till hers be kind, in spite of all thy Power or Art, Ambition or Revenge, not Love shall fill my heart.
TOo late I find my Error, poisoned with a dangerous passion, Jealousy, foolishly seeking what it would not find; the Curse of all the Gods are wrapped in his black thoughts, that yields to that Enemy of man, a Curse both in the Root and Fruit: First he blinded my Reason, against which Reason he made me doubt my Love; Then my eyes, which else must have seen a Brother in his face, and in this cloud made me lose my self; and then to find a new doubt, another misery. This Picture Picture of my Sister found by him, lost by I know not who, but given by some-body; I would not doubt Bellamira, yet I am sure
it is hers; neither she nor my eyes are disguised; there is some my∣stery as well as fate abroad to day; I'll have patience until I speak with her, nor will I be discovered until I be satisfied whose this Pi∣cture is. But see how my divided mind forgets her business, and talks away that little time that rests for their safety; for ere I can pursue my Design, and return from Clytus his Quarter, (whose faith I now admire and forgive) twill be too late to use his friend∣ship; for the Prince is resolved with his Prisoners this night to escape for Sicily; nor is there a way left to prevent this mischief, unless I take advantage of that trust that this Disguise has given me, and privately arm my friends, so to surprise the Guard and escape to Clytus his Quarter: this is our last and desperate hope, and this I must put in execution after the enjoying of some few minutes happiness, thus unknown informing my self of that dear knowledge my heart labours withal, and this benefit my misery will afford me; for being thus levelled by fortune I may be just to that excellence my better days could neither enjoy nor reward without blushing; such and so cruel are the Laws we our selves are bound to; and though we can give Laws to others, we are yet Slaves to custom and opinion, condemned to starve our minds upon the barren heart of some person only great in birth, and forbid to taste the full blessings this poor Maid is blessed with—Here they are within this place, the darkness will assist my Design, in hearing unseen what they say; and when I will I can by the be∣nefit of this light discover my self.
Good Heaven, do I lament any thing of Prison? Is not all the World Prison now, and a Prison equal to a Throne when he is gone? O Pollidor, he's dead, lost for ever, for ever, that's the great wound Death gives; let that thought excuse my immoderate grief, and awake the guilt that has long slept in thy vengeful mind: Thy Prince is fallen, dead, neglected, and unmourn'd, and thy heart afflicts it self for a Picture, the lost shadow of thou know not what, while the best of Princes without a tear from thy eye fills the number, and is by treacherous odds become a shadow: O ye Gods, why should mankind, wretched mankind, desire to stay after him, and wither out some few Ages here; why should the World out-last that gallant Prince, whose death has left it but a Carcass?
Your passion only tells you he is dead, for none saw him fall; it is only in your fears he's lost, and most unjustly you accuse me now of hate; for though I loved not the name of Leopoldo, yet Heaven witness I now adore the man.
Prithee peace, and let me love once, and but once; even Pollidor can deceive my heart when the Prince is concerned. Dis∣sembler, my fears and thy wishes are built upon the same unlucky ground—See, fond Youth, see the royal distinction of the brave Leopoldo from other men, behold his ancient Order, the Chain too  I saw him wear this day; but where is the sacred breast, upon which as upon holiest Altars these consecrated Relics hung? O Pollidor, Pollidor, that Shrine Murder and Treason have ruined, and with profane hands thrown down a Temple built by and dedicated to all the Gods,
All the Gods forbid.
Now you and my Father may smile, your hatred has found a malicious power to join with your wishes; try if all your Sacrifices or penitent prayers can make such a Prince, but I am certain thou hast lost a Friend; for do not think it possible I can be flattered to out-live him? and though I cannot hate thee, I can hardly forgive thy hatred to the Prince, whom I shall make haste to follow; Thou art but gone before to prepare the way; nor will I stay here but to dispatch thy business upon earth, and then Pollidor thou shalt see me follow; but I talk too much, until it be time to justify to the world how much I loved; here I will mourn my loss till I can find a handsome when, and glorious how to follow.
When that time appears, Pollidor will quit himself of this unkind thought, and thou shalt find me ambitious to have it said, I fell in Leopoldo's cause.
Such a Monument, (though I love my Brother) I would live to see thee raise thy self and the great Leopoldo: And if thou dy'st as handsomely for him as I would have lived faithful to him, who pities thee, or weeps upon thy Grave, are no Friends to ei∣there: but these are words, and he's dead. Ye Gods, who would have lost so glorious an Enemy? 'T was worth thy care to have preserved him, though thou did not love him thou should have kept him for a Pattern, his Virtues were worth thy Love and Envy; though he were bornn to thy Hate; Now thou hast yielded to his fortune; for though Leopoldo be dead and fallen under thy wish, not under thy sword, a gallant man would not have lost such an occasion to have made himself known in his own Revenge: now the world will say, My Brother hated a Prince he could neither love, imitate, nor overcome.
Heaven, can I hear this and not relieve her? I must inter∣rupt this grief, it is most unjust to let them be miserable for me that am the happiest man that ever Fortune struck at and mist, How I scorn her poor malice! Prouder of these two Friends than all those airy gifts she has called back.
Who these should be I cannot imagine; that so confidently avow their love and hate to my Brother; if it be dissembled it is done to the life; it is some cunning highly wicked, or else the kind∣est that our party has this day ruined.
What Picture's that they rave of? This discourse confounds
my thoughts; a Brother and a Sister; by their discourse she loves the Prince too: I will not yet be known, perhaps they'll be free, and I may know more by chance than by question what that Picture is, the loss of mine makes these Chains heavy.
Madam, start not, I beseech you, nor despise the Propose∣tion  I shall make for your safety, because you see me poor.
Sure thou art mistaken, dost thou not see thy Error?
When it is to serve you, Madam, my confidence I hope will find your pardon, else, miserable as I am, I would die sooner than betray the divine Bellamira.
Speak softly then what it is you design.
First be pleased to know it was I redeemed your Highness, the Soldier that desired to be concealed, which service I should not remember but to beget your faith. Know the Tyrant boasts your captivity, and vows such miseries as shall make you proud of his embraces ere he'll embrace them; this waked my heart; and could my single revenge have served you, upon the place I had struck him to the earth.
Sure I dream, whence comes this gentle sound? and how came so much humanity to get a power in this barbarous place, where Lust, Force, and Treason reigns! How came thy charity to get admittance hither!
Leave to wonder, Madam, and give faith to m•, for our time's short, and it is not every hour I can serve you in: This night you must prepare to follow my directions, and attempt your escape; for you are with the morning tide designed for Sicily, where you must prepare to suffer what the Conqueror shall im∣pose.
Wonder not, I prithee, at my want of faith; I have been so little acquainted with civil language since I came into his power that yours amazes me; I have this day received nothing but Injuries from Men and Elements, abandoned by all, and treated as the scandal and infamy of our Sex, like some Vagabond that had strayed from Honour and Virtue.
Give me leave to remove even the greatest of your griefs; the King and Prince live, I speak a truth as great as your joy; Palantus too is safe, and your fellow Prisoner here, and those two you heard discourse even now are Friends to whom your Highness owes much; they are yet but private virtues, but the world shall know them.
Thou art my good Angel sure; May I know who thou art? Certainly I will not betray thee.
Hereafter, Madam, you shall; let but this night pass, and trust me, and Heaven curse me if I betray you.
He sighs, sure he has been miserable himself he is so sensible of mine, and now some heavy grief hangs upon his heart; I am curious to know what kind of misery can make this poor Soldier sad.
What kind of misery? alas, Madam, miseries have not one sting I have not felt, and her bitterest roots are now my food.—Nature cannot be disguised, though my body be.
He weeps; what are the miseries that thus wound thy soul? for tears are her blood; did thou ever love unfor∣tunately?
Never, Madam.
Can thou have wit, courage, kind Nature, and a soft soul, and yet not love? it is strange that Love and Honour should be strangers; without love all thy virtues are not thine, they're but Lodgers, Inmate excellencies, and may be seduced, if not allied to thy heart by Love; therefore leave to hide thy mind and for∣tune from me; which I know must have something greater in it then thy words or condition speaks; dare you venture your life rather then your grief?
Take all the secrets of my heart, I love.
How by instinct I found his grief! humanity and ci∣vility but guide to Love, whose paths all that have honour tread.
Once, and but once, Madam; and therefore I may say I loved; though my eyes have much beauty seen written in her best characters, yet in all my days I was never pleased with more then one story of that fair volume, and my griefs are now the fear I should lose the Book ere I have read it out; for I have but newly begun the History of her face; but I lose time when it is most pre∣cious, because it is yours; for know, Madam, I must retire to the Guard, of which I am one, but it is to serve you; as soon as I have contrived your safety I shall give your Highness notice; in the mean time I'll discover, by this light, who are your fellow prisoners; but pray be pleased to conceal your self till I give the sign.—
Sure this soul's mistaken; it cannot be such a princely mind should be hid and buried in a Cottage, nor fate let so much honour grow so near the earth, while a Prince declines beneath the mean wretch, and becomes a slave to his passion, and submits to the worst of ills, a barbarous lust, a sin that shame and repentance attend here, and horror hereafter.—
Ha! it is he, the same Villain that snatched my Picture.
His hated sight brings back my anger; oh that I were free, to revenge the Prince upon thy sinful head.
Good gods, what do I see, protect me heaven; it is the same figure, my heart fails me, the Shepherdess is there too; Oh Fate, Fate, there is no resisting thy decrees.
Thanks for this friendly light, now I shall know the Au∣thors of that discourse my soul so much listened to; Ha! it is the young Shepherdess, I'll speak to her, I'm sure she's a friend. Fellows in misery, and friends to Leopold, such I know you are by your discourse, and to such the name of Palantus is not unknown; and gentle Maid, by all thy heart loves best I conjure you tell me what Picture it is you lament the loss of; for I, wretched I, have this day in battle lost all my soul doted upon; for my royal Master and his noble Family are this day ruined, and in this misery I have lost the jewel of my heart; it was a Legacy my Master gave me with his dying hands; it was a little Picture, but of the greatest fire∣tu living, if heaven have spared her.
Palantus nor his Master I know not, nor his Picture; but if it were that I found to day in the Wood, heaven and earth should meet ever I'd part with it to any hand, but death's; his cold Com∣mission should only force it.
It is rudely answered, yet if there were no other difficulty in regaining it then thy barbarous mind can oppose.
You promise your self too fast the victory o'er him that would complain neither of you nor fortune, if he lost it when the sword could win it.
Prithee, who art thou that talk thus in chains?
One that neither knows nor fears thee; one that will neither do nor take an injury.
Prithee, who art thou?
No more nor less then thou art, an honest man.
I'll inform thee what he is; we are two Plants that grew together from the same root in these peaceful Woods; we are two that till this day never saw an enemy; but who can be friends to those that hate the Prince, whose cause drew our swords? and though we be crushed thus with thy Masters ruin; yet I wish there were no more danger in either of your fortunes then you two will bring upon each other. For know, Palantus, thy faith to thy dead Master is admired by all; but none values it more then Phillora, a name yet a stranger to thee and the world, being sprung this day in blood; know it's the same un∣fortunate Girl thou saw this day in the Forest; and this whom thou threaten is my Brother; what he and I have done this day to appear friends to those royal names, Leopoldo and Bella∣mira, is not unknown, though yet never blessed with one sight of them but in their miseries, which are but the ashes of his greatness; let not then a shadow divide such friends; though my Brother love the Picture, yet he has justice as well as love.
Gentle Maid, forgive the passion my love and misery be∣got; and to you, Sir, the ignorance of whom I answered will excuse the wildness of my words; pray let us calmly inquire by what ac∣cident your Brother came to find and lose that Picture, by which I can easily collect whether it be mine or no.
Pray describe yours, that will inform us.
Mine was in a box of gold, enamelled with Phillamorte and black (the sad colours that are worn by me forlorn) the Cipher two xx crossed, within a figure of an armed Pallas; the hair brown, the forehead calm and full of peace; Juno's eyes, fair and full of mercy; but I want Poetry to express her beauty, to which the gods have give a mind equal to all she bows to.
It is the same my Brother found in the Wood, and that bar∣barons person there snatched it from him; and ever we could regain it again the enemy surprised us.
Which is he?
That, there he stands; but if ere I get a free∣doom I'll make thee repent it at as sad a rate as I lament the loss now.
Villain, restore my Picture, or thou'lt find my chains too weak to hold me from thy throat; it is the same, now I see him I know the Periwig and clothes.
You wrong me, I never took it from you, nor ever saw you before.
Villain and Traitor, thou lie; and were I loose I'd make thee acknowledge it in thy hearts blood; I would I could look the slave dead.
You are angry, and I must laugh at it; look here's the Picture you have lost; I have it and I will keep it.
Thou dare as soon drink poison; and as safe either of you may do it when I am free.
No more of this rage; cease to injure a man you know not, and despise not a man you have never proved; your loves are nobler far then your hatreds can be; your love has a gal∣lant cause, your hatred a mere imagined one; for a painted Card the curious thieft of an Artist's eye; besides, we know Pallantus dares as much as any man; and therefore he should not talk; and all honest men dare any thing that's just; and he that will more then is just is a bolder man then Pol∣lidor.
Excellent Maid.
Forgive me gentle Maid, and I have done; and now I turn to thee, and calmly I conjure thee by a Soldiers honour, give it the person thou took it from.
Neither of your two threats nor prayers shall force it from me; yet such a power those eyes have over me, that you shall command it for one kiss of your fair hand; dispose of it as you please; and let me stand the fury of their displeasure.
Gentle Soldier, give it to my Brother; thou took it from him, and with it all his peace of mind; justice is on his side, for I saw thee snatch it from him.
There, dispose of it as you please.
Oh, for an hours freedom, and a sword to dispute this right.
You shall have both, Sir; and be ashamed of your threats
too ere long; fear not, I have laid up your lye for you.
It is the same; look Phillora, here's our better Angel come again; so, now I defy Fortune and all her falsehood; frown on, here's my peace which I'll not give for all thy smiles; how I love my eyes now, better then I did my hands before! they faithfully held their hold, while these like cowards let thee go; it is the no∣blessed sense of any, and informs the knowing soul, makes acquain∣tance betwixt us and the great works of heaven, and obliges our hearts more then all the rest; see how it feasts my mind with these thin colours only! how graceful too the eye is! what it borrows the tongue and heart pays; how just and innocent the eye is! it never wrongs in conversation, nor withers one flower in this Gar∣den; she fills her self, and yet leaves no one beauty less for her de∣light: Now, Phillora, my soul feeds upon this divine object, and yet neither stains nor begets a blush; but, oh my fears! who can this be? that thought lies heavy upon my soul, and when it is known how to be won; were she to be fought for, I would not doubt my fate; but this gentle sex must be persuaded and flat∣te•'d from their freedom; and for me, a rude Woodman, bred in these Forests, where shall I find soft words to speak my griefs, and rock her gentle mind a sleep; while her soul listens to the story of my Love and misery; rough as my life I fear she'll think my nature too, and tremble at the thought of our conversation, and fly my embraces.
No, Pollidor, these are not thy faults; Pollidor was never barbarous, rough and cruel are not Pollidor's crimes; that that stains thy heart was want of love; who else might promise to him∣self success in all that honour can be engaged in: be therefore a Lo∣ver, and that powerful deity will teach thee how to conquer all those doubts.
Be a Lover! how like a young Lover thou speak! can all that would be Lovers? no Phillora, Love puts nothing to the question that God moves in commands; why else do's this shadow bind me? which I can thus throw from me; but how can I remove that that's figured in my mind? no, no; I may snarl and be angry, like a Wolf in the toil, but it is too late; the Hunter's come, and I am now his prey; yet if I could but know who I love, and see it possible to be believed how much I love, I should not rapine at the price I pay for her faith: But alas! I catch at air, and my love is spent on shadows; and when I find it more real I fear my despair must increase too; for if she be mortal she's some eminent person sure, and where shall I compass proud titles to heap upon her, to raise her name above the people, to please her vanity, when they shall wonder and reverence as she passes by? whore's that wealth and jewels whose envied worth and charming beauty may affect and emu∣late her bright eyes? had I a Sceptre, whose power (like Leopoldo) I might throw at her feet, and like him to Phillora by such a service speak my love, then I might hope: but alas! all I have to plead is love; and all I can do for her is to love her;
and what is that to her? when I shall urge it, she'll say, who do's not? what then is my love in order to my happiness, till she loves too, but idle air, lost and forgot like the found that breathed it?
What is love? why, it is sent thy punishment; a re∣avenge that his Deity has taken for being so cruel to my passion; and see if thou hast not already forgotten my griefs, negligent of the misery I suffer for fear of the Princes danger, only mind∣full of thy own pleasure; and can thou (unkind) hope I should join in thy loy, while thou art so negligent of my sadness? no Pollidor, first thou shalt taste my grief; what if she be dead thou love?
Ha! what hast thou said?
Dead, as Leopoldo, fallen under some wicked hatred. Suppose murder and treason tearing in pieces that noble form, and Pollidor looking on, held back by a Sisters envy only; what thinks Pollidor, could my reason hold him? could he be persuaded to look on, and not draw his sword to rescue her? thou art silent now, this was thy Sisters case to day, when thou, unkind, re∣fused'st to lend a hand, or suffer me to go to serve the Prince; and see how the gods have revenged my quarrel; and thou that could not be persuaded to love the best of things, Leopoldo, now dot'st upon the least of things, a shadow of thou know not whom, who perhaps is dead for love of another.
Dead! oh Phillora, that doubt has struck me to the soul; pale horror fills my mind; the tapers of my eyes grow dark; struck with that fear they grow drowsy.—If thou be  dead may the clouds grow hard, and the seasons be shuffled again into Chaos, and destroy the seeds of nature; if thou be dead let the spring no more prove a common cradle, but with false concep∣tion become their fatal tomb.
Who this should be that thus in shadows walks, and wounds the hearts of men, I cannot guess that know none but my self of all our sex; nor will not doubt my Brothers fortune if she grow not without the reach of honour; but if thy star be placed in a region as high as mine, then we'll sigh, and mourn, and dye, and leave to the world the sad story of our Tragedy.
Alas Phillora, death is the only thing that an honest man ought not to fear; nor did I ever apprehend him; but in the per∣sons of them I loved their dangers make him dreadful; it is not these chains, nor thus to be lost in a crowd, or buried in a dungeon, frights me; it is fear of this and thy fate that wounds me; for I am certain we cannot dye forgotten, we are not worse then Plants. Shall I believe Phillora and Pollidor can when they perish be∣come less then Herbs and Roots? they by dying lose nei∣there kind nor virtue; nay the ashes of some things my Father says are medicinable; and death sure cannot so quench fame or virtue, but some that have virtuous minds will preserve our story, whose fortune will find pity, though there be few to imitate.
Yet my Soul is sick with thoughts that we must languish and wither here, then die oppressed in the dark, and go I know not whither; and if not forgotten our selves, yet eg∣norant of what Fates our Friends suffer; These, Pollidor, are the bitter wounds that strike before death, and wound deeper then death it self.
It is he, but how to believe him or Fate I know not; one of the two deceive me; seven years I have loved his shadow, and now no sooner find him but he's lost beyond redemption; his shadow nor his obscure birth are not so impossible to my Fate,  as his Love of another; can it be that I should be so cursed, to dote upon a man below me, and be despised too? Heavens make him worthy of my Love, or me worthy of your care.
No, Phillora, all other thoughts have given place to this great one; this dear object of mine Eyes and Heart I cannot part with, nor divide from my Mind; Phillora was, but this is now her business; A thousand kisses I'll give each day to this pale shrine,  while Love and Grief will lend me life.
Hold, as thou hast Honour, hold; and profane not that picture with thy Lips; all but that I can suffer, till kinder Fate will give me leave to dispute my right.
Not kiss it for fear of thee? Yes, and die upon it. 
You will, wretch? I shall make thee live to know that Princess is to be kneeled to, and not be approached but with sa∣crifice of thy life; For know, (to thy despair) it is the Princess Bellamira's picture that thy lustful Lips have thus profaned.
aside. Ha! what says he? my Picture!
Does your Soul shrink at the name of her? Wretch,  when thou shalt see her Eyes thy Heart will turn to ashes for this Insolence; and thy proud thoughts find an humbler Altar to offer thy saucy flames at then thy Princess Breast.
The Princess Bellamira! Oh Pollidor, our Fates are a∣kin still; and it is my joy we fell from a height fit for Princes to aspire unto: Great and noble (though unhappy) were our Loves; But if she be that gallant person Fame speaks her, how came you by her Picture? Palantus is her Subject as well as Pollidor, and all such are set at equal distances in Honour; Any thing that's a Gentleman is as near this hope as Palantus; Did she give you this Picture?
She give it me! no, fond Girl; she has a Soul of ano∣there temper, tic a Jewel of a double value as it is hers; the greatest wealth of my Heart that never loved ought but her, though I no∣ver yet durst tell her so: But with care and fear kept diligent watch to hide my passion, as thy fond Brother has done to pub∣lish his.
If she did not give it, by what right can you pretend to it more then my Brother?
By my Royal Masters Bounty; who this day when he fell in my arms (full of age and wounds) from his Breast he plucked that Jewel and gave it me, with his commands to wear it as his
last favour, a present fit for my hopes, that never durst aim at more then her shadow, too well acquainted with her generous Mind; whose royal branches will never bear such low fruit as my Love that was born her slave. Her Brother too, (to whom thou hast avowed hate) my God-like Master; A Prince whose great Soul has still been my pattern, and I must die ere I can imitate; whose kindness still kept me warm in my Royal Masters bosom, and honoured me with his trusts too; His Mind never stained with jealous thoughts of my greatness with the King, which are the great ties upon my Heart, not to abuse their favour as the un∣grateful, ambitious pretentions of a slave; But here my Breast has worn in secret that fire whose grief was known only to one as unhappy as my self, whom I lament no less then I love the other.—  And now I beg from thee, for that royal families sake, be so just to thy King and Princess, as to redeem from that rude hand those sacred relics; See how he hath stained it with his hot breath! Thy hands are loose; or but release mine, and I'll tear the figure from his Heart too. Good gods, I always kneeled to it, and had thy Soul been filled with Honour thou would sooner have kissed the Plague then have profaned it thus.
It is Truth he says, my Heart condemns me. Here, Soldier, prithee carry it to him, not for fear of thee, but her;  such reverence and such fear as we pay the gods her name has bred here, which is the truest Valour: And here I confess my self a young and ignorant Lover, take it and forgive me; take it and be a friend to him that will dote upon thee for loving that Princess with so much more gallantry then himself; Yet you nor she ought to be angry with me for not finding a way I never trod before; The is the first time I ever saw any thing better my self; we are two, a Brother and a Sister, that have loved each other with as much Innocence and Passion as you can boast; and yet we kiss when we love most. 
Now can I scarce resolve to take it, his Heart has high sense of Honour; How rude, and how calm, in one minute! would I had some of that power again that I lost this day but to serve thee with, that all the world might wonder at the Friendship of us Rivals in a desperate Love.
Oh Phillora, thou set out first, but I shall overtake thee, if not over-run thee; for my Heart is wounded, I hope, to death, with this new kind of grief.
If we out-live this misfortune thou shalt be my friend; the Brother that lay in the same womb with me shall not be pre∣fer'd before thee.
Heaven! thy hand is working, and as invincibly as fatally.
Oh Pollidor, dear as my Souls bliss, leave to stab my Heart with these desperate groans; Look up, or else farewell; do not think to go and leave me behind; We are both miserable, the same cause too, and all our joys were of kin; we are allied in our miseries too, and we will die Brother and Sister; I am now
collected, and can chide that passion that accused thee even now, and thus kiss those Eyes whose dear light is my Hearts fire; Oh Pollidor, thy tears have mortal poison in them, Farewell; The gods call, and by a thousand ways beckon us to come; and to refuse their summons would look rude in us that have Honour and Peace of Mind gone before to make our way. Oh Pollidor, we must part, forced by a sullen Fate, and broken heart; Love, and the Prince, give fatal wounds.
Phillora! Sister! Oh ye gods, spare this poor Girl, and take a stubborn heart; Oh, she's gone! help, as you have charity, some water, fetch some water.
Heaven, and all good things forbid this early mourning for such virtue in the bud; unkind frost, to nip so soon the fairest Rose that Nature ever boasted. Art, thy Envy has destroyed her, because thou coldest not imitate her Excellence. She breathes; Oh look up, gentle Phillora, and hear thy Prince conjure thy Soul; if Love be her errand, bid her stay; Leopoldo, thy Leopoldo calls her back; for if thou die thou hast lost thy way, and to find Le∣opoldo, stay.
Leopoldo!
Yes, Shep-herd, Leopoldo. 
Leopoldo! Sure I heard that name; that voice had a power to call me from my Grave; But why does Pollidor abuse his Sister, does he take delight to see her miserable?
Hence all thoughts of low fears, this cloud I thus dis∣perse; See, Gentle Maid, behold thy Leopoldo.—Oh thou strangely Excellent, above the merit or weak faith of dull men; whose  story will make past Histories blush, and shrink their narrow fame into nothing, when thy faith and excellence is known; And I blush to think how much I owe thy Virtue, and how little Fortune has left me to pay thee with.
It is he, it is the Prince; Oh let me kneel to you, Sir; why does your noble heart thus stoop to save a piece of earth, whose infection you ought to shun?
See, kind Fortune has thrown me down from that greatness that divided us last, only to make me capable of thy Friendship now; And when I wish my self greater then Phillora, may Treason find me; Here is perfect happiness, this is full joy; for what is joy (gentle Maid) but hope stripped from our fears, that hung like rags upon them and darkened their Beauties?
My Brother! Then the gods are careful of poor Bell∣lamira.
If my Love be welcome here, but thy safety I have no wish in store.
Welcome, Sir, as winters sun, or summers shade, well∣come as your own wishes, welcome as your safety to my Heart, that loves and feared you were betrayed; Oh give me leave to kneel, and in silence at your feet weep out our joys which are so surprising I want words to express, and am fain to use these Em∣blems of grief (my tears) to utter it.
The prince Leopoldo; good heaven where was my mind!
From your Brother I beg forgiveness, for taking his pi∣cture; jealous, I confess, he had too much Interest in the Excellent Phillora; for finding her in his Arms, the sight blinded me so I could not discern the Brother in his face; Thus love is pleased to Triumph still in afflicting our minds with unreasonable hopes, sometimes, and other some with as idle fears. And now, Pal∣lantus, can you accuse me for having robbed you of your Pi∣cture? but I can reconcile all; for I believe the same Soldiers that took me robbed you, and in the wood spoiled me of such Jewels as I had about me, for which they quarrelled in the dive∣zion; The advantage I took hold of, and slew them, and then took one of their habits to save my self, and serve my friends, which you are; who I must now acquaint with the happy news; the King lives, found and known most miraculously by your Fa∣there the old Forester, who knew his Signet upon his finger; the rest  of our friends, I hope, are escaped; for I hear of no other Prisoners but our selves.—And by this my Sister, I hope, believes I am a  Lover; however I know she is dear Bellamira.
The Princess Bellamira! is she a prisoner too?
Dear Bellamira, hide not thy face; let us resolve like our selves, and Act those decrees with honour, and leave the rest to the gods; for we see how little we can command our own, or rule others fortunes.
This was the Shepherd that rescued me, and saved my brother.
It is the Princess; then, oh, be dumb, for ever dumb, since thy guilty tongue has betrayed thy heart.—Yes, Madam, it was my fortune, and the only grace that she ever showed me, when she gave me power to save the Prince; and if she will let me die for your Highness, I have all my wishes.
I pray, Sir, quarrel not with Fortune; me-thinks you owe her much, and are still likely to be in her debt for more.
Oh, Madam, upon my knees I fall, and beg a pardon for our unreasonable hatred, which our Ignorance was only guilty of.
Kneel not to me, gentle Phillora, whose friendly heart has Justice to all our kindness; and if I can live to pay my score to this Company, I shall then die indebted only to the gods, whose mercy will take our Faith for further Sums.
Softly, I pray, lest the busy ear of Jealous mischief (watchful to our destruction) catch this dear Secret.
Pray let me deliver to your Love and Care this Jewel of my life; for know, Bellamira, I have vowed, (and it is written in
Heaven, and here I again confirm it,) Never to marry any but this Maid; and if fate frown upon that, a strange curse find me if ever I quit my freedom.
Oh hold, Sir, call back that rash vow, and be still worth the love and envy of all the world.
If Phillora says I am happy my joys are currant; her stamp only can make them so, that's my vow; for I will purchase thee at the rate of all things but my Honour.
Why do you vow so rashly, Sir? before you have called your Reason to counsel? my heart is so much yours it will not consent you wrong your self; and I am so proud of my Innocence, and real Love to your Highness, that I must not con∣sent to that vow; For though I am the private Issue of a poor Forester, yet my heart's too proud to Love every common Fire∣tu; nor is it every Prince that I could love, nor do I find my mind so subject to the vanity of our Sex, as to be pleased with their loving me; therefore be pleased to live my Prince, or I shall die your handmaid, and show my love was greater then my ambition, which few women arrive at in Story.
No more of this kind war now, for heavens sake; Put on your disguise, for fear we be all lost in your discovery.
I shall obey, and so must you, Bellamira; Do you not find something like your dream, Sister?—Me-thinks there is so much fate in these accidents, that we war with heaven when we dispute them; See thy vision revealed; are we not all saved by these Foe∣resters? the King lost and found, and these two Cedars of the Forest, whose fate heaven only knows?
Upon my knees, Madam, I restore this jewel; The grief and distraction my soul was in wounded this day with thousand mise∣ries, will plead, I hope, a pardon for the fault my Tongue has made in discovery of a Saucy passion; yet I could wish the whole King∣doom were as guilty as Pallantus, their love would have been less dangerous then their hate.
No, Pallantus, if it be dear to thee, keep it; and value that, as I shall do thy Friendship; for I have long known thy heart, and shall trust thee hereafter with the Secrets of mine; my father has found thou art faithful, and grateful; And all the gods so bless me as I love thee for it, with all that thou can hope, or I can in honour give; and if I have Interest in Pallantus he will obey me; What it is I command him Fidelia shall tell him; till then I am silent, and her love shall speak the rest.
Madam, I have much pretence to love; but I shall doubt it, and not hope your reward, when I shall refuse a ready obedience to all your Commands.
Farewell, Phillora, our safety calls me, pray be silent here, when I am gone, for they are jealous of me already; this night if possible we'll make our escape to Clytus his quarter, of whose heart and faith I am fully satisfied; The keys are now in my power; and in the dead of night I'll call ye: The word shall be, Phillora.
All the gods protect the Prince.
What do they mean by his figure in a Dream, and point at me, and talk of her Love? sure I dream; when I have seen the worst of Fortunes, Twill always be in my power to die; there's none so wretched but she can afford him a grave; her Eyes are fixed upon me.
Why do's my heart tremble at the sight of him I thus long have desired to see? why should I apprehend this hour as dangerous? Yet I feel a pain without a name, a power not known; it is less or more then Love, Yet not arrived at guilt; it is neither fear, nor desire; why should I blush then to own the Joy and kind∣nos I have for him?
HOw vain and Insolent is man, that dares call these the weaker Sex! when we consider the Actions of Virtuous Women, the thousand dangers and difficulties they must pass through ever they arrive at that great name; what pa∣tience, what courage, what reservedness, what silence, what mo∣desty, how quick of sight, sometimes to apprehend approaching dangers, to shun them, and again not seeming to see such as meet them in the face, their checkings and forbiddings of Nature, deny∣ing, when she calls loudest, and most pleasing to their sense when she prompts them to be women; Yet we see them many times, in pure sense of their Honour, deaf, and dumb, and lame, even when wealth, dignity, and beauty, beckon unto them to come; all these, and thousand difficulties more, almost impossible to our sense (that have taken up a liberty to Act the contrary) they daily perform, with a watchful diligent virtue, whose generous minds have imposed these Laws upon themselves, and now those Laws must be obeyed before they can command a fair name; while vain men assume a Deity, and believe, if they have Courage they can with their Swords build themselves Trophies. In short, from these Excellent sufferers within I may conclude, nature, and all good things ought to be committed by destiny to the care of that soft Sex, who, till they love, and give themselves away to men, can do nothing little.
SO, so, lay down the provisions here; come, Madam, let us retire into this Rock, until the tide serves, then we shall be called; for we have agreed with an old Fisherman, an acquaintance
of the Satyrs, who for his Masters sake will safely convey us to some port that's free from the Conquerors power; but we must lie close till then, for the Enemy are already in the Town, but the height of the Cliffs, when we have the night to friend, will secure us; under whose protection we must make our escape, and leave the rest to Fortune.
I'll go too, I'll not stay, until I find my gentle Mistress; a curse fall on his head has frighted my love from her home; the plague of Ambition and cross love torment him day and night; may his Eyes ne'er shut till I have blessed mine with a sight of her; I fear she is hurt, my heart aches so; this busy trouble of my mind was never so unruly as now; it makes me sick, my Spirits grow weary, I faint to death, a cold sweat and sadness is all o'er my breast.
How lively this poor wretch describes my pain! But die Arcus, and all the world, ever she knows I have a thought of Love; yet all my resolution cannot keep me from ripening at my fortune, made by nature so opposite to what I love, and as if designed for mi∣series her heart is by fate given to a shadow in a Dream; My first cross lost a friend, dear as my Eyes, whose kindness and faith but speak that love which his modest Sister could neither tell nor hide: toge∣there our miseries found us, but to this day I could never know his Fortune, being, by different lots, become the slaves of different Ma∣sters, and my heart apprehends his death; our Country else would ere this have discovered him, our colour in this nation, making us as public as odious; A gallant and a faithful Servant it was as ever prince made a Friendship with; and had not our miseries struck us in the spring of our design, something worth story might have be∣fallen us; Curious to see the world our youths ventured into dan∣gers; to which slavery was our first step; but my fate was not to be satisfied with one Captivity; not miserable enough she thought, while only my body was in chains, and therefore sent these that gall my mind; Love, blind partial Love will have me his prisoner too, only to show the variety of his slaves; Why else did he throw away a dart upon me, where there is no possibility of being any thing but his slave? But I am resolved neither my condition nor passion shall be known, but in my Epitaph; and there, by a silent Lover, I'll stand distinguished from the crowd of Rivals, which my heart only emulates in worship; but see the fate of men, the least deserving is most successful; And barbarous Almanzor by an impious conquest has power to revenge himself, and insult over the miseries of that Princess; But I am still a wretch to talk while shoe's in chains; Yet if I out-live her, let base and ungrateful be writ upon my name; This night I'll find the proud Conqueror, and print a thousand wounds upon his breast, or fall a Martyr to those great names, Leo∣poldo and Bellamira, which, though they were guests too great for my sad heart to contain, yet their loss is death.
Alas, Arcus, we have all the same interest in this general grief; This grief and common Calamities (like the infected Air) wounds all, to whose dangers I must add a wound of mine
own, and the cure grows still more desperate; I have lost my friend, the kind and faithful Pallantus is fallen; and I must fear, though I cannot know, his misery, the uncertainty of whose ill wounds deeper then any danger that can threaten my self.
No more of this imagined danger; but retire, and wisely attend our own safeties, that we may preserve our selves till we know what fortune has befallen our great Master; which we can∣not hope, unless this Night we make our escape; within we may resolve what to do.
SEnd for Roderigo, put all things in readiness, it is resolved this morning tide I'll be gone, and with me bear the scornful cause of my affliction; That blind foolish boy is neither won by reason, Interest, nor flattery, and set without my Swords reach; he is not to be bribed nor won by sacrifice neither, like his friend fortune; some way I must find to reconcile my self to that fond Deity, or all my hopes are lost.
Roderigo, I am thinking.—
Of Love, Sir, I know you were.
Of Love, yes of Love, and sent for—
Me, to inform your Highness of his humour; faith, Sir, I know him as little as you reverence him; his kinsman, and his mother, I have practised, (a Bottle, and a Girl) these kind friends I can serve you in; for the other young Gentleman, he spoils con∣versation, and affects corners, either to kiss or cry in; I hope your Highness is not inclined to that Idle humour; pray will you let me hear you sigh; upon my Conscience you will make but an ill Lo∣ver; I dare as soon undertake to hedge the Eagle in, as you win the Princess; yet they say there are as many and certain ways to win a woman, and as many holes into her heart as there are upon her—Basta.—But believe me, Sir, there's one, if you can hit it, is worth them all.
This is a kind of knowledge, Roderigo, that few are igno∣rant in; but yet let the god despise me if I fear either of them; and though Poets and Lovers still conspire to beget a terror in our hearts, yet my reason tells me, even from those lamentable Stories that make love seem so dangerous, that we most unjusty blame Love when it is the Lover that's in fault; for Love is not in himself our Enemy; Love is as wholesome and as natural a passion as any that affects the heart; and only corrupted loves are dangerous; Love and Wine may both be poisoned; should we therefore curse the Vine? No, it is Love, wounded with Jealousy and Inconstancy, or Infected with disdain; Love set too high, or too low, by birth or Nature opposed, which, thus set out of her reach, or so low in the Earth that Honour cannot stoop to gather her blessings; or
else at such a height that even Hope loses his Leap, and the noble Fruit hangs still to tempt us: or a worse Curse than all these, which is my fate, to love a scornful Maid that loves another: these are the true grounds of Lovers miseries, and their Errors are falsely laid upon Love, and all our stubbornness called his Crimes, when we, not Love, are blind, who is indeed the gentle Tie of all Mankind, though he be made many times the most innocent Root of many mischiefs, and would be all Honey still but that our Rea∣son gives him a sting; Reason, Roderigo, which Chain the Gods, have thrown upon us; for we no sooner covet and know what would please us, but we find it still forbidden; and from this Root (this Reason) all the foregoing miseries are derived; kind Nature else would be obeyed, and all these troubles pass without a thought or grief. But to our business, which I'm sure, Love shall never be with Almanzor.
Yet it would be fit to be civil, and either send or go your self to the Prison, you have handsome cause enough to yield you an Excuse; dissemble your past anger, being in the heat of battle, incensed by her scorn, whose sharp language and your wounds smarting made you speak and act beyond your Reason: Come Sir, when you can win two Crowns with a few fair words never refuse to play at any gems Fortune proposes: besides, I have observed it, Women sooner forgive faults done to them, than those they do to others; for their shame is more than their anger can be; and it is easier flattering their weakness into pity than ripening their Reason into Justice or Discretion: The left-side is predominant in them still: could I love one Woman better than another, (which I am so far from believing Virtue, that I think I ought to be beaten for it) if I did not with your game win any Woman I'd never com∣mand Men again. Death, what Cards would you have to play if these lose? A young handsome General, a Prince, and Conque∣roar, that has wit and courage, and yet be strangled in an Apron∣string! sigh and let a Smock smother me! They shall bury me un∣der the Gallows when I die of that Disease; No faith, if any of them be too hard for me it shall be in Bed, and there let them use me as they please; I care not whether I win or lose in their arms, and he that desires more of Love than such a kindness is mad: when I embrace her if she smile and do speak like a Lover, let her heart be as busy as she pleases, and make any other happy till I miss her company. I do not remember I ever sighed, yet I think I have had my share of Women, but I would not be so miserable as to remember any of their faces for a Kingdom, for then I might be subject to Constancy, a Disease harder to be cured than the Pox; Constancy is really a weak-stomack'd Lover: My heart di∣gests a Mistress presently, and hungers for another; thirsts and enjoys her without any thought of Constancy and Remembrance; but the last is as dangerous as if my Supper should lie in my belly always, where should my Dinner go? If ever your fine Arguments persuade me to be one of your one Meals men, you shall geld me; give me an appetite every meal in the day, and kind hearts to
feed on, Wit and Beauty will find a Cook, and we'll make our Sauce our selves.
This Doctrine I am no Heretic in, Roderigo; yet I believe you will allow a man may love one Dish better than another, and so far I am a Lover.
Fast and get a stomach, Sir; then all that's young and kind is fair and pleasing; so far I am happy though no Lover.
All things are in readiness for your Highness departure, and we only stay for your direction.
I'll wait upon your Highness to the Prison.
Is all ready?
Yes, Sir, but it is somewhat of the darkest to put to Sea, within two hours the Moon will rise; and being not straightened in our time, I shall counsel your Highness to stay a little; two hours of the Ebb carries us out of all dangers.
When it is time call at my Quarters; Come, Roderigo, within we'll resolve of this new business, Love.
This I feared; but how to prevent it, something as speedy as their mischief must be thought of.
WHy this sadness now when our great griefs and fears are over? Why thus ingratefully in silence do we receive blessings we scarce could hope for? when all our Fates both of Love and Hate were doubtful, none were sad; the great and general calamity past without concern, Pollidor and Palantus with all their Faith and Loyalty could find room for Love and Anger; and now when our losses are repaired they sigh and droop for sha∣dows.
And Pollidor that never knew Love, Fear, nor Grief, but mine, till this Figure filled his breast, now when he should sacrifice droops and hangs his head like Flowers oppressed with showers; now when kinder Fate has unriddl'd all our doubts beyond our hopes, dispersing all those mists we must have wandered in, by the bright eyes of the divine Bellamira. Fie Pollidor, can thou be sor∣rye for any honour the Gods have heaped upon thy Mistress? Thy sadness now is self-love, and shows her Excellence is too great a Guest to lodge in thy narrow heart. Fond Man, would thou be happier than to love and be beloved by such a person; a begging Lover with her alms is richer than those that triumph in the spoils and embraces of another Queen.
I see our passions, Phillora, are the innocent thoughts of pure
minds; we love Honour and Virtue only; and when they are in safety we know no fears: these men have Designs and farther ends in their desires than their blushings dare declare, else our joys must have found theirs.
It is too great a truth, Madam, I can prove it in my self; for my condition is equally miserable to theirs; Are not my youth and hopes equal to Pollidor's? Are not my dangers great as yours? Is not my stake as great and rich as any that now distrusts their fortune? Is there not the same distance betwixt me and my happiness that you tremble at? Yet I smile, because I know I desire no unreasonable thing; all my wishes are to see these Princes happy.
Can you hear this and not blush to find two Maids prompt you to find your resolution? We that are esteemed the weak Sex, that Shadows have led in Chains, I that have suffered under a de∣sperate Love without groaning or crying out for help, seven tedi∣os Winters afflicted with a Figure in a Dream, and till this day no∣ver saw the thing I loved, yet now it is met it shall not make me guilty of a blush for any action, though I know there be a Fate and future Prophecy wrapped in this Cloud (which thou art) and even my own wishes have something in them which I can fear; but Bellamira will die rather than stain her story; and if Pollidor and Palantus have that honour they pretend they will cease to afflict our minds with their sadness, and patiently expect that Birth Hey∣ven and Nations have thus laboured to bring forth.
Thus at your feet I fall, struck more by this Virtue now, than by your Beauty heretofore: Oy Gods, the divine Bellami∣re's miseries but set her off, and upbraid your justice that could neglect such a mind when they had taken pains to make it. And now be pleased to know my silence was no guilty fear of my own misfortunes, but revolving in my mind your fatal Dream, whose every particular is explained, which makes me wonder who this Youth can be whom Fate has marked out for the Envy of Man∣kind, though Nature have conspired against him, and set him as far from the reach of his happiness as there is distance between a Cottage and a Crown; yet see, Madam, if sadness have not seized his heart, destined to lodge the greatest Guest that ever yet possessed the mind of man, Bellamira's love.
Sure Pollidor has not so poor a spirit as to be sad for him∣self; I should hate him more than I love him now if I believed his heart could be so narrow as to wish his own happiness at such a rate as profaning of this Princess; add for less thou can not hope to purchase her: Let not this grieve Pollidor, but resolve to follow thy Sister still. Remember it was she that led thee to this degree of Honour: Remember how, contrary to Nature, Sex, and Custom, inspired by the Deity of Love, I laid violent hands upon thy heart, and forced thee to receive those glories thou now art proud of, in spite of that low mean hatred of a gallant Prince which would have held thee back: Look upon these wounds, there is a beauty in them, and a grace even in these scars,
such as no Virgin can excel with all the art of dress; and I glory more for having received them for these Princes, then in any my revenge gave this day upon our enemy.
Certainly, when your Highness shall consider my part, twill not appear strange that my mind is possessed with wonder; and then I hope my silence will find your pardon: I would I had lost my Reason with my hopes; that enemy Reason that informed my soul, and made me aspire that happiness; the loss of which she now presents with horror to my mind. Yet, know all the world, Pollidor can neither repent, dissemble, nor tame his love, though he can dye when a less cause then your Highness displeasure calls; but will not be hired to live at a less rate then your pardon. And Phillora may call to mind something consonant to this fatal Dream; do's she not remember how in our most innocent days, the Dreams our distracted sleeps have had? what honours and what worship has been paid us from crowds of unknown faces? which compared with this waking Dream seem to revive, though darkly and afar off, something from those nothings; and these thoughts begot that guilty silence which displeased my Sister. But though Phillora can chide my silence now, I fear she will short∣lie find her heart subject to thoughts too, whose strange kind of fortune is like troubled waters now, and the storm is yet in her streams; but when it is settled, honour and quiet of mind will di∣vide thy heart; for though she thinks now her heart will desire nothing but leave to love the Prince; know, Phillora, those roots that are in the spring contented to send forth a bud, their sollici∣tous natures are busy still to nourish them; such is thy heart now Love but buds in it, and it will break to see that after all thy care that flower thou dotest on should hang upon another bosom; and all thy sweets and graces wither in that shadow; and while thou dy'st to make a handsome story, some one less excellent, but more fortunate, surfeit on those sweets thou pinest for; then thou wilt find how vain and idle a good pity is, and that fruit (if they love) poor and virtuous Phillora may reap; for pity is a good that's still attended with misery, dear bought, being never pur∣chased at less rates then ruin; and they may be happy that can pity, but the wretched are still their subject; now thou hang thy head, blasted with this sad truth; and now thy soul is awakened I defy thy heart to be at peace.
Alas, Phillora, ignorant of the dangers we were in made us laugh in this storm; and those waves which we were pleased with to see toss our Bark, threaten destruction to us, unpractised in that dangerous element, which Pollidor, like a Pilot, wisely ap∣prehends, and arms against the known ill, whose dangers I dare not now behold: something above Reason must secure our Reason, else sadness and despair must find us all.
Madam, I have heard all, and shall conclude, as to play a Game that must be lost, is childish; so to throw up all Cards that agree not with our wishes, shows covetousness and impatience; we do not always play for gain, sometime company and pastime en∣gage
us; and I am resolved such fates as are dealt me I'll receive; and show how much I am above that fortune that opposes me; and if I cannot be happy, yet (against my miseries) I have this remedy, I dare dye; that pale guest needs but little invitation; especially to those that care not to live, nothing is so easy, nor so pleasing  as to dye: and we, Pollidor, that are but beggars at this feast, may go when we will without taking leave, or being missed.
Help, help for charity.
Whence came that cry for help?
As you have charity help the wretched; oh my fate! must I look on and see his dear limbs torn, and not have power to help him?
What strange misery is that that stands in need of our help to relieve him, that are our selves laden with mis∣fortunes?
Heaven bless the Prince from use of such a succour; hark, whence came the cry? sure it was from above; I fear the Prince may be discovered in his design of our safety; if so, lasy slow death, in spite of thy envy, I'll find a way to meet the Prince, and hasten thy visit hither.
Are you all deaf to our miseries? have the wretched no sense of others misery? are your hearts hardened to our suffer∣ings, who beg nothing but the mercy of a speedy death?
It is in the Cave; some other prisoners, sure, I'll take a light and see in what our charity can serve them.
Hold, I hear the Prison door open, and that light comes this way; be silent and observe, lest some unlooked for danger happen.
It is about the hour the Prince bad us expect him.
Some new calamity, I read it in thy eyes, Leopoldo; speak, what fate must we expect?
The time's too short to execute my design, for now at this instant the Guards are coming to fetch you forth; and this night you must away for Sicily, in company of the Tyrant, whose designs my heart dreads to think of, which ever he shall execute I am resolved, though I sacrifice my life, I'll strike him to the earth; this must suddenly be done, unless we can surprise the Guards, and thus in the dead of night make an escape; see, here are Weapons for all.—Thus armed and thus unexpected, who knows what success may attend the justice and resolution of this action?  Phillora is the Word; Here then let us embrace, as friends and fell∣lows in a great calamity, whose sad estates admits no cure but this desperate attempt.
The gods, and Prince Leopoldo's fortunes guide us.
Oh the misery of men, fallen below the pity even of  the wretched themselves!
What voice was that?
It is some wretch in the Dungeon; just as your Highness op'ned the door he called for help, and your coming put us off from inquiring what it meant.
Alas, alas! how cruel are men to men! See, if the very beasts do not prey upon the living members of the wetched.
Sir, your habit speaks you a Soldier, and since you are Master of those great blessings, Arms and Freedom, be mercy∣full to the wretched, who only beg some charitable wounds to re∣lieve them; I hope you will not find your sword the power for such an alms. See, Sir, two of many, two in number, one in blood and misery, the dearer part of my soul, all that the Plague and Fa∣mine has left to finish such sad fates as a cruel enemy shall impose, despised and forgotten, neither worth his cruelty nor his care, un∣less your sword relieve us; and yet our crimes are only our Nation.—
Your colour speaks you strangers; and your miseries have begot a pity, which I have time only to relieve, but not to inform my self of; what were those that run away? 
Foxes, who daily haunt this place, and will scarce ex∣pect while we are dead, but grown bold upon our afflictions prey upon the living; yonder lies my friend oppressed with sickness whose words they despise; nor could all our threats nor cries pre∣vail; slavery has so defaced the image of the gods in miserable man, that the creatures have lost the respect and reverence due to him; dull captivity has given such strange allay to that rich metal that man was at first coined in, that we are not currant among beasts.
Sir, we are prisoners too; and now upon forcing our free∣doms a sword and liberty I can give; and if you will take your fortune with us you shall be welcome.
When I have afforded this charity to my friend I shall most readily join in any design, to be revenged on this barbarous enemy.
One of those keys I believe will open his locks; and while you perform that charity I'll satisfy my self concerning those Foxes.—How should they come hither? surely there is a way out, else how could they come in? I'll see the issue of this chance.—
Oh Brother, what new blessing's this that gives thee to my Arms, what means this freedom? will they at last be kind, and let us dye?
No, gentle Sister, a better star guides us; and far from hence be those sad rites of Funeral, till we have taken
some revenge upon that barbarous power under which we have thus long suffered.
Sir, your goodness I hope will excuse our tardy visit, when you shall know we are under the same slavery, and but this hour released from our chains.
Our gratitude, not our excuse is due; and all my past miseries you have buried in this great blessing, and I shall at last be free, or dye revenging the injuries this poor Girl has suf∣fer'd, the only precious part of my soul; whose youth has been persecuted with the worst of ills that Love or Fortune could threaten, and all for loving a gallant man; whose noble heart I know would bleed could he but fear the miseries she suffers for him, though he be her Prince. This ambitious passion has made her taste many a bitter thought: Her colour makes this story strange to your ears, and this black makes it look like a fable, when we say we love; though here be the sad example of that lit∣tle god, great in power; whose dart has fired her private mind, and the saucy flame aspires her Prince's breast; yet she's nobly born, and what was my blessing proved her misery; for had not I been blessed with his friendship she had not ne'er been miserable with the sight of him; this as a secret her troubled mind concealed till the Prince was lost at the fatal battle of Carthage; since which misery I have wasted my days in slavery, and by chance met this poor Girl, hunting through divers miseries a peaceful grave, seduced by a Witch, who ignorant of her sex, being asked her fortune, bad her seek her happiness in the hand of a white woman, strange and impossible.
I am very faint, yet my heart divines some bless∣sing from the sight of those fair eyes.—
How my soul shakes to hear this poor Maids misery! and my pity would fain believe, amongst us, she might find that blessing that seems most desperate in her fortunes. Palantus, pray give her something to drink.—And be not dejected with thoughts of past ills; you are now amongst a company that dare vie with your most desperate thoughts; and yet will not doubt the rewards due to their innocence.
Her fortune is so like my own I cannot but love her, I grow concerned too in her miseries.
My thanks is due to all; but the joy and won∣der of this hour has made me neglet the payment, which I shall do in prayers to all the gods, that ye may never know the use of such a kindness, by having tasted those sad calamities that wound my mind.
Be quiet and resolved; for I hear some noise at the Pri∣son door; which way went the Prince? let us retire, for they are now shutting of the door.
EIther my Eyes deceived me, or they were foxes; I saw them leap.
Foxes, fool? whence should they come?
Why from their burrow among the Rocks, forced with hunger to seek their prey; finding us in their way, what's more natural for those beasts then to force through us? Let us return and see if we can find any sign of their passage.
How easy it is to give fire to fear! Our late danger makes us apprehend every noise. Hark, it is something scrapes within.—See, see, the furs hang upon the Rocks still; how con∣temptible a thing this fear is!
How long are the hours that sorrow loves! Time passes like a thought when we are happy; But Oh, how tedious will my 
 grief make the few days I have to live! Ha! it is fire, some star sure; Arcus, do you see that light?
It is something strange, but what Heaven knows; A light in the earth! Be not amazed, collect your selves; If our fears be true, what is there in fortune left for fear? Hark, I hear a noise too, listen.—Do you not hear a noise and strokes? Tic some Witchcraft sure.—It is a man, I hear his voice, and his words have reason; I'll speak to it what ever it be.—Ho! within, what art thou? how came thou to this cave? what seek thou in this place of misery? 
I'll answer it.—A wretched Prisoner whom the mercy∣less Enemy hath exposed in chains to the rage of wild Beasts; What ever thou art, for charity give some relief to the wretched, by in∣forming our miseries where thou art, for thy light has deceived me pursuing of those Beasts that would have devoured us; I hoped to have found a passage this way, which now is desperate.
Hark, sure I know that voice.
And I that sound, or else my miseries deceive me. Arcus! Arcus
Prince Leopoldo!
The same; struck with wonder and amazed, what are we next to expect from Fate? Are we all Prisoners then?
No, Royal Sir; we are in freedom yet, though their nets are pitched about us; Help, help, Philemon, to remove these stones, and force a passage here.
things my Heart can wish, glad to find my Love approved by so great a Mistress in the School of Honour; By whose name I vow to the gentle Cadesse an eternal Faith, and Hymen shall witness my Vow.
All the gods say Amen.
We must be gone, but whither, oh whither! Sad Fate! that must be gone, but knows not where to find a safety!
Not whither? Yes, to Gaietta, where faithful Clytus resides; Wonder not that I call him faithful, time will unriddle all; and (I hope) my Sister will not refuse to trust those that I esteem faithful, until we gain Gaietta; Love and Bellamira's Fortune shall guide us.
I submit, and where Leopoldo trusts will not ask a why; and if Clytus be faithful, and we escape, let us hereafter no more throw the scandal of blind guides on Love and Fortune; but freely deliver our selves to their protectior.
COmmand them pique their Oars, and let her drive with the Tide, lest the quietness of the night discover us with the noise; the Moon is risen too.
Sir, The boat that came from the Town is put under the Cliff, and there we saw lights.
Give order to hide ours, lest they betray us as theirs have done them.
Ours are hid.
We have the wind and tide to friend, she cannot to sea but we must meet her; if she fall into the Bay, the other Galleys are ready to oppose her; Come, Sir, let us look out, it is a fine Evening.
It is so, and if our honest intentions find their gods, I hope to see a glorious day in Naples.
ROderigo, if you can think of any thing to be added to your Commission or Instructions, send after me and it shall be confirmed.
At present I can think of nothing; for till your High∣nos and the purchase be arrived in Sicily, (which is indeed the root of all your business) all other thoughts are idle; and pray, Sir, let me prevail with your passion this night to treat them civilly, and make excuses to the Princess for your past neglects; Confess you know the debts are great you must pay ever she can believe you a Lover; and if you prevail not with her Heart, consider how
miserable you must be though you should force her to a Marriage, when you must sleep in the bosom of an oppressed incensed princess that looks upon you as the Murderer of her father, brother, and destroyer of her Country; Which, with that soft gentle passionate Sex is a grief above all the rest; her heart must tell her it was prince Almanzor, that destroyer of the man she loved, to your face, the an∣guish of soul threw out that secret knowledge which upon my life the person himself could never win from her; but distracted with her affliction, or anger, to spite your heart, has given you a secret her bosom friend ne'er was partaker of.
It is reason all thou urge, and I confess my self a beast when my passion rules me; but I will now endeavour to redeem my fault.
Sir, your Civility, If it does not get you a wife, yet it will oblige her, and make her your friend; twill be no small advan∣tage to your success; and having her in your power, it may divers ways advance your affairs in Sicily; Her love and passion for ano∣there, with the right she has to the Crown, and Interest in the people, you may by compounding her freedom secure your Conquest in Si∣oily; think on it, Sir, and let not passion for a woman seduce you; and Remember Kingdoms, Sir, are scarce, and there are many chapman, and women are common, and grow every where; let us be wise men, Sir, and when we cannot do what we would, do what we can.
How now, whore's your fellow, that we sent for?
And please your Highness, we cannot find him; it is not a∣bove an hour since he went into the prison, whose doors are still locked, and the key in the Inward side.
Did you knock?
Yes, Sir, but no body would answer.
Death! not answer, Sir, let's force the doors.
Here's the nest, but the Birds are fled.
Haste to the guard, command no person whatsoever pass without my order, let them seize all.
Perhaps, Sir, they're hid; for tic not possible they should be gone, and the door shut.
Search, Villains, twill concern you, for your lives are at stake.
Your Highness found us upon our duties, the doors shut, we cannot answer for a prison.
What Path is this? it is full of the new steps of many feet; let's follow these signs, see whither it leads.
Here they have escaped, but it is certain this pass was found by chance; and being so lately gone cannot be far from hence; search the Rocks hereabouts, they are but three men, un∣armed, and two women; let's lose no time, Roderigo, but di∣vide, and call if you see any body; this Accident has destroyed all our hopes; fool, fool, too late thou find the punishment of thy barbarous rage.
IS it far, we must go?
No, Sir, the Boat Rides under you Cliff.
Haste, haste aboard, or we are all lost; a party of arm∣ed men pursues us, I saw them and their lights Issue from the Cave.
To the Boat then dear Bellamira, and with thee take these our friends, and dearest pledges of our lives; Philemon, by all thy past kindness I conjure thee, take it not unkindly that I desire thy age to retire with these to a place of safety.
I'll not stir unless Phillora will be my Guard.
Gentle Phillora, let me once prevail, and now wait upon the princess Bellamira while I with Faith and Duty follow the brave Leopoldo.
I obey, and scorn to doubt that fate, that the prince, and Pollidors swords strike, to defend.
Away, away, I hear their noise; when we are engaged lie off from the Shore; if we be fortunate we'll call you back; The word shall be Victory and Phillora.
COurage, Sir, it must be they, they fly us; it is impossible they should have means to escape.
Let's pursue them close then.
THose lights a shore must be they; they have now doubled the Point, the Boat too is but a small Fi∣sher-man.
I counted them by their lights, they are not above a do∣zen in number; let us land a small party upon this Point, and it is impossible they should escape us, for we are now betwixt them and their Boat, which I have commanded the Galley to sir∣prize.
I am of Clytus his opinion, and that it be executed with diligence.
I'll command the Boat ashore then.
STand, and make good this pass, by this, our Friends are secured; and let us make them find the danger of pursuing a Lyon to his Den.
See Roderigo, here they are.
Ha! Almanzor! nay, then the Fates are kind.
Is there no more of you? Fools, what made you venture up∣on even terms? do you think our Innocence, and the Princess Bella∣mire's cause, is no odds?
Ha, how the devil came they Armed?
Hence this disguise.—Shall stories say Leopoldo feared to be known when Fate set him, Man to man, to dispute Fortunes with Almanzor? no Tyrant, see Leopoldo.
Ha! Leopoldo.
Yes, Almanzor; but see a Saucy Wood-man, that will strike the fairest Deer in the herd, or fall at his foot.
And the best is best cheap.
O! and this last sigh for Bellamira.
Lie thou there.
To fall under Leopoldo, though it be ill luck, it is no shame; your chance is good.
And so is Roderigo's; and let him thank this Disguise for his Life, under whose protection this day I safely heard him speak like a Man of Honour, which has made me forget he was an En∣my—Hold, every man hold. Let us not use our Advantage with cruelty, while I embrace the noble Pollidor, and congratulate with Princely Pyrrhus our strange delivery.
Though nothing be welcomer than the Princely em∣braces of Leopoldo, yet let us remember how dear these pawns are which yet are exposed to Fortune; and when they are safe let us rejoice as Winners.
Ha! the Princess taken! this my Soul apprehend∣ed: See Sir how busy mischief has been, and prepare to redeem the Princess.
Hold, Pollidor, while I to Prince Leopoldo discover a Secret which will seem strange and full of wonder; yet wit∣nos Heaven, I shall deliver nothing but a happy Truth, a Truth that has already found the wish and faith of the per∣sons most concerned; and to gain the speedier credit with your Highness, be pleased to receive this Signet from your Royal Father, who impatiently expects your Highness at Gaietta; the Princess and this joyful Company are already satisfied with my news which I shall begin with throwing at your feet the old Ravack.
Ha! Ravack alive!
A Name sometimes well known to Palantus, who here presents to your embraces our King, and your Kinsman, the young Genorio, Son to the unfortunate Ortho, whom cross Fate has thus long hid in the person of the gallant Pollidor. A Secret not less to him than to your Highness, for which upon my knees I beg his pardon.
Is this my Royal Kinsman?
What do I hear?
Be not amazed at this new Truth; for it was by the counsel of your Friends we concealed your Birth and Quality, which I should have discovered could I have promised my self your safety.
Have I lost the dear Phillora by this knowledge, Is not she my Sister still?
Yes, Royal Sir, Phillora is a Branch from the same great Stock—And what change this knowledge may bring her Fortune we must consult your Highness breast; my heart flatters  it self with hopes of happy Hymens.
Then the Gods have been careful of poor Leopoldo, whose heart Phillora knows was resolved (at the price of all things, but my Honour) to have purchased her friendship; and I will not now be so faulty to her as to fear her faith.
If sullen Fate had robbed the noble mind of the great Leopoldo of all those Royal Dignities that distinguished him from common men (as Fortune threatened once this day, acting her worst to destroy him) yet my Soul witness I should have torn from my head all those unlook'd-for Glories she has heaped upon me, to have repaired the Prince, from whom I beg that Hymen now I refused, and defy the World (being Leopoldo's) to make me miserable or faulty.
To Gaietta, and there let the Gods see us possess the blessing they have prepared for us; but first let me embrace the faithful and kind Ravack, who as a Father shall ever be loved and reverenced by us; and to you, Sir, though once an Enemy, thus I open my arms; no Excuses, Clytus, this habit gave a sufficient satisfaction, in which as a private Soldier I heard thy dispute with that unhappy Prince, by whose discourse I can witness Clytus his faith to his Prince, which has reconciled me to all his Errors.
Your goodness, Sir, has bound my heart for ever; I confess it was a blind zeal I followed my Master's interest with; and my faithful heart has found this great blessing for his reward.
Bellamira, thy Hand Bellamira; Is there so much of Pollidor remaining in Genorio, as still to desire to change a Sister? If there be, let Bellamira strive to out-vy Phillora in Love and Faith, and thus become one Root again, while the different Branches bear the same Fruit, Love and Friend∣ship.
Sure, it is not believed I should find words to express my joys; this is a blessing I must thus approach upon my knees, and shall always possess as Servant to Bellamira.
Your knee, Sir, but teaches me what I owe the King,
nor will I allow you have a greater share in this joy than I: this blessed discovery has cleared us of all the guilt that stained our Family, while the precious blood of your self and Phillora lay upon our name. This Storm has happily waked me from a fatal Dream, and now is settling into Innocence and Peace. Heaven witness how dear the name of Genorio was ever to me; and since the kinder Fates have made him and Pollidor all one, my heart has nothing left me to wish: Now I can rejoice when I call to mind the doubtful hopes Genorio (as Pollidor) lately pursued; and I hope this confession that I believed Pollidor loved will satisfy Genorio; he that desires more Arguments of my Love than a Faith of his must die unsatisfied by Bellamira; for I can tell it all the World sooner than Pollidor, and hide it too from all but him; what is the rest of Fortune that should make Pollidor thus sad?
My silence, Madam, is neither sad nor dullness, but a busy mind, confused and surprised with joy of un-imaginable blessings, in which the Crown was the least part. They were the thoughts of the divine Bellamira that drew my Reason into my self, that I might with an humble thankful heart con∣template the great Giver and the glorious Gift. Can you be∣lieve, Madam, your Friendship is to be possessed with less than distracting joys? At this time to be deaf and dumb speaks Love best, and my ambitious heart whispers there is a hope in this change that I may out-live my despairs.
No more of Fear, Sir; for know, I do not hide my joys, curious to conceal them or my thoughts from Pollidor; but because I fear it would look like Dissimulation to tell him how happy this day has made me; and now I beg he will let me con∣ceal my joy for my own sake, as I did my grief this day in ten∣dearness of Pollidor, whose griefs were then the afflictions of my heart.
Vanity and folly would only ask more than your great heart freely gives: Know, Madam, when I have wasted my life in gratitude my last breath shall be my last thanks, if I possess such a blessing as to be yours for ever.
By this, and by this Phillora, I conjure thee no more of doubt nor fear. Heaven and Earth are reconciled, and we shall stand the marks of their blessings here.
With you, Sir, there is fullness of joy; and I shall be forced to use all the virtue Heaven has sent me to receive this bless∣sing of Leopoldo's friendship; therefore cease to ask any thing of Phil∣lore that has nothing left in her heart to give but your self again, and when unkind you will rob me of that I will die to make me a
passage through my heart, for nothing but death can force that dear name from thence.
No more, no more; this kind strife and emulation in your love will make us waste a happy age together. 
From your hands, Madam, with joy I receive and give this faith, and I doubt not but Fidelia will approve my faith the better, for having seen it tried by despair, and approved by so great a Judge in Love as the divine Bellamira.
Nor shall I think my heart less brave for being folded in those arms your Highness refused, nor esteem the love and friend∣ship of Palantus worse for having been worn by so brave a Prin∣cess.
This, Palantus, is that I had to beg; and now I conjure thee by all that love and gallantry thou hast been so diligent to show the world, pay here thy vows to friendship, and I shall be happy by be∣ing able to make my dear Fidelia so.
Madam, my love was always obedient, but here is no occa∣zion to show it; and now I lament the virtues of the sad and kind Fidelia which give me no room to express your power. Fi∣delia has a Beauty and a Virtue to be sought after at the price of Kingdoms, and hazard of all that's most dear to man, and it is to injure her to receive her as courtesy from her who knows my soul had always a value and kindness for her; and truth still dwelt in my heart; for since I would not lie to thee that loved, but plainly told I loved another, be confident I shall never lie hereafter; and now I have said that here before the Gods of Gratitude and Truth, in the presence of this Princess, I vow a faithful friendship to the gentle Fidelia.
Your hand, Fidelia; this days misery shall beget to morrows joy and wonder.
These strange unlook'd-for blessings, like Dreams of troubled minds, are so far beyond our hopes they can scarce find our faiths: See, Madam, the first change of Fortune was of this your Servant; you'll laugh, Madam, and scorn, when you shall know Arcus was one of your Train, and those eyes made me for∣get my Love, till the miseries and kindness of this Maid strangely struck my heart; and I beg the Honour to let our Hymen's Torch be lighted at your blessed fire; the black is but the shadow of a beauteous soul, and secures us from Rivals in our Loves.
Until your Highness has seen the King I beg we may de∣fer the rest of this story, where there are many Friends that long to pay their duty here; you'll be pleased, Sir, to give Clytus your Com∣mission to publish this joyful news to the Army?
Why this Ceremony to me? If I be your King, I com∣mand you live still like a Father with me; and may Heaven frown upon me when I forget the affection of a Son. O Phillora! this day is thine, and (if we out-live it) our peaceful Cell we'll to a Tem∣ple turn; but whore's our Friend the Satyr?
Fled, with Joy, to bear these tidings to the King.
Let not our Joys rob us of our Humanity towards these, the Enemies of our peace, since fortune used them as the means to the happy discovery. Pallantus, let that unfortunate prince be taken up, and his body embalmed, and mourned, as becomes his birth; his miseries were his own seeking, no fault of ours; To you, Roderigo, the body shall be delivered; and to let you taste part of our Joys, in this your misery, you shall have fair leave, and all things fit, to make your retreat; provided you withdraw your Forces out of Sicily, and quit all you pretend to there; to this, I hope, Prince Genorio will agree.
This generosity is like the Character the world gives of great Leopoldo; and he shall find his humanity has overcome more then his Sword; and from such an Enemy We shall not be ashamed to have received Conditions, nor fail to Magnify the just Leopoldo.
This Charity being done, we may safely review our happy∣nos, mine has his Centre here. Lead the way, Clytus, to the Tem∣ple; there let us finish those blessings that the Sword has but begun.
And since such blessings from our Dreams we see;
And that I still may happy be,
Let Bellamira Dream for me.

NO Comic Scene shall here salute your eye,
Whose scoffing Vein may tickle, till you lye
Half breathless in your mirth, and so at best
Bribe your applause with some new minted jest.
The Tragic Buskin traverses our stage
In bloody Fillets, fitter for this Age,
Where Treason, Murder, Lust, and every Vice
Grows impudent, and rifles for the Dice.
Translation is no crime; We here impress
A Spanish BASTARD in an English dress;
And lay him at your Doors, that some of You
Moved with a milder Genius might bestow
Some favour on our Out-Cast; by your hand
Our Brat must dye or live, must fall or stand.
We crave your Charitable smile, the rather
Because he's not so Wise to know's own Father.
And Pallas-like (if w' are not too profane!)
He had no Mother but his Father's brain.
Thus Fatherless and Motherless! We sue
For him in humble flexures unto you:
My Faith assures me, many of you have known
To make some Bastards which you durst not own
For shame or fear; and some of you may be
Mistaken in your Fathers Pedigree;
Your favour cannot shame you; may h' invite
Your bounty, though but in a smile or mite.
Some Childless Signior, take him to his feet;
It were Cruelty to let him lie in the street:
A sin! alas! a shame! a sin! that He
Should beg upon the Parish-Charity.
He's born, and must be kept! faith! think upon it,
And stand his God-Fathers once at the Font:
His boon is not ambitious; since it is such,
Deign him your Patronage, h'wo'nt cost you much.
True Charity should feel no stomach qualms;
Know, Sirs, a BASTARD may deserve your Alms:
We crave your serious Thoughts, if any Crime
Render him odious, blame his Fate, not him;
He scorns Censorious Critics; and don't fear
To stand the Bar to a judicious Ear;
For though to be a BASTARD be his Fate;
His Wit is sterling, and legitimate.
The world so swarms with Bastards now, that I
Need not despair for want of Company;
I'm in among the Throng, although you say,
I came through the back-Doore, or by th'wrong-way,
I care not; if I may some Portion merit,
I am content, I beg not to inherit;
Though Bastardisme can make no Title good,
Yet know a BASTARD may have Noble blood;
And challenge Kindred with the best: my Name
Would not be made the White for squint-ey'd Fame
To dart her Arrows at, had every Front
Its Lineage and Descent well drawn upon it;
Nor would the world need Spectacles: it is known
Though I'm a BASTARD, not a common one;
Yet, that my Name is in my fore-head placed,
Blame th'Printer, it was he made me brazen-faced:
Perhaps he feared, lest I should stray, so some
(Reading my Name) might eas'ly bring me home.
Well! this poor favour sue I from your breath,
That, since I must be pressed, 'tmay n't be to Death,
And that the Ballads may not rack my Fame,
A BASTARD craves this Portion, a good Name.
ARt sure he will come?
I'm sure he promised me.
But Debtors words are like to whirl-winds, here
And every where when they should pay. This money
Is worse then bird-lime, or a Tertian Fever,
And will stick close to their possession
That have it; specially to pay.
Then thou
Believe he will not come?
'Ts no point of Faith, Sir,
But I doe think so: send for him to Trucks,
To Passage, or Primero, and he will find
Ryals of eight, and Pistolets to play,
Or pawn his plate for it; but to pay your debt,
Tush! it is a trifle.
What? six thousand Duccats?
Faith! were it seven, the Hollanders (he will tell you)
This year surprised the Flota; and the ships
From th'Indies by the inauspitious blasts
Of the ill-boding North, are still kept off;
And then he will kiss away his hand in kindness,
With Beso las manos, criado de vuestra market,
And for these terms expect forbearance.
What
Shall I do then? I need my money, and
Must have it immediately.
Faith get it then
Which way you can; For on my conscience▪
He will not pay you, less you fairly set
An A•g•••ill on'• shoulders; clap him up,
And then ne'er fear your money.
That were base;
Unworthy in me, who have still professed
My self his friend, to be the first that should
Shipwreck his Credit, which in the Cities eye
Shines bright; the chiefest glory of us Merchants
Is Alvarez: no! I do know him honest,
And sure he will pay; if not, the sum's not great,
I can forbear't.
Six thousand Duccats is
A sum of money, many an honest man
Would wish his patrimony.
Say it be,
It is too little to o'repoize the worth
Of Alvarez: For should I once begin,
His other Creditors by my example
Would lay their Actions on him, keep him fast
For ever coming forth.
Faith! not much matter,
There let him lie, and keep the pavement warm,
Tell to the silent Walls how he hath wasted
His wealth in riot, and by Drabs contracted
A foul consumption both to corps and purse;
Make the dumb stones his Confessors, they'll melt
Perchance into contrition, and weep
To see him made their Captive.
You're too cruel;
I must not be so, lest that Widows prayers
Whom he hath cherished, should draw vengeance on me,
And Orphans tears shed for his loss, rise up
In swelling Cataracts to overwhelm me.
Consult with reason, Sir: this childish pity
Is an effeminate passion, shake it off:
Say he hath spent his own rich patrimony,
And others wealth in purchasing a Name
To his posterity; pray tell me Signior,
Will that Name pay his debts? Or will those men
That have been better for his wealth, afford
Him so much kindness; it were but gratitude
As to content you and an hundred more
He stands engaged to: Let me rule you, give me
Leave, I'll arrest him in my own Name, so
You may pass blameless: pray you do, when others
Have seized on all, you'll wish perchance you'd taken
My foolish counsel.
Hold your tongue, I will not
Injure my friend so, I'll first lose it; tell me
What Cash affords your Desk?
Ten thousand Duccas.
See it told out with expedition;
My daughter's to be married, and must have
That as a part of portion.
Married, Cousin?
You'll not be so ignoble to infringe
Your promise to me?
It was an ill one, better
Broken then kept.
Did I for this, when you
Deplumed of your Estate, to shun the frown
Of envious Fortune, was constrained to cross
The surly Ocean, and so steer your slight
Into the Indies, with a little remnant
Of your left wealth, content your Creditors,
Bring up your daughter only upon hopes
To have her for my pains, as then you know
You did oblige your self, that now another
Must reap my harvest: Let me tell you, Sir,
It is not honest in you:
How now Bastard?
Dare you be muttring? Is it not more then I
Am any way obliged to, to maintain
Thee in the fashion of a Gentleman,
Make thoe my fellow, but thy tainted blood
Thinks to pollute mine? Urge me with a promise
Unjust as that was? You may pass, the door
Stands open for you, and your Passport's writ,
Take your course, Bastard.
You're my Fate, your tongue
Hath power to transform my thoughts, create
Anew my resolutions; I confess
From you I have my meat; my life depends
On your beneficent Genius: I offend
Even to damnation, should I be ingrate
In my respect to you: I've left my hopes,
Your promise Let he now hath quite washed out,
No print of it remains within my breast:
Join her in Hymeneal rites with whom,
And when you please; my worst desires shall be,
Heavens give her joy.
Now thou art honest, Gaspar.
I see thou dost affect me, I'll provide
To solemnise thy nuptials with some One
To thy advancement.
Sir, Your bounteous hand
(I know's) too liberal: may I have his name
That must enjoy my Mistress?
Balthazar!
Don Frederiques heir! But stay ••'s Varina's portion
Already told and ticketed?
Yes, Sir, and set apart.
Save you Sir; or rather as we say in French, Bon jour:
Is my illustrious Mistress stirring yet?
She's none of the earliest risers: please you walk in and eat an
Olive, taste a cup of Alicant, and by that time she'll come.
I thank you, Sir; but my stomach hath not yet digested the crudities of last nights Symbolum
It might have done, I'm sure you fasted.
And has not left picking his teeth yet.
Yet if you please, my renowned Uncle, that must be, we will vouchsafe to warm our palats with a jar of your Monturkie.
He means to Fox himself, that he may have Rhetoric to Court his Mistress: For, Facundi calices quem non fecere disertum, Dull Cups make men eloquent.
My diminutive and defective knave, seal your lips.
He's afraid I should cozen him of some of the Monturkie he hopes for.
How fares your Uncle?
Well, very well; he hath sent my Mistress a copy of his coun∣tenance, and here she come.
Strike me not dead with those bright eyes, retort
Those splendent Sun-beams on your self, who only
Can bear such piercing clearness.
Mark his postures, he'll kiss her shoo-strings.
Nay, eat the Rushes she treads on: look how Pythagorically he gapes? he's turned Astronomer!
Have you measured the length of hen physiognomy, or taken the height of her forehead yet?
But Master, you must salute her.
Divine, ambiguous, and transparent creature, I salute you with this b—b—bus: my complements were not cut out according to the garb of the time; but my words are sufficient interpreters of my inter∣nil affections, and so sweet-heart I love you by this b—b—bus.
A little of this, Sir, is sufficient.
Nay! thou shalt have thy belly full of it, my little Duck.
I never heard of a belly full of kisses before.
Lend me your hand to feed on!
Beware, Mistress, he eat it not, he is sharp set I assure you, he had nothing but an Eringo root and a clove of Garlic for his colla∣tion.
Sir, Praepontio, My Ness deserves none of these complement.
How, Sir? you are her Uncle, and so your tongue is privileged; but if another had presumed to speak so profane a syllable upon her merit, mark me, if thunder-thumping Jove had said it, mark me, I would have pulled him by the fore-top, or lugged him by the ears.
I doubt not of your valour; but my business Urges my hast.
And so doth mine.
He's ready to bewray himself.
Say, will your Uncle make her a Jointure?
Will he? A man of your reverend complexion to demand that question? Will he? He shall, in spite of his nose, old dotard! or else I would, as we say in Italian, prove him, Al stulti loco, that is to say, wholly a fool: But he has done it already, Sir, Look here, Sir.
Why then we will contract you.
You are content, Varina, to have this Gentleman.
Since you command it.
You'll use her kindly, Sir.
Curse upon this magnificent corpse else; she shall have her Moletto's in green Jackets to stoop to her, when she pleases to per∣fume the air with her odoriferous countenance; and her Negro's to lay their heads for her to tread on.
And if you, Master, be not able for night work, and so forth, send for me, I can do that.
Well, I'll trust you with her: Gaspar, let's go.
Farewell.
Come Gentlewoman, me thinks I am as lusty as Nestor in his second Age.
You may believe him, Mistress.
It seems to me that your beauty operates with my body, as the Sun with the year; which makes the year throw off its russet mantle, and becoming young, to take on its green coat: Now methinkes my bones, frozen with Age, are dissolved, and distill into my Cod∣piece.
These words are in you, as the Primrose in the midst of Win∣la, but the Primrose stinks not so bad as your breath.
Now my former vigours return to my vitals; Atlas was but a weak Boy, which could not scarce bear up that with his Shoulders, which with my little finger I am able to sustain: Now could I with a kick of my heel, strike a Lane through the Alps, and so make an in-road for dusky Neptune, I tell thee my sweating, Atones, when he was beloved of Venus, was not so beautiful as I am. Troth thou art supereminently beautiful too: Jove would think it no disparagement to be a Cuckoo, a Swan, a Bull, on any thing, to enjoy the beatitude of thy sweet society; Great Hercules would to school, and learn to spin again for thy enjoyment, In brief, Lady, I love you.
In brief Sir, though my Uncle pleas to think me worthy of no bet∣la a spouse then your ridiculous self, in serious terms I cannot affect you it is not the quaintness of your language that can charm me. If Cu∣bid have no more powerful darts then what drops from your tongue, he can wound but little. Sir, it will argue your prudence to desist from this your enterprise, for my part I had rather be of the society of Danaus daughters, and torment me in the abissive Hogsheads, then be your bed∣fellow. But we poor Orphans being shuffled out of our own estates, must be disposed of at the pleasure of our Guardians, even to any one. But, Sir, in short, I shall esteem more highly of a wise man in his shirt, then of a fool in his richest Trappings: and for my own part, I can∣not love you.
Never marry her then, Master: for if you doe, you may chance be a kinsman to the great Turk, and blazon the Horns for your Arms.
You doe but jest, you speak not heartily?
You'll find I am in earnest. Farewell, you know my reason∣lution.
O Rubio, call her back.
Will she come when I call her?
Conjure her then.
I am no Necromancer, I never studied the black Art in all my life: But do you hear Dona Varina I call you, I conjure you to come unto my Master Don Praepontio. Sure, Master, she's no Devil, for if she were, she would have risen at my conjuration.
But what shall we doe to get her?
Faith, Sir, you and I and half a dozen more good fellows will rifle for her, you shall have Dice will run nothing but sixes.
THis doting Don thinks that his years have made
Him wise, in fishing with a golden bait,
And doth presume his gold hath power so far
For renovation of his aged Corps,
As had Medea's enchanting spells to Aeson:
He thinks that women's aims are fixed on lands,
And that they frame their love on Silver-mines.
Treasure's no loadstone for a maids affection.
Alas! He doth mistake our Sex in this,
Though Gold be welcome to enrich our train,
Yet not so far as that we should neglect
The chief of all, the person of a man:
Should we permit the flowers of our youth
Thus to be nipped by Ages snowy Winter,
And so bereave our selves of all those joys
Which Nature hath conferred on our Sex,
While blooming in our youth, for earth and dirt?
No! it is not so, this is my resolution;
Gold with a Man is good, but if I choose,
I'll take the Man, and will the Gold refuse.
Unhappy eye! which did attract those beams,
To set my heart on fire! Unhappy ear!
Which did with such a greediness suck in
The charmings of her lips! and then convey
Them through thy winding palace to my brain,
Which works and beats, as if the Cyclops held
Their Forge within my head: Unhappy man!
Thus to become a slave unto thy passion!
Confine these love-sick thoughts, or drive them out,
Lodge not such enemies within thy breast,
They'll be thy ruin! But (alas!) my power
Is transmigrated to another breast;
Yet would it were, so might I hope at length
My love might crowned be with good success.
Dry up thy eyes.
Good morrow to you, Sir!
What passion hath surprised you, that you seem
Another man? Eugenia's well, I hope.
Discover, friend, what strikes thee in these dumps;
Your eye betrays you, somewhat is amiss,
Prithee what is it?
Chaves, thou art my friend,
And it were a sin not to impart it to thee.
Here lately was a Lady, which my eye
No sooner did discover, but my heart
Was all involved in flames, a sudden ague
Seized upon all my limbs, that to approach
Nearer, or speak I could not: in this ecstasy
I stood awhile unmovable, till she
Quited the place.
What is she? ne'er despair,
Have her thou shalt, though she were made of gold.
Varina is her name, she's well endowed
With all that Art or Nature can bestow;
That —
Feed not thy self with these; prithee what is she?
Where lives she? Pray reveal it.
Sir, her Father
Was a rich Merchant of this famous City,
Who dying in the Indies, left this his Orphan
Sole heir to his estate; which he bequeathed
Unto Alonza's care; he hath betrothed her
Unto a foolish Lord, one Don Praepontio,
Expel these clouds of sorrow, we'll make our wits
Outreach his wealth! Come! let us write a letter,
I'll have it safe conveyed; once get admittance,
And she's thine own.
Most sacred Goddess, to whose sacred shrine
The greatest Kings, nay Jove himself hath bowed,
Contain my passions, keep my sudden Love
Within the bounds of maiden modesty,
Sweet Roderiguez! now me thinks I see
Majesty couched in thy serene brow,
Upon thy tongue enthroniz'd Eloquence
Within thy looks Cupped in's best array;
And when thou goosed, the humble ground doth sink,
As if submissive to thy stately Port;
But Stay! my Passions, stay; let's pause awhile,
My affections must not lead me in a maze;
Discretion doth advise that Pallas rule,
And Cupped serve; she will me best direct
To my terrene Elysium, Pause awhile,
Listen to Judgments dictates; they are best.
The Carthaginian Princess lost her life,
And credit too by her too quick affection;
Phillis confiding in Demophoöns vows
Did lay her Bridal pallet in the grave:
Repentance soon made Oenoës angry tongue
Condemn the rash credulity of her ears.
And so may I Varina, if I yield
To Passions hair-brain'd, wild instructions:
Then set a bay unto thy loves swift Current;
See his affections first, and if he prove
Loving to thee, Varina, do thou Love.
See, see the Object of my best respect;
Oh! did my heart enjoy that happiness
As doth that Gentleman, whose subject ears
Such music entertain, as hovering spheres
Yield in their proper motions, his breath
Falls on his shoulders as doth Zephyrus
On Flora's party coloured vestments, ah!
Why doe I languish thus? I'll speak to him,
It is as fit for maids to court, as men;
If that the truth were rightly scanned; but niceness
And Custom do forbid it; its no sin
If well we weigh it in its proper balance;
Then set the better foot before, and try,
Oh! what exploit began I to attempt?
What, casting off the weed of modesty
To cloth my self with impudence? O fie!
Should it be said, Varina did disrobe
Her self of grace, and virgin-purity,
And turned masculine, to court a stranger?
No! back, base Cupped! thy Rhet'rick I scorn
Now in my second rumination, 't may be
That time will quench this burning Aetna in me,
Or heavens inspire him for to know my love:
Grant one of these ye Gods, and pity me,
Afford your help in this extremity.
Be it so, I'll send the letter.
I hold the mission of a letter best,
One line, one sentence with premeditation,
Quickens, doth bear a greater prevalence
Then words extemporary can expect:
Words are like infants, whose unwelcome birth
(If premature) bring death unto their mother.
Let it be so. —
It shall be so, Apollo guide my pen,
And let thy Heliconian Fountains yield
Liquor unto it, that the thing I write
May there prevail, where rests my souls delight.
Come, come Sir, draw, or by this hand and sword
I'll be your Priest.
Sure you mistake, I am not
The man you look for.
You shall find, my eyes
Have their true object: Coward, prate not, draw,
Let s view thy weapon.
Sir, your habit speaks you
A man, and noble, I admire your judgment
Should be so rash to quarrel with me, who
Ne'er injured you, and to my knowledge, till
This time, ne'er saw you.
All your Rhetoric
Shall not excuse your carcass, turn and fight,
Or perish.
Tell me why, and then you'll find
I am no Coward.
Hear my reason, You
Have offred me an injury; I must not
Put up, while you do walk with that same nose:
Make hast and draw; Draw, or this slave shall beat
Courage into thee, Coward.
Well, perforce
Since you will tempt a danger from my arm,
Receiv't.
So now, I hope, you'll yield the cause
Made you so valiant.
Stay, for pity save
Picarro's life, take mine, as you're a man,
Bridle your fury.
Doe I dream? who speak?
A haplesse Virgin! let the prayers and tears
Of one that never sued before, redeem
His lifes dire forfeit: if you be so cruel,
That nought but blood will suit your anger, here
Sheath your bright weapon in my breast, my blood
Will sooner quench your ireful heat; kill me,
And let him live.
Sure she has stolen from heaven
An Angels utterance; had Ʋlysses heard
This Siren minurize, the mast had been
Too weak to hold him; Orpheus might have learnt
New notes to fit's harp; had a salvage Scythe,
Or untamed ••re, when manacled they drive
Whole flocks of men before them, on whose flesh
Death strait should riot, hear her speak, their fierceness
Would soon relent, they would forget the sweetness
Of their inhuman banquet, and let loose
Those they had marked for slaughter.
Pray you Sir.
Historians truly may relate how stones
Followed Amphion to the Theban walls;
How lofty Ossa and Banchaia danced
At overhearing the Odrysian Lyre;
That Dolphins at Arions Harp grew tame,
And couched their scaly backs to bear him out
Of Neptunes foamy surges; likely it is
And possible, since one Accent from her lips
Can work far greater miracles, I would raise
A man that long had bedrid lain; nay, were he
Witherd with feeble age, should she smile on him
He well might laugh at sage Meden's charms:
Tell Aeson then, that her blessed look had made him
Fuller of youthful vigours, then the force
Of her enchanted herbs infused into him.
Then you will save him? —
Look, how dark sorrow's beautified? how comely
She's in her tears? they sit upon her cheeks
Like Erythraean pearls enchased on grounds
Of true Vermilion: Foolish Lapidaries!
What need you borrow of the frozen Zone
Congealed Ice? catch these drops, they're more precious
Then most transparent Crystal; I would fain
Grant thy request, but that I should too soon
Be exiled from that blessing which your presence
Fully affords me; yet it is too unholy
That she should kneel, I'll raise her.
Here I'll lie.
Prostrate for ever, less you please to save
Picarro's forfeit life.
How happy, Heavens!
Is he in being vanquished, to have
So fair a saver? would my life had been
Put at his mercy: For your sake I'll grant
Him life on this condition, That he tell
What made him be my enemy.
This morning
If I mistake not, passing by our coach
As we were coming from our Vineyard, you
Pulled up the Curtains, drawn before, to see
Who were within, which he in heat of blood,
Took as a wrong, and followed you.
I'm sorry
I was discourteous.
Come Picarro, Signior,
I am your words true servant.
How now Chaves?
What drawn so near the City? pray heavens! my stay
Has not endangered you: met you with thieves?
With one hath stolen my best of Jewels; Sir,
I am undone; lost friend for ever.
Why?
Look I not strangely o'er I did? My looks —
Why? What should ail you? Are you frighted, Sir?
Doe not my eyes speak my hearts falsehood? Ha!
Chaves, dear friend, how fare you? Is all well?
I prithee be my Priest, and sacrifice
My treacherous carcass to Eugenia, doe it,
And when I yield the Ghost, I'll tell thee friend,
That I fare well: ne'er stare on me, my life
Is a worse torture then the rack, or wheel,
Ixions plague is but a play-game to it
Nor his that rolls the revoluble stone,
Nor that of proud Prometheus, on whose heart,
Th'insulting Vulture preys.
Alas! he raves!
What cursed Friend tempts you to be thus desperate?
Desperate? Kill me, let thy Rapier doe it,
Ne'er muse upon it, I deserve to die:
Do justice on me.
Tell me why, and then
Perchance I'll do it.
Hear me then, Suppose
I had a beauteous sister, you Roderiguez
Should vow her service, proffer her your love,
Get my consent, her fathers, and her heart too,
And aster fool both him and her, and me.
Should I not kill you, think you?
Yes, I deserved it.
Then here's my sword, I've done all this and more,
The vow's I made to your Eugenia's nothing,
A dream, an airy shadow, you are fooled,
Your father's cozened by my hopes; it is true,
I love another.
It is impossible;
Your fury makes you utter this.
By the hopes
I have that thou wilt kill me, I have spoke
No more but truth, by all that's good I have not:
I love another. —
I stole her countenance, but she my heart.
You're a treacherous man,
Base and unworthy, take your weapon back,
Defend your self.
I will not, I confess
I have deserved death, but it grieves me, that
By thy hands I must suffer; but my fate
Is irresistible: Dispatch me.
Stay,
Ever I doe kill thee, think how ominous
Thy crime is: young men will abhor thee, virgins
Hearing thy fault, will with their imprecations
Heap tortures on thee: Poor Eugenia! Sister!
I grieve for thee most: Are you ready?
Yes!
Not to resist, but to be sacrificed.
I'll not become his Butcher: for the name
Of Friend, so often vowed between us, holds
My arms, I cannot strike him; live to see
Heaven work thy ruin: I'll not be thy Priest.
Farewell, false man, and look who ever thou wed,
She'll be a faithless strumpet to thy bed!
Thou lie, return, I'll fight: —
She, I now love, is one, thou oughtst not mention
Less on thy knees with reverence: one, whose looks
Would even allure a Hermit, who had spent
His years in solitude, to leave his Cell,
And heavenly contemplations, to admire
Her perfect essence, dare thou prophecy
Her for a strumpet? were thou armed with thunder
This arm should reach thee, Clouds of lightning shall not
Secure thee: Know Sir, she is one, whom Angels
Would to enjoy, desert their bliss, and vote
No less then adoration due unto
Her heavenly virtues —
Hoe's past hopes! more sisters
I have, more friends so worthy as himself
I ne'er can hope for: Sir, I pity you
And can my service help you ought in gaining
Your Love, command it.
Mean thou thus?
You use not
To find me faithless: not my sisters wrong
Shall make me prove disloyal: may I know her
Is your new Mistress?
There's my misery,
I know her notmy self, but it is the same
Was in the Coach we overtook.
Is it she?
That's Mariana, Daughter to Alonzo
The Indian Merchant, I am well acquainted
With Garspar, noble Chaves: he, who is
Her Fathers Cash-keeper, him we'll use as means
To win her for you: Our Varina lives
In the same house: come! let's about it.
Heavens prosper our designs, and may our fate
Make us in them, them in us fortunate.
THose Sulphurous flames, which Aetna's fiery paunch
Assidually into the air doth vomit,
Bear not such force as doth this Paphian fire:
Inconstant supposition never taught me
This instant lesson, but experience:
That poisoned token in the Centaurs blood,
Which made Alcides burn in living flames,
Had not such vigour, as these parching fires:
Which, while I fan with sighs, and think by groans
To puff them out; the more (alas) they flame:
If not extinguished by some timely showers
My heart must turn an Aethiop: Come! sweet Boy!
And sing à Lachrymae unto my woes
A mournful Lachrymae, that from my eyes
Whole Seas of brinish liquor may arise
To drench this heat; I cannot now admire
That Cupids Father was the God of Fire.
Sweet Cupped hear
A Maiden vow;
Though thou art blind, thou hast an ear;
Let him, whom I love, know
What pain and smart
Lies burning in my heart,
To this my humble boon dispense
Thy sacred influence;
And (though to cure thy eyes:)
Let not a Virgin full thy Sacrifice.
Sweet Venus, see,
And make me blessed
Visit me in this misery,
Connive at my request:
Assist thy Son
Till he hath done.
His mystic rites, and with new fires
Fulfil a Maids desires:
Else here I'll prostrate lie
For ever, and will Swan-like, singing die.
Lendme a quill, &amp;c.
Enough! this yields but nutrimental food
Unto my dumpish humours; go, begone,
Poor soul! how art thou tortured in distraction,
And discomposed in various resolutions:
Sometimes to speak is countenanced as good;
But modesty steps in, and checks my impudence:
Then silence is thought best, but that would wrong
That noble Person that deserves my Love:
Thus while I practise for to quench the fire,
I doe increase it, and it flames the higher.
Save you, sweet Mistress, the noble Roderiguez
Desires but so much favour at your hands
As to peruse this his most humble missive.
He may command a greater thing then this.
I hope the Heavens do prosper our Achievements;
Her countenance warrants a good acceptande.
You may for this time depart, and tell your Master,
That matters of such weight, desire some pause:
Before we make an answer: Friend, too morrow
About this time you may expect it here:
All humble thanks, sweet Lady: at that time
I shall attend your pleasure: all sweet happiness
That can be wished, attend you.
Friend! Farewell!
See how my storm is turned into a calm,
My clouded night into a sun-shine day,
My heart but now depressed almost to death,
Revives, and grows too ample for my breast,
My fears are banished, and my joys become
Redundant and superlative: to you
O heavens! my duty doth return her thanks!
And testifies it by her grateful hands.
He, for whose sake I would exchange the world,
Now throws himself a servant at my feet:
But let me guide me in my bliss, and wear
My fortunes wisely in a formal fashion:
I must not countenance his suit too soon,
But bridling up my Love with judgements reins:
Keep at a distance, counterfeit my mind
To be so far estranged from Venus Court,
That it were as hard to make a Proselite,
As me a Soldier in the Paphian field:
Should I be prone and facile to his will,
In some few days my kindness would grow stale:
The shadow, when pursued doth fly, but turn
Your back, and it in duty follows you:
Should I concede too soon, and not deny,
I should infringe the custom of us maids,
Who in the things we most of all desire,
Must feign neglect, or else a mere dislike:
Well then, how ever I'll play a maidens part,
And make me stubborn, though I break my heart.
FAith! you're a cunning Lover, I had thought
I had deserved more interest in your trust,
Then that you thus should steal your nuptials, and
Ne'er let me know on it, whore's my gloves?
Why Gaspar?
Why should thou think I should be married?
Cause
I know it is truth; your Father has disclosed
The party to me.
Party? prithee speak;
And do not rest; what's that thou prat'st of? husband?
And Hymenaean rites?
As if you knew not!
Not I truly.
Nor shall you know it then for me, I might
Incur much danger, should I be but seen
To kiss your hand thus, discourse with you, in brief
It is to the jealousest, most ignoble man
In all the City: so farewell, there's all
That I dare stay to tell you.
Bless you, Mistress.
Cousin, good cousin, leave me not, before
You have explained this riddle, on my life
I'll not disclose you told me.
May I trust you?
Mark then your fate, Your father hath decreed
You for Don Balthazar old Frederiques heir,
They are agreed.
Save me Saints, I'd rather
Be wedded to a Leper; one half bedrid,
Laden with gout, and all diseases, would not
Be half so odious to me: is it not he
That should have had Varina?
The same.
Sweet Gaspar,
Make some obstructions, and doe thou, sweet Jove,
Be an impediment to that decree.
Cousin, alas! I have quite wearied him
With my petitions, but he's deaf as Nereus
Is to the shipwrecked Mariners, or rocks
Unto the bellowing surges of the Sea.
Thou hast been always honest, Gaspar, and
A Friend, a Father to me: in this strait
I'll try thy love; advise which way I shall
Escape these nuptials; say, is it possible?
I shall be proud to doe that office, Kings
Would glory in; to doe you service, Saints
Would sure disert their bliss: Do you but speak,
Breath but one accent from those lips, the winds
Will all contend, which shall be first made blessed
With its conveyance; your sweet voice can charm
The Sirens silent, force the Crocodile
To leave his feigned weeping; at your looks
Palms would renew their freshness; aged hearts
Grow young again, Scythians be mild; if ever
Rash Phaetons sisters had beheld those drops,
They never more would boast their Amber tears
To be more precious.
Push! you flatter me!
What means this ceremony?
And had those creatures
Book-blinded men, that dream of other worlds,
Tell of Elision blessings, known the joys
Are in your love, they would have lost themselves,
As I have done, in contemplation
Of this surpassing happiness, you bless
With its enjoying.
You are tedious, tell me
How to evade this mischief.
Proton me,
I'm in a labyrinth, subtler then the cave
That held the Cretin Minotaure; it is easier
To catch wild Bores, make Neptune calm
When he most rages, then to give your worth
Its just Encomiums. I'm so far transported
With rumination on it beyond my self,
That I have quite forgot your first demand.
Pray tell me Cousin, How may I delude
Balthasars nuptials?
It is difficult,
There is but one way left, and that's to wed
Another, ever you come unto his bed.
Faith! any body, honest Gaspar, bring
Some aged Laser from the Hospital,
Or towing Galliego, and I'll love
Him rather then the other, let me see
Whom thou would wish me to.
An honest man,
One I dare swear that loves you.
Nominate him:
By all that's good, I'll love him.
She's my own.
I'll take you at your word —
Behold the man, the true Idolater
Of thy perfections, one whose every thought
Is on thy virtues, how to give them reverence
Due to their merits.
This is brave, proceed,
You're Courtly grown, what spirit has infused
This unaccustomed phrase into you?
Your
Love which hath power to give a dumb man utt'rance,
Make Idiots Orators to fill the world
With new inventions; consecrate this Age
Only to Poets, whose immortal lines
May celebrate thy praises. Though thy Father
Could be so perjured after a thousand oaths,
To seek to rob me of my interest in thee,
Yet the known goodness of thy Nature tells me,
Thou'lt not be perjured too, I'm sure thou'lt love me.
Reason good, base man!
Did all this painted process tend to this?
Were Balthazar a man composed of vices,
Il'd sooner cast my self away on him,
Then on thy baseness: Loving'Coz. farewell!
You may go meditate to get a wife,
And ruminate on your most base desires
In the Grand-Placa. Walk, Sir.
Is there no thunder left in heaven? Has earth
Left all it's fear, it shakes not at the hearing
Of such inhuman perjuries, until
It have a rupture vast enough to swallow
At once the world, that it may ne'er produce
Again such treach'rous animals, as my fate,
My cursed fate torments me with: I am
A proper man, I've limbs enough▪ because
I have a blemish in my blood, my Mistress
Rejects me; Thus should I in open Court
Sue for her as my wife: I have no means
To stand against her Father, and it is gold
That rules the Law now. Well! since all will be
Villains, why should I practise honesty?
I've brains as well as other men, my spirit
Tells me, there's means to right the wrong. Who's this?
Gaspar? the man I looked for.
Don Roderiguez!
What drew you hither?
Sir, my business is
Now with your self; Your Master has a daughter
I have a most deserving friend affects
Her dearly, wilt thou be a means to gain
Her favour for him?
I did take you Sir,
To have been a person of more real worth
Then thus t'assay a servants loyalty;
Think you my Masters daughter shall become
A prostitute? If this be all your business,
I must not stay to hear it.
Thou mistake,
I have no such intention, thou shalt raise
His daughter with a marrige to a man
Of noble Blood and Fortunes.
But her Father
Has promised her to one he will not break with.
You cannot have her.
Hold! there's gold, thou shalt
Persuade her love my friend, I know thou can,
My honest Gaspar.—
Sir,
I am a man whom stepdame Fortune made
To eat my bread in servitude, my Master
Is all the hopes I live by, and my trust
Hath gained me some respect above a servant;
Should I undo his purpose, cross this match,
For your sakes, I should win the execrations
Of all true servants; and perchance your selves
Seeing me false to him, would fear t'impose
Confidence in me: pray receive your gold,
I must not do it.
Come! thou shalt, the man
Thou dost it for will raise thee far beyond
Thy expectation, Gaspar.
May I trust you?
What needs these doubts?
Then know my Mistress hates
The person whom her Father would bestow
Her on in marriage; would your friend, or you,
Or any one, there's in the City you may hire
To kill him, then admission will be easy.
Most excellent! his name? he's sealed for death.
Balthazar, Frederiques heir, to morrow night
Your friend and you come to the window, and
Bring something that may please her, and ne'er doubt
You shall have gentle audience.
I'll about it.
Doe, on your shoulders I my self will rise
To quit my Masters monstrous perjuries.
THus have I framed, though long first, my rescript,
As well as the poor Minerva of my brain
Enabled me; it is tart enough, I'm sure,
To vulnerate and pierce a heart of steel:
If his affection's biased with virtue,
He'll re-addresse to me to work the cure,
What Polios wounded, it alone could heal;
The limb that's burnt we hold unto the fire,
Loves wounds must have their Balsam from that hand
That made the Ulcer. Stay! th'Times Clock doth prompt me
This hour Thomaso promised to be here,
To bear my answer back. He comes: Your actions
Are comments to your words, and what your tongue
Of late expressed, your diligence performs.
Right worthy Lady, should I vilify
My faith by misperformance, I should think
My self degenerate from what I was.
Your words engage my faith; friend, there's my answer.
Thanks worthy Lady, this shall surely have
Acceptance far more gracious from your servant,
Then such a Jewel which the Egyptian Queen
(To add a complement to sumptuousness)
Dissolved drank unto her Anthony.
Then bear it to him instant, it may be
His expectation may be harassed out:
For what desire commands us to expect,
Time, if protracted, makes us disgust;
Haste therefore, and farewell.
Adieu! sweet Lady!
Now if this Letter bear a gentle sense,
And gives a Fiat to Rod'riguez suit,
His heart will mount so high with joy, that it
Outstrips imagination. Noble Sir —
What news Thomaso? come and glut my ears
With comfortable tidings.
Whether such
As you expect, Sir, or the contrary,
Resides not in the confines of my knowledge.
Spake you not with her at the time prefixed?
Yes! and her mind salutes you in this paper.
Came this from her?
I had it from her hands.
Had thou encompassed all this Universe,
Especially the East and Western India,
And ransacked either of them for their pearls:
Or had thou ripped the bowels of the earth,
And laid her hidden treasure at my feet,
It could not have procured the hundredth part
Of that content, as doth this piece of paper.
Still may it be multiplied, and augment
Your wished beatitude a thousand fold.
What have we here? A slat denial? Ha?
Hard-hearted Lady! had thou spectacles
Which might so help thy optitick faculties,
As to behold my bleeding heart, thou could not
Choose but relent, and love me for my love.
Patience, noble Sir —
Tic cruelty! alas sh'ad courteous been
Had she procured my death, or my proscription:
But thus to charact'rize my torments, and
To dally with my flames, doth argue she
Studies the Art of inhumanity.
Let not such thoughts find harbour in your breast,
Exile them thence.
They took possession:
And cannot easily be extruded thence.
Why then encounter her your self, and speak:
Let not a Letter daunt you, storm again:
Your parts do speak you man, and you may win her:
It may be she observes formality,
In these her actions: and for fashion sake
Her tongue says no (as maidens use to do)
When as her mind thinks yea: good Sir, about it.
Thy Councel's prevalent, and I'll observe,
Next time I'll try her: and my reasons shall
Triumph victorious, or in th'Duell fall.
OH! my decayed paunch! is it not a miserable case that a mans belly should ne'er see a piece of roast beef, nor ones guts feel one drop of double drink in two years? There's one Mr. Want, a lean Gentleman of our Parish, hath so debarred me from sustenance, that I scarce weigh threescore on each side, besides feet, head, legs, and offal. There's an old shaver they call Don Praepontio, that lives hereabouts, that maintains his men every day in holiday bellies, and their chaps strut, as if they were created for nothing but to blow bagpipes: now, if I could scrue into his service, my spiny Car∣cass would begin to whine as a dog after flesh, when his chaps run over. But soft, sure this is he.
I'll make as if I knew him not, and praise him to's very face, and then I'll warrant you.
Thus perambulating all alone, I ruminate on the multiplicity of those joys, that my Varina might afford me.
Save thee honest friend.
Why? what art thou?
What am I? Thou see I am neither horse nor mare, bull nor cow, hog nor pig, dog nor rat, mouse nor cat, fish nor flesh, nor good red herring: but as I may say, a mere man.
My Mistress will be well taken, Rubio, to hear this fellow talk; but say, art a mere man, can thou keep thy money, and not grease the ale-wifes fingers with it?
How? grease the ale-wifes fingers with it; nay I should prove a very fool then: for she might then grease my face with her talons, for not paying my reck'ning.
Well spoken of a fool.
I, by my faith, Master, was it.
I mean, can thou keep thy money from spending?
I, Master, if I had it.
Wilt thou live with me?
I, Sir, an't please you, I'm dissolved on that point already.
Go, stand at the Curtains, and seal your lips. Did thou invite her, Rubio? you must wait very attentively at her elbow, and if perchance a drop fall from her mouth, you must be sure to catch it, I'll have it put in a reliquary: but does not my great ruff become me admirably? will she not like me, think thou, in this suit? I will coin words shall make her in love with me.
You will bewitch her with your very looks, ne'er doubt it; you look now more completely then the great Mogul, or the Arch-Duke.
I have a Lions Countenance.
Nay, a Bears rather, or a Baboons, you look so smug on it, Master.
But did thou see what an admirable piece of Poetry I con∣sarcinated in my bed; nay, in my sleep, Rubio?
Some drowsy Poem.
Ovid de Art Amend was never like it: Hold my Cloak Rue∣bio, doe you see?
I see your back-side, Sir.
But mark my Verses, how melodiously they run upon their feet.
They gallop.
Mark. Hem—hem—hem.
If you would old Natures wonder
See, list while I her praise out-thunder:
Her head a Cedar over-growes,
Her rosie Cheeks, and radiant Nose,
Her hands Lilies, for eyes behold
Amber or Barberry Gold:
From her middle to her knees,
Guess what monstrous rarities
Lye hid: the Tropic Zone cannot
Burn, or cast forth flames so hot,
As does my heart, it is she must heal me,
Or Death will with his paws bemeale me.
How lik'st thou it?
Horribly, beyond expression.
I will write a whole volume of such Elegies, and put down Lope de vega, or Gacilasso's Poems.
You must get tunes to them, they will pass for excellent new Ballads.
O! my Uncle!
O! my wise kinsman, what says your Mistress?
O Uncle! she is the noblest, wittiest woman that ever I en∣countred with since I galloped over the Alps; she surpasses me in inge∣niosity for all my travels.
And my Master, God bless his worships Coxcomb, told her, you would give her Holland Cheese, Parmasane, and Calves-head to breakfast if she would have him.
Nay, Uncle, she asked me if you would give her your land at Granada.
And what did thou answer?
Peace, sirrah, Uncle, aspect my judgement in being responsible: I said, I, that he will, if I thought the old dotard would not, I would dash out his brains.
Thank you Nephew! How then?
For, quoth I, although he were hanged, or drowned, or dead a∣ny way, though the Devil should carry him away in a Hurricane, I should have his land, being as I am, eldest son to his eldest sister; is it not so Uncle? I know my Pedigree.
Master, you need no Herald to blaze your worth, you can doe it sufficiently your self.
True! very true; but Uncle, shall I dance with my Mistress anon, I long to meet her in a measure, I can so caper it.
Here comes your Mistress, and her Uncle.
Pray let me accost them.
Welcome noble friends.
For your part, Sir, à posterior I salute you thus; and your Sir, thus, with this Italian Fresco: But as for you, my superabundant Mi∣stress, accept the Foot•• of my Minerva for your congratulatory well∣come.
It is pity, servant, you are not pictured with a Laurel wreath in your forehead.
Or rather with a Coxcombs Crest, Mistress.
But my most inestimable Mistress, I must dictate to you, That you vilify my brains fecundity, in not applauding my ingenious con∣captions, since sure you love me.
Better then she loves Plum-porredge, or Minc't-pyes, I dare protest.
Tell me then, thou Master-piece of Nature.
Mistress-piece, Sir, she is a woman.
Does not the superficies of my countenance demonstrate as
much love as Don Quixot's, or Gerardo's, the unfortunate and ominous Spaniard? am not I kin to the Family of the Guzmans, think you?
Alias, Goosman; alias, Goodman Goose.
And am I not the most acute, complete, polite Itinerator that ever capered over the Alps, and the Pyrenaean mountains, and the most sublime and ingenious Poet that ever drank of the Heliconian, Castali∣an, and Pierian Fountains: Have not I sixteen languages exactly, per∣fectly, and perspicuously.
Sixscore, Master.
Come, my supereminent Mistress, let us expatiate to refresh our palats with our delicious banquets, the minc't pies, and the Plum∣pudding which my English Cook made me, will be cold else. Come, sirrah, follow.
Now my sweet guts and garbage, my Fathers old Boots were never so liquored and greased as you shall be.
HAst thou the Song? Boy?
Yes, Sir.
Are the Musicians ready?
They expect behind you pillar.
But art thou sure this is her window?
The same, ne'er fear, we shall have audience.
Hail Mariana! let thine eyes
From their sable Clouds arise,
And dart their fire
(At our desire)
To re-illuminate the skies.
The Moon is down, the Stars doe hide]
Their lustre, and our zeal deride,
Ʋnveil thy beams,
Those goldenst eams
Will vie them in their greatest pride.
Shine forth sweet light! one gentle ray
Will drive, our dismal night away;
And make us deem
Sol mounts his Team;
Our zeal shall swear it is break of day.
Let us, sweet Saint, thy virtues know,
How great a brightness they can show,
Tell us the Sun
Is backward run,
And that he hath reversed his Plough.
Shine out sweet Venus, thou can soon
Transcend the Taper of the Moon,
And with thy light
Quicken the night,
Turning our Morning into Noon.
Hail! Mariana, cast an eye
With a relenting sympathy;
Ʋnvail the books
Of thy sweet looks,
And let me read my Destiny.
So now depart, and charge the Musicians they say nothing.
I will Signior.
The window is opened, friend, list who speaks.
I marvel, Catalina, who bestowed
This Music on us; it was good and sweet.
Some one, that dogged you home from Alvarado's,
Some Amorado.
Speak Sir, now or never.
All peace content and joy attend you Ladies.
What man art thou, that when Nights Curtain's drawn,
And with her sable mantle veils the skies,
Dare venture on our secrets?
One, you promised
When for your sake I saved Picarro's life,
To keep in memory.
Sir, if you are he,
I am obliged, I confess, to honour
Your nobleness, but these untimely hours
Admit no conference: for your Music, Sir,
We give you thanks; so much I love you, that
I'll not endanger you, if you be seen,
You run your lifes dire hazard, Sir, good night,
Fair thoughts attend you.
Stay! for Loves sake, were there
Dangers as thick here, as there's stars above us,
I would contemn them all; if death it self
Should here encounter me, l'ld scorn the fury:
Tell him his hand had here no power; your presence
Makes men immortal.
Cause you shall not, Sir,
Condemn me of discourtesy; I'll stay,
But to your purpose, let me know it briefly;
Or I must be unmannerly.
Why then,
In brief I love you, and desire your love.
And is this all, good night! —
Hear him out, Mistress, he's an honest Gentleman,
I know by's words;
My zeal could tell you, Lady,
That your are fair; you know it; that your eyes
Clothe night in days robes, and eclipse the stars
With their bright lustre; that you are the model
Of Natures artifice, her true Idea,
In whose brow Art and Beauty wedded meet,
But these, dear Mariana, and the like
Pedantic terms, I leave to those whose loves
Are in their lips; I'll be as plain in speech,
As zealous in respects; my deeds shall speak
My Love no Changeling
But I cannot, Sir,
Nor must not love you many one would feed
Your flames with frustrate species to deride
Your passions, but I do carty with me
More honest thoughts: as you have been, I'll be
Brief: save your labour Signior, they are fruitless,
You sing to the deaf, and plough the sandy shore,
I must not love you.
I'm obliged to you!
It is well and nobly done to put an end
To my hot tortures, view this blade, the same
Which for your sake I did restrain from shedding
Picarro's blood for better ends; shall now
In bloody Characters write me thy Martyr.
Hold! hold! for heavens sake; hold! —
What mean you Chaves?
Nothing, but to open
A vein that's stopped; it is good for me to bleed:
My sword will be a good Phlebotomist,
I'm sick of the Pleurisy; a burning fever!
It is better once to die, then thus to live
In lingering flames; and piece-meal crumble: ha!
Be thou my friend; and since my Life cannot,
Let death now make me pitied: Let me die!
You're a faint hearted Soldier; what dashed
At first repulse? admit I could afford
You heart-room in my breast: you might well think
Me very light, should I at once be won
Without experience of your Loyalty:
Besides, our Countries use permits not Children
To choose their husbands: It is my Fathers care,
Get his consent, and peradventure I
May yield to love you.
Do sweet Mistress, he's
A very honest man: I'd take his word.
Look! how the enamoured air hangs o'er her lips
To suck a blessing from them? I can think
Now it was no fable, that bold Bores
Rapt fair Orithya, since I see him haste
To ravish thee of that too precious breath,
Thy words expire with; it will make his own
Sweeter then Syrian winds, when nought but Myrrh
And Bysse perfume them.
You're too hasty Sir.
It is impossible that I should love you,
I am contracted.
Yet it is in your power
To love your servant.
If Anatomists
Tell truth, that say, In the Center of our hearts
There is a little Concave, where resides,
Our best affections; then your Augury
Must needs be truth, for all the love lies there,
Is to another worth engaged.
Make me
But of your privy Council, pray reveal him.
Then know, since first I saw you, I have been
(The night will hide my blushing to your face)
A true devotarist to your lovely virtues;
Deride me not, dear Signior.
I am
Ravished beyond my hopes, my heart's too narrow,
Too strait-lac'd for th'exuberance of my joy.
This is the house: now Gaspar I shall see
Thy truth, I hear some mutt'ring. —
Walk round the house, my maid shall let you in.
It is she, I hear her voice, and here he comes.
Sir, stay, you must not pass so.
What art thou?
That thus presum'st to over-hear our secrets,
And rashly tempt thy death.
I am a man,
Thy equal every way.
About your business,
Sirrah, be packing, or I'll send you hence.
Were you encompassed with hot lightning, armed
With Corslets made of Dragons maile, your breath
As poisonous as a Vipers, or a Toads,
Yet I alone would dare t'encounter you.
You're very valiant: Frenzy prompts you thus,
Or else tic some fat Fleming, who being drunk,
Hath lost his way to th'Brothell, and doth think
To find his drab here: Friend, you've lost your way:
Be wise, and save your carcass by a retreat:
You I walk, nay make a leg, and thank me too
For letting you to pass, or I shall teach
Your noll more manners.
Teach thy self, false man,
More honesty: which of you is it, that
Thus Courts my Mariana? cause to him
I only speak.
It is I.
Then let me tell you:
You injure one, that never injured you:
She's mine, betrothed to me:
I'm sorry it was
My hapless fate to meet you in this place,
I shall but post you through the Avernal Lakes
On Embassy to Pluto: and desire
Those Deities to fit you with a Mistress:
You'll have her forcibly, although you see
She cannot love you? gentle friend, put up!
This is a glorious quarrel, every drop
Of blood, that's spilt, will have a Crown beyond
The palm of Martyrs▪ For my Mistress? come!
Address your self to prayers first.
Prithee stay:
Thou seem a person qualified, before
We fight and die (for that one of's must do)
Think what unworthy and inhuman cause
You stand to justify with blood: her Father
Hath given her me, before whole Quires of Saints,
(Heavens hierarchy) we were contracted: do not,
Blinded with lust, run headlong to a sin,
So foul and horrid: hazard not your souls
Lasting salvation in a quarrel, so
Unjust on thy part: say, 't should be my fate
(As it may be) to kill you: what a mass
Of endless woe thou pluckst upon thy head?
Had thou no other crimes to charge thy soul,
Think what a monstrous, and ignoble sin
Is supplantation in this kind of wrong:
Above Astraea's Laws? A Christian, Sir,
(As you should be) at naming this would have
A frigid palsy in his veins: pray, tell me,
Feel you no Earthquake in you?
Thus, and thus
I'll Catechise you.
Oh!
So preach in hell:
We have full entrance now, but least the noise
Disturb the house, we'd best depart, and come
When the next night in favour to us shrouds
Sleeping Olympus in her dusky clouds.
I do approve your counsel: —
So! they are gon: I'm hurt, my loss of blood
Makes my legs falter: Fool, to shed a drop
In an effeminate quarrel: can the name
Of woman pass without fell execrations
Through these parcht lips? henceforth I will evade them,
As the infectious scum of pestilence:
To Troy once famous one base Helen brought
A final ruin: fair Persepolis
Had still stood Asia's glory, had not Thais
(That obscene Thaiuml;s) by her witchcraft made
Fond Alexander to consume't by fire:
Each woman is a plague: I justly may
Curse their whole sex, since Mariana's false.
I must be silent.
Balthazar?
Who art thou?
It is I, your servant Gaspar! are my words
Not truth: have you not met with them: Alas!
I fear you're wounded: Sir, base villains! —
Yes doubly Gaspar, for my bodies harms
Surgeons may cure them: but the wounds my mind
Suffers, 's past help of plasters: Oh! I bleed:
These are but scratches, here's a wound indeed.
Faith! think not on it, Sir, she may be honest,
Though she hath suitors: women will delight
In the plurality of servants.
But
That she whostood the Goddess of my love,
Whose truth should Angels with me 've sought to blast,
I should have judged them liars: should be thus
Inconstant, false: this puts me quite beyond
The confines of all reason!
Good Sir! patience.
Patience! what's that? pray carry me to some
Infected Post-house, or foul Hospital,
Where all diseases flourish: where no sound
Person can enter, but he must return
Full fraught with all contagions: there I'll steal
From one a plague-sore; rob another of
His purple spots, this of a fever, till
I have engrossed all maladies, that carry
A spreading rancour with them, and that have
Death in their bosoms: then I'll straitway come,
And keep society with none, but women:
Till the whole sex have shared of death, and those
(For some will live) that do remain to keep
Earths store alive, be so infected, that
Their future issue be all monstrous: Tell me,
Should I not fit her then for this, and all
That bear the name of women?
Sir, you grow
Outrageous in your passion; your blood
Carries a fervor, that won't let this pass
Without revenge; I'll work the means, if you
Have heart to act it.
Wilt thou do it?
Ne'er fear't:
Go to your lodging, dress your wounds, you may
Inform her Father at your leisure.
Well,
I'll rest upon thy care, and make my hand
In thanks retaliate thy just deserts.
O! that I could but borrow for this instant,
A vipers breath to blast thee, but it is well,
Vines clip not Elms for nothing, I must twine
About them subtly, till they kiss the earth,
Or else my ends will have abortive birth.
NOw should I be entrapped in my own Gin,
Whom should I blame, but only my false heart?
Should that unkindness dropping from my pen,
Extinguish quite poor Roderiguez flame,
On whom should I disgorge my troubled stomach,
But on my self? it is pretty to consider
How I expose my self unto a wound,
To make another bleed. —
Pardon, sweet Damsel, this my bold intrusion,
Urged not by rude behaviour, but by love.
Sir, you're a stranger; but if it be void
Of ill intent, your pardon's quickly sealed.
If that to evidence the true affection
I always bare unto your noble self,
Be ill intent, then my access is conscious.
To court me with your love, Sir, it is strange,
I'm a poor Orphan, one whom Fate decreed
To hang my Fortunes on another girdle,
Time sure hath proved himself a cunning Artist,
That in so short a space could frame a subject
For your affection; it is not long a go
My eyes took their first notice of you.
Time.
Is not that cunning Artist, but your virtues,
Which through the winding convex of my ears,
Conveyed this winding admiration to my heart,
It is not your means, sweet Lady, but your love
That I now covet: For your guardians favour,
I weigh it little, so you'll grant me yours:
Throw not those angry fire-balls of thy eyes
Upon me who am Touch-wood, lest I here
Molder to ashes; bid them that they keep
Fast their Artillery; it is your milder beams,
Those rays of favour that we now request.
Though I am conscious of no demerits
Residing in me, that might claim these praises,
These pick-thanks of your tongue, I think my self
Too good to entertain a scornful jeer;
For honours sake forbear't.
Wretched mistake!
That you should once conceive my heart could lodge
The least base thought that's Traitor to your honour!
But hear me, Sir, Once walking with my Nurse
For recreation in our shady groves,
She told me her prophetic spirit feared
Some false One would betray me to his love,
And to my ruin.
If it was me she meant,
The Sibyl lied.
However, it breeds suspicion.
What demonstration of my zealous faith
Can this your incredulity exact?
Shall I contend in combat with the Lion?
Or else affront the ugly foaming Boar?
What is it that I shall doe? Speak, and it is done:
Shall I betake my self to the Russian Fields
In the midst of Winter, where my faithful blood
May freeze to Coral, and my sad laments,
Congeal with th'aire? Shall I devote my self
A sactifice to Aetna, or to Neptune?
Shall I achieve to fetch the golden fruit
From th'scaly Dragon? pluck fell Cerberus out
From his stinking den? These, or a thousand more,
I'll doe at your command.
To promise, Sir,
Is easy, when performance lags behind.
'S your heart so prepossessed, that there's no room,
No corner left to hold one grain of faith?
I'll try your love; here, take this, drink it off.
Leave not one drop in the bottom of the cup.
What ever it be, I'll banish fear and do it.
Is it off?
It is.
Then know that thou art poisoned.
This is that draught which to Ʋlysses mates,
In stead of drink sage Circa did extend;
It is venoms quintessence, rank poison.
Poison?
Yea, poison! not the ugly Toad includes
Worse venom then that potion.
Methinks,
I feel no alteration in my blood.
I know that too. Th'time for its operation
Is not yet come; some seven hours hence, and then
A deadly fire raging within thy breast,
Shall make thy Arteries crack, and tear thy nerves:
An Iron girdle shall not hold thy body
It shall so swell with this envenomed draught.
Alas! good Lady, you much fail in the end
For which you practise this; you plot my torture
By fear of death, alas! you doe mistake,
My love shall own you for her greatest friend:
For thus to live, deprived of your love,
Is worse ten thousand times then death it self.
Then, thank you for this cruel curtsy,
I will not stile you cruel, or hard hearted,
But pitiful, a kind and loving Lady,
And so will limb your virtues to the life:
This kindness chalenges my best respects;
First, that you fix a period to my flames:
Next, that I dye a sacrifice to you:
What? Art thou glad to die, and proud to fall A victim by my hands?
Your victim, Lady!
Do not dissemble, in the heavenly Quire
There's no permission for an hypocrite
To be a Chorister; do not palliate
Th'internall thoughts with such Hypocrisy.
I scorn the Title of an Hypocrite,
I lived your Lover, and will dye your Martyr.
Then am I sorry for my cruel act.
There, take thou that, and work thine own revenge
While time permits.
It shall not be, sweet Lady.
First, should these eyes behold these wretched hands
Pluck forth my entrails: should my harmless soul
When it is transported over Charons passage,
But have intelligence that you were injured.
It would return, and kill your enemy.
What needs a further trial of thy love?
Then know, that draught I gave thee was not poison,
But is as cordial as th'Hyblaean neclar.
This is beyond the fathom of my weak
Conception's, that you durst expose your life
To one, whom you (for ought he knew) had injured.
I durst expos't to thee, I knew thy heart,
Forgive me now the rude assault I made
Upon thy patience: here accept my hand,
My heart, my love, it is all thine own.
This gift
Is more to me then the Oriental Empire,
Which lies embroidered with earths chiefest treasure,
Pactolus, nor proud Tagus cannot bring
So rich a Present to their native Prince,
As is Varina's love: Alas! one kiss
Stolen from her lips, is worth th'Grand-Signiors bliss.
I'll be an Argus, for no other name
Will better sit me; I will watch this Io,
I'll dive into her secrets, and her maids;
I'll look with Eagles eyes into her ways,
And went she through her actions as the snakes
Glide o'er the stones, yet would I find their tract.
LEt me persuade you, Brother, to surcease
This endless suit, what wilt advantage you
To keep his carcass?
Why ran he in debt?
I could have kept my money.
Sir, my Father
Doth not deny to pay you, all he asks
Is time of payment.
Can he offer fairer?
He owes me money, yet I so respect
Alvarez credit, that I'll take his word
Without security.
And because you
Will play the fool, and lose your money, must
I doe so too; let me then have his land.
Sir, if you'll take my bond, I will oblige
My self, and all the land my Father leaves me,
To give you satisfaction.
Keep your land,
Sow garlic on it, I will have nought but money▪
Give me my money.
You're the strangest man
That ever I dealt with, had not you far better
Take that then loose all▪ say, he die in prison,
What will you get then?
'S body, that I'll sell
To the Dice-makers, they shall put his bones
To the same use they were at while he lived,
He may thank's gaming for it, the Dice, and •s Drabs.
My patience will not hear this▪ Covetous man,
Were it not for th'reverence I ow, this house,
Thou should not thus abuse thy betters —
He
Threatens, bear witness, Sir, I'll have your tongue
Bound to the peace.
Balthazar, pray persuade
Your Fathers patience.
Whore's your daughter, Sir?
Not stirring?
Yes! — Mariana!
Did you call?
My business, Sir, is private.
We'll withdraw.
Good morrow, Mistress, slept you well last night?
Your eyes look red, I doubt you slept not well.
What makes you look so ghastly?
Faith! I dreamed
Last night, that being underneath your window,
I heard men talk there, and you answer.
Dreams
Are foolish fancies, and it is witchcraft, Sir,
To credit them.
Nay more, I heard you vow
Love unto one, and bid him come and enter
Into your Conclave; you doe understand me?
Yes! that you dreamed so.
And as he was going,
I staid his passage, and he wounded me.
And when I waked, blushing Aurora told me
That I was wounded.
Sir, You did but dream,
Believe it not.
Yes, Mariana, see
This Crimson livery which your servants bounty
Last night bestowed upon me, it is a brave one,
Does't not become me finely?
Saints protect me!
How came you hurt, my dearest Balthazar?
You are not wounded?
This is brave, she will
Persuade me she is innocent. O woman!
How various are thy humours? thy devices?
How sly thy projects? Men with ease can find
Natures obscurest reaches, over-reach
The craft of Serpents, tame wild beasts, and bring
All things to their subjection, only woman
With her deceit, surpasses man, confounds
His best capacity. But tell me, Mistress,
Did you not see me wounded?
I? These eyes
Would have turned blind at such a sight; let's see!
Is your wound dangerous?
Heavens! I think deceit
Has left its room in Hell, and built its mansion
Within thy breast: Is it possible your face
Can be so full of impudence, to swear
A thing so false?
He raves! I'll call for help!
Yet more Maeanders! tell me hypocrite,
My fine dissembler, who it was you set
To be my Butcher? I'll not seek revenge;
But (as my duty is) go kiss his hands,
Prostrate my neck unto his honoured feet,
Because my Mistress loves him.
Las! he's frantic!
True! you have made me, Mariana, were there
Any evasion to excuse thy crime,
I should be ready to believe thou might
Be blameless yet! But I have proofs that banish
All probabilities, my ears can tell
That you're turned Harpy; Oh! there is no trust,
No faith in woman left!
Yet in this fury?
Dear Balthazar, what have your jealous eyes
Observed in my behaviour? You should think
That when my Fathers will hath made me yours.
I should fall off and take another.
Nothing!
My eyes and feeling fail me, all my senses
Were wrapped in ecstasies of endless pleasure,
To think you were my Mistress: I do know
That you are virtuous, your affection's wholly
Bent to my love; let me but kiss your hand,
But touch it only, and you'll soon perceive
With what an equal temper I can doe it;
I'm none of those who carry hot-houses,
Stoves in their blood, I've been too cold a Lover,
Too modest with you, therefore you reject me.
Yet more outrageous?
And have taken one
Some strange-backt monster, whom perchance you've seen
Out of your window in the Placa, take
The quick Strapado nimbly, or have born
Some massy burden, and his big-made joints
Ne'er crack beneath his ponderous weight, that promised
An abler body to content your lust,
More raging then a Goats; be brief, who is it?
Some slavish Galliego, that has stolen
My interest in thee?
You're a foul mouthed man!
Come you to rail? you shall find fuel friend
To feed your fire with, till its hear has burned
Thy entrails out; I love another, go,
And tell my father on it, nor you nor he
Shall know his name: it was the same that hurt you,
You may go tell, Sir.
Impudence, declare
Or perish.
Murder!
How now Balthazar?
What drawn upon my daughter? it is not fair.
Pray give an ear unto my short request;
As you're my Father, kill me, ever my name
Be blasted thus by this ignoble man,
Whose head hath forged a crime against me; Fiends
Would ne'er have dream't of.
Strumpet!
Sir, desist.
You have done more already then you'll answer.
He charges me, that underneath my window
Last night some people hurt him; that he heard
Men talk to me: which how it is possible,
And you not hear it, judge your self: but malice
Ne'er wants a subject to defame.
Your servant
Can verify my words as truth.
Who I?
Did not the reverence which I ow this house,
With-hold me from the fury which the lie
(You call me as a witness to) had stirred?
In these hot veins, you should be taught, base man,
How to create such Fabrics.
Slave! we will
Have vengeance.
Yes! we mean to have it, Sir.
You'll walk, or by this Rapier
Walk awhile, I shall
Live to dissect thy treacherous Corps, as small
As crumbs or Atoms.
Hark you, Signior,
The goodness that your goodness makes me owe
Your Family, obliges me to be
Nice in a point, that does so near concern
Your houses reputation: Balthazar
Said nought but truth, for Mariana has
Assidual suitors.
Had the a Devils spleen,
Or Serpents breath, thou coldest not blast her goodness?
First should this weapon rip my entrails out,
Ever I would be so impious as to seek
To blast her fame: honest? her sex may raise
After her death Mausolaean monuments,
Or some tall Pyramid, as to the chastest,
Ever crowned the name of women Nature first
Would go awry, the Ocean lose its course;
Ever she her virtue. Lass! Sir, I do only
Tell, she's frequented.
Why did you deny this?
When he did charge you with it?
Though to you
In private I give notice; think not, Patron,
I am so careless of your Daughters honour,
Or your good name: (although in things of truth)
To back her foes. I do believe, her spirit
Flowing with noble thoughts rejected him
Only to place her love upon another,
Of higher merit.
Then it seems you know
Whom she's frequented by?
Your'e pleased to call
My faith in question, Sir.
Next time he comes,
Be sure you give me notice; that's your charge
I'll loose this worthless breath else, when you see,
You will believe it, mean time what you please,
Do Sir: Be sure you shall behold that she
Shall miss her match by my fine treachery.
THy Uncle, Love, holds still a jealous eye
On all my actions: and I am advised
By my friend Gaspar, that's suspicious ears
Are still behind the hangings: that the servants
Have from him in commands to watch who visits
Your self, or Mariana, twill be best,
And safest in my judgement, in his presence
That thou forbear to cast a smile upon me:
And that like old December I should look,
With an unpleasant and contracted brow:
Why? can thou change thy heart, my Dear, that heart
Of flesh (thou give me) into Adamant,
Or rigid Marble? can thou frown on me?
You do mistake me, sweet, I mean not so
To change my heart: I'll change my countenance,
But keep my heart as loyal, as before.
In troth I cannot credit it, that thou
Can cast a frown on me: I prithee try.
Then thus! —
I prithee, sweet, betake thy self to school,
This Lesson thou must learn, in troth you're out.
Well! I must learn and practise it, or we
Shall blast our budding hopes.
Come! try again!
But if I try, and prove a good proficient:
If I do act my part discreetly, you
Must take it as a Play, not as a truth,
Think it a formal, not a real frown?
I shall.
Then once more thus,
My Mistress hath
The falling-sickness of us maids! help Sir!
Why how now, sweet? I did distrust thy weakness:
Now I have learnt my part, you are to seek.
Faith! it was my weakness, when I did perceive
A cloud of rage condensed on thy brow,
My heart began to melt: but pardon, sweet!
It was an effeminate infirmity.
This must be left: the world must be deluded,
With outward species; we must blind their eyes
With mists and shadows: Faith! thou must disclaim
Thy childishness, and arm thy self with valour:
Grow masculine my dear▪ an El'zabeth,
An English Eliz'beth, whose grave aspect
Though woman may decline thee almost man.
It must be so, or my effeminate heart
Will prove our ruin.
What? you're always billing?
Measuring your lips together? All the house
Is in an uproar: and your Uncles eye
Rolls up and down in every corner: haste,
Or you'll be taken: Don Praepontio came
To visit you, Varina: is enraged
To find you absent: all your nuptial robes
(He says) are fitted, and your bridal bed:
Next Thursday is designed to knit your hands:
The Priest will then in readiness attend:
This was the substance of his errand.
Gaspar!
I've thought thee still my friend: and thy advise
(I know) is sound: Contrive, which way I may
Shun Don Praepontio's bed; and keep my honour
Reserved for Roderiguez.
Honest Gaspar!
Model some way: it is not an armed Legion
Shall stop my passage, till I do efect it:
Gaspar, thy Counsel.
Sir, your obligations
Have beamed so freely on me, that my brain
Is wholly at your service: and this Lady
May likewise challenge, as her just desert,
What lies within the verge of my small power.
My counsel deems it best, that when the Church
Expects their near approach, in some disguise
You Roderiguez with some other blades,
Lay Don Praepontio breathless, and in haste
Convey your prize, Varina, to some Cottage
Which lies sequestered from the Cities eye:
There's the best safety, till the Inquisition
Is out of breath: and smiling fortune offer
A time, when you may marry her in peace.
Your policy is orthodox, my hand
Shall ratify it with a bloody seal.
Nephew! you now are entering into the world,
Let me advise you, who am well experienced,
Be not too credulous, trust none without
A good assurance: try before you trust.
I warrant you, Uncle, your wealth linked with my wit, will make me an unparalleled Gentleman, they will elect me Alcalde Ma∣jor, next year, or else I say there is no prudence in the gray-beards of the City.
Very pathetically spoken, when you are Governor of the Ci∣tie, I hope you will give me a good Office.
Yes! thou shalt have the honourable function of hangman: how lik'st thou it?
Marry Sir, I do not like hanging very well.
Who art thou?
Your worships Taylor, Sir.
That is to say my worships thief, alias thief to my worship.
Are my wives nuptial Vestments ready?
To the putting on Sir.
Hast thou perfumed the clasps and keepers?
They will take no perfume, Sir.
Hast thou made her petticoat to the behind or before?
On the side, Sir, according to the French Fash'on.
Yes! that's best. We Spaniards must now tout ala mode France.
And her gown needs no fardingale Sir.
Well, very well: give your attendance to morrow, and you shall have a quarter of a chicken and a le•man for your dinner.
Afford 6 panvilos, he may chance eat your dishes else.
What's that?
A busque.
Must she wear it behind or before, or between her legs to keep them from interfering!
No! Sir, but on her breast, to hide her great belly.
Are the Fiddlers bespoken? has the shoo-makers brought home my embroidered pantofles, I mean to dance in them: bid the Millai∣ner put ambergrease enough on my shirt, I shall stir till I stink else.
Of sweat Sir?
I, what else?
Come, Nephew, you had best go visit her to night.
I'll go before you Sir.
Come you egregious strumpet
Abstract of impudence! what has my patience
Made thee presume of my connivency:
So much vile, Minion, that your wanton lust
Durst gallop like a posthorse: run at base
In sin, and fearless meet lasciviousness:
As if that Saints and men had been as deep
Involved in sleep, as you in sin: and now
To see Your lust dance Antics? must my house
Be made the stews, the sinful receptacle
Of you and your Adulterers? you could laugh
At me, contemn my age; Alas! poor man!
The Gout doth hold him captive in his Couch,
We need not fear him: I did hear you Mistress,
And would have entered then, but that I thought
It more revenge, I held it greater Justice
To send thy soul (grown filthy) unto hell
Glutted with pleasures. Come, you'll tell me, Mistress,
Who it was, was with you.
Thus outrageous?
Fie! Patron! such a passion would befit
A husband better then a father: Age
Should furnish you with better temper, Cousin:
Sweet, wipe thy eyes: in troth it is but a trick
Common to such young folks, to have a servant,
A friend in private to supply their wants:
Be not so passionate, you must forgive her.
Pardon, good Sir.
Stand by, or I shall turn
My rage on you! Insatiate Strumpet! was not
The man I destined for your husband, good:
(Too good for thee) but that thy wanton eyes
Must choose another? Must the Patrimony
I thought to leave thee, the estate I purchased
With such a care become a salary
To your hot sin: your Bastards shortly will
Call Grandfather, and look for portions
Out of my wealth, but I'll prevent it, Minion:
Speak briefly!
What? that I have sinned? O Sir!
Remember I'm your daughter, let that name
Move you to pity of my fact, which youth,
Unbridled youth occasioned: though my crime
May challenge death, as it's desert: your hands
Ought not to be deaths messengers: 't suffices
That I have sinned, add not to my delict
By making you a parricide: dear father,
Forgive me.
No! Thou'st laid a stain upon
Our houses honour, which thy wanton blood,
Nought else can wash away.
O! rob not Heavens
Of their prerogatives; let them revenge
Your quarrel, for my mothers sake, whom oft
You said my feature represented, spare me:
For her sake do it.
Nay, for her sake rather
I must be moved to butcher thee, who fear not
So to profane her image, which remains
Better decipherd in thy perfect essence,
Then in her monument: Thoud'st better 've pulled
Her sacred relics from their Urn, defiled them,
Cast out her ashes on a dunghill, then
Committed this, for which her glorious soul
(If Saints can weep) makes heaven a sea: O Girl!
Shame! that thou art my issue: I conceited
If there had ought been good in Nature, then
Thou had been Mistress of it: now I see
(Grief to my age!) I was too fond: Affection
Made me adore an Idol: I was cozened:
There is no trust in mortals.
Pray you, Sir!
You are too much distempered: faith! her fault
Is not worth half this anger: take her up,
Let not the earth pollute those limbs, the pride
Of Natures workmanship, you may behold
In those fair Orbs true penitence, those tears
Were of sufficient virtue to restore
A person damned to paradise: forgive her:
Or you're too cruel, Signior.
Let her then
Reveal her Partner.
That demand's unjust,
If she should do it, men should fear hereafter
To pressure women, when they see that threats
Can force Discoveries: good Sir, ask it not,
It is too unreas' noble.
What said my Father?
Marry, ungratious minion: I would know
Whom you have chosen for your stallion,
To glut your never-sated Orke withlust.
Is it me you mean Sir? slack your passion, Sir. —
Conceal him, if you do affect his life.
These lips yet tepid with his frequent kisses,
Before they utter ought to hurt him, shall
Be closed for ever, rather rot with Cankers.
Noble Virago!
Then resolve to die.
I care not, here's my bosom, rip it up,
And steal an acute Eagles eye to pry
Into my hearts small caverns, and explore
His name, that writ there, yet it will remain
Hid in some little Concave, that your fury
Shall never know it: kill me, I shall smile
On ugly death: embrace her with a soul
Triumphant as a Martyrs, I will perish
A thousand times, ever once I will disclose
That precious secret.
Do you brave me? do you?
Let go my hands.
I must not, will not let you
Draw mischief on your self: go in sweet Cos!
Let me alone with him.
Stand off: Let go,
And let me follow her.
For what? your rage
Shall not have way to do an act: which done,
You'd wail in tears for ever, should you kill her,
Think what a crime you onerate your soul which,
Next, what a scandal would ensue: a man
Of your known worth at this age to become
A Parricide on such a daughter, only
For keeping close her friend: Why should you be
Inquisitive to know him?
To have revenge.
Why so I did imagine: banish rage,
And hear with reasons ears: be sure your daughter
Has placed her love on some base one, she dares not
Make privy to your ear, should she disclose him,
You would, she thinks, have vengeance for her fault:
Were he a person noble, she would haste
To tell his name, boast of her choice: how say you?
Is not this reason?
Very true!
He being
A man so worthless, 't would disgrace you more
In seeking vengeance, for the humorous world
Apt to suspect the worse, would judge the Cause
Of your revenge to be, as it is: and so
You lay your own dishonour, and your daughters,
Open, which else might sleep unmentioned, none
But you and I are privy to it, and ever
A syllable should pass in your disgrace
Out of my mouth, I would be dumb.
But Gaspar!
What shall I do with her? For Balthazar
Will publish her disgrace, so all will shun
Her hated Nuptials: I'll go make her enter
Among barefoot Nuns into some Monastery,
Spend the long remnant of her blooming youth
In holy prayers and penitence: I'll make
The poor my heirs, found sacred Hospitals,
Build Colleges with my revenues.
Madness!
Religious madness! that's the ready way
To sell her to damnation: will her spirit,
(Can you conceive) which now doth pass the limits
Of Liberty, endure a Cloister? Balthazar?
Fear not his clamours; wise men will impute
Them to his passion; because he has lost her, rather
Then to her merit: Patron, you may find
Some younger Brother noble as her self
To be her husband; Gold will make her seem
A virgin, though a Mother.
Honest Gaspar!
I know thou love me.
As I doe the bliss
I hope for.
And, alas! ungrateful I
Have been too negligent of thy worth, but thou
Hast inurn'd all those acts.
'Ts my Duty.
Once
I promised thee her marriage, and in Justice
She is thy wife; and sure Astraea's angry
For the injury I did thee, and imposes
This heavy cross upon me; wilt thou now
Solemnise with her Hymens sacred rites?
Be not dismayed; although her hair-brain'd youth
Hath run into an error, rather due
To heat of blood, then her condition,
She may be honest.
Honest! I dare swear
She will be truly virtuous, but the meanness
Of my poor fortunes makes me worthless, I
Have a spot in my blood, which would dishonour
Your family, reserve that, Sir, for one
Of noble and illustrious Parentage;
Whose worth and quality may add a title
Unto your houses fame; for my part, I
Nourish no such thoughts; all the height my poor
Ambition soars at, is to be esteemed
Your humble slave still.
You're too humble, Gaspar,
Erect thy Spirit, man, thou had a Father
Had fire in's veins; come, thou shalt marry her;
I doe command you.
Your commands are laws,
As sacred to me as are Oracles,
I must not break them.
Thou wilt wed her then?
Since you command it.
Now I see thou love me.
Call me no more thy Patron, but thy Father.
I will acquaint my daughter with my will.
Have I not laboured finely? has my brain
Not won the Laurel wreath? She is my own,
And what care I now what the envious world
Can say of me? They'll call me Cuckold, that's
In my esteem, as much as they should call
Me Signior: Let her take her pleasure, she,
Not I, doth sin: I'm sure she will afford me
My fill at night too. Happy Age! when all
Were common, when old Natures laws were read
Without a Comment: every man was free
For every woman: then none feared the stab
For kissing.
Save you Gaspar.
And you too:
Sir, what's your business?
It is not, Sir, with you,
It is with your Master.
With your Master? Hem!
How scornfully this youth demeans himself?
Ever long, when I am married, I shall be
Sir Don, or any thing.
Good Sir, my Father
Commends him to you, and entreats you would
For satisfaction of the debt he owes you,
Accept his land at Cordova in mortgage,
And pay old Frederiques debt.
I grieve, Picarro,
That he should com to this; but it is his fate,
I'll doe him any curtsy, return
This as my answer.
Honoured Sir, I shall.
A handsome man, and an observant son.
Call back Picarro, Gaspar!
Sir, Picarro.
My Father doth request you to return.
Signior Picarro, I so much lament
Your noble Fathers case, that will you truly
Resolve me one thing, I will pay his debts
Without your mortgage.
'Tshould be difficult
That I would not doe for his liberty.
Are you in love
Not to my knowledge.
Could
You be content to have a Wife?
Corinna
Were a fit match for him.
Yes, of your choosing.
You've seen my daughter Mariana, what
Say you to her?
She is contracted, Sir,
Surely he will not break his promise with me.
Your daughters word's beyond my hopes.
But say,
That you should have her, could you her affect?
Sure! sure he jests.
Nothing but heaven and bliss,
I should desire more then her love.
Picarro;
I doe so much commiserate thy Father,
And thy own sufferings, that I am resolved
To give her to thee; and thy land shall be
Her Jointure.
Do I dream? Ha! ha! I hope
I shall not be deluded, Patron, Father,
What doe you mean?
Peace! slave! I'll tell her of it.
But surely, Patron, you will not deal thus?
Hark, Sir, you mean to marry her?
I doe.
You see this sword?
I, what of that?
Nay nothing.
It is a pure Toledo blade, it cost
As it is really worth, twelve Duccats, Sir.
But if you marry her, you have a woman.
I hope she's no Hermaphrodite.
No, but
She's something else, a Whore.
Out slave! you're frantic.
O! that I were but valiant, had but heart
Great as my wrongs are, or but so much power
As would suffice to right them; I could pull
The Crystal Excel that supports the Spheres,
Down to the earth, that all the world might perish
Together with my self, since all have sworn
To be stark villains with me: I'm resolved
Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta mover.
To Hell, I'll now address me.
Thou art come.
Now to thy period, Bastard! it was your plot
To bring me among my enemies, on purpose
To have me slain, but I have escaped to be
Thy ruin. Say thy Prayers. —
What mean you, Sir?
To kill thee, slave, and so set free the earth
From bearing such an execrable monster,
Such an inhumane villain.
As your're noble,
Lend me a little utterance, till I cloth
in vocal sounds, a business that concerns
Your honour nearly.
But be brief, thy breath
Will blast me else.
You come, you say, to kill me?
I'm glad that Nature has afforded life
To such a wretch as I am, till my blood
May doe a person of your worth a pleasure.
And is this all?
Forbear a little, hear me;
You doe suppose it was my plot to bring
You to your death, I do confess.
What? Speak!
That won with gifts, I did entice you thither
To your destruction: But, hear me, Sir,
There's none so vile, but may repent; and since
Your Fate afforded you a happier lot,
Then to be slain, forgive me: if the blood
Of such a miscreant, can ought avail you,
I'll give it you my self, you shall not stain
Your noble hands with my poor homicide.
Rare! excellent villain: But methinks those tears.
And looks, spring out of feigned penitence;
Disclose the man that hurt me, and I'll pardon
Thy horrid fact, and raise thee.
Willingly:
It was he must be her husband.
Picarro.
Picarro.
May I believe you? Is this truth?
Else kill me.
Farewell! there's gold.
But stay, if one so vile
As I may give you counsel?
Any thing
That tends to his destruction.
Your hot breast
Thirsts for revenge; let it be noble, he
Off'red you public wrong, let your revenge
Be public too!
As how?
As thus, to morrow
When he returns from his wisht-for Nuptials,
Meet him, and kill him, then escape into
The Church, twill be your Castle and Asylum;
It is brave and safe.
Ingenious Gaspar, think
He's dead already.
This hits right, let all
Perish; I care not, if I rise, who fall.
Tic strange, my Father, Sir, should come to hear on it
It was that knavish Boy that did betray us.
Pray, Sir, be pleased to return your answer.
Friend, you may walk, I've nothing to return.
Then without bashful fear, or flatrery,
You are a noble villain.
How now, Sirrah!
Is not your Fathers love to be esteemed
Before your friends? Does not your natural duty,
You ow him, stir a fury in your blood
Against that traitor? Poor Eugenia! she
Wearies with tears, even grief it self to think
Of this cursed perjury, and her brothers Spirit,
Which either doth for fear, or fond affection
To that ignoble perjurer, permit
Him breath without revenge; but were it mine,
As it is your case, I would devour him up
Like some wild Anthropophagus: Let Nature
Convince you, kill him.
Hold your peace, and walk,
Be gone, or I —
What dare thou, noble villain!
Thy Father on his blessing charges thee
To take revenge; and dost thou only not
Contemn his will, but keep society
With his cursed Enemy; mark his cursings, Sir,
Think on his blessings.
Honest friend! the love
I bear your noble quality assays
Me to detain still with you, but my duty
Commands me not t'incurre my fathers curse.
I must desert you.
Prithee doc, kind Coxcomb!
I'm glad I'm rid of thee.
Yet ever we part,
Think on my sisters merit, how, her virtues
Transcend your Mistress qualities; next view
The peril that you are in; Should it come
To Balthazar, that you did wound him, death
Would sure ensue; but for our former love
Let me entreat you be reclaimed.
Imust not,
Nor will not, you may:
Sure! I am bewitched,
To love him, when I offer to relinquish
His Company; there's something loads my feet
With lead, I cannot leave him, fellow, go,
Return this answer to my Father, that
When I come home, I'll satisfy him, why
I did not doe his pleasure, so be gone —
Without reply:
Well Sir.
O! Sir Chaves! what shall we doe Sir Chaves? my Mistress—
What of his love? are we discovered?
O! worse! she's to be married.
Married?
I marry, married too morrow at Saint Saviours Church.
Alas! poor man! to whom?
I know not; oh! I know not!
Hold him.
Good Sir cheer your self.
Some luckless serene blast me, may a damp
Thick as Thyestes serene blast me, may a damp
Thick as Thyestes darkness spring from Dis,
And muffle up the world in endless night;
That none may see those nuptials, which I'll make
Fatal as Jasons; tell your faithless Mistress
In stead of pines, I'll send her tapers, Yew,
And deadly Cypress to make green her bed,
Where virgin Laurel and such harmsess boughs
Dare not approach for fear of blasting; Fiends
Will be her Bridesmaids; surely I was borne
With all good stars my Opposites. Is it too morrow?
Yes Sir too morrow? pray, why rave you thus?
I pray Sir tell me, may we not, ever then
Borrow some toilsome woodnetts, and invite
The gallant youth of the City to go hunt
In yonder deserts?
Why? what then?
To take
The salvage walkers of the wilderness,
Bulls, Wolves and Tigers, and manure them up
In yonder spacious Amphitheater:
And then set fire on it; till their flaming throats
Roar, howl, and raise a Clamour, which may rend,
Like some huge thunderclap the trembling Earth,
That all, ever then, might sink to hell, ha! is it not
Brave? let's about it, friend.
Why should you be
Thus cruel? Sir, your rage transports you.
Whither?
Now I know, maid, when she hath seen her own,
She'll view my nuptials.
'Ll you be married too?
Married? I'll study to surpass her falsehood,
Her curious eyes, I make no doubt, have chosen
A handsome Bridegroom?
Yes! indeed.
To let
Her see how much I scorn her and her beauty,
I'll wed me to a Creature, in whose looks
Foulness is truly character'd, whose eyes
Are poisonous as a Basilicks, and scarce
Afford their Owner light enough to see
Her bodies horrid edifice, whose frame
Is the true substance, which Anatomists
Aim to decipher in their strange dissections
Of liveless Mortals; tell her it is to death
I'll wed my self; the grave shall be our bed.
It is none of hers, it is her fathers fault;
Study prevention, or you lose her.
Did you
Not, tell me she was to be married?
Yes! but I hope we shall find means to hinder't.
I'll take your Counsel.
BRing the pistol hither? is it charged?
It is sir:
Begone, then quickly. Now Picarro breath
Till 9. a Clock, no longer; hug thy Mistress
Suck poison form her lips till then, and glory
That thou bereav'dst me of her.
Is your name
son to Frederique?
Yes! friend.
I come to tell you, that you have been wronged,
Sold to destruction.
All the Town knows that,
Thou need not come to tell me on it, perchance
My wonders sent you to explore my secrets;
Prithee about thy business.
Can that front,
Those limbs of yours which stile you man, endure
Such an abuse without revenge? I come
T'informe who it was that hurt you.
Pish! I know them.
And can they live unstigmatiz'd for villains?
Surely you know them not, they're strangers here.
Did not Picarro hurt me?
He poor man!
Is injured to be wedded to a strumpet.
Chaves, one Chaves wounded you.
What's he?
What is that Chaves?
A base villain, Sir.
How know thou this?
By's own confession, Sir,
It is he that wounded you, and gracious Themis
Has you decipherd for her instrument
Of vengeance; Chaves is his name, on forfeit
Of all the lives I have, I'll make good what
I told you, and conduct you to the person
That injured you.
Picarro then is guiltless?
As is my self.
Chaves! well let him walk
Till I can meet him, then it is odds, this Arm
Shall pay his falsehood; but Picarro must not
Pass thus, depart not from me, friend.
No Sir
Now perjured Chaves is thy Fate at hand,
And if Eugenia lives, thou shalt not stand.
PLay louder Picroes, that string's made of an Usurers gut, it sounds like the jingling of a mony-bag. Fie! on these Git∣terns and Treble-base viols, they are not comparable to an Italian bar∣biton; march on my dear Colloquintida, Uncle, you are not so merry as the solemnity of my presence deserves. March on fiddlers, the fur∣mitee my English Cooke promised to make me, will be burnt too else: but what's that Rubio?
O Sir! a piece too rare for vulgar eyes,
And worthy only your perspicuous judgment:
An Epithalamium I composed on your wedding, you'll allow my
Mistress Bride to kiss me for it?
Nephew, it will serve better at home then here.
Good Husband! Without Ceremony.
Good Husband? How sweetly her throat utters it? All the Pricksong in St. Saviours is not like those two words; but lead the way while I support my magnificent Corps, with my Mistresses fain. Arm through this dark Entry; they say it is haunted with spirits; but if they come, we'll conjure them.
Oh! The Cramp, the Spavins, the Yellow Janders, the Grincoms, the rambling Trot, or some such Belly vengeance has put my guts out of joint. I tell you, Rubio, untruss my points.
So you may chance contaminate my fingers. Alas! You bleed.
Is my blood red or yellow?
It is white, Sir.
Oh! Dismal, dismal! Don Praepontio's guts are too big for his belly.
Alas! My Nephew's wounded! Look about who hurt him?
'S life, here's nothing but the walls, unless they be invisible. Master, you do but dream, you are not wounded.
I am neither Husband, nor Master now, but I must die; I leave my body to be buried; and good Uncle, sweet Wife, and honest Rue∣bio, put a musket, powder and shot into the Coffin with me.
Look how those Rosy cheeks convert to Daisies!
On my blessing do as I bid you, or my furious Ghost will haunt you; for since it was some Spirit of the Buttery; because I lo∣ved wine well; or Hobgoblin, because I used to lick the Cream bowls, that has done me this injury to kill me; I will when I come among them be revenged; for sure it is, I must go whisper two or three words with Pluto and his Fraternity; bury me in a Coletta, or Buff jacket, that Rapiers may no more hurt me.
How rawboned Death's with his black dart
Ready to pierce my Lions heart?
Alas! Poor Nephew, he bleeds?
Yet, Uncle, I will spite of his nose bequeath my movables; First, to my feet Wise Varina I give all my Plate and Jewels; and to my Uncle all that I have in my Closet. viz. Two Holland Cheeses, three pound of Raisins Solis, &amp;c. And to thee my servant Rubio, all that I have in my Pockets, as also the Handkercher wrought with Co∣ventry blew, and my Needle-case and Thimble, &amp;c. But good Rubio, pup my sneezing box with me into the Tomb, it will clear my eyes.
Oh! I can speak no more, for now to Heaven doth go
The Valiant soul of Don Praepontio.
But whore's my Niece? Varina! Oh! She's gone;
This is some cursed plot; let's in, and send
•oasts to way-lay them, ever they take to Sea,
Dispatch out Hew and Cries; that may arrest them,
And bring them back to judgements bar. Hard fate!
What plagues of grief hang on my aged head,
And drop their vengeance on my hoary hairs
In showers of blood? Was it not enough my daughter
Defamed my Family by her goat-like lust;
But now my Niece, Varina must conspire
With Villains to disgrace me? Could her baseness
No safety find, but by her Husbands blood?
Rebellious Children! Know a Fathers hand
Provoked, strikes hard; and though I do endure
Your faults a while, my vengeance shall strike sure.
Oh! My sweet Master. I am undone, I am undone, many an Ashwednesday and Goodfriday nights supper must my belly make; I was no sooner come from being an under-Scullion to be an under-Cooke; but now I must Crab-like crawl backward from being an under-Cooke to be an under-Scullion, or any thing! Oh, miserable! Well, I will go in, and fill my belly now, though I fast the longer afterwards; if fate has decreed that all the fat must be in the fire, it must be so; my belly must pray patience; I fear this next year will be nothing but Ember weeks.
CUrse on my fate!
Have patience, Sir, we shall
Remove your grief too; or in streams of blood
We'll swim to our desires.
O! Signior, Gaspar!
Why had not we your notice of this wedding?
It was so closely carried, that my ears
Could ne'er be privy to it; what ails my Master?
Why, Sir, so pensive? Fear not, Sir, my Mistress
Will love you still; but I do sound you come
To Butcher her new Bridegroom; Is it not so?
Thy augury's most true; these swords but now
Reak'd in the streams of Don Praepontio's blood;
To help my Friend Rod'riguez to his Love.
In troth the World's well rid of such a fool!
And yet are thirsty; we must sail through blood
To our desired port; tell her •'ll drink
A health unto her in Picarro's gore;
I once did in obedience to her will,
Spare it, but it was by Fate reserved to be
Drawn empty now, and this enraged hand
Shall break the Conduit up; twill do me good:
In expectation here Isle wait, until
I find and kill him —
No! don't kill him now:
It were too unholy to profane those rites,
Besides, he's armed with th'choisest of his friends,
That should you kill him, it were impossible
You should escape the aestrum of their fury,
Patience awhile, bridle your wrath, Isle plot
To do it more easy: Pray be pleased.
Thou were it
Hatched in a Pigeons nest, thou art so timorous
Tell us of murder, not of safety, rather
Let's study to create new ways to kill
Though to destroy the world; and so to be
Earths common Executioners; then that
He should enjoy and crop those blessed Roses.
What if he do? he has but what you left,
He will prick his Fingers ere he pluck that rose;
Before to morrow night his Glass is run.
Pray, Sir, with draw, be sure on it.
Good Sir, doe.
Your counsel shall prevail.
So let them go, had this fresh Gamester entered
And kilt Picarro; and her Father known
It was he enjoyed her, he would have procured
A pardon for him, and have given him her,
So I'd been cozened, but I'm rid of all:
Balthazar kills Picarro, then himself
Suffers; Praepontio's kilt by Chaves, whom
The Law for that fact strait shall apprehend,
And soon condemn as guilty; so not one
Is left to be an obstacle.
Sir, my Master bids you not expect him, he'll not come.
He will not come? how now? He call them back:
Oh! that I were but registered the first
In Coxcombs catalogue, to place my hopes
On One, when others offered to effect them.
Villains had need to see with Argus eyes,
They'll be most fools else, when they seem most wise.
FAith! Mistress do not grieve so, you do wrong
The beauty of your face; should your new husband
See this, he'd grow suspicious; dry your eyes
For shame, 'ts a sin to weep in wedding shoes.
Denude me of these gaudy garments, get
Funestal vestments for my new attire:
Lend me a book to pray on, and entreat
The Priest that married me; to com again;
I'd speak with him.
Still in this moestfull tune;
You will not dye I'm sure?
Pray, keep those flowers
To straw my Coffin with, and tell the Virgins
That came to grace my nuptials, I invite
Them to my Obsequies.
Bless me! Mistress, better
Chaves were hanged, then you should kill your self
For him, your husband is a proper man,
And for Sir Chaves, you may have him too,
Dye, quoth you, faith! that were a trick indeed;
Be merry, Mistress, come, you shall; this is
Your wedding day.
My day of burial call it;
For so it will be, I have lost the May,
The flower of Brides, my Virgin glory, and
I know, my husband hearing what has past
Twixt Balthazar and me, will be most curious
In searching; when as needs he must, he finds
Me for a Virgin thrust on him, to be
Not so, he will kill me.
Is this all your fear?
Mercury water, or some Cypress berries
Will cozen th'cunningst searcher of them all.
I must not trust it. Catalina, thou
Hast always loved me!
Yes truly, Mistress.
Thou would be loath to see me murdered?
Bless you, good Mistress!
Thou art fair and young —
Faith, reasonable; I've seen many a worse
Face in a Ladies habit, I'll assure you.
And I dare say a Virgin—
Yes, in truth,
The more's my grief.
Wilt thou supply my room?
And be the Bride to my new husband?
I
Would not, forsooth, lose my Virginity.
Come, be not squeamish, when he is in bed
And th'Candle's out, then Isle frame an excuse
To rise, and thou shalt com into my place;
And after he's asleep, Isle come again.
For your sake, Mistress, I will do it, and get
A drug to make him sleep.
Doe, prithee doe.
It is late, about it.
Son! you're beholding to the youth of the City,
In the solemnity of these your Nuptials,
They have procured a Masque, they stand without.
False and foolish are the toys
Of Worldly joys,
The Paphian Goddess only rules
Frantastick Fools:
Then why should I (simplicity!)
Thus dote upon her Deity.
Woman is light as a feather,
Or the Weather:
More inconstant then the wind
Is her base mind:
Fickle still, can only be
Constant in inconstancy.
The rose which plucked I have refused,
Another chose:
Mars did hug Venus, Sir, yet she
Could satisfy
Black Mulciber. Your wife doth know
To draw Actaeon on your brow,
And make your Cornucopia be
Triumphant to Eternity.
Dance.
This is a strange Epithalamium?
It is a strange Song! and a far stranger dance!
It is rare and new! it carries mystery with it.
Who is the chief to whom we owe our thanks?
It is I, Picarro! Sir, it is I, your Mistress
Knows me, I did provide this Masque on purpose
That you might know, how you are injured.
Explain your Riddle, be our Oedipus,
W' are yet in darkness.
Thus, Sir, That old man
That led the woman, represents Deceit,
And she his daughter Lust; the next pair, he
On the right hand is Treachery, who lead
In me deciphering True Affection:
And the last couple which came after us,
The first of them is Wantonness, who pulls.
Lust from me, and doth give her to that person
Who signifies a Cuckold and a Fool.
You understand me!
Tic a Paradox.
Then know, your wife's a hateful prostitute,
Her Father is a Villain, you a Cuckold.
I'll say no more.
You've said enough already
To seal you to damnation.
O Sir, stay,
Give Losers leave to speak: his fury moves him
To be thus passionate.
But that I will not
Stain with your blood my Nuptials, you should know
How false your tale is: but there's other times
To meet with you.
I shall be ready when
You please to call me.
It is strange me thinks
That Balthazar should be so spiteful, Brother:
This must not pass thus.
No! I shall hereafter
Have vengeance.
He deserves ten thousand deaths
For such a wrong.
What muse you on, Sir; Ha!
Balthazar, Sir, has always been a man
Of good esteem, I marvel he should raise
Without occasion, such a calumny.
O! help my daughter!
Hold her, else she falls!
Heavens shower down Balm to cure her, or let loose
Some blasting lightning, that may sear me up
Till I convert to ashes: see, her breath
In little streaks flies from her, to make sweet
Death with its precious flavor; send for hither
Those curious men that strive to give new life
To Carcasses, those that do spend their studies
In Image-making; let them here receive
A perfect pattern, afterwards to cut
All women's Marbles by.
There's life! there's life!
She beautifies uncomely death! Might she
Remain thus uncorrupted, she would make
A Statue passing all the Alabasters
We can erect, in memory of her name.
Oh! Oh!
That breaks her heart-strings! Blessed Saint!
Fly not so fast, sweet soul; I'll rob the Turtle
Of his swift wings, but I'll o'retake thee, that
In thy society I may mount to yonder
Celestial region, for thy sake they will not
Deny admission; the Saints are rimerous
To lose their mansions; for her merit asks
A Crown above a Martyrs.
Son!
Behold!
Her spotless soul attired in white, ascends
In a clear Chariot, drawn by virgins: strait
I come, stand off.
She will recover:
Yes!
When she's among her fellow-Angels, then
She may recover life, a glorious essence
Due to her goodness; Earth was too unworthy
To bear so rare a jewel, fitter far
For Heavens rich wearing; yet you have done well
A while to stay me, while I steal a blessing
From those pure lips; though they are cold, one kiss
From them will glut me; which delight hath equal
To that she's gone to.
Her eyes open.
Look,
The Torches fade at such a brightness, surely
In this short trance sh'as lost that little remnant
She had of human essence; and 's become
Wholly immortal, and deserves our knees.
Why gaze you on me? is it not just? A saint
Merits this honour.
You all hate me; why
Did you recall my spirits from the bliss
They almost had attained to?
I'll support thee,
And if thou fall, my arm shall keep the earth
From touching thee; twill grow too proud to bear
So rich a burden.
O Picarro! I
Had thought you'd had a better faith in me,
Then to grow jealous at the false report
Of a base man; I will not live to have you
Deem so ignobly of me.
Were this breast
Armed with th'obdurate shells of Tortoises;
Or mal'd with s••les of Dolphins, I would force
A passage into it, that you might behold
Each thought that's there, if any one but savour
Of jealousy, then utterly detest me;
But I will make this slave an expiation,
A very Anathema for this injury
Which he hath with such impudence averred
Against thy honour.
I believe you, Sir.
Fill me a bowl of water, I'll begin
Your Nuptial health.
Let it be wine I'll drink't.
Were it liquid metal.
Father-in-law, to you.
Brother, to you.
Son, to you; and may she
Be made a mother by you.
Catalina.
I've done.
Come! Fill it till it over-flow,
Or bring a bigger glass.
It is needless, Sir.
He that denies to pledge't, I'll flit his wezand.
Alonzo, it grows late, it is time the Bride
Had put the Torches out; we'll see her bedded.
I doe prefer the pleasures of this night
Before all treasures, or the earths delight.
Is it possible he should be gone so soon
To bed? It is yet scarce ten a clock.
O Gaspar!
Lend me thy Torch, by heavens me thinks it were easy
To set the House on fire, and burn the villain
In her embraces.
So you'd burn her too!
Faith! not much matter, since I left her, all
My Ice is turned to Marble, could I not
Borrow yon star for one half hour, and cast it
Like to a ball of wild-fire through yon hole,
To make the chamber hotter? Were it not pretty
If from the top of yonder Pyramid
I could embrace the Moon, and pull her from
Her watery spears, to singe their plumes? Say friend,
May I not doe it?
What strange temper's this?
His mind runs on the Moon, What? Lunatic?
Look where the death-full Owl flies: Hark, her wings
Flask in the air, t'invite the Daws that nest
In yon tall steeple to deride me: is there
No heat in nature left? Am I converted
So soon to water? Yet my eyes are dry.
They cannot weep a flood, sufficient
For a new general Deluge: Look! I quake
Like to a frosty Polander, when wrapped
In Iron sheets, he lays him down a man,
O'er night in th'Field, and in the morning rises
A Cake of Ice, or Snow-ball. Is it not cold?
My limbs do play on th'Organs.
It is your fancy:
You're passionately mad.
I do not vvalk yet —
Bare, with a long Horn armed, nor kiss the dust
With naked feet; but I will learn, these garments
Are very ponderous: when I've rent them off,
I shall begin to be a Bedlam.
Gaspar,
Prithee persuade him.
Sir, you do conceit
Because your project mist to night, your love
Is lost for ever; do not so, to morrow
We will have a night as opportune as this,
To kill her husband.
Yes, if he would die,
When we do wish him dead, or could our eyes
Kill him, and never look upon him; so
I doe believe he might be slain, but else —
Hear me a little, if I do not show
A way to kill him —
That's an easy thing:
Level a Canon at him, blow him up
With Gunpowder.
But hear me, Sir, to morrow
You and your friend, with others I'll procure,
In strange disguises shall present your selves
There in a Masque; I'll tell you are my friends,
And in the Dance one of the men I'll hire
Shall kill him; you shall not be touched in this.
How like you't, Sir, is it not a good conceit?
Good, very good, could my deeds but effect
What you have spoken— but I fear he has
Some charms about him, steel nor poison will
Enter his body: so 'ts impossible;
That what you here advise can ever be done.
Yes! fear not, Sir, I'll visit you to morrow.
Do, and forget not what you promise now.
His care and vigilance is far beyond
Our thoughts.
Then let him glut himself to night.
It surely, Sir, shall be his last good night:
Men may shun public, but not private spite:
Come! you're a wily strumpet; faith! thou did
Excellent well! but not one word: I'll go
And dress me; —
Sure I have drunk the blood of scorpions,
Sucked mandrakes juice or henbane seed, my heart
Is almost hurnt to ashes: Catalina,
Fetch me some water.
Here's some ready Sir.
Give me another cup, I hate that bowl:
It was that I drank last night in: was it not you
Filled me the wine?
It was.
Was nothing in it?
Nothing, but wine and sugar, Sir.
What's this?
Some of the sugar spilt on the side of the cup:
I'll wipe it off.
Stay, is this sugar, minion?
I've found you out, you're hired to poison me:
This is a drug, speak quickly, say by whom
Or perish.
O good Sir! if I had thought
I should have had no better a requital,
I'd not have been so kind.
So kind? as how?
Be brief, or this shall spoil your utterance.
A Maidenhead deserves more favour, Sir.
Impudent devil! who'd to do with that?
Last night you had it, Sir.
Dye, Monster!
Hold, Sir, for Heavens sake! I confess, my Mistress —
What of my Love?
To say truth, Sir, she hired me
To give y' a sleepy potion, having lost
The blossom of her honour, she procured
Me to supply her place, and laid me by you.
But is this truth? ha! whore!
Egregious strumpet, was it not sufficient
To make me be the pack horse of thy lust;
The common father to thy odious fry:
The loathsome compound of lasciviousness
Thou hast within thee? but thou must betray
My chaste embraces to the sinful arms
Of a foul harlot, on that sacred night
When I was full with hopes of the reward
Of my true love: ask mercy quickly; pray,
For I will kill thee.
Holy Angels guard me!
What mean you dear Picarro? Heavens and Saints
Help, as I'm guiltless.
Guiltless? so's the Devil;
A plague upon this cursed effeminate sex!
Would curses wound as doth the Mandrakes groan,
I would invent as bitter searching terms,
As cursed, as harsh, as horrible to hear
As lean-fac'd envy in her loathsome Cave;
My tongue should stumble in my earnest words,
My eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint,
My hair be fixed an end, as one distract,
Yea, every joint should seem to curse and ban;
Oh! I could thunder out a Volley of Curses,
A rapsody of baneful execrations!
What? dost thou turn away, and hide thy face;
I am no loathsome Leper, look on me;
What? art thou like the Adder waxen deaf?
Be poys'nous too, and kill thy forlorn spouse.
Thou hast a place about thee, where the furies
Take up their mansion; I do know, thy eyes
Can with false tears outvie the Crocodile:
Thy tongue can altercate more several notes,
Then the Hyaena's, and can sweetly charm
As doth a Siren, warble forth as sweet
Notes as a Philomel: it is bootless now
To seek to palliate thy Crimes, thy partner
Revealed it all: repent, and do it quickly:
Or 〈…〉 damned, I care not.
Must I die?
〈◊〉 •old, though Queens upon their knees in tears
〈…〉 pardon, Saints implore thy life,
〈…〉 •ot save it: can thou nourish hopes
Of ought but death, when thy inhumane Acts
Tell thee thou hast deserved to suffer for them
More then eternal tortures?
O Picarro!
Remember what I am, not what I have been,
I'm now your wife; Sir, if I have been tempted
To that Venerean sin: it was ever religion
Had made me yours: you were not injured by it,
And though for fear of being discovered, I
Did thrust this hapless maid into your bed,
Though't be a fault, that well might merit death,
Damn me not for it: give me leave to make
My peace with Heaven, and then I'll yield to die:
Thank you to kill me.
If I let her talk
A little longer, she'll persuade me: come,
Hold up your hands for mercy, make short prayers,
And this shall say Amen unto them, pray —
Since your stern rage will not permit you hear
A word of mercy: for your own sake do not
Draw double vengeance on your self: poor Girl,
It was I that cause her sin: a twofold murder
Will lie too heavy on you.
Sure my hand
Has got the Palsy: yet before thou dy'st,
Discharge thy conscience of one crime: thy soul
Will be the lighter: tell me this, what Fiend?
What Devil in humane shape? for man would never
Have tempted thee to sin, it was that betrayed,
Thee to his Lust?
I'm sure you've heard my Father
Contracted me to Balthazar.
What then?
Thinking that he should have been married to me,
I let him have my honour, little dreaming
Of what has happened since: remember once
I saved your life, for that good turn afford
A little Leisure.
Mariana, since
Thou art dishonest, it is impossible
Virtue should rest in women: sure some Saint
Of your deceitful sex has fled to Heaven
With all your women-vertues: otherwise
You would had a share in it.
Ever you strike, one word
Ever I be silent ever: there must come
A day, when you must dye too, when your faults
Must be ripped up, as mine are now: and then
You'll find it written in your Conscience-book,
As first and greatest of your sins, that you
Not only were a parricide, but that
You damned a soul too, which will be required
Of your poor Ghost: then that will quake to see
Me wrapped in flames, when it remembers how
Your anger cause it: rather shut us up
Poor Recluses in some strict Monastery,
Where we may weep, till in our tears we swim
To mercy, with our prayers beg heavens to shower
Their blessings on you.
I will have a Cave,
A darksome Spelunk in some Wilderness,
Where never grass grew, where the baleful tops
Of Yew and Cypress banish Titans light,
Where never harmless bird nor beast doth live
For the foul Airs infection, where the howls
Of wolves and goats (such as your selves are) shall
Joined with the screech owls and the ravens notes
Make but harsh Music to you, all that's there
Shall be an Emblem of that Stygian Grove
You both deserve to enter.
Ought but death
So ne'er so horrid.
How now? is the wind
In this door? what? is she discovered?
Fly hence, who ever thou art, if thou wilt save
Thy soul from spilling, but yet stay, thou art
(If any good be on the earth) an honest
Plain-dealing man, thou told me that, which now
I find too true: but I rejected thee,
Now to my woe I rue it.
Las! Sir! I
Was grieved to see a man of your true worth
So basely cozened, to be cast away
On such a Mammet: why? that very hour,
That luckless hour you came here, I had found
Her whoredom out: she was but thrust on you,
When all refused her: Me(poor man!) her Father
Tempted with gold, did vow her, and when I,
(Because I knew she was a vvhore) rejected
His urged proffer: he resolved to vail her
A Nun, but that your coming did prevent it:
To your undoing,
Knew her father then,
That she was false?
Knew he? it was his plot —
Against my persvvasions (Heavens they know) to wrong
Your noble self, and I for love to virtue
Would then have told you, what you know not, but
You deemed me frantic: I could weep an Ocean
To think how you, Sir, are by them deluded,
But it was your fortune, it is past help.
I prithee
Go to the sacred Church, and bid the Sexton
Evacuate the vaults and monuments
Of the old bones that many years have kept
Their rotten habitation there; and bid him
Make the Church-yard one sepulchre: I'll bring
Bodies enough to fill them; not the plague
Shall be more pestilent, then my vengeance.
Sir,
You've found me true to you, and since my Master
Could be ignoble, Justice and the zeal
I ow to goodness, urges me to aid
You in revenge: Let it be thus.
As how?
I came to you now to crave license, that
At night I might have brought a masque to grace
Your Festival: Let it go on, I'll hire
Men in the Masque to kill her, force her Father
That he may see his error.
Kill him too.
I, Sir, what else!
It was Balthazar she served.
What time of day is it Gaspar?
Early yet,
Near seven a clock.
My business calls away;
You will not fail at night.
Question't no more.
Mean time be sure that none, good Gaspar, speak
With these base strumpets, let none have access.
No! not the wind, Cousin, poor Cousin, had you
Not better have had me then these rude Ruffians?
There s no way now but death.
O! Cousin, yet
When I behold thee, I can fear no peril:
I know thou'lt save me.
'T may be so, but what
Would you do for him, that should save you?
Any thing.
Though many that receive such injuries
As I have done, would be more prone to vengeance,
Then mercy: yet if you will love me, Cousin,
I'll save your life, and kill this same Picarro.
Do it, and by this hand I'll marry thee.
By this same kiss I will, before your maid!
I, Gaspar, save our lives, and marry us both.
Keep close your Conclave, stir not out, I'll plot
A means to save you: the plot is in my brain.
We are alive yet, Catalina, Women
May sometimes overreach the archest villains:
Gaspar, I'll fit you: you may chance expire
Before us: Scorched men use to shun the fire.
SO smile the Heavens upon this holy Act,
That future hours with sorrow chides us not:
Amen! Amen! but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of Joy,
Do then but close our hands with sacred words:
Then Love-devouring death do what he dare:
It is enough, that I but call her mine.
These violent delights have violent ends:
And in their triumph die like fire and powder,
Which, as they kiss, consume: the sweetest honey
Is loathsome in its own deliciousness,
And in the taste, confounds the appetite:
Therefore love moderately, long love doth so,
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Is this the Lady? Oh! so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the flint, or bruise the street,
A Lover may bestride the Gossameres,
That idle in the wanton Summer-air:
And yet not fall: so light is vanity.
Good even to my Ghostly Father!
Daughter,
Thy spouse shall give thee thanks here for us both.
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Varina, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour Air, and let rich Musics tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness, that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Conceit more rich in matter, then in words
Brags of his substance, not of Ornament,
They are but beggars that can count their worth:
But my true Love is grown to such excess,
I cannot sum the sum of half my wealth.
Come! come with me, and holy rites shall give
A fiat to your Love: I'll join those hands
(As you have done your hearts) in Hymens bands.
This is his lodging, I believe, he's scarce
Out of his bed yet: walk, Sir, down the lane,
While I go in, and train him out: but then
Be sure you do dispatch him: least he wound you,
And grown enraged with some petty scratch
Shred your subdued Carcass into mamocks:
You know his voice? I•ll go.
Be expedite.
This way he went, they told me: Well o'retaken:
Were you at prayers, or at confession lately?
Why Sir, I hope you are no Priest, Picarro?
I must be yours, I come to shred your corps:
And send it minced to Pluto's baleful table:
You're welcome, Sir, but say, I play the Butcher,
Strike you down first, and ripping up your offal,
Should throw them to Diana's yelping troops?
I know your quarrel.
Gramercy hand! I've plaid the Butcher now:
And felled the Beast: procumbit hume boss!
While thou hast sense left, cry for mercy, think,
Think what a horrid, sacrilegious sin
Thou hast committed: doth not thy soul tell thee
(Now when thy faults appear) that thou art damned?
Without redemption?
I hope not, as yet
Can't I remember what I've injured you in:
That you should take my life; my last nights act
Was nought but truth.
I know that, but it was thou
That had her honour, that bereav'dst her of
Her virgin purity: and when thou shedst
For all thy Crimes one drop, for this weep seas:
They'll scarce wash white thy spotted soul again.
Did Mariana tell you this?
Thy conscience
Tells thee that this is truth.
It is not truth.
Trust me now dying, she's as chaste, as she
Was born for me, it is one Chaves, that
I did stand here to kill; he whored her: O!
Some Angel keep thy soul in, till, thy tongue
Reveal that villain, Chaves? he's a stranger,
I know him not: you'll glory, faithless Mistress!
That you have made me kill your enemy:
My friend, that stood to right me: but that Chaves,
I'll find him out, though he were hid in mists,
And quartered in the Clouds, my searching eye
Shall make a quick discovery, and enrol
Him in the list of my engaged foes;
But in this labyrinth I'll have a Clue
To guide my steps unto his final fall.
Some friendly whirlwind hurl me hence with speed,
Into some desert wilderness, which woman
Yet ne'er polluted with her steps; — they fly me:
Good creatures, stay! forgive me: sure this tongue
Has injured you: good? (can that adjunct be
Fit for a woman): if you know your selves
Bankrupt of female vices, to be heirs
Of your lost sexes goodness: pray, you tell me,
And I'll adore you with that reverence,
I would do Saints, be proud to say hereafter,
I met two virtuous women.
Surely Sir,
You have received some monstrous injury
From woman; makes you out of charity
With all that sex; yet be not so, your mother
Was but a woman.
Very true, you seem
Endued with sense; had you but known the wrong
I have received from one, that should have been
More honest: you will then, I know, confess,
I speak not without cause.
You're married, Sir?
Yes!
And it is your wife has injured you?
But tell me, did you love her?
Just as you've seen the Ivy cleave to the Oak,
Or hony-bearing Woodbine to the Thorns,
So dear she was to me.
And can that fact,
How foul soever, change that love into
So dire a hatred? Look but on the King
Of beasts, the Lion, when his Lioness
Sins with the Leopard; though he storm, yet when
Sh'as washed her self, he strait forgets it: sure
Your wife has washed her spotted soul in tears
For her delict, take pity on her: I,
Although a stranger, must persuade you.
Sooner
To set the world on fire, then to forget
Her faults.
I knew a damosel once, both young
And beauteous, that offended, she was wed,
And ever her Nuptials had been false.
My wife:
Sure't was my wife.
Nay, more: to cloak her fault
She got another to supply her room
On the wedding night.
You know our story: sure't
Could be none else but she.
And yet her husband,
Pitying her youth, did pardon her.
A man,
Moulded of patience, or of baseness, but
What did she then?
Why? He immured her up
In an observant Nunnery, to pay
The tribute of her sin with Penitence;
And she's a convert now: do so, when next
You see your wife, take that good course, and do not
Damn her and your self too!
Alas! My wife
Committed more then this, for when her throat
Was underneath my sword; she feared not then
To irritate Heavens vengeance with a lie,
A wondrous lie, you see yon Gentleman.
Yes, what of him?
That injured man, she told me
Was he, that had enjoyed her, made me kill him,
And yet Heavens justice, gave his dying lips
Leave to reveal her partner.
Know you him?
His name is Chaves!
Chaves?
Judge you Mistress:
Merits she not a Chiliad of deaths?
Her own tongue, Sir, shall be her judge; she does.
What's Pluto's gates blown op, and Cerberus gone?
How came these Harpies?
I have run, Picarro,
A weary race in sin, and the last post
Being almost mine, I falter; I have stolen
Forth of my Chamber, with intent to leave
Your loathed sight for ever: to have fled
With my loved Chaves hence; but that your words,
Thought of my sin, the fear of Dis and vengeance
Has made a convert of me; kill me now:
I die repentant.
Since thou ask thy death,
I will not be so cruel, thou shalt live
To be my pities Trophy: could I pardon
Thy fault, would you be honest?
O, Sir, do not
Make a poor contrite, now more miserable,
My life's to me grown odious: Sir, your thoughts
Run on my slaughter, but my minde's on Heaven:
Aver it not, one word of life may hinder
My resolution: you have seen the palm
(That sweet date-bearing tree) hang down its head
(Is it were to beg an Ax) toward the Earth,
To cut it up, when void of fruit and moisture
It seems a scorn unto its neighbour trees:
Of me it is a true Emblem, I have lost
My fruit of Virtue, am become the shame
Of womanhood: do justice, rid the Earth
Of such an impious burden.
Wretched soul!
Thou shalt not die.
I do desire it.
Come!
Take up your vail, and follow me.
To death.
Yes! Mariana, die upon his Course
Thou made me murder.
One stab more: so now
Methinks I'm well, lend we your prayers, and shed
A tear for me, Picarro!
Yes! I'll help
T'imbalm thy Corps with my salt drops: but now
Since thou art dying, for the love I bore thee
While I did think thee virtuous: discharge
Thy soul of such a Ponderous crime, reveal
That Chaves to me.
No, I must not, Jove
Will be incensed against me more in peace
With all I'll yield this little puff of breath;
This flash of air, my life, to the hands of death:
Him I forgive that most hath wronged you, yet
That you shall know, you are beholding to him;
It is he that saved your life at my request:
My blood converts to jelly, I am cold
As Mrable-dew within: my minute comes,
Close my poor eyes, Picarro, say I die
A penitent, that's all. Oh!
Receive her, Saints,
To your society: how sweet she looks?
She's yet alive.
O no! Her breath is gone
Surely she is, it cannot be such beauty
Should rest in a cold Carcass: I could wish
It were undone; or that my hand had been
Blasted, ever it had struck her: had thou carried
Virtue in this fair mansion, thou had made me
Too happy! —
Sir, you will not kill me too?
No! I have done enough, yet more blood must
Follow: help, take her off the sordid Earth,
Too good to bear her, and then bear her in:
Be private as the night is.
I will, Sir.
So, is he gone? This Catalina I
Have done to purchase my enfranchisement:
Infuse some balsam to my bleeding wounds,
Distilled by some divine Paeonian hand:
And now, Picarro, will I seek thy death,
And unto Chaves plot a quick escape:
Then to the Church or Chapel we will hit
To make complete our wished felicity.
A little further, Sir, I left him: Master,
Here's Signior Chaves. Heavens protect me, see
My Master's slain.
By whom?
I know not, Sir:
I'm by this reason destitute of means
To help me, here a stranger: please you, Sir,
To grace me with employment: I should study
To do you faithful service.
Friend, I care no,
And if I do.
Sir, I am now arrived
At my long wished for port of bliss and wealth;
The holy rites are done; she is my own;
It is the greatest now of my misfortune,
That yours legs still behind.
Our love returns
Thanks to your wish: Heavens crown your love with joy;
Long live in peace and bliss; and may your issue
Puzzle Arithmetic to number them;
Accept my thoughts, good friend, they're good, though they
Tumble from my distracted brain; if ought
Can add unto thy happiness, but wish it,
And my affection shall cry Amen!
Your love commands my duty to return
Whole Floods of thanks; your wish is so complete
'T needs no addition. Sir, what fellow's that?
May he be conscious to our secrecies?
Yes! He is trusty, it is an honest fellow.
Gaspar has been with me, and full of tears
Told me, since last night w'are discovered;
Your Mistress had run her lives hazard, had not
Gaspar—
Relieved her, is it not so? That fellow
Was born to do me good.
Her jealous spouse
Perceiving that she did affect some other,
Had slain her, had not she begged life till night,
And then we in our Masque must kill him.
Brave!
Excellent! It is beyond imagination;
Come, let us in and make us ready.
Well!
I'll wing my feet, until my zeal can find
Picarro out, and unto him reveal
My Masters secrets; save his life, and then
He will kill Chaves; so I shall revenge
His (slighted) perjury; and if I live
Chaves shall die, my brother I'll forgive.
Come, come! My noble Lads! The time grows on,
The Masquers will come by and by; here hold!
There's 40. Ducats; spare you no mans life
I bid you kill.
I warrant you, Sir, we are old dog at it, they die if they had Cats lives.
Well said my Trojans! I shall live to make
You walk the streets in Velvet, Plush, and Scarlet;
Fie! on the Dutch serges and these fustian doublets;
Men of your quality to walk in such
Vulgar accoutrements?
We are Soldiers, Sir.
I'll have you all made Captains, go behind:
And when I hem, be nimble as the Eels:
Away my bullies.
tell me treach'rous Gaspar!
What evil have I merited of you,
That you should be so perjured as to plot
My ruin purposely to free that Strumpet?
Should it be true, I might well stile thee villain:
I scarce believe it.
It is a lye beyond
The Devils forging, think Sir, had my heart
Been so malicious, I would have appeared
Again before you? you may easily see
The motive of their feigning this in hopes
By blaming me to save themselves, to make you
Beholding to them for the dear engagement
Of freeing you from danger, more for spite
That I love you and hate them: they imagined
Thus to betray me to your rage: receive
Dear Sir, my weapon, if you can conceit
That I can be so impious, kill me, do it
I do beseech you.
I should first conceive
All false and base before thy loyalty:
Thou hast been always honest true, to me.
Villany't self would not deceive your goodness:
Is not one Signior Gaspar here?
He's here;
What would you friend?
My Master, Signior Chaves
Commends him greatly to you, and desires
To speak one word with you.
Chaves? what's he?
One of the Masquers.
Though a stranger to you,
Because I see you are a Gentleman;
I'll save your life: know Cozened man, the masque
Is nothing but a dance unto your death:
That Gaspar has betrayed you to that Chaves
That whored your wife: he doth expect without,
To kill you: it is enough, farewell, be wise
Thou now art grown to that vast height in sin,
That Dis would gape and swallow thee, but that
The prime Fiends fear that thy vile treachery
(Should thou come thither) would so far out-shine
As doth Hyperion in his fullest Orb,
The smallest Played; so they should not be
Respected among th'infernal Regiments.
Thy crafts are now disclosed thy faults ripped up.
I'll send thee strait with a deserved doom,
To keep society with the Harpyan troops,
And Fiends of that Tartarian Republic.
Still you're so credulous; just Judges use
Ever they condemn, to hear both parties speak;
I understanding Chaves to have wronged
You in your wife, that you might vindicate
The highest stile in vengeance-book, I went
And told him all, he has related, promised
You should be slain: but this was my intent,
Only to train him hither to his death,
That as they both had sinned, they both might suffer
Vengeance together.
Why knew I not this?
It was my intent you should have known't, he only
Anticipated my relation.
That you should know, I lie not—hem! hem!
What are these?
Why these are they I hired to do the act,
To send them both to hell: tell me, my lads
Of steel, did I not swear you to decide
One Chaves into Atoms?
Yes! sound truth!
And whom 't should please Picarro to command?
Yes! on our honest words!
Lo! here comes Chaves masqued-hem!
There stand the men Picarro, that must kill him.
Treason! I'm murdered, yet scorn to perish.
Unvengeanc'd, you shall know I have a spirit.
Eugenia's curses hang upon my arm,
Or Virgins tears have glued my sword so fast,
I can't unsheathe it: Oh! my strength decays.
Tremble not earth that thou must bear me, see
Engenia waited on by glorious Troops
Of constant lovers, comes t'upbraid me with
My perjury, but I'll not hear it. Oh!
O Sir, you thought you could deflower our virgins
Without revenge, in Balthasar's destruction
You did triumph; and you have slain Picarro;
Look! he lies weltering in his gore; I hope
You'll pay me nobly for betraying him?
You shall enjoy your Mistress I she expects
Within your presence!
Ha! Picarro slain?
My zeal has been too tardy; I have lost
My share of honour in this noble act.
Heavens bless me, whore's that villain that durst draw
This noble blood? villain this hand shall be
Thy Executioner! Treason! 's hell broke loose?
Has Pluto sent these Bandogs out? yet take
One thrust from my revengeful arm, twill make
Some expiation for my noble friend,
And these my wounds! Alas! my hand's grown weak,
Yet will I lay me by his noble corps,
We'll brethren be in death: and know our Ghosts
Shall make you run distracted! poor Varina!
As my last pledge of love, in streams of blood
Dropped from my own veins, will I drink thy health:
Farewell my Dear; may heaven commiserate
Thy sadness, and protect thee. Oh!
'S This he
That stole Varina to his lust?
It is he,
It is Roderiguez, Chaves his Comrade
In all his villainies; it is he that slew
Praepontio at his wedding, and conveyed
Varina to her ruin, and his lust.
This Lady is a stranger
May mine eye
Now see the ruin of this perjured villain!
Now my disguise is useless, Heaven hath owned
My cause at length, and its due vengeance showered
Upon his perjured head; Heavens plagues are sure.
Perfidious Chaves,
That cursed hand that helped
Thee to fulfil thy lust, now worked thy fall:
Balthasar's death, Picarro's wrong is now
Retaliate in this thy ruin: but stay,
Some vengeance fall from my provoked hand;
Eugenia gives thee this, and this; nay take
One more for her account, perfidious slave!
As if thy perjury could not wrong enough
Eugenia, and the honour of our house;
Thou must seduce my brother to thy part,
Make him copartner in thy crimes; for him,
For Roderiguez sake, I'll give thee this:
Nor shall my Fathers grief unpunished go;
One stab for him: me thinks my rage now sits
Triumphant in her element; while I
Feed it with wounds, and make his blood repay
Both principal and Interest of my tears!
We thank you Gaspar, and Picarro both,
For this our bloody banquet. He! who's this?
My brother! Cursed villains! who durst be
So cruel a Phlebotomist, to strike
One vein of his? dear brother! might I fetch
Prometheus-like, new fire from the heavenly excel
To put in this pure Carcass: could my breath
Infuse new life into thee, I would lay
My self upon thy lips, and kiss, till all
My vigours transmigrated into thee:
But since the heavens are deaf, and death will deign
No audience to my wish, thy sister shall
Lay her thy Bedfellow: and with one stroke
In Crimson-streams swim with thee unto bliss. Oh!
More objects still of ruin? this will be
A bloody Poppet-play: —
This way he went.
Now fortune do thy worst, I scorn thy frown,
Deride at those contractions on thy brow:
Speak louder with thy threats, and spare not me,
Varina now will live in spite of thee.
Varina! welcome home, General give you joy:
Faith! it is not handsome thus to steal a wedding:
When shall I have my Gloves? Picarro, see!
Varina bids you joy.
She claims my thanks.
Saw you my husband lately, Cousin?
There!
There he's in bed with Chaves.
Help, she falls!
Faith it is no matter: this is she, whose skill
Helped Chaves to his Mistress; and so fooled
Balthazar of his hopes: it was her Counsel
Betrayed poor Mariana; it was her head
That forged all the plots against your honour.
Excellent Gaspar! do see you're honest!
Above all malice, thou shalt share estates
With me, thou dost deserve it, friend.
All this
I've done for you, illustrious Sir, and now
Reward me how you please: would I have been
False, Sir, I could have had that mans estate,
But your love is more worth then all the worlds:
What doom must Mariana, Sir, expect?
She had escaped, and I by chance did find her,
Stealing to Chaves tabern, and in rage
I sent her to the Devil for a pawn.
Ha! Am I cozened? you did well, it was Justice,
The Law does free you, for you only slew.
Your wife, and her Adulterer.
O Gaspar!
What means this murderer?
Hem! shallow fool!
Glory in Mariana's death? you may
Get a new wife so beautiful.
Slave! Bastard!
Hast thou no spark, or jot of goodness left?
The salvyge Arab, or the horn-foot Satire
May but commence thy pupils, cruel slave!
Who ever begot thee, sure thy mother drew
Her blood from the Bassarides, or was
Of near alliance to that cursed Hag,
That into fritters sliced her only son:
Hell was thy Cradle, and some Harpy did
Perform the office of a wretched nurse:
Thy heart can study nought but treachery,
But! Oh! I feel the angry hand of death,
Gripe my small arteries, and Atropos
Hath bit my thread of life. Forgive me Heavens!
Treason! Oh! Treason!
Look me dead, fond man
To vex thee more, it was I that first betrayed
Thy wife to Chaves: I that did procure
Balthazar to have murdered thee, and now
At last, when I was all disclosed, came over
Thy stupid brain, only in one thing crossed,
(In Mariana's death) my plots has hit,
They're all o're-reach'd by one poor Bastards wit.
Is not this Mariana? sure it is.
O horrid spectacle! what wretched hand
Durst to attempt this execrable fact!?
Chaves, Picarro, and Balthazar slain?
Poor Roderiguez, and Varina too?
What unknown Lady's this? (methinks her face
Speaks her allied to Roderiguez!) Oh!
Let me but kiss those lips, and send my soul
With thine into Elysium to dwell:
Lo! in these windows that let forth thy life,
I power the helpless balm of my poor eyes:
Avaunt! thou dreadful minister of hell!
Thy power could touch but their mortality:
Their souls thou coldest not hurt: Avaunt, begone:
If heaven have any grievous plague in store,
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
O! let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
In showers of fiery Vengeance on thy head.
Behold, the pattern of thy Butcheries!
See! Villain! See! how my Poor Chaves wounds
Open their congeald mouths, and bleed a fresh:
Blush! blush! thou lump of baseness! Bastard! blush!
Within whose breast more snakes and Hydra's dwell
Then in the Stygian and Lernaean Dens;
For it is thy presence that exhales the blood
From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells;
May Heaven with lightning fry thee into death,
Or let the inhiant Earth Devour thee quick,
As it doth swallow up mp Chaves blood.
Cousin, you know no Rules of Charity.
Villain! thou know no Law of God or Man.
No beast so fierce, but knows some touch of pity.
I slew them not.
Then say they were not slain.
But dead they are, and Devilish Slave by thee.
I did not kill your Chaves,
Then he lives.
Nay, he is dead, and by Picarro slain.
Take heed, that monstrous lye will choke you; did
Not you kill my dear Chaves?
I grant; yes!
Dost grant me? he was only fit for Heaven.
And thou unfit for any place, but hell,
He lives that loves you better; then he could.
Name him.
Your friend and servant, faithful Gaspar.
Where is he?
Here.
What? dost thou spit at me?
Would it were mortal poison for thy sake:
Out of my sight thou dost infect mine eyes.
Thy eyes sweet Cousin, have infected mine.
Would they were Basiliscks to strike thee dead.
That you may know, how little I respect
Your love; receive this token from my arm.
What shall we doe now, Signior?
You must swear
Balthazar killed Mariana, Chaves
Balthazar; Chaves and Varina fell
By mad Picarro's arm; then in revenge
Roderigvez killed Picarro: this is brave,
Twill hold out water well; but whore's this wench?
This devil Catalina? heavens! she's gone!
W'are all betrayed, undone.
O noble Patron!
Behold the ruin of the stateliest structure,
Dame Nature, ever built by those cursed villains
My daughter!
Comfort Signior! Let your reason
Put reins unto your passion! Courage!
What? comes Gaspar now to comfort me?
Came he right now to sing a ravens note,
Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers,
And thinks he that the chirping of a wren
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Can chase away the first conceived sounds?
Hide not thy poison with such sugared words;
Lay not thy hands on me, forbear I say,
Their touch affrights me with a serpents sting;
Thou baleful messenger! out of my sight;
Upon thy eye-balles murderous Tyranny
Sits in grim majesty to fright the world:
Look not upon me, for thy eyes are wounding;
Yet doe not go a way; come Basilicks,
And kill the innocent Gazer with thy sight;
For in the shade of death I shall find joy?
In life, but double death, now she is dead;
Come hither, Alvarez, and fright thy soul
With a new Gorgon; see! see! where thy son
Lies weltering in his gore!
Who did this murder?
He, that foul monster, and this cursed villain
With that, came rushing in and slue your daughter—
First, then Picarro killing him, was slain
By these two varlotts:
Quick, lay hold on them!
First with strong ropes we'll bind them to the rack;
And with hot Irons extort their sparkling Eyes.
Sir, credit not this villain! by his means
Chaves enjoyed your daughter; it was his brain
That hammered all this mischief; and at length
When Mariana would not own his love,
With his own hand he stabbed her! is it not so?
Bastard!
Confide not in these feigned Comments! —
Confess you varlots, or I'll rack you!
He
Hired us unto it; and first by his Command
Fell this man Chaves by our impious hands:
And after, Roderiguez: then this Lady
Seeing her Brother slain, did with her bodkin
Open her veins and laid her by his side;
Next this Varina, whose young spouse was lately
Massacred here, now swouns into her death;
Then by this mans command Picarro fell,
And by his own hand Mariana, thus
Ended this Tragic Scene.
It is doubtless true;
But it was Picarro that slew Balthazar.
Am I betrayed? clap, thunder at my fall,
For Fame shall speak me for as sly a Bastard,
As Sin ever viewed; you'll laugh when you doe see
My limbs distended on the torturing Rack:
But you shall lose your aim; since I must die,
I'll please my self in choosing of my death.
But know, Alonzo, it was your baseness, that
Urged me to this revenge; which you must feel
A little nearer; you your self shall fall.
Curse on you all! this hand shall now set free
My self from your intended tyranny.
Hold! hold his hands! we'll him in piecemeal tear,
And throw his carcass for the Dogs to feed on;
The earth ne'er bore a monster like him.
Hold!
Keep life in him, till we complete his torments,
That his black eyes may see the vengeance due
To his deserts; which plagues shall studied be.
It is past, I'm going now, my blood is pale,
It comes thin from my heart-strings: may you all
Perish, alone the Bastard doth not fall.
Convey these bodies in, our grief shall swell,
And study torments that may equal Hell.
NOw we have done, 'ts the greatest of our Fears,
You'll say, W'ave led you hither by the Ears
To see some strange Conceit: But when you came
You found our 'Spitall-wits, both Blind and Lame:
Faith! if w'ave made you Fools! it were best you be
Silent, that you may have more Company.
If any injury be done, We doe
Acknowledge, it is only done to you:
We cooked it for your Palats, if the Meat
Disrelish, don't indict us for a Cheat:
We hoped to please: if ought disgust, We wish
You'd think it but an ill-cookt Spanish Dish.
Your Patience claims our Thanks: Let GASPAR have
Your Favours hang like Scutcheons o'er his Grave:
His Death hath Justice satisfied: from you
We doe (on his behalf) for Mercy sue.
Let not your hasty Censures raise those stones
Which doe Inurn him, or disturb his Bones,
And throw his Ashes in the air, be wise,
Lest his proud Dust rise, and put out your eyes.
Bridle your Passion: it were sin, your breath
Should sting his Name, and blast him after Death.
My Fancy prompts Me, that your Votes will give
(Attested by your hands) a large Reprieve
Against Envie's doom, and that his Genius shall
Not be condemned as quite Apocryphal:
If any strain's unsav'ry, or don't fit
Your Humour, say it is a Bastard-Wit:
It is our hopes in Country, Court, and City,
If not your Love, We shall deserve your Pity.

Critic forbear the Stage, what do you here?
I come to judge your Play, not for to jeer.
Although you know to judge, yet fancy rules
Which makes the best of Critics knowing fools.
Prologue you censure boldly, and condemn
The able Critic amongst the Wou'dbe men.
Who to describe from us, asks no more skill
Then to observe, how twixt each Act they will
Twirl on the toe, picking their teeth, and dance
Then, sometimes whistle Ala mode de France.
The Play being done, they on each other look
To read in one another faces how it took.
None daring (though supposed valiant) for to say
It was well Acted, or it is a good Play.
When one non Guilty of ability
To judge, a•k•th his Friends advise, when he
Antickly answers (faith) with little pains
He could write better, yet ne'er break his brains▪
To which, his Lady with an easy Faith
And little judgment, answers, and saith,
Such foolish fellows as have writ before
Should you but write (dear friend) would ne'er write more▪
At which he smiles, and cries fie, fie, there be
No question some can write as well as he.
Which she must doubt, whilst he denies it so
As if he knew it were truth, but would not know
These art your Crit•ck Wou'dbes rail at the Poet
For writing sense (poor souls) and they not know it.
When we, where there's a fault proclaim't it is true,
But never do it till judgement finds it due.
Distinguish then twixt Wo'udbe wits, and us
That dare do Justice, though miraculous.
Prologue farewell, if you deserve applause,
The knowing Critic shall maintain your cause.
Now unto you that dare be just, and judge
Without partiality, we shall not grudge
To be chid gently, and shall study mend
Such faults as you shall say our Author penned.
If 'has writ nonsense, thus he bid me say,
He writ by'ch spirit, just as the (Brethren pray
TI's certain truth, the Letters, this day, from our
Valiant General (to our young King) affirm
A Cessation Of Arms, on both fides,
For these three months.
Can you guess the reason,
Our General having (as is supposed) much the
Advantage, should he give them battle.
Believe it, our General
Hath to much honesty, mixed with knowledge, to
Condescend, to any thing can prejudice
Our King and Country.
He's a man, no one loves virtue can suspect,
I hear his Letter hath struck a drooping melancholy
In the King.
Ti's truth, but the cause was not our Generals actions
But his Council, who (as ti's talked) dissuades him from
Loving the fair Aurelia: as a match too far beneath him.
Ti's probable, for questionless he loves her much,
And pity ti's the virtuous fair one hath not dowry
Equal her birth, and merit.
Which if she had, I know no reason, but she might
Make a wife, for any he that's mortal—
me thinks, thou droop'st as if thy spirits
Were with thy fortunes lost: both might be raised
Again, would but the subject please to let
His King command.
He ill deserves the name of subject that should
Refuse to obey your just commands.
O Sebastian, What appears just to us, not seasoned
To the palate of the giddy headed multitude,
To them's unjust.
It is not what we, but what they will that must.
Wher's Aurelia thy fair daughter?
So please your Majesty, the Lady Artesia and she,
Wait in the presence.
Go call them in: Gallants, you hear our Army is—
Like to have a ••ea••ing ••me, the General hath my
Consent, for a three months Cessation.
Sir. the General (we know)
Can nothing act but what must visibly appear
(To men of reason) much advantageous, to your
Self, and Country.
We doubt it not. How doth the fair Artesia—
What not yet in love? me thinks our Courtiers
Are grown dull, but it is Delirus (son to our
Noble General) is the man: Have I
Not gue'st unhappily?
That's as it proves Sir.
May it prove well as I wish it.
And may your Majesty in your love prove happy.
So wishes my Aurelia: if I mistake not —
My Aurelia: See, see, he kisses too close, as
Contracted lovers, when fore't to part.—
Aurelia: harbour not within thy Ivory breast, that
Traitor to thy beauty, Melancholy; he's an ill guest,
Not to be rooted out (if settled) but with a certain
Ruin of that fair fabriek. Ther's not (within
The compass of my power) that thing, thy virtue
Can command, I will not carefully see performed,
By my chaste love I will.
Royal Sir, low as the earth, I thank you, you,—
That can pity in distress, a thing not worth
Your noble thoughts.
Arise, Aurelia: Reach me a chair there—
Artesia, stay.
When you are Queen perhaps I may obey—
Call back Artesia. Artesia, what desert
Your friends? come we must have your opinion too,—
Reach another chair here.
Pardon great Sir, the humblest of your handmaids.
Come sit I say, when you are Queen; Artesia
Will obey, and as I am your King I do expect
No less from you.
Great Sir, the practice of my obedience,
Shall be my joyful study.
Show it in this, sit down.
Your will, shall be my law.
Gentlemen, pray tell me (you that are Landlords
To the Commonwealth) what creature living
(Dares own me for his King) can justly envy
At the favours, I bestow on this fair Virgin—
What all silent? Antonio,
What say you?
Sir, I should be loath to stand engaged, for that many
Headed beast (the commonwealth) yet confidently
Dare say, ther's not, a Noble breast, would not
(With me) rejoice to see, such virtue matched.
This is gross flattery—
Artesia, what say you?
Sir, I am so far from diveing into the thoughts of
Others, I hardly know my own.
But I can shrewdly guess them, and ne'er cast a figure.—
All leave us, but wait in the next room.
What are we Princes, bove other men, more then in,
Our care? I do remember (blessed be his memory)
My Royal Father, would lay his hand upon my head
And say, boy, wed not thy self to pleasure, it is
An insinuating evil; which once embraced, and of
Thy heart possession got will ulcerate the body,
And if not timely cured, may infect the soul.
It is care, not pleasure, must preserve thy crown
Which if thoud'st have, upon thy head, sit fast
Study to know thy subjects, and so rule
Not to be thought too wise, not yet their fool.
It was good council, which to my best of power, Isle labour
To find out, and follow; here Bellicosus (our General)
Writes, my love to fair Aurelia is generally known
What if it be? and that considering her birth, and
Beauty, she may deserve my pity not my bed,
And that the event may prove dangerous to act,
What the subject may make his pretence of quarrel:
(I had best have the banes of matrimony, ask in
Every Parish Church in my dominion, with the hands
Of the Parson, and Church-wardens, for the approbation,
Of the lawfulness of my choice) but Bellicosus,
Is honest, and carefully instructs us for the best, as
One whose gray hairs, pleads an insight, in those
State affairs, my unexperien't youth, ne'er understood.
Besides, it was my Fathers charge, on his sick
Bed, I should 'bove all, take his advice,
As one, near us in blood
Whom he hath found, entirely faithful to his Crown.
It is ill to loose a subject, hardly to be found.
You' powers above instruct my tender youth
Love her (by all the Gods above) I do more then
My life; Nor can I find a possibility, to spend
The remnant of my days, on this frail earth,
In peace, without I do enjoy the fair
Aurelia for my wife, what though she be poor
In what our earthly fools adore, more then
There Gods, she hath, in her Chaste breast
Virtue enough, for to redeem, forth from
Captivity, 'bove half the world.
Court dross, that love it Aurelia I am thine
As much from thee, entales thy virtue mine. —
But Snap dost thou still continue thy dissolution
That there is, things mortal, and in Coats, like
Women, that can deserve my embraces.
Pardon me, Sir, I spoke not in the plural number.
Plural, Snap; what's that
Why plural signifies; more then one,
Plural, may be many
Plural, many, I shall remember plural, an excellent
Word, what is that one, thou would make happy
In my acquaintance.
She is a Lady, Nobly born; of a high Spirit,
And heir to great Estate
Let her be as Nobly born as she will, I care not a pin
And for her high spirit, her's that shall take it down—
What may her state be, say you.
Some five thousand pounds, per annum.
Snap, I understand you well, per annum
Is by some kinswoman of hers, is it not so
Sir, you mistake per annum is meant
Five thousand pound a year
A very trifle Snap, but because she is thy friend
And I fear thou hast acquainted her with my good
Parts, I may be merciful, and pity her.
I thank you Sir, I hope, she will deserve it
It may be so Snap; what may her name be
The Ladies name is Artesia Daughter, and heir to the
Late deceased Lord Endimion
Heir me no heirs, when will her father dye
He hath been Coffind under ground this twelve-moneth
Nay then he may be dead, but Snap, you might have
Told me so.
You know her lodging.
I do Sir,
Some time to day Il'try her wit.
You will find her, well worded, and discreet.
For that Snap; I shall word with her, I believe, and
For discretion, those that know me, know I have
My share, Snap; hath not my Taylor done his part
How do I look.
Singular well Sir, for ill' be sworn their's none looks
Like you.
Snap; I do believe thee hark in thine ear—
It is without question, he intends to make the fair
his Queen.
It is doubtless so, And though the Generals letter
Some what displeased him, I find his resolution fixed
Which hath strangely wrought, an unaccustomed
Mirth in him.
By all the Gods, I joy in it
He loves not virtue, doth not. In the name of—
Jupiter, what may yon' monster be
If a Baboon, he's of the largest size I ever saw
We know the beast, his name is Dull. Goldcalfe—
One (however ill bestowed) The fates have pleased
To shower down wealth in abundance, I wonder much
Sebastians fortunes, being sunk, he begs not
This same fool of the King, He hath an Estate
Few Noble men in our Land, can purchase
With their own
Now by the gods, it were but Justice, lets move it to
The King, Sebastians Noble mind will never
Condescend to do it
By Jupiter, Il' join it'h motion, Engenio, thou
Know the Gilded calfe
Prethe accost him, I long to see
How his inside doth, with his out agree
Snap; They have spied me,
And come to do me reverence.
Mr. Dull Goldcalfe; your most undoubted friend
I shall desire you take acquaintance, of this my
Noble friend, I am confident he will deserve
Your love.
It may be so
Noble Sir, Although a stranger to your worth,
Yet the Noble Character fame gives of you, hath
Encouraged me, to become, an humble suitor, you
Would vouchsafe, to list me amongst, those hap
Mortals, you dain to stile your servants.
Snap; This is a large Complement,
Not suddenly to be answered
It is stale and out of fashion.
Say you so? Sir though I understand by my man
Snap; your complement be stale and out of
Fashion, yet for this Gentleman's sake (I honour
With the name of friend) your suit is granted
Right Noble Sir, I thank you
And I in his behalf.
Mr. Dull Goldcaulse, the confirmation of your
Health, is joy to me.
Noble Antonio, I give you plural thanks,
And gentlemen, I am glad I met you, I must
Trouble you on friday next to my wedding,
Snap; where shall it be?
For that we shall contrive
Please you to make us happy, in your brits name
And place of being, we shall be proud to waite on you.
Tell my friends her name, I have forgot it, I never
Saw her yet gentlemen
How ner'e saw your bride, and yet your match so near
No faith not I, but Snap; will show me where
She is, anon.
Snap; pray what may this creature be, that can
Deserve so high, and rich a match, as this my
Nob'e friend.
It is the Lady Artesia, daughter, and heir to the
Late deceased Lord Endimion.
And yet Snap; you told me he was dead
Noble friend he is
Say you so, it was more then I understood
And Snap; hath done you justice, she is the only
Match, for wealth, and beauty, our country doth afford
You will not fail to come then
Name but the place, and we'll attend you
Snap; we'll have it at the Cake-house
Behind the Hospital
Not for the world Sir, a Lady of her birth and breeding
Keep her weedding at a Cake house, it would be evil
Disparagement to you both
Why Snap; my father (I have heard him say)
Kept his wedding there, and he thought himself
As good a man, as she.
Tic true Sir, but now the fashions altered
Where lies the fashion now
Her house will be the only place
Gentlemen, at her house a friday. I will about
It straight, Snap show me the way—
I waite your worship.
He scopes well, with tossing in a blancket, if he
Dare attempt this, her high spirit, will have no mercy on him.
It is but the prologue to the misery, he is like to endure
His ignorance will be his daily punishment.
By Jupiter, I neither hear, nor in my travels
Ever saw his fellow, in other shape then in
Long coats, and bells, what is his man, he seems
To be a cunning knave.
The man hath better blood runs in his veins, then
His ridiculous master, and questionless, aims at his
Private ends, in this same borrowed shape
Of serving-man.
May he prosper in it, more then a bare subsistence,
For the fool's to much, come Gentlemen it is time
We did attend the King.
Then lead the way.—
This is no flattering glass: if true, my judgment
Cannot find, Aurelia's face, five thousand pounds
A year, more beautiful then mine. I have been
Much flattered, if this face speak, not it self the
Best it'h Court; And at that rate, I have sufficiently
Tyraniz'd over my poor Idolaters, mong'st whom
I must find out one, that must gladly act, what
Ever I prescribe,
Artesia must not, cannot see
Aurelia in the Throne of Majesty
And I a poor neglected looker on,
My fortune, and my beauty
Speak me (aloud) I do deserve the best.
And shall a beggars brat, skip over my head, and
I, when it is to late, whine out my griefs, and
Say I might have done. Aurelia, you may be
Queen of Faries, or of some petty Island in the
Other world,
This is to hot for thee, thy eyes strike fire
When thoroughly quenched, mine then, will blaze the higher.
What monster have we here —
I perceive the Lady is at leasute, by being alone
Prethe remember my service to her, and tel her I
Will find some other time to wait on her.
By no means Sir, you shame your self for ever if
You speak not to her; could you have found a
Better time then when she is at leisure.
Sa•st thou me so Snap; Hem, hem, Lady:
Would it were out.
Would what were out?
Nay ther's it; I cannot tell that;
Snap; tell her my name, and riches and that
I love her, for my good parts they'll speak for themselves.
This you must do your self;
Or be for ever shamed.
Sir, have you any thing to say to me?
Now, now, now.—
Lady my name is Mr. Dull Goldcalfe, of an
Ancient family; my father, was above fourscore
When he dyed; his arms is a sleeping calfe,
You may see them Lady in every Tavern window,
I have heard my father say they cost him
Forty shillings, my Estate is infinite; for my parts
Judge you, if you have any wit.
So much, I have, I think I know your business,
You come to proffer your self to be my jester.
She pays him home—
No i'll be sworn Lady, Snap; can tell
I am in earnest,
Sir I am indisposed, to entertain a fool,
But if you dare be troublesome, i'll have you
cudgeld out of doors.
Why Lady, take you me for a fool
And a coward.
Else she mistakes abominably —
If you do Lady, I can dispense with my conscience
Choose my side, and with my money buy a Colonels
Place, entertain half a score cashiered,
Officers that shall be at my command,
Can I not Snap,
But when their monies done, (you feed
Them with) they will command you.
To give them more money, i'st not so snap?
Very right.
But Snap, because they shall command but seldom
I'll give them swinging sums at a time, ther's divers
Of my kinsmen have don't before me
Lady, how do you like my way?
So well, that if you do not find it out quickly
I'll make my foot man show it you by the head
And shoulders.
Thanks Noble Lady, Snap and I know
The way very well, no ceremony Lady to your servant;
But you mistake me Lady, I mean the
Way of being (for your preferment) a Colonel,
For no disparagement to you Lady, I have
Heard that Colonels are no Cobblers, nor
Tinkers, but companions for Princes,
Be they not Snap?
This Ass is troublesome. Well Sir
I have considered of it, and when
You are a Cobbler or a Tinker, (I mean a
Colonel) you shall expect a
Further answer from me—
Hay Snap, was it not well done to make
My self a Colonel? I had ne'er carried
The peevish ape else.
Most excellent well contrived. Now
Sir, that she may understand that you are a
Very Colonel, for so you suddenly must be;
I speedily will endeavour to find out some of
These Officers you speak of, on whom
I must spend freely, and after you have
Furnished them well with money (which you
Must do) ther's not a vintner, nor Ale-house keeper
In the City, but within three days
After receipt, will with cap in hand salute
Your Officers, as thus. Save you Noble Captain;
Save you Noble Lieutenant, how fares it with
Your Noble and truly valiant Colonel
Goldcalfe. Ten days will ripen your
Fame to that perfection, that not a
Parrot, nor starling in the City, but will prattle
Colonel Goldcalf. This to your Lady known,
(As soon twill be) you need not
Doubt her favour.
O rare Snap; about it straight,
Thou shalt have money store. And Snap;
Because she shall not understand I am a
Usurer, as was my scraping father,
I'll summon in all my principal money,
Hang use, we will find use for it
Shall we not Snap?
Admirable use (Noble Colonel.)
Sa'st thou me so boy? her's half a piece
For that, how rarely it sounds, (Noble Colonel)
Come away Snap; I long to be confirmed a Colonel
The king, is sure, too full of Noble thoughts, to
Play upon my present misery, and to believe those
Favours he bestowed (so publicly) on me, as real, as
Spoken they appeared; would amaze one that deserves
No better then my self. You gods give me, a worthy
Patience to undergo, what ere' you lay
Upon me. Noble Antonio, —
Welcome, what news from Court?
Most Excellent Lady, by (me unworthy)
The King commends his best of love to your fair self,
Who sadly knowing, fortune hath blindly dealt
With you, and doubting your present supplies,
Hath sent you a thousand pounds, which he
Commands you to dispose of, as what he hath
Pronounced, your own.
I humbly thank his Majesty. Ferdinando—
Madam.
Lay by that bag.
Madam I shall—
Your burden (Antonio) hath heat you,
I hope it is not in respect of me,
You use this Ceremony.—
Madam, it is a reverence, my loyalty commands,
To her, my King, intends his Queen.
Fie Antonio, This speaks you aright Courtier
But to me, the poorest of your friends,
It was too much.
Madam, I ever shall acknowledge the Court
The place hath brought me up,
Yet never looked on flattery with other eyes,
Then those that saw it monstrous,
It is my judgment, not my will that ers, if I mistake
The King.
Which sure you do Antonio, and easy may
Confess it, as what's your Princes daily exercise,
(His charity) your judgments known too sound,
To entertain a thought,
The King whose state and virtue, can
Command the worthiest she,
His own and neighbouring Princes Country
Doth afford: can cast his eyes upon a
Wretched thing fortune is pleased to frown on,
My poor deserts, examnin'd by my self;
And known, can swell my humble thoughts,
Up to no higher pitch then to be known his
Grateful creature, and when my prayers, for
Him and duty to his Majesty I neglect,
May I be blasted, as one not worthy day light.
And may his envy burst him, that looks with
Grudging eyes, on your preferred deserts.
Thanks good
And to the King,
My duty; and my thanks▪ as heartily as I pay
The gods in my devotion.
And may you be,
No more nor less then what I wish to see;
So blessings attend your goodness.—
How rare doth honesty at Court appear,
Yet is not strange, when virtuous Princes stee'r.—
Come, you are too fondly peevish, and
Must be ruled, you know our fortun's sunk
Beyond recovery, (but by this means)
Have I with early care and pains,
Made it my study to contrive (most for your good) in
This neglected shape of slavery, a way to raise
Our low sunk house, And must you out of a
Self wild nicety, refuse that which your betters
Gladly would embrace (and joy to compass)
What freely I have offered, to throw into your arms.
Consider, and be wise, for rather then I'll act the fool,
To my own ruin, and others mirth,
I'll leave my Country, never to return, where
You may live to say, you had a friend —
And brother.
O Gentle Brother; stay, hear me but speak,
You would not tie me to a thing, I shall be shamed
To own, a gilded monster, one that the people never call
A man, but when he buys the title. Come, you do
But this to try me. I know you are too full of Nobleness
To engage me to a misery, I cannot hope for end of,
But with the loss of life; be merciful in your
Commands, and i'll obey.
How have you spent your time, hath not your
Court experience, nor education in the Common wealth,
Taught you to understand, he wants for no good parts,
That hath enough to purchase tongues at his command?
Besides, when valour (although not in himself)
But once is known, to curb the daring Talker,
He may as freely pass the muster-role of Gentry
As he, that yesterday Commenced at Paris.
Come, you must and shall be ruled, or loose a friend,
More precious, then most Brothers
You know Gold-calf young, and easy wrought upon,
Apt (yet enough) to take any impression your more solid
Judgement shall find fit to mould him in. No whining,
But consent, the rest shall be my care to see performed.
Come, come, your speedy answer; It is the last I'll urge.
Things of this high concernment, require some time
Of study, which I shall urge you grant.
Be speedy, as what much concerns our business
And think, what women would refuse so rich a fool;
The world goes well with woman, when they rule. —
To such as do desire it. All I can think, or say,
Study, or not, I find I must obey.—
HEY, ho, I have had the most sweetest, pleasant'st
Comfortabl'st dream, That ever woman waked from.
Beshrew their noise, that put me out on it,
Me thought I could have spent—all this morning in it;
Venus assist us we may dream,
For we have but little comfort waking;
Waiting call you it? yes we are waiting women,
We may wait long enough, ere these
Courtiers will do a poor soul a good turn.
Yet, Why do I rail at them?
They are but men, flesh and blood,
And can do no more then they can do.
It is our unmerciful Ladies, that give the poor souls
No breath, nor time to recrute.
What hopes can we have then?
Yes, Ferdinando, the Lord Sebastians man,
Begins to promise something;
Yet he com's on too, just like a posse Captain
With his forlorn,
Upon a breach he hath been beaten from;
But time and experience may increase his valour.
And see to my wish, he is here.—
Fair Mistress Dorothy, I kiss your hand.
You may make more bold, and be more welcome
Sweet Ferdinando.
Fair one, you have invited me to a bliss,
Exceeds what men call joys on earth.
It is all you Courtiers can do, to dissemble
With our sex.
Number not me, amongst the prophaners
Of such beauty, I must for mercy sue to: if I may
Hope to enjoy, what you fair self, hath only to dispose of.
You will not find me proudly Coy,
It is love in love (they say) makes all the joy.
This kiss,
The happy prologue to our ensuing bliss.
The business (I gladly snatched to wait on your
Fair self) was to commend my Ladies service
To the fair Artesia: please you to let her
Understand so much.
Sweet Ferdinando, I shall, as one your
Employment hath made proud.—
If you be proud, the devil shall
Lime you for me; was there ever such a piece of
(Second-hand formality) wrapped up in silk?
The Goat, and sparrow's chaste to her,
Il' have her married to a Regiment of Swiss,
The Eldest company will but awake her lust;
Nor shall the youngest find reason to despair
She'll not hold out, she's returned quick.—!—
My Lady (seemingly) thanks the fair
Aurelia, and doth return her service, but so
Coldly, as if she intended not to deserve
Wages for it.
It is strange my only joy, (for so I now
Shall make bold to call you) can you guess the cause?
Why truly yes, (I shall not doubt your secrecy)
Not if you think I love; Racks cannot
Force reveal, when you command a silence.
Then know, my Lady hates Aurelia,
More then she loves to be admired.
And that's enough. By what strange means
Hath she deserved it?
Her envy for the favours, the King
(Is pleased) bestow on her, while she
(As she conceives) is slighted.
It is probable, And what you have pleased
To impart, is with my love locked here.—
This kiss. Time calls away,—
When Cupped knows it is here, my heart bids stay,—
Blessings go with thee; despair not wench.
My dream some pleasure brought
A real wake's beyond a sleeping thought.—
Artesia not at Court? with her my business lies,
What ever to my father I pretend.
It is well the King picked out Aurelia for his
Choice, my jealous heart first at the sound
He loved, began to faint.
Delirus, welcome to Court
We hope the valiant General (your Noble father)
Enjoys his health.
He do's; and by me saluts you both
As his best of friends.
We thank him, and wish victory may
Crown his actions.
You make him happy in such noble friendship.
Pray Gentlemen how fares it with our virtuous King?
The camp generally speaks him in love,
In which they wish him prosper.
So we do all, as you in your fair Choice, Artesia
Truly Eugenio, I should be proud for
To be known her servant, (would she accept the
Service.) And do confess it were a happiness,
I know none greater could I deserve her favour, which
She well knows I am too unworthy of.
A soldier Delirus, and doubt the Conquest.
Men that would seem to know,
Reports she loves you.
Eugenio report's their own.
I shall believe it too, when (truth it is known
See where she comes, a confirmation
To your wished success, Crown your desires —
Content wait on Artesia, fairest of thy sex —
Delirus welcome, how fair
Our friends in the camp.
As men, whose swords your beauty
Sharpens; resolvedly well.
Sure you mistake Delirus, you mean
The Kings Mistress, the fair Aurelia.
Madam; The King looks not with
My eyes, he is young, and possible may err in's
Tender judgment. would he be tried by votes,
His double voice would hardly carry it.
You have a smack ot'h Court yet;
Delirus this savours not ot'h Camp;
Do they dissemble there too?
My faithful love speak for me,
I understand it not.
Do you love me then?
So well, I must not live, if you
Refuse to accept it.
But.
But, what Madam? If a piece of duty,
Within the compass of my poor power, hath
Been by me neglected, let me but know
Wherein I have offended, and I'll redeem it,
Though with the loss of life.
I take you at your word. And know, I can
Return so much of love again, I equally will engage it'h
Hazard, dare you (with me) join, to revenge
My wrongs? till righted, I have vowed
A single life
Else may my blood turn cold as Iberian Ice;
And may my name be (through all after Ages)
Blasted with coward.
Enough, I dare not doubt the non performance,
Of whats so firmly bound, yet least you startle,
I Must enjoin your secrecy,
Which I (by all the Gods) vow to perform.
Then know, it is the King hath wronged me,
Dare you now right me.
Protect me all you powers; the King; pray speak—
That I may understand you.
Then thus, the love he bears Aurelia, too loudly is
Proclaimed not to be known by you, who not content
(In public to acknowledge) must in the face of all the Court,
Make me, his scornful mirth, whilst every savcy flattering groom,
Derides my sufferings, as one, that not deserved
Common commiseration: you now have understood my
Grief, and if your love burn with that fervent
Flame, you have with protestation here professed,
I shall expect you Act, what I prescribe, and you
Engaged (by oath) stand bound for to perform
Why do I shake? you have an Angels shape,
Proclaims you virtues storehouse; there cannot then proceed,
Forth from a Mine of virtue, a bastard issue.
I know you are as good as fair, and in that
Confidence, stand prepared, to put in execution,
What you vouchsafe command.
The King then must not live.
The gods forbid it, my blood begins to chill,
The very name of King, hath struck an icy coldness
Through my veins, my sinews shrink, and strength
(Like an ungrateful servant) deserts me in
My misery. O yet be merciful; and let this piece
Of life I hold, appease your anger, and
Redeem my King
You have shown your love, valour, and strength
Of protestations in your fear. I did but this to try
You, suppose it had been a subject wronged me.
O that again, and but the knowledge of a name,
You'd have destroyed, and by our loves it is done.
It is Aurelia.
A simple woman, poor maid, I am thy murderer.
A soldier Delirus, and so tender conscienc'd,
Think what it is you enjoy (my love) no beggars fortune
With it; besides I'll take you off from being
Executioner, which if enjoined you were bound
For to perform by Oath. Ferdinando servant
To old Sebastian, is poor, and vehemently
Courts my woman, who with the promise
Of her love and gold to boot, you easily may
Tempt, for to perform the deed, either
By poison, or as you both shall else contrive.
What hopes can you expect, I can enjoy a peace
Within my self, when she is Queen, that at the
Hopes of rising, dares publicly affront me?
You cannot love, and yet refuse to right me.
I must acknowledge. I have not boasted much of
Love to you, yet dare confess,
Had you been wronged like me, my tears bear—
Witness for me; I should have righted you
Though life had been engaged.
As I will thee, urge it no more, it is done;
Dry those fair eyes.
This kiss confirms she sleeps, Aurelia dead
Our joys at full, leap to our marriage bed. —
You understand your charge.
At full.
Then see you do perform't with care,
As you expect to cate again.
Thou man of Mars we shall, recrutes
Must then acrew the trifling summ's exhausted we
Received Not a denier, our linings can produce.
Already gone, all on the gut or have you victualled
For this week, fearing a siege of Bailiffs; pray let
Me understand what you must spend a day, I
May prepare to furnish you, my Ignorance
May make me err.
Nobly spoken, and to the purpose,
Thou man of metal. Captain our usual rates declare.
Lieutenant, I understand you, you mean
When laden with the spoil, we did return victors
From Poland.
Or when that powerful arm (with
Our assistance) fell on the rear of the Swiss;
In which great slaughter we seas'd ten thousand
Pounds, then but a trifle.
Or,
Or when you spoke truth, which no man
Can remember. Come, come, no noise, nor blustering—
Here, I understand you well, and shall (if you dare
Talk such words;) but when I licence you, return
You with your leaguer pipes to the chimney-corner,
Where when your doxyes nim the pocket small,
You then perhaps may drink again, and then
Betwixt each draught, recount your valorous acts
To oyster wives, who can admire them, and
Weep at every arm or leg, you phillip from the
Foe, sighing parentheses at your sad Catastrophe,
Why you worms, poor as Carthusian munks,
That borrow titles, to fright Tipsters from their reckonings,
And dare usurp titles of honour you never understood,
Could you hope with your coned speeches ever to possess, me
With belief, that you were valiant; or ever fought,
But when engaged for reckonings with your Host,
Or with the boys for to redeem your Ladies
From the pump, which you protect not out of love,
But lively-hood; and though the sin of theft
You love, as what you live by, yet dare you not
Attempt your selves, more for fear of beating then
The law. But thrust your females into danger,
Who once a month do penance under last for
Your maintenance. What, all silent? Lieutenant, faith
What might your last great victory in Poland
Be worth to you? Ensign; speak, what brave a
Achievements lately.
Thou man of knowledge, we do recant,
Nor will we more the History of war repeat.
Victorious Sir, we are your captives,
Command and we will obey.
Then to your holes again; all is forgot,
Your bodies Il' see vamped; which if you dare
But pawn, Il' find a baliffe shall Command
In chief, mean time her's to subsist,—
Till further order you receive; and as you do
Expect supplies from me, be careful in the
Husbanding of this, adieu—
Heroic Sir, Your bounty hath chained us to
Your commands, we are your moving creatures.—
Breathe there in Christian shape,
Such monsters? Ferdinando, be careful in your relation,
The'yr things you utter of a high concernment;
Suppose Artesia monstrous as you make her,
Delirus hath a noble soul, and surely would not
Aid her in a fact, but to repeat is horrid;
Besides Aurelia (poor Girl) ne'er understood
What it was to injure any thing had life.
O Sir, your noble soul (too innocent to
Understand the guilt in their foul breasts) will
Not give leave to think; what pride and envy harbour.
My service (though far unworthy your
Acceptance) after this ten years trial (I hope)
Cannot beget suspicion of a truth; I soundly can
Maintain. Behold this—
Purse full of Delirus gold, by him put in this
Hand to murder your Aurelia.
Protect her you just powers,
Why did thou take it?
To save her life, which else had been
In hazard. Had I refused to undertake the
Murder, my single testimony would have appeared
My shame, as not believed, when he should
Please deny it; and some distressed wretch tempted
With gold, have been her executioner.
Thy bare testimony, is yet all can be
Alleged against them.
Her woman with me is bribed, who as they
Vainly think I fondly dote upon, who I must
Have in marriage (for sooth) into boot;
Who should I urge to witness against the
Murderers, she might be bribed against me.
Thou faithfullest of servants, preserver
Of our lives, my wretched state unable to
Requite thee, produces tears of sorrow.—
The gods reward thy trust, and may they bountifully
Shower their blessings on thy head.
My Honoured Lord, dry those aged
Eyes, for my reward his great, in your
Acknowledging me your creature; it was but mercy
To my self, to keep my self from sin. Honoured
Sir, Think what's to be done, in what so
Much concerns you.
The thought of so much wickedness,
Captives my reason, I know not what to think, or
Do; what dost thou think most fit?
Since you are pleased command my
Poor advice, my duty binds me thus. The
Favour our virtuous King hath deigned to shower
On your fair daughter, hath been great,
And what may swell to yet stands doubtful.
Could you (with the consent of her) unknown
To the Court, for a small time convey her to so me place
Of safety; the King would then (as needs you
Must pretend no knowledge of her being) express
That love as yet is but suspected; the which
When known, as your grave wisdom shall direct, our
Course we will steer, besides my attendance on her
In disguise makes for my safety. And if so
Great and honourable a charge may be committed
To me unworthy, I shall with care and duty
Express my joy to embrace it.
Ferdinando, I should ungrateful be,
For to suspect neglect of care of her, thou hast preserved
From death; take her into thy charge, she is
Still Aurelia; who knows not how to disobey,
Whatever I command.
Blessings light on you both, you prosper must,
Where ther's so good a child, a man so just—
How black and ugly to my self do I
My self appear? methinks my hands look
Bloody; and my friends stare on my face with that
Unaccustomed earnestness, as if they saw my
Guilt. It is but my foolish fancy, a factious spirit
Within me that rebels, which I'll suppress.
How many thousand in our kingdom quaff
Up this cup, that never start in sleep. And yet
Methinks sometimes I hear the innocent fair on,
With milky hands held up for mercy
Pleading. Artesia too (the price of blood)
Who I must love if live; she yet as fair
Appears as Sainted innocence, sure it was but
Justice in her, and no fault at all. Then am I
Quit, when we too are but one.
See where she comes, no Angel but of light,
Durst ere assume that shape. Justice it self,
Must quit me for a fact, the gods would have
Committed, to have enjoyed that Saint.
What man that is but mortal would refuse my guilt,
But for to touch that lip? My Artesia, I bring
You joy; Aurelia's not long lived
My dear Delirus, is it done?
Few hours will confirm it, the slave
Bit greedily at the golden bait, and cunningly
Contrived her death, as thus. He as his custom is,
trusted to guard Aurelia in her private walks,
Drills her to the sea side; where drowned, he
straight way ships for flight.
It is to my wish; but from my woman,
This must be kept close, she dotes on him,
And must not know his flight.
Aptly considered, her death once known
Our longed for joys draw near. Sweetest fair one,
I must a little leave thee, and to Court; from whence
I hope to bring thee news, she's lost;
This kiss, farewell.—
Pray make no stay.
When thou command it were sin, not to obey—
How vainly hope, fond fools deludes:
Delirus, thou art contracted my instrument, not yet
My husband; where ther's a Prince, I cannot love
A subject; Aurelia dead? Delirus stands too deep engaged
(Although his passion boil) to dare an injury to me.
And then, (who knows,) but that the King may cast his eyes
On me; my wealth and beauty, (if I mistake not) will put
Him to his travels to out-match them.
That spirit's poor, and weak that judgement's seen,
Who lives a subject that may be a Queen.—
It is strange; I do nothing but dream
Of that Lady, I would I were a Colonel we might be
Married: When shall I see my Officers?
I have appointed some of them to wait upon you
Here, I wonder at their stay, I hope they are not
Engaged in fight; which should they be in
Some unlucky quarrel,
The streets would bleed.
Will they fight so Snap; they'll not be angry with
Me, that give them money I hope.
What are their names? how must I call them?
You must observe their Titles, as I present them
To you; the Captain (however, through the fortune
Of the wars, brought low) is Nobly born and
Must your kinsman be, as one that's near allied unto
The fair Artesia, your beauteous Mistress; whom you (with
Great respect must use) as the only man, should
She prove coy, can make you happy in her marriage;
For know, she fortifies her self upon his judgement,
And must approve her choice.
Honest Snap; how I love thee; then he sai's I shall
Have her? If he do, he shall want nothing.
Sir, I have procured you his consent; and know
He could not want, would his great spirit give him
Leave to spend some of his Cozens thousands;
Which as she's a woman, he scorns to do. And to the
Furtherance of your business, know you are much in's
Favour, he will accept your money.
Which Snap, he shall not want while
I have any; and so I'll tell him.
It were an affront, your life would hardly satisfy;
For know, what ere (by me) you let him have,
Should he perceive that you but notice took on it; his fury
would be great, and he in scorn return your money, besides
The certain loss, of your fair Mistress.
Sai'st thou me so Snap; why then I'll not say
A word on it.
By no means Sir; I think I hear them coming.
Renowned Captain, the slaughter (you have
Made is great, and fury may be slack't.
Now by my fathers Ghost (who when alive)
The Tamer of the Eastern world, let go your hold,
Or mercy I forget. And shall the son of Mars be barked at,
By the whelps of Lily, and not destroy the fry?
Sir, speak to the Noble Captain,
You may appease his fury.
Pray Sir, let me entreat you put up your Sword.
Sir you have prevailed,—
Your breath hath from the jaws of death,
Redeemed the caitiffes, which else had slept.
Sir I thank you, pray how
fell you out?
Lieutenant, my breath is hot, declare
To this (my Noble friend) the matter.
Then mark, for thus it chance it:
My ever to be renowned Captain, from
Visiting his Cozen, (a virtuous Lady your
Worthy self is pleased to honour with the name of
Mistress) her coach being—
Otherwise employed, on foot made hither;
When in the street (and not far hence) some scattered
Troops, of Cuirassiers chance it to pass by, an
Officer it'h Rear, (whether by chance) or at
My Captain is unknown, held up his finger to his
Nose; which soon my Captain seeing, (not
Used to such affronts) straight drew his sword,
And with a blow glanc't from his
Armour, killed his horse.
The Officers horse you mean,
That held his finger up.
The very same; when on the ground,
My Captain scorning to take advantage on
His foe, gave him fair leave to rise,
Who being up presumed to draw, (which dear
He paid for); for with the loss of his sword
Hand, he was forced retreat; my Captain being
Merciful, was pacified with this. His bloody
Sword, not being fully sheathed, when back,
A Troop returned threatening (aloud revenge)
But had you seen, (how then) like lightning, my Captain
Flew about him, you would have thought, the god
Of war, had then descended from his throne.
For to destroy the world; my Captain by the multitude
Engaged, we to his rescue drew; who we,
Through lanes of scattered limbs redeemed, and as you saw
Brought off, impatient we withheld him
From further pursuit of the foe.
With what a confidence the impudent rogue
Delivers his invention. —
Lieutenant, no more, the skirmish is not worthy mention,
Sir your attention hath been great to what deserves but
Little, I shall be honoured in your acquaintance as
One, my fair Cozen Artesia, is proud to call her Servant:
Pray take some notice of these Gentlemen,
However fortune plays the whore with them,
You'll find them men of metal.
If of any, twill be of his own—
Gentlemen, I am proud to be your friend.
As we to acknowledge our selves to be your
Vassals, Noble Colonel.
Noble Cozen, for shortly I must call you so.
Good Captain no more of fighting
If you love me, I shall ne'er hold out another Conquest.
The Drums shall beat no more, nor Trumpets
Sound of war, what think you of the Spanish
Grape? Shall we to the Tavern go my valiant Colonel?
Where we will toss your mistress in good Canary.
Valiant Colonel, he has it right. Captain I'll wait on
You, but Gentlemen there will be no fighting?
Who draws his steel's; my foe.
Nay Gentlemen; if there should, you see I am
Not unprovided; but Noble Captain let not your Cozen,—
Know I am given to quarrelling.
He sleeps, that dares pronounce it.
Colonel pray lead the way.
A feast my stomach, better fits, then fray.
Miraculous! he has uttered truth—
Come Snap. Ensign command your
Lieutenant to follow—
It is above wonder, where she should be,
If dead she would be found; and if alive,
I know no cause of discontent, she had
To quit the Court.
It is a thing, ther's not two heads in all the Court,
'Gree in one thought. Some that that the King is
Privy to her retirement; others that she's made away,
But on what grounds, they know not, and every one their
Verdict spends, while none knows where she is.
That which, to me most strange appears, is
That her father, the lord Sebastian; (enraged
With sorrow) utterly disclaims the knowledge of
Her being; but that which much suspicion breeds, is
That Ferdinando is missing too, who questionless (if
Alive) must know how she's disposed of; the
Fellow too, ever accounted entirely
Faithful to his master.
What course is taken in the
Search of her.
To all parts messengers dispatched;
Noble Delirus, Welcome, Is fair
Aurelia heard of?
Nor will be I think. Gentlemen good day to you.
The King is close retired into his closet, nor will
Admit to speak with any.
If so, it is then without dispute, he knows not
Of her being.
It is bu'zd (but upon what intelligence I know not)
That she was seen near the sea side, some that
She's fled with Ferdinando; others that Pirats seas'd
Her, but both improbable; the harbour being
So near, and yet none know it.
Gentlemen, a nobler employment (at such a time
As this) would more become you all. All leave us—
The fair Aurelia gone, and none knows whether?
Yes, there is some that knows—it must be so.
I am confirmed in it, This is our Generals plot.
It is he is King, and he shall rule; he had no way but
This, to gain it with his credit; sure he would
Not murder her, he lives not that can do it, and
Look her in the face. The Courtiers cannot all be
Ignorant of this, (but I may find a time to pay
Them for their Loyalty) Poor harmless maid, thy
Virtue all good men should protect, hath been
Thy ruin. You gods above (the just protectors
Of my childhood) give me a manly patience to
Undergo what you are pleased to inflict upon me
I must dissemble grief, how ere unfit to act
Another part. Aurelia, Thy King must now
Turn wanderer; for by those gods whose aid I crave,
Il' leave no ground unsearched, while life supports
My fainting limbs, till I'm confirmed thou art alive
Or dead.
If living 'Im rewarded, but if dead
That grave enjoys thy body, is my bed.
THese storms presage no good. The
General now arrived at Court,
Whose business with the King requires hast; Delirus
With confidence conveighs him to the King his
Closet; where when arrived, instead of King
They found a letter with his own hand writ, directed
To the General. what the contents are, is unknown
To any but himself, but his distracted looks
Speak them not pleasing. The Gods prevent
What I much fear.
It is to be feared indeed; this strange conveyance of
Aurelia we sadly may lament; for questionless he
Loved her much, but where he should abscond
Himself, or go without assistance of some 'ith Court,
Is more then ordinary strange. The gods instruct
His youth, and bring to light the authors of these troubles.
Amen; Nor is there missed (a man) it'h
Court, we can conceive the King would make
Privy to any secret design of his; it is impossible
He should be far or long unheard of; But see,
Here comes the General.
The gods assist me, what ridl's this?
Gentlemen. Antonio your ear, The rest I
Shall entreat forbear the room.
Antonio; The King I ever—
Have observed, hath loved you much, nor
Hath it been without your just desert. Pray peruse
That letter, it must be he (if any) the King—
Imparts his secrets to—
My Lord. I understand it not, more
Then that Aurelia being strangely shuffled out
Of the way of the sudden, where none will seem to know,
Hath cause his discontent.
Aurelia; (the gods protect her innocence)
I hope she is not murdered.
My Lord, I hope so too, for sure
Ther's not (on earth) a soul so black,
Can act the murderer.
Forbid it all you powers, knows not the
Lord Sebastian of her being?
His grief and close retirement,
Confirms him ignorant.
I am amazed with horror; Antonio prethe
Read out, for sure my aged eyes mistake,
Or else I fain would think so.—
My Lord, we received yours, dated
The fifteenth of this instant; but were to weak in
Judgment to understand your plot. Which the
obscureness of our travel confirms, takes well;
Some small pretence of sorrow for my departure,
May make good your title. I am in health,
And shall return ere long: In the mean time,
Remember I had a father loved his subjects well.
If you have spared the life of poor Aurelia, use
Her as one, on whose well doing my life depends.
Rash and uncharitable young man,
My tears in pity—
For thy folly shall Plead me guiltless. Have I
With sweat and blood (proud of the toil) this
Thirty years and upward; when this unhappy
Kingdom with fear and conquest almost spent,
Redeemed thy tottering state from swift approaching
Slavery, when every eye proclaimed their fear,
And every down cast look despair.
Raised thy low sunk fortunes to such a height,
Thy (then victorious foe) now trembles to behold?
And must I now have treason and murder
Laid to my charge for my reward.
Antonio thou art honest, one that the flattering
Court could ne'er bring (yet) 'ith fashion;
Prethe tell me, have I deserved this black,
Ungrateful charge?
My Honoured Lord, may I become a scorn
To virtue, if ought of these sad accidents
I know; nor can I guess from whence the
Rise should come, more then the discontent
Your letter brought with it.
Protect me innocence; my letter were
Your partaker, made of the contents.
Only my Lord, your mild dissuasion
From Aurelia's love.
Curse on the time I moved him in it;
But it is no time to talk. Antonio, by the
Dear and tender love thou bear the King,
Labour his search in what thou may.
Patience assist me, thy need I ne'er more wanted,
Our speedy course must be to lay the ports.
The gods direct us for the best, and may he be
Accursed for ever sought this miser:
My Lord, in what you please
Command, I ever shall obey—
Ferdinando, what place is this?
Madam, The village near is called Felix.
The country (we are in) the fair valley, the
Only seat for shepherds, and pastoral delights our
Country yields.
That little of the world my youth hath
Travelled through, never yet discovered to my
Sense a place of so much beauty. The
Guiltless here (perhaps) may walk, protected
With their innocence, free from Artesia's
Envy. My doubtful thoughts will
Hardly give me leave to credit, Artesia
Meant me so much harm. Truly I ever loved
Her well, and can forgive her, would she yet be good.
O Madam, your clear virtue,
Unspotted with the thought of sins of that
High nature, pleads ignorance in the trade the
Vicious husband.—
Here comes a shepherd with a sad aspect
So please you Madam step aside unseen,
We will observe—
And must Amintor, poor Amintor,
Only be the object of Cleoras scorn. My harmless
Sheep bleating bewail my moan.
And every Shepherdess but she,
In pity can bewail my misery.
But it is Amintor's fault, whose slow paced Courtship
seldom conquers love.
He must be bold, and active in embraces, that gains desire,
While I with bashful dullness quench the fire.
Why do I blame the fair Cleora? when bashful
Fear in me, may possibly in her beget the like
Suspect. Forgive me fair Cleora, that uncharitably
Condemn my Judge, before ther's sentence given:
But Il' repent, and let the fair one know,
How much of love (though dare not speak) I owe.—
Cupped, assist me as I thee obey,
If that offend, what then must be the way.
Hey day, what stuff's here: This should be
The pitiful Amintor by his sad complaints.
It is he; Amintor, what not yet contracted to
Cleora? It is much she should continue coy,
And you Court her at this distance.
In the name of Cupped how long hast thou lost
Thy wits, thou worshipper of weather-cocks.
Come, come, listen to my good counsel, that shall
Convert thy Pagan Idolatry.—
Cease Amintor, cease for shame,
Let not dotage blast thy name.
Love but as I do, dote on none,
A woman's worthless when she's known.
Love this fair face to day, to morrow t'other;
When that's enjoyed, think where to find another.
Tell me master of your Art,
You that can command your heart.
So to love; (if love it be)
You profess to every she.
How Courtlike you can swear each face you see
Though forty in one day, still Captives thee.
I had rather swear for to enjoy,
Then Captived be, by one that's coy.
Man naturally freedom loves,
Leave chastity to Turtle Doves;
For he's as blind as love, that fettered lies;
Beauty when men are fond will tyrannize.
Coldest thou but unswear an oath,
As freely as thou breakst thy troth;
Or coldest thou but as constant be,
In ought else, as in inconstancy:
You then might painfully confess with me,
You love too much, for men's Idolatry.
When fading beauty shall disguise
My free born heart to Idolise;
I then perhaps, may pity thee,
As partner in thy misery.
Variety of dishes is my fare,
That face I ne'er yet saw, when seen is rare.
Think thou I'll pity crave of thee
Or ruin love, variety▪
No Strephon; no, thy change of fare,
Diseases breed; sad looks, despair:
Whilst I triumphantly despise thy charms,
And laugh at thee, in my Cleora's arms.
Amintor thou art lost, good counsel is
Cast away upon thee: did ever man complain
Of cruelty on her, that hardly knows
Thou love? or if she do, it is but at second
Hand. Rise and repent, and I'll be merciful and
Court her for thee; or if of late you are so valiant grown,
You dare alone venture the thing (you call a virtue)
Your chastity, with Cleora: go and whine
Out in some sad madrigal your dotage;
Which she'll in scorn deride,
Had thou my Confidence, she were thy Bride.
Away thou lewd profaner of
Those rites; the god of holy marriages must
Punish for thy perjuries.
It is sin gain'st Cupit, to hear
Such profanation.
Amintor thou art past recovery, I'll
To my wanton Nymphs,
Who love like me,
Not so to dote, yet fancy any He.—
Honest shepherd stay.
Virtuous shepherd, may Hymen to your
Blessed content crown all your chaste desires.
Fair Nymph, if yet not wed,
The self same wish attend thy marriage bed.
Courteous shepherd, can you entertain
This Nymph and I; who much desirous, to imitate that
Harmless life, we hear you prosper in, hither invited
Us? Our stock is not so great to boast, nor yet so poor
To fear a want; your looks speaks you a
Friend to strangers, who can forget to live,
Sooner then be ungrateful.
Truly I pity you as strangers, and
Should be proudly glad to entertain you, were I
But master of where withal; for know
I am but a servant to my father,
An ancient shepherd age gives not leave
To go abroad, his house is not far distant
Hence, a poor small cottage; such as it is
Please you to go with me, my poor endeavours
Shall not be wanting, for what
It can afford.
Brother, we thank you, and shall to
The utmost you shall please demand, prove your
Faithful paymasters. My sister here unused
To travel, would gladly be at rest,
Please you to lead the way?
Most willingly, this is your path,—
Fairest of creatures, I can (aloud) proclaim tyidings
Of joy, Aurelia's death, Ferdinando's flight; and what
Beyond our wishes, most happily falls out; the
King in discontent hath left the Court,
I hope ne'er to return.
Delirus, it is a Traitors wish.
How Artesia?
You understand me sure, if I
Mistake not; he is your King, or ought to be.
Fie Delirus, so long a Courtier, and not
Know your duty.
I am confounded, sure it is not Artesia.
For that I shall resolve you straight.
It is the very same. —
Where are your eyes?
My reason's at a loss, this cannot be;
Come, come, no more of this, beshrew me,
But you almost staggered me, I know now
It was but in jest to try my temper,
And I forgive it.
Ho, ho! forgive it? you are not my Ghostly—
Father, It was language might have become your
King, but sounds to saucy for a subject.
Nay now Artesia, you over act your part, this
Kiss concludes the Scene.—
You are abominably out Delirus, you
Should have acted at more distance, you must go con your
Part anew, and learn to know, to whom you are to speak.
The Poet ma• instruct you.
May I believe this real, and from Artesia?
'Thats as you please; I gladly would find
Out a way would more confirm you, which
I shall study, since plain dealing will not do.
By what neglect of mine, have I deserved this scorn;
Let me but know, if but to lessen my admiration?
Neglect of duty to your King (if well
Examined) you'll find deserves no less.
Why Artesia, can neglect of duty be a
Fault in me, to him you would have murdered?
Pray recollect, and but consider what you'd
Have courted me to do, which I refused in duty.
This but confirms thy ignorance, which
Would not let thee see I did it but to try
You, in which assurance know, Ther's not on earth
A thing can acceptable be, from you to me,
But your diligent search of the King,
Who when you have found, and that
You tidings bring of his dear safety; I
May forget your faults, tell when
I take my leave.—
The gods above are just, nor am I
Punished yet to my desert.
Here but begins your justice, which must so heavy fall,
That but to think of, wrecks my Eclipsed soul.
Aurelia now afresh begins to appear, her hair
Disheve'ld about her Ivory skin, threatening (aloud)
Revenge. Thou shall have justice fair innocent,
And thy appeased ghost, no more be put to wander
Through the deep in ghastly horror. Artesia, it is time
To think of death; for rather (then to my shame)
Il' live to see thee lodged within another arms;
I will in death enjoy, what (scornfully) thou hast
Alive refused; from this accursed hour, let no man
Ere believe a woman can be true; And where
There wants invention to contrive a just mans fall,
Think of Artesia. O women, women! The sun whose
Glorious beams survey the frantic world,
Would stay his motion and stand still, as proud
For to behold a constant fair one.
Why should their inside be so foul, there out so fair,
But to entrap mortality? but I too late (with
Death must purchase knowledge.
Bad consciences are house-hold clocks that tells,
On earth one minutes joy, ten thousand hells. —
Angels protect my Lady, what ground so ere
She treads, it was unkindly done, not to acquaint
Me with her flight, for sure it must be so, for when my lord
(In tears) saw me bewail (as by my fear, I did conceive)
Her loss, he did with cheerful looks (such as
Would seem) confirm the knowledge of her safety;
Put me in lively hopes she lived.
His language too, who would not say she lived;
Would not confess, he thought her dead:
But what of all I least can understand, is that when any
But my self, (of those same few he will admit) name
But daughter, or Aurelia, he throws him on his bed;
And for the while they stay, ne'er answers to them more;
Some thing there is, I fain would understand,
But dare not urge to know, the gods above assist her,
What ere her undertakings be.—
Health to Bellira. what no news
Yet of Aurelia's being?
Not any; only bare hopes she's well.
From whence spring they?
From little else more then that I fain would hope
The best; yet Ferdinando's being with her
Doth half assure me she can have no harm,
As one, whose actions were ever known virtuous,
And Noble.
I understand you well, the Character you give
Him▪ plainly speaks you love him; which is the
Cause you embrace so coldly, what I have laboured for;
But know Goldcalf will be delayed no longer,
Therefore you must prepare, to morrow to be his bride.
What more whining? I had thought your
Resolution had been fixed, or after all my
Pains; must I yet travel for it?—
What may this mean?
O worthy brother! If ever tears and prayers
Unfeigned, from a distressed maid did move
Compassion, behold (with pity) your miserable
Sister, who cruel fortune hath so unkindly dealt
With, that I must choose to loose my brother,
Or my life. And with the loss of that, I am
Resolved to purchase peace hereafter. Heaven
Knows I mean no other force to do it, more
Then the confirmation of the match you speak of:
Twill soon dispatch me, yet in obedience to
Your will, that little time I have to live
I'll call him husband.—
Never, never Bellira; Thou hast a noble
soul, not fit to match in dunghill breed.
And know I practised but a trial of thy love to me,
Be happy in thy choice who ever it be.
Thy love confirms my liking. For know, I
Have fit instruments to compass my honest
Ends on Goldcalfe, (how ever the busy world
May judge my actions) for well thou know, his
Griping father, with base cosenage.
Ruined my uncle, so consequently me.
This the world knows is meet,
To cheat the cozener, can be no deceit.
Worthy Brother, you have revived
My blood that began (apace) to chill
Within my veins; for which, the life I hold, shall
Ever be employed, as you shall please dispose
Of it. May all your undertakings prosper
To your hearts desire. You have no present business
To command me? if not, my
Occasions call.
Bellira, first know, I have prepared a habit for you
You must put on to further my designs;
A man you must appear Bellira for a few hours,
Which shall be undiscovered to any but my self,
I shall instruct you in the part you have to
Act, at our next meeting: it is a trust Bellira,
I dare impose in none but you;
Till when farewell.
Which I shall gladly execute,
As you shall please command—
Antonio's gon in search of the King.
May his endeavours prosper; what a
Hum this accident hath raised in the Court: In
What strange shape▪ and by whose assistance,
He could contrive (so suddenly) his this,
So secret being, begets in me a wonder. The gods
Divert his mind from quitting (long) the
Court; the event may prove much dangerous
To us all, that wish him well.
The common people ignorant of their
Own safety (wedded to change) unanimously begin
To call Bellicosus King; some crying up his
Valour, and experience in the wars, some his
Justice, all his honesty; whose loyal heart appears
So far from coveting a crown, he seems much
Troubled at the clamour. And should the King
His discontent detain him long from Court, it is
Thought the General must accept it, to appease
The frantic multitude, who rashly may (should he
Refuse) elect more undeservedly.
His wisdom will foresee, and carefully
Prevent such dangerous consequences, as one
Whose approved Loyalty it were great injustice to
Suspect. Saw you Delirus lately? The Court
Speaks of strange alterations in his looks and carriage.
I did, and know it speaks no more but
Truth; for never (to my knowledge) did I
Behold a more dejected creature. The cause must
From Artesia spring▪ or none.
It is without question so, ther's an ambitious
Spirit lodged within that seeming modesty of hers,
Hath almost cracked Delirus. How fondly doth
That man enslave his reason, that dotes on pride
And envy. She strangely hath forborne the Court
Of late, and may be hatching mischief, were but
Her envy backed with politic assistance.
Her pride and scorn apparently was seen, (as
Wanting government to hide it;) when as the
King was pleased to throw his favours so
Liberally on Aurelia.
On which I much observed, the King
Great notice took: here comes the General.
Gentlemen, for love of virtue, your
King and countries good, disperse your selves
Into the City, where confidently you must give out,
The King (by letters I received from him) confirms
His health and safety, and that his strange deserting of
The Court, was only to perform a penance he
On himself enjoined (by vow) for some unruly
Thought his blood provoked him too; which once
Performed, he will return with speed. This
The distracted people may (for a time)
Appease, in which we possible may hear some
Tidings of the King. And as I well know
You're honest, I doubt not but with care you
Will perform this trust, as what (at present)
Much concerns the common good.
Sir, You honour us in a trust, wherein
We can express that love, and loyalty, our duty,
And allegiance binds us to —
How unconsiderably violent doth untamed
Youth, hurry to its own destruction? The gods
Can witness bear how innocent I stand (in but a
Thought to act what other ways (might
More then to my reason) just appear. My counsel
In that letter I wrote the King, hath bred
In him a jealousy Aurelia is by me removed.
This by the flattery of some fawning slave
In the Court, must be confirmed a truth; and all
My services in balance put with some base
Wretch, not worthy name of man; (it is
But a small reward, for what the world
Well knows I justly have deserved.) But
Bellicosus, now is the time to right thy self, and
Crown thy actions with the height of honour; when
As the changeling rout with uncontrolled fury
Proclaim the King. And must I (when thrown
Into my arms) refuse to accept what with the
Slaughter of a seven years war, could not be purchased.
It speaks a weakness in my self, I know unfit to
Govern. But Isle resolve—ne'er to deceive a trust.
Amasius, live to enjoy what's thine, I will usurp
In nothing, but thy care.
It is a known truth.
He's more then man, offends not in his youth —
I must in some disguise venture to Court, where
Since we parted, the Country speaks of a sad change
Of things; the King (in every shepherds mouth)
Is spoken privately gone from Court, none
Knows, or will do whither, but questionless in
Discontent at fair Aurelias retirement.
And what we but suspected of his love to her,
By this we may confirm is real. Some quick
Prevention must be studied, or it speaks
Danger to them both. My absence too from
Hence (till my return from Court) will offer to
Aurelia the knowledge of the Kings deserting of the
Court, which fain I would keep her from
Knowledge of; for how so ever her virtuous soul,
Not willing to be thought ambitious of the
King his love (more then a Loyal subjects duty
Can deserve) she strangely loves his person,
Which she in modesty (to her weak power) makes
It her labour to conceal.
My labouring fancy is at a stand how to contrive,
What I would gladly act, the poor Bellira too,
Left alone unsatisfied laments her Mistress
Loss, though I deserve not pity, or forgiveness;
Once more, must undiscovered see her,
And part unknown. Bellira, I love thee well,
Yet would be loath to have it found in after
Story, I brake my faith to satisfy thy love;
It shall suffice I'm true,
When known to all, I needs must be to you —
Drawer. —
Here Sir,
Draw a pottle of the best sack; Mr.
Captain (Cozen that must be) What say
You, i'st not so?
It is a grape of power, which were I to
Encounter Priams fifty sons, all at one time
(The quarrel being just) would make the
Victory doubtful.
O strange! Drawer, let it be sack then,
But Mr. Captain it will not make you angry
With your friends, will it?
It operates the contrary effect on friends,
And doth increase affection, never
To be divided.
Directly it is wonderful; we will taste it
Most horribly then; Mr. Lieutenant,
Shall we not?
Noble Colonel we will. Till your
Fair Mistress at (but relation) of her healths
We drink; shall stagger and turn round.
Excellent good I protest. Mr. Ensign,
You are for Sack too?
Renowned Colonel, since from our
Mothers wombs, we strech't our warlike limbs,
We scarce have tasted other, Behold
Our Nectar coms. —
Colonel uncase. Cloaks are superfluous weeds,
The blood shall boil with Sack, and scorn the Robes
Of shelter. Drawer fill to the brim.
Here noble Mr. Snap. —
Sir, you shall behold a miracle, I'll do you Justice.
By the life of Bacchus, bring me a more inspiring
Glass, or Rogue you bleed; must
We in thimble drink?
Captain, It is well.
Must it be so then, thou man of
Temperance? we then will sip in little. —
Lieutenant, your Noble Colonels Lady,
My murrion then lies low, while I—
The goddess pledge.
O admirable rare!
Thou standard-bearer to the son of Mars.—
Prepare to pledge his Venus. Sir, let measure due be
Given, fill to the brim.
Come to me.
But Gentlemen, is it the fashion for all to have
My Mistress, but my self,
Colonel you are the last must have her.
Why then we shall ne'er be married I think —
Sir, you mistake, I mean the last must have her
Health in drink. It is a la mode de France.
Say you so? nay I shall learn quickly.
Lieutenant I thank you, Colonel, to your fair
Mistress, the incomparable Artesia.
Thank you heartily good Mr. Ensign. Snap.
These are all brave men?
Sir, you speak them just, they are men will do you
Credit, (though I confess they are costly) but Artesia's
Wealth shall pay for it in the end. —
Sir, It is your Ladies health.
And her money too shall pay for it shortly;
Shall it not Snap. —
Mary shall it sir, please you to drink. —
Gentlemen, her's to you to all, I'll be sworn
It is a cup of right, excellent right wine; boy give me—
To other cup. Cozen Captain and the rest, her's
To you all.
Heroic Cos, I thank you. Drawer, some
Of your Spanish smoke?
You shall sir. —
Lieutenant; come, shall the foes bones be twirled.
Colonel, you'll not stand out for half a dozen glasses?
How mean you Captain?
Art thou a stranger to the twirl of die,
Behold a brace, made of a Germains bones —
I slew in duel. —
What is your game?
He that throw's least must drink.
Say you so? a match, come Snap.
You shall make one.
By any means, come Gentlemen, stand round,
It is all in fashion. Drawer, see you that stakes be made.
So, so, it is well, set down. Come her's for me—
A five, a special throw. Colonel, please you
The die to hurl.
Come hey for me; hey day an ass.—
By the bright splendour of Artesia's eyes, it is true—
A four that, come the next Mr. Snap. a six—
Colonel, he out throws you much. A deux —
Colonel you then must chirp, come off with it
To the next mu'st pledge.
Come, come, give me it, an ass do you say at first? that
Was ill luck i'faith; her's to the next shall drink.—
Drawer fill full; come begin I'll be the last this time.
A trey? throw Mr. Snap. Come, come,
It is half the die. —
Well done Mr. Snap. A five? he throws exceeding well—
Ensign, throw you the next.
Drawer light me a pipe. —
He drinks, he drinks; by Jove a deux—
Come this for me. A six, pox ot'h bone—
I shall not drink to day: Here Colonel above —
A deux you scope. Now by the whore of fate an ass again. —
The dye runs true, an ass he will remain —
An ass always? besworn a pretty jest—
Captain, I feel my self grow valiant
Another ass will make me draw.
By no means on your friends.
Captain for all your blustering, the other cup —
May make him valiant. And now I do remember
Some twelve month since, when but a puny lad,
In such a humour just as this, he shrewdly
Hurt two fencers,
Which to prevent again, I'll drink
For him, for know I hate to draw
Upon my friends.
Or foes if you can help it, if I mistake
Not much.
Come, come; who throws? —
Noble Colonel. Ther's a young Gentleman
In the next room, hath stayed this hour for
Company; who not coming humbly desires
Admittance into your acquaintance as
One fame loudly speaks of.
Shall he come in?
By any means. It were uncivil to deny him,
Drawer, tell him he shall be welcome.
I shall sir. —
Has he a sword Snap? we should
Have asked him that.
Colonel, what afraid? Were he as
Stout as Ajax armed with his sevenfold buckler; this
Steel should (on his knees) force him confess—
Himself your slave,
By Jove a pretty stripling. Colonel —
Pronounce him welcome.
Sir, you are kindly welcome.
Noble Colonel, (if I mistake not)
Fame gives you out the man, I humbly thank you.
And must acknowledge some boldness in my
Request; which if a fault, pray blame report,—
The only spur, invited my ambition; you
Would be pleased to call me your servant.
Sir, I understand you, and can tell
You, here are Gentlemen (besides my self) have
Swords which when they please to draw,
The frighted people tremble.
Gentlemen, I shall be proud to serve you, as
One would gladly be your valour scholar.
Then know young man, from this time
Forth thy foes must fear. Drawer, fill
Me a brimmer of rich Canary.—
Gentlemen, I hope my rude intrusion, breaks
Not up the sport (I understood by the Drawer
You were at) I gladly shall make one, I have some
Trifling crowns, I'd sport to pass away the time.
To him (i'faith) Colonel.
What says thou Snap. Shall I play with him?
By any means, should you refuse, it might
Breed suspicion, you either wanted money, or that you were
Exceeding miserable, which might endanger coming
To Artesia's ear; which must not be.
Excellent well thought on, honest Snap.
Cozen Captain, pray drink to the Gentleman.
Sir, have at you, to all that honour our Noble Colonel.
Sir, you make me proud to pledge a health, I so
Much honour. Sir, to the Noble Colonel. —
Which to refuse were death, let come.
Noble Colonel. How exceeding perfect, Snap,
This stranger has it?
It is perfect through the City, thank my care.
Honest Snap. right honest Snap. Come sir,
Shall we to this sport?—
With all my heart sir, her's that will hold
Some minutes play. —
Would Bess, and Doll. were here,
To nime the sum, they should have garments fine,
And strut the streets by day. —
The chimney corner then should smoke,
Without our helps, and double pots stand still; while we the
Tavern fortify, against the potent Constable.
Come, come; the dice.
Gentlemen, I can furnish you rarely,
Behold her's choice. —
Sir, what's your game? I am good at nothing but
At Passage. Drawer make clean the Table.
Sir, I set you this?
Sir, That's too much.
Refuse to throw at none.
Says thou me so, honest Snap? Then heir's at all —
You then must pay me this.
Courage Colonel, twill come again.
Hang it dirt, I care not a pin,
Come Sir, set me deep. —
Thats mine, come again.
Snap; You must fetch me more money—
Sir, You must not want here, one good
Hand brings all again; if there be not money enough,
What think you of two or three Manors,
Isle bring the deeds.
Do Snap, make haste honest Snap.
I shall return with speed. —
Come, I set you this.
Courage Noble Colonel, the next pull's ours.
It is all my own.
Isle swear he has the best fortune I ever saw,
Come cheer up, give him a brimmer;
Colonel you are a cup to low to win: Sir, you
Have admirable throwing.
Sir, it is by chance, I seldom part a winner—
Here Cozen,—It is excellent wine I feel it
In my head. Here drawer, fill my valiant Cozen.
Sir, Snap my man will come with more money Presently.
Cozen if this shit-breech wins, this steel —
Redeems it all again, what ever it be.
That will be rare i'faith —
Come Snap, here Sir, this bag I set you —
At all, were it a million —
It is all mine
Sir, this is the last bag; but here are Deeds.
Come Sir, her's to other bag.—
This for it all.—
It is mine.
Snap, did you ever see the like?
After so often winning he needs must loose;
Set him five hundred pounds a year.
A match. Come Sir, you have all the money;
Heer are deeds of five hundred a year;
Will you pay as much if you loose?
Come Sir, I'll not be out-brav'd.
Set them, and and if they prove so much, or more,
Or less, accordingly, I'll pay, it.
A match.
Then lusty dice at all—
They are mine.—
Mushrome, deliver all you have put up, back to
The Colonel, or you eternally shall sleep.—
How's that? return again what I have won,
Deliver that again so saucily, and slave you dye.
You slaves.—
Isle try your manhood, my coin is easily made
Good, without my brothers help: what things
In shape of men did here appear.
It will be wondered at, but more when known;
By what a handsome shift we got our own—
AS yet my pilgrim weed, hath been my safe protection.
Surely the Court is mercifully, sparing in their
Search of me; I hear no hew and cry sent after me.
(Though I have read t'has been a course, some
Saucy subjects have presumed to take in search of
Their lost King.) My tender feet have faithfully
Performed their promised penance, in hope
To appease the angry gods, for the by paths they
Have trod, and must have present ease.—
For heaven knows, they are unable to support me
Longer. Poor Aurelia, were it thou but living now
(The sad remainer of all the comfort left me)
Thy tender heart would (pitifully) say I loved,
But that poor little hope I have, waits on despair.
Death would be welcome now, but deaths a
Tyrant to those that covet him, and only
Loves to prey upon the worlds idolaters.
Who vainly clambering in it to catch at all,
By death receive an everlasting fall.
Content is sure the Landlord of this happy place,
Who lets out parcels to his Nymphs and swains,
As harmless as the flocks they tend.
Here on a hillock sits a shepherd swain (free in
His choice to love) only with natures help,
Composing what his un-envied wit brings forth
To court his mistress with, while she seemingly
Bashful smiles, to hear her self so courted.
Near whom a merry swain, with his oaten
Reed, defies the bag-pipe, and proclaims a
Challenge to all the valley, which when received, the
Pretty discord in variety, begets a joy in (the then)
Feeding flocks, who skip to hear the melody,
Their safe protectors make. A universal silence
Crowns this happy place; and I must sleep in jest,
That fain would do it in earnest. Bad world, I
Can forgive you all, O my poor unfortunate Aurelia.—
YOu God of love, whose aid I crave,
Look down and pity me;
A harmless maid, from ruin save
Lies wounded here by thee.
Heaven knows my unaspiring heart,
Ambitiously ne'er aimed
It was you great god) chose out the dart,
So Nobly me inflamed.
Then since (loves god) the power is yours,
It were just to let him know;
How much a simple maid endures
That dares no love to show.
It were then but just, to ease my pain,
And grant me my desire;
That he as I, may burn again
Or quite put out my fire.
Thus to the unpittying air, I vent my
Sad complaints, who more a tyrant then a
Comforter, in my own tone of woe, returns
My words of sorrow; (poor satisfaction to a maid—
In love.) Aurelia, how hast thou lost thy Loyalty,
Who most unworthily hast disobeyed the
King his last commands? Did he not charge thee
Not to harbour within thy breast that traitor
To thy quiet melancholy, as one (he by experience
Knew) if not with care prevented, would seek thy
Ruin; yet thou like an ungrateful wretch,
Hast entertained the Traitor. I want a confidence
To see his face, that could refuse his counsel, (I
Undertook to follow in my silence.) Would
Ferdinando but return from Court, my doubtful
Thoughts would find more settled reft, Pray
Heavens all be well, for my disquiet sleep•
(I fear) presage no good O you preservers of
The innocent, protect the virtuous King; who
Had he been a subject. (I blush to speak the rest)
I might perhaps have lived to have enjoyed,
What now were a presumptuous sin but for to hope;
Yet heaven can quit me, it is not to enjoy his
Honour as he is King, but as he is man
His virtue. Defend me, you just powers; how
Have I betrayed—
My innocent thoughts? I hope he sleeps; his age
And habit speaks no danger in him. It is surely
Some religious man, wearied by long travel,
In the performance of some holy Rites, hath laid
Him here to rest.
He do's begin to stir; did not my modesty
Forbid, I would observe him further, her's none so
Near to see me, if I should venture?
Which I'll for once attempt.—
Where am I? such joys I have received in sleep;
I am afraid to know I am awake: for I am from a
Short sleeping hight of happiness, thrown headlong to
A lingering sorrow. Sure it is some heavenly place?
Me thought I heard the music of the sphear's charming
My troubled senses into happiness, I dare not think of waking.
I should (to the just gods) appear unthankful,
Should I repay this blessing I enjoyed (although but
In a dream) with base despair; heaven knows (what
Ever I deserve) what's yet in store laid up. I am unjust to
Nature and my self, by want of food to punish that
Life I should preserve. I'll to some honest Cottage near
To find relief; Heaven knows I cannot
Travel far.—
Ther's something in this holy man, speaks
Much of sorrow, Me thinks we might be partners
In our griefs, durst we but make them known:
I was but late my self a stranger here,
And should uncharitable be, not to acquaint
Him, where there is relief.
Sure I am in Paradise, and this
Some goddess is—
For since my eyes left to behold the
Fairest of that sex, I ne'er behold so excellent
A form. There must be pity in that Angel shape.
Fair Nymph, assist a wearied wandering Pilgrim
In your directions to some place of succour.
But if thou art the goddess of this heavenly place,
Forgive the doting error my age pleads pardon
For, and I shall pay (when known) the due
Performance of your holy Rites.
Thou holy man, (such you appear to me)
And truly I believe, I am no goddess I, but an
Unfortunate poor shepherdess; too much acquainted with
The afflictions, of this too bad world, who glad
To show, (in what I may) respect to reverend age; will
Carefully conduct you to a house near hand, my self
Is but a stranger to, yet dare presume what it affords,
You shall be kindly welcome to.
Sure I still dream, and did but think I waked
That voice, that face; and all doth so agree,
My easy faith would fain believe it were she.
Or else her Ghost assumes this shape; to let me know
Her murderers; It is so it is so, fair innocent
Thou shalt have justice, let me but know the authors of
Our woe. But whether doth my passion lead me?
Fair Nymph, let me but know thy name,
And whence thou art?
Father I am ashamed I have
Presumptuously disturbed your quiet; which was
A fault of ignorance, I heartily can be sorry
For. Can you forgive it?
Pardon thou exellent creature; that I
Have called thy blood out of thy cheeks, with my unruly
Passion; the sad remembrance (your fair form presented
To my aged eyes) put me in mind of a lost child
I had, so like your self; I durst almost have challenged
You for her. But my Aurelia's dead.—
Why starts she at that name? It is she. it is she.
You gods let me not surfeit with excess, but by degrees
Receive my thankful joy.—
This fair white hand is flesh and blood?
And this Aurelia, Living Aurelia? I am made for ever;
This happy hour will gain me more then all my
Labouring life could ever purchase.
You cannot blame me sir, to start at such
Unusual passions in an aged man, which would they give
You leave, I gladly should embrace the knowledge of
What (as yet) I am a stranger to.
Madam, Then know, I am a man (how ever with
Age I do appear unable) hath been employed
In search of your fair self.
For though my low condition in the Court, deserve
No knowledge from your honoured self; know it
Hath been my place of boad, before your honoured
Father (the lord Sebastian) ever could call you
Daughter. Dear Madam? let—
Not my honest meaning truths affright you more, but
Understand I am employed in search of you,
By none but by your King.
Away, you're an Impostor, or some unhappy
Man, (with too much care) bereft of Reason.
It was my charity to your assistance, and not
My custom, made me thus fondly inquisitive
Of your condition, which I have found my self
As much mistaken in, as you appear in mine;
For know I am a poor shepherds daughter, not
Far from hence, that daily tends my flock
Which I have so long neglected, I fear I shall
Be shent: So heaven preserve you.—
Lady, pray know I cannot so mistake, but
Since it is your will to have it so, I have no
Commission to force you to confession, yet I
Would gladly know whether the letters to your
Fair self (I have with many a weary careful step)
Brought you from the King will be accepted,
If not, it is my duty to return them, and onl• greet
Him with the glad tidings of our health and safety—
Pray stay; but have you letters from
The King? and are you secretly (by him) employed?
Pray let me see them.
If you be that Aurelia they are directed.
To, I have.
Come, you will be secret. I am the
Same, pray let me see them; I hope the King
Enjoys his health.
Never better Madam—
Know you this superscription?
My Lord the King.—
Her colour's gone; she faints, Angels
Above, assist me; Aurelia look up, speak, or thy
King ne'er more shall utter word. She breathes;
How doth my joy, my bliss, my all delight on earth!
One word of comfort, speak.
How fares it with the King? I am pretty
Well thanks heaven, and your assistance,
Why that's well said; rise my Aurelia,
And let this kiss confirm our never to be divided loves,
I now could surfeit here with joy, did reason not
Command forbear. O let this happy day be to all
After ages kept as a day of joy, which I (while
The just gods shall lend me breath on earth)
With care will see performed, in memory of that
Happiness, this hour confirmed Thee living.
But my Aurelia, it was unkindly done (unknown
To any) to desert the Court, and take this borrowed
Shape, leaving me desperately unsatisfied of thy life
Or death; it was a punishment (Aurelia) I could
Not well collect, I had deserved from thee.
My much loved Lord, that virtue shines
Within your noble breast, will hardly give
You leave to credit; the plot was laid to take
Away this harmless life: which to preserve (only
With the assistance of faithful Ferdinando)
We privatel• got hither as to a place of refuge,
Where with the change of habit we meant to spend
Some days, in the contrivance of our future safety.
Aurelia Thou dost amaze me with a story,
Of that unheard of cruelty, had any tongue but
Thine related, I could (as soon) with the same faith
Have credited, what mans invention could proclaim
Impossible. Sure the• have no Christian names,
Or if they have, let me but know the fiends, and as
I am thy King I'll see thee righted.
My Lord, I freely can forgive them,
They may repent, and in their after life deserve your
Pardon. Please you my Lord to put on your
Disguise, we else may be (by some unwelcome guest)
Discovered; And (as to my poor present home)
We walk, I shall in duty to your commands discover all.
It was carefully remembered; the joy I
Have received in the blessed encounter of m• fair
Aurelia, made me forget I was to all the world
(But thee) a counterfeit.
This kiss; now lead the way,
Where virtue is my guide I cannot stray —
Where should this King be, I have
Endeavoured pretty well to find him out, with
What diligent search my wit, and labour could
Contrive, yet all in vain I seek. From the city, to
The small cottage, hills, and dales, woods and
Plains, yet no ridings; not a stripling of eighteen
I see, but I from top to toe examine. Had but some
That I know the large commission I have ther's
Not a handsome gentlewoman in the country
(Without a protection from the General) should
Go unsearched, It were well if they escaped too.
Indeed I am too modest for the employment, which
Was a fault the General might possibly have
Thought me not guilty of, considering I was bred
In the Court. But if I persist in it, I shall be able
To give but a very slender account of my travels.
It being now in fashion for Princes to make escapes in
Women's habit; but I must mend my fault, and
Stretch my modesty.
But who comes here —
Save you Courteous Gentleman, pray saw
You a fair young she pheardess straggling here
About, I fear hath lost her way.
You speak as if she were a stranger to the
Place, dwells she far hence?
But here at hand▪
What danger is there then, that she can
Straggle here if dwell so near.
Although she dwell so near,
She is a stranger here.
Prethe courteous shepherd, let me but understand thee
And I perhaps may tell some tidings of her.
Then know, she's but lately come amongst us,
For we (as yet) not know her name, nor whence she came;
But sure she is as courteous a Nymph, and fair,
As ever sung to pipe.
What years dost think she is of?
She looks some seventeen,
Or much about.
Shepherd, (may I a stranger to
This place my Beast being tyred request you help
Me to some refreshment for my horse, and me;
For which in part of payment, take this
Gold; with it, my hearty thanks.
Excuse me Sir, the poor entertainment
Our Cottage will afford, cannot deserve this pay;
I wish we had it for you.
Shepherd, I ever made content my
Feast; which I am sure to find,
In what you have.
Thank you Noble Sir, since you will
Have it so; please you to stay till I but search the
Next Cops for a stray Lamb, I will
Return with speed,—
Shepherd. I shall attend; I do not
Know, more then a simple hope, grounded
On strong desire it should be so:
But I am on the sudden strangely overjoyed, with
Confidence of a discovery of something.
A young shepherdess (did he not say?) of
Some seventeen years of age, I and a stranger too;
One that as yet, he neither knows her name, nor
Whence she is. Well my young King, if I
Do chance to find you in the smock habit, I
May hap to make you look re di'th cheeks,
Without the help of Spanish paper.
You gods, I'll pray my beads o'er twice a day
The more, should this stray shepherdess
But prove my King. And all you powers, bear witness
With me, it is not for honour, or reward, I covet thus to
Find him, as that I fear, some more unwelcome to
Him, may do it to his more prejudice. But her's my
Shepherd come. Shepherd shall we go,
Sir, I now will wait on you; this is
Your way to your horse.
Thanks honest shepherd, the joy I apprehend,
Made me forget I had any —
I hope the rout's now pleased they have a King,
Yet some cried out for none (the devil stop their wind-pipes)
The General appeared much backward, in the judgment
of the standers by, to accept the Government; yet Crowns
Are things, seldom unwelcome come,
How ever with care maintained.
Eugenio, be confident, the General nothing acted
Outwardly in show, but what his loyal heart provoked him too,
Nor could he with the safety of the Kingdom (as things
Then stood) refuse to accept the Crow;
For that besides the present danger might have ensued
By the domestic rabble, had he refused.
His known acceptance of it now▪ strikes terror in
The Foreign Enemy, as under whose victorious
Arm, they have long groaned.
Cornelius, I am satisfied, and hope (as you)
The best, but where the King Amasinus (if alive)
Should live so long recluse, to my poor sense.
Appears miraculous; the gods protect him, and prevent,
What we have just cause to fear.
He is hardly honest, joins not in that prayer.
Amasius, Till I here thy death confirmed, (which
Heavens forbid) I never shall acknowledge other King but
Thee, and cursed be he that do's.
Prethe forbear, I think I hear him coming.
My lord Sebastian, what ever I'm forced (to my best
Care for all your goods I hope) to take upon me, This is—
A ceremony, from you, I neither will expect nor suffer,
Pray my lord put on; it is your grave assistance
In this great charge I have undertaken; not what in duty
Doth become a Subject to his King, that I expect from you.
And I am glad (my lord) to see these over-acted passions,
So well blown o'er, that did so ill become your gravity.
We men that know the world, if thankfully would
Receive a blessing; must patiently endure a Cross.
But mine is great (my lord.)
It is truth; therefore your patience in it appears
The more commendable; for know, ther's not a Loyal heart
Amongst us all, but hath received a loss, a great one too.
Though I must confess yours comes with advantage;
But let us not despair; The gods are just and merciful,
And when we least expect, may bring us joy.
Cornelius, what no news yet from Antonio, in his
Search ot'h King? he is a man I put much
Confidence in his Noble care.
My gracious lord, I dare (with reverence to your self)
Presume ther's not that thing alive, that owns the name
Of man, would more rejoice, to bring you happy
Tidings then himself; nor make a more laborious
Search in what he hath undertaken.
It is believed Cornclius. and you mistake my
Meaning much, if you but think I spoke as doubting,
In the performance of that trust he did with joy embrace,
I know he's honest, as you can think him. Gentlemen,
I fain would urge a question to you all, which could
You satisfy, it would be a favour I ever should acknowledge.
My Lord, please you propound, (my honour
Stand engaged) in what I may, I'll satisfy.
Thank you Cornelius, the question's then,
What you conceive may be the cause, my son
Delirus so dejects himself.
Then here my Lord, I take off my engagement;
I think it doth proceed from fair Artesia's scorn,
Whom he unfortunately, yet entirely loves.
My Lord, he speaks my thoughts.
And mine.
Gentlemen, I thank you all, and shall as
Carefully (in what I may) acknowledge this great favour.
Fond Boy, how hast thou lost thy self? I fear past all
Recovery. Proud scornful woman; yet why do I
Blame her, when she stands bound as she expects
Her future bliss, to make her free election. Yet how he should
Deserve her scorn, I understand not: the blood that fills his veins
Speaks him as nobly born as she, stand was as well deserving. Things of
This nature must be gently curbed, and by degrees, with
Moderate persuasion weaned from.
He that with violence, seeks to restrain loves fire,
Instead of quenching, makes it flame the higher.
My Lord, and Gentlemen, your good advise in matters that much
Concern the common good, requires your present aid.
We ever shall obey, in what you please command. —
The King not to be found? He doted strangely so to leave the
Court, ne't to be heard of more. Upon a beggar too, a thing not worth
His Royal thought: and whether dead, or living, it matters not,
The multitude with noise hath made their General King:
And since it is so, Delirus ought to be considered of, as now the
Best in being— it must be so;
A few good words will reconcile the man. —
Within there, Dreswell?—
Madam here,
Haste to the Court, there to Delirus Lodgings, and if by
Any means thou can procure admittance to him, pretend you come as
Of your own accord, in pity of your Ladies sufferings, who ever
Since she heard of his melancholy retirement, hath kept her chamber,
And denied access to all comers of what quality soever, nor will
She eat, or drink, or sleep, (as is conceived) till she hath seen him.
All this you must do in so melancholy a posture,
He shall not doubt a syllable you utter,
(And if thou can deliver it in tears, it will do better.)
This done, strictly examine all his gestures, and every word and sigh,
So exactly, that you may be able to give me a just account how he
Stands moved with your relation, that thereby I may accordingly
Prepare my self for his encounter. Is my Coach ready?
Madam it is.
Then I'll abroad, but will return by that time I
Conceive thou can be here again. Be careful in it.
Well go thy ways, thou woman, indeed thou art the very
Master piece of all thy sex for cunning. I thought I could have
Done pretty well; but I am a very puny, and but begin to learn
The art of dissembling. Delirus, you shall be happy; My Lady
Does love you, but it is because the mad-folks of the Town
Have made your father King. Who should they but depose, as
They are like enough, (it being now in fashion) my Lady
Then must sue out a Divorce, and marry the next heir
Apparent to the Crown.
Now shall I have this melancholy Coxcomb (who she hath
Sufficiently abused) believe me; for I shall do it rarely. I serve
So exquisite a Lady in the trade; I cannot choose but move
Compassion. It were rare durst I but laugh, to see him sit cross
Armed, and sigh out (in some pitiful tone) his folly, which I
Must charitably call his repentance, which he, (in hope I will be
Merciful to him) and call it so to my Lady, gives me five pieces,
Which I must seemingly refuse, yet hold it fast. What necessary
Commodities to our Ladies are we waiting-women; and faith
Should not grudge at any thing we do, if they would but in (some
Reasonable measure) consider us. We must not kiss (forsooth)
The gentleman-Vsher, not for a hundred pound that's not to
Be forgiven; they are very tyrants to us in that particular,
And covet all. I had but some small hopes of Ferdinando, the
Lord Sebastians man, and indeed to say truth, the fellow was of
A pretty able make, and promised well. And he they have shuffled
Out of the way; all is too good for us poor souls, but we
May find a time to fit them for it: But to
My business now in hand. —
Aurelia, thou hast filed me with amazement, in the
Relating of such a piece of villainy, the fiends of hell, would surely
Tremble at to see perfor'md. Put on thy hat Antonio, this is no
Time nor place to show respect to persons. O Aurelia, how are we
Bound to the just gods, for thy miraculous protection, and sure
Those gods have blessings yet in store for thee, that have so safely kept thee.
Faithful Ferdinando, I yet may find a time to pay thee for thy
Loyalty. Antonio, thou lately came from Court, and
Can advise us for the best; delays do oft prove dangerous,
What woul'dst thou have us do?
Since you are pleased to think my poor advice
Worthy the following; I humbly should request you not
Conclude on any thing, till Ferdinando be returned, who
Madam (if I mistook not) you hourly here expect.
I do Antonio, and wonder at his stay.
Pray heaven all be well.
Antonio, I like your counsel well, and will be ruled, how took
The General our strange departure from the Court—
Ferdinando is returned, Ferdinando welcome.
Nay be not frighted, her's none but are your friends.
Noble Antonio, I know not whether my joy; or wonder
To see you in this place, is greater, but both speak much.
Thanks good Ferdin ando, thou living miracle of honesty,
Pray take acqaintance of this aged man, as one we all stand bound to,
Which you (at more convenient time) shall understand.
Heaven still increase your age, and happy days.
Thank thee my good son, and majesty thou live
Long to be wondered at for thy fidelity.
What news from Court, I hope my
Father doth enjoy his health?
Madam, he does.
Ferdinando, thy looks speak no good tidings
No news yet of our King?
Madam, I expected that enquiry to have been made by you.
Indeed it was coming out, had not Antonio
Prevented me, I hope he's well.
That hope is all we have left; for hitherto their search hath
Been in vain. Madam, I much mistake (if since my late departure,)
Your looks speak not much more of cheerfulness, then
When I left you. And I am sorry I have not news for to deliver,
Would fetch more of that blood into your cheeks, hath
Been so long a stranger to it's home.
Thou speak a Prologue to a Tragedy, prethe be brief.
We stand resolved to hear, the utmost can befall us.
Then thus it is. The King (as yet not heard of) the factious
People, (mutable by nature) generally rise; some crying out Bellicosus
Should be King; others would have no King; but most of all,
Would have they knew not what. Thus in the streets
Tumultuously they swarm, who Bellicosus (for some small time to
Appease) in hopes to hear ot'h King, pretends receiving Letters
From him; wherein he certifies his health, and that the reason of his
Stealth from Court, was to perform a penance he on himself enjoined by
Vow, for some unruly thoughts his blood provoked him to, and
Would return with speed. This by the eminent'st men it'h Court
Delivered as a truth amongst the Rout, did for a time appease; but
Long it lasted not; for being shortly after, thoroughly whet with wine,
They all brake out; crying aloud Bellicosus should be King.
At which the General under pretence of what might have fallen
Out more prejudicial to the Common-wealth, accepts it for prevention;
And since makes strong apologies in his own defence.
But may they all be swallowed up alive, that own him for their
King, long as Amasius lives, or we confirmed,
(Which heavens forbid) he is dead.
Let this confirm thee, Amasius is alive—
Alive to thank thee for thy Loyalty.
Which life, long may the gods preserve—
With health and joy.—
Ferdinando, leave off to wonder at this happiness, it is
No time to talk but do. Sir, the long experience of the Generals
Loyalty and faithful service to your crown, may justly arm
You with a considence, he dares not act the Traitor.
But Antonio, what think you of the intended murder of
This fair Virgin; there was a fault Antonio, a great one too,
One that the gods command should not be smothered.
So please your Highness. if you but think the General
Guilty but of a thought, (of what I know his very soul abhors)
I soon could clear that doubt.
Till when, I shall conclude him not Aurelia's friend,
Though he may take my Crown, and yet ne'er injure me.
Then on my knees, I beg this favour (for your satisfaction,—
That you vouchsafe me leave to go to Court, where speedily
I will contrive a way to clear your doubts, in what
You can desire to know.
Rise Antonio, It is granted on those conditions, and how
In the mean time (for the advantage of your undertakings)
We shall dispose our selves, consider; and it is done.
Virtuous Sir, it is a trust, my life could ne'er deserve, which
I'll perform or loose it in the attempt. Madam please you to let
Your faithful servant show me to the road I am a stranger to,
I shall (to him) impart what's best for you to do, suiting
With my designs. So heavens shower down his blessings on you both
And speed thee in thy honest undertakings.
Ferdinando, conduct Antonio, as he shall desire.
Come my Aurelia, our poor hom's the best,
Although no Palace, ther's more quiet rest—
CAptain, hold, hold, I say; thou now deserve that Title;
Come let us put up, you shall have your desire.
But know it is not out of fear I do it; fear being a thing I never
Understood. But it is thy valour that hath won my love,
Which shall continue, long as you dare thus valiantly make good
Your honour, which I (in pity to your self)
Much fear is not long lived.
Then welcome death, who in the horridest shape he
Can put on, shall ever make this flesh of mine (but now redeemed
From the base brand of coward) ever tremble to behold him.
Sir, be not too incredulous nor wonder-struck; that I
Can speak a truth; which to my shame (I must confess)
I have but seldom uttered. Forknow the baseness
Of my former actions, hath waked my better judgment
To a repentance of my sinful folly; nor is there in these veins
One drop of blood but came from noble springs. And if this
Small sprinkling of my redemption can nothing gain on your belief,
But name an undertaking honourable, that may confirm
Me to the world I am a man, and I'll attempt it, or
With the loss of life leave ample satisfaction,
I dyed no coward.
I do embrace thy friendship, and believe thee—
Heartily believe thee, as one that joys in thy recovery,
And what (before) I could not think thee worthy of; now doth
Appear unworthy thy acceptance. But for the present
Here take this bag, with it the assurance, of—
My assistance in what I shall be able. And what so ever you
Have done for me, (how ever to your judgement it appears) yet
Know, it was but honest, and but a slight to get my own;
Long since by Goldcalf's fathers unjust dealing
Detained from me.
Sir, it is believed, and for your money (my want compels
Me to accept of) I thank you, as what I not deserve, but
What your Nobleness (in pity of my present state) is pleased
Bestow on me. And that you shall see your money well
Employed, I'll to the army, where my actions shall speak me
Willing to redeem my mis-spent youth, or
Find a Noble death.
May victory and reward, crown all your
Undertakings. So farewell.—
Succeess attend your wishes to your desires, while I
Practise to live, that I shall dare to d•e,—
Delirus, however I have past by the enquiry of
Your discontent, yet know I have a fathers eye, that sees your
Wound that bleeds, and know it must be searched well, ere it can
Be cured; therefore I charge you on my blessing (as
You expect that I should prove your faithful Surgeon) prove
You a dutiful patient, in plainly laying open to me
The cause of this your present grief.
Sir your Commands are too powerful for me to
Disobey. And what of Discontent you have lately
Seen in me, sprung from Artesia's scorn
On my impatient love.
Me thinks thou should consider, whose son thou art
A Soldier too, and have thy reason captived
By the imperious pride of a vain-glorious woman. For shame
Collect thy scattered senses; (and if not out of pity to thy
Self) yet in respect of my commands (which here I lay upon
Thee) return her scorn again. And then she'll sue to thee.
Fond Boy, thou doest not know the subtle trains of women,
Whose wavering minds prove labyrinths to the most ingenious
Searchers, can thou yet love, and she yet scorn?
My Royal Father, in all obedience to your Demands
I thus must answer; and call the gods to witness with me,
I hate her actions more then I ever loved her person;
Which now with scorn, I both disdain.
That's spoken like thy self. What news with thee?—
My gracious Lord; There is; a traveller (a stranger he seems)
Desires to be admitted to your presence; who (as he
Doth pretend) hath business of much concernment to deliver.
Admit him in. Welcome friend, would—
Thou ought with us?
Yes, my good Lord, I have something to impart that
Much concerns your knowledge.
I do not like this fellows looks, what should his
Business be. Sir, your business may require privacy,
I'll wait within your call. —
Pray stay sir, my gracious Lord, such is the nature
Of my business, I shall not only crave this Gentleman may
Hear the delivery of it, but also such of your Royal
Council as are near at hand.
Fabius, call those that wait without—
Now when you please begin.
Then (by your gracious favour) it sadly thus fell out.
It was, when the harbinger of light, had given notice
To the late darkened world, that the bright Sun was darting
Forth his radiant beams upon the teeming earth, when near
To the black Cliff (a place well known to all) and fit
So black a purpose; upon the top of which, a man (I thought
I spied, (but proved a monster) near whom, after a
Stricter view, I could discern something to move, (but
Knew not what it was. Towards it I gently made, willing
To see, unseen: when by the help of the craggy Cliff I soon
Had got within the hearing of a voice (in such a Tone of woe
Sadly lamenting) the neighbouring rocks in tears did seem
To melt, to hear the moan it made. Pity, and curiosity,
To know what it might be, joined to contrive, how
I might make my approach so near, to satisfy my doubts
Remaining undiscovered, when envious nature conspiring
The ruin of what she should preserve, by a small creek
Of the Sea divided us. Yet at so small a distance, I could
Discover a maid (for such she seemed to be) upon her knees.
With hands held up for mercy to her murderer. Who
Less relenting then the hardened Rocks, proclaimed himself an
Enemy to pity. And with a voice befitting such a bloody
Mind, demanded if she were prepared to dye.
(As if he meant, for to preserve in her, what in himself in the
Very act he must destroy.) To which she answered something,
So faintly dying not to be understood, when straight I could
Perceive the slave prepare (into the Sea) to cast the innocent
Fair one, whom he before had drowned in tears.
This sight, I tremblingly beheld, cursing the water that divided
Us. Yet hoping to prevent his bloody execution, a loud
I called, as confident in the consideration of his own present
Safety, being discovered, I happily might save her life:
But all in vain; for what with threats, fair promises, and tears
I could prevail, was only to behold her fall into the sea.
At which unheard of piece of cruelty, the Sun not daring to
Behold so foul a murder, withdrew his waterish beams
(Made pale with fear) behind the burdened clouds, who big
With Tears, in thousand spouts did trickle to the earth,
There witnesses of sorrow.
The Villain, his black deed done, question's the justness
Of the Gods, in hopes he should escape: which to prevent
I nimbly down descended, fetching a compass to the place my
Reason prompt me to believe he must attempt to make his
Flight, where (by the Justness of those Gods he so mistook)
We met. I drew and bid him stand; at which the daring
Slave grinned in my face, and with a confidence, as if his
Cause were just, draws in defiance of my single opposition.
To blows, and thrusts we went, when guided by the hand
Of Justice, my sword soon found a passage to his death.
When he (afraid to die) when death appeared so near,
Tremblingly for mercy begged, in hope he might have lived.
On which I took advantage, and with the promise of
My assistance in his cure, and silence for the fact he had
Committed, he to my joy (in his behalf) discovered, not
Only who it was he had murdered, but also who had hired
Him to that accursed deed of darkness; which when at
Full delivered (to my amazed wonder) I fell to earth, as if
I had received the greater wound. Only I rose again, which
He did never; for just (as if the Gods had lent him breath
Enough for his confession,) he left the world.
My Lord, I have not yet quite finished,—
And shall desire all that are present, may hear my story out.
Delirus stay, I do command you stay.
My Lord, I am not well, of the sudden.
So short a stay as this requires, can no ways
Prejudice your health. Friend go on to let us know, as well
The Murderers, as the murdered; heaven knows, I tremble
But to think, at what I urge to know.
As soon as grief will give me leave
(My Lord) I shall. —
The murdered person, was that virtuous innocent, the
Fair Aurelia, Daughter to the Lord Sebastian.
O Delirus, thou art lost for ever, ever lost. —
Sure friend thou did but dream, and this some
Vision was. It was an act so horrid, the gods in justice
Never could have beheld. And there must want temptation
In the fiends of hell, to work on man (though frail)
To be her murderer.
My Lord, it was no idle dream; yet heaven can
Witness, I could have gladly slept for ever, rather then lived
To see this waking truth.
Then briefly speak her murderers.
First on my knees I beg your gracious
Pardon, for what—
I must deliver or burst. And here I stand to accuse—
Your son Delirus, and the Lady Artesia, daughter to the
Late Lord Endimion, the innocent Aurelia's murderers.
And Ferdinando, servant to the Lord Sebastian, (whom with this
Hand I slew,) by them was hired her executioner.
My trembling heart will hardly give my tongue
The utterance to say it is impossible.
My Lord, I am confident your grave wisdom's such,
Ther's nothing (this loose fellow) in madness hath delivered,
Deserves your serious consideration, more then what punishment
He hath deserved; for give me leave my Lord, had he his wits,
(Which no man here can think) in what hath fair Aurelia
Injured me? or if she had, my fair actions in the world
Speak me no murderer Besides this frantic accusation,
Delivered by a single man, whom none knows whence,
Or what he is. My Honoured father, this rightly weighed.
It were fit the slave should know his punishment, which
Must be great as his offence. For villain know—
Thy lif's to poor a satisfaction for my injury.
Sir, I have heard you, and must take leave to tell
You, I am no slave nor villain; nor is there in these veins of
Mine one drop of blood (however I appear) but sprung
From Noble parents. And here I call the gods to witness
With me; I wish, and heartily, you could but clear your
Self of fair Aurelia's murder as thus I clear
The doubts of what I am—
All Antonio!
You knew this purse Delirus, when laden with
The price of innocent Aurelia's blood, you gave it Ferdinando
In part of payment for his black deed.
True Antonio, it is all but truth. O cruel Artesia,
By thee I fall, to my eternal ruin—
Be merciful great powers too a weak aged
Man, and load me not too much with your afflictions,
Your burden is to great, yet fain I would support it
Bravely. Cornelius, I do command you take speedy order,
That object of my shame be carefully conveyed to the
Castle. And you Eugenio—
Haste to Artesia's lodgings, where seize her with a guard,
And house them both together. They may forgive each
Other, and repent before their deaths.—
O Antonio, I looked for joy at thy return, but thou hast brought
Me woe; bitter woe Antonio, but I forgive thee freely,—
And commend thy honest care, thou hast nothing done,
But what our Laws, and thy religion bound thee to.
Antonio, I mean to act the Judges part my self, for since
Corruption crept into the Bench, the Jury finds it death for to be
Poor, the rich may plead not guilty. Poor Lord Sebastian
Thou shalt have justice done thee. (Small satisfaction for thy loss)
Yet all the world shall see,
If thine be great, mine cannot lesser be—
O Ferdinando, thou hast made me young again,
Thou happy messenger of joy; me thinks thou hast pulled back
Least twenty of my years. And will the King be here
(Dost say) and in disguise, and my Aurelia too?
My Lord they will; be confident they will.
I do expect them every minute.
But Ferdinando, I want how to contrive to entertain
Him, my poor house is quite unstored, and no direction's given
For any thing, can look like welcome to him.
My Lord, since you so much desire to make him
Welcome, I shall instruct you how to make him so.
If you but think his welcome doth consist in feasting (my Lord)
You so mistake our present business, that know you ruin all
His honourable designs, he hitherto (with care and pains) hath
Laboured for to compass. First you must let it be your care,
Your joy transports you not; but what of joy
You must express, must be upon good grounds you are securely
Private; other ways to take no notice of them, more
Then what they outwardly appear to be.
This, and no other is the welcome that the King expects.
Thanks Ferdinando; honest Ferdinando, thou
Faithfullest of servants, I thank thee for thy advice, which
I in all things carefully will follow. I can no longer keep my
Joy within the narrow bounds of my poor breast,
It must (at these weak aged eyes of mine) have vent,
It must, it must.—
My Lord the King is here.
Long live my gracious King, and may your poor—
Sebastian live to be truly thankful to the gods
For this blessed hour of joy.
Rise Sebastian, no more of this, we know thy
Love and Loyalty. But must enjoin you (in all your actions
To express to us, not what we are, but what
We appear to be.
My much loved Lord, your poor Sebastian can be
Acquainted with no other study but what shall teach me to obey.
O my poor girl, never more welcome to thy fathers arms.
You gods, let not my joy make me forget my duty.
Ferdinando with speed find out Antonio, and let him
Know of our arrival at the Lord Sebastians, where we shall
Hourly expect to hear, as he shall find occasions offer.
I shall with care perform it—
Come my lord Sebastian, we are now your guests;
Dispose us as you please, you dare without suspicion, trust
Your fair daughter with us, her vertu's guard enough.
Your own, (great Sir) may challenge a far
Greater trust. So please you, I shall conduct you to
The best part, of a homely house.
Sebastian you are happy you have a house that
You may call your own; it is more then I dare do.
Come my Aurelia, it is all my joy, that
I can call thee mine.
Sir, were it not a sin I am a stranger to,
I should begin to fear I should grow proud ot'h honour
You are pleased to do your creature.
As I to have such a creature for to honour.
My Lady hurried (with a guard) to the Castle?
It is so, the scorn she threw upon Delirus hath made him desperate,
And confess the murder; my jealous heart presaged
No less, when no entreaties could prevail on him, I might
But speak my message; which when I but
Attempted, he seemed in scorn, and hate
Of her to stop his ears.
Lady, your plot's are now discovered to the world; at least,
To Ciciley, which is too hot for me to live in.
A ship (now weighing anchor) stands bound for Italy.
I'll take this proffered means for my escape.
Farewell Artesia, my safety bids not stay,
She dyes a fool, that dyes, when live she may—
Cruel Ferdinando, how were we all mistaken in
That murdering vellum, whose name (to all posterity in
Memory of this damned act) shall ne'er be thought on but with
Horror for fair Aurelia's loss. The gods (in her) have
Robed us of our Magazine of virtue
In her we have just cause to fear our Princes loss,
Their virtues were as inseparable, as I fear their fortune.
Cornelius, how took Delirus his conduct to the Castle?
With much seeming patience, but not a syllable
Could be urged from him. How now Eugenio? how have you
Disposed of your bloody fair one, the everlasting shame
To all her sex? how doth her pride and envy
Bear her present fortune?
Prethe be merciful be merciful in thy opinion of her, for
Though the thought of her foul deed proclaims her monstrous,
Beshrew me but she made me weep, and so would thee
Cornelius, had thou but seen her penitence.
They are Crocodiles tears Eugenio, for know she can
Put on what shape she please, to act her present part,
And it was thy charity, not her true penitence,
That so prevailed on thy believing sense.
Cornelius, I boast (my self) to have no knowing
Insight in the women's trade, yet dare with confidence affirm,
Those passions I saw in her of sorrow for her fact could not
Be counterfeit. For know▪ soon as she saw Delirus, in
The Castle, her tears in floods gushed forth, as
Witnesses, she sorrowed more for him, then for her self;
And humbly on her knees before us all, confessed her self
His murderer. At first he seemed with loathed eyes to
Look on her, who still her self, confessed her self to be
The principal in blood. This penitence in her, compassion
Wrought in him, who took her up and kissed her
In witness of forgiveness, she wept the more to see him
Pity her, for which she knew she did deserve the less
From him. So like two weeping Niobies they stood and read,
(As well as tears would give them leave,) their own
Misfortunes in each others face; and both in pity
Wept, while they themselves, themselves unpitied,
Yet for each other pitifully wept. When I (unused I
Must confess) to wash my face in tears, made up
A third in mourning. Which she perceiving, humbly
Thanked me for my compassion, and hoped it was
Bestowed on him, as what she not deserved. This,
And such like expressions of repentance, with streams
Of hearty sorrow flowing, wrought so in him, he asked
Her if she loved him dying, she so much injured
Living. Which she (as well as words and tears could witness
For her) answered, yes, so well, that were she but as
Sure of his, she should rejoice a faithful penitent in death.
This, in true signs of love, and sorrow uttered, he
Sends away (straight) for a holy man of the Church,
Who after some private confession on both sides made,
Joined both their hands in holy marriage; which
Done, as grief would give them leave, they both
Rejoyc't, and kissed; then wept again, so that my
Pity (in my tears) rather increased, then lessned by my
Stay. When urging necessity for my departure, I sadly
Took my leave, and left them prodigally bestowing
Their tears upon each others face.
I blame thee not Eugenio, for being a weeping
witness of their woes, when I can scarce forbear
At the relation; heaven knows, I wish them long
Life on earth to enjoy each others love.
Eugenio, Thou hast delivered miracles,
But know, I can believe what comes from thee,
Which had appeared much doubtful from another
Mouth; she hath purchased now my pity and my
Prayers, which I'll acknowledge justly due, and pay—
How now Fabius, weeping for your young master?
You cannot blame me Sir, when I am
Made the messenger of death.
How? sure it is not yet come to that.
I would it were not; or else some other had
Been made the messenger.
Prethe speak out, that we may understand you.
The King enraged, to understand his son
Was married to his murderer, commanded me to
Let them know about four a clock this afternoon,
They must prepare to dye, and keep their
Wedding in the other world. Which they (poor
Souls) with joy received, and thanked me for my pains;
(As willingly) as if I had deserved it:
It was but short warning, the gods
Prepare them for their long journey. Gentlemen,
I have some present business calls me aside, but
I shall soon return to share with you in sorrow.
You'll hardly find us unprepared for that.
But think thou Fabius the King intends this
Hasty execution; it is surely done to fright them into a
Preparation for the other world:
Sir, Pray heaven you not deceive your self.
The King is known too constant in his resolves,
To alter what he with seriousness protests, which to our
Griefs we too too soon shall find.
Eugenio; The tim's but short, and it is
But labour lost if we not speed. If he will have
Them dye let's move for longer time.
With all any heart, I shall plead hard for one.
Then let's away.—
Come my Artesia, dry those fair eyes, the gods
We know are merciful, and can forgive what
We can act. Thou hast with penitential tears, in
Streams of sorrow (from thy swollen eyes)
Washed off that guilt that clouded thy fair soul,
And dost appear as white as sainted innocence. We
Are married to another world Artesia, let them
Enjoy the happiness in this (if there by any in it)
That are wedded to it, whom we with pity, not
With envy must behold. And it is no little joy, amidst
Our sea of troubles, to see thee thus prepared for
Death; which we will embrace as greedily, as
Shipwrecked travellers do the longed for shore:
And O thou injured maid, in what celestial
Part so ever (thy now made glorious soul) doth hover;
Look down with pity and a forgiving eye, on us
Thy sorrowful murderers, who ready stand to
Sacrifice two lives, to appease thy angry ghost.
Give me thy hand Artesia, our time draws on apace,
And yet methinks I fain would have thee live;
Would my poor life pay the great debt we owe,
But the devouring law cries all or none. Thy blood
Artesia, sits with a confidence in thy fair cheeks,
As if it meant not suddenly to leave its habitation.
And it is great pity, now it hath possession, to turn it
Out of doors.
My Lord, I have but ill deserved this
Noble pity; and here my dying breath shall witness
For me, I would not live on earth after your
Death, to be commandress of the world. Yet know
My Lord, I gladly could both live, and dye, to serve you.
Dye, for to confirm this doubtful world, with
What a feeling sorrow for my sins, I could endure
Death, and live with you on earth; to witness to the
World how I could love, and honour you. Which
Since denied, I gladly shall embrace my death, and
Only grieve I have robed the world of you—
My Lord, your guard waits you, and you to
Death are summoned.
It shall be welcome Fabius. Thou see no
Panic fear about us.—
See how the lilies, and the roses in these
Fair cheeks undaunted fit. Why dost thou weep for us.
I weep (my lord) for you, and for my self; for
You, that you must loose your life; and for my self that none
But I, must be chose out the messenger of death.
Thou art vainly troubled, at what I thank thee for.
Come my Artesia, this kiss, now lead us to our deaths.
Heir's doings indeed, my Mistress going to pot
I'faith. What a deal of mony't has cost me to be a Colonel
To no purpose. A plague of that stripling stranger, he made no
Stranger of my money I am sure; the Jack napes firkt
Me too, out of my Deeds of almost a thousand pounds a year.
Pox of those German's bones, my Cozen Captain slue in Duel;
They were sufficiently revenged on me for the murder, but
It is no matter, I have saved my life yet, by not being
Too hasty. If I had married Artesia, I had been peppered i'faith,
(However I scope yet) for ther's Delirus, a brave spark
Must dye, but for offering to have her. —
Hey day Snap, what turned Gentleman?
Sir, no more such buggs words; which if you dare
But utter, I'll nail your ears to the wall; a punishment
Your honourable father (long before his death) wisely
Prevented, by leaving them behind him on the Pillory,
For Cozening such honest Gentlemen as my self.
For know you wretch, you that dare talk saucily, the
Gentleman that won your Deeds of you at play, when be perused
Them, and knew them to be the very same your father
Cozened my uncle of; He, in pity of my present wants
Bestowed them upon me, and they are mine.
And should I chance to hear you should but say they ever were
Yours. People should soon forget you were alive.
But as you may behave your self, I may forget all your
Past folly, and keep you company.
Thank you good Snap.
You draw no breath if I but hear that word again.
Pray sir, forgive me for this once and I'll remember;
How may I call you, are you a Colonel too?
No sir, by chance, I am no Colonel; the name I
Answer too, is Sunck-low.
Sunck-low; Methinks you are risen very high.—
Well honest Mr. Sunk-low, pray let me have your company for
Old acquaintance sake; you know you can loose nothing by it.
But by no means, be not known, how I was beloved, for
Mr. Sunk low, it were as much as my lif's worth, were it but
Known Artesia would have married me, for ther's one
Must dye, but for offering to have her.
Well Sir, I shall be careful, so you observe as I
Instruct. Farewell—
I am finely gulled i'faith, but I must wiser be,
Or else resolve, to wear Snaps livery.—
My Lord Sebastian, the gods (you see) have here
Miraculously discovered to the world, your daughters
Murderers. (And yet, but that we know them to be so,
They do not look like such) my Lord you shall have
Justice done. Delirus, were it thou a Stranger to my blood as
It ill becomes a Judge. And all you gods can witness, amidst
My mass of grief, I have rejoiced to hear your sorrows for
Your faults expressed, and willingness to dye. I must confess
Your have been cruel, bitterly cruel to your selves and us; for by your
Means (Heaven knows I not accuse your wills to do it) we have
Lost a general loss, unspeakable, a King, a virtuous King, never to be
Enough lamented. But I shall cease to add unto a grief,
This world affords no cure for; and will forbear to stop
You longer in your journey to a better.
But ere you go, take with you my forgiveness, and with it,
Both my blessings. And may that comfortable joy good men
Receive in death, fill both your breasts.
My gracious father (unhappy in so unfortunate a son)
We come with no set speeches here, for to prolong
Our wretched lives. Let not those aged eyes distil a tear
For us, we are prepared for death. Can you (my lord Sebastian)
And all the rest, show mercy to a dying pair, in your
Forgiveness; we gladly would depart this life in peace,
With all the world, if you vouchsafe, it may be so.
Our prayers, and tears speak for us, we both
Forgive and pity.
The gods above (with store of blessings
Reward your charity. We are now at peace with
Heaven, and earth, and fain would be at our expected rest.
Then Sir do your office.—
Hold, hold I say.
Who's? that dares contradict what we command?
If you have not forgot me Bellicosus, it is one
That had power to dare; nor do I know by what
Strange means I have lost it; know you this face—
The King? Long may the gods preserve your
Life, and make us thankful acknowledgers of his
Blessings in your Highness safety.
Pardon me gracious Prince, my sudden joy
Encountering so much grief, made a confusion in my troubled
Senses, and did retard my duty. Which thus upon my knees—
I beg forgiveness for; and what so ever (for'cd for the
Common safety of your distracted kingdom) I have taken
On me, here on my knees, in duty to your Highness
I surrender with tears of joy. Long live our gracious
King Amasius, King of Sicily.
Long live Amasius King of Sicily.—
My Lords, and Gentlemen, I thank you all
For the Loyal remembrance of your poor Prince,
Whose tender care shall be to study all your
Safeties, and preserve them. Rise Bellicosus, thou
Ever to be admired pattern of love and Loyalty. Just man,
I ask thee pardon for every evil thought, I ever
Harboured against thy virtue. Justice and mercy still
Walk hand in hand, I know thou can forgive it.
O my much honoured Lord, your virtue ever
Kept too strong a guard on vice, to let you act what
Could deserve forgiveness, from any but the gods.
My Lord, I shall become an earnest suitor, that
You'll vouchsafe to let a piece of justice pass on these
Prepared Offenders.
Offenders? Delirus, and the fair Artesia,
(If I mistake not)—
My Lord, what masque is this, for sure they cannot act
Offenders parts in earnest; pray make me understand you.
Forgive me then my Lord, that must be the sad
Reporter of my shame, and their unheard of cruelty.
In them behold the fair, and virtuous innocent
Aurelia's, murderers.
You have unjustly done, but to suspect them
Guilty, your witnesses are false, Delirus, and Artesia,
Murderers? it cannot be, it is impossible; poor soul she ever
Loved them well, so they did her; it is some villainous
Train, (by forgery) laid to betray their innocent lives.
And here I set them free—
My gracious lord they have confessed the fact.
It was then because they were ashamed to live
After so foul a charge maliciously laid on them:
Delirus, Artesia, speak, was it not so?
My Lord, and King, we are Aurelia's murderers,
For which foul deed, we have with tears and prayers
Made peace with heaven and earth, if you'll be
Merciful and but forgive us too.
With as much willingness, as I'll receive a blessing;
Rise both, rise I say, so. Bellicosus, I hope (in my—
Late pilgrimage, I have made my peace with heaven,
For all my youthful sins, and am (at length) returned
With joy. As for Aurelia (know Bellicosus) I
Loved her more then life; but since unfortunately
She is dead, and these her murderers (as they confess)
Have truly sorrowed for their offence; I here
Pronounce their pardons, which stands irrevocable,
If I command in chief.
Why then my Lord, you are to your self, and
All the world unjust. In your commanding hands you
Hold a sword, as well as scales; can it be mercy called
To act injustice. Princes, as the Ambassadors
From heaven are bound to right the wronged, and not
To wrong who should be righted. Behold this
Aged man whose bitter tears of sorrow cry out—
(Aloud) for Justice. And if my gracious Lord) you
Have made a vow (at the return from your devotions) to act
A piece of mercy; now show it on your self, in
Doing Justice on these prepared offenders.
O Bellicosus, thou art my safe Protector and my
Guide to virtue, behold this warrant for the justness—
Of my actions—nay be not wonder-struck,
She is alive—
And warm.—
I am o'rcome with the apprehension of a joy,
I fear my self unable for to bear. Welcome to
Life thou virtuous maid. Cornelius, Eugenio, all see, Aurelia
Is alive, and our lost Prince returned; safely returned;
Delirus and Artesia, ask mercy of the King, and
Fair Aurelia; they are good, exceeding good, and can forgive.
So, so, my joy must have a larger vent,
Or I shall burst, —
The gods preserve your Highness,—
And the much wronged
O my most Gracious Prince, and thou
Much injured maid, if ever tears, from a true sorrowing
Heart compassion moved; pronounce forgiveness
To a pair, whose tears in prayers, to the just Gods, we'll
Daily pay for your Eternal happiness.
Rise, and here receive (from us)
Forgiveness and our favour.
May all my actions prosper as I freely do forgive
You both. Long may you live and love.
The gods crown all your desires, with joy
And length of days.
My Lord Sebastian, I now must call you father,
For by to morrow night, I doubt not your consent,
To bed the fair Aurelia,
My Lord, we are your poor creatures, can only pay
Our daily thanks, for what undeserved honours you
Are pleased to throw upon us.
So please your Majesty, I see a pair
Of lovers met (I have long parted) desirous
To kiss your hand.—
Rise Ferdinando, and may thou joy in thy
Fair choice, thy faithful services, shall be
My Care to see rewarded.
Come Bellicosus we shall some mysteries unriddle to you,
And let you understand, Antonio's mistake in his relation
Our following days, do fairly promise joy.
He ignorantly fears,
The sailing of his ship, that Bellicosus steers.
ALL from our Author that I have to say,
Is that he hopes (as we) you'll like his play.
Confirm then what (as yet) but stands in doubt,
As you came welcome in, you'll go pleased out.

MY Youths have forfeited their pottle;
It is almost ten of clock.—
Come new new new new
Who buys my new books here?
What books have you got there, Sirrah?
Newly come forth, and newly printed.
Why (Sir!) here is, how conspicuously the Hogans are conculcated by their own Adulation.
Those are hard words, Sirrah.
But altogether in fashion, I can assure you, Sir.
Not with those that understand them not.
Sir, you do most prodigiously mistake; there being an order they should pass without exception where there is the spirit of pronunciation.
Pray let me have more facetious language, and less of your spirit.
Sir, I know your mind, And shall endeavour to pleasure you presently. Let me see, here is A true, perfect, and exact account of Justice Dapper, and his Clerk's Sodomitical revenue, to the great disabling, and impoverishing the Active, and well-affected Females.
Come give me that, what others have you?
Why here is another, of a famous Doctor's miraculous obtaining the Philosophers stone.
Doth your book speak how?
Yes Sir, that either the Stone, or a perfect receipt to obtain it, was preserved in a wrack, and cast on this shore; which hee hath purchased, to the unspeakable content of all his believers.
What is the price of them both?
A great Sir, I can assure you.
Sirrah, that's too much, here's three pence for you.
Why Sir? Justice Dapper, and his Clerk's revenue is worth three pence; And do you think the Philosophers Stone cost me nothing.
Here Crackrope, here's your money.
You make a brave trade of this, Sirrah.
In troth Sir, but a bare livelihood; (or where I get
A penny by the Philosophers stone, there's Dapper and his Clark
Gets ten pounds by the well-affected female.
It is very probable; for they often for a touch
Change Dross into Gold. Farewell Sirrah.
Thank you good Master, I hope to have rare news for you next week.
Come new new. who buys my choice new new here?
Pox on it. Here's a dispensation for oaths necessary, sticks damnably on my hands;
The people refusing to buy, as if they had it all by Rote.—
Adrastus, good day to you: what, at your study thus early?
A study your neglect invited me to spend my idle time.
Term not that neglect (Dear friend) which we'll confess
A fault of Drowsiness.
Come, come, you are sluggards both. I hope you will confess
You have forfeited your pottle.
VVee have. And when you please demand it;
You'll find us ready pay-masters.
But what books were you so seriously meditating on?
Strange books, which we'll peruse
When you shall pay your forfeits.
It wants not much of noon, what think you of it now?
I, I, let's march.
It is sure too soon.
Not to be merry, wee have been sad too long.
Then lead the way.
Come let us walk Symphronio, it is wee must pay:
Sent-well, me thinks thou art not half so active as thou were it wont.
Sure thou art grown rich of late.
It is (as you say) of late, if I be rich.
It is thy own fault thou art not. Thou art young,
When I was at thy years, I would have stirred my self in faith,
Such getting times as these.
Why there is old Firmstand would make half a dozen of us.
Yes, a weary with running up and down after him
As I have done. I have followed him, like his shadow,
Daily this half year, and to no purpose.
Sentwell, you give me no account of the five pounds
You had of me to furnish your Comrades
That undertook to trap him.
Had it been more 't had gone; I am out of purse an Angel
About that business. You reckon still what you are out of purse,
But do forget what I have brought you in.
(I will not say by my just information)
I do remember, I do remember, Sent-well,
But could wee trap old Firmstand,
VVee might lye still and rest a month.
Sir, I have tried all ways man could invent to undo him:
Intruded into his company, not only once or twice,
But times innumerable; And Proteus-like, varied my shape,
And faced him down that I was not my self.
Yet hee, so cautious (still) in drink, or other ways,
That not a syllable, tending to the States abuse,
I ever could hear him utter.
Why then wee must another way to work before hee leaves the town:
Hee never (yet) saw Perjurus my Clark.
Never, to my best of knowledge.
It must be so, Sent-well: Perjurus and you shall to his
Lodging go; And under some pretence of business
That Perjurus shall seem to have with him,
Fall in discourse ot'h State.
Which hee will hardly do, or if hee should, he will cautious be
What language hee delivers.
No matter, if that will not do, Perjurus and you shall swear.
VVee heard him speak treason against the State.
Right, very right.
Not so very right neither. Sir, you know me to be your creature,
But you have so slenderly rewarded me for such like actions,
I know not what to think on it.
No more, no more, all shall be well. I must away to see
There's no injustice done about sharing the VViddows goods
VVee cause to be plundered. Sent-well, let me alone
About eight of clock this evening to plot your business
For old Firmstand; and for thy part,
Thou shalt have treble share.—
I think so too. The treble Gallows, if wee had our due.—
Mistress, have you any acquaintance in the Change?
Not I, Clarathea: Hast Thou?
Not I truly; but it matters not much, for I have often
Found strangers to part with their Commodities
At cheaper rates then those that would be thought our friends.
You wagg, speak softly, or you'll be heard.
Now by the Gods I have not seen a rarer piece.
In all my travels.
Beshrew me but she is handsome.
Let's walk and observe her.
Dear Symphronio, wait an opportunity to accost her maid, and know
Her name and being.—
So quick, shoe's gone, I'll follow her, and it shall go hard but I'll be
Able to give you punctual satisfaction.—
But do you hear, you'll not be scrupulous to pay
this debt, and pimp when flesh invites.
No, no, my friendship stand engaged.
I'll take it, farewell.—
I feel an unaccustomed qualm, I hope I am not caught.
If I mistake not, she more then ordinarily eyed me.
Why how now Adrastus? have I stood the shock of so many sparkling eyes, to shrink now in thy prime of judgment? but
twill away again I hope.
Yet why may not she deserve my love? I have made no vow that I have broke, nor ere profaned at Cupid's Altar: Venus assist me then, and let it work.
Noble Adrastus, what all alone? whore's Symphronio?
Faith I have employed him in a business, he will not be scrupulous in telling thee.
See here hee is come. Sure it was some merry business hee looks so pleasant about the mouth. Symphronio prithee make us partakers of your mirth.
That you shall, just at the turning out ot'h change
I gave the Maid a pull by the coat.
What Maid, in the name of Cupped?
Thou man of ignorance, be silent, and give ear.
She turned about, and with a smiling countenance
Told me I was mistaken, they were not for my turn.
Her Mistress hearing her, looked back, and blushed,
Then cause her man go forward.
I, resolved not to return unsatisfied, fell on again,
And with a civil Confidence told her I had a reasonable
Request, she, in two or three words could satisfy.
At which she made a stand, and gave me leave to ask her Mistress
Name, and dwelling. She readily answered,
It was more then she had Commission for to do.
Yet for that I looked like an honest Gentleman,
(That could not harbour a dishonourable thought) she would.—
She told me her father, —And there she stopped, and sigth'd,
As if she thought him unworthy so heavenly a child.
At last she brought it out, telling me, her Master
(Father to that Gentlewoman) was called Gripe-man;
His dwelling in the High-street; And this his Daughter
And only child, was named Letesia.
I courteously thanked her, and so departed.
Hey day, what stuffe's here? all this ceremony for a wench?
You might have courted (with less ado) the holiest
Sister in the City, and have sped too.
Peace, peace you wag; upon my soul she is
A virtuous creature.
Prethe engage not thy soul for the female sex, they are brittle ware.
Thou would adore her sex during life,
Did thou but see her face.
Is it a friend of yours that hath the letting of her out,
You so extol her?
Leave jesting; By Jupiter I dare swear she is virtuous;
Would I had never seen her face.
By Cupped hee is serious; nay if the wind blow there,
Come, come, let's pack.
No cure for love like a good cup of sack.—
How now Clarathea, what taken up in the streets by Gallants?
Not by Gallants, Mistress; And for taking up the place
Was not convenient; which had it been
I should have saved him that labour,
And have taken up for him.
You should.
Faith like enough, had wee been both agreed.
Thou art a mad soul, but faith deal truly with me,
What his business was.
Cannot you guess?
It were strange I should;
Dost take me for a Witch?
No I'll besworn, nor I believe hee neither; for if hee had,
Hee would not have so earnestly enquired after you.
After me?
Even so; his business was to know your name and habitation.
Prithee wench be serious.
By my maiden-head it is truth.
That's but a ticklish oath, may I believe it?
Seriously, most true.
And did thou tell him?
I did indeed.
Urged hee to know no more?
But only so. It is your father calls, Away.—
That Lady should be right by her swimming gate.
I am provoked, and must have ease.
Sister, sister, his't, his't, why sister.
Would you ought with me, Sir?
Lady, it is dark.
It is very true. Sir! Can you make it lighter?
You may with standing on your head;
For there's no doubt you burn below.
My directions (Fair Lady!) will be
No stumbling block to you.
No, I dare swear, she will by them find
A very even way to hell.
This is some zealous brother troubled with rebellious flesh.
I will observe them further.
If my heartily proffered service appear not troublesome,
I shall perform the duty of a servant,
And wait upon you home.
Sir, I thank you. But me thinks your habit
And your language are not well matched.
However matched, they shall agree to do you service.
This is no Rogue.
Sir, to give you answer. I am this night to encounter
With a friend about some business
That much concerns my livelihood.
I believe so; And may concern his death
If hee procure not the better Surgeon.
Lady, shall I request you make me then so happy
As let me know where I may wait on you to morrow?
So it be in the evening, where you please.
Pray name the place most convenient for you,
And I'll not fail to attend you.
What think you of the Naked-boy in Flesh lane?
The hour now, and I'll not fail you, Lady.
'Tween four and fiveith' evening,
Till when, your faithful servant.
Lady, all happiness attend you.
O here is rare sport for Monsieur Albinus,
My masters friend.
Well, Brother Zealot, if my wits not fail,
I'll have an excellent Cure to cool your tail.
Drawer, be sure you let's have that that's right.
Sir, I'll play with any Vintner (confined within the circuit
Of a hundred mile) Canary against Canary.
Well Sirrah, let your wine be rich as your words,
And I'll bet on your side.
I'll warrant you Sir.
Mettle, welcome to town.
How do our friends in the country?
All well, Sir. Sir, here are letters for you.
Sirrah, I looked for you two days ago.
Sir, your letters speak my occasion of stay.
And how? And how honest Mettle?
Your faithful servant, Sir.
I have rare sport in chase for you.
For me, Mettle?
For you Sir, if you please pursue it.
Here is a cup of Sack to your welcome to town, Mettle.
I thank you, Sir.
Nay give him t'other cup. What news Adrastus?
The news is, they write to me for news.
Adrastus, Lore your top sail: Vive la Roy.
Come, away with it; Symphronio, to you.
Thanks good Adrastus.
Come Mettle, the rare sport you talk off, what is it?
Why Sir? some hour since, making enquiry for my master,
(Though somewhat dark) I could discover a zealous Brother
In hot pursuit of a wench; hee followed her,
I followed him: at length with complemental language
Hee assaulted her, who seemed somewhat shy at first;
At last, pretending earnest occasions for her excuse this night,
She engaged to morrow evening to meet him, twixt four and five.
The bargain driven thus, they parted several ways.
I followed the wench, and pretending my self to be his man,
Told her, my master had considered, and would request her
The meeting might be by three in the afternoon.
What design had thou in that?
Sir, as thus: That if in case you and my master
Fancy a scene of mirth, l'le bring you to the place
By three of the clock, where (without doubt)
You'll find her. Then you have time enough before hee comes,
For to contrive (which without doubt she will consent to)
Some punishment fits your mirth, and worthy so base an abuser
Of the Common-wealth.
Excellent Mettle! Here drink this for me.
You bind me to you, Sir.
Adrastus, Pox of your melancholy, there's no denial,
You must (in this design) along with us to morrow.
I shall consider of it.
Consider me no considers, you must go with us.
Hee must, hee must.
Mettle, come hither.
Prithee Adrastus, ingeniously tell me,
Doth not this wench, this she fayrie-female trouble thee?
Thou were it not wont to be thus off the hooks.
Wilt thou not laugh at me, if I should confess?
Faith no: I ever could distinguish between a friend
Seriously deserving pity, and objects fit for laughter.
I know not what you call being in love,
But if I not enjoy her, I must forget
There can be joy on earth.
Enjoy? Dost know what it is thou would enjoy?
She may be (for ought I can perceive) thou know
Not worthy thy affection.
Can there be so much beauty
Without a world of virtue and desert?
Symphromo, you know her fathers house.
If what lier maid delivered to me be true, I do.
Adrastus, few hours will make known if she worthlly deserve,
Which when discovered, and that I find her worthy thy affection,
Employ Thy Albinus: And if I fail to serve Thee, to my last drop of blood,
May misery enforce me take up arms against
My natural Prince.
The same wish I; And I know nothing worse.
My noble friends, I thank you, and cordially believe you,
What ever (through weakness) I deserve.
Now for contrivance, how to obtain that happy hour
Wherein I may reveal my thoughts to her, (none else being by)
To me appears miraculous.
That, I'll engage my life, you speedily shall do.
It is impossible, how can thou contrive it?
It were a happiness I dare not hope for.
Be not too incredulous, this I'll perform,
Or ne'er draw sword again.
My life for it, what hee undertakes, he will confidently
Go through with.
O Symphronio, I know his will, would hee had power equal!
I hope on the condition I do your business, you will
Accompany us to morrow to Mettle's Wench and holy Brother.
I will, and what lies in me to increase your mirth
I really shall act.
Why that's well said. Now for your business.
Some time this night will I procure a suit of clothes, with which
(My periwick left off) I well may pass for round amongst the Synod.
The issue of my business expect to hear to morrow.
Drawer, Drawer, to pay?—
Sir, you shall know presently.—
Name but your hour of return,
And we'll expect you here.
There's no place better; by nine or ten in the morning
I will be with you.
Symphronio, give me a note of the old mans house and name.—
That at our lodging you shall have.
Drawer, what's to pay?
Four shillings and a penny.
Eighteen pence club will do it.
Drawer, the rest take for your pains.
Thank you Gentlemen, you are very kindly welcome.
Peerce, show a light down stairs.
It is all paid ith'Kings-head,—
How have I lost my liberty? Was ever Maid betrayed
By her eyes as I have been?
Dote on I know not what, or whom?
Must I languish for what I know's impossible to obtain?
Thy hopes, Letesia, at best, are but that hee is noble, and a single man.
Suppose this be, where shall I find him, or of whom enquire
To ease my troubled soul?
I may as well search for a Diamond in the main Ocean lost,
And hope (alike) to find it.
And yet, how much desirous is my troubled heart
To entertain something like hope?
Why should his friend (for sure hee must be so)
Enquire after me? give my Maid money for discovering
My name and dwelling? All this is nothing,
And yet it may be something: No it cannot neither;
For it was his friend enquired, and sure his business
Only concerned himself.
Letesia, Thy little hopes is dished. But if his friend
Come in his own behalf, I may enquire of him.
And that will breed a jealousy, and may, suspecting
Him his rival, kill him, (which heaven forbid)
That must not be.
This is the third time
I have taken you alone in melancholy postures.
Venus grant you are not in love.
In love, with what?
That (if you please) lies in your breast to resolve me.
There is one of the pitifull'st holy brethren within
To speak with your father, that ever eyes beheld.
Know thou his business?
Not I, but something hee pretends to have with him
Of much concernment.
Know's my father of his being here?
Not yet.
I'll then go call him.
See, see, they are here.
Good morrow to you, fair Mistress.
The like to you, Sir.
Letesia leave us till I call you.
I shall Sir.—
Now when you please, begin your business.
Sir, the common report of your just carriage in the holy cause
You undertake, hath encouraged me to make my case known
To you, the well handling of which (I doubt not) but will
Be very advantageous to us both.
You say wonderful well, and to the purpose.
Pray proceed.
A repetition of such truths as I could justly deliver
To your ample satisfaction, how laboriously active
I have been in the advancing this great cause,
Would be too tedious for you to undergo the hearing of;
Though my present condition must invite you to believe,
I have been rather not rewarded at all, then meanly.
Sir, it is believed. Pray proceed to your present business
Now in hand.
I shall. And, to be short, thus stands the case.
There is (and not far hence) a wanting Gentleman
Whose former rate of living being high, will easily be wrought
The only instrument to work our ends, his acquaintance
Being great with a young Gentleman hath long born
Arms against us; And one that only trusts this
Gentleman with his absconded living.
Now your promise that hee shall share (of what your
Known Authority may easily wrack from him)
I'll stand engaged, makes him your creature.
A brace or two of thousands will not be hurtful,
And may be spared from twenty, which this my friend
Will make appear, not only that hee is worth,
But where it is.
Honestly spoken, very honestly spoken, and to he purpose,
Home to the purpose. And let me tell you, you need
Not doubt, but that your care, and wisely managing a business
So much concerns the general Good, shall largely be
Rewarded beyond your expectation;
Believe it honest Gentleman it shall.
Sir, I doubt it not. But for my friend, when hee hath
Discovered what wee can wish to know,
We'll hold him to it.
Right, right, our shares will mount the higher.
The rest I have to say, is, That I could wish,
And heartily, you would delay no time in being known
To this same Gentleman. Your summons shall procure
His presence here, or where else you please, at two
Hours warning. Though (if my poor advice may stand)
I think your house the only place.
By any means my house, Sir. And let me entreat you
Make it yours, and your friends. Faith, what think you
Of a piece of Beef, and bring your friend?
Come, come, you shall dine with me to day. Clarathea, Clarathea,
Fetch me a pint of sack, and call Letesia in.—
That baggage will have the green sickness,
Shoe's spoiled for want of exercise.
Sir, will you have a whole pint?
No words be gone, I say a whole pint.
Miraculous! hee is not long lived sure.
Well Sir, since you will have it so, I have considered,
We'll be your guest.—
And welcome, heartily welcome honest Gentleman.
Letesia, take special notice of this Gentleman and his friend, that when they come,
You bid them welcome, as my poor house can make them,
They will deserve your acquaintance and respect.
Sir, your commands, and their desert will merit much more
Then I can be serviceable in. But, to my power, I'll labour to deserve
From both forgiveness.
Such Angels of light, are only capable of forgiving
What wee poor mortals trespass.
No more, no more: Beshrow me Sir, this savours of the Court.
Pray Sir, let your charity extend so far, to credit me,
I hated much that Idol.—
Well said wench, Fill, fill.
Sir, here's to you, and your noble friend.
Thank you, worthy Sir.
Health to you. Fairest Mistress.
Your servant, Sir.
Lady, you cannot drink.
She is a very pingler, a very pingler.
Come Sir, t'other cup to you.
Thank you Generous Sir.
Verily it is more of the creature, then I have
So liberally tasted (in a fore-noon)
This sanctified ten years.
Sir, time (at present) is precious with me, having a very
Great influence on the affairs of this Country,
And must take leave, but shall not fail you at the hour of twelve.
Till when, I humbly take my leave.
Fair Mistress, your faithful servant.—
Letesia. I have invited this Gentleman and his friend
To dine with me to day, let us have some things extraordinary,
Twill not be lost: so good morrow, Girl.
I do believe so: you seldom do invite those you loose by.
You Powers above! lay not your heavy judgments on a feeble
Maid for het fathers sins; For I much sear the crooked
Paths hee treads, portend our house no good.
Just Powers! protect the innocent.
What wine is it, Gentlemen?
Your best Canary.
I'll draw you a pint of the best in the town, Sir
Adrastus, what is it a clock by your watch?
It is somewhat more then nine.
Albinus promised to be here before noon.
My life on it, that he will perform. And were you not
Acquainted with his change of habit, I am confident
You would not know him.
Is hee so metamorphosed?
As ever man was: Hee looks so like a factious Brother,
That the Synod, though utterly against any enjoying
Pluralities but themselves, could not less bestow upon him
Then three Benefices.
It were rare sport to be a spectator how hee behaves himself.
Wee shall have that at large when he returns.
Sir, there is one below desires to speak with you.
Why did not bid him come up?
Faith (Sir!) hee looks so like a factious Brother,
I thought you'd be offended.
Go, prithee bid him come up.
It is hee; wee must take no notice who hee is
Before the Drawer.
By no means.
Save you, Gentlemen.
You are welcome, Sir! I am glad to see you well.
Pray sit down. Drawer, reach a chair.
And how doth our noble friend?
I come, I come; Anon, anon, Sir.
In perfect health; And how, and how, Gentlemen?
Faith, how do you like my shape?
I hardly can believe that thou can be Albinus.
Very likely; nor that you are (this day) to dine with Letesia
Your fair Mistress.
Yes; that I shall be to dine with her I doubt not.
Thou man of little faith.
Mettle, fill me a glass of sack.
Here (Sir!) here's wine.
Here Symphronio, here's to Hollands Master-piece.
You are very merry Albinus.
And so may you be if you please,
I am sure you have cause enough.
Prithee Mad-cap be serious, Did thou see her?
Yes, by this flesh and blood did I, and feel her too;
Had I not loved thee well, I had become my own petitioner
And deceived thy trust.
Dear Albinus, be serious; And let me know
The event of thy proceedings.
Mark then, and rejoice, for by our friendship
I'll utter nought but truth.
Then I believe thee; Prithee proceed.
Then thus: This morning early (as well Symphrenio
Can witness) I parted with him. And as hee directed,
Towards Gripe-mans house I steered my course.
Where when arrived, and knocking at the door,
There comes a wench, demanding what my business was.
I, in a zealous tone (as if I had worn my own clothes)
Told her, I desired to speak with her Master; (whose condition,
I had ever a pint of wine with a poor botcher, his near
Neighbour, sufficiently enquired) she entreated me come in,
Telling me, her Master (she thought) was ready, but not
Come down. Away she went, and no sooner gone,
But down comes a bad father (for so I am given to understand)
To a most virtuous child. I told him I had a business
To impart that much concerned him. Hee immediately
Had me into a handsome parlour, where I was blessed
With a sight of (I must confess) your beauteous Mistress;
(If ever my eyes beheld one) her father commanded his
Daughter and Maid-servant forth the room, which they
Obediently obeying, I began my story, which as wee go
I'll tell you; for dine with him this day, I have engaged my self you shall.
And this, dear friend, is truth.
I know not how to husband this poor life I hold
To make thee satisfaction.
Nay, if you complement, I'll dis-engage my self again.
Thou know with thee I cannot.
Come, we'll knock off, and all go to my chamber.
Where you must smug your self up for your encounter.
Mettle, wee must not forget three of clock this afternoon,
The whore must be remembered.
And the rogue too, or I am much mistaken.
Mettle, pay you the reckoning; Come, let's go.
I shall Sir. —
SIr, wee thank you for your noble entertainment, and shall as men
You highly have obliged (to the uttermost of our poor power)
Faithfully serve you.
Gentlemen, you are heartily welcome to such poor fare you have found.
And what was amiss to day, Letesia,
Pray let it be your care next time to mend.
For (Gentlemen!) I shall expect you'll be my daily Guests.
Sir, pray a word with you. —
Sir, wee humbly thank you, and rest your grateful servants.
Lady, content; wait on your fair soul.
May I deserve the honoured title of your servant.
Sir, I want a judgment to pay desert, yet never hated
Where I ne'er found any.
Sir, be confident I shall not fail (speedily)
To put it in execution.
I doubt it not.
Lady, the gratefull'st of your poor servants kisses your hand,
And humbly takes his leave.
Your servant, Sir. —
It is hee: You just Powers! that have vouchsafe't
To hear the poor petitions of a distressed Virgin,
Be still assisting the humblest of your hand-maids.
What should his business with my father be?
There must be strange pretences of large profit in it,
They hardly else should be invited here.
My youth, and unexperience I have in Cupid's school,
Puts me in doubt of what I fane would credit.
I do confess (I blush to speak the rest) I eyed him more then
Became my modesty to do; (I hope hee thought not so)
And if I not mistake, his looks betrayed much more of love
Then business with my father. Yes, yes, it must be so,
And yet it may be otherways. Suppose (which Venus grant hee may)
Hee love me (if it be possible) as well as I love him,
The hopes I have to enjoy him with consent of my father, is so little,
Despair awaits that thought.
His looks speaks too much of honesty to be rich enough, (as times go now)
For his consent, No, no, Lotesia, it must be one dares lift his hand
Against his sacred Prince, (which sure hee dares not do)
And by sinister ways hoard up unlawful Wealth,
Must (by my fathers choice) be made my Bridegroom.
But I'll as soon embrace a Leper,
As tie my self to what my soul abhors.
What meditating, Mistress, who your noble Guest should be,
You dined with all to day?
That requires but small study;
They are men that come about business to my father.
My maiden-head upon it, you will not find it so.
Why dost thou laugh?
To think how you mistake.
Prithee, unfold thy riddles, and let me know thy thoughts.
Cannot you call to mind, you ever did see one
Or both of them before?
Never to my best of knowledge.
Why then I can assure you these are the very Gentlemen
Wee sawith' Change the one of which enquired of me
Your name and dwelling.
That cannot be, they were all Gentlemen.
If you examine strictly, so you'll find these to be.
For know, hee that wee took to be the pitiful holy brother,
Is, in disguise, the Gentleman enquired of me for you.
It is impossible.
It is so; That I should be mistaken.
What should this mean, Clarathea? Can thou guess?
Yes, that one (for both I cannot think)
Would fain make love to you.
What ever it be (dear wench!) keep secret,
Till time reveal the event.
Be confident of me; for when Clarathea shall betray
Your trust, may she live neglected,
And dye forgotten. —
Symphronio, Your haste hath brought us hither an hour
Before our time, and it is too soon to drink
After so full a meal.
It was well considered; Let me alone to drive away some
Time without the help of Sack.
Mettle hath perfectly got the part I gave him (if the
Bulls pizill put him not out)
And I have mine ex tempore.
Doth the Rogue know hee shall be basted?
Gently, hee doe's: But I am resolved to try his utmost
Patience; see here, they are come. —
wee are resolved
(Not knowing how wee may be encountered
When our expected company arrives) to pass by drinking
For half an hour. Mettle, you are perfect in the part I gave you:
Sir, I have not coned this three days, yet
Dare prefume I am perfect.
Well, look to it, you know your forfeit, if you but miss a word.
If you are ready, come what will, I'll run the hazard.
But where are your properties?
For those, I shall furnish my self below. —
Pox on it, I shall ne'er hold out without some drink.
Drawer!
Here, Sir.
Sirrah, fetch us a quart of sack. —
Here's Mettle. Prithee Albinus forbear your sack,
They'll soon dispatch the Scene.
Well sirrah, let the sack alone till wee call.
I shall, Sir.
Come, come to your sport, prepare, prepare.
Let me see, let me it, gotten this week by incomes
From Mistress Dunce a Common-Council mans wife, — Three pounds, a gold Ring two silver spoons worth thirty seven shillings.
From Mistress Zeal widow, — forty shillings.
From Mistress Tartwit a Cooks wife, — three pounds.
From Mistress Fat a Tanners wife, — fifty shillings.
From Mistress Phime Feather-woman and widow, — one pound ten.
From Mistress Grease a Tallow-chandlers wife, — one pound two.
From Mistress Error widow, — forty shillings.
From Mistress Extortion a Brokers wife, — Tastetie to line a cloak.
From Goodwife Shuttle a gifted Weavers wife, — two fat Geese.
From Mistress Fly-blow a Butchers wife— a filver bowl worth three pounds.
Why here is nineteen pound, nineteen shillings got with much ease.
How willing these poor souls, in body, and in purse,
Are to contribute to the Elect!
For (to say truth) wee are chosen, but it is to cozen them.
I must abscond: My spiritual exercise grows too laborious.
O for a Cornish Curate from beyond sea, to officiate in my
Absence but for one month!
Would they forbear me on the seventh day, I should rub out
Much longer, and please much higher on the week days.
But to stand two hours spending (to no purpose) is too much.
Who's there? Upon my life another client.
A Greek or Hebrew book displayed doe's well.
Here's one desires admittance to you.
Who would you speak withal?
With your reverend self, divine Sir.
O hee is right, hoe is right.
Come in, Friend.
Save you, holy man.
You also: What may your business be?
A scruple Sir of conscience, I fain would be dissolved in.
Resolved, you would say, friend.
It is very right, resolved I fain would be.
Time with the Elect is precious, but to such good works
As these wee are called; Friend, open your case.
Sir, I am poor but however have brought that with me,
That shall show I am willing (to my utmost strength,
And ability) to give you satisfaction for your pains.
Honestly spoken, very honestly spoken,
And conscientiously; pray begin.
Then thus I shall discover my secrets to you.
I find my self (of late) much given to rebellion,
Towards a poor woman, yet, young and lusty.
A neighbours wise of mine, who (I fear) if I enjoy,
Will lye very heavy on me.
Now, Sir, I have endeavoured to become a true
Subject to my self, but finding my endeavours no way prevalent,
I shall desire to be resolved, how far
Your dispensation (she being none of the Elect)
Will extend towards the satisfying our venial desires,
How far inclinable to your desires find you our Sister?
Verily Sir, comfortably inclining.
Is her husband of able body for the procreation of the Elect?
That case is doubtful, and much to be feared,
Hee having known her this two year and upward
Without fruit thereof;
The woman having ever been laboriously endeavouring.
Brother, enough, enough, I say.
I have with attention heard you; and shall (as considering
It my own case) instruct you for your best advantage
Both of soul and body.
As for your rebellion, if your cause be wholesomly
Advantageous to your profit, you may rebel,
As many others, and my self (at present) do.
But so to rebel, as of necessity must be prejudicial to you
(Our sister being impoverish't) I shall advise you to take
This comfortable admonition from me, which is,
That you put on the Armour of Providence,
And cleave to a more beneficial sister.
Divine Sir, I thank you; and do begin to find your
Wholesome and comfortable admonition effectually to operate.
And that you may perceive, I came not altogether unfurnish't
With what, I hope, shall (in some reasonable measure)
Satisfy you.
Good Sir, I doubt it not.
You shall not need; Behold this ell of mettle,
It is a good one: the Bull it once belonged to
Cost me eight pounds.
Marry, I shall give nine for yours, if you waste it not
Too much in the service of the Elect.
Sir, what's your meaning?
That you shall soon discover.
Now hear me with attention:
Thou Metropolitan Imp of Satan, Monster of mankind,
Thou compound of Fornication and Adultery.
Nay, nay, stir not, nor let nothing of noise come from
Thy perjured tongue, which know can mollify as much as tears can rocks.
Now, in a softly tone, answer me (if it be possible) nothing but truth
(A thing by thee rarely uttered) to what I shall demand.
You know one Fly-blow a Butchers wife.
Fly-blow, Sir?
Yes, Fly-blow Sir. Know, wretched miscreant, she hath discovered
Thy black soul to me; and should thou but utter one
False syllable to those known truths I shall ask from thee,
By all the Gods, I'll add to my intended fury, and geld thee.
Forbid, you Powers, geld me; I am undone then.
Sir, I shall confess any I know, you please to ask me.
Good Sir, be merciful. Geld me.
If truth so long forgotten by thee can be again remembered,
You may be merciful to your self, and save your Dowcets.
Thank you, good Sir; and be confident, what you shall
Please demand within the power of my utmost knowledge,
You fully shall be satisfied.
Then to the purpose: How long have you been acquainted
With Mistress Flye-blow?
Verily, I shall most punctually resolve you.
Sirrah, answer me not in that sniv'ling tone
You cheat the world with.
Why, Sir, it is some eight weeks and odd days
Since first I did enjoy her.
Villain, did you enjoy her then?
Pardon me Sir, I mean no otherways then
The sanctified company of a zealous sister.
Alter that tone (I say) or I shall whet
You understand the rest.
Sirrah, be short; what money, and monies worth have you had
Of her? For Villain, know, that misled
Woman is my wife.
What do you start? (I must confess, I blush to own her)
Come, be brief, and to a penny satisfy my demand,
Or you grow fat, and sing well.
I understand you, Sir, and shall cast it up to a penny.
Let me see, my book will tell me; let me see,
The eleventh of August last, —twenty shillings.
August the eighteenth, —ten shillings.
The second of September, —forty shillings.
The fourteenth of the same Month,— twenty shillings.
The first of October, —A silver bowl, to the value of three pounds.
This is to a penny, what she hath been pleased to bestow.
And upon what terms did you receive it?
Merely her charity, for good
And wholesome admonition.
Indeed such admonition requires consideration,
Which you shall have. Come, come, deposit
What with your Mountebank tricks
You have juggled from her.
No consideration, Sir, for the pains
I have taken with your wife.
For that, let me consider—yes, I have thought
Of some valuable consideration, worthy your care and pains,
But you must stand to my curtsy,
The bowl and money being tendered me.
I thank you, Sir, most kindly.
Nay, nay, for that, let it alone,
Till you see what I shall deserve.
Here is to a penny, Sir, what I have received of her.
Now, Sir, how ever you have plaid the knave
By deluding my wife, you shall be sure
To find me a man of my word.
Hold Sir, if you be a man, consider, and be merciful;
Good Sir, consider my Coat.
It was well remembered; I shall, I shall, and lay it on so much
The harder, you may feel the better through it.
O Sir! draw in your pizil, (if you be a man) and spare me
Till the next Lords day is past, or I shall be unable
To scatter the sanctified seed of Reformation into the bowels
Of our dear Sister-hood.
Their reverent hearing, and your instructions
Claims good places in hell.
Sirrah, give thanks I am out of breath; Farewell.
Cheat me once more, I'll send thee home to hell—.
I do believe you; A plague go with you, and your pizil.
The Rogue hath made jelly of me.
Complain of this, I dare not for my credit, which, I must more
For my profit, then my conscience value.
This must not unrevenged go thus,
The slave is honest, that claws enough for me
To ruin him, and his whole family.
How now, Mettle? This was but a rehearsal,
When is your real day of performance.
Zwounds, I know not what jest there was on my side,
But I have all the reason in the world to believe
Hee was in earnest.
You shall excuse me for acting the sinner again in jest.
Indeed thy natural doing of it is in earnest,
Though wee applaud thy sufferings in jest.
But how? but how, in faith Mettle? was it not smartly performed?
Yes, on my side, I'll besworn.
A plague on it, my gown had no lining in it neither,
Which you ne'er considered.
Pox of a bad memory, I had spared thee else—.
There is a Gentlewoman below enquires for you, Mettle.
Tell her I'll wait upon her straight.
Drawer, bring up some of your best sack.
Another Scene as long as this had choak't me.
I shall Sir. —
Mettle, take your Lady into the next room,
And as you find her tractable to your defignes, acquaint us.
I shall Sir.
She must have my assistance to persuade her to it.
Come Mettle let's to her.—
Drawer, fill me a brimmer.
Adrastus, here's to the fair Letesin, earths richest Jewel.
Too rich (I fear) for Mortals to enjoy.
Such another desperate word, and, by all the Gods, I'll court
Her for my self, and hope to enjoy her too. And, I think, I look
As like a Mortal (in this shape) as any brother in town.
Save you, Gallants. Pray bid this Lady welcome.
I hope you speak not in the plural number.
What think you, Lady, do I appear a Gallant?
Sir, though it be a thing much given to people of my profession
To pry into the habit of a man, I look into the mind
And nobler part, and where I find most worth,
I there most honour.
Spoke like the Queen of Amazons;
I must salute your judgment.
Sir, you mistake, those were my lips you kiss't.
Lady, my ambition was to come as near
Your judgment as I could.
Lady, your servant.
Nay, pray sit down.
it was well this
Gentlewoman had virtue enough to guard her,
I should suspect her being with you alone else.
Make you no body of Mettle? Or do you think,
Because hee pleasures you sometimes,
He will pimp for all your friends?
What say you to this, Mettle?
I say, Sir, it is an office I never understood.
That's very strange, truly.
To you, I do believe it is; I think I had best take up
The next room against our Brother comes;
Hee must not know she is in our company.
By no means. Carry a pint of wine into it,
As if she called for it.
I shall, Sir.—
It is a precious youth.
Lady, Health to your dearest servant.
Thank you, noble Sir. —
I must have this pint pot, hee is below already.
Mistress, pray go into the next room,
And act your part to the life.
Let me alone; hee is not the first knave
That I have made a fool of.
Not by a brace of thousands. Now will she pick his pocket,
And hee lay felony to our charge,
Then where lies our scene of Mirth?
Faith, under the lash. Symphronio, how do you
Like the Vermin you have had conference?
They are together, the Rogue kiss't,
You might have heard him hither.
Gentlemen! what's your plot? as yet
I am a stranger to your design.
Mettle, and I have studied that.
What it is, the event shall show. But now you talk of plots,
How goes your business forward?
Adrastus, art thou not a hungry?
Thou feed (to day) on nothing but thy Mistress eyes,
And those you fell upon without any grace.
I do confess
I hardly know what other food wee had; but as for grace,
The Gods send thee but half as much.
Symphronio, hee is now admitted.
Hee has got the Old mans good will.
What, to marry his Daughter?
Soft, and fair; there's somewhat more goes to getting his good will.
Hee hath free admittance to visit his fair
Mistress when hee pleases,
Marry, I believe, you might have had
Fathers, Mothers, and all the Kinns
Consent besides, (in a less time) to have matched with your Lady
You parted with but now.
Thou look like one that would
Have married us, had wee been both agreed.
The Rogue drinks like a fish, and she plies
Him with half pint draughts; she hath much ado
To keep his hands above board: the other cup will ripen him for your company,
Then it is my cue to Enter.
Will not the rogue be troublesome?
Not long, if hee drink so fast. And it
Shall be my care that hee shall want none here.
Mettle, how doth she bear her drink?
Hang her, she'll bear any thing is laid upon her.
Now will I enter.
And wee prepare to entertain the slave with gravity.
Is all contrived, Symphronio? What punishment wee
Lay upon the Rogue? for something wee must do worth his
Remembrance.
It is, it is; all is contrived.
She hath prevailed upon the Babe of Grace.
And hee prepared to enter.—
Come near, come near, good Cousin.
Here's none but are my special friends,
I can assure you.
Save you, Gentlemen.
You are most nobly welcome. Mettle,
A chair there for the Gentleman. Mistress, pray sit here.
Thank you, good friend: why, I had thought I had lost you all.
I think I have not seen you, nor your friends here, these eight or nine days.
This whore is got half drunk, and she will do it rarely.
Lady, it is true; but blame not us, but our occasions, that enforced us
To it: our business now being over, we'll be your daily visitants.
Sir, a health to the greatest honourer of this fair Ladies
Virtues.
Cousin, the Gentleman drinks to you.
Thank you, noble Sir.
Help the Gentleman to some wine.
Here Sir, please you drink.
Thank you, Sir; Lady, here's to you.
Sir, she should have it last.
Say you so? Then here's to you, Sir,
This fair Ladies servant.
Thank you, Sir; Mettle, help the Gentleman.
Help, help, the Gentleman is troubled with the falling sickness.
How is it, Sir? cheer up, ell's well again.
How is it, Cousin? what, not well, sweet heart?
Pray fetch him some strong water.
A pint at least. Courage, noble Sir; how is it?
Very well. Sir,—but that I have got the hey-cot.
Your Cousin, Mistress, is drunk.
I hope not so.
Verily not drunk—I am—not drunk—I must
Confess I—I—I have tasted liberally of the creature,
But you shall see—I am not drunk;
Here's to our Prince.
How dares hee drink that health?
I thank you, Sir.
Hee dares (now) drink his health, hee dares not name
But to revile, when hoe's sober.
That's bravely done.
You'll pledge me, Sir?
That I will.
Here, Lady, here's to you.
Thanks, noble Sir.
The beast sleeps, the wine works rarely.
Shall I produce? The engine is in the next room.
Come, bring in, bring in,
Twill cleanse him better then a purge.
Sir, do you hear? do you hear?
Come, come, hee is fast.
Gentlemen, wee must have all your hands.
With all our hearts.
Do you want my help?
No, Mistress, you have acted your part already.
Wee four make the complete number.
Lady, pray shut the door.
Come, in with him, in with him, in with him.
So, so, it is pretty well for the first heat.
Something hee would have said, could hee have spoke;
Hee grumbled vilely.
Incomparable sport! Fie, fie, you let him breathe
Too much. So, so, to work again.
Prithee, let him down, it has wrought;
The Rogue stinks like a pole-cat.
How rank a Traitor smells.
Very true; especially, in the nostrils of the righteous.
The Rogue hath tired me; hee looks white,
I fear wee have killed him.
No, no, hee breathes.
How, do you like this sport, Lady?
So well, I fain would have some more of it.
The slave hath put my shoulders out of joint.
What, shall wee leave him so?
Wee must per force, till wee have breathed our selves.
Hee that is weari'st I'll supply his place.
I fain would help to give him t'other stool.
Let him recover first, and then for t'other bout.
Fill me a glass of sack.
here's to the dish you feasted on to day.
Thanks, dear Friend, this Vlllain hath almost
Broke my wind. Lady to you.
Your poor servant thanks you, Sir.
Mettle, fill some wine; Come, now for t'other bout.
A match, come Gentlemen, four corners and a fool.
A knave, I am sure; come, ho-vast.
So, so, so; it is well, it is very well; Gently, gently, down with him; hee grumbles.
Hee is not drunk, but hee hath tasted so liberally of the creature.
All this will not bring him to his senses.
Here's money fallen out of his pocket.
Sirrah. diminish not a penny of his ill-got coin,
But put it in his pocket.
I shall, Sir.
Mettle, help me to a Butchers prick or two.
Here's a brace of great pins, if they will do.
Yes, yes, they'll serve; give them them,
I'll swear you have performed it rarely.
What follows now? —
Drawer, take you a care of this beast in mans clothes,
Here let him lye (without disturbance) till hee wakes.
Take charge of what hee hath,
That nothing be diminished.
Sir, be confident, none shall come near him but my self.
Sirrah, make him pay the reckoning, and if hee enquire
(As questionless hee will) tell him wee are all strangers;
If hee refuse to pay, wee will.
Here's for your pains.
Sir, I thank you, and carefully will perform your will.
Good holy Brother, I must make bold to pin
This paper on your breast.
Farewell, my fleshly Saint.
Wee are all indebted to this Lady for our Scene of mirth,
Without whose help wee had done nothing.
Lady, here's half a piece to keep you honest.
Thank you, courteous Sir, I shall endeavour to practise,
And what in my power lies, I shall be glad to serve you in.
Your servant, Lady.
Come, let's go, the sport will be his wonder,
When hee wakes, which (by the Drawer)
Wee shall know at full. —
where have I been? Was ever man in such a plight as I?
Sure I have been cast into a sleep, and hung in some painted
Cloth, to personate the prodigal.
What's here? a paper pined upon my breast?
Perhaps I am in Turkey, and this my price of sale.
I must make bold to see how I am valued.
Here lies a fleshly saint did lately prank it,
Instead of sheet, doe's penance in a blanket.
This may be all true, And I believe the Author might have writ
To'st too. Yes, yes, it must be so, for I am pocky sore.
They have given me purging comfits too, for I'm
Damnable moist behind; What company was I in?
I remember nothing but a whore, and that she would
Needs carry me to some friends of hers, and they have used me thus.
No hat, nor cloak,
It is strange, they should not be thieves,
And stranger that any other should use me thus.
Here's all my money to a penny.
I shall unfold this mystery in time.
I hear by anon, anon, Sir, this is a tavern.
The door is locked, and I must knock,
Though to my shame, I do it.
Anon, anon, Sir.
Who ever used me thus, sure they dare not
Speak of it, for fear I come to know it, and punish them.
Drawer, how came I in this pickle?
Do you not know, Sir?
Not I; prithee, honest Drawer, tell me, and
I'll be thankful to thee.
Sir, I cannot tell, I do assure you.
Who was in my company? Did you tend this rome?
I did, and if I not mistake, there was three or four Gentlemen
And a Gentlewoman.
Know thou any of their names?
Not I, nor can remember I ever saw any of them before.
Where is my hat and cloak?
I have them safe below.
That's some comfort yet; how long stayed the company here?
Four or five hours.
Is the reckoning paid?
Not a penny.
Why did you let them go?
What Authority had I to stay them?
They gave me charge of your hat and cloak, and said you lost the reckoning,
Which you not being in a condition to deny,
They gave me charge of you, and went their way.
What is to pay?
A mark, within a penny.
Fetch me my hat and cloak, and here's your money.
I shall, Sir.
This Drawer is a rogue, and privy to my sufferings,
But I must hold my tongue,
Sir, here is your cloak and hat.
And here's your money.
I hope, Sir, you will remember the Drawer.
I would I had as much reason to remember you
As you have me,
I made you rare sport, without all doubt.
Here take your blanket, are not the corners stretched?
A very pretty wholesome way of purge,
A plague of such Physicians.
This is the fruits of winching: show me the stairs;
I'll cautions be, how I come in such snares. —
What should this business be, my father laid, so strict
A charge on me to use them with respect?
It is out of some strange hopes of profit they assure him.
How I should learn it out? I know not.—
Mistress, the Gentleman that dined here is at door.
Enquiring for your father; shall I admit him in?
Why, thou know my father is not within.
Ell's one for that, I believe you can doe his business better;
I'll call him in—
Clarathea, Clarathea: —
This wench, will shame me.
Sir, my Master is not within.
Here's my young Mistress, please you to impart
Your mind to her.
I think I have given him hint enough,
His looks speak him not faint hearted.
I'll leave you both to vent, or burst.
Fairst Mistress, I have something of importance
To impart to your father.
Truly, Sir, hee is abroad, but if you please to expose some
Little time to the hazard of his coming home,
You are most kindly welcome.
Virtuous fair, One I thank you. And since your
Noble soul hath denied to honour me with this your
Courtous invitation, Pardon me, sweetest, if I endeavour
Not to let slip these happy minutes, the Gods (for ought I know)
Hath lent us to enjoy for our unmatchless happiness.
Nay start not, sweetest fair One, I have no frightful
Story to relate; I have forgot all things of horror
Since I became unable (more) to serve
My too much injured Prince.
You have been then in these unhappy wars?
Pity it had been, I should have lived to see my Prince
Engaged, And I in debt to nature for my health
And limbs, and been a looker on.
You speak like one our Prince may justly call his
Loyal subject; it had been happy wee had all been such.
Lady, so entirely I loved and honoured you,
(Ever you delivered this your Loyal soul.)
That were it (in nature possible) this might have added.
Know then, I have escaped these wars, to be (by your virtuous self)
Adjudged to live or dye.
Can you love? love me so, to make me yours.
Sir, it is a question, requires much more deliberation, then
A sudden answer. I must confess, it were a means
To quench those flames (you do pretend to burn in) should I,
And to a stranger to, so easy part, with what (so much)
Concerns my life and honour?
Mistake me not, sweet saint, it is but a hope I beg,
Which a small encouragement (from you) will make me proud of.
Nor can I possibly urge, or dare expect that satisfaction from you,
That may impair your honour; let me but hope,
And it shall be a happy prologue to my ensuing story.
Sir, The hope you can expect from me, and I in honour give,
Is this; I nothing see, but that your person, and your noble mind,
Deserves a far more worthy wife then I can be.
But, Sir, I have a father, whose choice I must prefer (in duty)
If hee gives consent, it is probable I may not repent it.
You have with joy unspeakable transported me
Above the clouds, there let me drop, my fall might be the greater.
O! unsay that again; that very name of father hath chilled my blood,
And sounds despair to my beguiling hopes.
Too well, I know what choice your father aims at;
Nor is fit you should obey him, where the choice hee makes
Tends to your ruin.
Can the Woolf and Lamb embrace? Or can there be
A sympathy, where nature hath made antipathy?
Nor are you obliged (by duty) to obey him in what's unjust.
You know his soul is black with sin, Forgive me, Dearest,
That I am forced to put you in mind, of what, I know,
You gladly would forget. Can you expect to enjoy one happy hour
With him, whose sole delight must be to hoard up wealth,
Gotten by base sinister means.
Besides the daily curses (for his sake) you'll have.
Your door washed too, with tears of Orphans, and such
Oppressed poor, as hee shall hourly boast hee hath undone.
For know, sweet Creature, the free access wee at this present have,
To your fair self, is only that wee will assist him
In the ruin of a young Gentleman (for ought I know)
Unborn; but as wee do pretend, knowing his griping way of gain,
That I thereby might have the happy means
To make my love known to you.
I am a Gentleman, though (I must confess) a husband
Far unworthy so Angelical a Beauty.
Nor have I to my wish (for your virtuous sake) means
Worthy your acceptance. But what I have, (though not so poor to want)
Shall be enjoyed by me, only to do you service.
And as you are known to be your fathers Heir,
You may suppose his wealth, more then your virtue, is what I aim at,
Make me but happy in your self,
Let him enjoy his pelf; which, when I covet,
May I live long forgotten of my friends, and loose you love,
Which (with my life) must in one grave be buried.
Sir, what you have said touching my fathers life,
I could with tears wish were not true.
And for your love to me, I thank you, which
(To my poor power) I'll labour to requite.
Pray take this for present answer.
Indeed, I am not well, and must retire; only
This, your language, I shall seriously weigh, and at our
Next meeting resolve you more at large.
So heavens preserve you. —
Angels protect thee, sweetest of thy Sex. —
Wee have been at Old Firmstand's Lodging, but to no purpose.
Hee left the town three days since, but will return for certain
Two days hence at furthest.
It was ill luck you mist him, but since his stay from town
Will be so short, the matter is the less.
Sent-well, here's money for your present wants,
You must about a business presently for me,
You know the Golden-head.
Very well, Sir.
There lies a Gentleman, his name Adrastus,
I think you have seen him.
Marry have I, Sir.
So much the better: Be sure you dog him
Forth his Lodging, and if you house him in a tavern (as ten to one you will)
Use all the slights you can to Riggle into his company,
Which, if you cannot do, be sure you take a rome, or wait so near him,
You may discover what their discourse is.
And let me know what you can gather this night;
And if their plot (contrived) stand right, it is rare.
I'll firk my youngsters when they come to share.
Sir, I'll do my best, and doubt not to perform your will.
Go, go about it straight, make haste. —
Yes, yes, it must be so;
There's danger in delays: The Girl
Must from temptation, or shoe's lost.
Some few months more she will be head-strong,
And carve her own bits, which I'll in time prevent.
 Letesia. Letesia.
Letesia, here's news for you.
Your uncle Miser, writes old Avaritia, likes well of
The match between his son and you.
And that because hee would have you near one another,
Hee thinks it fit you should be at his house,
And sojorn there a while, till things between us
Fully are agreed on.
You see, Girl, what a care I have of your well doing;
My thoughts are often hammering about your good,
When you full soundly sleep; young Avaritia
Will make a wealthy husband for thee.
Up with your trinkets, and prepare to go:
Nay, no study, I have said it, and it must be so. —
Indeed it must not. Good Avaritia, match in your own
Dunghill, it will avoid a bastard breed.
Money makes men adored, faith not by me;
Virtue and honour crowns felicity.
How now, Clarathea? Ar't sure Sent-well is employed
To pry into his actions?
Am I sure I live? I stood by when your father gave the charge,
And the Villain undertook it greedily.
How shall wee do to give Adrastus notice of it?
This slave will discover else, they do delude my father,
And then wee are all undone.
Why, faith, for once, (to do you service) I'll to
His Lodging my self. I heard what directions my Master
Gave him. Let me alone to acquaint him with the plot;
But now I think on it too, I'll not go neither.
Dear wench, why not?
Why Faith, cause you'll be jealous.
Prithee, leave thy jesting, by my life not I.
Tic more then time thou were it gone.
You have prevailed; and I resolved to venture. —
Marry, Sir, this is something like.
I see my Taylor can fit me without taking measure of my conscience.
The same quantity serves, how large so ever,
Fools report it is streach't.
What a handsome bug-bear it is, to 'fright men out of a happiness,
Their reason (were it not enslaved, by doting on a world in the moon,
To recompense their pining Misery) must prompt them to enjoy.
Persist in beggary, do, and let your admired conscience
(Ushered in with rags, and meagre chops)
Attend you to your graves; Where (if your dust
More brighter shine then mine)
Be thankful to the Glow-worm
Let me embrace this world, till I forbear
(For conscience sake) to enjoy, with full delights
What lust unsatisfied desires.
This dumb God I'll adore, Money, to thee
I'll sacrifice, thou art my Deity.
How now, Rogastos?
How draws the lungs of our new Government,
The air of profit, (sweeter then are the Arabian winds)
Into our garrison?
Doth conscience (still) part freely with her outward
Garments, trusting the soul for to re-cloath the body?
As yet they gallop to their sufferings, as wee can wish;
Only the Lady that wee ravished,
Hangs still an arse.
She still continues firm in belief,
It was the private Soldier.
She doe's; but wonders much there's no severer search
To apprehend what (foolishly) she terms her foes.
For that wee shall (with fair pretences) gild
Much thicker then her eyes can pierce.
As thus; the wrack shall force a guiltless prisoner
To confess the fact, which done before such
Witnesses as soon shall publish it,
Wee may (with safety) murder him,
And it cried up for Justice.
Securely contrived, (my better Genius) and politically;
But we'll forbear a while, to try what gentler
Means may work upon her (easily) beguiled faith,
Which I shall make my study.
Rogastos▪ haste, and give order the Foot
Be all drawn out.
That part of the spoil wee seized on last, I intend
For to distribute to all an equal share,
As well to those remained in garrison,
As the party marched to take it.
It will unanimously beget a will to Act
What ever I prescribe.
Your judgment's deep and noble.
What you command, I'll see (with careful speed)
Shall be performed. —
Well, go thy ways, Conscience is merciful,
And troubles not thee.
Why, here's a Proselyte newly converted to our side,
Out-doe's us all in mischief.
I can dispense to trot, in what some in the world
Call sin, but love not to run off my legs too soon.
Humanity commands me hate the violence
Of his tyranny, which (for our own ends)
Wee must privately embrace, how ever intend
For to depress his fury.
It is policy makes us conspicuous to the world,
Which wee, with sly hypocrisy must
Endeavour to consociate, and then this little.
World's our own. —
How am I obliged to fair Letesia for this discovery?
Her virtue will redeem her fathers soul.
Devoted pilgrims with their tears,
Could not have cleansed by prayer.
Shoe's thy own, Boy; this very act of her's
Confirms it.
Adrastus, wee must have gloves; and for her
Garters, let Albinus and I alone.
Would it were come to that.
Nay, if you cannot stay, Mettle knows where
To help you to a cooler.
Would I had one for you, as hot as I could wish.
Why, Sir, do you think my Master wants a pimp?
No, I'll besworn, as long as thou serve him.
Mettle, hee doe's abuse thee. Go see if thou
Can discover such a person sneaking here about, Letesia's
Maid described, and bring me word.
I shall, Sir. —
Letesia goes contrary to the rules at court.
They choose to entertain, such as may stand for foils to beauty.
Were but that wench (she keeps) trick't up like them,
She would out-shine them all.
Me thought she did deliver her message to me,
Not like one bred to serve.
What punishment shall wee invent, to inflict upon
This Rogue, hath undertook to pry into our actions?
That must be thought on.
Where shall wee dine to day?
Faith at some tavern, if but to see what
This same Rogue dares do.
Agreed,
What hast thou discovered?
I have, Sir, a Rogue, marked out for such designs,
He's walked some half a dozen turns about the door.
You may easily know him, A short squat Villain,
Crop't close to a large ear pendent, with a broad blew list,
Crooked backed, splay feet,
And a seared Conscience, Sables.
Herald-like spoken, but that hee left out his Arms.
Give me but leave, and I'll engage
To torture his black soul to death.
Pray try your art, and take your own freedom.
But, Mettle, Must not wee share in the laughter of his sufferings?
You shall, Sir, and be an Actor too.
Mettle, go you before: Bespeak a dish or two of meat
Where wee last night sup't.
I shall, Sir.
You two shall go the back way, and I'll take this.
Come, Albinus, then we'll take this. —
I dare say hee loves you; for when I had delivered
My message to him (poor Gentleman!) o're-joyed,
Hee knew not what to say. Till anon, collecting his scattered
Spirits (ashamed I should take notice of his passion)
Hee made me this answer; Sweet heart!
Pray (from me) thank your fair Mistress for this
Noble Curtsy: And let her know, the life I hold
(Too poor a thing to part with in recompense of this great favour)
Is only by me valued, but as it is her's to dispose of,
I took my leave of him,
And what I could to avoid it, hee forced me
Take a piece, and bid me tell you,
Sometime this afternoon, hee would
Not fail to wait on you.
But art thou sure he will come?
Are you sure that you would have him come?
So sure am I he will come.
Dear wench! what (in this straight of trouble) shall I do?
My father hath plotted with his brother Miser,
That I must into country, there to be made sure
To that most sordid wretch, young Avaritia.
This must I be forced to do, or study quick prevention.
Study? I understand nothing of study in it.
Too well you know your fathers temper,
Whose resolutions are unalterable.
What then can you resolve, but bag and baggage (with Adrastus)
To be gone to some secure place of safety?
And you do not know, things being past his reach to compass, how the
Gods may work his alteration.
I have thought on it; And must conclude it so.
I had rather marry an Ethiope, then one
I shall be shamed to own. You Gods above, forgive
My disobedience to my father, which you well know,
Virtue and honour both enjoin me so. —
How now friend, are you used to these same fits?
Now (by my life) it was a shrewd one.
It is gone; have you no harm, Sir?
What harm? I understand you not,
Did you not see it then?
What dost thou mean?
What should I see?
The Gods protect me from such another sight of horror;
Sure it has hurt your shoulders.
What thing? what hurt? what, or whose
Shoulders? Art thou not mad?
Not yet; I do not know what such
Another sight may do; For sure in a more horrid shape
The Devil ne'er appeared.
Dost take me for a Devil?
You were not far from one but now,
When hee sat upon your shoulders.
Upon my shoulders?
I am glad (for your own sake) you neither saw
Nor felt it: I am afraid there is some fearful sin
Sits black upon thy soul, that's unrepented of.
You Powers, protect me from such encounters! Farewell. —
What should this mean? me thought hee did appear
Too truly 'frighted to abuse me; His action could not be
Counterfeit; his colour went and came:
I am a Villain, that's certain.
Heavens, protect the man. What art thou?
I do conjure thee in the names of all the Gods, speak,
Why in that hideous shape dost hang on that man's shoulders?
Who, mine, Sir, do you mean?
Why dost not speak to it? See, see, it is down and beckons thee.
As if the business it had on earth, concerned thee only.
Heavens bless me, Sir, I see nothing.
Look, look, there it walks; speak to it (I say)
It beckons thee to follow it: So, so, now it is gone,
Just there it vanished.
Into what a cold clammy sweat 't has put me?
The Gods guard me from such foul fiends.
How dost thou feel thy self?
Sir, truly, not well. I am somewhat 'frighted
At what, you say, you saw.
It is impossible; Did thou not see, nor feel it.
Not I, Sir, truly.
It is wondrous strange.
Friend, look into thy conscience, and
There search if unrevenged blood
Cry not for justice.
Truly, Sir, I never had a hand in murdering any body.
I must confess, many a poor soul I have undone.
Thy conscience be thy judge, which well examine,
And I am confident you'll find it clogged
With fearful crying sins. —
It is true, it is true, they are crying sins indeed.
These are no idle fancies; this Gentleman is a stranger too,
And did but confirm what the former saw.
Me thinks my sins circle me round, and in a ring
Unmasked, appear each in their horrid shape.
Gripe-man, (thou Author of my ruin)
Thou now appear'st a monster. 'Curse on the time,
I ever saw thy face.
You Gods (above) forgive me. It is time well spent,
My eyes being open (now) for to repent.
COuld you perceive it wrought at all upon the slave?
Rarely; the Rogues bones made music in his skin.
I strongly do believe (if the slave be not quite given o'er)
It will convert him.
Hang him, flint hearted slave, hoe's unrecoverably spent.
Hee vanished like our Devil, hee has
Quit his employment upon it.
I tell you, hee is converted.
Symphronio, prithee tell me, Were it
Not strange Albinus should turn converter
Of the wicked?
Strange as a frost in August.
Yet you had hanged your self, had I not wrought you means
To court your fair Letesia and what had then (think you)
Been of your soul become?
Adrastus, What can you say to that?
I grant hee did a pretty handsome cure (indeed)
His Master-piece.
Indeed, your Mistresses.
Time calls away to visit her.
Gallants, where shall I see you some two hours hence.
We'll wait you at our Lodging.
Agreed.
Adrastus, My service to the fair servant
Of your fairer Mistress.
Hangs your mouth that way?
No, you mistake, all that I have stands
That way.
That may be doubtful. Farewell.
May all thy undertakings prosper,
To thy noble souls desire. —
Sure, wench, thou did mistake; Art sure hee promised to be here?
It is more then two of clock.
By none but Lovers clocks; I know it wants of two.
Now, what say you? Am I mistaken?
Upon my life it is hee. —
My modesty will not give me leave to acquaint him
With what (more then the world besides) my heart desires.
You Gods, I hope he will move it first,
That wee escape together, for I shall never do it.
The joys the Gods delight in most,
Still wait upon you, fair One.
I should ungrateful bee, should I not wish you share in them.
Preserver of my life, so much have you engaged your creature,
It were a study too presumptuous for mortals to requite.
If I have done you any, truly, I am glad. But
But what, blessed Saint?
But I much fear, it will not lye within the
Compass of my weak power to do you more.
Rob me not of a joy, the hopes of
Hath transported me.
I am, by the express command of my father, charged into the
Country, and there to try how I can like a suitor of his choosing.
And one (hee is resolved) whether I like, or not, must be my husband.
It is an unjust resolve; (I do perceive, your Maid
Is no stranger to your counsels, Lady.)
I should ill reward the service she hath done me,
Should I requite it with distrust.
There's nothing (I dare think) I dare not trust her with.
It is a noble performance, to be faithful,
And deserves high reward.
Now since you are pleased to acquaint your poor Creature
With what so near concerns you,
I humbly shall request what you resolve to do in it.
Sir, you urge to know what lies not in my power
To satisfy.
I gladly would be assisted (by some
Judicious friend) what I should do
In such a weighty business as this is.
Then it is no time to dally.
Do you love me so, to make me Master of your self?
A happiness (by all the Gods) I would not change
For what (besides) this world affords—
Pray Mistress speak — no —Sir, she doe's.
Be confident (I know) she doe's.
Is this a time to nourish bashfulness?
Sir, pray think what's to be done,
And for the rest,
Take poor Clarathea's word.
Thou art not mad.
No, nor would have you so tame, to fool your self
Out of the joys you aim at, next to heaven.
Pardon me, Sir (I pray) if I appear too saucy.
It would make one mad to know as much as I.
And see how doubtfully she would appear, in what
(I know) is in her heart confirmed.
Sir, she is yours. Will you confess it Mistress?
It is a truth, my breast (spite of resistance)
Will it self discover.
May I enjoy this blessing without envy from above?
No enamoured God descending to forbid the banes.
Religious fires, without passion kindled,
Temperately burn, and last to out-live the envious world,
Whose narrow breasts we'll give leave to suspect,
Not comprehend our joys.
Why this is as it should be. Come foundlings,
Now wee shall have you as bad as t'other side.
Leave billing, and resolve what's to be done.
Thanks, good Clarathea, for thy remembrance;
For I had almost lost my self in joys unspeakable.
My dear Letesia, (so I dare call the now)
Hast thou made choice of any course to steer in this
Same sea of trouble, mixed with joy?
Truly, not any I; My shallow judgment is too weak
To comprehend what's to be done in things of this high nature.
Sir, That's your part to act.
Which I, with all respectful care will labour to perform to our
Souls comfort. And to our great assistance, I have two noble Friends I dare
Call trusty, as thou thy best Clarathea.
Sir, be confident, that little life I have, shall willingly (in toil)
Be spent to see your joys completed.
It is believed, Clarathea, and it shall be my careful study to find
Out some noble way of requital. My Letesia, I now must leave thee
Till my next return, which shall be speedy, as our safety shall permit.
My trusty Friends (I must impart my secrets to) expect
My coming; whose help I must make use of in our speedy flight.
This kiss, and so wee part.
My person moves, with thee remains my heart.
Farewell, thou faithful servant.
The Gods protect you, Sir.
Amen to that. Clarathea, thou hast plaid the wagg
Sufficiently to day, and yet I do forgive thee.
For, I confess, I am glad it is out; I would not have it to do
Again, for half my fathers ill-got coin.
And now you talk on it,
You should do well for to provide good store of it.
You know not what may happen.
Happen what will or can, I'll not diminish one penny
Of his wealth, so many curses goes along with.
No Clarathea, he shall not say I robed him.
What money, and jewels of my own
I have, il'e carry with me, the rest let him enjoy.
I think I hear him Cough•, come let's away.—
Did not I tell thee Adrastus, that her Maids message was a prologue of confirmation to your late scald bliss. Well the Gods give the joy, thou hast the mine of virtue, her Maid's, a handsome scab, and well qualified. I read it in her face.
Albinus: Thou dost not know the worth that's in that Virgin thou talks't of, by all the Gods (setting Letesia aside) I know not where to match her, believe it, she is not what she seems to be, (I mean) not born in so low a condition, but by some misfortune fallen to it.
I must confess, her language, shape, and carriage speaks her of better breeding, then her presents state makes known. But what course (Adrastus) do you intend to take, you cannot hope to have her Fathers will to this.
Tic true; And therefore would advise with you, what's to be done her Father being resolved (speedily) to send her out of Town.
Let him do so, then seat her on the way, and bear her to some place of safety, in which we will both assist you with our lives and fortunes.
Noble friends, I thank you. But that must not be the way, for first, her Father will not send her with a less guard then two, from whom, we cannot take her (with our security) without we take their lives (which all the Gods forbid) but they'll pursue us strictly. No, no, I have contrived a way much safer. You Albinus, (since you have pleased to proffer me (so fairly) your assistance.) I shall request to visit the old man in your accustomed disguise, t'will clear me from suspect. You shall enjoy Symphronio here in Town; And fair Clarathea: who I intend to leave, to give me constant notice how her Master takes his Daughters flight, as also which way his genius drives in search of her, while fair Letesia, and I, steer to Geetrudenberghe, where (by Mettle) you shall have timely notice what's further to be done. How like you this contrivance?
Why very well, as can be wished.
It stands for me, on goes my mouldy Clothes again, il'e once more be a brother. And when I know my part, let me alone to act.
The next is, that you prepare all things in such a readiness.
Clarathea, here is somewhat in this Letter
I fear me will displease thee.
That is impossible, if it may tend to do you service,
Virtuous fair one, I have since my departure from thee (with the assistance of my faithful Friends) concluded of our remove, which will be so sudden, that I must request thee to prepare those necessaries you take with you, to be in a readiness at a minutes warning. Remember me to thy faithful Servant, who, I must request to stay behind (some small time) to observe her Masters actions. My noble Friends (I leave behind) will upon the receipt of a Letter from me, accompany her to Geetrudenberghe where we shall stay their coming. Fail not to burn this Letter.
What says my Deer Companion, i'st not too great a trouble to inflict upon thy patience, to stand the shock of my Fathers fury, when he shall know I am gone? 
Not any, I am better acquainted with his temper, (let him but hold his hands) then to be troubled, at what his tongue can utter.
Come then my best Clarathea, for till it be thy will to alter it, I still shall call thee so, we must go pack up for our remove, for tic to me unknown, how soon we shall be summoned.
What you command, I ever shall with joy obey. —
Rogastus, the orders from our General speak, we must be careful both by Sea, and Land, what strangers we admit into our Garrison. Pray let it be your care to see the word be given, that no• an Officer of mine may plead ignorance for his neglect. Something there is in it that much concerns the State: And as I guess, they fain would make a stop, of some that would desert this Land, which we must look too.
Sir, can you guess what Persons they should be they aim at.
Faith not, my Major will return this Night, of whom I do expect some Letters of import.
Sir, tic strange to me, the sword being in our hands, we should from time, to time be put of thus, and not receive our pay.
Tic true, but a little patience pays us. For know, the time approaches near for us to pay our selves, (a frugal way our Masters have all had before us) and now our turn comes next, there being a powerful At my raising to oppose us. The which, before we can encounter, the Country we must drive, as what concerns us most. And Rogastus, he's a fool, sense ruin we intend that in the act, can't get enough to spend.
Tic happy news, I long to be at the sport. How I shall laugh to see the Bacon eating churls upon their knees for six pence in the hundred of their own coin which il'e in State deny them.
Rogastus take order that your sentinels, bawl not for relief, as they have used to do. Your Corporals use no justice, in their relief, but as affection guids them, which, let me but find out, Il'e lay them neck, and heels.
Sir, it shall be my care to see it remedied. —
Tell me when she went, and where she is, or by my vexed soul, il'e rip thy hear out, and find it there.
You may rip it out if you please, which when you have done, t'will but confirm your error. Pray Sir, Argue but reason, would it not ill become your servant to examine you, where you go, and what your business is abroad?
Why tell me, Thou Witch, could she convey her things forth of the house without your knowledge? Go, not a syllable of reply. Find her me out or i'll invent tortures unheard of for thee.
Sir, The Witch you threaten, cannot conjure for your Daughter, I will assure you.
I am undone, betrayed, to my eternal ruin. Where should this Whore be gon? some villain hath enticed her. I'll find her hints out, if the expense of my estate will do it.
Save you worthy Sir.
Not so worthy, as you conceive. I am not worthy my own Child's keeping, but I will turn the infide of this whole Land outward, but I will find her.
Good Sir do, and all honest men shall thank you, we then shall have it right again.
I tell you Sir, I have lost my Child, my only Child, and I must find her out.
If you find her out, she must be above one and thirty, and then (I hope) she is past crying. Sir you are not well, il'e visit you so me other time.
I cry you mercy Sir, I am distracted, nor can you blame me much. My Child, my Daughter, my only Child is gone.
Pray Sir whither.
You do not mock me Sir.
Not I can assure you.
Why then I tell you, she is gone (for ought I know) to the Devil.—Ent: Sent-well. Sent-well: My joy, and comfort's gone.
Your torments then are coming.
You are a comforter for the Devil.
Again, where, where, the Gods protect me; where, what Devil.
Art thou Mad too.
Yes, and tic you have made me so, look back upon your sins; That Devil you talk of else, will haunt you, as he hath done me.
Leave of thy idle talk, and send thy spirits abroad to find out my Letesia.
If she be lost find her your self, for so you shall for me, know (if she be gone) tic a just plague the Gods have laid upon you for your cursed life. Isle be no more your Drudge, and instrument of wickedness, you have undone my soul, and body. You now may list me down, amongst those wretched souls, made miserable by your tyranny. The Catalogue of which is infinite: But isle unmasque you; And to the world display such horrid truths, shall vex the Friends of hell to see themselves (by you) out down in villainy.
I am amazed, the whole world's conspired against me. This Villain is possessed. O my brains, my brains. Great Lucifer, I do conjure thee summon Boniface, Mahomet, Copernicus, Matchiavil, Ecphantus, and all thy Learned Politicians in thy black Caos to invent a torment (yet unheard of) to inflict upon this slave. For it is resolved you dye. This Council set, your torments (then) grow nigh —
I fear, he is distracted past cure, you touched him to the quick.
I speak but truth Sir: And I wish it may do good on him, he hath long gone astray.—
Sir, you stir not a foot further without a Pass.
Which I could easily have procured, had I suspected any strictness in your Garrison.
Sir, the favour will be great, please you to let me have a Lodging in the Town, which I shall pay for. to their full content. And for yovr cutesy, I shall study some noble requital, worthy your acceptance. And that I press thus earnestly is in the behalf of this young Gentlewoman unused to travel.
Pray be satisfied, we have no lodging, or if we had, we keep none in our Garrison for Whores.
Thou foul mouthed Villain, take what thou deserve.
 
The Gods be merciful, and gurard my Love.
Villain; Thou hast slain me.
Thou lys't, my sword did but it's office, it was thy tongue that hurt thee.
Kill the slave, has murdered our Lieutenant.
Hold, let's carry him to our Governor.
Bear the Lieutenant to his Quarter, make haste, and call our
Surgeon, least he bleed to Death
Come Sir, you that dare kill our Officers in our
own Garrison, you, and your Minion,
must along with us.
Honest Soldiers, as you are men, procure in some good
House, a Lodging for this Gentlewoman, for which,
I liberally will reward you.
What I have done, my life shall answer.
Lay not uncivil hands on her, ner'c harboured evil thought.
Trouble not your self. The Governor will provide
Lodging for you both, shall hold you
Look to the Wench, she faints.
Angels protect thy Life, how it is sweetest.
She comes again unto her self. Mistress cheer up, (poor Gentlewoman) here is none shall hurt you.
I can receive no harm, if he be well.
Why I am well (my Dear.)
Soldier, your Language speaks Christianity.
Pray drink this, your reward is still behind
if you'll assist this poor distressed Maid.
Sir I thank you, but can do nothing till our Governor hath disposed of you. Then if we can do you, or her any service, you shall command us.—
Was he so much enraged.
By all the Gods, he will run mad, (I fear.)
And that same Rogve, that we possessed, the Devil haunted so,
is so far from jealous that we did abuse him.
That he will engage his soul (which now he doth intend
to Husband to his best advantage.)
The Devil really haunted him.
Works it any good on the flint hearted slave.
The most reformed man alive; And preaches nothing
but he's damned. And that he thunders in his ears, to the great terror of his guilty Conscience.
How takes Gripe-man such language from his Mercury?
Why faith, but scurvily; And conjures up the Devils to invent unheard of torments to afflict him.
I cannot guess, till he hath spent his fury.
I long to hear of Adrastus his safe arrival with his Mistress,
would one of us had gone along with him,
he was but weakly guarded, with his Man Mettle.
It was his own desire.
Tic true, his Letters, which I speedily expect, will clear our doubts.—
BE merciful you Gods; And let me see my Child
before my breath depart this totterd mansion.
But how dare I invoke the Gods that must be just
in punishing my unexampled life.
How gashly (now) the wounds in my black Conscience
doth appear. So numberless, and mighty are my horrid sins.
The remnant of my life, only to think them over
would be too little, what time would they require
(then) to be sorry for.
First, let me (with advantage) make amends, those many
souls by my unheard of Villainies, made miserable,
whose Prayers, may as a Cordial refresh my far spent soul.
My horrid treason against my just, and sacred Prince
for vengeance cal's aloud.
The ruin of my Country, which (to my best of power)
I have been actor in. The least of which considered,
I am but gently scourged.
O my Letesia, poor innocent Girl, thou hast not fined
to be a sufferer with they cruel Father. It was I conspired
thy ruin—it must be so, my covetousness
to match her to young Avaritia, hath forced her to this flight.
You Gods above, restore me but my Child; And il'e become
your faithful Penicent.
And what I have unjustly from poor souls detained,
I will restore, till all cry hold, they h've gained.—
Have you heard how the Council of War hath disposed of the young Gallant that wounded our Lieutenant, t'was a shrewd hurt, t'was ten to one he had not kilt him.
I hear he shall be hanged.
You are mistaken, for when he had his sentence to be hanged,
hating so base a Death, he proved he had been an Officer
In the late war against us. And must be shot to death.
Trust me, I pity him, he seems a gallant person.
Me thinks it is great injustice he should die,
The Lieutenant (as the Surgeon doth give in) being likely
To recover.
It is true, but since it is their pleasure he shall die
What cannot they pretend to take away his life.
They say he fell upon our Guard, and that (though not
Discovered) he had more aid which fled, though
I dare say, there's nothing of it true, could I but save his life
I willingly would venture a limb.
And he that shoots him, may his hands rot off for me.
Amen, say I. Come let's to the Parade, where we
Shall know, what hour he dies, and who are
Chose his marks men.—
My eyes have not beheld a more diviner shape.
Her beauty hath inflamed me to that height, I must
Enjoy her, though I survive no minutes after.
She dotes upon that slave that wounded my Lieutenant, for which
He dies, for when she knows him dead, her love
Like the affections of most women, will die with him.
But should she continue obstinate, and hate me, as having
Power to save his life, I then were further off obtaining
My dossiers. But I will court her high. Rich gifts are
Baits, that beauty often bites at. Laborious cunning,
With a weighty purse, in time will do it.
If nothing will prevail, this follows next by course
What I not fairly can, Isle do by force.—
I wounder much we hear not from Adrastus:
I know no reason for it, I have been strangely troubled
Since his departure, the Gods grant all be well.
Symphronio: you shall along with me to old Gripemans
To see if he continue in his Frantic fury.
Besides we shall of Clarathea, understand what course
He hath taken in search of his fair Daughter.
God when you will I am for you. —
Mettle: I somewhat fear the goodness of thy news
Thy looks betray some sad mischance.
Nay, if thou weep it is vain but to suspect it.
It is sad indeed. For if you make not haste, you'll never see
My Master more alive.
Is he so dangerously sick.
No, Sir, he wants no health, this letter will take you off
From wondering at my language.
He must not long out-live him, by whose means he falls.
peruse those sad contents.
Come, come Symphronio: 't is no time to grieve;
But to resolve, what 's to be done, whore's fair Letesia:
She is close prisoner in the Governor's house,
And none but such as he appoints, comes near her.
Poor Gentlewoman, I will redeem thy Adrastus
Or perish in the attempt.
Symphronio: I shall entreat thee, stay (yet) a while
In Town, and visit Gripeman as my Brother:
The rest contrive thy self, only to see what course
He steers to find his Daughter.
Clarathea shall along with me, her present service
May stand Letesia: in some sted.
And be confident, you shall (by Mettle) speedily hear
From me, how all things stands.
For so it may fall out, that you may do great servis
For Adrastus here.
Mettle: run to Clarathea: tell her, she must provide
(Immediately) to go a long with me to her Mistress.
I shall Sir,
Since you conceive my stay may be a furtherance to my
Distressed friend, I faithfully shall study (here) to act
Whatever your directions shall employ me in,
Thanks noble Symphronio: Fare thee well
My brains are all on fire.
I long to act, what, I in heart desire
Lady, you do exceed in grief, you wrong your beauty
To lament for what's not in your power to remedy:
He is but a man you grieve for: And there are more
It'h World as handsomely active as he.
Clear those fair eyes, and tell me, if my self
(I must confess unworthy) may deserve your love.
Do you love me then.
My actions (fair one,) shall satisfy that doubt.
I take you at your word, then set my husband free.
That's not within the compass of my power to do.
You are a dissembler, and profane the name of Love.
This is not nobly done to triumph over a weak woman,
(Through her ill fate) your slave:
The conquest you will gain by it, may well be added
Amongst the Trophies of your great victories
Achieved in this rebellion.
Lady, the usage you have found (and from a stranger too)
Deserves more civil language. But i'll forget it.
And doubt not, this foolish passion over,
But you'll consider, and be sorry for it.
Never. For know, lay it in thy power to make me empress
Of the World. I would not out-live my husband
Many hours to enjoy it.
Lady. I see this is no time to urge a serious answer from you.
But yet remember, you are in my power, and (if you please)
You may be happy. Think on it.
So fare you well.
Where am I, or of whom can I expect relief.
Was ever wretched creature so miserably unhappy as I am.
And shall Letesia live, and my Adrastus die,
And I his murderer?
Thou might have lived brave soul the pattern (still)
Of virtue. But I have robbed the World of such a juel
The Gods esteemed too rich, to bless this earth with.
I must (in justice) sacrifice my life to him that I have ruined,
For on my knees (before the gods) I vow
When I shall understand his death, caused by this
Act of mine, one hour not to out-live him.
There is no hope of mercy (on honourable terms)
From such a heap of sin, as this.
Was ever woman courted (by a villain) to her dishonour
Just in the act of murdering her husband?
And shall I not revenge thy death (brave soul)
It is decreed.
That hand that murders thee, that heart shall bleed.
Coldest thou (Clarathea) readily find the way to the
House we came from.
Most undoubtedly I could.
And give perfect directions to Letesia.
Such, as she shall not miss.
But Sir, are you confident, they will be honest, in what
(I must confess) they cheerfully have undertook
to be most secret in?
O Clarathea. The woman was my Nurse, whose milk
Innocent, as the Livory it wore, still sympathized
With Loyal blood. She can betray nothing
But her own fear, how much she wants to do.
Not suffer for her friends.
Adrastus and Letesia's lives, thrown upon less assurance
Might (though in their safeties) justly
Have called me murderer.
Pre thee Clarathea: how do I look, May I not pass
For currant, without a superscription written
On my back, this is a Traitor?
You may. But Sir, the danger's great you undertake.
Dost thou consider mine, and slight thy own.
Thou wonder of thy Sex. Thou make me (blushing)
To confess, that when I have paid my debt to friendship
By laying down this inconsiderable life.
I have but initiated thee, a woman.
Pardon me worthy Sir, I do confess, I may resolve,
But yet, may stagger too, in the performance of such a piece of friendship
Had I not a guide to light me, more strange
Than is a blazing Star.
It is too pitifully strange (indeed) to find true friendship.
Farewell (brave soul.) Be careful of the hour
And directions of the way. For Letesia's impatient Love,
Should she but miss Adrastus: some few minutes,
Might be occasion of their certain ruin.
This kiss, so, farewell earth
Our meetings next in Heaven.
And may the noble example of thy friendship
Be as a Star to future ages
To light them unto virtue.
Sir, if I not mistake you are a stranger to me.
What may your business be.
Sir, I am brother to a Gentleman (made happy in your
Acquaintance) his name Adrastus.
Away out of my sight, I know your business well.
Sir, know, I have left those cursed ways, that would have
Headlong hurried me to Hell. Be gone I say.
And if you be his brother, tell him I do advise him
To repent, and not betray his friends.
This is strange, he is converted.
I must another way to work.
Sir, you do mistake my business. My brother not being well,
And sorry to think what he had undertaken, sent me
To let you know his change of mind.
And bade me tell you, in any thing that's noble, and honest,
He faithfully would serve you.
But to betray a friend, or do an act unworthy,
He would not for the World.
It is honestly resolved, you now are welcome.
I love your brother for it. Young man follow his steps.
And covet not by base sinister ways to hoard up wealth,
Least thou be Father but of one virtuous child,
And have that taken from thee.
Sir, your tears hath easily gained credit in my belief
It hath been your sad case.
Indeed it hath, and could I but enjoy my Child,
I would (with comfortable tears) labour to wash
My too bad sins away.
But 't was my fault, seeking to match her to a covetious
Wretch, she thus deserted me.
Suppose, in this her time of absence, she should bestow
Her self on a more noble choice, though not so rich,
Could you forgive her, and (with joy) receive
Your Child again.
O worthy Sir, there's Music in your tongue, receive her,
Yes, next to the joys above, on earth, I know none like it.
I am glad to hear you say so,
And though I am a stranger, to your Daughters flight
And place of being, keep your house, and I doubt not
But ere long to be the happy bringer of the joyful news
Your Daughter's well, and show you where she is.
Blessings go with thee, thou art my good Angel.
How gracious are the Gods (so soon) to hear my prayers.
The hope I have of what I would enjoy,
Hath made me young again.
Dear friend leave off to urge it.
Can thou believe Adrastus, values his wretched life
At such a rate to purchase it with the loss of thine.
I should be branded for a Coward upon record, should I accept it.
No, no, Thou miracle of friendship, preserve thy noble life,
To employ it in thy Prince, and Countries cause.
There wants such guides to honour, and desert.
Poor Letesia: I call the Gods to witness, were it not to part
With thee, my death, would be as welcome as my sleep.
But since it is the pleasure of the Gods, we shall not here
(On earth) enjoy. I freely do bestow her on thee. Albinus,
Take her, and be confident, thou wilt find her worthy
Thy acceptance. And may you live long, and happy
And once a year,
Water my sad remembrance with a tear.
Pardon me Adrastus, for I must speak my thoughts.
Your language, or religion, I am mistaken in.
You would bequeath fair Letesia to me, your self
Resolves to Murder. Hath she so ill deserved,
For her return of Love, and loss of friends
(Only for your sake.) And will you requite her love
With taking away her life.
Protect me innocence, I understand you not.
You shall do then. For know, Letesia hath sworn
Not many hours to out-live you, which she'll perform
Maugre, the Worlds resistance.
Can you deny, to save that noble life, that hath engaged her
Own (so far) for yours, and make her own white hands
The instruments of her death. Be merciful, if not for pity,
For shame of the World, which will cry out in Ballads
Against the Murder. Clarathea too (That faithful'lst of
Servants) at the same time shift's clothes with your Letesia:
Who will not fail to meet you at the house appointed.
Where should she miss you, her impatient Love might put
The whole frame of our great business out of joint.
And, for that you do suppose, I loose my safety in preserving
Yours, you much mistake, I have not gone so simply to work
But I have secured that.
Make me but happy in that assurance.
And il'e desire to live, if but to call thee friend.
Know then, I have bribed, some of your guard
To assist me in my escape. Come, come, no words, withdraw,
And let us shift our clothes. Be confident in your going out,
And no man can suspect you.
Be sure, keep fresh in your remembrance, the directions
To the house you meet at, as what most near concerns you.
I cannot hear, therefore make no reply,
No complements (dear friend) when death's so nigh.
Where stands the wind,
North East.
Run to the Key, and give order, the long Boat be made
Ready, and manned with able men. I'll out to Sea anon,
Two, or three leagues. Saw you your Lieutenant lately.
Sir, I did this morning, and found him pretty hearty.
Where are your Sergeants.
Sir, I left them at their quarter but now.
Go, and from me give them strict charge they speedily
Draw out all those commanded men I gave them order for.
Isle have the prisoner shot before I put to Sea.
Now what say you, you that were confident
He should not die for this.
Why, I say I am sorry for it, and could almost die for him:
There is no Justice he should suffer death for this;
For what he did he was provoked too by uncivil language.
It is all the Justice (now) in fashion, every man in office
Makes his will, his Law. Were all the Soldiers
In the Garrison of my mind, he should shoot him himself
And that (I think) he dares not do, and
Look him in the face, come let's go.
It is your best way to tell me where she is gone.
It lies not in my power, or if it did, can you think
I, that have undertaken thus much for her, will now betray her.
Art' not afraid of Torture.
Not I, I can assure you, I came to undergo
What you d are lay upon me.
That's nobly spoken yet. Let me but this night enjoy thee
And isle not only forgive thee all, and set thee free our
Garrison; But generously reward thee.
Sir, I thank you for your courteous proffer, but isle not buy
My freedom at that rate, Had my Sister stayed
(Perhaps) you might have had her consent.
She jeers me.
I do believe I should, was she your Sister then.
She was.
And do you love her so well to die for her.
Indeed I do.
Then speedily prepare, your time is short:
Or will you (yet) consent, do but consider, what it is to live,
Which weighed with what you foolishly deny,
And you must yield in reason.
Indeed I must not, and when I do to save this wretched life.
May all diseases mankind hates most
Proclaim it on my fore-head.
So brave:
Sir, the prisoner wounded our Lieutenant is fled,
And another in his clothes left in his room.
Then (by the Gods) the Marshall shall to Torture.
This is brave juggling. Lady, you know (now) who this
Valiant villain is, that dares die for his friend.
But you have Engines (I doubt not) now at work
For your escapes. But isle prevent them.
And since you are so valiant you dare die,
You shall have your desire. Soldier, run to the Goal
And let the Gallant know, at five a clock this evening
He dies. For, by my Tortured Soul, at my return from Sea,
(Without you do repent, and yield to my desires)
You both shall suffer death.
You'll ease me of a pain, ther's nothing else
Can quit me from.
What are we men, we should desire to live in this frail
World, where there is nothing certain, but uncertainty
To day, with the rising of the Sun, raised to the height
Of what our joys can aim at. And by his setting,
Ruined, and forgotten: A friend
It was friend I said.
Hark how theretorting Echo (shrilly) through the grove
Conveighs the name of friend, and rests its self,
As weary in the Toiling search
Of what deserved that name.
And shall my friend, (the worthiest of what deserves
That Title) die to preserve my life. No
Dear Letesia: whom (by the Gods) I love, and value
Next my honour, thou must excuse me.
Too well (I know) Albinus did but pretend the way
Of his own safety, to encourage me, in the securing mine.
How soon that fatal sentence of his death
May be pronounced, I know not.
Something I must pretend to fair Letesia, of business
For some time, which will be difficulty obtained.
Forgive me (my Letesia.) my honour is more than life
Justice, and friendship (now) parts man, and wife.
Sir, it is the pleasure of our Governor, that I should let
You know, about five a clock this evening, you must prepare to die.
Thanks honest Soldier, there's for thy news
He shall not take me unprovided?
Know thou what death, he is resolved I suffer
Shot, I believe Sir, for there's no order to the contrary.
It is a noble death, I thank him for.
Would I could save your life.
It is pity such true friendship should be cut off.
Thank thee, noble Soldier.
What may this shout of joy proclaim.
Truly, Sir I know not,
How now Corporal, know you the reason of this shout.
Hark, the great Guns are fired too.
Yes, it is to welcome a Gentleman ashore
That this day saved our Governor's life.
By what strange means, there was no storm at Sea.
No, no, 't was thus. Our Governor, no sooner had put out to Sea,
(Whether to take the air, or make himself Sea-sick,
I know not) But a small Boat of Pirats, well manned
With Musketeers, hid in a small creek, whipped out,
And got between our shore and them. Who being far
Too nimble for our Boat, having more Oars,
Soon boarded them, who to save their lives were forced
To yield. When (to the amazement of our Governor,)
This Gentleman now landed, (and then their Captain)
Clapped in our Governor's hand, a good broad sword,
Bidding our men (if ever) now fight for Liberty, and enjoy it.
Himself giving a brave testimony to our doubtful men
By the death of two, or three of the chief Pirates, that he was in earnest.
This done, they all fell to it. The Pirates distracted at this
Surprise, not knowing what to think (and less to do)
The major part was soon cut off, the rest brought prisoners in▪
In this same skirmish, we had but two men hurt.
And this brave Gentleman (the preserver of their lives)
Received two wounds in the shoulder.
Now you may judge, whether our Governor hath not just
cause (nobly) to entertain this stranger.
Come let's go see him.
Sir, we wish it lay within the compass of our powers to serve you.
I thank you honest Soldiers.
I was a cursed to let him go, what business can he have here
in a place he is a stranger to.
His noble soul will not endure to let Albinus suffer
in his cause. And this a plot (by him) contrived for to
procure my safety. You powers above, that looks with joy
on penitential tears.
behold a poor beblubbered Maid on bended knees
to implore your mercy.
Let not your vengeance fall upon the innocent, for the
Guilties sake, spare my Adrastus, and lay your load on me.
But if my cruel Fathers fins cannot be washed off, but with
our bloods, we will make one sacrifice.
And since our bodies are denied to enjoy,
our bloods shall mingle.
And drop out life together.
Worthy Sir, you are welcome to your Garrison,
for whils't you please to stay in it, it must be so.
My life, I hold of you, which when you please command
Il'e sacrifice to serve you.
Sir, your b re acknowledging me your servant, hath wiped off, what I have, or can be serviceable in, and made me (now) your Debtor, which I shall never be unable to confess, although not pay. It was my love to virtue, and my Country, commanded me to do no less, then to endeavour your safety (together with my own) from such rude slaves as those, for whom (I must confess I did, (but sore against my will) some small service, having been late their Prisoner, which gained me that command, you saw I had amongst them.
Sir, you shall over come in this, and all things else. And be assured, what entertainment this Country can afford (within the bounds of my command) shall not be wanting to serve you.
I have a sight to entertain you with, (tic probable) you have not often seen. Soldiers, are the marks men ready, I gave command (to day) should be drawn out.
They are Sir.
Go, and give order to the Marshall, he bring the Prisoners forth to execution.
 Com: Sir, will it please you walk, where I shall show you a handsome Creature, which will needs taste death, for to preserve her Sisters life. The like example of friendship in a Gentleman for his friend, one that I ne'er yet saw.
Is such examples of friendship common in these parts?
These are the first, and rarest (should they hold out touch) I ever saw, or heard of. Will it please you walk.
Your servant waits you Sir.—
Dares that Villain Tyrant (your Governor) hope to find mercy in the other world; That can commit such horrid murder on a harmless Virgin, that hates bad deeds as much as he doth Virtue? You Gods above, redeem an innocent Maid forth from the jaws of this Rebellious Woolf. The act appears so horrid, it will not let me dye in peace.
Peace, here is our Governor.
Yea, I will hold my peace. You Tyrant, Governor, Villain, Monster of Men.
 Look on this heavenly form, as innocently fair
 as thou ar't sinful soul. And tell me, if thy flesh not tremble to be her murderer.
You Powers (above) protect me, what vision's this. I is some Angel, hath assumed that shape to make my wounds bleed fresh.
Sir, are you not well.
Somewhat there was, that I have seen, much like that face that troubles me. Good Sir, what may her Name be.
Mistress, what may we call your Name.
Tell now, the unfortunate Clarathea.
Cheer up (brave Maid.) Thou art so far from acting what may beget a fear, Angels rejoice, they have begged thee from this world, to enrich their Throne, whilst this admiring world gropes in the dark, as wanting virtues light.
Thou sacred Spirit speak. T'was kindly done to come and bear me company, to the other world
Help, help, she faints.
Tic she tic she, you Gods, rob us not of our joy so soon, Gentlemen, for Heavens sake help. —
speak one word of comfort, Ti's thy Corianus calls thee. So, so, she breaths again. Sir, If I have ought deserved at your noble hands, (in what you may) assist this virtuous Maid, in whose well being, consists my life.
Soldiers (some of you) lay by your arms. And run for my Sedan, fly you Villains.
 Dear Lady, pardon your penitent servant, who only did intend to show you Death in him to see how bravely you could bear it out.
Doth my Corianus live, or do I Dream.
Thou comfort of my soul. Thy Corianus lives. Lives to enjoy, what the rich Oceans treasure should not buy for me. My best Apfia:
Sir, this passion tells me, she should be of some value to you. And I am gladly happy it so false out, that I may serve you for the life I hold. Soldiers make ready, and fire at that stout Villain.
Hold, hold I say. Thou foul mouthed tyrant. There is more worth lodged in that noble breast of his then would redeem (forth from the jaws of hell) thy soul designed for Ruin.
 Let all the unreconciled world, that stands deriding at the Name of Friend, wash their bespattered souls; And here fall down, and worship. O Albinus, thou hast out done story, for where invention found not charity to purchase a belief in thee, they may behold their error. Here you tyrant, take the blood you thirst for,
 I am the mark you aim at: T'was I that wounded your Lieutenant.
My Dear Corianus, if you have any power to prevail speak for these worthiest of Men; They will deserve your love, as Persons I have been preserved by.
Sir, Then I must beg (what it you please to grant) you everlastingly engage your Creature. That since your Lieutenant (unfortunately wounded by this Gentleman) is past Deaths present danger, that all may be forgot between your self, and those two Gentlemen (the unparalleled examples of true friendship) for whom, besides what obligation, my Apfia charms me with, I am bound (upon my knees) to plead for. And will engage, they shall deserve your love; And prove your Grateful Servants.
Sir I have given you the power, dispose of them, and me as you please. Soldiers, unbind the Gentleman, he is no more your Prisoner. And now we stand all three your Debtors for the lives we hold.
Worthy Sir, what you have (so liberal,) engaged for us.
 shall be performed. My Life you have preserved, which I shall husband to the best advantage (in all obedience) to your commands.
Sir, I must proclaim my self a Traitor to my own reason, should I no• endeavour to preserve those lives, I must in mercy to my self (if il'e seek honour) Imitate.
And doth Letesia live, to see her Dear Adrastus free, worthiest of Maids, I joy to see (as for my self) thee lodged in those blessed arms thou gave for Dead. Thy virtue hath redeemed us all.
I ne'er could do service worthy your acceptance till this hour. And what (through weakness) I may want to serve you. I know my Coranius (gladly) will perform.
Lady Apfia's Friends, commands the Life I hold. Come my Apfia, I shall unfold thy Fathers plots, and charge he gave his servants to confirm me Dead, which (once) began to grow disputable, through the festering of a wound he gave me.—
Symphronio.
The very same I can assure you.
Sir, (if I mistake not) this is your Virtuous Daughter.
Ney, flinch not fair Letesia.
I bring you none but friends.
And lives my Letesia; My Child, my Daughter?
Yes, and Adrastus your Son to, I can assure you.
My blessing on you both; And with it, all I have.
Worthy Sir, (my Father now)
Come come, no words; All is forgot, all is forgot.
My joy is too great for me to contain.
This sight, hath filled my veins with youthful blood,
I hardly can believe I am mortal.
This is a Day of joy, worthy remembrance. And Gentlemen; And Ladies, what I have done displeasing to you. Pray forgive it. And if you please to solemnise your joys in this poor Garrison, what is, and the Country can afford, is yours.
We humbly thank you Sir.
And should accept this noble curtefie, did not my House call home, which pray command as yours. Where I, with Feasant, Cock, Parteridg, and Plovers, will nobly feast you; And these Loyal Lovers.

I Take my leave Iacinta, and cannot wish you
More happiness than you possess.
You must
Dissemble, or it is within your wishes
To make you self, Francisco, mine, which would be
A fair addition to me, in my faith
Of that most noble love you have professed.
When you but dare to own me, I am past
The fear of any destiny that can
Divide us—but your Father. Your own virtue
Be still you guard. I do not like this watch
Upon our meeting, pretty Felisarda.
Tel Signior Francisco I would speak with him.
I do not like his frequent visits: though
His birth and generous parts deserve to march
With men of honourable name, I am
Without ambition to sacrifice
My daughter to his pension for life.
Your pleasure sir?
Hath hitherto Francisco
Been to affect you in the list of those
I held my friends.
I hope no forfeit made
By me, hath lost that good opinion
You placed upon me.
I cannot tell
How you may be transported with desires
Above my thoughts to allow, I would not have
My silence, and the free access y' have had
To my house, (which still is open to wise guests,)
Betray me, or my Daughter to the mirth
And talk of men in the Plassa, My estate
Doth walk upon sound Feet, and though I make
No exception to your blood, or person, sir,
The portion I have fixed upon Iacinta,
Beside the wealth her liberal Aunt bequeathed her,
Is more than your thin Younger brother's fortune
Should lay a siege, or hope to. I am plain.
And something passionate (if I understand you)
Without a cause. I am a gentleman,
With as much sense of honour, as the proudest
Don that doth ride on's foot cloth, and can drop
Gold to the numerous minutes of his age
And let me not be lost for want of that,
Deserves not to be named to fill the balance
Against true honour—let me tell you sir,
Virtue and blood are weighed against themselves,
You cannot know the price of these, when either
Scale is not poised with things of the same nature.
You're very right, and therefore I do weigh
My Daughters wealth against your fortunes sir,
I t•ke it they are things in the same specie,
And •end it cafie to distinguish, yours
Can hold small competition, and by
A consequence that Fathers use to info•re,
As little hope to equal in affections.
Sir I must tell you I esteem Iacinta
Fit every way to meet your Elder Brother,
Whose Birth will interest him so much in that
Full fortune which your Father now is Lord of,
Your expectations may prompt you look
Without much curiosity for a Bride,
I shall believe thy soul is made of Atoms,
That places so much happiness in Dust.
Sir, I can quit your Jealousy, my thoughts
Level beneath your Daughter, and shall be
Happy if you consent I may devote
My applications to Felisarda, your Niece.
Is it my Niece? I ask your pardon.
Nay then be welcome, and t'encourage you,
Although her Father a poor Gentleman
My brother, by the malice of the sea
And winds, have lost what might have ranked him even
With some that ride upon their reverend mules,
I'll find a portion for her, if you strike
Affectionate hearts, and joy to call you Nephew.
Pray be not angry, that I take a care
To place my own, where I may see it answered
With State, as well as Family.
You show
A provident Father. I shall not then
Be endangered to your scruple, if I address
My services to her, whose humble fortune,
In the relation to your blood, and nobleness,
Is wealth enough to me?
I wish it prosper.
You have much honoured me.
That scruple's vanished.
These are considerings, with which Parents must
Timely prevent the folly, and the fall
Of Children, apt to lose themselves in shadows
And gaudy apparitions.
Your Son
Is come from Salamanca Sir.
I hope
Philosophy hath by this time tamed his wildness,
I have been careful not to feed his riots.
Hoe's welcome; my next study is to choose
A wife for him,
With him a Gentleman.
That seems of noble quality.
Your blessing,
Next which 'tvvil be a happiness, if you
Embrace this noble Gentleman Don, Alberto,
To whose affection I have been engaged.
Our studies grew together, and o•r loves.
You do an honour to us.
If he thrive
Upon his fair intents sir to my Sister,
Whose character he he's took delight to hear
From me sometimes, it will enlarge our honour.
He has improved in language—his estate?
Six thousand ducats sir per Annum clear
In his possession, beside
The legacy of a Granam when she dyes
That he's outlived 6. cats within their family.
This tastes again of the old humour, hoe's
Not settled yet.
Your pardon sir, I cannot
With any patience think of an old w•man,
They are agues to my nature, she that lives
To three score is a witch, and fit for fuel
By the Civil law. I hope my mother's well.
Sir I beseech you, be not you mistaken,
I am not what I was, I'm strangely altered
From the wild garb, and can discourse most gravely
Of any thing but old and toothless women.
Do not you think it fit, she should be burned sir,
That lives within an Hospital till the roof
Consume to dust, and no more left for covering
Than is kept up in one continued Cobweb,
Through which the birds may see her when she creeps
Under a spiders canopy; what think you?
Speak your own conscience.
A young wife will cure
This angry heat of blood. You are most welcome,
Command my house, and if you can affect
My Daughter, for whose love (as my Son here
Prepares me) you took this pains, I shall
Make equal propositions. I knew
Your Father well, Don Roderigo, who
Gave up his life with honour against the Moors.
Once more y' are welcome: Son Luys show
The way to your Sister, and bid her entertain
Your friend with all the love her modesty,
And my commands may prompt her to.
You much oblige my services.
Remember Don
Conditions, if my Sister and you join
Your coppiholds, I have a life must be
Maintained till the old man dye, hang his pension,
Two'not keep me in salads. I'll conduct you.
I like his person well, and his calm gesture
Speaks for his other composition.
The estate is competent, my Daughter is
Obedient, which rich Parents call a blessing,
Whose wisdom is to advance their name, and fortunes.
My Son is all my study now.
My noble Don Ramyres, you look cheerful.
It is a good omen, I have buisness w'ee
•uch as cannot despair your entertaiment;
You have a Daughter.
I would you had one;
• should be willing to translate a Son,
••d by his marriage be most proud to call
••ur Daughter mine.
You are next a Prophet, Signior,
And but the Sexes differ, speak my thoughts;
• is harmony on both sides; to be short
〈◊〉 let our gravities not waste time, and breath
〈◊〉 our affairs, give the Young leave to court
And spin out days in amorous circumstance;
〈◊〉 Son Fernando, I need not call him Heir,
〈◊〉 birth concludes it, I would commend
〈◊〉 fair Iacinta: 't can be no dishonour
〈…〉 Family to mix with mine.
〈…〉 Tic an addition
〈…〉 a luster rather to our blood.
〈…〉 Tic my affection to you Daughter, which confirmed
〈◊〉 ••rvation of her virtue, makes
〈…〉 this tie between 'em; I may safely
〈◊〉 you will assure a portion that
〈◊〉 fortunes will deserve, who must enjoy
〈◊〉 I possess, unless you disaffect
〈◊〉 person, or decline his education,
〈◊〉 •each hath not spared my coffers to advance him
〈◊〉 •he best form of Gentleman.
I want
〈◊〉 of tongue to answer this
•our freedom, and the bounty of your nature,
Towards my Daughter, and so far am from
Exception to Fernando, there's no Cavalliero
In Spain I wish to thrive so well in her opinion.
T will be his encouragement,
If he entrench upon no•others interest,
I mean not to except, how well he can
Deserve her nobly from a Rival, if
Her heart be not contracted, this were to
Engage'em both to loss of Peace, and Honour,
Perhaps betray a Life.
You argue nobly,
She is yet Mistress of her thoughts, and free,
While her Obedience doth keep in trust
Her heart; till I direct it, which shall be
To love, and choose your Son to live within it.
Have I said home?
You have. When they have met
We may conclude the Dowry, and confirm
Our mutual assurances, till then farewell.
I like this well; Ramyres has
A fortune for a Grande. Don Alberto
Must now excuse me, if my vote prefer
Fernando, whom my Daughter must accept
Or forfelt me. The new guest is not warm
In his access, and sha'not feel with what
Soft art, and subtle ways, I steer her passion;
Yet were Alberto's state ten Maravides
Above Ramyre's, I should place him first.
Fame is an empty noise, Virtue a word
There's not a Jew will lend two Ducat; on.
He is returned, I must prepare Iacinta.
I hope my past life hath not sir so ill
Deserved, you should be jealous of my duty
When you command, although in things of this
High nature, man being nothing more concerned,
Next the divine considerations,
Than in the choice of her that must divide
The joys and sufferings of his life, a Son
May modestly insist upon the privilege
That Love by his great charter hath conferred
On every heart, not to be forced, yet I
Freely resign my will, and what men call
Affection, to that object you present me.
Apply your self then to Don Carlo's daughter
Shoe's young, fair, rich, and virtuous, and I've had
Full treaty with her Father, who expects
Your visit.
Young, fair, rich, and virtuous,
Four excellencies seldom met in one;
She cannot sure want servants, that commands
Under so many titles. I could wish,
(So much I have ambition to be thought
Obedient sir,) she were but one of those.
She is all, and one.
My duty were not less
If I forgave my self a happiness
To perfect your commands; sir, I am ready,
To try my fortune.
There is no fear of thy repulse, and when
Thou dost confirm her gained to thy affection,
My greatest act, and care of life is over.
Go on and prosper.
He is passionate,
And like the fury of the winds, more loud
By opposition; such a providence
May be mine one day when I am a Father,
And he for whose advance my cares are meant,
Like me, may with a fair and formal show
Disguise his thoughts too, yet I am to blame,
For my affection to a dream, a thing
With which my eyes only conversed, to hazard
A Fathers love, and the rich peace it brings;
I'll uncreate the face I dote upon
And be my self, or—what? my brother?
Now Francisco, you met my father?
Yes, and he
Looks as some news had much exalted him.
You are not so merry in the face, what Is it?
Nothing.
You held no controversies with him?
no.
I cannot guess he was angry by his smiles;
How did you part?
exceeding kindly.
What changes your complexion?
You are deceived.
Pre'the' how do men look that are in love?
Why? as they did before; what alteration
Have you observed in me?
You have then a Mistress,
And thrive upon her favours; but thou art
My brother, I'll deliver thee a secret,
I was at St. Sebastians last Sunday
At Vespers.
Is it a secret that you went to church?
You need not blush to tell your ghostly Father.
I prithee leave thy impertinence; there I saw
So sweet a face, so harmless, so intent
Upon her prayers, it frosted my devotion
To gaze on her, till by degrces I took
Her fair Idea through my covetous eye,
Into my heart, and know not how to ease
It since of the impression.
So, proceed.
Her eye did seem to labour with a tear,
Which suddenly took birth, but overweigh'd
With it's own swelling, dropped upon her bosom,
Which by reflection of her light, appeared
As nature meant her sorrow for an ornament;
After her looks grew cheerful, and I saw
A smile shoot graceful upward from her eyes,
As if they had gained a victory o'er grief,
And with it many beams twisted themselves,
Upon whose golden threads the Angels walk
To and again from heaven.
I do believe
By all these metaphors, you are in love;
I see you have a fancy, but proceed,
And be not melancholy.
I have told thee all.
This is indeed a vision; you have
But seen her all this while, if I may counsel you
You should proceed, her face is nothing when
You have perused the rest.
Tic dangerous.
You must excuse me Brother,
There can be no hurt in a handsome woman,
For if her face delight so much, what will
The enjoying of so sweet a pile of beauty?
Thou hast infused a confidence, I will
Embrace this counsel, you shall with me Brother,
And see how I behave my self, the Lady
Is not far off.
Withal my heart, In pawn
My life you shall enjoy her; what is she
Of flesh, and blood, that will deny, when she
Is fairly courted? may I know the name
Of this loved Mrs? you may clear your thoughts,
I dare have no design to wrong your love.
What think you Brother of the fair Iacinta?
Don Carlo's Daughter?
To that happy coast
I now am sailing; we lose time, clap on
More wings thou feathered God; thou hast put fire
Francisco into my drooping thoughts, and as
They had already bargained with the wind,
They are aloft, and chide loves lazy motion.
A word before you fly; but is Iacinta
Your Mistress then?
The beautiful Iacinta.
Dost think I sha'not prosper? what is she
Of flesh and blood, that can deny, when she
Is fairly courted? add to this my happiness,
That shoe's the Mistress, whom, from all her sex
My Father hath made choice of for my courtship;
He hath already treated with Don Carlos,
And it was his last command, I should address
My present visit to her.
Very well;
If this be truth, you need not trouble wings
To overtake this Lady, to my knowledge
(I'm serious now) she has bestowed her heart
Upon a friend, who has already fortified
Himself against the world, that would oppose
His title to it.
From what intelligence
Have you gained this? her Father knows it not.
Come, these are but subtle pretences scattered
By some, who cunningly thus hope to make
Themselves a victory, by cutting off
More fruitful expectations, this must
Not disengage me, prithee walk.
I can produce my Author, here, Fernando.
And with my blood defend that interest
She gave me, with intent I should preserve it.
How, is she yours Francisco?
Mine, if hearts
Have power to make assurance.
Tic some happiness
I have no stranger to oppose, whose high
And stubborn soul would not release this treasure
But make me force it through his blood. Francisco
And Fernando are two rillets from one Spring,
I will not doubt he will resign, to make
Me fortunate; or should his will be cold
And some close thoughts suggest I had no privilege
By Eldest birth, but came a sly Intruder
Upon his right of love, there is a tie
Of Nature and Obedience to a Father
Will make him give this blessing from his bosom,
And strip his amorous soul of all his wealth
That may Invest my wishes.
I read not this
In any of the reverend Casuists;
No inequality being in our blood
The la• of nature meant we should be equal;
It was first tyranny, then partial cu•to me,
Made you more capable of Land. Would you
Be lord of us, because you are first born,
And make our souls your tenants too? when I've
Named you my Elder brother, I exclude
All servitude; Justice that makes me love you
Carries an equal law to both;
Nay I can love you more if I consider you
(Without the chain of blood) a friend, than all
The bonds of nature can enforce me to;
In both relations give me leave to love you
As much as man, but not resign my Mistress.
You ascend higher, and persuade by what
Obedience is owing to a Father,
They give us life, a good Son keeps it for him,
And every drop bled in their cause, a glory;
I can acknowledge this, and sacrifice
Life, Fortunes, a poor recompense to lose
(Were they all multiplied) to show my duty;
But these are things may be resigned, a Mistress
Is not a wealth in balance with the world,
But much above the poise of all it's happiness,
And equal with our honour, riveted
I•to our so•l, it leaves her not, when death
Hath ••ook this body off, but flies with it
Mo•e svvift, t• love it in the other world.
You are very pa••ionate.
I am very j•••,
And you s•all find it brother ever you twine
With my Ease•a, mine, if vovves may give
Posse••ion of each other's soul.
No more
May she be worthy of thy heart, till mine
Do entertain a treason to divide you;
But I, to sati•fie my Father, must
Present my self, and trust me, will so manage
My love to her, as thou shalt have no cause
To Interpret me a rival. O Fra•cisco
Our loves are of a kindred, for mine is
Devote to Felisarda, to her Cousin
Poor Felisarda.
Theodoros Daughter?
We never yet changed language, nor doth she
Imagine with what thoughts I honour her;
But here is the distraction, thou can not
Expect more opposition from 〈◊〉 Carl•s,
Than I must from my Father, if he knew
Where I have placed my heart.
Let us assist
Each other then, till time, and some kind ••arres
Mature our love.
Let Fathers look at wealth, tic all their Saint:
Hearts are freeborn, and love knows no constraint.
HOw do you like Alberto Sister? is he not
A gallant Gentleman?
For what good Brother?
cannot Judge his Intellectuals,
But we have plenty of more proper men
〈◊〉 Spain.
He i•anexcellent Scholar,
He was still Emperor in the Schools, and since
He studied Logic and Philosophy,
He was the flower of's time at Salamanca.
Tic pity he should be gathered then.
What be gathered?
The flower you talk on.
If you affect him Sister, he may grow,
And you may keep him still for seed please you.
And sell him out at sowing time to Gardeners.
Come, you must love him.
He's he the Black-art?
I know not how Magic or Philters may
Prevail, and yet he looks suspitiously.
You think y' are witty now, do ye hear, you must
Affect him for my sake.
Now you speak reason;
I may for your sake dote upon him, Brother,
This is a conjuration may do much.
Well said,
Thou art my Sister, this good nature shows it.
And now I'll tell thee, I have promised him
As much as marriage comes too, and I lose
My ho•or, if my Don receive the canvas.
He he's a good estate, and I have borrowed
Considerable monies of him Sister,
Pieces of eight, and transitory Ducats.
Which must be paid.
Not if you marry him;
Conditions have been thought on.
How? conditions?
And some revenue was convenient
To do things like a Gentleman, I may
Tell you, my Father is a little costive,
Purse-bound, his penfion cannot find me tooth-picks,
I must live till he dye it is fit you know;
Alberto he's an Exchequer, which upon
Thy smiles will still be open.
Very good;
Then you upon the matter have sold me to him
To find you spending money?
No, not sold;
W' are at no certain price; sums have been lent
In expectation, or so, and may again.
You deserve Brother I should hate you now.
It is all one to me, so you love him;
For my part I de•ire but my expenses.
What if another man supply your wants
Upon the same conditions of my love?
I am indifferent, so I have my charges,
My necessary wine and women paid for,
Love where you please your self; I am but one,
I would not see him want that's all, because
My Father is not yet resolved about
His going to heaven.
Well sir, for Don Alberto,
You shall be his advocate no more, and there's
A Fee to bribe your silence in his cause.
Why, thank you sister,—will you dye a virgin?
Why do yo ask?
I would speak for somebody, tell me but whom
You have a mind to, and I'll plead for him,
And if he be a Don he will consider it;
You may give me what you will, besides.
When I
Resolve, You shall be acquainted.
But do ye hear,
Until you do resolve, I would lose no time,
Tic good keeping a friend, and a warm client;
You may look lovingly upon Alberto,
And let him hope at all adventures, in
Two months you may be otherwise provided
And he may hang himself, in the mean time
Some favours now and then to the poor Gentleman
Will doe him good, and me no hurt, besides
You'll please my Father in it, whose vote is for him,
And that's a thing material. I am
To meet with Don Alberto, and some Gentlemen,
I will preserve his confidence, and tell him
I have talked with thee. Have you any more
Of this complexion? cause I know not what
Occasions I may have to keep my credit
With men of mark and honour, where I am going;
You are my Fathers darling, and command
His yellovv Ingots; tother Doblon D'oro.
So I may bring a rent-charge upon my self.
The tother drop of orient mercy, come.
You care not what accounts I give my Father.
Thou hast tvventy ways to cousin him, vvedge i•
Into the next Bill, he vvears Spectacles,
And loves to read—Item for pious uses.
Can it be less to help a brother? well said.
Let not this feed your riot.
By no means.
I am for no Carthusians to day.
Farewell dear Sister—who is that?
My Father
I cannot endure that old mans company.
I am past complement, and must acknowledge•
Your fair intentions honour us, she is no Goddess
Of beauty Sir, but let me without pride
Boast my self blessed, Fernando, in her virtues,
And that which crowns em all, obedience•.
Iacinta, Entertain this Gentleman
With all becoming thoughts of Love, his merit
(Out of no rash, but mature judgement,) hath
Prevailed with me, to name him to the first
And noblest place within your heart.
Until this hour I never had the confidence
More than to think of love, and hide a flame
That almost hath consumed me. You may think
It worth a smile, and that I only flourish
To show my vanity of wit or language,
But when you understand that I bring hither
No young affection, but a love took in
Long since at my ambitious eye, it may
Beget your gentle thought, or will, to cure me.
Pardon me, if the more you strive to print
A truth on this short story of your passion,
The more I find my self inclined to wonder,
Since you seem to infer, You took in the
Disease at fight of me, I cannot be
So ignorant, as not to have received
Your Name and Character, but never kn••
••fore, when you did grace us with a visit▪
And how then at such distance you contracted
A danger so consuming, is above,
My knowledge, not my pity, if you could
Direct me to the cure with Virgin honour.
So, so, I leave you to the amorous Dial•go,
Presume you have my voice.
Sir, with your pardon,
You lead me to a Wilderness, and take
Your self away, that should be guide; do you
Engage me to affect this Don Fernando
•n earnest?
Yes.
You did direct my love
•o Don Alberto.
I dispense with that
•ommand; you may by fair degrees, and honour,
Quit his addresses, and dispose your self
•istris and Bride to Don Ramyres heir.
It does not thus become you sir, to mock
〈◊〉 Virgin never injured you; he is
•our elder Brother, I am here beneath
•he level of his thoughts, in the nature of
〈◊〉 servant to my Cousin, and depend
Upon my Uncles charity.
May I be
Cursed in my own affections, if I
Delude thee, though to achieve our best desires
We seem to dissemble thus before Don Carlos.
This is a secret yet to poor Iacinta.
You have my will; obey it.
Hath Francisco broken his faith already?
May you both joy, where you have placed your loves.
You apply close Francisco.
With your good favour,
I fairly hope.
Your Father's gone Iacinta.
I should be
Equally pleased if you would leave me too.
This is a change.
Unkind Francisco hear me.
Tic my meaning. Brother I have prepared
Your story there with Felisarda; lose
No time.
Iacinta, clear your thoughts again,
And •ardon that I took a shape to fright you;
I shall not grieve to see Francisco prosper,
And merit all your favours, since my hopes
Must thrive, or have their Funeral here.
Are we
So ble•• Francisco? you have a noble Brother.
I may suppose my Brother, Felisarda,
Hath made it now no secret, that I love you;
And since our stars have so contrived, that we
Have means to assist our mutual ambitions,
D• not you make their influence unprofitable;
Tic the first boldness I ere took to visit you,
Al•hough my eyes have often with delight
And satisfaction to my heart observed you:
You seem a noble Gentleman, and can take
But little glory to undo a Maid,
Whose Fortunes cannot bring you any triumph.
How mean you fairest?
Not to be flattered Sir
Into a sin, to cure my poverty;
For men whose expectations are like yours,
Come not with honour to court such as I am,
(Lost to the World for want of portion)
But with some untamed heat of blood.
I dare
With conscience of my pure intent, try what
Rudeness you find upon my lip, tic chaste
As the desires that breath upon my language.
I began Felisarda to affect thee
By seeing thee at Prayers, thy virtue winged
Loves Arrow first, and it were a sacrilege
To choose thee now for sin, that hast a power
To make this place a Temple by thy Innocence.
I know thy poverty, and came not to
Bribe it against thy chastity; if thou
Vouchsafe thy fair and honest love, it shall
Adorn my fortunes, which shall stoop to serve it
In spite of friends or destiny.
My Brother
Knows my whole Interest in thee, to whom
My Fathers care directed him, but we
Thus mutually resolve to aid each other.
This must be wisely managed of all sides;
Parents have narrow eyes.
Our meeting thus
Will happily secure us from their Jealousy;
Our Fathers must not know this countermarch.
Ha; I like not this; Fernando at busy courtship
With Felisarda, and Francisco so
Close with my Daughter.
Las we are betrayed.
My Uncle.
You are her Kinswoman, and of her bosom,
I preach in my absence, plead to •air
I•cinta for me; as an earnest of
My 〈◊〉, accept this trifle from me.
〈◊〉 it is a jewel.
Without this reward
I should solicit sir your cause, and do
My duty to Don Carlos, who desires it.
I take my leave.
Madam, I shall be proud
To call you Sister, but you will prepare
Another happiness if you vouchsafe
To speak for me to pretty Felisarda,
She's bound to hear your counsel and obey it,
If I may owe this favour to your charity.
Your goodness will deserve more.
I must follow him.
Do you take notice Felisarda, that
You live here on the bounty of an Uncle?
Your Father had but ill news from the Indies.
Sir, as your goodness wants no testimony,
I shall attend it with all humble services.
How durst you in the presence of my Daughter,
Maintain such whispers with Fernando, ha?
Sir, he was pleased—
No more, I here discharge you.
I'll provide one to attend you
With less relation to your blood. I'll hear
Of no de•ence, away—out of my doors.
Go to your Father Signior Teodo•o:
Hi• ships may rise again were sunk by the Hollander,
And Fl•t from St. Thome, he may prefer you
To some Rich Don, or who knows but you may,
Born on the Plumes of his estate, be made
In time a proud Condessa, so adios
M•i illustre Sennora Felifarda.
Thus have I heard a tall ship has been wracked
By some strange gust within the Bay: his passion
Admits of no dispute. O my poor Cos,
I fear my turn is next to be an exile,
Thy absence must deprive me of Francisco,
Who can no more glad his Iacintas eyes,
With a pretence to visit thee.
Tic not
My fear to suffer want so much afflicts me,
As that I must lose you, but he returns.
Don Pedro de F•ente Calada coming hither,
With Don Alberto, and my Son?
Yes sir, the Count desires to see Iacinta
Whom your Son has so commended, and sent me
To give you notice.
Ha Iacinta, retire
To your closet, and put on your richest Jewels,
A Count is come to visit you; Felisarda
There may be some more art used in her dress,
To take the eyes of greatness.
Sir you speak
As I were meant for sacrifice, or sale;
The C•not Don Pedro—
No reply; be careful,
And humble in your office Felisarda,
And you may live, and eat here, till Iacinta
Provide another servant to attend her,
Which may be three whole days; my anger is
Not everlasting; bid my Wife come to me.
• expect an honourable guest, the Count Don Pedro,
To see our Daughter, whom I have commanded
To appear with all her riches to attract him.
If his Intents be honourable, I have heard
Don Pedro loves a hansom Donna.
He had better cool his hot blood in the frozen
Sea, and rise thence a rock of Adamant
To draw more wonder to the North, than but
Attempt to wrong her chastity.
This from Don Pedro is an honour binds
The service of our lives.
Noble Don Carlos.
If we had been prepared, we should have met
This grace with more becoming Entertainment.
Tic fair, and equal to my wishes,—she
Does smell of roasted Garlic; this your Sister?
That is my Mother, here is Iacinta Sir.
She has a tempting shape, I now am pleased.
I Use to kiss all; hum a pretty thing?
I like not his busy eyes on Felisarda.
You will be faithful to me?
Who, I faithful? how shall I live else?
Son Luys.
Madam.
Will you be pleased admit Don Pedro, by
The Title of your s•rvant, to presume
Sometime to wait upon you.
It were pride
And saucy ambition sir in me, to think
You can descend so much from your great birth,
To own a name, and office so beneath you.
I that before thought women easy trifles,
And things which nature meant only to quench
High flames in man, am taken with this Lady.
Luys thou hast wronged the fair Iacinta,
Thy praise was thyn, and cold, Spain is not rich
Enough to boast her equal: and I love her.
Oh she will be to proud to know it Sir.
Proud, she must be, whose eyes have such com∣mand.
She has a pretty servant too, Luys,
I like 'em both.
How, both?
They will do well,
One for a Wife, the other for a Concubine.
It will become your high blood.
Say I kiss
Her white hand, and present her with these Pearls?
Your honour shall command.
Your Daughter has a most magnetic face,
And I pronounce her happy, your consent
Confirms her mine.
Ther's nothing in my blood, or fortune, but
Don Pedro shall command. I was Prophetical?
Come hither Alsimira, would imagine?
Hoe's taken with Iacinta, and hath pried
Already my consent.
Believe not all
That great men speak are Oracles, our Daughter—
If she be stubborn, uncreates her self,
Be you wise, and counsel her to this ambition,
Or thus I loose you all; ha turn away,
That Fairy shees a Witch, the Count talks with her.
I hope you hold me not Sir less deserving
Than when you gave me free access to plead
My service to your Daughter—if that Don—
Sir you too much prejudicate my thoughts
• must give due respects to men of honour,
Nor is it fit I should impose upon
The Freedom of Iacintas love.
You're noble.
My Lord.
I do not like this Don.
You are of my mind, I do not like him neither,
And yet the blackbirds in the bush, see what
present •e would give my sister.
Did she refuse it?
I never mean she shall, what wrong my friend?
Yet I'll take all, and let him hang himself;
If he would send his ey••, I would undertake
To 〈◊〉 'em to the Jeweller, they would off,
Foe• 〈◊〉 toadstones. Have no fear, my Mother
Is for you too, you must fee both your Advocates.
Iacinta.
Sir.
She takes her self much honoured.
You oblige.
Let me alone to carry things.
Be confident to trust me with your honour,
If it would pawn for any thing.
I'm not perfect
How to neglect Alberto yet, and must I
Throw off Fernando, but new Entertained
By your command? the World will censure strangely.
The World will praise thy wisdom, &amp; my care;
Or if some giddy tongues condemn what's good,
Must wee be servile to that fear, and lose
That which will make us Judges of their folly,
And damn it with a frown of state? they are fools
That dote upon those shadows, Idle talk,
The slime of Earth-worms, that doth shine to cousin
Infants, it is fit wee raise our thoughts to substances.
Let modesty and nature plead a little,
If I appear not found to Entertain him.
I may collect more strength by time and counsel,
And for your satisfaction dare profess
My Lord hath too much graced the low Iacinta
With a pretence so noble, but I should
Be held not worth his person, and too light
At his first breath of courtship to fall from
My Virgin strength, and give my self his captive.
I shall allow that ceremony; the Count
Makes an address.
I must use thrift in my delight, my eyes
Are proud, and must be taught by absence how
To value such a Mistress. I do miss the chambermaid.
It will become me to attend.
Your pardon.
I'll take it for an honour, if your Son
Be pleased—but to my coach?
Oh my good Lord!
So much I am your creature, if you knew
But where to match me, I would be your coach-horse.
So, so, Iacinta's stars do smile upon her,
'Twil be a match, were but my Son as fair
In expectation of a bride, I'd write
N•l ultra to my cares, he is to aerie
And volatile, a wife would timely fix him,
And make him fit to manage my estate.
But he returns, I'll feel his pulse.
thou see how near Iacinta is to happiness.
I did some office in it, she may thank me.
I first inspired his Lordship.
Such a providence
To build thy self a Fortune by some brave
And noble marriage would become thy study,
And make thy Father willingly resign
His breath, with confidence to know thee wise
To govern what my Industry hath gatherd;
What think thou of a wife?
I think little sir.
What should I do with a Wife?
Imitate me, and study fame, and wealth
To thy posterity. Have I with care
Acquired such an estate, that must not last
Two Generations?
The way to make it
Last, is not to think of Wiving; for my part
(Sir with your pardon, if I may speak freely)
I had opinion once I was your Son,
But fearing by your narrow exhibition
You loved me not, I had a controversy
Within my thoughts, whether I should resolve
To geld my self, or turn a begging Friar.
A begging Friar?
Tic as I tell you Sir;
This last I fixed upon, and have been studying
Where I conveniently might raise a sum
To compass a hair shirt Sir,
To make trial before I thrust my self
Point blank into the Order.
Thus wild Sons interpret still
A prudent Father; but you may discharge
Your Jealousies, unless it be your own
Devotion to be chaste, and live a recluse.
For that I can be ruled; I have not lived
After the rate of hating any women
But I can hear of Marriage, if it be
Your pleasure: but these Wives Sir are such tickle
Things, not one hardly staid amongst a thousand;
Beside, unless you find one very rich
A man may cast a way himself, and get
A bundle of Beggeries, Mouths, that day and night,
Are open like Hell Gates, to feed; I would not
Hazard my Freedom, and the blessings Heaven
Has lent you Sir, upon a Wife with nothing.
Thy pension doubles for that word; in Earnest,
How much I like this wisdom; take this Purse,
I will have no account, and find me out
A wealthy Maid or Widow but not ugly.
No? not ilfavourd Sir, if she be rich?
A little old or crippel'd?
I wo'not have thee
Mary a crooked, deformed thing, because
She may have children—
Not, unless she have
An Infinite wealth to make 'em strait sir;
I'll marry a witch so she have money sir.
No, on no terms a Monster.
Then I wo'not.
And now it comes into my mind, they talk of
A young rich Widow, Donna Estifaniar,
What do you think of her?
Thou hast named one
To my own desires, she lives a Widow still,
But she has refused many brave Dons.
No matter,
I like her sir the better.
She gives good entertainment.
I will have her
If you but say the word. I wear a charm
To catch a Widow; but this Purse will hardly
Last till we finish, I must do things with honour.
Thou shalt be furnished like my Son; kneel down
And ask me blessing, I do long to give it thee.
I have your blessing here.
Isle find thee out
Some Jewels to present thy Mistress too.
'Two'not be much amiss, the Gold will go
The farther Sir. I know not how this
Came about, unless Don Pedros coming to
My Sister have made him mad, &amp; wrought this miracle.
How careful he was I should not mary one
Deformed, I have chose the hansomest things thus far,
And I mary with a Witch at these years, let the Devil
Ride my wild Mare to death; and now I
Consider on it I wo'not have the Widow
For fear of the worst, yet I'll to her,
And make a business on it to keep the old
Mans Bags in motion; this with some good
Husbandry, and no play, may last a Fortnight,
Tic very Gold: yes, it will pay some scores,
Maintain my Negro, and a brace of Whores.
Now fiddles do your worst.
How, no success? where lies the opposition?
Don Carlos equal with my self professed
His free desires, and to dispose his Daughter
To meet thee with all loving entertainments.
What can she argue to thy birth, or person,
Attended with so plentiful a fortune?
I must believe thy courtship dull and faulty:
When I was at thy years and spring of blood
I wound my self like air among the Ladies,
Commanding every bosom, and could dwell
Upon their lips like their own breath, their eyes
Doubled their Beams on me, and she that was
Of hardest composition, whom no love
Could soften, when I came with charm of language,
Her Frost would strait dissolve, and from her eyes
Her heart came weeping forth to woo me take it.
Yet you that did with a Magnetic Chain
Attract so many, could possess but one;
I came not to Don Carlos house with cold
Or lukewarm thoughts, but armed with active fire
That would have melted any heart but hers,
Bound up with ribs of treble Ice against me,
By which I found there is another fate
That governs love, against whose secret doom
In vain is eloquence or force.
So Obstinate?
Nothing that I could say
In my own cause, could make her tongue or looks
Promise an expectation to thrive
By any after service, this disdain
I did resent, as it became my honour,
And now confirmed against her pride, have thought
Of something, that with your consent, may tame
Her scorn, or punish it to her repentance.
Name it.
She has a Kinswoman lives with her,
Felisarda Daughter to Signior Teodoro,
A trade fallen Merchant, Brother to Don Carlos,
This Felis▪ that now lives on the charity of her Uncle,
Half servant, half companion to Iacinta,
And fair, I would pretend to love, observe me sir,
And in their presence court her as my Mistress;
Me thinks I see already how Iacinta
Doth fret and frown.
I like it well.
To see her Cousin so preferred, it is
The nature sir of women to be vexed
When they know any of their servants court
Another, and that love they thought not worth
Their own reward, will sting 'em to the soul,
When ti's translated where it meets with love,
And this will either break her stubborn heart,
Or humble her.
But what if this pretence,
By such degrees convey away your heart,
That when Iacinta comes to sense, you cannot
Retrive your passion from the last, or say
Felisarda should believe you, and give up
Her heart to your possession, when you
Are by your first desires invited back,
What cure for Felisardas wound, if you
Affect her not? although I like that part
Of your revenge, I would not have my Son
Carry the hated brand of cruelty,
Or hear Fernando broke a Ladies heart;
But live upon his clear, and honest truth,
And if Iacinta have not valued him,
Find his own estimation in some other
By fair and noble Courtship; Virtue is
Above the gaudy shine of Gold; and if
My Son love where his honour cannot suffer,
The want of Dower, I can forgive.
You now, read exc'lent charity, and like a Father,
It is the harmony I would hear, I chide
My fears that did suspect you would prefer
Wealth in a Bride; there is no beauty, or estate, compared
To that resulteth from the soul; I dare
Now op this narrow Closet, and present
The name I love above the World, it is
Sir Felisarda, equal in her blood,
Within whose virtuous poverty
More Treasures are contained, than in those veins
Of earth, which opend by our slaves, do bleed
Such floods of Gold into the lap of Spain.
Pardon my long concealment of her name,
It was sin against your virtue, and once more
Speak in that blessed Language, I may hope
To call this Virgin mine.
How long have you
Been taken with this female holiness?
Before Iacinta was propounded, this
Took firm possession of my faith.
Thou hast discovered thy destruction, foolish Boy.
Was this your policy to be revenged
Upon Iacinta, whom my providence
Elected to preserve our name and family,
To 〈◊〉 upon a Beggar? thou hast flung
A fire into my brain• either resolve
To perfect 〈◊〉 command, and throwing off
That 〈◊〉 thou hast prai•'d, prefer Iacinta
To the best 〈◊〉 within thy hart, and marry her
Or live a stranger to me, and divested
Of all those rights, •hich nature, and thy Birth
Have sla•ter'd thee with hope to find; expect not
Alive, the stipend of a Groom to feed thee,
Nor dead, 〈◊〉 naked charity of a shroud
To hide thee from the Worms.
O•r▪ call back
That 〈◊〉 sentence, it were sin to let
This passion dwell upon you, nor would Heaven,
Whose eyes survey our frailty, suffer
So wild a rage possess you.
Tic within thy own obedience to divert it.
When you have heard what I can say more,
You will chide your fierce command.
What Riddles this?
Iacinta is already made another, and my force
Upon 〈◊〉 vows, can be no less than sacrilege.
This is some new pretence.
Sir, not to wast your patience, she hath given
Her self by holy contract to Francisco.
Thy younger Brother?
This I know will calm
Your fury, and those eyes that threatend lightning
With smiles applaud Franciscos fate, and praise
•y disobedience.
Franciscos Mistress?
His wife confirmed by vows, &amp; change of hearts,
I had it from themselves, when either strove
Whose circumstance should credit most their story,
Her tear or his conclusive groan, to seal
Their marriage, but both were equal sir,
What curse had I deserved, that should divorce
This Innocent pair of lovers?
All this talk
Which foolish thou interpret'st thy defence,
Hath but enlarged thy folly, and that act
Which in Francisco I commend, upbraids
Thy own degenerate baseness: shall thy brother
Who carries all his portion in his blood
Look high, and careful of his honour aim
At fortunes, and with confidence achieve
His glorious end, and shall his Elder brother
Engaged by nearest tie to advance his name,
Lye beating in the common tract of gulls,
And sacrifice his birth and expectations
To a cozening face, and poverty? instead
Of adding mon'ments, that to the world
Should be his living Chronicle, to bury
His own, and all the antique honours (he
Ne'er sweat for, but were cast into his blood)
Within a dunghill? thou hast forfeited
Thy birthright, which Francisco shall inherit,
Nor shall the loss of my Estate be all
Thy punishment; hear and believe with horror,
If thou renounce not her that hath bewitched
Thy heart, Felisarda, and by such a choice
I shall affect, redeem this scandal nobly,
Fernando from this minute I pronounce
Heir to his Fathers curse; be wise or perish.
Why does not all the stock of thunder fall?
Or the fierce winds from their close Caves, let loose,
Now shake me into Atoms?
Fie noble Brother, what can so deject
Your Masculine thoughts? is this don like Fernando!
Whose resolute soul so late was armed to fight
With all the miseries of man, and triumph
With patience of a Martyr? I observed
My Father late come from you.
Yes Francisco,
He hath left his curse upon me.
How?
His curse, dost comprehend what that word caryes
Shot from a Fathers angry breath? unless
〈◊〉 tear poor Felisarda from my heart,
He hath pronounced me heir to all his curses.
Does this fright thee Francisco? thou hast cause
To dance in soul for this, tic only I
Must lose, and mourn, thou shalt have all, I am
Degraded from my birth, while he affects
Thy forward youth, and only calls thee Son,
Son of his active spirit, and applauds
Thy progress with Iacinta, in whose smiles
Thou moist see all thy wishes waiting for thee,
Whilst poor Fernando for her sake must stand
An excommunicate from every blessing,
A thing that dare not give my self a name,
But flung into the Worlds necessities,
Until in time with wonder of my wants
〈◊〉 turn a ragged statue, on whose forehead
•ach clown may carve his motto.
Will it call
•is blessing back if you can quit your love
•o Felisarda? she is now a stranger
•o her Uncles house, I met one of his servants
•ho told me on some Jealous apprehension,
Don Carlos had discharged and banished her.
He could not be so barbarous.
You know her Fathers Poverty.
And her Wealth of Virtue.
It is worth your Counsel,
To ex•min what you may preserve, if wisely
You could persuade your heart to love some another—
What was it Francisco said?
Whose equal Birth,
And Virtues, may invite a noble change.
Do not you love Iacinta?
Most religiously.
If you can but contrive your hearts at distance•
And in contempt of honour, and your faith
Sacred to Heaven, and love, disclaim your Mistress,
I may be happy yet, what say? I know
Iacinta's Wise, and when she understands
How much it will advance, her charity—
Our case is not the same with yours good brother▪
Wee have been long acquainted, to contract
Affections, if I understand, your loves
Are young, and had no time for growth.
Do not wound me.
Tic false, by Love it self thou hast deserved
•I should forget thee now; dost thou consider
Love, (that doth make all harmony in our soul,
And seated in that noblest place of life,
The heart) with things that are the slaves of time,
And that like common seeds, thrown into Earth,
It must have leisure to corrupt, and after
Much expectation, rise to name and vigour.
Love is not like the child that grows, and gets
By slow degrees perfection, but created
Like the first man, at full strength the first minute,
It makes a noble choice, and gains from time
To be called only constant, not increased.
Preserve thy own affections, and think mine
Noble as they, I shall suspect thy love
To me else; prithee leave me.
I'll obey,
And study how to serve you.
Ha, tic Felisarda.
Turned out like one that had been false, where shall
Poor Felisarda wander? were it not
To ask a Fathers blessing, I would visit
Some Wilderness, ever thus present my self
His burden and his sorrow.
Had you no relation to Iacinta pretty one?
I was her servant.
Come, you shall be my Mistress; they have used
Thee scurvily, I will provide thee a lodging.
I shall not use your bounty sir for that.
Thou art a hansom Dona, here's a Pistolet,
Meet me i'th'evening, wot?
Where, and for what?
The where, at thy own choice, the what, thy honour.
You are not noble.
Don Pedro will Embrace thy buxom body.
You must unhand this Virgin.
For goodness Sir,
Add not your anger to my sufferings.
Unhappy Felisarda.
Is she a friend of yours Signior?
She is not for your sinful knowledge Don.
Baser los manos, adios Signiory. Diabolo!
My blood is high and hot, unless I marry timely,
• must seek out a Female Julep.
Don Carlo's fear of you was my first error,
But I accept my banishment, and shall
Humble my self to my poor Fathers Fortune;
You will be sir dishonoured to be seen
With such a walking mis•rye.
Thy Uncle
Hath plaid the Tyrant with thee, but lose not
Thy virtuous courage; how our stories meet
And challenge kindred in affliction!
Oh Felisarda! I do suffer too,
And for thy sake, thou shalt know more; till I
Salute thee at thy Fathers house, preserve
Good thoughts of thy Fernando, and accept
This little Gold, no bribe against thy honour.
My best return must be, my Prayers.
Farewell.
Tic not impossible my Father may
Retract his cruelty, and by time, and some
Discreet ways yet be wrought to like, what now
His passion wo'not let him see, her virtue.
How many Seas are met to wrestle here?
I love you sir so well, that I could wish
You were a Witch;
A Witch, your reason Lady?
Then it were within the circle of your art
B• some device to rid me of Don Pedro,
Or if you could by any spell but get
My Father disaffect him—
A Witch? thats a way about, I were best cut his
Throat a little.
You 're much beholding to my Brother sir,
He still commends you; such an Advocate
Deserves his fee.
Unless my cause succeed
He has been feed too much; your Brother, Lady,
Preserves a noble friendship; if I were sure
You would be mine Iacinta, I could tarry
Till your Father dye.
But how can you procure
Don Pedro to have patience so long,
Whom my Father pleads for and prefers?
There, ther's the mischief, I must poison him;
One Fig sends him to Erebus, tic in
Your power and wit to spin out time, I may
Invent a means for his conveyance. Ha!
The Lady Estefania.
Welcome again,
This is an honour to us, whore's Iacinta?
Salute this noble Lady. Ha, Luys,
Hast thou prevailed already?
I'm in the way you see,
She has not been observed they say to walk
So freely with some men that boast more favour.
What makes the Lady Estefania here?
I like not their converse, this day is ominous.
Was it not the Count Don Pedro that retired?
What object here displeased him?
Ha, ha, did see the Don?
Preserve your mirth—I must be satisfied.
I'll lay a thousand Ducats that my costive
Don has been tampering with my VViddow, I
Observed (when I by chance let fall discourse)
How much he was an amorous servant to
Iacinta, she changed her colo•r and did make
Such business how my Sister did affect him,
That I may guess, though I make use on it otherwise
To the old man, to keep the pulses of
His Purse in play, she came to examine chiefly
How matters here proceeded; well, if she love him—
She is thy Mistress.
My Mistress? yes, but any man shall mary her.
How?
She is a Widow, Don, consider that,
Has buried one was thought a Hercules,
Two cubits taller, and a man that cut
Three Inches deeper in the say, than I, consider that too,
She may be cock a tvventy, nay for ought
I know she is Immortal.
What dost with her?
Faith nothing yet,
And have but little hope, I think shoe's honest.
Do's she love thee?
At her own peril, vv'are not come to articles;
There is not wit in vviving, give me a vvhore;
But that I ow thee money, thou should never
Marry my Sister neither?
Not Iacinta?
No, nor any other simpering piece of honesty,
If I might counsel thee, while any wench
Were extant, and the stews inhabited;
Is it fit, a Freeborn Gentleman should be chained
Tenant for life to one? Hang marriage shackles,
Tie the Town Bulls to'th'stake, we must have concubins.
Don Pedro was too blame, and trust me Madam
He shall find nothing here to advance his triumph.
You are Virtuous Iacinta; I presumed
When I should land my sufferings on your knowledge,
You would excuse my unexpected visit.
My Brother has been Just in the relation
How he pursues my love, but I shall be
Happy to serve your Justice, and must tell
The noble Estefania, my heart,
By all that love can teach to bind a faith,
Is placed where it shall never injure what
Your mutual vovvs contracted; I smile not
With mine own eyes upon him, it is my Fathers
Severe command to love him, but this story
Cleared to my Father would secure us both.
If any faith or service in me can
Deserve this goodness, cheerfully employ it.
I will be confident to use your Virtue.
I will refuse no office.
My Father comes most aptly.
Ha, ha, ha, have pity on my spleen,
I shall crack a rib else, ha, ha, ha.
You are very merry, Don Alberto; Son,
You may be of the counsel too, this house
Is mine I take it, I advise you would
Frequent it less.
How Sir?
I do not like your visits,
And to remove the cause, my Daughter is
Already sir disposed, to one above
Your birth and fortune, so fare-you-well.
You understand, now laugh and pick your teeth.
Daughter—
Did you hear this Luys?
I, the old man raves.
Must not frequent his house.
Would it were in a flame, so his money and I
Were out on it.
But thy Sister—
Would be refined in the fire, let her burn too.
My friend, if I have not Iacinta,
There are certain sums of money—
I am not of your mind Don, the sums are most uncertain.
Come, you did laugh too loud, my Father is
A Stoic, but despair not; go to your lodging,
I'll see thee anon, and either bring thee money
Or else some reasons why I do not bring it,
We won't go to Law, I'll pawn the widow
Rather than thou shalt want; go say thy prayers,
And show thy te•th no more, till I come to thee.
Now the business here?
Wee have agreed Iacinta,
And he to morrow privately
Will at the Church expect thee; tic an age
Till I salute the Bride to this great Don,
Whose thoughts are winged to enjoy thee, and resolve
No more delay, prepare to meet this Honour.
To morrow? this must be crossed.
My next ambition Madam will be perfect▪
To call you by some nearer name; my Son—
Is a most noble Gentleman, I know not
Where lives so clear a merit.
Oh sweet Madam.
Iacinta.
I have a suit to you.
To me?
Only that you would not dote too much upon me,
A gentle easy sober pace in love
Goes far, and is much better than a gallop; if you please
We may hold one another in hand, and love
This seven years, without sealing and delivering.
Withal my heart.
You'll do me a pleasure Madam.
You instruct well.
This Courtship is not common.
I confess it.
Son Luys.
Sir.
Let her not cool.
And she do,
I know the way to heat her again.
I will not yet reveal my abuse Iacinta,
And if you please to favour a design,
I have a plot may serve to both our happiness.
I'll obey.
There is a trembling in my heart.
You must not leave us yet Madam.
You may command me.
My Don so rampart, ther's something in this pannier
Shall spoil your match to morrow; Don Alberto,
When I disclose, shall worship me: be drunk,
Cancel arrears, and beg to lend more money.
It is most exactly done, and firm.
I could,
Omitting or inserting but a word, or particle,
Trouble the whole conveyance,
And make work for the law till doom's-day: but—
Is it possible?
You do not know the quirks of a Scrivano,
A dash undoes a Family, a point,
An artificial accent i't'h wrong place,
Shall poison an Estate, translate your Land
In Spain now into either of both Indies,
In less time than our Galleons of Plate
Are sailing hither; but you are my friend,
And noble benefactor.
Ther's more for your reward.
I humbly thank you Signior. Su Criado.
Farewell.
Su Servitor.
This deed makes thee my Heir Francisco, and
Will like a powerful spell upon Don Carlos,
Whose soul is superstitious upon Wealth,
Win his consent to make Iacinta thine.
Sir, I cannot say my duty shall deserve it
Since nature, and religion, without all
This bounty challenges my best obedience.
Away, thy sight
Is my disease.
Your blessing sir I kneel for.
What Impudence is this? wilt thou subscribe
To take off mine, thy curse on Felisarda?
For I do hate her heartily; disclaim
All promise, contract, or converse for ever,
I'm else inexorable.
Sir.
His eyes shoot poison at me, ha? he has
Bewitched me sure, what coldness thus invades me?
Ther's something creeping to my heart. Franscisco? ha▪
Possess this gift of thy Inheritance;
Convey me to my chamber, oh—Fernando,
If thou dost hope I should take off my curse,
Do not approach my sight, unless I send for thee.
Forbear good Brother; Diego, Rotor•go,
Your hands to assist my Father, one go for his
Physician.
This turn is fatal, and affrights me, but
Heaven has more charity than to let him die
With such a hard heart, it were a sin, next his
Want of compassion, to suspect he can
Take his Eternal flight and leave Fernando
This desperate Legacy, he will change
The curse into some little prayer I hope,
And then—
Make hast I beseech you Doctor.
Noble Fernando.
As you would have men think your art is mea•
Not to abuse mankind, employ it all
To cure my poor sick Father.
Fear it not sir.
But there is more than your thin skill required
To state a health, your Recipes perplexed
With tough names, are but mockeries, and noise,
Without some dew from Heaven, to mix and make 'em
Thrive, in the application: what now?
Oh sir, I am sent for the Confessor,
The Doctor fears him much, your Brother says
You must have patience, and not Enter Sir;
Your Father is a going, good old man,
And having made him Heir, is loath your presence
Should interrupt his Journey.
Francisco may be honest, yet me thinks
It would become his love to interpose
For my access, at such a needful hour,
And mediate for my blessing, not assist
Unkindly thus my banishment. I'll not
Be lost so tamely, shall my Father dye
And not Fernando take his leave—I dare not.
If thou dost hope I should take off this curse,
Do not approach until I send—it was so,
And it is a law that binds above my blood.
Make hast good Father, and if heaven deny
Him life, let not his charity dye too.
One curse may sink us both, say how I kneel
And beg he would bequeath me but his blessing▪
Then though Francisco be his Heir, I shall
Live happy, and take comfort in my tears,
When I remember him so kind a Father.
It is my duty.
Do your holy office.
Those fond Philosophers that magnify
Our human nature, and did boast wee had
Such a prerogative in our rational soul,
Conversed but little with the World, confined
To cells, and unfrequented woods, they knew not
The fierce vexation of community,
Else they had taught, our reason is our loss,
And but a privilege that exceeds sense,
By nearer apprehension, of what wounds,
To know our selves most miserable. My heart
Is teeming with new fears—Ha, is he dead?
Not dead, but in a desperate• condition,
And so that little breath remains wee have
Remitted to his Confessor, whose Office
Is all that's left.
Is there no hope of life then?
None.
Is he not merciful to Fernando yet? no talk of me?
I find he takes no pleasure
To hear you named: Francisco to us all
He did confirm his Heir, with many blessings.
And not one left for me? oh take me in
Thou gentle Earth, and let me creep through all
Thy dark and hollow crannies, till I find
Another way to come into the World,
For all the Air I breath-in here is poisoned.
Wee must have patience Brother, it was no
Ambitious thought of mine to supplant you;
He may live yet, and you be reconciled.
That was some kindness yet Francisco; but
I charge thee by the nearness of our blood,
When I am made this mockery, and wonder,
I know not where to find out charity,
If unawares a chance direct my weary
And withered Feet to some fair House of thine,
Where plenty with full blessings crowns thy table,
If my thin face• betray my want of food,
Do not despise me, cause '• was thy Brother.
Leave these imagined horrors, I must not
Live when my Brother is thus miserable.
Ther's something in that face looks comfortably.
Your Father sir is dead, his will to make
Francisco the sole Master of his Fortunes
•s now irrevocable, a small Pension
He hath given you for life, which with his blessing
•s all the benefit I bring.
Ha, blessing; speak it again good Father.
I did apply some lenitives to soften
His anger, and prevailed; your Father hath
Reversed that heavy cen•ur of his curse,
And in the place bequeathed his prayer and blessing.
〈◊〉 new created by his charity.
〈…〉 ceremonies are behind, he did
〈…〉 'd within our Covent,
〈…〉 Sepulture to me, I am confident
〈…〉 will give me leave—
His will in all things I obey, and yours
Most •••rend Father; order as you please
〈◊〉 Body; wee may after celebrate
•ith all due obsequies his Funeral.
Why you alone obey? I am your Brother:
My Fathers Eldest Son, though not his Heir.
It pleased my Father sir to think me worthy
•f such a title, you shall find me kind,
〈◊〉 you can look on matters without Envy.
If I can look on matters without Envy?
You may live here still.
I may live here Francisco?
•onditions? I would not understand
•his Dialect.
With me, from Madam Estefania?
If you be Signior Francisco.
Slighted? I find my Father was not dead till now.
Crowd not you Jealous thoughts so thick into
My Brain, lest you do tempt me to an Act
Will forfeit all again.
This is Iacintas character —Fail not to meet.
As you timely will prevent the danger of my rape.
My soul! Estefania can instruct you all particulars—
My service to your Lady, say I shall obey her commands.
Is that an Inventory you peruse?
Fernando you must pardon me, ther's something
Of Essence to my life, exacts my care,
And person, I must leave you, we may seasonably
Confer of things at my return. Iacinta.
Tic clear I am neglected, he did name
Iacinta too, in triumph, and is gone,
Big with his glories to divide '•m there,
And laugh at what my constant love hath made me.
My heart is in a storm, and day grows black,
Ther's not a star in Heaven will lend a beam
To light me to my ruin. Felisarda!
That name is both my haven, and my shipwreck.
Excellent.
You'll give me now a general release
For all the sums I ow you?
Thou hast blessed me.
I was born to do you good; about it presently
Now you know where to ambush, away I say
And get comrads: Iacinta and my Mother
Is all the carriage, you may know the coach
By the old women's cough ere it come near you,
She has a desperate malice to one tooth left
Still in her gums, till she has shook that out;
You wo'not need a warning piece, farewell.
Farewell, why whats the matter? you shanot leave me;
Thy Mother wo'not know thee in a Vizard.
You must excuse me friend, I would Join w'ee
In the •urprise, but that—
What I prithee?
I have extraordinary business, that concerns me
As near as life.
May not I know'•? thou art going
To the Widow now, thy Mistress.
Tic a business of more consequence;
Dost think I would leave thee, and there were not
Such a necessity?
For what?
And there were no more Sisters in the World,
You must excuse me.
Nay, nay, we must not part, unless I know
This mystery, some reason why you leave me.
If you will needs know, there's a wench stays for me,
The toy I told thee on; farewell Alberto.
But will you leave such business and a friend?
Business? art thou a Gentleman &amp; vvouldst have
Me leave a Lady I haven't seen this three year
For business or a friend?
I must to her; if I had a heart
Ten Tu• of Iron,
This Female Adamant would draw it to her,
I feel it going; I do tell thee Don,
There is no business so material
In nature as a wench, and if thou art my friend
Thou vvouldst leave my Sister now in such a cause
And bear me company, I must be drunk,
And she must pick my pocket too, that is
Another secret when we meet together
That never fails.
Why art thou desperate?
Dost not thou fear thy body?
A wench is Physic
My body has been used too, leave thy prating,
And let me take my course.
And you be so resolute—
I must give you one advice before you go;
When my Sister's in thy custody, observe
The time and place, and things convenient,
And stand not fooling about ceremonies
But put her to it.
Thou would not have me ravish her?
Yes but I would,
Shoe's no Sister of mine if she cry out
For such a business, she has more wit.
Was ever such a mad-cap.
I'll not pray for thee.
I sha'not prosper if thou dost.
Thy hand, Isle drink thy health, &amp; hang thy self.
Farewell.
You tell me wonders Madam, Don Ramyres
Dead, his Son Fernando disinherited,
And young Francisco made his heir?
I took
Franciscos word.
Tic strange.
Your stars smile on you.
Yet I much pity the poor Gentleman.
Busy your thought about your own, Francisco—
Hath promised not to fail?
He waits where he can easily observe
How soon the coast is clear to visit you.
So, so, thus hooded
The day cannot distinguish our two faces,
And for your voice, you know how to disguise it
By imitation of my cold and hoarseness,
And when you come to Church—
Let me alone, there I'll produce the Contract,
Which will surprise Don Pedro, and your Father,
To see me challenge him, I have prepared the Priest too,
Whose holy Eloquence may assist, how ever
This will give you opportunity to perfect
Your wishes with your servant, put the rest
To fate Iacinta.
I hear some approach, retire into my Closet.—
Iacinta. Eec. Sir.
Not thy voice recovered?
A violent cold—
Count Pedro must salute you ere we go.
Impute it to devotion, that I make
Such hast to be within thy arms,
One kiss and I shall carry with me
Another soul, and count with Joy the minutes
I am to expect this happiness.
Iacinta you follow with your Mother in the Coach;
My Lord I wait you. Ped Ther's Heaven upon her lip.
He has kissed, and took his leave I hope.
I must owe all my happiness to you sweet Madam,
I had been lost without your art to help me.
Love wo'not leave his votaries.
I hear my Mothers cough, I have finished
And you must act your part:
Come •are you ready Daughter? the Coach stays.
I attend
Don Pedro will cure your cold before the morn∣ing.
What duty Felisarda shall we pay
To Heaven for this last care of us?
Let not thy eyes,
Although thy grief become 'em, be in love
With tears, I Prophecy a joy shall weigh
Down all our sufferings, I see comfort break
Like day, whose forehead cheers the world; if Don
Fernando love thee, he is a Gentleman,
Confirmed in all that's honourable, and cannot
Forget whom his own virtue hath made choice
To shine upon.
Unless my Innocence,
Apt to believe a flattering tongue, see not
The Serpent couch, and hide his speckled breast
Among the flowers; but it were sin to think
He can dissemble, Father, and I know not,
Since I was first the object of his charity,
I find a pious gratitude disperse
Within my soul, and every thought of him
Engenders a warm sigh within me, which
Like curls of holy Incense overtake
Each other in my bosom, and enlarge
With their Embrace his sweet remembrance.
Cherish
Those thoughts, and where such noble worth invites,
Be bold to call it love.
It is too much
Ambition to hope he should be just
To me, or keep his honour, when I look on
The pale complexion of my wants; and yet
Unless he loves me dearly, I am lost,
And if he have but mocked me into faith,
He might as well have murdered me, for I
Shall have no heart to live, if his neglect
Deface what my affection printed there.
There is no fear of his revolt, lose not
His character. I must attend some business.
If Don Fernando visit thee, preserve
His fair opinion, and thou moist live
Above thy Uncles pity.
Will you leave me?
My stay shall not be long; the Garden will
With smiling flowers encourage thee to walk,
And raise thy drooping eyes, with hope to see
A spring like theirs, upon thee.
Why should I
Give any entertainment to my fears?
Suspicions are but like the shape of clouds,
And idle forms in the air, we make to fright us,
I will admit no jealous thought to wound
Fernandos truth, but with that cheerfulness,
My own first clear intents to honour him
Can arm me with, expect to meet his faith
As noble as he promised—Ha! tic he.
My poor heart trembles like a timorous leaf,
Which the wind shakes upon his sickly stalk,
And frights into a Palsy.
Felisarda!
Shall I want fortitude to bid him welcome?
Sir, if you think there is a heart alive
That can be grateful, and with humble thoughts,
And Prayers reward your piety, despise not
The offer of it here; you have not cast
Your bounty on a Rock, while the seeds thrive
Where you did place your Charity; my joy
May seem ill dressed to come like sorrow thus,
But you may see through every tear, and find
My eyes meant Innocence, and your hearty welcome.
Who did prepare thee Felisarda thus
To entertain me weeping? sure our souls
Meet and converse, and we not know it; there is
Such beauty in that watery circle, I
Am fearful to come near, and breath a kiss
Upon thy cheek, lest I pollute that Crystal,
And yet I must salute thee, and I dare
With one warm sigh meet, and dry up this sorrow.
I shall forget all misery; for when
I look upon the World, and race of men,
I find 'em proud, and all so unacquainted
With pity to such miserable things
As poverty hath made us, that I must
Conclude you sent from Heaven.
Oh do not Flatter
Thy self poor Felisarda; I'm Mortal,
The life I bear about me is not mine,
But borrowed to come to thee once again,
And ere I go, to clear how much I love thee—
But first I have a story to deliver,
A tale will make thee sad, but I must tell it,
There is one dead that loved thee not.
One dead
That loved not me? this carries sir in nature
No killing sound; I shall be sad to know
I did deserve an Enemy, or he want
A Charity at death.
Thy cruel Enemy,
And my best friend, hath took Eteranll leave
And 's gone, to heaven I hope, excuse my tears,
It is a tribute I must pay his memory,
For I did love my Father.
Ha! your Father?
Yes Felisarda, he is gone, that in
The morning promised many years, but death
Hath in few hours made him as stiff, as all
The winds, and winter, had thrown cold upon him,
And whispered him to marble.
Now trust me,
My heart weeps for him, but I understand
Not how I was concerned in his displeasure;
And in such height as you profess.
He did
Command me on his blessing to forsake thee;
Was it not a cruel precept, to enforce
The soul, and curse his Son for honest love?
This is a wound indeed.
But not so mortal;
For his last breath was Balsam poured upon it,
By which he did reverse his malediction;
And I that groaned beneath the weight of that
Anathema, sunk almost to despair,
Where night and heavy shades hung round about me,
Found my self rising like the morning Star
To view the World.
Never I hope to be
Eclis'd again.
This was a welcome blessing.
Heaven had a care of both; my joys are mighty.
Vouchsafe me sir your pardon if I blush
And say I love, but rather than the peace
That should preserve your bosom, suffer for
My sake, it were better I were dead.
No, live.
And live for ever happy, thou deserved it.
It is Fernando doth make hast to sleep
In his forgotten dust.
Those accents did
Not sound so cheerfully.
dost love me?
Sir.
Do not, I prithee do not, I am lost,
Alas I am no more Fernando, there
Is nothing but the Empty name of him
That did betray thee, place a guard about
Thy heart betime, I am not worth this sweetness.
Did not Fernando speak all this? alas
He knew that I was poor before, and needed not
Despise me now for that.
Desert me goodness
When I upbraid thy wants. It is I am poor,
For I have not a stock in all the World
Of so much dust, as would contrive one narrow
Cabin to shroud a worm; my dying Father
Hath given away my Birthright to Francisco,
I'm disinherited, thrown out of all,
But the small Earth I borrow, thus to walk on;
And having nothing left, I come to kiss thee,
And take my everlasting leave of thee too.
Farewell, this will persuade thee to consent
To my Eternal absence.
I must beseech you stay a little sir,
And clear my faith▪ Hath your displeased Father
Deprived you then of all, and made Francisco
The Lord of your Inheritance, without hope
To be repaired in Fortune?
It is sad truth.
This is a happiness I did not look for.
A happiness?
Yes Sir, a happiness.
Can Felisarda take delight to hear
What hath undone her servant?
Heaven avert it.
But it is not worth my grief to be assured
That this will bring me nearer now to him
Whom I most honour of the World; and tic
My pride, if you exceed me not in Fortune,
That I can boast my heart, as high, and rich,
With noble flame, and every way your equal,
And if you be as poor as I Fernando,
I can deserve you now, and love you more
Than when your expectation carried all
The pride and blossoms of the spring upon it.
Those shadows will not feed more than our fan∣cies;
Two poverties will keep but a thin table;
And while wee dream of this high nourishment,
Wee do but starve more gloriously.
It is ease.
And wealth first taught us art to surfeit by;
Nature is wise, not costly, and will spread
A table for us in the Wilderness;
And the kind Earth keep us alive, and healthful,
With what her bosom doth invite us to;
The brooks, not there suspected as the Wine
That sometime Princes quaff, are all transparent,
And with their pretty murmurs call to taste 'em.
In every tree a Chorister to sing
Health to our loves, our lives shall there be free
As the first knowledge was from sin, and all
Our dreams as Innocent.
Oh Felisarda?
If thou did own less Virtue, I might prove
Unkind and marry thee, but being so rich
In goodness, it becomes me not to bring
One that is poor, in every worth, to wast
So excellent a Dower, be free, and meet
One that hath Wealth to cherish it, I shall
Undo thee quite, but pray for me, as I,
That thou moist change for a more happy Bridegroom;
I dare as sson be guilty of my death,
As make thee miserable by expecting me.
Farewell, and do not wrong my soul, to think
That any storm could separate us two,
But that I have no fortune now to serve thee.
This will be no exception sir, I hope,
When wee are both dead, yet our bodies may
Be cold, and strangers in the Winding sheet;
We shall be married when our spirits meets.
Your daughter does not use me well Don Carlos.
I know not what to think,
Some great misfortune must be the cause.
Not yet appear? they might,
And they had crept like Tortoises, Arrived
Before this time.
There is some strange disaster.
The Coach orethrown, and both their lives
Endangered, can but excuse 'm.
Oh my Lord, Don Carlos.
The Tragic voice of women strikes mine ear.
Alsimira?
Madam.
Where is our Daughter?
My fear almost distracts me, she is gone,
Stolen, ravished from me.
Ha.
An armed Troop
In Visards forced her from my coach; and heaven
Knows where they have hurried the poor Iacinta.
A troop of armed Devils.
Let them be
A legion, they are all damned.
Nay they were men and mortal sure.
I w'on'ot leave one soul amongst them all.
Mine is in torment.
In the hope and height of my ambition
To be thus crossed! how escaped you?
Alas I was not young enough, I offered
My self to bear her company, and suffer
As much as she did, but one boisterous fellow
With a starched voice, and a worse vizard, took me
Just here above my Sciatica, and quoited me
Into the coach again upon my head,
I had a larum in it for half an hour,
And so I escaped with life.
Did they sue her with any rigour?
To say truth they were gentle enough to her.
That mollifies▪ and they may live.
Hell overtake 'em, lets return, they had better
Committed incest, than this rape.
They had better ravished Proserpine before
Don Lucifer's own face. I am all fury.
Pardon my dear Iacinta, It was love
That threw me on this act, I had no patience
To see thee forced into a marriage
By a covetous Father, whose devotion
Is only Wealth and Title; I esteem
No danger, if at last the fair Iacinta
Smile and allow this duty; let not silence
Deprive me longer of thy voice, whose every
Accent will please, though it pronounce my sentence;
There's death in this Eclipse too, sweet dismiss
Thy ungentle veil, and let thy eyes make bright
This melancholy air, that droops and dies
For want of thy restoring beams.
Now sir,
What think you of your Mistress?
You are the Lady Estefania I take it.
Yes, you did take me from the coach Alberto
But by a consequence I find, you thought
Iacinta in your power, I could have told you,
Had you discovered sooner what you were,
Where to have found your Mistress, but shoe's now
Above your hope, and by the priest ere this
Made wife to Don Francisco.
To Don Pedro?
It was not sir impossible that I
(Had not your violence prevented me)
(By a plot between Iacinta and my self,
To take her place and person in the coach)
Had by this time been married to Count Pedro,
Whom I have power and Justice sir to challenge
If Contracts carry weight.
Have I so long
Ly'n beating at the bush, and is the bird
Fled to Francisco?
I should show I had
A passion sir, and sense of this captivity,
But that I find it was error, and not will
Lead you to this; and your own loss now made
Irreparable, helps to tie up my anger.
Madam, I must confess a wrong, and dare
Submit to let your anger punish me,
For I despise my self, now I have lost
My expectation, and if you please
To think I had no malice in this act
To you, You can propose no satisfaction
I shall esteem a penance to repair you,
As far as my poor life, if you'll direct it.
It is nobly promised sir. You shall redeem
In my thoughts what is past, if you be pleased
To make my stay no longer here; I have
No desperate aim to make Don Pedro yet
Know how to right me, or make public what
Should bind his honour to perform.
Was not Luys Madam entertained your Servant?
I shall make known the story if you walk
But to Don Carlos House.
You shall command me.
No news yet of Iacinta?
None.
He must
Not live in Spain, nor in the World, if my
Revenge can overtake him, that has stolen
My Daughter; could you not by voice or habit
Guess at the ravisher? Ye are traitors all.
Now I consider better, I suspect
Alberto one of the conspiracy,
Some voice did sound like his. You know he loved her.
Ha! Alberto?
And how he might engage some Ruffians
To cross Don Pedro.
It was he, whore's Luys?
I do not like his absence, thei'r both guilty;
My own blood turned a rebel? send for the Alcaides,
They shall both trot like thieves to the Corregidor.
Where is Count Pedro?
Gon in search of his lost Mistress.
When all things were ripe,
The very Priest prepared to seal our Joys,
A work my brain did labour for, and sweat
With hope to see accomplished, undermined?
And in a Minute all blown up?
Have patience
She may be found again.
But how my Lord
May be inclined to accept her foiled, or wounded
In fame—
Luys is here.
Borachio, here's a spectacle! more affliction?
Where is your Sister, whats become of Iacinta?
My Sister and Iacinta are gone together.
I know all the business.
Where is she?
She is very well, I know not where she is.
But Don Alberto is an honest Gentleman,
And has by this time done the feat.
Confusion—
You think you had all the wit, it was my plot.
You may thank heaven that you are old, &amp; ugly,
You had been no Mother of this World. But sir,
I have some news would be delivered privately.
Mother of mine, avaunt.
You are not my Son.
Was ever man so miserable? away
Thou sponge; get him to sleep,
I dare not meddle with him.
In sobriety a word.
Where is Alberto?
Where every honest man should be a bed, with my Sister,
Old man, I have considered of the former matter we talked on
And would do things like a dutiful son, but I find that a
Wife is not altogether of convenient for me as a—
Will none deliver me?
They are somewhat slug,
Now I have found out an excellent tumbler,
That can do the Somerset, please you to be acquainted
with her, and give me your opinion, She shall play
with all the stews in Christendom, for all your are
worth, if I live, and yet she is but 17 there's a peri∣winkle,
I had a Gemini, before I went to travel, And
I am bound in conscience, if you think fit, to see her
well Provided for—
With whips, i'll have her skin flayed off.
Her skin flayed off? dost thou know mortal man
What thou hast said? I tel the Don, nothing can come near
Her in the shape of an Officer, she is a very Basilic &amp; will
Kill em with her eyes 3 score yards point blank, but you
May talk, &amp; do your pleasure with her, for I came a
Purpose to bring her to your lodging, if you love me,
Do but see her, it shall cost you nothing, you shall
Be my friend, hang money?
Thus will my state consume, vexation!
What shall I do? when you have slept, Luys
I'll tell you more, attend him to his Chamber
And make his Door fast.
Luys You will consider on it, upon those terms, I will go
Sleep at vvinckling.
And vvo'not all this take a way my senses?
My Son is lost too, this is all a curse
For my ambition and my Avarice.
News Don Carlos from our Daughter.
Ha, a Letter! it is Iacintas hand.
Knovv'st where she is?
Yes Madam, and her resolution
reads.
To attend her Father, with my Master Don Francisco
If Don Carlos please to admit 'em, the matters done.
What matter?
They are as fast as any Priest can make em.
Wife to Francisco, now his Fathers heir?
That's some allay, if it be true, she writes,
Don Pedro was contracted to Fstefania, who supplied
Her person in the Coach—it was not Iacinta was ravished
Then, Don Pedro was not noble, after he had made faith,
To entangle my Iacinta. Hum, say they shall
Be welcome.
They are present sir.
I am nor yet collected, but if this
Paper be justified, I receive you both.
Peruse those wonders Alsimira.
Sir, though by the tie of nature you may chal∣lenge
All duty, this is done so like a Father
It exceeds all your care.
Let this confirm,
I bring a fortune not to be despised,
But were I Master of the World, I should
At price of all my wealth, think this a treasure
Purchased too cheap.
My blessing and my prayers, I'm new created,
And bow to that great providence; all Joy
Spread through your souls; this is not much amiss.
But what's become of Madam Estefania
That took Iacintas place?
Forced from the Coach
By Don Alberto, thinking her my Daughter
That part of our plot failed, but my intents
Were fair, and to assist this injured Lady
Don Pedro sir.
You shall for some few minutes.
Withdraw into that Chamber, in his passion
He may be violent, leave me to moderate.
I shall obey you sir.
Was ever man of my great birth and fortune
Affronted thus? I am become the talk
Of every Picaro and Ladron, I challenge
A reparation of my honour; whore's
Iacinta? tic a plot, a base contrivement
To make my name ridiculous, the subject
Of every scurrill language.
My Lord with pardon
Of your Altesa, you're not Injured here,
Unless I have been faulty in too much
Observance, and desires to serve your person,
With almost sacrifice of my Daughter.
Ha! too much to me?
I would you had remembered
How much your Honour was engaged before,
By Contract to another, when you mocked
The Innocent Iacinta, now not mine.
Who hath traduced my fame, or mentioned me
With that dishonour? I disclaim all Contracts.
The unconfined Aire's not more free, than I
To all the World, except your beauteous Daughter.
Do you know the Lady Estefania?
Dares she make saucy claim? my breath dis∣solves it
If every Lady whom we grace with our
Converse should challenge men of my Nobility—
I wish my Lord you could evade it, for
The honour of my Family; if your conscience
Or Art can nullify that Ladies sinterest
I am resolved—my Son Luys shall
Then marry With that Widow, I have no other
Ambition.
You are wise, and I
Am fortified to clear my self thought-free
From any promise to that sullen Madam.
Ha! tic Iacinta, and she wears the Jewel
I did present, conspicuously; I ask
No reason for thy absence, let me chain
My darling in this amorous curl, tic happiness
Enough to repossess thee, not the policy
And power of Hell shall separate us again.
It is but Justice sir.
Ha! Estefania.
Do you know her sir?
Do You know this character?
Conspiracy.
When this is read Don Carlos
You will imagine he has wronged your Daughter.
Is this your hand Count Pedro?
Mine—tic counterfeit
Upon my honour, and I thus dissolve
Thy insolent claim.
Nothing can bind I see
A false heart
This must give you freedom Madam,
If you release his hasty vow.
Faith cannot
Be compelled sir.
These are all Impostures;
I take my self into my self.
What shall become of her my noble Count?
I pity her
But cannot cure her wound, and if you be
Her friend, advice her to contain her passions,
And wisely love one that can entertain it.
You hear this Madam?
And can smile upon
His violated fath.
Now for Luys,
To strike in with the Widow,
Hoe's a sleep.
Isle wake and quicken him.
Had thou bin worth my love, I should have held
Thee worth my anger shadow, of a Lord.
Thy greatness I despise, and think thee now
Too poor for my revenge, and freely give
Thee back thy barren promises, and when
I read in story, one that has been perjured,
I'll write Don Pedro in the place of him
That broke his faith, and thank my fate to have mist thee.
If you please Madam, while he is in the humour
Of being base, I'll make him gather up
These paper relics, which he shall make him self
Up into rolls, and having swallowed 'em
For Pills, thank you, his Physic was so gentle.
It will be too much time &amp; breath lost on him.
It will become me Madam to attend you.
So, she is taken off' and my path free
To Carlos Daughter.
Contracted to Don Pedro? say.
She was, where is Estefania?
Gone with Alberto; proud to wait upon
The Lady I neglected.
Follow 'em Luys?
I do not like he should insinuate
Now she is free, and his hopes desperate in
love.
How long have I slept sir?
Thou dost dream still, pursue the Widow now
Or never look at such a fortune.
Is she gone with Alberto? what if I say,
I have lain with her, and that shoe's with child by me?
That would stain both your fems; away and welcome
When thou return, and she confirmed.
Isle confirm her, or confound somebody,
No more, I am awake, this is Don Pedro
I'll talk with him first, will you justify,
The Widow is a Widow still, and sweet
For all your Contract, that you have not been
My rival as they say after the flesh,
And that you did not know I had a mind,
Or not a mind, to do the deed of Matrimony?
Not I upon my honour.
You are witness—now to Alberto.
Manage the business temperatly.
Let me alone to be temperate, if I do not cousin
Some body, let me never drink Sack again.
What think you of Iacinta now my Lord?
As on the Saint I pay my chief devotions.
I come to seek one, that I late called Brother,
But he hath forfeted that Name, and Justice
Weary of such a prodigy in nature
Hath armed me thus in he revenge, Don Carlos,
Obscure him not, no darkness can protect him,
My sword shall forage every room like lightning,
No Cave but it shall visit, and through ribs
Of steel compel my passage to his heart,
Although I meet him in his Mistress Arms,
The lovers Sanctuary, I dare force Francisco,
And with my Sword cut the Embrace that chains him,
Rather then he shall glory in my ruins,
And revel out, those honours, with her, he
Took from my blood.
It shall not need Fernando.
Hum, here is like to be a bloody business,
I'll not disturb 'em.
As you are Brothers, by your Fathers dust
That should sleep quiet in his Urn, by her
Dear name that gave you life, that now prays for you,
Chide this unnatural fury.
What demands Fernando?
My inheritance wrought from me
By thy sly creeping to supplant my birth,
And cheat our Fathers easy soul, unvvorthily
Betraying to his anger for thy lust
Of wealth, the love and promise of two hearts,
Poor Felisarda and Fernando now
Wither at soul, and robed by thee of that
Should cherish virtue, like to rifled Pilgrims
Met on the way, and having told their story,
And dropped their even tears for both their loss,
Wander from one another.
Tic not sure
Fernando, but his passion (that obeys not
The counsel of his reason) would accuse me,
And if my Father now, since spirits lose not
Intelligence, but more active when they have
Shook off their chains of flesh, would leave his dwell∣ling,
And visit this course orb again: my Innocence
Should dare the appeal, and make Fernando see
His empty accusations.
He that thrives
By wicked art, has confidence to dress
His action with simplicity, and shapes
To cheat our credulous natures; tic my wonder
Thou durst do so much injury Francisco
As must provoke my Justice, to revenge,
Yet wear no Sword.
I need no guard, I know
Thou dare not kill me.
Dare I not?
And name thy cause, tic thy suspicion not Fran∣cisco
Hath wrought thee high and passionate, to assure it,
If you dare violate, I dare possess you
Withal my title to your Land.
How is that?
Will you resign the interest to such
A fair Estate, and wrong my Daughter sir?
Let him receive it at his peril.
Ha!
It was my Fathers act, not mine, he trembled
To hear his curse alive, what horror will
His conscience feel, when he shall spurn his dust,
And call the reverend shade from his blessed seat,
To this bad World again, to walk and fright him?
I am abused
Can this be more than dream?
Sir you may cancel it, but think withal
How you can answer him that's dead, when he
Shall charge your timorous soul for this contempt
To nature and Religion, to break
His last bequest, and breath, that sealed your blessings?
These are fine fancies.
Here, and may it prosper,
Where my good Father meant it, I'm overcome.
Forgive me, and enjoy it, I may find
Some Earth that is not thine, where I may die
And take up a dark Chamber, love Iacinta,
And while I seek out where to be forgotten
Live happy, and divide the spring between you,
So, so, ell's well again.
Fernando stay.
Ha, my Father and Felisarda?
Don Ramyres and my Niece?
Are they both dead?
I dare kneel too, they do converse. Don Carlos
Do not you know that shape? it is wondrous like
Your Niece.
And that your Father, ha!
How long hath Felisarda been a sad
Companion to the shades? I did not think
To find thee in this pale society,
Of ghosts so soon.
I am alive Fernando,
And Don Ramires still, thy living Father.
You may believe it sir, I was of the counsel.
It is a joy will tempt me, wish to live
Here, without more ambition to change
For blessings of the other World; and is
My Father willing that wee both should live?
Men thought you dead.
It lay within the knowledge of Francisco and some few
By this device to advance my younger Son
To a Marriage with Iacinta sir, and try
Fernando's Piety and his Mistress Virtue,
Which I have found worth him, and my acceptance,
With her I give thee what thy birth did challenge.
Receive thy Felisarda.
It is a joy,
So flowing, it drowns all my faculties,
My soul will not contain I fear, but lose
And leave me in this extrasie.
I am cheated.
Not so, what dower you add above that fortune,
Descends upon her by your Sisters Legacy
Francisco shall deserve, with a proportion
Out of my state; live, and be happy both,
You shall not want a Father in my care.
Our children thus increased Don Carlos, it is
Our shame if we neglect 'em; Teodoro
You now may call me Brother.
I'm honoured.
Well, take my blessing too, love her Francisco.
My bounty is to come, and if my Son
But finish with his Mistress—hoe's returned,
Where is the Widow?
Sure enough.
And Don Alberto.
I ha made him sure too, I ha peppered him.
How?
In your ear, I ha cut his throat, do none pursue me?
I hope thou hast not killed him? ha!
You hope to late, I could not help it, you said
He was my Rival.
Not to loud.
Where, where shall I obscure me, the Alcaides
Will be here presently, and search for me.
I left him giving up the ghost, at a cranny
I made into his side, through which a man
Might see into his midriff.
Art thou desperate?
Beside one window that did look into his lungs,
From whence his wind came strong enough,
In six hours sail to dispatch a Carrack to the straights.
I'm mad.
I should neglect my life, but it would not sound well
With your honour that Don Carlos Son was hanged,
Or put into the Galleys; are they not come yet?
I am undone, there is no safety here,
Make fast those doors, and by the Postern gate
Thou moist escape, take the best Horse, away.
I shall want money sir.
Come follow me?
This accident I fear will quite distract me.
You must dispatch me quickly sir, there is
No staying to tell the money, gee't me in lump,
I'll count it afterwards, good sir make hast.
Something hath happened that doth fresh
Perplex him.
Where is Don Pedro?
Hoe's here.
The storm is over sure, I hear no noise,
Toledos are asleep, Iacinta? have
I found my love?
Here it was lost indeed,
I must allow no such Familiarity
With my Wife.
How? married?
It is most true my Lord.
You have not used me thus?
It had been Impious to divorce your heart
From Estefania; My good Lord, wee know
Your Lordship is religious in your promises.
I defy all Estefanias, Lady you are civil.
It will become my care so to preserve her
My Honourable Count.
Honourable?
It appears not by these contempts.
Your Lordship cannot want a Female Furni∣ture.
I must have some body now I'm prepared, my blood
Will take it ill, would I had Estefania;
Shoe's here, Madam I hope you have
A better faith than to believe I was in Earnest,
Don Pedro is only at your service.
It is too late sir, this Gent. is witness,
Of your surrender, and is now possessed
Of all that's mine.
It was your Noble bounty,
For which I cannot study a return
More apt than to resign to your good Lordship,
My Interest in Iacinta, give you joy Count.
Such a rich Widow serves my turn.
So so,
If I consider well this is but Justice.
Ha, are not you Don Alberto: fetch back Luys.
The very same sir, and this Lady is my Wife,
Please you salute her.
Sir for the credit of your wisdom talk not,
The man you see's alive and married too,
With my consent, alas I owed him money,
That Widow has paid all, I must be honest,
I had no heart to leave you so unsatisfied,
These sums must go for other debts,
My debts do clog my conscience, and are better
When they are timely paid sir, then let run
With their long Teeth to bite your state hereafter,
And if when I am free you dare but trust me—
Was ever Father cheated thus, come hither,
How dare thou be so impudent?
I cannot help it sir, unless you dye
Or give me better means, I shall make bold
With these devices, you are my Father sir,
And I am bound—
To cousin me?
All must be mine, and if
I pay my self a little before the day,
You shall be no loser when you come to reckon,
This sha'not make a breach twixt you and I,
They are honest men I ow this money too,
When I am clear prescribe me any method
And rank me like your son, I will deserve
You shall forget my wildness, and acknowledge me
A convert without blemish to your family.
I must be Intercessor.
And we all.
I'll think upon it.
Since I cannot have Iacinta, I desire
I may have her Brother.
Not in marriage.
I like his wit, his spirit, and his humour,
Do not you love a wench?
Yes sir.
Thou shall it never want.
Wenches?
We'll live together, and▪ if thy Father
Be not bountiful, thou shalt command my fortune.
You speak nobly.
Ladies, I ask your pardon
Unless you hold me desperate, disdain not
That I may this day wait upon your triumph,
And to each Bride offer some gift to expiate
My folly and offence.
You are too bountiful.
You're all my guests to day.
I beg your next
Remove may place the Scen' of Joy with me,
My house shall be much honoured, lead the way
With Verse and Wine let Poets crown this day.
SO so, your dangers over, and the state
Secure, as when our Fleet in Eighty Eight
Was fired and scattered, to confirm it true
Here is Don Pedro taken Prisoner too,
I'm at your mercy Gentlemen, and I
Confess without a rack conspiracy,
So far as my poor part in the Play comes too,
But I am innocent from hurt to you,
And I dare quit the rest from any plot
Meant but to please, if you believe it not
I dare make oath, your hands can do no less
Than certify your friends what I confess.

A Sirs these eyr has a mickle geod savour. The creept thus
fur intolth' Kingdom, like an Erivigg intoll a mons
lug, and sall as herdly be gat oout. Ise sa seff here as
a Sparrow under a Penthoowse. Let the Sheriffo
Cumberlond gee hang himsell ins own gartropts, Ise
ferr enough off him, ans fellow Officer the hangman
now. I a Scot Theff may pass for a trow Mon here; Awe the emp∣tie
Weomb and thin hide I full oft bore in Scotland, an the geod fare
I get here! Be me saw Ise two yards groan about sin I cam fro Scot∣land,
the Deele split me gif I cam at thee mere Scotlond. Ise even
now ny the bonny Court, wur meny a Scot lad is groan fro a Mag∣got
ta a bran Goose; marry Ise in geod pleight. Weal, Scotlond,
weal, tow gaff st me a mouth, but Anglond mon find me met; it is a
geod soil geod feith, an gif awe my Contremon wot plant here,
th'od thrive better thou in thair non.
In the foul Deels name who's yon? a sud be me Contremon by's
scratin an scrubbin; A looks like Scotlond it sell, bar an naked; A
carries noought bet tha walth o Can aboot him, filth an Vermin.
Awe Scotlond, Scotlond, wa worth tha tim I cam oout o
thee; Ise like tha wandering Jew ha worn my hooves sa thin as pau∣per,
and can get no shod for um; Anglond has geod sooft grond, bet
tha peple ha mickle hard hearts; Awe Billy, Billy, th'adst better ha
tan tha stripe for stelling in Scotlond (bet thot it is sin ta rob the spent∣tle)
an ha thrived by it, than ta come ta be hanged here, or starved; tic
keen Justice a mon sud dee sick a deeth for making use o his hands,
I ha no oder member worth ought.
On's mon what gar thee in these pickle? how came hither?
Even on me ten toes sir, and thay err worn oout now, thay'l
ser me no longer.
When tha Deele sall mend'um? sham few thee, a Scot an
cannot shift.
A lack sir, a mon mo not stell here for's neck, and Ise mickle
sham ta beg.
How mon not bag! Once you are nen a me Contremon than.
Ey marry that am I, geod feith Ise a Scot, an boorn at Andre
keddin.
I thoought fa be thy iddle leife, what gar thee cam hither?
A lack mon I sud a bein whopt aboot tha Toown o Berwick
for theiffing in Scotlond, bet broke gale and escaped it.
Had tow tha conscience ta stell fro thy own Country, an hast
not tha sece ta bag in an oder? fie mon, fie. Once hoow think leive?
Look her mon, look her, sa tha virtue o bagging
A sir do ye drop, do ye drop at mooth sir?
Ey sir, seek a sight may mack a mon sown.
Sow up your chops in tha Deeles name, gif you cannot bag
ye sall not eat sir.
Geod feith an I ha not eat un morsel these two days, cam
away mod, cam away.
No, no, sir stey your fercnes, keep your fangs off sir, ye ma
ha tha mang.
No geod feith, Ise a clear skinned lad.
Bet monstrous lozy.
Dooubt not that sir, thay'l pin ta death sir, for I ha noought ta
fed um bet Skin, an that's two toough for thair teeth—cam away
mon, sum cherete good Contremon.
Weal set doowne—look thee here mon,
these gis tha leg o a English Pressed.
Sey ye sa mon.
Reight weal thay bein mad up o Cappon and whit broth▪
thay mack their carcase fat, bet their folls len; do ye thenk S. Andre
wad a fe•ted la mickle gif a cud a gat seek met as these▪ No, no, by
me saw Ise hang than; he was starved, thay fare deliciously; he woes
•oowzy, and hod no sheft, they bien buried aleife in fin lenin an lown
sleeffes▪ •he stunk oboe grond, they bien swetten'd leiving an deed, oboe
an under groan; A me saw S. Andre had her don sa meny marvels
gif a h•d stuffed his carcase la full as thay.
Geod feith I main pass for a sent ten, for me carcase is bar an
thin enough.
Ey for sent Theff, for he ner did mirackle—these Torky leg
cam fro a Merchants Table, these Widgins wing fro a Citzens, an
these Gooses leg fro a Lawyers.
Bred, thay mack mere preamble 'boot thair booty then awe
tha peple in Cristendum de aboot thair saws, how had tow tha face
ta speeke at sa meny doors mon?
A sir, I sall tach ye ta bag bravely, mind ye me now sir, I
stole two Coows fro me Contremon and gat tham agate ta Cumber∣land
ta seele, bet tha plaggy shriefe gar tham tack fro me, an sent me
toll tha gale, bet I gat loose, an sa cam froward, an in tha Noorth I
met a iddle Tourneys lod, when mad me these Certifice, an sat awe those
Jestece nams tol't, that tha shreife o Comberlond had den me mickle
wrong, an sa Ise cam up toll the King for Jestece.
Geod feith wad I had seek an oder.
Cam away mon, hest thee, fill thy weomb, and get thee on
you sid mon, an Ise kep o these, and sa nen fall scap us—hark ye me
mon, you mon tell 'am you cam o geod parentage, an ha lost awe
your siller as ye cam for Anglond—you mon speeke a by mon, an
not lick a Mole under groan pest herring.
Weal, weal, Isle be avis'd be you, gif you far weal I fall
not far amiss.
Gang away mon, gang away mon, see tow, see tow yon
braw mon tofore thy eyne.
—Bless your honour, Ise speeke a word or two ta your honour.
My honour▪—Pox on your fawning hide, what would you
have with me and be hanged?
—No, no, sir I pray your honour wax not wrothfull, Ise a mon
o geod rank in my own Country, an ha kept geod beasts.
I, for some bodies else, thou dost not look as though thou
ere were worth one.
No, no, sir, me non proper goods geod feith; I cam wi mickle
siller in me purss ta Englond, weal clad.
With some old Curtains that bore S. Andrews story, or i will∣drens
blanquets stole, and turned to Trowsies.
No geod feith, I ha even bien robbed o awe.
Rob thee! of what? had he a mind to be lousy? but this
is an Engine laid to draw a piece of silver to you, is it not so?
Your Honour speekes mickle weal.
—There—there's some of your Country men at Court
lives better by this trade than you.
Un word ta your honour.
Hy day, another! I'm way laid, hast thou been robed too?
No, no sir, no, tha shriffe o Comberlond has dun me mickle
wrong sir.
Whipped you about the Pigmarket?
A has taken away me Cows sir, an awe me goods, see here
sir, I ha awe those worthy Jestece nams ta testify.
There is no beggar like the Scotch-beger for tricks and
impudence—Come what must discharge me from you sir, and your
bellowing?
Geod feith sir I wont siller ta gat Jestece.
—Had thou had Justice done thee, thou had been
hanged long before this.
Bred, he's a fortune teller.
There—that will serve to buy you Oatmeal; sir there
is no more of your Caterwauling Companions here abouts, is there?
No, no sir, ant lick your honour.
No, no, pox on your Nees and your Nose too; I'm glad I'm
rid on you.
Now sir, ye had not tha face ta bag, hoow lick ye it now
sir, what ga he toll ye.
These smaw piece o siller.
A geod beginning mon, tolld a ye not sum o our Country men
leaved at Court by baggin.
I sea now a Scot may lie by atorete, an beg wi permission—
weal to Curt ta, an lie sa fest as tha be o'um.
Be me saw an thats herd ta dee;
see tow, see tow mon yon brawe fellow, wi't his gold Rope aboots
neck, an's long Cot lick a sark, geod feith he's ta herd for twantyo'um.
He's tha foul, gis a not?
Ey, ey mon; A has feuld himsell intoll mickle favour gif a foul
himsell not oout again—sey a cams unjust us mon, wees speeke toll
him—Bless your honour sir, bless your honour, Ise gled ta sea your
honour in heelth.
Be me saw you are a bold fellow.
I'm your own Contremon sir, I ken your honour mickle weal,
bless your worship.
Kenst tow me mon?
Mickle weal an't lick your honour, I ken your honour weal
enough, your honour is the Kings foul.
A mon, he kepes mere feules than I; bred, he's keep tow ta
gif tow can foul him; how far Scot art tow?
Marry Ise a mickle way oofe now.
Bet I wad kne what tow were boorn.
Gin me Mothers Weomb sir forty years aghast.
Once mon speeke toll me i what piece o Scotlond were tow
boorn.
Geod feith gin meny sir, I ha bien boorn fro piece to piece a me
Mothers back sir, and ha seffered mickle sorrow.
The fow Deele tack thy large lug, when was thy fader?
A mon sir surely.
The black Deele a was sir, where leaved a▪
A sir at a piece your honour kens mickle weal.
Where mon, where?
A sir, A sir what plaice caw ye that sir where your honour nursed
tha tiny babe wi will on's back sir?
Oout tha few Deele, oout Rog—bet when art tow mon?
I'm even yar Contremon two sir, cam ta bien a Curtier ta sir.
Once a Curtier! a Carter, tha Hangmon, that Deele.
Ye ha geod friends there sir, ye may dee mickle for us.
Dee mon! bred, he that sall dee for thee sall ha enough ta
dee; art geod for oought? when can dee for thy sell?
Even what ye sea sir.
Oout this is base, it shams your Country, mind ye me; when o
ye swain ha mest wot?
He that can sheft be.
Reight weal.
And that's even I, this foul had not a face ta bag toll I bole∣dend
hum.
Oout, oout mon, sham feast?
No, no. I sall grew bold enough gif I fall get oought by it.
Gif ye had Clad sirs, what curs wad ye tack to lieu?
Ise cud mack tha King, bliss his Worship, an't lick your ho∣nor,
mickle geod Puttins an Potsloose.
I'd bien oath Mint, sir, I love ta finger siller.
Weal sirs cam away wy me, for Contres sack Ise gat ye sum
Purveyance, an sum lodging, and tan we fall find oout him work
for ye among um here.
Bless your honour for your benefaites.
Pray recollect your self, I cannot do it
Without a loss to my repute and fame,
If you have but a foot of ground unsold.
Therefore consult your thoughts, my willingness
Shall not be wanting to procure your freedom;
But I'd not have a dirty piece of Land
Bring an obstruction to it.
Why? as I live
I have not an Inch left; what ere I mortgaged
Is either sold out-right, or forfeited,
I lie not on my Credit.
How's that Man?
Have you credit then? Why, that's as bad.
It is not held convenient by the Huff,
Lords of the sword, that any Yongster should
Be one of us 'till he 'as not only lost
his 'state, butt's credit too.
Upon my life,
Dear Townshift, I've not credit for a thrips;
Thou know it well enough, my roaging Laundress
Will not do it for the washing of a shirt.
Why, have you shirts then?
One as I live, no more, and that so thin
You may draw't through a Needle.
What Boots have you?
I cannot call these any, yet they are all;
And as for stockings, I have long ago
Held them unnecessary.
Why this Cloak,
And the weather warm and friendly.
It is too much,
The weight on it, I confess, 's not to be borne,
Isle ease me of the burden, It shall sink
In sack when I'm made free, prithee about it.
I would not for a world you should have any
Remnant of your Estate left,'t would undo you
See, here's my Brothers, Drawforth and Pinck-carkase
May I presume to recommend you to 'em?
You may, you may, dear Townshift.
How now Trapheire,
What is all gon yet?
All he swears by's Twibell,
His Cloak excepted, and its time expires
Within this half hour; shall we make him free?
Trapheire, you now are to begin the World,
Which you cannot do handsomely, unless
Your Land and you be separated, and if
Ought lie concealed, twill rise in judgment against you;
Therefore pray have a care, it is Christian Counsel.
It is not fit the least piece of your old
Adulterate fortunes should corrupt the new
Your wit must purchase.
Right, beside, he'll ne'er
Have a refined Wit 'till he has nothing left.
The greatest Enemy I have Gentlemen is my Cloak,
And I promise Isle fee 't no more.
Say you so, then to the next Tavern;
Boy—boy—a Room.
Please you to walk into a Room Gentlemen?
What call we thee for else?
How like you this Room Gentlemen?
Indifferent; bring us Wine and Tobacco of the best sirrah.
You shall indeed sir.
Dear Townshift thou must show this Gentleman
The way to the Brokers.
Is he for sale, or Mortgage?
For sale by all means, I'd not charge my memory
I've ought left worth redeeming.
Bravely resolved—Is it Racie?
Right Racie sir believe me.
Trapheire to thee.
Drink apace, dear Townshift
The sight of that same Gentleman's my tortour,
I prithee rid me of him.
Townshift swear him.
I cannot with a safe conscience swear as long
As that appears before me.
How shall I get it out of the house?
Leave thine here, and wear mine thither.
O how I hate to call it mine—away wit't.
Trapheire, you now must exercise your Wit
To live on others, as w'ave lived on you;
Wit's never good till purchased, what though't be
With the loss of fortunes Trumpery and Trash;
Content ne'er dwells among dirty Land, who sells it
Parts with a deal of care, and scurvy toil;
Men never are ingenious that are clogged with it.
The Generous spirit will not be cooped up
In that same Country Cage, a mansion house,
And confines of the Buttery; be free,
Thou art not worth a Great
When this is spent.
How much, how much dear Townshift?
But thirty by my Valour.
Down with it, down with it;
Isle not put up a Dodkin on it; dear Townshift,
Drink, drink away, I thirst until it's melted,
Your molten silver swallows best.
His Oath, his Oath.
Your sword.
By this Hilt, and this Blade
Which at Hounslow was made,
You swear to be true
To what shall ensue.
First, You swear not to make it any scruple of Conscience to
cheat your Father; That you will hunt after young Heirs, and when
you have coursed them out of wind, you'll refresh 'em with some Scri∣vener,
Broker, or Draper; That you'll keep always three strings to
your bow, to make it bend till it break; That having gotten a Bub∣ble
or Bishop, a lad of the last adoption, that you make him sense∣ble
of a Wench, though to the charge of a Surgeon, it being reason
all trades should live, and if occasion be, wink at small faults. Next
be sure to keep them continually at Game, or Drinking; Uurge 'em
to quarrel, and then take up the business, but not without profit to
the Brotherhood; That what quarrels soever arise among our selves,
must not cause us to fight with one another, but the Coins of the
Bubble or Bishop must make us friends; That you must not pay
your Coachman but with kicks, unless your Bubble or Bishop do,
and then he owes you a fare; That your Bubble, or Bishop, and you,
keep but one Purse, though two Drabs; That when you have drei∣ned
him dry, you make him free, if he sue for it, if not let him keep
Company with the Titteretues, and live upon the sin of Sodom;
That you I take your chance of the day, where there is need of dip∣ping,
without grumbling.
That while you can stand
With sword in your hand,
You'll not be in awe
Of the Halberteere Law;
Kiss this—Now you're free
Of the Huffs company.
Hey for the Brotherhood; No Wine stirring, Boy?
You Rascal, whore's your duty? absent? ho!
More Wine.
You shall sir by and by.
Bring a Glass will hold
A Pint at least, I hate a thimble full,
We shall ne'er have consumed this mighty mass
If we sip thus like sparrows;
I marry, this looks like some Brother to you all.
Gramercy.
Sirrah, cover the Board with Bottles,
This is our Coronation day, the Room
Shall swim in Wine; be frolic Huffs, and drain
Me dry, yet I shall live when you're all hanged.
How now, how now Traphiere!
Drink and be damned;
Must I waite on your Drivelling?
Drawforth to you—Charge him home.
Traphiere a whole bottle to thee—I'm up to the Chin.
—So, so sir,—you're a fine fellow; Is all paid?
No, ell's not come in yet.
Isle stay no longer.
Pray leave my cloak behind you.
Your cloak sir? how came it to be yours sir? I have one some
where.
Yours is at the Brokers sir.
Is it so sir? I thank you for your information.
There lies the virtue on it.
So sir, I thank you twice; for once I care not if I put my
Cloak into my pocket.
But Trapheire, Trapheire.
Who pays the house?
Let the house pay it self; dip, dip and be hanged you that
have Cloaks, am I bound to fill your insatiate Gorge eternally.
What Asses were we to let the money lie so long, knowing
his Rascally humour, he'll not pay a Penny when he's in drink—
See what thou can work him to.
Boy.
Sir—I shall sir.
Trapheire, a prize Trapheire.
Of what? Sprats?
A Gudgin man, a Gudgin's come to Net;
The Master of the house desires admittance
To play a Game at Ticktack for a Piece;
And thou know Trapheire—ho—
I know it Rogue;
And thou shalt play with him for all he's worth;
Isle venture on thy hand my whole Estate,
This my trusty Blade. Provided always sir—
That you have half—it is granted—he's here;
Thou know I have no money.
Thou shalt not want dear Bully, Isle not leave
My self a George.
Spoke like thy self, come be so.
There sir, pay your self.
You're kindly welcome Gentlemen, fetch my Quart.
Death, what's this?
Ha ha, ha—Only the Reckoning paid sir.
You're Rogues, Shirks, and Cheats; Isle indict you
Buoy good sir, employ your Tongue at Billings gate;
Adieu, adieu.
Farewell and be hanged.
For your part sirrah, Isle have you up for keeping of a Bawdy
house.
Do your worst sir, do your worst.
You're mickle braw sirs, you're mickle braw; bred, ye look mere
lick Burgomasters now thou hedge creepers; ken ye your
sells sirs? ken ye your sells sirs?
Geod feith sir, gif awe that sud ken themsells, wad ken themsells,
nen wad ken us; A me saw sir, I'd rader ha'um trast me thou ken me,
fur gif thay sudken me reight, thay'd sea me deed tofore thay' trast
me.
You're mickle wise sir, ye ha robed a foul sir.
We wish you weal sir, we wish you weal.
Sey ye sa sir? you're vary cheretable; ken ye me sirs? On's, ye
are groan see loofty you'll knee no body; when set you up in tha Deeles
name? when, when put these gay feathers on your back? even I, an
now yol flee away ta tha Deele, Hark ye me sirs, gif ye bien sa high,
Ise tack ye down wy a Plague ta ye; when had you're entailed Vermin
tan off ye wy a murren? when, when gat ye a—
Oour saders and mothers sir.
Did thay sa sir? bred, gif thay gat ye, thay ner cud gat feod
enough for yar side Weombs; Are you provender pricked now sirs?
ha, when am I? ha sirs, ha, when am I?
O our geod friend sir, bliss you.
The Deele wound ye, slight ye me? On's, Ise sa geod a mon
gas awe in Scotlond, an ha mere siller in me purse.
English stamp sir, I believe it.
Ye beleeft! when tha Deele cares for your beleeff?
Geod sir, geod sir be sober.
Bred, Ise not drunken; ha ye bien at cost wy me sirs? ho!
Ise sall uncass ye sirs, an ge your Arse tha Ayre again, are ye sa hot sirs?
want ye a Cooler? Bred, Ise ge ye sick a Rattle wy a Rome ore tha
Riggins sall mack your Ribs reore sirs.
Geod your honour put up your wroth, an wees buckle oour
Wots; wees yar on Contremons ye knee weal enough.
An sud love won oder; you've a geod Master sir, an oour Con∣tremon,
when macks mickle o you.
Bred, an Ise mack sa mickle o hum as I can.
He's a geod mon sir, and you ha wot enough.
Ken you that mon, ken you that? On's, an ye bien not wud
ye ma ha wot ta chep enough; bet Ise no body, my benefaits are
noought worth.
You're awe body sir, wees at your Commandment.
Sey ye sa sir? why, now ye speeke, be vis'd by me, any sall
oout wot um awe; mind ye me sirs, will ye be avis'd?
Sed ye sir, wy awe our harts.
Ise ha ye turn Dooctors.
Ise a Dooctor, a Dooctor; geod feith, wees mack braw
Dooctors.
Mind me mon, mind me; These Kingdom's mickle sick, tha
Curt o tha Cety, tha Cety o tha Curt, an tha Country o beoth, an awe
of•m o tha Kirk, an tha Law; tha Kingdom's Livergron wy iddlnes
an Raches, and now noought can cur it bet a Scots Dooctor, no
matter for your skill.
Geod feith sir, wees ha skill enough ta bleed its siller veins
Ise warrant ye.
Ha bet confidence, lye and dissemble handsomely.
Wees you're on Contremons sir, doobt it not.
Tha name o a Scot gis enough ta cur awe their maladies; ge
um peson an thay'l tack it for a Cordall: persuade um thay are sick
thay'l beleeff ye, and gif ye mack um sick thay'l beleeff their in be
health, bet ye mon carry sem show o holiness wy ye, an profess awe for
thayr goods.
Sa we sall sir, an tack'um when we ha done.
Billy sall going toll the Country, and tow salt kep behind, an
bien Dooctor here, and gif tow hest wot enough tow can not
wont work.
No geod feith, I sall mack me sell work enoough, for gif I
can hell no distampers Ise mack enoough among um.
Cam away than, cam away.
—It was Morning ere he went to bed sir.
—Ell's one; tell who it is, and twill be warrant
Enough for your awaking him; it is business
I come about, and of concernment too,
That cannot admit delay.
Isle venture then to call him sir.
Do so—if this design
Of mine prove prosperous, Townshift, it will be
Some comfort to me that I am even with thee.
He'll waite upon you presently,
He's rising.
A good Lad—Townshift arm thy self, for I am prepared
To give thee an assault, and dare thy Action
At Law, if Wit and Sword should fail,
Dear Townshift.
By this light I have not slept
A minute; what's the news? you served us bravely
the other night at Tavern.
On this drinking!
This perilous Drinking will destroy us all;
Thy pardon my dear heart, the business now
I come about will try thy friendship.
How?
I hope no quarrel.
Yes, with my base stars.
But what's the matter, tell me?
That's my meaning,
A sort of Rascally Bailiffs dogged me hither,
And thou know if I be once taken I am
A slave perpetually.
What would thou have me to do?
We'll send to Drawforth and the rest.
'T won't do,
They'll make but a disturbance in the street,
Yet I may be surprised for all their Valour,
And then I am undone; the hopes I have
In one I am to dine with lost, which might
Be worth to thee and me some hundreds Bully.
Send for him, now let him take up the business.
What, ere I'm thoroughly known to him; besides,
Should he take this up twenty more would follow't,
Who knowing me so low now, do forbear
To execute their rigour.
What would have me do?
Hark thee, I've thought upon a fine Deceit;
Hast any Patches in thy Chamber?
Rare ones,
Of all sorts.
One to Disguise my face, with a Cloak, would
Do it to the life.
Sure they are gon, Isle send to see.
Oh hang 'em Rogues, the are skulking at the Lanes end,
Or some blind Alenouse—Dearest Townshift do it.
Do what?
Lend me thy Cloak, and Isle contrive a Patch
Shall cover my left eye, they may not know me.
I know not what to do—I should go forth
My self.
Nay prithee Townshift—
Will you leave
Your Sword then▪ you'll have no—
Prithee would have me
Pass by 'em unprovided, put the worst,
They should descry me.
There's no trick in it Trapheire?
No more trick than you see; I prithee meet me in Fish∣street
at the Feathers, where we'll dine; there thou shalt see my
friend, and Isle restore thy Cloak dear Townshift.
Well, thou shalt have it—Boy fetch
My Cloak and patches—it is thine, there take it.
Gramercy; Is it handsome?
Very well; I must lie down and take a Nap at twelve;
I will not fail to meet thee.
Sirrah boy, be sure you wake him.
I warrant you sir.
Ha, ha, ha,
I'm sworn to cheat my father, and it is fit
He that first made the Gin should hansell it.
—Sir, you are kindly welcome, and the oftner
You visit me, the welcommer you shall be;
I honour men of knowledge. Master Folly,
I am obliged to you for his acquaintance.
—Geod feith sir, an he's worth yours; I sall play him wy
any English Dooctor in the World.
No sir, Ise can dee mere than Ise speeke sir.
—I believe you sir,
By what I find of truth within my self;
I must confess, I am not altogether
So right as I would, my body tells me
I may admit of Physic.
Mickle weal sir.
I'm troubled with the Spleen, a strong disease
Amongst ns Magistrates, which makes me fear
It is not for cure.
Ise cur it in two minutes gif ye ha
Bien troubled wy it twenty years, an awe
Your tribe gif tha'• cam toll me.
No, no, he's reight.
You'll do a wondrous cure then.
I sall dee' to me honour; bet that's not awe
Your Malady, ye are not soound at heart sirs.
I know not that sir.
Plenty an iddleness ha bred gross humours in you, whelk
mon be pourged away, or elke ye dee for it; bet Ise sall ge ye that sir,
sall mack ye bare an leight enough.
I thank you sir; accept this, pray, and I
Shall further gratify, but be speedy,
Good sir, with your Preparatives.
Ise gang aboot it street, Ise gang aboot it sir.
Your servant Gentlemen, I shall hear from you sir.
Soon, mickle soon sir;
Look mon, look awe thay bien sick o gis seek fin things as these, fiev
golden lads mon, fiev mere are worth a Leards land sir; geod feith
gif their veins wul ran seek droops as these wees drain um dry—A
simple fouls, that ken not when they are weal, bet will bien wasting
thair means toll set thair boodies oout o frame—a fouls, fouls.
No matter mon gif oought can be gut wy putting um oout o
fram, tha Deele try his skill to put um in again for Jockey.
Keep off firs—keep off, ga me would toll speeke toll ye; Ise
cam for awe your goods, mind ye me?
Very well, very well.
Ise cur awe diseases, awe manner o Malades, an sall tack noought
o ye for me peyn bet your siller; Gif there bien er a Kirk Pressed
among ye choked up wy Pluraltes o Benefaits, tha Poowder in these
pauper macks the Impostom breck, an tacks awe away clear—Gif
any Pressed bien vexed wy tha Babylonish mang, these Purgation med in
me non Country, curs hum were he ner sa fer spent.
For our Doctor sir, for our Doctor.
For our Vicar.
For our Parson.
For our Curate.
For our Bishop, Prebends, and Curates.
Gif any among ye bien troubled wy tha neyce o Organs in your
lugs, these poowder curs you for ever.
For our Town sir.
For ours too sir.
And ours, and ours sir.
And our whole County sir.
Gif any among ye bien blind wy tha sight o Lawn sleeves,
these cures and restores ye.
For my Landlord sir.
For mine too sir.
And mine.
And mine.
And mine.
Gif any among ye ha tha boon o a tith'd Soows baby stick in
your would pip, these saw cur you street, and tack awe away.
For me sir.
For me too sir.
And me sir.
And me sir.
And me sir pray.
Gif any among ye bien troubled wy heart burnings, tha Poow∣der
in these pauper curs ye street.
For my Neighbour sir.
And mine sir.
And mine too sir, I pray.
And some for our whole Town good sir.
Gif any o ye bien sore wy ore mickle burdens, an weary o your
Riders, these Poowder macks ye strong ta orethraw um, or ta bar
greater.
For us all sir.
Gif any o your stomachs bien oppressed wy Law, these pell sall
remove tha cause, an tack it away. Gif any bien hard boound, these
sall mack mickle free.
For my Landlord sir.
For mine too sir
And mine sir.
And mine sir.
And mine sir.
Gif any among ye bien troubled wy a scurvy mooth, these tacks
awe felth away.
For my wife sir.
For mine sir.
And mine sir.
And mine sir.
And my Mistress sir.
Gif any bien troubled wy a looseness, these ties um fest as a Rope
or hawter.
For my wife sir.
And mine sir.
And mine sir.
Geod Peple, now I ha gau ye awe remedies ta your Malades,
two does hence Ise sall bien her or not ta sey what operation thay
ha had upon ye; Ise sir ye sall ha remedy or non; an sa far ye
wall.
Farewell sir, farewell.
A pretty place this.
But the Company!
The Company dear Cos hither resorts
Gives life and sweetness to it; the rarest wits!
So rare la man may lose himself ere he
Discover 'em—for they are not to be—
Discovered—Besides, the Women, Ladies,
Of such excelling beauty, you would swear
They painted—and not be forsworn, as merry
As Cupped when he wantons.
And you spent
Your means amongst um?
And spent rarely well!
I've no remorse for it. Can you sing?
Not I Cos.
How Cos? not sing! why then you are no Company;
We have a merry life so long is it lasts.
Isle lay my life you fence not neither.
Yes,
My grounds I do.
Have you the grounds of fencing? that is, to
Make the Passado, to retrieve, comply,
Defend, make up, close, and Disarm;
You know not this I warrant?
Not I truly.
I cannot think what will become of you,
When you meet Men of valour.
I pray keep me
Out of their company, I love no quarrels;
I came to study the Law.
At a fine time.
You've bought no Books I hope.
I, but I have.
Return them to the Bookseller for shame;
A Sword will prove more useful: hark ye Cos,
I am resolved to have you learn to fence.
I'd rather learn to sing.
That ye shall too:
Your money will do all things—yonder's Townshift,
How like a Rogue he looks? I will not shun him.
And Cozen, as I was telling you
With your leave sir.
It was well asked sir,
What's your will with me?
My Cloak sir—wher's my Cloak sir?
Even at the Brokers sir—
How—you are a Rogue.
That's nothing sir—your railing will not fetch it out again.
Townshift I love thee, thou know I doe.
A pox upon you.
Thou know the oath, I'm not to spare my Father.
And though we quarrel, yet we must not fight.
I'm punctual to my Oath; but if thou hast
The conscience, I am ready.
Is he sunk for ever.
No, it may rise again, if you be civil.
Is that your friend?
And Kinsman.
Wilt thou cheat him too?
My Oath is past, I will not be forsworn
For a Kings ransom.
Nay then, I'm satisfied.
Come, be known to him—Cos, this is my friend.
Sir, I kiss your hand.
I thank you heartily sir.
Fie Cos, fie, there's a complement.
He does not look as though he needed ought,
Save what thou want, a Cloak.
Good wit Cos, good wit.
Oh Rogue, how he claws him.
Where shall's dine?
I'll to the Ordinary.
Where?
In Fetter-lane.
To feed on Bruise, and be served with Linen
As sable as the chimney. No, weel take
A Coach, and hence to Fish-street.
What shall we do there?
Eat fish, the World does not afford the like.
But the Coach is costly,
Poh, I'll be at that;
It is said the Milk of Asses, makes men fat.
FIE Masters fie, geod feith you're mickle oout; I ga hum noought
bet convenable stooff.
You're a Rascal, a Scotch Horseleech, a Doctor, a Dolt∣head:
Oh the madness of the men of these times; if any of them be
but a little out of temper, none can set them right but a Scotch
Doctor forsooth, as though all the English ones were fools. But
Sirrah, Sirrah, it is well known my husband
was never distempered, till he came acquainted with such a De-coy
as you—Curse on the time—
Geod Mistress hark ye toll me.
Hang you Rascal, my Husband was never troubled
with whimsies in his head, nor never railed against his Superiors;
he was ever a quiet man, and an honest man, and had the love of the
whole Court, and so had I too. Many a good turn have the good Gen∣tlemen
done me, which I must never expect now again, so violent∣lie
my Husband rails against the Government. But if he suffer for it,
thou shalt not wear a Nose to thy face; a Nose on thy face said I:
Nay if there bee a sign-post in all this Town I'll hang thee on it—
Ah poor heart.
Here hee comes—See what a pickle you have put him in; My
fingers itch to come at thy face, that ugly
face of thine.
A me saw shoe's a Deele, and will spell awe my Market gif
I ser her not lick him; these gis o tha sem powder, whelk gif sha
smell ta, will mack her sa lick him as may be.
Sweet heart.
Oh, art thou there? tic well; there has bin ne'er
A Pursevant here yet to fetch me, has there?
A Pursevant for you! for what cause Husband?
I am too honest, that is cause enough.
There is a Council Table, Yes forsooth,
And at it is contrived men's ruins—ho.
Who's that? who's that? first not for me they ask?
I shall be lost quite, if I look not well
About me.
True, you're in the way to undo
Your self, and me, and all your Family.
But this is thy Gin Rascal; Oh I could tear thee.
Mistress ga me while toll speeke toll ye; these wudnes o his,
cam fro tha corruption o his hart: Awe that I ga hum was seek as
these, be me saw smeel Laddie, smeel Laddie.
I have not Patience.
No, no, be not wud, smeel toll it.
My thinks tic very comfortable.
Hoow doll ye geod sir?
Oh Mr Doctor is it thee! art safe?
It is wonderful there's nothing charged against thee!
There is an Office called the Green-cloth too,
Has no man had thee there yet?
They ken me sa weel sir—It works brawly.
Hark you Husband, what is that you said but now?
I believe it, what was it? the King is pestilent, wilful; ho; I was it so?
why then, for ought I know, hee must bee beaten into better man∣ners.
Reight weel sed geod feith.
Honest Mr Doctor, pray come in sir;
You are the welcom'st man come to my house
This fortnight—Husband love him, has he not
A taking countenance?
No body at the Gate?
I am possessed with fears and jealousies.
And well you may be Husband, I am sure
You have had cause enough, good Man, I grieve,
I grieve to think on it.
Mr Doctor, be advised;
Pray go not unprepared; to Night you shall
Take my house for your shelter, things work strangely.
Sweet Mr Doctor you shall be so welcome,
It passes; truly, you're a man upright
In every thing I warrant, pray come in sir.
Geod feith, tha cass is awter'd.
Bring forth your Prongs Neighbours; All men stand up
for the truth: And he that will lie on the Sunday, is not to be true∣sted
the week after, what say you Neighbours?
I say a Sundays lie may go as far as a work-daies, my reason is,
it has more leisure to travel.
For my part neighbours let them lie that will I have no more to
doe with a lie, then a lie has to do with me; if any lies with my wife,
it shall go hard but isle do as much with his.
I, if he have none Neighbour.
Why, if he have none Neighbour, I must go without; no man
will be a slave I think.
A slave! who has such a mind let him have it still: For my part
Neighbours, Isle work hard, earn my bread with the sweat of my
brows, none shall eat away the fruit of my labour, but I will sit
down when it is done, and laugh, in despite of all the Kasars in the
World.
Hold a pluck there Neighbour, it is ill playing with edge-tooles;
that word despite comes not in handsomely, and may bring us all
to the Pot.
What! have wee a scabbed sheep amongst us? lets clear our
flock of him.
Hold Neighbour, hold, I am for you with all my heart, but
give me leave to speak to you; I am but a fool it is confessed, but i will∣drone
and fools tell truth sometimes, you know.
And what of that, and what of that.
I say again, it is dangerous meddling with edge-tooles; there's
store of trees here abouts, and there may bee Gibbets made of them,
and you know well enough what fruit Gibbets bring forth; I say no
more, but be careful what you do.
Away with him, away with him.
One word more Neighbours, one word more; it is not well
to mock our Superiors, much worse to threaten them: for as I
have heard, there was a suit at Law commenced about a Fart.
Ha, ha, ha, how man, how!
Why, I will tell you Neighbours, be but patient; there was a
fellow, Isle not tell his name, was pissing against the wall, the
Mayor came by, now you know the Proverb, tell a tale to a Mare,
and twill let a fart; but here the case alters, for the fellow let the
fart, and the Mayor took it in the nose, and caused the fellow to bee
carried to the Town Hall, as Prisoner.
The Mayor was a Horse, or a Whoreson knave, what's this to
us?
Now to the suit.
It is worn out, weel have none on it.
Neighbours lay down your Prongs, take my devise;
It is an old Proverb, be merry and wise.
Away with him, away with him, we will break the Cords
of our slavery.
These gis tha Doctor, I tolled ye o sir, mickle wise an holy,
My non Contrymon ta sir.
Sir the Character
The Town receives of you, makes me ambitious
Of your Acquaintance.
I complamen not sir, Ise doown reight Scot;
Awe verity an honesty.
The better sir.
That language is the freest from deceit,
That carries most simplicity.
No, no, Ise not sa sample neder.
Pardon me;
I speak not in that sense, but have regard
Unto the Metaphor; I don't conclude,
Because the Organ of the soul may be infected,
The soul must be imperfect; for I've known
Men rarely endued, that Nature has denied
The benefit of expression to.
You're a Scollard sir.
And I presume you one. I have read something
Of the Metaphysics, though I took not on me
The function, or the practice: But, no more
Of that sir, it is not wisdom in a man
Unskil'd, to hold a weapon against a Fencer.
Mickle weel sed geod feith.
All my Discourse
Draws to this Period; that is, you'd be pleased
T'afford me your opinion; some thing I ail,
But know not what, save this, a deprivation
Of breath, and find it prejudicial to
My Calling.
You ha bad lungs sir, whelk macks ye short wound.
I could have told you that sir; My defect
Proceeds from thence; but for the Remedy—
I know my failings.
You'll few sir intoll a Consumption very soon sir, gif ye tack
noought ta keep ye fro it; Awe the dreggs o Rome mon be tan fro ye.
Gead feith, gif he tack ye in hand sir, you're awe hole.
You're ta fat at hart sir, Pluraletes bred bet iddlenes, an iddle∣nes,
bad humours; ye mon keep a spar diet sir, an be brought lo wi
Purgations sir, an when tim sers ha simon Comfortives sir.
Sir, I shall trust my body to your Care.
Bet Ise net trust me saw to yours.
Sir, Mr Soongul'd desires you would come with the Doctor
to him presently.
I sal swett hart, my Jo; Doctor, you mon ta Mr Soongul'd
wi me.
You are sent for sir, I see.
Bet I sal ha ye in mind sir.
As soon as may bee—farewell sir.
Fer not sir, fer not.
This is the best Room Gentlemen.
It stinks of Tobacco, don't it Cos?
How Tobacco!
Tobacco is Companion for a Prince.
I take none though.
Then you want education; fill Boy, fill.
Townshift to thee.
Let it come.
Sir, ther's some Gentlemen in the next Room desires
your Company.
What are they?
I think their names be Drawforth and Pinckcarcase.
Plain Drawforth and Pinckcarcase; well admit i'm.
Shall it be so Cos?
I hope there'l be no quarrelling.
What if there be?
Have you not here your men of Iron by you.
Can you be better backed and breasted sir;
Townshift, the Rogues have got a Bubble.
The more the merrier—your servant,
Gentlemen.
This is our friend, and desires your Acquaintance.
Gentlemen, a man of worth, Isle assure you.
What Country man I pray sir?
An Essex man sir, your servant.
The better flesh Isle warrant.
I know not that sir, I have near bin tried.
Not near shall be for me.
Drink, drink about.
To thee Drawforth.
A health to thy friends Mistress.
Well done, about with it.
I thank you Gentlemen.
What! not begin another?
I've drank too hard already; this same glass and no more:
Gentlemen, your Ladies health sir.
Why Traphiere, whence this gallantry?
What an idle question
Is that of thee; why, who should do it, but this?
He sent his Taylor to take measure of
The buildings of our bodies.
And the appurtenances
Came to us by like Providence.
Drink, drink about.
Cos, let me give thee o'er our Wine some Counsel;
You are a landed Man, be careful what
Strange Company you keep; for there are Cheats,
And desperate Cheats abroad, will make no Conscience
To bring you into Bonds, and make you sell
Or mortgage all you have; take heed good Cos,
What Company you keep.
He that cheats me, shall have good luck Cos.
When does your Taylor fit your body with
A fashionable suit; this bears an Antique
And worn-out date. A gentleman of your Fortunes
And walk so like a Cow-driver.
I will have one against Sunday.
Some six yards makes me one too, let it be so; ho!
The like proportion fits me, twelve, us both.
Well it shall be done Gentlte-men—
Drink, drink about, your friend is gone.
Isle send yours after him.
I-must-be-gone, 'tis-late.
No sure. What, by thy Watch?
The hand is upp-on-on-twel-ve.
A pretty Watch, I prithee lend it me,
To have another made by.
Tis-a-Watch-of Price-Coz.
I would not borrow it else.
What store of Chink have you?
Money-enough, mony-enough.
Lend me a piece or two.
There-there Boy.
The like to me sir, come, I shall, I shall.
There-sir. Ile-be gon—
The house, the house, to pay.
Twenty two shillings and you're welcome Gentlemen.
make it up five and twenty, and you two shall cast Dice
which pays it—are all parties agreed—I know
our noble friend will not be backward.
Nor ours; Heroic spirit wilt thou?
Her's more wine Gentlemen.
About with it, about with it.
The Dice, the Dice.
Come tic a good throw Cos.
But that's better sir; your friend pays.
Hang him he cheated, he's a cheat.
Ne'er go not I, Gentlemen.
You lie, you lie.
How the lie? will you take that?
How shall-I-help it pray?
Well done Cos.
—Hang him he's-but a Country puppy Calfe.
Throw a Pot it's head.
I shall-not-hit-him. If-I-doe; I am-no-more
Puppy-then your self—
Why, that was well done.
Ile-kick you sirrah—I learn'd-that of-you Cos—
Gallants expect to hear from us, and suddenly.
A Coach there.
I hope, they—wait—not for us—ho!
What if they do? we fear em not, pay, pay;
Boy there's your reckoning. Call a Coach Boy.
Ha ye work for a Scot Sawger, when ha bien awe tha
Wirld ore once ten toes; Ser'd awe Religions, an can tha better be o
any. I ha killed tha Where a Babilon, Body an Saw, brent awe her
Rawlecks wi tha feer o zeal. I can carry two feces under won
hood: I can be a Sent, an I can be a Deel, gif ye ha wirk for me; I ha
seem a power a riches in me does, but ha broought noought heom
wi me bet St Andras Cross, want an Poverty.
A sir! the bonny siller came a piece, gif I tol'd um a tale,
thay'd ga mickle heeds; geod feith won pell set'd awe malades.
An what pell woes thot mon?
The Pell o sedition.
A, ken you thot mon? tha sam set tha Magistrate an's wife
intoll fears an jealousies, turned tha insid o tha Kirkmon ooutwards,
an noow's awe gall, tha Ceteson gis as bitter; tha Layer cannot stoned
he's brought sa week wy me Purgations, and tha Curtier not worth
tha grond a goes on; I ha let awe his geod as weal as he's bad blood
oout.
Saw ye Gentlemen gif ye ha a mind ta bien sawed, ken ye
me sirs?
How sud we ken thee mon?
When, not Scarefool your Contremon?
Where hast bien mon?
Awe tha Wirld ore sirs, an now awe pleces are wary o me;
Ise cam ta Anglond toll seek wirke.
Here's wirke enoough gif ye bien wise ta deele wy tha Ang∣lish
mon.
Geod feith Ise chet'um thay wern ner sa cheted, show me
toll'um, where lieu thay?
In the Cety, and Country ta; marry, bet cam away wy us mon,
wees tack a drink first, an tawke mere on it.
Cam away Io, cam away.
DOwn with this Babell-builder, this Court pride,
Dagon and his Idolaters shall down.
I, down with'em husband, down with 'em, they have stood
long enough; I am sure their long standing have made you come
short many a time and often, but I hope now husband you'll take 'em
down a Button hole lower.
Am not I a man?
You think so husband, I warrant.
Why, a King's no more.
Nay, is he that husband? troth I dare say our man William is
as good a man as the best of you; for as they say, a man is a man and
he has but a hose on's head.
Well, I am resolved William shall forth.
Forth, how do you mean forth? I hope you will not leave
me unprovided at home; you know your own business abroad, and
I am certain he can do your business at home better than your self—
oh husbund, husband here's the Scotch Doctor.
Mr Doctor, what news Mr Doctor?
Nen geod sir, nen geod sir, bet me frond ha had hes cass pulled
ore his lugs.
By whom, by whom?
When, when, bet tha prod Prelates sir; Ise tolld um o thair kna∣very,
an thay gar tack away me brawery; bet thoough thay ha tac∣ken
away me Cot, thay sall ner ta•k away me conscience, that's hole
an sound, an ned nen o thair pachings o thair preachments.
O wicked, wicked children of darkness!
Her's a frond o min sir, a mon a meight an mettell, when ha en∣dured
meny a brunt and storm, he sall stoned betwixt ye in awe
harm.
I shall be glad of your acquaintance sir.
True, truly sir, you have a face like a man, you'll do the busi∣nos
I warrant, let you alone, but gently to the women sir, for we
are twigs, and may be bowed which way you list; mere tender
twigs sir.
Bred, bet sam o ye bien toough enoough.
We are a long time indeed a bringing up, but then we are
soon cast down; women have tender hearts, and tender flesh, and
tender consciences, though naughty men report that we have none;
husband shall they walk into th'Parlor; I do love to enter into Dia∣logue
with these Gentlemen, they talk so prettily.
I, with all my heart.
You will meet with sir fine Plunder among the Ladies; you
shall dine with us too—you may make me amends with a Court
smock; I look to wear one in truth, they are so fine and so perfumed,
it passes.
Come sir, we'll discourse of our affairs
After w'ave dined—you'll dine with us too Gentlemen?
Wees tack ye ot yar word.
Nay, you may do it sirs, you may do it, you have warrant
for it; it is well enough known, the Pomp of the Prelates, the
Whore of Babylon her self in her feathers, the Kings of the earth
commit fornication with her Plu•alities of Benefices makes men but
idle, says Mr Doctor, and idleness makes you fat, and fat makes you
pursy, and so by consequence short winded; It is a trick of Rome to
starve our Religion; Let Iezabell be brought before the Elders, and
the whore of Babyilon to the Whipping post, let her have lash upon
lash; let her smock be given to the Rag-men, it may come to be Pa∣per,
and her Condemnation writ in it; let the Whelps and the Cubs
be brought to the Stake, baite'um, baite'um, baite'um, I am your
warrant saith Mr Doctor.
Master Doctor's an Ass.
Children you talk not like men, you are but middling Chri∣stians,
it is well known to the Parish.
That Bedlams fit for you.
Those that will follow me, let um follow me,
I am now for the Truth,
And the Covenant in sooth.
Hi, hi, hi, Stow the Friar, stow the Friar.
You see what he has brought me to, my Crutches;
I was ere held an able man you know;
Had my tongue at Command, and my head too,
But now they both are so enfeebled I
Have scarce the use of either; if I had
It were all one, the Country People are
Bewitched into belief, they have as much
Reason and Law as I, and will become
Their own Solicitors, and Council too.
I cannot last long, but expect still when
My Crutches will deceive me, and I fall
To the ground for ever.
—I am brought to nothing
As well as you, I little thought a Scotsmen
Could ere have dreind my Veins, and purse so dry,
I am not worth the ground I go on; so
Dejected are my thoughts; my spirit lost,
And all the hopes of my recovery
Extinct and buried.
I should not have known you,
Had you not told me who you were; you are
So changed from your self. Oh those were times,
Worthy to call to mind, (though to our grief)
When you and I, like Twins, derived a being
From one another sustenance, the Monopolies
That you projected, and I perfected!
Like two expert Limners, the one employed
To fashion the face, the other to finish it.
—I, those were times indeed, but all I got
Then, has been since consumed; and I guess
You are not much the better; I am weary
I protest of my life, and would thank him
Would do me so much good as take it from me.
—Patience is the best remedy where no
Better can be obtained; it is vain to crave
The thing we want when it is not to be had;
Your dancing days are done, and all the breath
The Scot has left me scarce will heat my fingers.
—And my affliction does the more increase
To see my friends disabled, as I am,
From helping one another, it is a grief
That's inexpressible, and not for cure.
—What Fortune sours, content must sweeten, he
Is the best man o'rcomes his misery.
—For my part, I am but a man, and I owe but a death,
let them take it, as they say they will, give um good on it, let them
come, let them come—where are they? stand, stand, stand.
Husband now you talk of standing, pray let me lye down,
and then let 'em do their worst, I defy 'em.
—And so do I, we'll to the Tarried, Woman, and there we
are secured against Devil, and Pursevant.
—I'm wearied off my legs with doing nothing but running
up and down in every Nook and Corner like a Rat for fear of
catching.
—They are coming, they are coming; let me come in
woman, let me come in.
I would you would come in husband once, you have been
out long enough to small purpose I'm sure.
Believe it, their Design aims at our ruin;
And though the Cord they make be somewhat finer
Than Ordinary, Twill choke us at the last;
I hold a naked freedom better far
Than an adorned Prison; golden fetters
And Iron ones produce a like effect,
What differs them's but curiosity.
Into what a Lethargy has these rabble Scots
Betrayed the peoples senses? tell them on it
And they'll abuse you for it. Nay, though they see
Distraction brought unto their very doors,
They'll look on it, and not know it till they feel it,
And then will tamely kiss the Rod that whipped 'em.
A Nation proud and Arrogant as the Beggar,
That when he has got a Bonnet 'bove his wearing,
Will scarce bow to the Giver. All the service
They ever did this Nation was to help
The people eat their victuals, and share their fortunes.
They are good for nought, but to eat, louze, and sleep,
And stink a street up. Tell you stories of
Don Iohn of Austria, the Mogul, great Cham,
Their valour at Madril, Levant, or where
You will, and this in some blind Chimney Corner
In fume and smoke, roused up with lanted Ale,
'Till that their faces do resemble the Towns
They set on fire; And yet dare not encounter
A Rat or Weasel.
—Yet the world reports
Them, men for siege the best, and can endure
The greatest hardship.
Very true, if they
May but lie still they'll feed on one another,
Rather than venture on their Enemy
To get the least Provision, and indeed
The worst will serve their turn, for they are men
Loves any thing but beating, yet they'll take
That too if need be; take'em down a little,
And you may fillip dead a score of them.
It is a shame the English should become
Such mules to such base burdens; I'm resolved
To turn the Chance o'th'Dy that favours them,
Though to the hazard of my being.
—Twill
Be tan a piece of service fit for Chronicle,
And you shall want no furtherance.
If I bring not
The Soldier, Doctors, and their Crew of Cheaters
As tamely to be hanged as puppy Dogs,
Let me resolve no credit from you after.
Sir, though I hate your Bulls, and your Decoys,
And know you have two ends to all your ways;
I fear you not, for Truth will show her self
Inspight of all the clouds you cast upon her.
You are in th'right. Truth will appear, and that
To th'shame of your trimmed Covenant; for though
She be but plain, she is more glorious
Than all the gloss and Colours that sets forth
That new devise, Created to deceive
Poor simple people, and at last your selves.
These are but bandying, Isle pursue my wager.
Isle venture ten pound more you're lost in weight.
You'll lose your self sir with your confidence.
Bar treachery and I care not.
I cannot endure this fighting Cos, a Dad.
Pox take your Dad; is that an Oath for a Gentleman?
A Lad at ten swears more profoundly; you'll
Be quarrelling, and then you dare not fight;
As though I were a wall of Steel or Brass,
To stand betwixt you, and receive the Darts
Cast at you; Sir, why did your Cowship send
An Answer to your Challenge, if you found
Your blood so Cool and Phlegmatic?
It was your doing,—I had not had the heart else.
For preservation of your honour sir
Could you do less than Answer him?
What was he
That brought the Challenge?
Pinckcarcase by name.
A devilish name, and full of devilish ends;
This fighting is not lawful; prithee Cos
Take up the matter, I have little maw to it.
What, now the Hostage Reputation
Is past, will you Recant, Renege, Revoke,
Recoil, Revert? stand to your Principles.
I shall not stand an inch of ground believe me.
It is pity you are worth any; let me see,
How shall we do it with Honour?
It is no matter
For that thing Honour; let her walk alone,
I don't desire her Company on such terms,
Sweet Cos, sweet Cos.
Let me see—I'm resolved
That you shall fight him.
Cos, I had forgot
I swear, a strange infirmity, that is
I zound when as I hear a Gun shot off▪
And tremble at a Pistols, all my senses
Become as useless.
Why, it was your own motion.
No matter, it is but so much charges lost,
I will not fight with Bullets, I've more conscience.
Why, then you must prepare a Case of Rapiers,
For Townshift and my self, ours are grown dull
With often usage.
Oh, the better Cos!
They'll do less mischief.
Then your fencing Master
Must make you at your Chamber fit for the field.
That's past his skill I'm sure; more charges Cos.
It cannot be avoided, if you mean
To fight on foot, and put off your Horse combat.
In my mind it is horse-play to fight on foot;
But hark you Cos, don't you make winking at
That Weapon ye call sharp, I'm not so set.
Fie, winking, No, how will you see to hit him;
No matter so he hit not me; but may not I
Bar Points being the Challenged?
That's base, and Player-like.
I'd rather play so, than work otherwise.
Come, come, resolve, you know the time draws near.
I would it did not, I love not to think on it;
Can we throw nothing in Times-way to make
Him stumble, and stop a little.
Resolve upon your weapon ere he be
Furnished with horse and Pistols.
Isle lay my life he's that already, then
Twill be unworthy in you to—
Good sir, talk not to me of Worthies, my Father was none
of the Nine; he ne'er kept Company with your Huffs, nor Puffs; be
could drink in a Tavern and ne'er quarrel about the Reckoning; he
lived without knocks, and died in the love of his Parish.
But he has left a quarrelsome son behind
Must pay for all.
I shall not stand much upon
That point, so I may be discharged from beatings;
Methinks a skin set out with Eyelet holes
Appears not handsome, nor a face to be
Painted with black and blew, I hate those colours.
What will you give him shall take up the business without
loss to your honour?
A man cannot lose
That which he never had; My Father was
A man of Bags, and might have been a Knight
When Knighthoods went a begging.
But to the matter,
What say you to my proposition?
Troth,
It sounds well, let me see now what in Conscience
You will demand?
But twenty pieces.
So;
To save a man from beating, very good I
How many such do ye meet with in the year?
Hundreds, hundreds sir.
Men must live Cos, men must live.
Any where but on me (good Cos;) but sir,
Before my Cos here, Isle give you ten.
Ten is too little in all conscience Cos.
Consider sir the danger.
And the Charge
Already I've been for horse and Pistols;
But those I hope you will return me, when
The peace is made.
Not one, expect not one,
They are forfeit Goods to us Lords of the Soil.
It is true, you've been at charges, and for that
Reason Isle undertake it at your rate;
Forbib, but I should bear a Conscience too.
Meet us at the Mairmaid.
At the hour of twelve.
The precise time.
Cozen, he will deserve it.
Would I had his Art
To live by when I and my fortunes part.
He is the Challenged, and justly may
Design the way of fighting, and the Place;
But though you have provided us with Horses,
Swords, Pistols, and so forth, yet there's a thing
Called money, we do want, put case he should
Fall by your hand, in what a case were we?
Suppose that you should fail;
—I, there's the Danger.
We must fly for it, and that we cannot do
Conveniently, without a sum, the Oratory
Of Silver makes our passage free and safe,
The want of it detains us; open, open
Your closemouthed bags, and let them speak to us.
Troth Gentlemen, Isle tell you, and I lie not,
You have got a hoarseness since they came to Town,
And speak so low, a man can hardly hear 'em.
One Mortgage sir will raise their voice again.
Well, well, he might have taken another way
To work; had I been he, and he been me,
I would have asked him Mercy.
But you see
He is a man of spirit, spirit, sir!
I would he had no more then I, a gnat
Is better furnished; I have heard my Mother
Protest, and solemnly, I had a heart
No bigger than a hazel Nut.
—Why, saw shall it?
No, but she felt it; it is an imperfection
In Nature I can't help, and it is as cold
I warrant as a Cucumber.
And rises
So little in your stomach!
Troth, as little
As may be sir; how shall I heat it Gentlemen?
Drink wine and Drab.
Why, so I do you know;
Yet when the flame of drinking's o'er, I fall
Into the Noose of Taverns, like a Pigeon.
Only then y'ad best fight when you're drunk.
And so.
Be hanged when I am sober; no, I bear
Too great a Conscience.
If it be a burden
Too hard to bear, we'll teach you how to throw
It off, and live as we do without any.
Take up this quarrel Gentlemen, and have
My heart for ever.
What to do, to throw
The hounds ye starve? yet that so little, twill
Not be a mouthful; it is your money we
Value the most, let your heart go is it came.
Why, I shall mortgage next week.
Are you serious?
May we give credit to you?
I've occasion.
Thou shalt have more rather than want; my Buliy,
We are thy Guardians, who assaults our ward
Suffers, unless he be on a sure Guard.
BRed, those English are Deeles, w'are awe lost men; Awe oour
knavery is oout, nen will tack oour parts; Tha Ceteson•
hong their heads doown lick bull rushes, an won not bien sen for us.
Hoow cam thay in tha Deeles namsa awe o won mind? Ise
sir Ise ded what Ise cud toll mack um •et on oder ta deeth; tha
Deele fear um, there lick Serpans that gif ye smite um asunder will
join again.
W'are awe lost, sheft, sheft, tha Deeles a coming toll tare
tha Covnant sha year heals, sha year heals, sponge away sirs, sponge
away.
On's gif tha men o War flee, what sall we hid our sells—
Awe sir; sir.
Take them into your Custody, they are
Your lawful prize.
A sirs, a sirs, geod feith wees meant no bad.
What Mr Doctors! have we found ye? who can cure the
Citizen of his head ach but the Scotch Doctors? who their wives of
the Tooth-ach but the Scotch Doctors? the Scotch Doctor is all in
all, the Kirk will take no Physic but of the Scotch Doctor; the
Country will be cheated by none but by the Scotch Doctor; the Court
and Gentry will be beggared by none but the beggarly Scotch Do∣ctors;
come away and be hanged.
Mercy sirs, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy.
Hawd, hawd, hawd sir.
Nay, I don't intend
To take the advantage of you as I may,
I owe a greater honour to true valour;
I have heard Nobly of your Countrymen,
And therefore to assure my self Report
Lies not, I have exposed my Person to
This single hazard.
A sir▪ I dee leov you.
And I shall love you too, if that I find
You prove as Gallant as you've spoke your self:
Consider what dependences are on you,
Whom you've involved by your large promises
To this Engagement; let them see you dare
Do something for their money.
Be me saw sir
You're a mickle Gallant mon, Ise thra me swerd an heart at your non
feet sir.
That's base, not Souldierlike; submissiveness
In this Case speaks you Coward, and if so,
My breath has been ill spent; what, will you fight?
Not a neustye sir, geod feith I love a English mon wy
awe my heart. A sir, A sir, send awe reight, send awe reight—her tack
me weppon, Ise your non Prisoner sir geod feith.
Since thou art so base,
And not fit for a Noble Treaty, take
This, this, and this.
A geod sir, use me like a Gentlemen.
A Gentleman, a Swineheard, hangye, go,
The Bubbles broke, the wind gave Being to.
You're welcome Gentlemen, show a Room there Boy.
Sirrah, there will some Gentlemen ask for us,
Direct 'em hither.
I shall sir; what's your wine?
Sack, Boy, the quickening sack; and such Tobacco
As may inspire a spirit into clay,
Quick, and as sharpe as lightning.
Oh good sir,
I can't endure to think upon a storm;
Talk not of lightning, it does bode some quarrelling;
The calmest language is the best, when there's
A peace intended.
Here they come; now Cos
For your honour seem somewhat averse
To an agreement; carry your self stoutly,
With an unaltered Countenance.
It is not in
The power of humane frailty.
—Gallants, welcome;
You're men I see for Credit.
What must I say?
Carry your self manly.
What would I give now for an Inch of manhood;
How he does eye me; would I had a look
But half so piercing, I'd encounter then
With Basilisks; It carries daggers in it
Will penetrate a Coat of Male; there is
No safety but in distance.
How he looks at me!
With such a hungry countenance, as though
He meant to satisfy himself upon me;
But if he knew but what a piece of flesh
He had to deal with, he would not be so greedy;
I was not cut out for a Roister; sure
Nature ne'er meant me for the field, unless
To call my Cattle home, or try my hounds.
I am so great an enemy to a sword
I wear none when I ride; Oh, how yon fellow
Would spurn me, like a Mushrome, could he get
Me but alone; but he shall be hanged first.
What, all this while and speak not to each other?
Why, you have hearts of Oak: Not bow, dear Cos!
I cannot help it.
Come, we must have you friends.
With all my heart sir.
How's this? the man's bewitched;
See what the Gold can doe!
If you please sir, I am your humble servant.
And what say you Cos?
Hum, I smelt, it is so,
The fellow is a Coward on my life.
Are they not all so? it is a blessing then.
Come sir, our friend is willing to pass by
All the affronts you gave him, if you'll wave
His Challenge.
Isle wave nothing but my Sword
Against my Enemy.
Shall we be friends?
A friendly bloūd runs not yet currant in me;
Be challenged by a dunghill Cock? I scorn it.
Why, this is rare! Cos, Isle spit in thy mouth.
Sir, it is your friends desire as well as ours
To prevent bloodshed.
—Let such things as you,
That dare not waste their blood be sparing on it;
For my part, Isle not value if he Tap
From me a Pailefull.
Who the Devil Conjured
Up such a spirit in him?
Your friend's grown—
Take him down, or by this light
Isle kick him.
Poh, let me alone for that.
The Gentleman grows angry, Isle be gon.
Hang him, a Coward, a mere Coward, friend▪
How, a coward! he speaks not like one;
I would his hands were tied behind him, I
Would make a trial on it; but he has teeth
Strong as the tusks of Boars, and legs more stiff
And big then any Bedspost, I should do
no good upon him.
Come Cos, throw
Your Ranting habit off, the Scene of War
Is past, and now put on your Robe of Amity,
The Bride-garment of Peace.
—Peace! who shall peace?
It is sauciness to tell me so.
How's this!
You worm! slight, if I lay my hands
Upon you once, Isle tear you into nothing▪
You Cowardly simple Puppy. Sir, Isle—
Not so loud good Cos;
You know I have but followed your directions.
Be hanged, and overdone it, had not you sirrah?
The Gentlemen shall know you have not spirit
To look a Cat in th'face, if that you be not
More sociable.
—Good Cozen, Isle do any thing.
Well, I have brought him to it with much ado;
Here, shake hands, sir; you must be friends.
Well, if I must, I must, patience is a virtue,
And Isle embrace it—I am your friend sir.
I shall never be your foe sir.
So said, and so done sir, will do well.
The Rascal acts it handsomely.
To your credit:
Ours is the silliest Rogue.
Boy, more wine;
Would we had Music here to celebrate
This Nuptial.
I will send for some.
Do so; come, here's to the Married Couple.
I do believe we both can't got a Boy
Will prove a Soldier.
Ah sirrah, are you there?
I am your own man sin.
Let's have a good Ayre, but drink first.
Drink about Gallants, what the Music dulls you;
Hast ever a new song fellow?
Yes, of the Scots coming into England.
That, that by all means.
Please you to hear me—it is but a Ballad put to
One of their own tunes.
The better, the better, let's hear't.
CAm lend, lend you're lugs Ioes, an Ise speeke a song,
Sing he heom again Jockey, sing heom again Jockey.
O hes bonny deeds, an hes prowes among;
Sing heom again, heom again, O valent Jockey.
Sirs Iocky's a Mon held o mickle Note,
Sing heom again▪ Jockey, &amp;c.
The breech o tha Covnant stuck in hes throat;
Sing heom again, heom again, &amp;c.
For Jockey was riteous, whelk ye wad admire;
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
He fooght for the Kirk, bet a plundered tha Quire;
Sing heom again, heom again, &amp;c.
An Jockey waxed roth an toll Anglond a cam,
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
Ero whence he'd return, bet a lack a is Lam;
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
An Jockey was armed fro top toll toe,
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
Wia power o Men, and are geod Deuke I trow;
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
Sa valent I wis thay were, an sa prat,
Sing heom again Jockey; &amp;c.
No cock nor hen durst stoned in their gat;
Sing heom again, heom, &amp;c.
In every street thay ded sa flutter,
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
No Child dare shaw hes bred an butter;
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
Now when oour ferces thay herd on o'er night,
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
Next morn they harnessed themsels for a fight;
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
Their Deuke was tha mon that wad be sen stoote,
Sing heom again &amp;c.
He feec• us a while, street twurn'd Arss aboot;
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
Our men that ater these valent Scot went,
Sing heom again, &amp;c.
Had ner fond him oout bet by a strong sent.
Sing heom again heom again, o valent Jockey.
Ha, ha, ha! it's good enough for the subject,
Drink about, drink about; More wine Boy;
Here Witwud to thee.
Let's discharge the Music.
With all my heart.
There ye Rascals.
Thank you Gentlemen.
Trapheire to thee.
Let it come, a Pint and thou dare.
Art mad, Trapheire is drunk enough, he will be
Not'company for a Dog immediately.
To your Mightiness sir.
I shall pledge your Highness sir—to you sir.
Excuse me pray sir, I am almost spent.
Not pledge me!
No, he shall not pledge you sir;
What then? he is my friend.
But why should he
Be more excused then ours? will you drink for him?
Not, neither sir.
Then he shall pledge me sir.
He shall not sir.
Nay Trapheire, what dost mean?
Hang him turd—Are you good at that sir?
I shall return you Answer by this Messenger.
Good Cos no fighting; I will drink a Gallon
Rather than lose one drop of blood—It is
Too precious for the floor to drink.
Gentlemen your noise has drawn Soldiers into the house,
th'a•e coming up; as many as can get into that little Closet,
I would not be in custody for a Million;
The Rode, the Rode—
That's all our faults, in, in.
Where shall we be?
Whore's all these Huffs—what you two make this noise?
hurl Pots, break Glasses, you are youths indeed; Is this a time of
night for you to rant in? come you must with us.
Nay good Gentlemen.
Gentlemen, you may come forth, the coast is clear.
Whore's the two Gentlemen?
They have taken 'em with 'em.
Did they pay the Reckoning.
No sir.
A pox upon you, why did you not aske'em for it?
I durst not sir, for fear they should say, the rest of their
Company was above.
It is right, the Devil's on it, this was your doing Trapheire,
Will you pay the Reckoning now?
Not a penny, Isle keep unto my Oath, throw who shall dip
or pay if you will.
Here's Dice, throw—twelve, hang ye Rascal
Now my Chance—it is passable—throw.
Mine is the worst.
But mine's the worst of all—Sirrah Boy will you take
this Cloak for your Reckoning?
I know not sir whether I shall or not.
You shall not sir, now, you know, as long as such Spankers
last; what's to pay?
But thirty shillings sir.
Death! but thirty says thou? well, there it is;
I shall be even with some body.
Why, this was handsome Trapheire.
Make room for the Magistrates;
The Prisoners
There—
Which are
The Prisoners?
These sir.
Mercy, mercy, Master Judge.
What are those?
The subjects on the which these Villains practised their
subtilties and deceits; first, I shall tender my Charge against 'em,
then produce my evidence.
Very well, very well, proceed.
In brief (Sir) then they have infected most
Part of this Nation; here's a thing,
A man of Reputation once, and bore
A place amongst you.
I do pity him.
And now is fit for no place except Bedlam:
Here is another, a man you would think
The Devil could not work upon, and yet
These Scotch ones have. The Lawyer, father of
Contrivances, is noosed in one himself;
He cannot stand without his Crutches, and
His head's so light his nose is every minute
Ready to touch the ground.
What is that Gentleman?
Do you conceive him one? have they left ought
Upon him like a Creature? may we swear
He is a perfect man, no Ghost? it is hard.
The hurryings he has had with sleepless eyes,
Continual Purgations, Bleedings, what not,
That they could but invent to bring him low;
He's ell's left of a Courtier, and deserves
Your pity; there's no double doors betwixt
His heart now, and your eyes; he's so transparent
You may see through him. Tic not these alone
You have brought to this, but all the Country people,
Both Common sort, and Gentry.
What say you for yourselves?
Mercy, mercy, mercy, wees love tha English mickle
weal.
Yes, it appears so; weal requite your Loves,
But cannot say, with your own Coin, because
You never were worth any, but we'll find
A way to pay you home.
When they had thus
Spread their infection, they begin to think
Their safety would not last without the Soldier;
And to that end and purpose does persuade
The giddy People, which they had before
Distempered, with their Poisons, to receive
This man of Feather, as their grand Protector:
They take him, and to Covenant they go;
Two hundred thousand pounds! (a sum would buy
Their Kingdom) must be raised and paid to them.
Very fine.
But mark sir the event,
I am resolved to open what they did
For all this Money.
Twill do well indeed.
They gave a piece of Paper, in the which
Were strange things promised then, As if that all
The Courage of the world contracted were
In their, and but their Nation.
And what found you?
I now proceed to that; I found'um sir,
Like Bull-rushes, that tremble if the wind
But blow on them, they run and tumbled o'er
The necks of one another, like to tiles
A storm forces from houses tops; this any thing
But man, who owned the name of their Protector,
In the most abject'st manner, and beneath,
The Spirit of a man, threw at my feet.
His Sword, and himself too, on single terms,
Without a stroke; Scarefoole they call him, and
They must be Citizens or none that fear him;
A Rat shall make him run to his own Country.
Ise a Gentlemon sir, mind ye me? Ise gang toll me non
Country wy awe me heart gif ye wul.
Not in such haste sir, we'll reserve you for
Another purpose—take him hence to prison.
The few Deele fire thot tong.
What think you sir that Paper, cost so much,
Is worth in weight? here's one will tell you sir.
I am a public Notary by profession,
And dare speak nothing but the truth; the wager
Past on this Gentleman's side, the Popes Bull weighed,
It down by much, the other was not worth
In weight a Penny loaf.
Ha, ha, ha!
But what make you here sir?
Not to do harm sir.
Stay not here upon
Your peril sir, your Bulls have too long tails.
I stay but for a wind sir.
I must confess we have been much deluded,
Cheated, and Cozened by these perjured Scots,
Under the show of zeal and honesty.
Hang 'em Rogues, they complain they are pillaged, you
made 'em not bare enough sirs, you should have taken their skins off
too, they would have made monsters of us, but truly my husband is
a Natural man, and I am his own wife; I hope you do not think
we are otherwise than we should be.
I have a husband here too, help his head, he was a
Man once, and I was a Woman, as this Gentleman the Courtier
knew well enough, but now I am no-body, thank yo• pick-purses;
Pray spare 'em not, I'm sure they would not spare me when time
was, do what I could.
Take them hence, there will be order shortly
To pack 'em to some foreign parts, they are
But Caterpillars, and what place so ever
They come at will be the worse for it; take 'em hence.
A mercy, mercy, mercy.
You have done Justice.
You've seen these Scots desected, Gentlemen,
And what d' you find 'em now to be, but Rascals?
Mere Mountebanks, that has instead of Cure
Bred strange Diseases, and distempers amongst you;
Jugglers, that looked you in the face, and told
You a fine tale, to keep your senses busy,
While they did pick your Pockets.
Our Pockets say you sir? I, and something else too, could
They have come at it; but soft, soft, two words to a bargain.
Master Smallfaith, we shall do what lies in us,
Upon your Recantation, to bring
You into favour with the Common Wealth,
And seat you as before, as Capable
Of her Preferment.
I thank you.
Blessing on your hearts.
We make the same profession sir to you,
On the like terms. You may do much
Upon the giddy People, by the example
Of your own Reformation.
Sir, I shall
Do what befits an honest man (abused)
And servant to the Common Wealth.
And you sir,
Are not exempted here the benefit
Of favour if you will take hold of it.
I thank you.
I, and hold it fast husband; had I a good thing to handle, I'd
make much on it a long time I warrant you.
As for these Gentlemen here, Master Downfall,
And Master Worn-out, we shall do our best
To set the one upon his legs again;
And restore the other, though not to his full
Ability, yet to a health contentable.
We are your servants.
When all our minds and hearts are firmly knit,
Let the Scot do his worst, by Sword or Wit.

I Take my leave Jacinta, and cannot wish you
More happiness than you possess.
You must
Dissemble, or it is within your wishes
To make your self, Francisco, mine, which would be
A fair addition to me, in my faith
Of that most noble love you have professed.
When you but dare to own me, I am past
The fear of any destiny that can
Divide us—but your Father. Your own virtue
Be still your guard. I do not like this watch
Upon our meeting, pretty Pelisarda.
Tel Signior Francisco I would speak with him
I do not like his frequent visits: though
His birth and generous parts deserve to march
With men of honourable name, I am
Without ambition to sacrifice
My daughter to his pension for life.
Your pleasure sir?
Hath hitherto Francisco
Been to affect you in the list of those
I held my friends.
I hope no forfeit made
By me, hath lost that good opinion
You placed upon me.
I cannot tell
How you may be transported with desires
Above my thoughts to allow, I would not have
My silence, and the free access y' have had
To my house, (which still is open to wise guests,)
Betray me, or my Daughter to the mirth
And talk of men in the Plassa, My estate
Doth walk upon sound Feet, and though I make
No exception to your blood, or person, sir,
The portion I have fixed upon Jacinta,
Beside the wealth her liberal Aunt bequeathed her,
Is more than your thin Younger brother's fortune
Should lay a siege, or hope to. I am plain.
And something passionate (if I understand you)
Without a cause. I am a gentleman,
With as much sense of honour, as the proudest
that doth ride on's foot cloth, and can drop
Gold to the numerous minutes of his age
And let me not be lost for want of that,
Deserves not to be named to fill the balance
Against true honour— let me tell you sir,
Virtue and blood are weighed against themselves,
You cannot know the price of these, when either
Scale is not poised with things of the same nature
You're very right, and therefore I do weigh
My Daughters wealth against your fortunes sir,
I take it they are things in the same specie,
And find it easy to distinguish, yours
Can hold small competition, and by
A consequence that Fathers use t'infeire,
As little hope to equal in affections.
Sir I must tell you I esteem Jacinta
Fit every way to meet your Elder Brother,
Whose Birth will interest him so much in that
Full fortune which your Father now is Lord of,
Your expectations may prompt you look
Without much curiosity for a Bride,
I shall believe thy soul is made of Atoms,
That places so much happiness in Dust.
Sir, I can quit your Jealousy, my thoughts
Level beneath your Daughter, and shall be
Happy if you consent I may devote
My applications to Felisarda, your Niece.
Is it my Niece? I ask your pardon.
Nay then be welcome, and t'encourage you,
Although her Father a poor Gentleman
My brother, by the malice of the sea
And winds, have lost what might have ranked him even
With some that ride upon their reverend mules,
I'll find a portion for her, if you strike
Affectionate hearts, and joy to call you Nephew.
Pray be not angry, that I take a care
To place my own, where I may see it answered
With State, as well as Family.
You show
A provident Father. I shall not then
Be endangered to your scruple, if I address
My services to her, whose humble fortune,
In the relation to your blood, and nobleness,
Is wealth enough to me?
I wish it prosper.
You have much honoured me.
That scruple's vanished.
These are considerings, with which Parents must
Timely prevent the folly, and the fall
Of Children, apt to lose themselves in shadows
And gaudy apparitions.
Your Son
Is come from Salamanca Sir.
I hope
Philosophy hath by this time tamed his wildness,
I have been careful not to feed his riots.
Hoe's welcome; my next study is to choose
A wise for him,
With him a Gentleman.
That seems of noble quality.
Your blessing,
Next which 'tvvil be a happiness, if you
Embrace this noble Gentleman Don, Alberto,
To whose affection I have been engaged.
Our studies grew together, and our loves.
You do an honour to us.
If he thrive
Upon his fair intents fir to my Sister,
Whose character he he's took delight to hear
From me sometimes, it will enlarge our honour.
He has improved in language— his estate?
Six thousand ducats fir per Annum clear
In his possession, beside
The legacy of a Granam when she dyes
That he's outliy'd 6. cats within their family.
This tastes again of the old humour, hoe's
Not settled yet.
Your pardon fir, I cannot
With any patience think of an old woman,
They are agues to my nature, she that lives
To three score is a witch, and fit for fuel
By the Civil law. I hope my mother's well.
Sir I beseech you, be not you mistaken,
I am not what I was, I'm strangely altered
From the wild garb, and can discourse most gravely
Of any thing but old and toothless women.
Do not you think it fit, she should be burned fir,
That lives within an Hospital till the roof
Consume to dust, and no more left for covering
Than is kept up in one continued Cobweb,
Through which the birds may see her when she creeps
Under a spiders canopy; what think you?
Speak your own conscience.
A young wife will cure
This angry heat of blood. You are most welcome,
Command my house, and if you can affect
My Daughter, for whose love (as my Son here
Prepares me) you took this pains, I shall
Make equal propositions. I knew
Your Father well, Don Roderigo, who
Gave up his life with honour against the Moors.
Once more y' are welcome: Son Luys show
The way to your Sister, and bid her entertain
Your friend with all the love her modesty,
And my commands may prompt her to.
You much oblige my services.
Remember Don
Conditions, if my Sister and you join
Your coppiholds, I have a life must be
Maintained till the old man dye, hang his pension,
'Two'not keep me in salads. I'll conduct you.
I like his person well, and his calm gesture
Speaks for his other composition.
The estate is competent, my Daughter is
Obedient, which rich Parents call a blessing,
Whose wisdom is to advance their name, and fortunes.
My Son is all my study now,
My noble Don Ramyres, you look cheerful.
It is a good omen, I have buisness w'ee
Such as cannot despair your entertaiment;
You have a Daughter.
I would you had one;
I should be willing to translate a Son,
And by his marriage be most proud to call
Your Daughter mine.
You are next a Prophet, Signior,
And but the Sexes differ, speak my thoughts;
Tic harmony on both fides; to be short
For let our gravities not waste time, and breath
In our affairs, give the Young leave to court
And spin out days in amorous circumstance;
My Son Fernando, I need not call him Heir,
His birth concludes it, I would commend
To fair Jacinta: 't can be no dishonour
To your Family to mix with mine.
Tic an addition
Will add a luster rather to our blood.
Tic my affection to you Daughter, which confirmed
By observation of her virtue, makes
Me wish this tie between 'em; I may safely
Expect you will assure a portion that
His Fortunes will deserve, who must enjoy
What I possess, unless you disaffect
His person, or dechne his education,
Which hath not spared my coffers to advance him
In the best form of Gentleman.
I want
Abilities of tongue to answer this
Your freedom, and the bounty of your nature,
Towards my Daughter, and so far am from
Exception to Fernando, there's no Cavalliero
In Spain I wish to thrive so well in her opinion.
T will be his encouragement,
If he entrench upon no others interest,
I mean not to except, how well he can
Deserve her nobly from a Rival, if
Her heart be not contracted, this were to
Engage'em both to loss of Peace, and Honour,
Perhaps betray a Life.
You argue nobly,
She is yet Mistress of her thoughts, and free,
While her Obedience doth keep in trust
Her heart; till I direct it, which shall be
To love, and choose your Son to live within it.
Have I said home?
You have. When they have met
We may conclude the Dowry, and confirm
Our mutual assurances, till then farewell.
I like this well; Ramyres has
A fortune for a Grande. Don Alberto
Must now excuse me, if my vote prefer
Fernando, whom my Daughter must accept
Or forfeit me. The new guest is not warm
In his access, and sha'not feel with what
Soft art, and subtle ways, I steer her passion;
Yet were Alberto's state ten Maravides
Above Ramyre's, I should place him first.
Fame is an empty noise, Virtue a word
There's not a Jew will lend two Ducat; on.
He is returned, I must prepare Jacinta.
I hope my past life hath not sir so ill
Deserved, you should be jealous of my duty
When you command, although in things of this
High nature, man being nothing more concerned,
Next the divine considerations,
Than in the choice of her that must divide
The joys and sufferings of his life, a Son
May modestly insist upon the privilege
That Love by his great charter hath conferred
On every heart, not to be forced, yet I
Freely resign my will, and what men call
Affection, to that object you present me.
Apply your self then to Don Carlo's daughter
Shoe's young, fair, rich, and virtuous, and I've had
Full treaty with her Father, who expects
Your vifit.
Young, fair, rich, and virtuous,
Four excellencies seldom met in one;
She cannot sure want servants, that commands
Under so many titles. I could wish,
(So much I have ambition to be thought
Obedient sir,) she were but one of those.
She is all, and one.
My duty were not less
If I forgave my self a happiness
To perfect your commands; sir, I am ready,
To try my fortune.
There is no fear of thy repulse, and when
Thou dost confirm her gained to thy affection,
My greatest act, and care of life is over.
Go on and prosper.
He is passionate,
And like the fury of the winds, more loud
By opposition; such a providence
May be mine one day when I am a Father,
And he for whose advance my cares are meant,
Like me, may with a fair and formal show
Disguise his thoughts too, yet I am to blame,
For my affection to a dream, a thing
With which my eyes only conversed, to hazard
A Fathers love, and the rich peace it brings;
I'll uncreate the face I dote upon
And be my self, or — what? my brother?
Now Francisco, you met my father?
Yes, and he
Looks as some news had much exalted him.
You are not so merry in the face, what Is it?
Nothing.
You held no controversies with him?
no.
I cannot guess he was angry by his smiles;
How did you part?
exceeding kindly.
What changes your complexion?
You are deceived.
Pre'the' how do men look that are in love?
Why? as they did before; what alteration
Have you observed in me?
You have then a Mistress,
And thrive upon her favours but thou art
My brother, In deliver thee a secret,
I was at St. Sebastians last Sunday
At Vespers.
Is it a secret that you went to church?
You need not blush to tell your ghostly Father.
I prithee leave thy impertinence; there I saw
So sweet a face, so harmless, so intent
Upon her prayers, it frosted my devotion
To gaze on her, till by degrces I took
Her fair Idea through my covetous eye,
Into my heart, and know not how to ease
It fince of the impression.
So, proceed.
Her eye did seem to labour with a tear,
Which suddenly took birth, but overweigh'd
With it's own swelling, dropped upon her bosom,
Which by reflection of her light, appeared
As nature meant her sorrow for an ornament;
After her looks grew cheerful, and I saw
A smile shoot graceful upward from her eyes,
As if they had gained a victory o'er grief,
And with it many beams twisted themselves,
Upon whose golden threads the Angels walk
To and again from heaven.
I do believe
By all these metaphors, you are in love;
I see you have a fancy, but proceed,
And be not melancholy.
I have told thee all.
This is indeed a vision; you have
But seen her all this while, if I may counsel you
You should proceed, her face is nothing when
You have perused the rest.
Tic dangerous.
You must excuse me Brother,
There can be no hurt in a handsome woman,
For if her face delight so much, what will
The enjoying of so sweet a pile of beauty?
Thou hast infused a confidence, I will
Embrace this counsel, you shall with me Brother,
And see how I behave my-self, the Lady
Is not far off.
Withal my heart, In pawn
My life you shall enjoy her; what is she
Of flesh, and blood, that will deny, when she
Is fairly courted? may I know the name
Of this loved Mrs? you may clear your thoughts,
I dare have no design to wrong your love.
What think you Brother of the fair Jacinta?
Don Carlo's Daughter?
To that happy coast
I now am sailing; we lose time, clap on
More wings thou feathered God; thou hast put fire
Francisco into my drooping thoughts, and as
They had already bargained with the wind,
They are aloft, and chide loves lazy motion.
A word before you fly; but is Jacinta
Your Mistress then?
The beautiful Jacinta.
Dost think I sha'not prosper? what is she
Of flesh and blood, that can deny, when she
Is fairly courted? add to this my happiness,
That shoe's the Mistress, whom, from all her sex
My Father hath made choice of for my courtship;
He hath already treated with Don Carlos,
And it was his last command, I should address
My present visit to her.
Very well;
If this be truth, you need not trouble wings
To overtake this Lady, to my knowledge
(I'm serious now) she has bestowed her heart
Upon a friend, who has already fortified
Himself against the world, that would oppose
His title to it.
From what intelligence
Have you gained this? her Father knows it not.
Come, these are but subtle pretences scattered
By some, who cunningly thus hope to make
Themselves a victory, by cutting off
More fruitful expectations, this must
Not disengage me, prithee walk.
I can produce my Author, here, Fernando.
And with my blood defend that interest
She gave me, with intent I should preserve it.
How, is she yours Francisco?
Mine, if hearts
Have power to make assurance.
Tic some happiness
I have no stranger to oppose, whose high
And stubborn soul would not release this treasure
But make me force it through his blood. Francisco
And Fernando are two rillets from one Spring,
I will not doubt he will resign, to make
Me fortunate; or should his will be cold
And some close thoughts suggest I had no privilege
By Eldest birth, but came a sly Intruder
Upon his right of love, there is a tie
Of Nature and Obedience to a Father
Will make him give this blessing from his bosom,
And strip his amorous soul of all his wealth
That may Invest my wishes.
I read not this
In any of the reverend Casuists;
No inequality being in our blood
The law of nature meant we should be equal;
It was first tyranny, then partial custo me,
Made you more capable of Land. Would you
Be lord of us, because you are first born,
And make our souls your tenants too? when I've
Named you my Elder brother, I exclude
All servitude; Justice that makes me love you
Carries an equal law to both;
Nay I can love you more if I consider you
(Without the chain of blood) a friend, than all
The bonds of nature can enforce me to;
In both relations give me leave to love you
As much as man, but not resign my Mistress.
You ascend higher, and persuade by what
Obedience is owing to a Father,
They give us life, a good Son keeps it for him,
And every drop bled in their cause, a glory;
I can acknowledge this, and sacrifice
Life, Fortunes, a poor recompense to lose
(Were they all multiplied) to show my duty;
But these are things may be resigned, a Mistress
Is not a wealth in balance with the world,
But much above the poise of all it's happiness,
And equal with our honour, riveted
Into our soul, it leaves her not, when death
Hath shook this body off, but flies with it
More svvift, to love it in the other world.
You are very passionate.
I am very just,
And you shall find it brother ever you twine
With my Jacinta, mine, if vovves may give
Possession of each other's soul.
No more
May she be worthy of thy heart, till mine
Do entertain a treason to divide you;
But I, to satisfy my Father, must
Present my self, and trust me, will so manage
My love to her, as thou shalt have no cause
To Interpret me a rival O Francisco
Our loves are of a kindred, for mine is
Devote to Felisarda, to her Cousin
Poor Felisarda.
Theodoros Daughter?
We never yet changed language, nor doth she
Imagine with what thoughts I honour her;
But here is the distraction, thou can not
Expect more opposition from Don Carlos,
Than I must from my Father, if he knew
Where I have placed my heart.
Let us assist
Each other then, till time, and some kind stars
Mature our love.
Let Fathers look at wealth, tic all their Saint:
Hearts are freeborn, and love knows no constraint.
HOw do you like Alberto Sister? is he not
A gallant Gentleman?
For what good Brother?
cannot Judge his Intellectuals,
But we have plenty of more proper men
•n Spain.
He is anexcellent Scholar,
He was still Emperor in the Schools, and since
He studied Logic and Philosophy,
He was the flower of's time at Salamanca.
Tic pity he should be gathered then.
What be gathered?
The flower you talk on.
If you affect him Sister, he may grow,
And you may keep him still for seed please you.
And sell him out at sowing time to Gardeners.
Come, you must love him.
He's he the Black-art?
I know not how Magic or Philters may
Prevail, and yet he looks suspitiously.
You think y' are witty now, do ye hear, you must
Affect him for my sake.
Now you speak reason;
I may for your sake dote upon him, Brother,
This is a conjuration may do much.
Well said,
Thou art my Sister, this good nature shows it.
And now I'll tell thee, I have promised him
As much as marriage comes too, and I lose
My houor, if my Don receive the canvas.
He he's a good estate, and I have borrowed
Considerable monies of him Sister,
Pieces of eight, and transitory Ducats.
Which must be paid.
Not if you marry him;
Conditions have been thought on.
How? conditions?
And some revenue was convenient
To do things like a Gentleman, I may
Tell you, my Father is a little costive,
Purse-bound, his pension cannot find me tooth-picks,
I must live till he dye it is fit you know;
Alberto he's an Exchequer, which upon
Thy smiles will still be open.
Very good;
Then you upon the matter have sold me to him
To find you spending money?
No, not sold;
W' are at no certain price; sums have been lent
•n expectation, or so, and may again.
You deserve Brother I should hate you now.
It is all one to me, so you love him;
For my part I defer but my expenses.
What if another man supply your wants
Upon the same conditions of my love?
I am indifferent, so I have my charges,
My necessary wine and women paid for,
Love where you please your self; I am but one,
I would not see him want that's all, because
My Father is not yet resolved about
His going to heaven.
Well sir, for Don Alberto,
You shall be his advocate no more, and there's
A Fee to bribe your silence in his cause.
Why, thank you sister,— will you dye a virgin?
Why do yo ask?
I would speak for somebody, tell me but whom
You have a mind to, and I'll plead for him,
And if he be a Don he will confider it;
You may give me what you will, besides.
When I
Resolve, You shall be acquainted.
But do ye hear,
Until you do resolve, I would lose no time,
It is good keeping a friend, and a warm client;
You may look lovingly upon Alberto,
And let him hope at all adventures, in
Two months you may be otherwise provided
And he may hang himself, in the mean time
Some favours now and then to the poor Gentleman
Will doe him good, and me no hurt, besides
You'll please my Father in it, whose vote is for him,
And that's a thing material. I am
To meet with Don Alberto, and some Gentlemen,
I will preserve his confidence, and tell him
I have talked with thee. Have you any more
Of this complexion? cause I know not what
Occasions I may have to keep my credit
With men of mark and honour, where I am going;
You are my Fathers darling, and command
His yellovv Ingots; tother Doblon D'oro.
So I may bring a rent-charge upon my self.
The tother drop of orient mercy, come.
You care not what accounts I give my Father.
Thou hast tvventy ways to cousin him, vvedge i•
Into the next Bill, he vvears Spectacles,
And loves to read—Item for pious uses.
Can it be less to help a brother? well said.
Let not this feed your riot.
By no means.
I am for no Carthusians to day.
Farewell dear Sister—who is that?
My Father
I cannot endure that old mans company.
I am past complement, and must acknowledge
Your fair intentions honour us, she is no Goddess
Of beauty Sir, but let me without pride
Boast my self blessed, Fernando, in her virtues,
And that which crowns em all obedience.
Jacinta, Entertain this Gentleman
With all becoming thoughts of Love, his merit
(Out of no rash, but mature judgement,) hath
Prevailed with me, to name him to the first
And noblest place within your heart.
Until this hour I never had the considence
More than to think of love, and hide a flame
That almost hath consumed me. You may think
It worth a smile, and that 〈…〉 flourish
To show my vanity of wit or language,
But when you understand that I bring hither
No young affection, but a love took in
Long since at my ambitious eye, it may
Beget your gentle thought, or will, to cure me.
Pardon me, if the more you strive to print
A truth on this short story of your passion,
The more I find my self inclined to wonder,
Since you seem to infer, You took in the
Disease at sight of me, I cannot be
So ignorant, as not to have received
Your Name and Character, but never knew
Before, when you did grace us with a visit,
And how then at such distance you contracted
A danger so consuming, is above
My knowledge, not my pity, if you could
Direct me to the cure with Virgin honour.
So, so, I leave you to the amorous Dialogue,
Presume you have my voice.
Sir, with your pardon,
You lead me to a Wilderness, and take
Your self away, that should be guide; do you
Engage me to affect this Don Fernando
In earnest?
Yes.
You did direct my love
To Don Alberto.
I dispense with that
Command; you may by fair degrees, and honour,
Quit his addresses, and dispose your self
Mistress and Bride to Don Ramyres heir.
It does not thus become you sir, to mock
A Virgin never injured you; he is
Your elder Brother, I am here beneath
The level of his thoughts, in the nature of
A servant to my Cousin, and depend
Upon my Uncles charity.
May I be
Cursed in my own affections, if I
Delude thee, though to achieve our best desires
We seem to dissemble thus before Don Carlos.
This is a secret yet to poor Jacinta.
You have my will; obey it.
Hath Francisco broken his faith already?
May you both joy, where you have placed your loves.
You apply close Francisco.
With your good favour,
I fairty hope.
Your Father's gone Jacinta.
I should be
Equally pleased if you would leave me too.
This is a change.
Unkind Francisco hear me.
Tic my meaning. Brother I have prepared
Your story there with Felisarda; lose
No time.
Jacinta, clear your thoughts again,
And pardon that I took a shape to fright you;
I shall not grieve to see Francisco prosper,
And merit all your favours, since my hopes
Must thrive, or have their Funeral here.
Are we
So blessed Francisco? you have a noble Brother.
I may suppose my Brother, Felisarda,
Hath made it now no secret, that I love you;
And since our stars have so contrived, that we
Have means to assist our mutual ambitions,
Do not you make their influence unprofitable;
Tic the first boldness I ere took to visit you,
Although my eyes have often with delight
And satisfaction to my heart observed you.
You seem a noble Gentleman, and can take
But little glory to undo a Maid,
Whose Fortunes cannot bring you any triumph.
How mean you fairest?
Not to be flattered Sir
Into a sin, to cure my poverty;
For men whose expectations are like yours,
Come not with honour to court such as I am,
(Lost to the World for want of portion)
But with some untamed heat of blood.
I dare
With conscience of my pure intent, try what
Rudeness you find upon my lip, tic chaste
As the desires that breath upon my language.
I began Felisarda to affect thee
By seeing thee at Prayers, thy virtue winged
Loves Arrow first, and it were a sacrilege
To choose thee now for sin, that hast a power
To make this place a Temple by thy Innocence.
I know thy poverty, and came not to
Bribe it against thy chastity; if thou
Vouchsafe thy fair and honest love, it shall
Adorn my fortunes, which shall stoop to serve it
In spite of friends or destiny.
My Brother
Knows my whole Interest in thee, to whom
My Fathers care directed him, but we
Thus mutually resolve to aid each other.
This must be wisely managed of all sides;
Parents have narrow eyes.
Our meeting thus
Will happily secure us from their Jealousy;
Our Fathers must not know this countermarch.
Ha; I like not this; Fernando at busy courtship
With Felisarda, and Francisco so
Close with my Daughter.
Las we are betrail'd.
My Uncle.
You are her Kinswoman, and of her bosom,
I prithee in my absence, plead to fair
Jacinta for me; as an earnest of
My gratitude, accept this trifle from me.
Ha, it is a Jewel.
Without this reward
I should solicit sir your cause, and do
My duty to Ton Carlos, who desires it.
I take my leave.
Madam, I shall be proud
To call you Sister, but you will prepare
Another happiness if you vouchsafe
To speak for me to pretty Felisarda,
She 's bound to hear your counsel and obey it,
If I may owe this favour to your charity.
Your goodness will deserve more.
I must follow him.
Do you take notice Felisarda, that
You live here on the bounty of an Uncle?
Your Father had but ill news from the Indies.
Sir, as your goodness wants no testimony,
I shall attend it with all humble services.
How durst you in the presence of my Daughter,
Maintain such whispers with Fernando, ha?
Sir, he was pleased—
No more, I here discharge you.
I'll provide one to attend you
With less relation to your blood. I'll hear
Of no defence, away—out of my doors.
Go to your Father Signior Teodo•o:
His ships may rise again were sunk by the Hollander,
And Fleet from St. Thome, he may prefer you
To some Rich Don, or who knows but you may,
Born on the Plumes of his estate, be made
In time a proud Condessa, so adios
Mew illustre Sennora Felisarda.
Thus have I heard a tall ship has been wracked
By some strange gust within the Bay: his passion
Admits of no dispute. O my poor Cos,
I fear my turn is next to be an exile,
Thy absence must deprive me of Francisco,
Who can no more glad his Jacintas eyes,
With a pretence to visit thee.
Tic not
My fear to suffer want so much afflicts me,
As that I must lose you, but he returns.
Don Pedro de Fuente Calada coming hither,
With Don Alberto, and my Son?
Yes sir, the Count desires to see Jacinta
Whom your Son has so commended, and sent me
To give you notice.
Ha Iacinta, retire
To your closet, and put on your richest Jewels,
A Count is come to visit you; Felisarda
There may be some more art used in her dress,
To take the eyes of greatness.
Sir you speak
As I were meant for sacrifice, or sale;
The Count Don Pedro—
No reply; be careful,
And humble in your office Felisarda,
And you may live, and eat here, till Iacinta
Provide another servant to attend her,
Which may be three whole days; my anger is
Not everlasting; bid my Wife come to me.
I expect an honourable guest, the Count Don Pedro,
To see our Daughter, whom I have commanded
To appear with all her riches to attract him.
If his Intents be honourable, I have heard
Don Pedro loves a hansom Donna.
He had better cool his hot blood in the frozen
Sea, and rise thence a rock of Adamant
To draw more wonder to the North, than but
Attempt to wrong her chastity.
This from Don Pedro is an honour binds
The service of our lives.
Noble Don Carlos.
If we had been prepared, we should have met
This grace with more becoming Entertainment.
Tic fair, and equal to my wishes,—she
Does smell of roasted Garlic; this your Sister?
That is my Mother, here is Jacinta Sir.
She has a tempting shape, I now am pleased.
I Use to kiss all; hum a pretty thing?
I like not his busy eyes on Felisarda.
You will be faithful to me?
Who, I faithful? how shall I live else?
Son Luys.
Madam.
Will you be pleased admit Don Pedro, by
The Title of your servant, to presume
Sometime to wait upon you.
It were pride
And saucy ambition sir in me, to think
You can descend so much from your great birth,
To own a name, and office so beneath you.
I that before thought women easy trifles,
And things which nature meant only to quench
High flames in man, am taken with this Lady.
thou hast wronged the fair Jacinta,
Thy praise was thyn, and cold, Spain is not rich
Enough to boast her equal: and I love her.
Oh she will be to proud to know it Sir.
Proud, she must be, whose eyes have such com∣mand.
She has a pretty servant too, Luys,
I like 'em both.
How, both?
They will do well,
One for a Wife, the other for a Concubine.
It will become your high blood.
Say I kiss
Her white hand, and present her with these Pearls?
Your honour shall command.
Your Daughter has a most magnetic face,
And I pronounce her happy, your consent
Confirms her mine.
Ther's nothing in my blood, or fortune, but
Don Pedro shall command. I was Prophetical?
Come hither Alsimira, would imagine?
Hoe's taken with Jacinta, and hath pried
Already my consent.
Believe not all
That great men speak are Oracles, our Daughter—
If she be stubborn, uncreates her self,
Be you wise, and counsel her to this ambition,
Or thus I loose you all; ha turn away,
That Fairy shees a Witch, the Count talks with her.
I hope you hold me not Sir less deserving
Than when you gave me free access to plead
My service to your Daughter—if that Don—
Sir you too much prejudicate my thoughts
I must give due respects to men of honour,
Nor is it fit I should impose upon
The Freedom of Jacintas love.
You're noble.
My Lord.
I do not like this Don.
You are of my mind, I do not like him neither,
And yet the blackbirds in the bush, see what
present be would give my sister.
Did she refuse it?
I never mean she shall, what wrong my friend?
Yet I'll take all, and let him hang himself;
If he would send his eyes, I would undertake
To carry 'em to the I•weller, they would off,
For pretty coadstones. Have no fear, my Mother
Is for you too, you must fee both your Advocates.
Jacinta.
Sir.
She takes her self much honoured.
You oblige.
Let me alone to carry things.
Be confident to trust me with your honour,
If it would pawn for any thing.
I'm not perfect
How to neglect Alberto yet, and must I
Throw off Fernando, but new Entertained
By your command? the World will concur strangely.
The World will praise thy wisdom, &amp; my care;
Or if some giddy tongues condemn what's good,
Must wee be servile to that fear, and lose
That which will make us Judges of their folly,
And damn it with a frown of state? they are fools
That dote upon those shadows, Idle talk,
The slime of Earth-worms, that doth shine to cousin
Infants, it is fit wee raise our thoughts to substances.
Let modesty and nature plead a little,
If I appear not fond to Entertain him.
I may collect more strength by time and counsel,
And for your satisfaction dare profess
My Lord hath too much graced the low Jacinta
With a pretence so noble, but I should
Be held not worth his person, and too light
At his first breath of courtship to fall from
My Virgin strength, and give my self his captive.
I shall allow that ceremony; the Count
Makes an address.
I must use thrift in my delight, my eyes
Are proud, and must be taught by absence how
To value such a Mistress. I do miss the chambermaid.
It will become me to attend.
Your pardon.
I'll take it for an honour, if your Son
Be pleased—but to my coach?
Oh my good Lord!
So much I am your creature, if you knew
But where to match me, I would be your coach-horse.
So, so, Iacinta's stars do smile upon her,
'Twil be a match, were but my Son as fair
In expectation of a bride, I'd write
Nil ultra to my cares, he is to aerie
And volatile, a wife would timely fix him,
And make him fit to manage my estate.
But he returns, I'll feel his pulse.
thou see how near Iacinta is to happiness.
I did some office in it, she may thank me.
I first inspired his Lordship.
Such a providence
To build thy self a Fortune by some brave
And noble marriage would become thy study,
And make thy Father willingly resign
His breath, with confidence to know thee wise
To govern what my Industry hath gatherd;
What think thou of a wife?
I think little sir.
What should I do with a Wife?
Imitate me, and study fame, and wealth
To thy posterity. Have I with care
Acquired such an estate, that must not last
Two Generations?
The way to make it
Last, is not to think of Wiving; for my part
(Sir with your pardon, if I may speak freely)
I had opinion once I was your Son,
But fearing by your narrow exhibition
You loved me not, I had a controversy
Within my thoughts, whether I should resolve
To geld my self, or turn a begging Friar.
A begging Friar?
Tic as I tell you Sir;
This last I fixed upon, and have been studying
Where I conveniently might raise a sum
To compass a hair shirt Sir,
To make trial before I thrust my self
Point blank into the Order.
Thus wild Sons interpret still
A prudent Father; but you may discharge
Your Jealousies, unless it be your own
Devotion to be chaste, and live a recluse.
For that I can be ruled; I have not lived
After the rate of hating any women
But I can hear of Marriage, if it be
Your pleasure: but these Wives Sir are such tickle
Things, not one hardly staid amongst a thousand;
Beside, unless you find one very rich
A man may cast a way himself, and get
A bundle of Beggeries, Mouths, that day and night,
Are open like Hell Gates, to feed; I would not
Hazard my Freedom, and the blessings Heaven
Has lent you Sir, upon a Wife with nothing.
Thy pension doubles for that word; in Earnest,
How much I like this wisdom; take this Purse,
I will have no account, and find me out
A wealthy Maid or Widow, but not ugly.
No? not ilfavourd Sir, if she be rich?
A little old or crippel'd?
I wo'not ha'thee
Mary a crooked, deformed thing, because
She may have children—
Not, unless she have
An Infinite wealth to make 'em strait sir;
I'll marry a witch so she have money sir.
No, on no terms a Monster.
Then I wo'not.
And now it comes into my mind, they talk of
A young rich Widow, Donna Estifaniar,
What do you think of her?
Thou hast named one
To my own desires, she lives a Widow still,
But she has refused many brave Dons.
No matter,
I like her sir the better.
She gives good entertainment.
I will have her
If you but say the word. I wear a charm
To catch a Widow; but this Purse will hardly
Last till we finish, I must do things with honour.
Thou shalt be furnished like my Son; kneel down
And ask me blessing, I do long to give it thee.
I have your blessing here.
Isle find thee out
Some Jewels to present thy Mistress too.
'Two'not be much amiss, the Gold will go
The farther Sir. I know not how this
Came about, unless Don Pedros coming to
My Sister have made him mad, &amp; wrought this miracle.
How careful he was I should not mary one
Deformed, I have chose the hansomest things thus far,
And I mary with a Witch at these years, let the Devil
Ride my wild Mare to death; and now I
Consider on it I wo'not have the Widow,
For fear o'th'worst, yet I'll to her,
And make a business on it to keep the old
Mans Bags in motion; this with some good
Husbandry, and no play, may last a Fortnight,
Tic very Gold: yes, it will pay some scores,
Maintain my Negro, and a brace of Whores.
Now fiddles do your worst.
How, no success? where lies the opposition?
Don Carlos equal with my self professed
His free desires, and to dispose his Daughter
To meet thee with all loving entertainments.
What can she argue to thy birth, or person,
Attended with so plentiful a fortune?
I must believe thy courtship dull and faulty:
When I was at thy years and spring of blood
I wound my self like air among the Ladies,
Commanding every bosom, and could dwell
Upon their lips like their own breath, their eyes
Doubled their Beams on me, and she that was
Of hardest composition, whom no love
Could soften, when I came with charm of language,
Her Frost would strait dissolve, and from her eyes
Her heart came weeping forth to woo me take it.
Yet you that did with a Magnetic Chain
Attract so many, could possess but one;
I came not to Don Carlos house with cold
Or lukewarm thoughts, but armed with active fire
That would have melted any heart but hers,
Bound up with ribs of treble Ice against me,
By which I found there is another fate
That governs love, against whose secret doom
In vain is eloquence or force.
So Obstinate?
Nothing that I could say
In my own cause, could make her tongue or looks
Promise an expectation to thrive
By any after service, this disdain
I did resent, as it became my honour,
And now confirmed against her pride, have thought
Of something, that with your consent, may t•me
Her scorn, or punish it to her repentance.
Name it.
She has a Kinswoman lives with her,
Felisarda Daughter to Signior Teodore,
A trade fallen Merchant, Brother to Don Carlos,
This Felis. that now lives on the charity of her Uncle,
Half servant, half companion to Iacinta,
And fair, I would pretend to love, observe me sir,
And in their presence court her as my Mistress;
Me thinks I see already how Iacinta
Doth fret and frown.
I like it well.
To see her Cousin so preferred, it is
The nature fir of women to be vexed
When they know any of their servants court
Another, and that love they thought not worth
Their own reward, will sting 'em to the soul,
When ti's translated where it meets with love,
And this will either break her stubborn heart,
Or humble her.
But what if this pretence,
By such degrees convey away your heart,
That when Jacinta comes to sense, you cannot
Retrive your passion from the last, or say
Felisarda should believe you, and give up
Her heart to your possession, when you
Are by your first desires invited back,
What cure for Felisardas wound, if you
Affect her not? although I like that part
Of your revenge, I would not have my Son
Carry the hated brand of cruelty,
Or hear Fernando broke a Ladies heart;
But live upon his clear, and honest truth,
And if Jacinta have not valued him,
Find his own estimation in some other
By fair and noble Courtship; Virtue is
Above the gaudy shine of Gold▪ and if
My Son love where his honour cannot suffer,
The want of Dower, I can forgive.
You now, read exc'lent charity, and like a Father,
It is the harmony I would hear, I chide
My fears that did suspect you would prefer
Wealth in a Bride; there is no beauty, or estate, compared
To that resulteth from the soul; I dare
Now op this narrow Closet, and present
The name I love above the World, it is
Sir Felisarda, equal in her blood,
Within whose virtuous poverty
More Treasures are contained, than in those veins
Of earth, which opend by our slaves, do bleed
Such floods of Gold into the lap of Spain.
Pardon my long concealment of her name,
It was sin against your virtue, and once more
Speak in that blessed Language, I may hope
To call this Virgin mine.
How long have you
Been taken with this female holiness?
Before Jacinta was propounded, this
Took firm possession of my faith.
Thou hast discovered thy destruction, foolish Boy.
Was this your policy to be revenged
Upon Jacinta, whom my providence
Elected to preserve our name and family,
To dote upon a Beggar? thou hast flung
A fire into my brain; either resolve
To perfect my commands, and throwing off
That trifle thou hast praised, prefer Jacinta
To the best seat within thy hart, and marry her
Or live a stranger to me, and divested
Of all those rights; which nature, and thy Birth
Have fla•ter'd thee with hope to find; expect not
Alive, the stipend of a Groom to feed thee,
Nor dead, the naked charity of a shroud
To hide thee from the Worms.
O sir, call back
That murdering sentence, it were sin to let
This passion dwell upon you, nor would Heaven,
Whose eyes survey our frailty, suffer
So wild a rage possess you.
Tic within thy own obedience to divert it.
When you have heard what I can say more,
You will chide your fierce command.
What Riddles this?
Jacinta is already made another, and my force
Upon her vows, can be no less than sacrilege.
This is some new pretence.
Sir, not to wast your patience, she hath given
Her self by holy contract to Francisco.
Thy younger Brother?
This I know will calm
Your fury, and those eyes that threatend lightning
With smiles applaud Franciscos fate, and praise
My disobedience.
Franciscos Mistress?
His wife confirmed by vows, &amp; change of hearts,
I had it from themselves, when either strove
Whose circumstance should credit most their story,
Her tear or his conclusive groan, to seal
Their marriage, but both were equal sir,
What curse had I deserved, that should divorce
This Innocent pair of lovers?
All this talk
Which foolish thou interpret'st thy defence,
Hath but enlarged thy folly, and that act
Which in Francisco I commend, upbraids
Thy own degenerate baseness: shall thy brother
Who carries all his portion in his blood
Look high, and careful of his honour aim
At fortunes, and with confidence achieve
His glorious end, and shall his Elder brother
Engaged by nearest tie to advance his name,
Lye beating in the common tract of gulls,
And sacrifice his birth and expectations
To a cozening face, and poverty? instead
Of adding mon'ments, that to the world
Should be his living Chronicle, to bury
His own, and all the antique honours (he
Ne'er sweat for, but were cast into his blood)
Within a dunghill? thou hast forfeited
Thy birthright, which Francisco shall inherit,
Nor shall the loss of my Estate be all
Thy punishment; hear and believe with horror,
If thou renounce not her that hath bewitched
Thy heart, Felisarda, and by such a choice
I shall affect, redeem this scandal nobly,
Fernando from this minute I pronounce
Heir to his Fathers curse; be wise or perish.
Why does not all the stock of thunder fall?
Or the fierce winds from their close Caves, let loose,
Now shake me into Atoms?
Fie noble Brother, what can so deject
Your Masculine thoughts? is this don like Fernando!
Whose resolute soul so late was armed to fight
With all the miseries of man, and triumph
With patience of a Martyr? I observed
My Father late come from you.
Yes Francisco,
He hath left his curse upon me.
How?
His curse, dost comprehend what that word caryes
Shot from a Fathers angry breath? unless
I tear poor Felisarda from my heart,
He hath pronounced me heir to all his curses.
Does this fright thee Francisco? thou hast cause
To dance in soul for this, tic only I
Must lose, and mourn, thou shalt have all, I am
Degraded from my birth, while he affects
Thy forward youth, and only calls thee Son,
Son of his active spirit, and applauds
Thy progress with Jacinta, in whose smiles
Thou moist see all thy wishes waiting for thee,
Whilst poor Fernando for her sake must stand
An excommunicate from every blessing,
A thing that dare not give my self a name,
But flung into the Worlds necessities,
Until in time with wonder of my wants
I turn a ragged statue, on whose forehead
Each clown may carve his motto.
Will it call
His blessing back if you can quit your love
To Felisarda? she is now a stranger
To her Uncles house, I met one of his servants
Who told me on some Jealous apprehension,
Don Carlos had discharged and banished her.
He could not be so barbarous.
You know her Fathers Poverty.
And her Wealth of Virtue.
It is worth your Counsel,
To examine what you may preserve, if wisely
You could persuade your heart to love some another —
What was it Francisco said?
Whose equal Birth,
And Virtues, may invite a noble change.
Do not you love Jacinta?
Most religiously.
If you can but contrive your hearts at distance
And in contempt of honour, and your faith
Sacred to Heaven, and love, disclaim your Mistress,
I may be happy yet, what say? I know
Jacinta's Wise, and when she understands
How much it will advance, her charity—
Our case is not the same with yours good broth•
Wee have been long acquainted, to contract
Affections, if I understand, your loves
Are young, and had no time for growth.
Do not wound me.
Tic false, by Love it self thou hast deserved
'I should forget thee now; dost thou consider
Love, (that doth make all harmony in our soul,
And seated in that noblest place of life,
The heart) with things that are the slaves of time,
And that like common seeds, thrown into Earth,
It must have leisure to corrupt, and after
Much expectation, rise to name and vigour.
Love is not like the child that grows, and gets
By slow degrees perfection, but created
Like the first man, at full strength the first minute,
It makes a noble choice, and gains from time
To be called only constant, not increased.
Preserve thy own affections, and think mine
Noble as they, I shall suspect thy love
To me else; prithee leave me.
I'll obey,
And study how to serve you.
Ha, tic Felisarda.
Turned out like one that had been false, where shall
Poor Felisarda wander? were it not
To ask a Fathers blessing, I would visit
Some Wilderness, ever thus present my self
His burden and his sorrow.
Had you no relation to Jacinta pretty one?
I was her servant.
Come, you shall be my Mistress; they have used
Thee scurvily, I will provide thee a lodging.
I shall not use your bounty sir for that.
Thou art a hansom Dona, here's a Pistolet,
Meet me i'th'evening, wot?
Where, and for what?
The where, at thy own choice, the what, thy honour.
You are not noble.
Don Pedro will Embrace thy buxom body.
You must unhand this Virgin.
For goodness Sir,
Add not your anger to my sufferings.
Unhappy Felisarda.
Is she a friend of yours Signior?
She is not for your sinful knowledge Don.
Baser los manos, adios Signiory. Diabolo!
My blood is high and hot, unless I marry timely,
I must seek out a Female Julep.
Don Carlo's fear of you was my first error,
But I accept my banishment, and shall
Humble my self to my poor Fathers Fortune;
You will be sir dishonoured to be seen
Which such a walking mistry.
Thy Uncle
Hath plaid the Tyrant with thee, but lose not
Thy virtuous courage; how our stories meet
And challenge kindred in affliction!
Oh Felisarda! I do suffer too,
And for thy sake, thou shalt know more; till I
Salute thee at thy Fathers house, preserve
Good thoughts of thy Fernando, and accept
This little Gold, no bribe against thy honour.
My best return must be, my Prayers.
Farewell.
Tic not impossible my Father may
Retract his cruelty, and by time, and some
Discreet ways yet be wrought to like, what now
His passion wo'not let him see, her virtue.
How many Seas are met to wrestle here?
I love you sir so well, that I could wish
You were a Witch;
A Witch, your reason Lady?
Then it were within the circle of your art
By some device to rid me of Don Pedro,
Or if you could by any spell but get
My Father disaffect him—
A Witch? thats a way about, I were best cut his
Throat a little.
You 're much beholding to my Brother sir,
He still commends you; such an Advocate
Deserves his fee.
Unless my cause succeed
He has been feed too much; your Brother, Lady,
Preserves a noble friendship; if I were sure
You would be mine Jacima, I could tarry
Till your Father dyc.
But how can you procure
Don Pedro to have patience so long,
Whom my Father pleads for and prefers?
There, ther's the mischief, I must poison him;
One Fig sends him to Erebus, tic in
Your power and wit to spin out time, I may
Invent a means for his conveyance. Ha!
The Lady Estefania.
Welcome again,
This is an honour to us, whore's Iacinta?
Salute this noble Lady. Ha, Luys,
Hast thou prevailed already?
I'm in the way you see,
She has not been observed they say to walk
So freely with some men that boast more favour.
What makes the Lady Estefania here?
I like not their converse, this day is ominous.
Was it not the Count Don Pedro that retired?
What object here displeased him?
Ha, ha, did see the Don?
Preserve your mirth—I must be satisfied.
I'll lay a thousand Ducats that my costive
Don has been tampering with my VViddow, I
Observed (when I by chance let fall discourse)
How much he was an amorous servant to
Iacinta, she changed her colour and did make
Such business how my Sister did affect him,
That I may guess, though I make use on it otherwise
To the old man, to keep the pulses of
His Purse in play, she came to examine chiefly
How matters here proceeded; well, if she love him—
She is thy Mistress.
My Mistress? yes, but any man shall mary her.
How?
She is a Widow, Don, consider that,
Has buried one was thought a Hercules,
Two cubits taller, and a man that cut
Three Inches deeper in the say, than I, consider that too,
She may be cock a tvventy, nay for ought
I know she is Immortal.
What dost with her?
Faith nothing yet,
And have but little hope, I think shoe's honest.
Do's she love thee?
At her own peril, vv'are not come to articles;
There is no wit in vviving, give me a vvhore;
But that I ow thee money, thou should never
Marry my Sister neither?
Not Jacinta?
No, nor any other simpering piece of honesty,
If I might counsel thee, while any wench
Were extant, and the stews inhabited;
Is it fit, a Freeborn Gentleman should be chained
Tenant for life to one? Hang marriage shackles,
Tie the Town Bulls to'th'stake, we must have concubins.
Don Pedro was too blame, and trust me Madam
He shall find nothing here to advance his triumph.
You are Virtuous Jacinta; I presumed
When I should land my sufferings on your knowledge,
You would excuse my unexpected visit.
My Brother has been Just in the relation
How he pursues my love, but I shall be
Happy to serve your Justice, and must tell
The noble Estefania, my heart,
By all that love can teach to bind a faith,
Is placed where it shall never injure what
Your mutual vovvs contracted; I smile not
With mine own eyes upon him, it is my Fathers
Severe command to love him, but this story
Cleared to my Father would secure us both.
If any faith or service in me can
Deserve this goodness, cheerfully employ it.
I will be confident to use your Virtue.
I will refuse no office.
My Father comes most aptly.
Ha, ha, ha, have pity on my spleen,
I shall crack a rib else, ha, ha, ha.
You are very merry, Don Alberto; Son,
You may be of the counsel too, this house
Is mine I take it, I advise you would
Frequent it less.
How Sir?
I do not like your visits,
And to remove the cause, my Daughter is
Already sir disposed, to one above
Your birth and fortune, so fare-you-well.
You understand, now laugh and pick your teeth.
Daughter—
Did you hear this Luys?
I, the old man raves.
Must not frequent his house.
Would it were in a flame, so his money and I
Were out on it.
But thy Sister—
Would be refined in the fire, let her burn too.
My friend, if I have not Jacinta,
There are certain sums of money—
I am not of your mind Don, the sums are most uncertain.
Come, you did laugh too loud, my Father is
A Stoic, but despair not; go to your lodging,
I'll see thee anon, and either bring thee money
Or else some reasons why I do not bring it,
We won't go to Law, I'll pawn the widow
Rather than thou shalt want; go say thy prayers,
And show thy teeth no more, till I come to thee.
Now the business here?
Wee have agreed Jacinta,
And he to morrow privately
Will at the Church expect thee; tic an age
Till I salute the Bride to this great Don,
Whose thoughts are winged to enjoy thee, and resolve
No more delay, prepare to meet this Honour.
To morrow? this must be crossed.
My next ambition Madam will be perfect
To call you by some nearer name; my Son—
Is a most noble Gentleman, I know not
Where lives so clear a merit.
Oh sweet Madam.
Jacinta.
I have a suit to you.
To me?
Only that you would not dote too much upon me,
A gentle easy sober pace in love
Goes far, and is much better than a gallop; if you please
We may hold one another in hand, and love
This seven years, without sealing and delivering.
Withal my heart.
You'll do me a pleasure Madam.
You instruct well.
This Courtship is not common.
I confess it.
Son Luys.
Sir.
Let her not cool.
And she do,
I know the way to heat her again.
I will not yet reveal my abuse Iacinta,
And if you please to favour a design,
I have a plot may serve to both our happiness.
I'll obey.
There is a trembling in my heart.
You must not leave us yet Madam.
You may command me.
My Don so rampart, ther's something in this pannier
Shall spoil your match to morrow; Don Alberto,
When I disclose, shall worship me: be drunk,
Cancel arrears, and beg to lend more money.
It is most exactly done, and firm.
I could,
Omitting or inserting but a word, or particle,
Trouble the whole conveyance,
And make work for the law till doom's-day: but—
Is it possible?
You do not know the quirks of a Scrivano,
A dash undoes a Family, a point,
An artificial accent i't'h wrong place,
Shall poison an Estate, translate your Land
In Spain now into either of both Indies,
In less time than our Galleons of Plate
Are sailing hither; but you are my friend,
And noble benefactor.
Ther's more for your reward.
I humbly thank you Signior. Su Criade.
Farewell.
Su Servitor.
This deed makes thee my Heir Francisco, and
Will like a powerful spell upon Don Carlos,
Whose soul is superstitious upon Wealth,
Win his consent to make Iacinta thine.
Sir, I cannot say my duty shall deserve it
Since nature, and religion, without all
This bounty challenges my best obedience.
Away, thy sight
Is my disease.
Your blessing sir I kneel for.
What Impudence is this? wilt thou subscribe
To take off mine, thy curse on Felisarda?
For I do hate her heartily; disclaim
All promise, contract, or converse for ever,
I'm else inexorable.
Sir.
His eyes shoot poison at me, ha? he has
Bewitched me sure, what coldness thus invades me?
Ther's something creeping to my heart. Franscisco? ha?
Possess this gift of thy Inheritance;
Convey me to my chamber, oh—Fernando,
If thou dost hope I should take off my curse,
Do not approach my sight, unless I send for thee.
Forbear good Brother; Diego, Roderigo,
Your hands to assist my Father, one go for his
Physician.
This turn is fatal, and affrights me, but
Heaven has more charity than to let him die
With such a hard heart, it were a sin, next his
Want of compassion, to suspect he can
Take his Eternal flight and leave Fernando
This desperate Legacy, he will change
The curse into some little prayer I hope,
And then —
Make hast I beseech you Doctor.
Noble Fernando.
As you would have men think your art is meant
Not to abuse mankind, employ it all
To cure my poor sick Father.
Fear it not sir.
But there is more than your thin skill required
To state a health, your Recipes perplexed
With tough names, are but mockeries, and noise,
Without some dew from Heaven, to mix and make 'em
Thrive, in the application: what now?
Oh sir, I am sent for the Confessor,
The Doctor fears him much, your Brother says
You must have patience, and not Enter Sir;
Your Father is a going, good old man,
And having made him Heir, is loath your presence
Should interrupt his Journey.
Francisco may be honest, yet me thinks
It would become his love to interpose
For my access, at such a needful hour,
And mediate for my blessing, not assist
Unkindly thus my banishment. I'll not
Be lost so tamely, shall my Father dye
And not Fernando take his leave—I dare not.
If thou dost hope I should take off this curse,
Do not approach until I send—it was so,
And it is a law that binds above my blood.
Make hast good Father, and if heaven deny
Him life, let not his charity dye too.
One curse may sink us both, say how I kneel
And beg he would bequeath me but his blessing;
Then though Francisco be his Heir, I shall
Live happy, and take comfort in my tears,
When I remember him so kind a Father.
It is my duty.
Do your holy office.
Those fond Philosophers that magnify
Our human nature, and did boast wee had
Such a prerogative in our rational soul,
Conversed but little with the World, confined
To cells, and unfrequented woods, they knew not
The fierce vexation of community,
Else they had taught, our reason is our loss,
And but a privilege that exceeds sense,
By nearer apprehension, of what wounds,
To know our selves most miserable. My heart
Is teeming with new fears—Ha, is he dead?
Not dead, but in a desperate condition,
And so that little breath remains wee have
Remitted to his Confessor, whose Office
Is all that's left.
Is there no hope of life then?
None.
Is he not merciful to Fernando yet? no talk o• me
I find he takes no pleasure
To hear you named: Francisco to us all
He did confirm his Heir, with many blessings.
And not one left for me? oh take me in
Thou gentle Earth, and let me creep through all
Thy dark and hollow crannies, till I find
Another way to come into the World,
For all the Air I breath-in here is poisoned.
Wee must have patience Brother, it was no
Ambitious thought of mine to supplant you;
He may live yet, and you be reconciled.
That was some kindness yet Francisco; but
I charge thee by the nearness of our blood,
When I am made this mockery, and wonder,
I know not where to find out charity,
If unawares a chance direct my weary
And withered Feet to some fair House of thine,
Where plenty with full blessings crowns thy table,
If my thin face betray my want of food,
Do not despise me, cause 'I was thy Brother.
Leave these imagined horrors, I must not
Live when my Brother is thus miserable.
Ther's something in that face looks comfortably.
Your Father sir is dead, his will to make
Francisco the sole Master of his Fortunes
•s now irrevocable, a small Pension
He hath given you for life, which with his blessing
•s all the benefit I bring.
Ha, blessing; speak it again good Father.
I did apply some lenitives to soften
His anger, and prevailed; your Father hath
Reversed that heavy censure of his curse,
And in the place bequeathed his prayer and blessing.
I am new created by his charity.
Some ceremonies are behind, he did
Desire to be interred within our Covent,
And left his Sepulture to me, I am confident
Your pieties will give me leave—
His will in all things I obey, and yours
Most reverend Father; order as you please
His Body; wee may after celebrate
With all due obsequies his Funeral.
Why you alone obey? I am your Brother:
My Fathers Eldest Son, though not his Heir.
It pleased my Father sir to think me worthy
Of such a title, you shall find me kind,
•f you can look on matters without Envy.
If I can look on matters without Envy?
You may live here still.
I may live here Francisco?
Conditions? I would not understand
This Dialect.
With me, from Madam Estefania?
If you be Signior Francisco.
Slighted? I find my Father was not dead till now.
Crowd not you Jealous thoughts so thick into
My Brain, lest you do tempt me to an Act
Will forfeit all again.
This is Jacintas character [Reads]—Fail not to meet
As you timely will prevent the danger of my rape.
My soul! Estefania can instruct you all particulars—
My service to your Lady, say I shall obey her commands.
Is that an Inventory you peruse?
Fernando you must pardon me, ther's something
Of Essence to my life, exacts my care,
And person, I must leave you, we may seasonably
Confer of things at my return. Jacinta.
Tic clear I am neglected, he did name
Jacinta too, in triumph, and is gone,
Big with his glories to divide 'em there,
And laugh at what my constant love hath made me.
My heart is in a storm, and day grows black,
Ther's not a star in Heaven will lend a beam
To light me to my ruin. Felisarda!
That name is both my haven, and my shipwreck.
Excellent.
You'll give me now a general release
For all the sums I ow you?
Thou hast blessed me.
I was born to do you good; about it presently
Now you know where to ambush, away I say
And get comrads: Jacinta and my Mother
Is all the carriage, you may know the coach
By the old women's cough ere it come near you.
She has a desperate malice to one tooth left
Still in her gums, till she has shook that out;
You wo'not need a warning piece, farewell.
Farewell, why whats the matter? you shanot leave me;
Thy Mother wo'not know thee in a Vizard.
You must excuse me friend, I would Join w'ee
•the surprise, but that—
What I prithee?
I have extraordinary business, that concerns me
As near as life.
May not I know it? thou art going
To the Widow now, thy Mistress.
Tic a business of more consequence;
Dost think I would leave thee, and there were not
Such a necessity?
For what?
And there were no more Sisters in the World,
You must excuse me.
Nay, nay, we must not part, unless I know
This mystery, some reason why you leave me.
If you will needs know, there's a wench stays for me,
The toy I told thee on; farewell Alberto.
But will you leave such business and a friend?
Business? art thou a Gentleman &amp; vvouldst have
Me leave a Lady I haven't seen this three year
For business or a friend?
I must to her; if I had a heart
Ten Tun of Iron,
This Female Adamant would draw it to her,
I feel it going; I do tell thee Don,
There is no business so material
In nature as a wench, and if thou art my friend
Thou vvouldst leave my Sister now in such a cause
And bear me company, I must be drunk,
And she must pick my pocket too, that is
Another secret when we meet together
That never fails.
Why art thou desperate?
Dost not thou fear thy body?
A wench is Physic
My body has been used too, leave thy prating,
And let me take my course.
And you be so resolute—
I must give you one advice before you go;
When my Sister's in thy custody, observe
The time and place, and things convenient,
And stand not fooling about ceremonies
But put her to it.
Thou would not have me ravish her?
Yes but I would,
Shoe's no Sister of mine if she cry out
For such a business, she has more wit.
Was ever such a mad-cap.
I'll not pray for thee.
I sha'not prosper if thou dost.
Thy hand, Isle drink thy health, &amp; hang thy self.
Farewell.
You tell me wonders Madam, Don Ramyres
Dead, his Son Fernando disinherited,
And young Francisco made his heir?
I took
Franciscos word.
Tic strange.
Your stars smile on you.
Yet I much pity the poor Gentleman.
Busy your thought about your own, Francisco—
Hath promised not to fail?
He waits where he can easily observe
How soon the coast is clear to visit you.
So, so, thus hooded
The day cannot distinguish our two faces,
And for your voice, you know how to disguise it
By imitation of my cold and hoarseness,
And when you come to Church —
Let me alone, there l'l produce the Contract,
Which will surprise Don Pedro, and your Father,
To see me challenge him, I have prepared the Priest too,
Whose holy Eloquence may assist, how ever
This will give you opportunity to perfect
Your wishes with your servant, put the rest
To fate Jacinta.
I hear some approach, retire into my Closet.—
Jacinta. Jac. Sir.
Not thy voicerecover'd?
A violent cold—
Count Pedro must salute you ere we go.
Impute it to devotion, that I make
Such hast to be within thy arms,
One kiss and I shall carry with me
Another soul, and count with Joy the minutes
I am to expect this happiness.
Jacinta you follow with your Mother in the Coach;
My Lord I wait you. Ped. Ther's Heaven upon her lip.
He has kissed, and took his leave I hope.
I must owe all my happiness to you sweet Madam,
I had been lost without your art to help me.
Love wo'not leave his votaries.
I hear my Mothers cough, I ha'finish'd
And you must act your part:
Come are you ready Daughter? the Coach stays.
I attend
Don Pedro will cure your cold before the morn∣ing.
What duty Felisarda shall we pay
To Heaven for this last care of us?
Let not thy eyes,
Although thy grief become 'em, be in love
With tears, I Prophecy a joy shall weigh
Down all our sufferings, I see comfort break
Like day, whose forehead cheers the world; if Don
Fernando love thee, he is a Gentleman,
Confirmed in all that's honourable, and cannot
Forget whom his own virtue hath made choice
To shine upon.
Unless my Innocence,
Apt to believe a flattering tongue, see not
The Serpent couch, and hide his speckled breast
Among the flowers; but it were sin to think
He can dissemble, Father, and I know not,
Since I was first the object of his charity,
I find a pious gratitude disperse
Within my soul, and every thought of him
Engenders a warm sigh within me, which
Like curls of holy Incense overtake
Each other in my bosom, and enlarge
With their Embrace his sweet remembrance.
Cherish
Those thoughts, and where such noble worth invites,
Be bold to call it love.
It is too much
Ambition to hope he should be just
To me, or keep his honour, when I look on
The pale complexion of my wants; and yet
Unless he loves me dearly, I am lost,
And if he have but mocked me into faith,
He might as well have murdered me, for I
Shall have no heart to live, if his neglect
Deface what my affection printed there.
There is no fear of his revolt, lose not
His character. I must attend some business.
If Don Fernando visit thee, preserve
His fair opinion, and thou moist live
Above thy Uncles pity.
Will you leave me?
My stay shall not be long; the Garden will
With smiling flowers encourage thee to walk,
And raise thy drooping eyes, with hope to see
A spring like theirs, upon thee.
Why should I
Give any entertainment to my fears?
Suspicions are but like the shape of clouds,
And idle forms in the air, we make to fright us.
I will admit no jealous thought to wound
Fernandos truth, but with that cheerfulness,
My own first clear intents to honour him
Can arm me with, expect to meet his faith
As noble as he promised—Ha! tic he.
My poor heart trembles like a timorous leaf,
Which the wind shakes upon his sickly stalk,
And frights into a Palsy. Fer. Felisarda!
Shall I want fortitude to bid him welcome?
Sir, if you think there is a heart alive
That can be grateful, and with humble thoughts,
And Prayers reward your piety, despife not
The offer of it here; you have not cast
Your bounty on a Rock, while the seeds thrive
Where you did place your Charity; my joy
May seem ill dressed to come like sorrow thus,
But you may see through every tear, and find
My eyes meant Innocence, and your hearty welcome.
Who did prepare thee Felisarda thus
To entertain me weeping? sure our souls
Meet and converse, and we not know it; there is
Such beauty in that watery circle, I
Am fearful to come near, and breath a kiss
Upon thy cheek, lest I pollute that Crystal,
And yet I must salute thee, and I dare
With one warm sigh meet, and dry up this sorrow.
I shall forget all misery; for when
I look upon the World, and race of men,
I find 'em proud, and all so unacquainted
With pity to such miserable things
As poverty hath made us, that I must
Conclude you sent from Heaven.
Oh do not Flatter
Thy self poor Felisarda; I'm Mortal,
The life I bear about me is not mine,
But borrowed to come to thee once again,
And ere I go, to clear how much I love thee—
But first I have a story to deliver,
A tale will make thee sad, but I must tell it,
There is one dead that loved thee not.
One dead
That loved not me? this carries fir in nature
No killing sound; I shall be sad to know
I did deserve an Enemy, or he want
A Charity at death.
Thy cruel Enemy,
And my best friend, hath took Eternal leave
And's gone, to heaven I hope, excuse my tears,
It is a tribute I must pay his memory,
For I did love my Father.
Ha! your Father?
Yes Felisarda, he is gone, that in
The morning promised many years, but death
Hath in few hours made him as stiff, as all
The winds, and winter, had thrown cold upon him,
And whispered him to marble.
Now trust me,
My heart weeps for him, but I understand
Not how I was concerned in his displeasure;
And in such height as you profess.
He did
Command me on his blessing to forsake thee;
Was it not a cruel precept, to enforce
The soul, and curse his Son for honest love?
This is a wound indeed.
But not so mortal;
For his last breath was Balsam poured upon it,
By which he did reverse his malediction;
And I that groaned beneath the weight of that
Anathema, sunk almost to despair,
Where night and heavy shades hung round about me,
Found my self rising like the morning Star
To view the World.
Never I hope to be
Eclipsed again.
This was a welcome blessing.
Heaven had a care of both; my joys are mighty.
Vouchsafe me sir your pardon if I blush
And say I love, but rather than the peace
That should preserve your bosom, suffer for
My sake, it were better I were dead.
No, live.
And live for ever happy, thou deserved it.
It is Fernando doth make hast to sleep
In his forgotten dust.
Those accents did
Not sound so cheerfully.
dost love me?
Sir.
Do not, I prithee do not, I am lost,
Alas I am no more Fernando, there
Is nothing but the Empty name of him
That did betray thee, place a guard about
Thy heart be time, I am not worth this sweetness.
Did not Fernando speak all this? alas
He knew that I was poor before, and needed not
Despise me now for that.
Desert me goodness
When I upbraid thy wants. It is I am poor,
For I have not a stock in all the World
Of so much dust, as would contrive one narrow
Cabin to shroud a worm; my dying Father
Hath given away my Birthright to Francisco,
I'm disinherited, thrown out of all,
But the small Earth I borrow, thus to walk on;
And having nothing left, I come to kiss thee,
And take my everlasting leave of thee too.
Farewell, this will persuade thee to consent
To my Eternal absence.
I must beseech you stay a little sir,
And clear my faith. Hath your displeased Father
Deprived you then of all, and made Francisco
The Lord of your Inheritance, without hope
To be repaired in Fortune?
It is sad truth.
This is a happiness I did not look for.
A happiness?
Yes Sir, a happiness.
Can Felisarda take delight to hear
What hath undone her servant?
Heaven avert it.
But it is not worth my grief to be assured
That this will bring me nearer now to him
Whom I most honour of the World; and tic
My pride, if you exceed me not in Fortune,
That I can boast my heart, as high, and rich,
With noble flame, and every way your equal,
And if you be as poor as I Fernando,
I can deserve you now, and love you more
Than when your expectation carried all
The pride and blossoms of the spring upon it.
Those shadows will not feed more than our fancies;
Two poverties will keep but a thin table;
And while wee dream of this high nourishment,
Wee do but starve more gloriously.
It is ease.
And wealth first taught us art to surfeit by;
Nature is wise, not costly, and will spread
A table for us in the Wilderness;
And the kind Earth keep us alive, and healthful,
With what her bosom doth invite us to;
The brooks, not there suspected as the Wine
That sometime Princes quaff, are all transparent,
And with their pretty murmurs call to taste 'em.
In every tree a Chorister to sing
Health to our loves, our lives shall there be free
As the first knowledge was from sin, and all
Our dreams as Innocent.
Oh Felisarda?
If thou did own less Virtue, I might prove
Unkind and marry thee, but being so rich
In goodness, it becomes me not to bring
One that is poor, in every worth, to wast
So excellent a Dower, be free, and meet
One that hath Wealth to cherish it, I shall
Undo thee quite, but pray for me, as I,
That thou moist change for a more happy Bridegroom;
I dare as soon be guilty of my death,
As make thee miserable by expecting me.
Farewell, and do not wrong my soul, to think
That any storm could separate us two,
But that I have no fortune now to serve thee.
This will be no exception sir, I hope,
When wee are both dead, yet our bodies may
Be cold, and strangers in the Winding sheet;
We shall be married when our spirits meets.
Your daughter does not use me well Don Carlos.
I know not what to think,
Some great misfortune must be the cause.
Not yet appear? they might,
And they had crept like Tortoises, Arrived
Before this time.
There is some strange disaster.
The Coach orethrown, and both their lives
Endangered, can but excuse'm.
Oh my Lord, Don Carlos.
The Tragic voice of women strikes mine ear.
Alsimira?
Madam.
Where is our Daughter?
My fear almost distracts me, she is gone,
Stolen, ravished from me.
Ha.
An armed Troop
In Visards forced her from my coach; and heaven
Knows where they have hurried the poor Jacinta.
A troop of armed Devils.
Let them be
A legion, they are all damned.
Nay they were men and mortal sure.
I w'on'ot leave one soul amongst them all.
Mine is in torment.
I'th'hope &amp; height of my ambition
To be thus crossed! how escaped you?
Alas I was not young enough, I offered
My self to bear her company, and suffer
As much as she did, but one boisterous fellow
With a starched voice, and a worse vizard, took me
Just here above my Sciatica, and quoited me
Into the coach •gen upon my head,
I had alarm in it for half an hour,
And so I escaped with life.
Did they use her with any rigour?
To say truth they were gentle enough to her.
That mollifies. and they may live.
Hell overtake 'em, lets return, they had better
Committed incest, than this rape.
They had better ravished Proserpine before
Don Lucifer's own face. I am all fury.
Pardon my de•r Jacinta, It was love
That threw me on this act, I had no patience
To see thee forced into a marriage
By a covetous Father, whose devotion
Is only Wealth and Title; I esteem
No danger, if at last the fair Jacinta
Smile and allow this duty; let not silence
Deprive me longer of thy voice, whose every
Accent will please, though it pronounce my sentence;
There's death in this Eclipse too, sweet dismiss
Thy ungentle veil, and let thy eyes make bright
This melancholy air, that droops and dies
For want of thy restoring beams.
Now sir,
What think you of your Mistress?
You are the Lady Estefania I take it.
Yes, you did take me from the coach
But by a consequence I find, you thought
Jacinta in your power, I could have told you,
Had you discovered sooner what you were,
Where to have found your Mistress, but shoe's now
Above your hope, and by the priest ere this
Made wife to Don Francisco.
To Don Pedro?
It was not fir impossible that I
(Had not your violence prevented me)
(By a plot between Jacinta and my self,
To take her place and person in the coach)
Had by this time been married to Count Pedro,
Whom I have power and Justice sir to challenge
If Contracts carry weight.
Have I so long
Ly'n beating at the bush, and is the bird
Fled to Francisco?
I should show I had
A passion sir, and sense of this captivity,
But that I find it was error, and not will
Lead you to this; and your own loss now made
Irreparable, helps to tie up my anger.
Madam, I must confess a wrong, and dare
Submit to let your anger punish me,
For I despise my self, now I have lost
My expectation, and if you please
To think I had no malice in this act
To you, You can propose no satisfaction
I shall esteem a penance to repair you,
As far as my poor life, if you'll direct it.
It is nobly promised sir. You shall redeem
In my thoughts what is past, if you be pleased
To make my stay no longer here; I have
No desperate aim to make Don Pedro yet
Know how to right me, or make public what
Should bind his honour to perform.
Was not Luys Madam entertained your Servant?
I shall make known the story if you walk
But to Don Carlos House.
You shall command me.
No news yet of Jacinta?
None.
He must
Not live in Spain, nor in the World, if my
Revenge can overtake him, that has stolen
My Daughter; could you not by voice or habit
Guess at the ravisher? Ye are traitors all.
Now I consider better, I suspect
Alberto one of the conspiracy,
Some voice did sound like his. You know he loved her.
Ha! Alberto?
And how he might engage some Ruffians
To cross Don Pedro.
It was he, whore's Luys?
I do not like his absence, thei'r both guilty;
My own blood turned a rebel? send for the Alcaides,
They shall both trot like thieves to the Corregidor.
Where is Count Pedro?
Gon in search of his lost Mistress.
When all things were ripe,
The very Priest prepared to seal our Joys,
A work my brain did labour for, and sweat
With hope to see accomplished, undermined?
And in a Minute all blown up?
Have patience
She may be found again.
But how my Lord
May be inclined to accept her foiled, or wounded
In fame—
Luys is here.
Borachio, here's a spectacle! more affliction?
Where is your Sister, whats become of Jacinta?
My Sister and Jacinta are gone together.
I know all the business.
Where is she?
She is very well, I know not where she is.
But Don Alberto is an honest Gentleman,
And has by this time done the feat.
Confusion—
You think you had all the wit, it was my plot.
You may thank heaven that you are old, and ugly,
You had been no Mother of this World. But sir,
I have some news would be delivered privately.
Mother of mine, avaunt.
You are not my Son.
Was ever man so miserable? away
Thou sponge; get him to sleeep,
I dare not meddle with him.
In sobriety a word. Car. Where is Alberto?
Where every honest man should be abed, with 〈◊〉,
Old man, I ha'consider'd of the former matter we talked on
And would do things like a dutiful son, but I find that a
Wife is not altogether so convenient for me as a—
Will none deliver me?
They are somewhat slug,
Now I have found out an excellent tumbler,
That can do the Somerset, please you to be acquainted with her, and give me your opinion, She shall play with all the stews in Christendom, for all you are worth, if I live, and yet she is but 17 there's a peri∣winkle, I had a Gemini, before I went to travel, And I am bound in conscience, if you think fit, to see her well Provided for—
With whips, i'll have her skin flayed off.
Her skin fled off? dost thou know mortal man
What thou hast said? I tel the Don, nothing can come near
Her in the shape of an Officer, she is a very Basilic &amp; will
Kill em with her eyes 3 score yards point blank, but you
May talk, &amp; do your pleasure with her, for I came a
Purpose to bring her to your lodging, if you love me,
Do but see her, it shall cost you nothing, you shall
Be my friend, hang money?
Thus will my state consume, vexation!
What shall I do? when you have slept Luys
I'll tell you more, attend him to his Chamber
And make his Door fast.
You will consider on it, upon those terms, I will go
Sleep at vvinckling.
And vvo'not all this take a way my senses?
My Son is loft too, this is all a curse
For my ambition and my Avarice.
News Don Carlos from our Daughter.
Ha, a Lottery it is Iacintas hand.
Knovv'st where she is?
Yes Madam, and her resolution
•o attend her Father, with my Master Don Prancisco
•f Don Carlos please to admit 'em, the matters done.
What matter?
They are as fast as any Priest can make em.
Wife to Francisco, now his Fathers heir?
That's some allay, if it be true, she writes,
Don Pedro was contracted to Estefania, who supplied
Her person in the Coach—it was not Jacinta was ravished
Then, Don Pedro was not noble, after he had made faith,
To entangle my Iacinta. Hum, say they shall
Be welcome. Ser. They are present fir.
I am nor yet collected, but'if this
Paper be justified, I receive you both.
Peruse those wonders Alsimira.
Sir, though by the tie of nature you may chal∣lenge
All duty, this is done so like a Father
It exceeds all your care.
Let this confirm,
I bring a fortune not to be despised,
But were I Master of the World, I should
At price of all my wealth, thiuk this a treasure
Purchased too cheap.
My blessing and my prayers, I'm new created,
And bow to that great providence; all Joy
Spread through your souls; this is not much amiss.
But what's become of Madam Estefania
That took Iacintas place?
Forced from the Coach
By Don Alberto, thinking her my Daughter
That part of our plot failed, but my intents
Were fair, and to assist this injured Lady
Don Pedro sir.
You shall for some few minutes.
Withdraw into that Chamber, in his passion
He may be violent, leave me to moderate.
I shall obey you fir.
Was ever man of my great birth and fortune
Affronted thus? I am become the talk
Of every Picaro and Ladron, I challenge
A reparation of my honour; whore's
Jacinta? tic a plot, a base contrivement
To make my name ridiculous, the subject
Of every scurrill language.
My Lord with pardon
Of your Altesa, you're not Injured here,
Unless I have been faulty in too much
Observance, and desires to serve your person,
With almost sacrifice of my Daughter.
Ha! too much to me?
I would you had remembered
How much your Honour was engaged before,
By Contract to another, when you mocked
The Innocent Jacinta, now not mine.
Who hath traduced my fame, or mentioned me
With that dishonour? I disclaim all Contracts.
The unconfined Aire's not more free, than I
To all the World, except your beauteous Daughter.
Do you know the Lady Estefania?
Dares she make saucy claim? my breath dis∣solves it
If every Lady whom we grace with our
Converse should, challenge men of my Nobility—
I wish my Lord you could evade it, for
The honour of my Family; if your conscience
Or Art can nullify that Ladies sinterest
I am resolved—my Son Luys shall
Then marry With that Widow, I have no other
Ambition.
You are wise, and I
Am fortified to clear my self thought-free
From any promise to that sullen Madam.
Ha! tic Jacinta, and she wears the Jewel
I did present, conspicuously; I ask
No reasor for thy absence, let me chain
My darling in this amorous curl, tic happiness
Enough to repossess thee, not the policy
And power of Hell shall separate us again.
It is but Justice sir. Ped. Ha! Estefania.
Do you know her sir?
Do you know this character? Ped. Conspiracy.
When this is read Don Carlos
You will imagine he has wronged your Daughter.
Is this your hand Count Pedro?
Mine—tic counterfeit
Upon my honour, and I thus dissolve
Thy insolent claim.
Nothing can bind I see
A false heart
This must give you freedom Madam,
If you release his hasty vow.
Faith cannot
Be compelled sir.
These are all Impostures;
I take my self into my self.
What shall become of her my noble Count?
I pity her
But cannot cure her wound, and if you be
Her friend, advise her to contain her passions,
And wisely love one that can entertain it.
You hear this Madam?
And can smile upon
His viol ated fath.
Now for Luys,
To strike in with the Widow.
Hae's a sleep.
Isle wake and quicken him.
Had thou bin worth my love, I should have held
Thee worth my anger shadow, of a Lord.
Thy greatness I despise, and think thee now
Too poor for my revenge, and freely give
Thee back thy barren promises, and when
I read in story, one that has been perjured,
I'll write Don Pearo in the place of him
That broke his faith, and thank my fate to have mist thee.
If you please Madam, while he is in the humour
Of being base, I'll make him gather up
These paper relics, which he shall make him self
Up into rolls, and having swallowed 'em
For Pills, thank you, his Physic was so gentle.
It will be too much time &amp; breath lost on him.
It will become me Madam to attend you.
So, she is taken off' and my path free
To Carlos Daughter.
Contracted to Don Pedro? say.
She was, where is Estefania?
Gone with Alberto; proud to wait upon
The Lady I neglected.
Follow 'em Luys?
I do not like he should insinuate
Now she is free, and his hopes desperate in
Jacintas love. Luys How long have I slept sir?
Thou dost dream still, pursue the Widow now
Or never look at such a fortune.
Is she gone with Alberto? what if I say,
I have lain with her, and that shoe's with child by me?
That would stain both your fems; away and welcome
When thou return, and she confirmed.
Isle confirm her, or confound somebody,
No more, I am awake, this is Don Pedro
I'll talk with him first, will you justify,
The Widow is a Widow still, and sweet
For all your Contract, that you have not been
My rival as they say after the flesh,
And that you did not know I had a mind,
Or not a mind, to do the deed of Matrimony?
Not I upon my honour.
You are witness—now to Albert.
Manage the business temperatly.
Let me alone to be temperate, if I do not cousin
Some body, let me never drink Sack again.
What think you of Jacinta now my Lord?
As on the Saint I pay my chief devotions.
I come to seek one, that I late called Brother,
But he hath forfeted that Name, and Justice
Weary of such a prodigy in nature
Hath armed me thus in her revenge, Don Carlos,
Obscure him not, no darkness can protect him,
My sword shall forage every room like lightning,
No Cave but it shall visit, and through ribs
Of steel compel my passage to his heart,
Although I meet him in his Mistr is Arms,
The lovers Sanctuary, I dare force Francisco,
And with my Sword cut the Embrace that chains him,
Rather then he shall glory in my ruins,
And revel out, those honours, with her, he
Took from my blood.
It shall not need Fernando.
Hum, here is like to be a bloody business,
I'll not disturb 'em.
As you are Brothers, by your Fathers dust
That should sleep quiet in his Urn, by her
Dear name that gave you life, that now prays for you,
Chide this unnatural fury.
What demands Fernando?
My inheritance wrought from me
By thy sly creeping to supplant my birth,
And cheat our Fathers easy soul, unvvorthily
Betraying to his anger for thy lust
Of wealth, the love and promise of two hearts,
Poor Felisarda and Fernando now
Wither at soul, and robed by thee of that
Should cherish virtue, like to rifled Pilgrims
Met on the way, and having told their story,
And dropped their even tears for both their loss,
Wander from one another.
Tic not sure
but his passion (that obeys not
The counsel of his reason) would accuse me,
And if my Father now, since spirits lose not
Intelligence, but more active when they have
Shook off their chains of flesh, would leave his dwell∣ling,
And visit this course orb again: my Innocence
Should dare the appeal, and make Fernando see
His empty accusations.
He that thrives
By wicked art, has confidence to dress
His action with simplicity, and shapes
To cheat our credulous natures, tic my wonder
Thou durst do so much injury Francisco
As must provoke my Justice, to revenge,
Yet wear no Sword.
I need no guard, I know
Thou dare not kill me.
Dare I not?
And name thy cause, tic thy suspicion not Fran∣ciso
Hath wrought thee high and passionate, to assure it,
If you dare violate, I dare possess you
Wit hall my title to your Land.
How is that?
Will you resign the interest to such
A fair Estate, and wrong my Daughter sir?
Let him receive it at his peril.
Ha!
It was my Fathers act, not mine, he trembled
To hear his curse alive, what horror will
His conscience feel, when he shall spurn his dust,
And call the reverend shade from his blessed seat,
To this bad World again, to walk and fright him?
I am abused
Can this be more than dream?
Sir you may cancel it, but think withal
How you can answer him that's dead, when he
Shall charge your timorous soul for this contempt
To nature and Religion, to break
His last bequest, and breath, that sealed your blessings?
These are fine fancies.
Here, and may it prosper,
Where my good Father meant it, I'm overcome.
Forgive me, and enjoy it, I may find
Some Earth that is not thine, where I may die
And take up a dark Chamber, love Jacinta,
And while I seek out where to be forgotten
Live happy, and divide the spring between you,
So, so, ell's well again.
Fernando stay.
Ha, my Father and Felisarda?
Don Ramyres and my Niece?
Are they both dead?
I dare kneel too, they do converse. Don Carlos
Do not you know that shape? it is wondrous like
Your Niece.
And that your Father, ha!
How long hath Felisarda been a sad
Companion to the shades? I did not think
To find thee in this pale society,
Of ghosts so soon.
I am alive Fernando,
And Don Ramires still, thy living Father.
You may believe it sir, I was of the counsel.
It is a joy will tempt me, wish to live
Here, without more ambition to change
For blessings of the other World; and is
My Father willing that wee both should live?
Men thought you dead.
It lay within the knowledge of Francisco and some few
By this device to advance my younger Son
To a Marriage with Jacinta sir, and try
Fernando's Piety and his Mistress Virtue,
Which I have found worth him, and my acceptance,
With her I give thee what thy birth did challenge.
Receive thy Felisarda.
It is a joy,
So flowing, it drowns all my faculties,
My soul will not contain I fear, but lose
And leave me in this ecstasy.
I am cheated.
Not so, what dower you add above that fortune,
Descends upon her by your Sisters Legacy
Francisco shall deserve, with a proportion
Out of my state; live, and be happy both,
You shall not want a Father in my care.
Our children thus increased Don Carlos, it is
Our shame if we neglect 'em; Teodore
You now may call me Brother.
I'm honoured.
Well, take my blessing too, love her Francisco.
My bounty is to come, and if my Son
But finish with his Mistress—hoe's returned,
Where is the Widow?
Sure enough.
And Don Alberto.
I ha made him sure too, I ha peppered him.
How?
In your ear, I ha cut his throat, do none pursue
I hope thou hast not killed him? ha!
You hope to late, I could not help it, you said
He was my Rival.
Not to loud.
Where, where shall I obscure me, the Alcaides
Will be here presently, and search for me.
I left him giving up the ghost, at a cranny
I made into his side, through which a man
Might see into his midriff.
Art thou desperate?
Beside one window that did look into his lungs,
From whence his wind came strong enough,
In six hours sail to dispatch a Carrack to the straights.
I'm mad.
I should neglect my life, but it would not sound well
With your honour that Don Carlos Son was hanged,
Or put into the Galleys; are they not come yet?
I am undone, there is no safety here,
Make fast those doors, and by the Postern gate
Thou moist escape, take the best Horse, away.
I shall want money sir.
Come follow me?
This accident I fear will quite distract me.
You must dispatch me quickly sir, there is
No staying to tell the money, gee't me in lump,
I'll count it afterwards, good sir make hast.
Something hath happened that doth fresh
Perplex him.
Where is Don Pedro?
Hoe's here.
The storm is over sure, I hear no noise,
Toledos are asleep, Jacinta? have
I found my love?
Here it was lost indeed,
I must allow no such Familiarity
With my Wife.
How? married?
It is most true my Lord.
You have not used me thus?
It had been Impious to divorce your heart
From Estefania; My good Lord, wee know
Your Lordship is religious in your promises.
I defy all Estefanias, Lady you are civil.
It will become my care so to preserve her
My Honourable Count.
Honourable?
It appears not by these contempts.
Your Lordship cannot want a Female Furniture.
I must have some body now I'm prepared, my blood
Will take itill, would I had Estefaenia;
Shoe's here, Madam I hope you have
A better faith than to believe I was in Earnest,
Don Pedro is only at your service.
It is too late sir, this Gent. is witness,
Of your surrender, and is now possessed
Of all that's mine.
It was your Noble bounty,
For which I cannot study a return
More apt than to resign to your good Lordship,
My Interest in Jacinta, give you joy Count.
Such a rich Widow serves my turn.
So so,
If I consider well this is but Justice.
Ha, are not you Don Alberto: fetch back Luys.
The very same sir, and this Lady is my Wife,
Please you salute her.
Sir for the credit of your wisdom talk not,
The man you see's alive and married too,
With my consent, alas I owed him money,
That Widow has paid all, I must be honest,
I had no heart to leave you so unsatisfied,
These sums must go for other debts,
My debts do clog my conscience, and are better
W〈…〉 are timely paid sir, then let run
With their •o•g Teeth to bite your state hereafter,
A〈…〉 when I am free you dare but trust me—
Was ever Father cheated thus, come hither,
H〈…〉 thou be so impudent?
〈…〉 cannot help it sir, unless you dye
〈…〉 me better means, I shall make bold
〈…〉 devices, you are my Father sir,
〈…〉 bound—
To cousin me?
All must be mine, and if
〈…〉 self a little before the day,
〈…〉 be no loser when you come to reckon,
〈◊〉 •haven't make a breach twixt you and I,
They are honest men I ow this money too,
When I am clear prescribe me any method
And rank me like your son, I will deserve
Y… shall forget my wildness, and acknowledge me
A convert without blemish to your family.
I must be Intercessor.
And we all.
I'll think upon it.
Since I cannot have Jacinta, I desire
I may have her Brother.
Not in marriage.
I like his wit, his spirit, and his humour,
D• not you love a wench?
Yes sir.
Thou shall it never want.
Wenches?
We'll live together, and if thy Father
Be n•t bountiful, thou shalt command my fortune.
You speak nobly.
Ladies, I ask your pardon
Unless you hold me desperate, disdain not
That I may this day wait upon your triumph,
And to each Bride offer some gift to expiate
My folly and offence.
You are too bountiful.
You're all my guests to day.
I beg your next
Remove may place the Scen of Joy with me,
My house shall be much honoured, lead the way
With Verse and Wine let Poets crown this day.
SO so, your dangers over, and the state
Secure, as when our Fleet in Eighty Eight
Was fired and scattered, to confirm it true
Here is Don Pedro taken Prisoner too,
I'm at your mercy Gentlemen, and I
Confess without a rack conspiracy,
So far as my poor part in the Play comes too,
But I am innocent from hurt to you,
And I dare quit the rest from any plot
Meant but to please, if you believe it not
I dare make oath, your hands can do no less
Than certify your friends what I confess.

THe Cardinal, cause we express no scene,
We doe believe most of you Gentlemen
Are at this hour in France, and busy there,
Though you vouchsafe to lend your bodies here;
But keep your fancy active, till you know
By the progress of our Play, it is nothing so;
A Poets art is to lead on your thought
Through subtle paths and workings of a plot,
And where your expectation does not thrive,
If things fall better, yet you may forgive;
I will say nothing positive, you may
Think what you please, we call it but a Play,
Whether the comic Muse, or Ladies love,
Romance, or direful Tragedy it prove,
The Bill determines not; and would you be
Persuaded, I would have it a Comedy,
For all the purple in the name, and state
Of him that owns it; but it is left to fate;
Yet I will tell you ever you see it plaid,
What the Author, and he blushed too, when he said
(Comparing with his own for 't had been pride
He thought, to build his wit a Pyramid.
Upon another wounded Fame,) this Play
Might rival with his best, and dared to say
Troth I am out; he said no more; you then,
When'ts done, may say your pleasures Gentlemen.
WHo is that?
The Duchess Secretary.
Signior.
Your Lordships Servant.
How does her Grace since she left her mourning
For the young Duke Mendoza, whose timeless death
At Sea, left her a Virgin and a Widow?
Shoe's now inclining to a second Bride,
When is the day of mighty marriage
To our great Cardinals Nephew, Don Columbo?
When they agree; they wo'not steal to Church,
I guess the ceremonies will be loud, and public.
Your Lordships will excuse me.
When they agree? alas poor Lady, she
Dotes not upon Columbo, when she thinks
Of the young Count D'Alvarez, divorced from her
By the Kings power.
And Counsel of the Cardinal to advance
His Nephew to the Duchess bed; it is not well.
Take heed, the Cardinal holds intelligence
With every bird in the air.
Death on his purple pride,
He governs all, and yet, Columbo is
A gallant Gentleman.
The darling of the War, whom Victory
Hath often courted; a man of daring
And most exalted spirit, pride in him
Dwells like an ornament, where so much honour
Secures his praise.
This is no argument
He should usurp, and wear Alvarez title
To the fair Duchess, men of coarser blood
Would not so tamely give this treasure up.
Although Columbos name is great in war,
Whose glorious art and practice is above
The greatness of Alvarez, yet he cannot
Want soul, in whom alone survives the virtue
Of many noble Ancestors, being the last
Of his great family
It is not safe, you'll say, to wrestle with the King.
More danger if the Cardinal be displeased,
Who sits at helm of State; Count D' Alvarez
Is wiser to obey the stream, than by
Insisting on his privilege to her love,
Put both their fate upon a storm.
If Wisdom, not inborn Fear make him compose,
I like it; how does the Duchess bear herself?
She moves by the rapture of another wheel
That must be obeyed, like some sad passenger,
That looks upon the coast his wishes fly to,
But is transported by an adverse wind, sometimes
A churlish Pilot.
She has a sweet and noble nature.
That commend; Alvarez, Hymen cannot tie
A knot of two more equal hearts and blood.
Alphonso?
My good Lord.
What great affair
Hath brought you from the confines?
Such as will
Be worth your counsels, when the King hath read
My Letters from the Governor; the Arragonians,
Violating their confederate oath and league,
Are now in arms; they have not yet marched towards us,
But it is not safe to expect if we may timely
Prevent Invasion
Dare they be so insolent?
This storm I did foresee.
What have they, but the sweetness of the King,
To make a crime?
But how appears the Cardinal
At this news?
Not pale, although
He knows they have no cause to think him innocent,
As by whose Counsel they were once surprised.
There is more
Than all our present art can fathom in
This story, and I fear I may conclude,
This flame has breath at home to cherish it;
Ther's treason in some hearts, whose faces are
Smooth to the State.
My Lords, I take my leave.
Your friends good Captain.
Sweet Madam be less thoughtful, this obedience
To passion, will destroy the noblest frame
Of beauty that this Kingdom ever boasted.
This sadness might become your other habit,
And ceremonious black for him that died;
???he times of sorrow are expired, and all
???he joys that wait upon the Court, your birth,
???nd a new Hymen that is coming towards you,
???nvite a change.
Ladies, I thank you both,
??? pray excuse a little melancholy
???hat is behind, my year of mourning hath not
???o cleared my account with sorrow, but there may
???ome dark thoughts stay, with sad reflections,
Upon my heart for him I lost; even this
New dress, and smiling garment, meant to show
A peace concluded twixt my grief and me,
Is but a sad remembrance: but I resolve
???o entertain more pleasing thoughts, and if
You wish me heartily to smile, you must
Not mention grief, not in advice to leave it;
Such Counsels open but afresh the wounds
Ye would close up; and keep alive the cause,
Whose bleeding you would cure; lets talk of something
That may delight; you two are read in all
The Histories of our Court; tell me Valerie,
Who has thy vote for the most handsome man?
Thus I must counterfeit a peace, when all
Within me is at mutiny.
I have examined
All that are Candidates for the praise of Ladies.
But find???may I speak boldly to your Grace?
And will you not return it in your mirth,
To make me blush?
No, no; speak freely.
I wo'not rack your patience Madam, but
Were I a Princess, I should think Count D' Alvarez
Had sweetness to deserve me from the world.
Alvarez! shoe's a spy upon my heart.
Hoe's young, and active, and composed most sweet???lie.
I have seen a face more tempting.
It had then
Too much of woman in it, his eyes speak movingly
Which may excuse his voice, and lead away
All female pride his captive; His hair Black,
Which naturally falling into curl's???
Prithee no more, thou art in love with him.
The man in your esteem Celinda now?
Alvarez is (I must confess) a Gentleman
Of handsome composition, but with
His mind (the greater excellence) I think
Another may delight a Lady more,
If man be well considered, that's Columbo,
Now, Madam, voted to be yours.
My Torment!
She affects him not.
He has person, and a bravery beyond
All men that I observe.
He is a Soldier,
A rough-hewn man, and may show well at distance;
His talk will fright a Lady; War, and grim-
Fac'd-honor are his Mistresses; he raves
To hear a Lute; Love meant him not his Priest.
Again your pardon Madam; we may talk,
But you have art to choose and crown affection.
What is it to be born above these Ladies
And want their freedom? they are not constrained,
Nor slaved by their own greatness, or the Kings;
But let their free hearts look abroad, and choose
By their own eyes to love; I must repair
My poor afflicted bosom, and assume
The privilege I was born with; which now prompts me
To tell the King he hath no power nor art
To steer a Lovers Soul.
What says Count D'Alvares?
Madam he will attend you.
Wait you as I directed, when he comes
Acquaint me privately.
Madam, I have news,
It is now arrived the Court, we shall have wars.
I find an Army here of killing thoughts.
The King has chosen Don Columbo General,
Who is immediately to take his leave.
What flood is let into my heart! how far
Is he to go?
To Arragon.
That's well
At first, he should not want a pilgrimage
To the unknown World, if my thoughts might convey him.
Tic not impossible he may go thither.
How?
To the unknown other World, he goes to fight,
That's in his way, such stories are in nature.
Conceal this news.
He wo'not be long absent;
The affair will make him swift to kiss your Graces hand.
He cannot fly
With too much wing to take his leave; I must
Be admitted to your conference; ye have
Enlarged my spirits, they shall droop no more.
We are happy, if we may advance one thought
To your Graces pleasure.
Your ey before was in eclipse, these smiles
Become you Madam.
I have not skill to contain my self.
The Cardinals Nephew, Madam, Don Columbo.
Already? attend him.
Shall we take our leave?
He shall not know Valerie how you praised him.
If He did, Madam, I should have the confidence
To tell him my free thoughts.
My Lord, while I'm in study to requite
The Favour you have done me, you increase
My debt to such a sum, still by a new honouring
Your servant, I despair of my own freedom.
Madam, he kisses your white hand, that must
Not surfeit in this happiness???and Ladies,
I take your smiles for my encouragement:
I have not long to practise these Court t???cticks.
He has been taught to kiss.
Ther's something, Sir,
Upon your brow I did not read before.
Does the Character please you Madam?
More,
Because it speaks you cheerful.
It is for such
Access of honour, as must make Columbo
Worth all your love; the King is pleased to think
Me fit to lead his Army.
How, an Army?
We must not use the Priest, till I bring home
Another triumph, that now stays for me
To reap it in the purple field of glory.
But do you mean to leave me, and expose
Your self to the devouring war? no enemy
Should Divide us; the King is not so cruel.
The King is honourable, and this grace
More answers my ambition, than his gift
Of thee, and all thy beauty, which I can
Love, as becomes thy Soldier, and fight
To come again, a conqueror of thee;
Then I must chide this fondness.
Madam, the King, and my Lord Cardinal.
Madam, I come to call a Servant from you,
And strengthen his excuse; the public cause
Will plead for your consent; at his return
Your marriage shall receive triumphant ceremonies;
Till then you must dispense.
She appears sad
To part with him, I like it fairly Nephew.
Is not the General a gallant man?
What Lady would deny him a small curtsy?
Thou hast converted me, and I begin
To wish it were no sin.
Leave that to narrow Consciences.
????????? pleasant.
But ????????? would please one better. Do such men
Lie with their Pages?
Would thou make a shift?
He is going to a bloody business;
It is pity he should dye without some heir;
That Lady were hard-hearted now that would
Not help posterity, for the mere good
Of the King and Common-wealth.
Thou art wild, we may be observed.
Your will must guide me, happiness and conquest
Be ever waiting on his sword.
Farewell.
Pray give leave to examine a few thoughts;
Expect me in the Garden.
We attend.
This is above all expectation happy;
Forgive me virtue that I have dissembled,
And witness with me, I have not a thought
To tempt or to berray him, but secure
The promise I first made to love and honour.
The Count D' Alvarez Madam.
Admit him.
And let none enterrupt us; how shall I
Behave my looks? the guilt of my neglect,
Which had no seal from hence, will call up blood
To write upon my cheeks the shame and story
In some red Letter.
Madam, I present
One that was glad to obey your Grace, and come
To know what your commands are.
Where I once
Did promise love, a love that had the Power
And office of a Priest to chain my heart
To yours, it were injustice to command.
But I can look upon you Madam, as
Becomes a servant, with as much humility,
(In tenderness of your honour and great fortune,)
Give up, when you call back your bounty, all that
Was mine, as I had pride to think them favours.
Hath love taught thee no more assurance in
Our mutual vows, thou can suspect it possible,
I should revoke a promise made to heaven
And thee so soon? this must arise from some
Distrust of thy own Faith.
Your Graces pardon
To speak with freedom, I am not so old
In cunning to betray, nor young in time
Not to see when, and where I am at loss,
And how to bear my fortune, and my wounds,
Which if I look for health must still bleed inward,
(A hard and desperate condition;)
I am not ignorant your birth and greatness,
Have placed you to grow up with the Kings grace,
And jealousy, which to remove, his power
Hath chosen a fit object for your beauty
To shine upon, Columbo his great fvavorite;
I am a man, on whom but late the King
Has pleased to cast a beam, which was not meant
To make me proud, but wisely to direct,
And light me to my safety. Oh, Dear Madam!
I will not call more witness of my love
(If you will let me still give it that name)
Than this, that I dare make my self a loser,
And to your will give all my blessings up;
Preserve your greatness and forget a trifle,
That shall at best when you have drawn me up,
But hang about you like a cloud, and dim
The glories you are born to.
Misery
Of birth and state! that I could shift into
A meaner blood, or find some art to purge
That part which makes my veins unequal; yet
Those nice distinctions have no place in us,
Ther's but a shadow difference, a title,
Thy stock partakes as much of noble sap
As that which feeds the root of Kings, and he
That writes a Lord, hath all the essence of
Nobility.
It is not a name that makes
Our separation, the Kings displeasure
Hangs a portent to fright us, and the matter
That feeds this exhalation is the Cardinals
Plot to advance his Nephew; then Columbo,
A man made up for some prodigious Act,
Is fit to be considered; in all three
There is no character you fix upon
But has a form of ruin to us both.
Then you do look on these with fear.
With eyes
That should think tears a duty to lament
Your least unkind fate; but my youth dares boldly
Meet all the tyranny of the stars, whose black
Malevolence but shoot my single tragedy;
You are above the value of many worlds
Peopled with such as I am.
????????? if Columbo
Engaged to war, in his hot thirst of honour,
Find out the Way to death?
Tic possible.
Or say, no matter by what art or mo tive
He gives his title up, and leave me to
My own Election?
If I then be happy
To have a name within your thought, there can
Be nothing left to crown me with New blessing;
But I dream thus of heaven, and wake to find
My amorous soul a mockery; when the Priest
Shall tie you to another, and the joys
Of marriage leave no thought at leisure to
Look ba???k upon Alvarez, that must wither
For loss of you, yet then I cannot lose
So much of what I was, once in your favour,
But in a sigh pray still you may live happy.
My Heart is in a mist, some good star smile
Upon my resolution, and direct
Two lovers in their chaste embrace to meet;
Columbo's bed contains my winding sheet.
I See no face in all this Council, that
Hath one pale fear upon it though we arrived not
So timely to secure the Town, which gives
Our enemy such triumph.
It was betrayed
The wealth of that one City
Will make the enemy glorious.
They dare not plunder it.
They give fair quarter yet,
They only seal up men's Estates, and keep
Possession for the Cities use, they take up
Now wares without security, and he
Whose single credit will not pass, puts in
Two lean comrades, upon whose bonds tic not
Religion to deny 'em.
To repair this
With honour Gentlemen?
My opinion is
To expect a while.
Your reason?
Till their own
Surfeit betray 'em, for their Soldier
Bred up with coarse and common bread, will show
Such appetites on the rich cates they find,
They will spare our swords a victory, when their own
Riot and Luxury destroys 'em.
That
Will show our patience too like a fear.
With favour of his excellence I think,
The spoil of Cities takes not off the courage,
But doubles it on Soldiers; besides,
While we have tameness to expect, the noise
Of their success and plenty will increase
Their Army.
It is considerable, we do not
Exceed in Foot or Horse, our Muster not
'Bove sixteen thousand both; and the Infantry
Raw, and not disciplined to act.
Their hearts,
But with a brave thought of their Countries honour,
Will teach 'em how to fight, had they not seen
A Sword; but we decline our own too much,
The men are forward in their arms, and take
The use with Avarice of Fame.
Colonel.
I do suspect you are a coward.
Sir.
Or else a traitor, take your choice, no more,
I called you to a Council Sir, of war,
Yet keep your place.
I have worn other names.
Deserve 'em, such
Another were enough to unsoul an Army;
Ignobly talk of patience till they drink
And reel to death? we came to fight and force 'em
To mend their pace; thou hast no honour in thee,
Not enough noble blood to make a blush
For thy tame Eloquence.
My Lord, I know
My duty to a General, yet there are
Some that have known me here; Sir, I desire
To quit my regiment.
You shall have licence. Ink and paper???
The General's displeased.
How is it Hernando?
The General has found out employment for me,
He is writing Letters back.
To his Mistress.
Pray do not trouble me, yet prithee speak,
And flatter not thy friend, dost think I dare
Not draw my sword, and use it, when cause
With honour calls to action?
With the most valiant man alive.
You'll do me some displeasure in your loves,
Pray to your places.
So,
Bear those Letters to the King,
It speaks my resolution before
Another Sun decline to charge the enemy.
A pretty Court way
Of di missing an Officer, I obey; success
Attend your Counsels.
If here be any dare not look on danger,
And meet it like a man with scorn of death,
I beg his absence, and a cowards fear
Consume him to a ghost.
None such here.
Or if in all your Regiments you find
One man that does not ask to bleed with honour,
Give him a double pay to leave the Army;
Ther's service to be done, will call the spirits
And aid of Men.
You give us all new flame.
I am confirmed, and you must lose no time;
The Soldier that was took last night, to me
Discovered their whole strength, and that we have
A party in the town; the River that
Opens the City to the West unguarded;
We must this night use art and resolutions,
We cannot fall ingloriously.
That voice is every mans.
What now?
Letters.
Whence?
From the Duchess.
They are welcome;
Meet at my Tent again this evening; yet stay,
Some Wine???The Duchess health???
See it go round.
It wo'not please his Excellence.
The Duchess health.
To me! more wine.
The Clouds are gathering, and his eyes shoot fire;
Observe what thunder follows.
The General has but ill news, I suspect
The Duchess sick, or else the King.
May be the Cardinal.
His soul has long been looked for.
She dares not be so infolent! it is
The Duchess hand; how am I shrunk in Fame
TO be thus plaid withal? she writes, and counsels,
Under my hand to send her back a free
Resign of all my interest to her person,
Promise, or love; that ther's no other way
With safety of my honour to revisit her.
The woman is possessed with some bold Devil,
And wants an exorcism; or I am grown
A cheap, dull, phlegmatic fool, a Post that's carved
In the common street, and holding out my forehead
To every scurrill wit to pin disgrace
And libels on it; did you bring this to me Sir?
My thanks shall warm your heart.
Hold, hold, my Lord.
I know not what provokes this tempest, but
Her Grace ne't showed more freedom from a storm
When I received this paper; if you have
A will to do an execution,
Your looks without that engine, Sir, may serve.
I did not like the employment.
Ha, had she
No symptom in her eye, or face, of anger
When she gave this in charge?
Serene, as I
Have seen ??????e morning rise upon the spring,
No trouble in her breath, but such a wind
As came to kiss and fan the smiling flowers.
No Poetry.
By all the truth in prose,
By honesty, and your own honour Sir,
I never saw her look more calm, and gentle.
I am too passionate, you must forgive me;
I have found it out the Duchess loves me dearly,
She expressed a trouble in her when I took
My leave, and chid me with a fullen ey;
It is a device to hasten my return;
Love has a thousand arts; I'll answer it,
Beyond her expectation, and put
Her soul to a noble test; your patience Gentlemen;
The Kings health will deserve a sacrifice of Wine.
I am glad to see this change, and thank my wit
For my redemption.
Sir, The Soldiers curse on him lo???es not our Master.
And they curse loud enough to be heard.
Their curse has the nature of Gunpowder.
They do not pray with half the noise.
Our General is not well mixed,
He hes too great a portion of fire.
His Mistress cool him, her complexion
Carries some phlegm, when they two meet in bed?
A third may follow.
It is much pity.
The young Duke lived not to take the virgin off.
'T was the Kings act to match two Rabbit suck???ers.
A common trick of State,
The little great man marries, travels then
Till both grow up; and dies when he should do
The feat; these things are still unlucky
On the male side.
This to the Duchess fair hand.
She will think
Time hath no wing, till I return.
Gentlemen,
Now each man to his quarter, and encourage
The Soldier; I shall take a pride to know
Your diligence, when I visit all your
Several commands.
We shall expect,
And move by your directions.
You're all noble.
I shall perform a visit daily, Madam,
In the absence of my Nephew, and be happy
If you accept my care.
You have honoured me,
And if your entertainment have not been
Worthy your Graces person, it is because
Nothing can reach it in my power; but where
There is no want of zeal, other defect
Is only a fault to exercise your mercy.
You are bounteous in all; I take my leave;
My fair Niece, shortly, when Columbo has
Purchased more honours to prefer his name,
And value to your noble thoughts; mean time
Be confident you have a friend, whose Office,
And favour with the King, shall be effectual
To serve your Grace.
Your own good deeds reward you,
Till mine rise equal to deserve their benefit.
Leave me a while.
Do not I walk upon the teeth of serpents;
And, as I had a charm against their poison,
Play with their stings, the Cardinal is subtle?
Whom tic not wisdom to incense, till I
Hear to what destiny Columbo leaves me;
May be the greatness of his soul will scorn
To own what comes with murmur, If he can
Interpret me so happily; art come?
His Excellence salutes your Grace.
Thou hast
A melancholy brow; how did he take my Letter?
As he would take a blow, with so much sense
Of anger, his whole soul boiled in his face,
And such prodigious flame in both his eyes
As they'd been the only seat of fire; and at
Each look a Salamander leaping forth,
Not able to endure the Furnace.
Ha! thou dost
Describe him with some horror.
Soon as he
Had read again, and understood your meaning,
His rage had shot me with a pistol, had not
I used some soft, and penitential language,
To charm the Bullet.
Wait at some more distance;
My soul doth bath it self in a cold dew;
I magin, I am opening of a Tomb,
Thus I throw off the Marble to discover,
What antic posture death presents in this
Pale monument to fright me???
Ha? my heart that called my blood and spirits, to
Defend it from the invasion of my fears,
Must keep a guard about it still, lest this
Strange and too mighty joy crush it to nothing.
Madam.
Bid my Steward give thee
Two thousand Ducats; art sure I am awake?
I shall be able to resolve you, Madam,
When he has paid them any.
Columbo now is noble.
This is better than I expected, if my Lady be
Not mad, and live to justify her bounty.
The War is left to him. but we must have
You reconciled, if that be all your difference.
His rage flows like a torrent, when he meets
With opposition, leave to wrestle with him,
And his hot blood retreats into a calm,
And then he chides his passion; you shall back
With letters from us.
Your Commands, are not
To be disputed.
Alvarez.
Lose not
Your self by cool submission, he will find
His error, and the want of such a Soldier.
Have you seen the Cardinal?
Not yet.
He wants no plot???
The King I must obey;
But let the purple Gownman place his engines
In the dark that wounds me.
Be assured
Of what we can to friend you, and the King
Cannot forget your service.
I am sorry
For that poor Gentleman.
I must consess, Sir,
The Duchess has been pleased to think me worthy
Her favours, and in that degree of honour,
That has obliged my life to make the best
Return of service, which is not, with bold
Affiance in her love, to interpose
Against her happiness, and your election;
I love so much her honour, I have quited
All my desires, yet would not shrink to bleed
Out my warm stock of life, so the last drop
Might benefit her wishes.
I shall find
A compensation for this act, Alvarez,
I hath much pleased us.
Sir, you are the King,
And in that sacred title it were sin
To doubt a justice, all that does concern
My essence in this world, and a great part
Of the other bliss, lives in you breath.
What intends the Duchess?
That will instruct you, Sir, Columbo has
Upon some better choice, or discontent,
Set my poor soul at freedom.
Tic his character???
Madam, I cozily discharge all my pretensions
To your love, and person, I leave you to your
Own choice, and in what you have obliged
Your self to me, resume a power to cancel
If you please.
This is strange.
Now do an act to make
Your Chronicle beloved and read for ever.
Express your self.
Since by Divine infusion,
For tic no art could force the General to
This Change, second this justice and bestow
The heart you would have given from me, by
Your strict commands to love Colnmbo, where
It was meant by heaven, and let your breath return
Whom you divorced, Alvarez, mine.
This is but justice, Sir.
It was decreed above,
And since Columbo has released his interest
Which we had wrought him, not without some force
Upon your will I give you your own wishes,
Receive your own Alvarez, when you please
To celebrate your Nuptial, I invite
My self your guest.
Eternal blessings Crown you.
And every joy your Marriage
I know not whether I shall wonder most
Or joy to meet this happiness.
Now the King hath planted us
Methinks we grow already, and twist our loving souls
Above the wrath of thunder to divide us.
Ha? The Cardinal
Has met the King, I do not like this conference;
He looks with anger this way, I expect
A tempest.
Take no notice of his presence,
Leave me to meet, and answer it, if the King
Be firm in's Royal word, I fear no lightning;
Expect me in the Garden.
I obey,
But fear a shipwreck on the coast.
Madam.
My Lord.
The King speaks of a Letter that has brought
A riddle in it.
Tic easy to interpret.
From my Nephew? may I deserve the favour?
He looks as though his eyes would fire the paper.
They are a pair of Burning glasses, and
His envious blood doth give 'em flame.
What lethargy could thus unspirit him?
I am all wonder; do not believe Madam,
But that Columbo's love is yet more Sacred,
To honour, and your self, than thus to forfeit
What I have heard him call the glorious wreath
To all his merits, given him by the King,
From whom he took you with more pride than ever
He came from victory; his kisses hang
Yet panting on your lips, and he but now
Exchanged religious farewell to return,
But with more triumph to be yours.
My Lord,
You do believe your Nephews hand was not
Surprised or strained to this?
Strange arts and windings in the world, most dark,
And subtle progresses; who brought this Letter?
I enquired not his name, I thought it not
Considerable to take such narrow knowledge.
Desert, and honour urged it here, nor can
I blame you to be angry, yet his person
Obliged, you should have given a nobler pause,
Before you made your faith and change so violent
From his known worth, into the arms of one,
How ever fashioned to your amorous wish,
Not equal to his cheapest fame, with all
The gloss of blood and merit.
This comparison,
My good Lord Cardinal, I cannot think,
Flows from an even justice, it betrays
You partial where your blood runs.
I fear Madam,
Your own takes two much licence, and will soon,
Fall to the censure of unruly tongues;
Because Alvarez has a softer cheek,
Can like a woman trim his want on hair,
Spend half a day with looking in the glass
To find a posture to present himself,
And bring more effeminacy than man,
Or honour to your bed; must he supplant him?
Take heed, the common murmur when it catches
The sent of a lost Fame???
My Fame Lord Cardinal?
It stands upon an innocence as clear
As the devotions you pay to heaven,
I shall not urge my Lord your soft indulgence
At my next shrift.
You are a fine Court Lady.
And you should be a reverend Churchman.
One, that if you have not thrown off modesty.
Would counsel you to leave Alvarez.
Cause you dare do worse
Than Marriage, must not I be admitted what
The Church and Law allows me?
Insolent? then you dare marry him?
Dare? Let your contracted flame and malice, with
Columbo's rage higher than that, meet us
When we approach the holy place, clasped hand
In hand, we'll break through all your force and six
Our sacred vows together there.
I knew
When with as chaste a brow you promised fair
To another; you are no dissembling Lady.
Would all your actions had no falser lights
About 'em.
Ha?
The people would not talk and curse so loud.
I'll have you chid into a blush for this.
Begin at home great man, ther's cause enough,
You turn the wrong end of the perspective
Upon your crimes, to drive them to a far,
And lesser sight, but let your eyes look right
What giants would your pride and surfeit seem?
How gross your avarice, eating up whole families?
How vast are your corruptions and abuse
Of the Kings ear? at which you hang a pendent,
Not to adorn, but ulcerate, while the honest
Nobility, like pictures in the Arras,
Serve only for Court-Ornament; if they speak,
It is when you set their tongues, which you wind up,
Like clocks to strike at the just hour you please;
Leave, leave, my Lord, these usurpations,
And be what you were meant a man to cure,
Not let in Agues to Religion;
Look on the Churches wounds.
You dare presume
In your rude spleen to me, to abuse the Church?
Alas you give false aim, my Lord, it is your
Ambition and Scarlet Sins that tob
Her Altar of the glory, and leave wounds
Upon her brow; which fetches grief, and paleness,
Into her cheeks; Making her troubled bosom
Pant with her groans, and shroud her holy blushes
Within your reverend purples.
Will you now take breath?
In hope, my Lord, you will behold your self
In a true glass, and see those injust acts
That so deform you, and by timely cure,
Prevent a shame before the short haird men
Do crowd and call for justice. I take leave.
This woman has a spirit, that may rise
To tame the Devils, ther's no dealing with
Her angry tongue, it is action and revenge
Must calm her fury; were Columbo here,
I could resolve, but Letters shall be sent
To th'Army which may wake him into sense
Of his rash folly, or direct his spirit
Some way to snatch his honour from this flame,
All great men know, The soul of life is same.
I Did not think Celinda when I praised
Alvarez to the Duchess, that things thus
Would come about, what does your Ladyship
Think of Columbo now? it staggers all
The Court, he should forsake his Mistress, I
Am lost with wonder yet.
It is very strange
Without a spell; but ther's a fate in love,
I like him ne'er the worse.
Nothing but marriages, and triumph now.
What new access of joy, makes ???????????? Lord,
So pleasant?
Ther's a Packet ?????????
Makes the King merry, we are all concerned in it?
Columbo hath given the enemy a great,
And glorious defeat, and is already
Preparing to march home.
He thrived the better for my prayers.
You have been his great admirer, Madam.
The King longs to see him.
This news exalts the Cardinal.
He's here,
He appears with discontent, the Marriage
With Count D'Alvarez hath a bitter taste,
And not worn off his palate; but let us leave him.
We will to the Duchess.
He has not won so much upon the Arragon
As he has lost at home, and his neglect
Of what my studies had contrived to add
More luster to our Family by the access
Of the great Duchess fortune, cools his triumph,
And makes me wild.
My good Lord Cardinal.
You made complaint to the King about your Ge???neral.
Not a complaint my Lord, I did but satisfy
Some questions of the Kings.
You see he thrives
Without your personal valour, or advice,
Most grave and learned in the wars.
My Lord,
I Envy not his fortune.
It is above
Your Malice, and your noise not worth his anger,
It is barking against the moon.
More temper would
Become that habit.
The Military thing would show some spleen;
I'll blow an Army of such Wasps about
The world; go look your sting you left in the Camp, Sir.
The King.
This may be one day counted for.
All things conspire my Lord to make you fortunate,
Your Nephews glory???
It was your cause and justice
Made him victorious, had he been so valiant
At home, he had had another conquest to
Invite and bid her welcome to new wars.
You must be reconciled to providence, my Lord;
I heard you had a controversy with
The Duchess, I will have you friends.
I am not Angry.
For my sake then you shall be pleased,
And with me grace the Marriage;
A Churchman must show Charity, and shine
With first example, she's a woman.
You shall prescribe in all things; Sir, you cannot
Accuse my love, if I still wish my Nephew
Had been so happy to be constant to
Your own, and my election; yet my brain
Cannot reach how this comes about; I know
My Nephew loved her with a near affection.
He'll give you fair account at his return.
Colonel, your Letters may be spared, the General
Has finished, and is coming home.
I am glad on it, sir; my good Lord Cardinal
It is not impossible but some man provoked,
May have a precious mind to cut your throat.
You shall command me Noble Colonel;
I know you wo'not fail to be at th'wedding.
It is not Columbo that is married Sir.
Go teach the postures of the Pike and Musket,
Then dril your Mi???midons into a ditch,
Where starve, and stink in pickle, you shall find
Me reasonable, you see the King expects me.
So does the Devil; some desperate hand
May help you on your journey.
Here this, I this will fit your part: you shall wear Slashes, because you are a Soldier; here's for the blue mute.
This doublet will never fit me, Pox ont', are these Breeches good enough for a Prince too? Pedro plays but a Lord, and he has two laces more in a seam.
You must consider Pedro is a foolish Lord, he may wear what lace he please.
Does my beard fit my clothes well Gentlemen?
Pox o'your beard.
That will fright away the hair.
This fellow plays but a mute, &amp; he is so troublesome, and talks.
Mr. Secretary might have let Iaques play the soldier, He has a black patch already.
By your favour Mr. Secretary, I was asked who writ this play for us.
For u???? why art thou any more than a blew mute?
And by my troth, I said, I thought it was all your own.
Away you Coxcomb.
Dost think he has no more wit then to write a Co???medy? my Ladies Chaplain made the Play, though he is content for the honour and trouble of the business, to be seen in it.
Did any body see my head Gentlemen it was here but now? I shall have never a head to play my part in.
Is thy head gone? it is well thy part was not in it, Look, look about, has not Iaques it?
I his head? two'not come on upon my shoulders.
Make hast Gentlemen I'll see whether the King has supped; Look every man to his wardrobe and his part.
Is he gone? in my mind a masque had been fitter for a marriage.
Why mute? there was no time for it, and the scenes Are troublesome.
Half a score Deal tacked together in the clouds, what's that? a Throne to come down and dance; all the properties have been paid forty times over, and are in the Court stock, but the Secretary must have a play to show his wit.
Did not I tell thee it was the Chaplains? hold your tongue Mute.
Under the Rose and would this cloth of Silver dou???blet might never come off again, if there be any more plot then you see in the back of my hand.
You talk of a plot, I'll not give this for the best Poets plot in the world and if it be not well carried.
Welll said Mnte.
Ha, ha; Pedro since he put on his doublet, has repea???ted but three lines, and he has broke five butt once.
I know not but by this false beard, and here's hair e???nough to hang a reasonable honest man, I do not re???member to say a strong line indeed in the whole Co???medy; but when the Chambermaid kisses the Cap???tain.
Excellent mute.
They have almost supped, and I cannot find my head yet.
play in thine own.
Thank you for that, so I may have it made a proper???tie, if I have not a head found me, let Mr. Secretary play my part himself without it.
Are you all ready my Masters? the King is coming through the Gallery, are the women dressed?
Rogero wants a head.
Here with a pox to you, take mine, you a player? You a puppy-dog is the Music ready?
Gentlemen, it is my Ladies pleasure that you expect till she call for you, there are a company of Ca???valiers in gallant Equipage newly alighted, have offered to present their Revels in honour of this Hymen; and it is her Graces command, that you be silent till their Enter???tainment be over.
Gentlemen?
Affronted?
Mr. Secretary, ther's your head again; a man's a man; have I broken my sleep to study fifteen lines for an Ambassador, and after that a Constable, and is it come to this?
Patience Gentlemen, be not so hot, tic but de???fer'd, and the play may do well enough cold.
If it be not presented, the Chaplain will have the greatest loss, he loses his wits.
This Music speaks the King upon entrance; retire, retire, and grumble not.
With me!
Do you know the Masquers Madam?
Not I Sir.
Ther's one, but that my Nephew is abroad,
And has more soul than thus to Jig upon
Their Hymenrall night, I should suspect
It were he.
Wher's my Lord D' Alvarez?
Call in the Bridegroom.
What Mystery is this?
We want the Bridegroom still.
Where is Alvarez
Oh it is my Lord hoe's murdered.
Who durst commit this horrid act?
I Sir.
Columbo? ha!
Yes; Columbo that dares stay
To justify that act.
Most barbarous.
Oh my dearest Lord!
Our guard seize on them all, this sight doth snake
All that is man within me; poor Alvarez
Is this thy wedding day?
If you do think there is a heaven or pains,
To punish such black crimes in the other world,
Let me have swift, and such exemplar justice
As shall become this great assassinate,
You will take off our faith else, and if here
Such innocence must bleed, and you look on,
Poor men that call you Gods on earth, will doubt
To obey your Laws, nay practise to be Devils,
As fearing if such monstrous sins go on
The Saints will not be safe in Heaven.
You shall,
You shall have justice.
Now to come off were brave.
The Masquers, Sir, are fled, their horse prepared
At gate expected to receive 'em, where
They quickly mounted, coming so like friends
None could suspect their hast, which is secured
By advantage of the night.
I answer for 'em all, it is stake enough
For many lives, but if that poniard
Had voice, it would convince they were but all
Spectators of my act; and now if you
Will give your judgments leave, though at the first
Face of this object your cool bloods were frighted,
I can excuse this deed and call it Justice;
An act, your honours, and your office Sir,
Is bound to build a Law upon, for others
To Imitate; I have but took his life,
And punished her with mercy, who had both
Conspired to kill the soul of all my fame
Read there,???and read an injury as deep
In my dishpnour, as the Devil knew
A Woman had capacity or malice
To execute read there, how you were cozened Sir,
Your power affronted, and my faith, her smiles
A juggling witchcraft to betray and make
My love her horse to stalk withal, and catch
Her curled Minion.
Is it possible
The Duchess could dissemble so, and forfeit
Her modesty with you, and to us all?
Yet I must pity her; my Nephew has
Been too severe, though this affront would call
A dying man from prayers, and turn him Tiger,
There being nothing dearer than our fame,
Which, If a common man, whose blood has no
Ingredient of honour, labour to
Preserve, a Soldier (by his nearest tie
To glory) is above all others, bound
To vindicate; and yet it might have been less bloody.
Charitable Devil!
I Pray, my Lord, release under your hand, what you dare challenge in my love or person, as a just for???feit to my self, this act will speak you honourable to my thoughts, and when you have conquered thus your self, you may proceed to many victories, and after, with safety of your famit visit again
To this your Answer was a free resign?
Flattered with great opinion of her faith,
And my desert of her (with thought that she,
Who seemed to weep and chide my easy will
To part with her, could not be guilty of
A treason, or Apostasy so soon,
But rather meant this a device to make
Me expedite the affairs of War) I sent
That paper, which her wickedness not justice,
Applied (what I meant trial) her divorce;
I loved her so, I dare call heaven to witness
I knew not whether I loved most; while she,
With him, whose crimson penitence I provoked,
Conspired my everlasting infamy;
Examine but the circumstance.
It is clear,
This Match was made at home before she sent
That cunning writ, in hope to take him off,
As knowing his impatient Soul would scorn
To own a blessing came on crutches to him;
It was not well to raise his expectation,
(Had you, Sir, no affront) to ruin him
With so much scandal and contempt.
We have
Too plentiful a circumstance to accuse
You Madam, as the cause of your own sorrows,
But not without an accessory, more
Than young Alvarez.
Any other instrument?
Yes I am guilty, with her self, and Don
Columbo, though our acts looked several ways,
That thought a lover might so soon be ransomed;
And did exceed the office of a King
To exercise dominion over hearts,
That owe to the prerogative of heaven
Their choice, or Separation; you must therefore,
When you do kneel for Justice, and Revenge,
Madam, consider me a laterall agent
In poor Alvarez Tragedy.
It was your love to Don Columbo Sir.
So, so; the King is charmed; do you observe,
How to acquit Columbo, he would draw
Himself into the plot; Heaven, is this Justice?
Your Judgment is divine in this.
And yet,
Columbo cannot be secure, and we
Just in his pardon, that durst make so great,
And insolent a breach of Law and Duty.
Ha, Will he turn again?
And should we leave
This guilt of blood to Heaven, which cries, and strikes,
With loud appeals the palace of eternity,
Yet here is more to charge Columbo, than
Alvarez blood, and bids me punish it,
Or be no King.
It is come about my Lords.
And If I should forgive
His timeless death, I cannot the offence,
That with such boldness struck at me. Has my
Indulgence to your merits which are great
Made me so cheap, your rage could meet, no time
Nor place for your revenge, but where my eyes
Must be affrighted, and affronted with
The bloody execution? This contempt
Of Majesty transcends my power to pardon,
And you shall feel my anger Sir.
Thou shalt have one short prayer more for that.
Have I in the progress of my life
No actions to plead me up deserving,
Against this ceremony?
Contain your self.
I must be dumb then; where is honour?
And gratitude of Kings, when they forget
Whose hand secured their greatness? take my head off,
Examine then which of your silken Lords,
As I have done, will throw himself on dangers;
Like to a floating Island move in blood;
And where your great desence calls him to stand
A Bulwark, upon his hold breast to take
In death, that you may live: but Soldiers are
Your valiant fools, whom when your own securities
Are bleeding you can cherish, but when once
Your state and nerves are knit, not thinking when
To use their surgery again, you cast
Them off, and let them hang in dusty armories,
Or make it death to ask for pay.
No more,
We thought to have put your victory and merits
In balance with Alvarez death, which while
Our mercy was to Judge, had been your safety;
But the affront to us, made greater by
This boldness to upbraid our royal bounty,
Shall tame or make you nothing.
Excellent.
The Cardinal is not pleased.
Humble your self
To the King.
And beg my life? let cowards do it
That dare not die, I'll rather have no head
Than owe it to his Charity.
To the Castle with him.
Madam, I leave you to your grief, and what
The King can recompense to your tears, or honour
Of your dead Lord, expect.
This shows like Justice.
THis is the age of wonders.
Wondrous mischiefs.
Among those guards which some call Tutelar Angels,
Whose office is to govern Provinces,
Is there not one will undertake Navarre?
Hath heaven forsook us quite?
Columbo at large?
And graced now more than ever.
He was not pardoned,
That word was prejudicial to his fame.
But as the murder done had been a dream
Vanished to memory, he's courted as
Preserver of his Country; with what chains
Of Magic does this Cardinal hold the King?
What will you say my Lord if they enchant
The Duchess now; and by some impudent art,
Advance a Marriage to Columbo yet?
Say? I'll say no woman can be saved, nor is it
Fit, indeed, any should pretend to Heaven
After one such impiety in their sex,
And yet my faith has been so stager'd, since
The King restored Columbo, I'll be now
Of no Religion.
It is not possible
She can forgive the murder, I observed
Her tears.
Why so did I, my Lord,
And if they be not honest, it is to be
Half damned to look upon a woman weeping.
When do you think the Cardinal said his prayers?
I know not.
Heaven forgive my want of charity
But if I were to kill him, he should have
No time to pray, his life could be no sacrifice,
Unless his soul went too.
That were too much.
When you mean to dispatch him, you may give
Time for Confession, they have injured me
After another rate.
You are too passionate Cozen.
How the gay men do flutter to congratulate
His Goal delivery? ther's one honest man,
What pity it is a gallant fellow should
Depend on knaves for his preferment.
Except this cruelty upon Alvarez,
Columbo has no mighty stain upon him;
But for his Uncle???
If I had a Son
Of twelve years old, that would not fight with him,
And stake his soul against his Cardinals Cap,
I would dis-inherit him; Time has took a lease
But for three lives I hope, a fourth may see
Honesty walk without a crutch.
This is
But Air and Wildness.
I'll see the Duchess,
You may do well to comfort her,
We must attend the King.
your pleasures.
A Man of a brave soul.
The less his safety;
The King and Cardinal in consult.
Commend us to the Duchess, and employ
What language you think fit, and powerful
To reconcile her to some peace. My Lords.
Sir, I possess all for your sacred uses.
Madam, you are the welcom'st Lady living.
To whom, Mr. Secretary?
If you have mercy
To pardon so much boldness, I durst say,
To me???I am a Gentleman.
And handsome.
But my Lady has much wanted you.
Why Mr. Secretary?
You are the prettiest,
So.
The wittiest,
So.
The merriest Lady in the Court.
And I was wished to make the Duchess pleasant.
She never had so deep a cause of sorrow,
Her Chamber's but a Coffin of a larger
Volume, wherein she walks so like a Ghost,
T'would make you pale to see her.
Tell her Grace I attend here.
I shall most willingly.
A spirited Lady, would I had her in my closet,
She is excellent company among the Lords,
Sure she has an admirable treble???Madam.
I do suspect this fellow would be nibbling
Like some whose narrow fortunes will not rise
To wear things when the inventions rare, and new,
But treading on the heel of pride, they hunt
The fashion when tic crippled, like fell tyrants;
I hope I am not old yet, I had the honour
To be saluted by our Cardinals Nephew
This Morning, ther's a man!
I have prevailed,
Sweet Madam use what Eloquence you can
Upon her, and if ever I be useful
To your Ladyships service, your least breath commands me.
Madam, I come to ask you but one question,
If you were in my State, my state of grief,
I mean an exile from all happiness,
Of this world, and almost of heaven, for my
Affliction is finding out despair,
What would you think of Don Columbo?
Madam?
Whose Bloody hand wrought all this misery?
Would you not weep as I do? and wish rather
An everlasting spring of tears to drown
Your sight, than let your eyes be cursed to see
The murderer again? and glorious?
So careless of his sin, that he is made
Fit for new Parricide, even while his soul
Is purpled o'er, and reeks with innocent blood.
But do not, do not answer me, I know
You have so great a spirit, (which I want,
The horror of his fact surprising all
My faculties) you would not let him live:
But I, poor I, must suffer more, ther's not
One little star in Heaven will look on me,
Unless to choose me out the mark, on whom
It may shoot down some angry influence.
Madam, her's Don Columbo says he must
Speak with your Grace.
But he must not, I charge you.
None else wait? Is this well done,
To triumph in his Tyranny? speak Madam,
Speak but your conscience.
Sir, you must not see her.
Not see her? were she cabled up above
The search of Bullet, or of Fire, were she
Within her Grave, and that the toughest Mine
That ever nature teem'd and groaned withal,
I would force some way to see her; do not fear
I come to Court you Madam, you're not worth
The humblest of my kinder thoughts, I come
To show the man you have prokvo'd, and lost;
And tell you what remains of my revenge.
Live, but never presume again to marry,
I'll kill the next at the Altar, and quench all
The smiling tapers with his blood; if after
You dare provoke the Priest, and heaven so much,
To take another, in thy bed I'll cut him from
Thy warm embracc, and throw his heart to Ravens.
This will appear an unexampled cruelty.
Your pardon Madam, rage, and my revenge
Not perfect, took away my eyes, you are
A noble Lady, this, not worth your ey-beam,
One of so slight a making, and so thin,
An Autumn leaf is of too great a value
To play, which shall be soonest lost in the Air;
Be pleased to own me by some name, in your
Assurance, I despise to be received
There, let her witness that I call
You Mistress; honour me to make these Pearls
Your carkanet.
My Lord, you are too humble in your thoughts.
Ther's no vexation too great to punish her.
Now Nadam?
Away you saucy fellow; Madam, I
Must be excused, if I do think more honourably
Than you have cause of this great Lord.
Why is not
All woman kind concerned to hate what's impious?
For my part???
Antonio, is this a woman?
I know not whether she be man or woman,
I should be nimble to find out the Experiment,
She looked with less state, when Columbo came.
Let me entreat your absence, I am cozened in her,
I took you for a modest, honest Lady.
Madam, I scorn any accuser, and
Deducting the great title of a Duchess,
I shall not need one grain of your dear honour
To make me full weight, if your Grace be jealous
I can remove.
She is gone.
Prithee remove
My fears of her return,???she is not worth
Considering, my anger's mounted higher;
He need not put in caution for my next
Mirage, Alvarez, I must come to thee,
Thy Virgin, Wife, and Widow, but not till
I have paid those Tragic duties to thy Hearse,
Become my piety and love, but how?
Who shall instruct a way?
Madam, Don
Hernando much desires to speak with you.
Will not thy own discretion think I am
Unfit for visit.
Please your Grace he brings
Something he says imports your ear, and love
Of the dead Lord Alvarez.
Then admit him.
I would speak, Madam, to your self.
Your absence.
I know not how you Grace will censure so
Much boldness, when you know the affairs I come for.
My Servant has prepared me to receive it,
If it concern my dead Lord.
Can you name
So much of your Alvarez in a breath
Without one word of your revenge? O Madam,
I come to chide you, and repent my great
Opinion of your virtue, that can walk,
And spend so many hours in naked Solitude,
As if you thought that no arrear were due
To his death, when you had paid his Funeral charges,
Made your eyes red, and wept a handkercher;
I come to tell you that I saw him bleed,
I, that can challenge nothing in his name,
And honour, saw his murdered body warm,
And panting with the labour of his spirits,
Till my amazed Soul shrunk and hid it self,
While barbarous Columbo grinning stood,
And mocked the weeping wounds; it is too much
That you should keep your heart alive, so long
After this spectacle, and not revenge it.
You do not know the business of my heart,
That censure me so rashly; yet I thank you,
And if you be Alvarez friend, dare tell
Your confidence, that I despise my life,
But know not how to use it in a service,
To speak me his revenger, this will need
No other proof, than that to you, who may
Be sent with cunning to betray me, I
Have made this bold confession, I so much
Desire to sacrifice to that hovering Ghost,
Columbo's life, that I am not ambitious
To keep my own two minutes after it.
If you will call me coward, which is equal
To think I am a Traitor, I forgive it,
For this brave resolution, which time
And all the Destinies must aid, I beg
That I may kiss your hand for this, and may
The soul of angry honour guide it.
Whither?
To Don Columbo's heart.
It is too weak I fear alone.
Alone? are you in earnest? why? will it not
Be a dishonour to your Justice, Madam,
Another arm should interpose? but that
It were a saucy act to mingle with you,
I durst, nay I am bound in the revenge
Of him that's dead, (since the whole world has interest,
In every goodmans loss) to offer it;
Dare you command me, Madam?
Not command,
But I should more than honour such a truth
In man, that durst against so mighty odds,
Appear Alvarez friend and mine; the Cardinal???
Is for the second course, Columbo must
Be first cut up, his Ghost must lead the dance.
Let him die first.
But how?
How? with a Sword, and if I undertake it,
I wo'not lose so much of my own honour,
To kill him basely.
How shall I reward
This infinite service? it is not Modesty,
While now my husband groans beneath his tomb,
And calls me to his marble bed, to promise
What this great act might well deserve, my self
If you survive the Victor, but if thus
Alvarez ashes be appeased it must
Deserve an honourable memory;
And though Columbo (as he had all power,
And grasped the fates) has vowed to kill the man
That shall succeed Alvarez???
Tyranny.
Yet if ever,
I entertain a thought of love hereafter,
Hernando from the world shall challenge it,
Till when, my Prayers, and fortune, shall wait on you.
This is too mighty recompense.
It is all just.
If I outlive Columbo I must not
Expect security at home.
Thou can
Not fly, where all my fortunes, and my love,
Shall not attend to guard thee.
If I dye???
Thy memory
Shall have a shrine, the next within my heart
To my Alvarez.
Once again your hand,
Your cause is so religious you need
Not strengthen it with your prayers, trust it to me.
Madam, the Cardinal.
Will you appear?
And he had all the horror of the Devil
In's face, I would not balk him.
What makes Hernando here? I do not like
They should consult, I'll take no note; the King
Fairly salutes your Grace, by whose command
I am to tell you, though his will and actions
Illimited, stoop not to satisfy
The Vulgar inquisition, he is
Yet willing to retain a just opinion,
With those that are placed near him, and although
You look with Natures ey upon your self,
Which needs no perspective to reach, nor art
Of any optic to make greater, what
Your narrow sense applies an injury,
(Our selves still nearest to our selves) but ther's
Another ey that looks abroad and walks
In search of reason, and the weight of things,
With which if you look on him, you will find
His pardon to Columbo cannot be
So much against his justice, as your erring
Faith would persuade your anger.
Good my Lord,
Your phrase has too much landscape and I cannot
Distinguish at this distance you present
The figure perfect, but indeed my eyes
May pray your Lordship find excuse, for tears
Have almost made them blind.
Fair, peace restore 'em!
To bring the object nearer, the King says,
He could not be severe to Don Columbo
Without injustice to his other merits,
Which call more loud for their reward and honour,
Than you for your revenge; the Kingdom made
Happy by those; you only by the last
Uunfortunate, nor was it rational,
I speak the Kings own Language, he should die
For taking one mans breath, without whose valour
None now had been alive, without dishonour.
In my poor understanding, it is the Crown
Of virtue to proceed in its own tract,
Not deviate from honour, if you acquit
A man of murder, because he has done brave
Things in the War, you will bring down his valour
To a crime, nay to a baud, if it secure
A rape, and but teach those that deserve well
To sin with greater licence; but dispute
Is now too late, my Lord, it is done, and you,
By the good King, in tender of my sorrows,
Sent to persuade me, it is unreasonable
That Justice should repair me.
You mistake,
For if Columbo's death could make Alvarez
Live, the King had given him up to Law
Your bleeding Sacrifice; but when his life
Was but another treasure thrown away,
To obey a clamorous Statute, it was wisdom
To himself and common safety to take off
This killing edge of Law, and keep Columbo
To recompense the crime by noble acts,
And sorrow, that in time might draw your pity.
This is a greater tyranny, than that
Columbo exercised, he killed my Lord,
And you not have the charity to let
Me think it worth a punishment,
To that
In my own name, I answer; I condemn
And urge the blody guilt against my Nephew,
It was violent, and cruel, a black deed,
A deed whose memory doth make me shudder,
An act that did betray a tyrannous nature,
Which he took up in War, the school of vengeance;
And though the Kings compassion spare him here,
Unless his heart Weep it self out in penitent tears.
This sounds
As you were now a good man.
Does your Grace
Think I have conscience to allow the murder?
Although when it was done, I did obey
The stream of nature, as he was my Kinsman,
To plead he might not pay his forfeit life,
Could I do less for one so near my blood?
Consider Madam, and be charitable,
Let not this wild injustice, make me lose
The character I bear, and reverend habit.
To make you full acquainted with my innocence,
I challenge here my soul, and heaven to witness
If I had any thought, or knowledge with
My nephews plot, or person, when he came
Under the smooth pretence of friend to violate
Your hospitable laws, and do that act
Whose frequent mention draws this tear, a whirlwind
Suatch me to endless flames.
I must believe,
And ask your Graces pardon, I confess
I have not loved you since Alvarez death,
Though we were recontil'd.
I do not blame
Your Jealousy, nor any zeal you had
To prosecute revenge against me, Madam,
As I then stood suspected, nor can yet
Implore your mercy to Columbo, all
I have to say is to retain my first
Opinion and credit with your Grace,
Which you may think I urge not out of fear
Or ends upon you, (since, I thank the King,
I stand firm on the base of royal favour)
But for your own sake, and to show I have
Compassion of your sufferings.
You have cleared
A doubt my Lord, and by this fair remonstrance,
Given my sorrow so much truce, to think
That we may meet again, and yet be friends.
But be not angry, if I still remember
By whom Alvarez dyed, and weep, and wake
Another Justice with my prayers,
All thoughts
That may advance a better peace, dwell with you.
How would this cozening Statesman bribe my Faith
With flatteries to think him innocent?
No, if his Nephew die, this Cardinal must not
Be long-liv'd; all the prayers of a wronged Widow
Make firm Hernando's Sword, and my own hand
Shall have some glory in the next revenge;
I will pretend my brain with grief distracted,
It may gain easy credit, and beside
The taking off examination
For great Columbo's death, it makes what act
I do in that believed want of my reason,
Appear no crime, but my defence; look down
Soul of my Lord, from thy eternal shade,
And unto all thy blessed companions boast,
Thy Duchess busy to revenge thy Ghost.
Hernando, now I love thee, and do half
Repent the affront my passion threw upon thee.
You wo'not be too prodigal of your penitence.
This makes good thy Nobility of birth,
Thou may be worth my anger and my sword,
If thou dost execute as daringly,
As thou provok'st a quarrel, I did think
Thy soul a starveling, or a sleep.
You'll find it
Active enough to keep your spirit waking,
Which to exasperate, for yet I think
It is not high enough to meet my rage???
Do ye smile?
This noise is worth it, Gentlemen;
I'm sorry this great Soldier has engaged
Your travel, all his business is to talk.
A little of your Lordships patience,
You shall have other sport, and swords that will
Be as nimble about your heart, as you can wish,
It is pity more than our two single lives,
Should be at stake.
Make that no scruple Sir.
To him then that survives if fate allow
That difference, I speak that he may tell
The World, I came not hither on slight anger,
But to revenge my honour stained, and trampled on
By this proud man, when General, he commanded
My absence from the field.
I do remember,
And I'll give your Soul now a discharge.
I come to meet it, if your courage be so fortunate.
But there is more than my own injury
You must account for Sir, if my sword prosper,
Whose point and every edge is made more keen
With young Alvarez blood, in which I had
A Noble interest; does not that sin benum
Thy Arteries, and turn the guilty flowings,
To trembling gelly in thy veins? can hear
Me name that murder, and thy spirits not
Struck into air, as thou were shot by some
Engine from heaven?
You are the Duchess Champion;
Thou hast given me a quarrel now; I grieve
It is determined all must fight, and I
Shall lose much honour in his fall.
That Duchess
(Whom but to mention with thy breath, is sacrilege)
An Orphan of thy making, and condemned
By thee to eternal solitude, I come
To vindicate, and while I am killing thee,
By virtue of her prayers sent up for justice,
At the same time, in heaven I am pardoned for it.
I cannot hear the Bravo.
Two words more
And take your chance, before you all I must
Pronounce that noble Lady, without knowledge,
Or thought of what I undertake for her.
Poor soul, Shees now at her Devotions,
Busy with heaven, and wearing out the earth
With her stiff Knees, and bribing her good Angel
With treasures of her eyes, to tell her Lord
How much she longs to see him; my attempt
Needs no commission from her, were I
A stranger in Navarre, the inborn right
Of every Gentleman to Alvarez loss,
Is reason to engage their swords, and lives,
Against the common enemy of virtue.
Now have you finished? I have an instrument
Shall cure this noise, and fly up to thy tongue,
To murder all thy words.
One little knot
Of phlegm that clogs my stomach, and I ba' done;
You have an Uncle called a Cardinal
Would he were lurking now about thy heart,
That the same wounds might reach you both, and send
Your reeling souls together. Now have at you.
We must not Sir be idle.
What think you now of praying?
Time enough;
Commend me to my friend; the scales are even,
I would be merciful, and give you time,
Now to consider of the other World,
You'll find your soul benighted presently.
I'll find my way in the dark.
A stumble's dangerous.
Now ask thy life???Ha?
I despise to wear it,
A gift from any but the first bestower.
I scorn a base advantage???ha.
I am now
Out of your debt.
You have don't, and I forgive thee.
Give me thy hand, when shall we meet again?
Never, I hope.
I feel life ebb apace, yet I'll look upwards,
And show my face to heaven.
The matters done,
I must not stay to bury him.
COlumbo's death doth much aflict the King.
I thought the Cardinal would have lost his wits
At first, for's nephew, it drowns all the talk
Of the other that were slain.
We are friends.
I do suspect Hernando had some interest
And knew how their wounds came.
His flight confirms it,
For whom the Cardinal has spread his nets.
He is not so weak to trust himself at home
To his Enemies gripe.
All strikes not me so much,
As that the Duchess, most oppressed Lady,
Should be distracted, and before Columbo
Was slain.
But that the Cardinal should be made
Her Guardian, is to me above that wonder.
So it pleased the King, and she, with that small stock
Of reason left her, is so kind, and smooth
Upon him.
She's turned a child again; a madness,
That would have made her brain and blood boil high
In which distemper she might have wrought something.
Had been to purpose.
The Cardinal is cunning, and how ever
His brow does smile, he does suspect Hernando
Took fire from her, and waits a time to punish it.
But what a subject of disgrace, and mirth,
Hath poor Celinda made herself by pride,
In her belief Columbo was her servant.
Her head hath stooped much since he died, and she
Almost ridiculous at Court.
The Cardinal
Is come into the Garden, now???
Walk off,
It troubles me the Duchess by her loss
Of brain is now beneath my great revenge,
She is not capable to feel my anger,
Which like to unregarded thunder spent
In woods, and lightning aimed at senseless trees,
Must idly fall, and hurt her not, not to
That sense her guilt deserves a fatal stroke,
Without the knowledge for what crime to fright her,
When she takes leave, and make her tug with death,
Until her soul sweat, is a Pigeons torment,
And she is sent a babe to the other World,
Columbo's death will not be satisfied,
And I but wound her with a two edged feather;
I must do more, I have all opportunity,
(She by the King now made my charge) but she's
So much a turtle I shall lose by killing her,
Perhaps do her a pleasure, and preferment;
That must not be.
Is not this she, that would be thought to have been
Columbo's Mistress? Madam, his grace is private,
And would not be disturbed, you may displease him.
What will your worship wager that he shall
Be pleased again before we part.
I'll say this Diamond Madam, against a kiss,
And trust your self to keep the stakes.
It is done.
I have long had an appetite to this Lady,
But the Lords keep her up so high??? this toy
May bring her on.
This interruption tastes not of good manners.
But where necessity my Lord compels,
The boldness may meet pardon, and when you
Have found my purpose, I may less appear
Unmannerly.
To the business.
It did please
Your Nephew, Sir, before his death to credit me
With so much honourable favour, I
Am come to tender to his nearest of blood,
Your self, what does remain a debt to him.
Not to delay your Grace with circumstance,
That deed, if you accept, makes you my heir
Of no contemptible estate??? this way
Is only left to tie up scurrile tongues,
And saucy men, that since Columbo's death
Venture to Libel on my pride, and folly;
His greatness, and this gift which I enjoy,
Still for my life, beyond which term; a Kingdom's,
Nothing, will curb the giddy spleens of men
That live on impudent rime, and railing at
Each wandering fame they catch.
Madam, this bounty
Will bind my gratitude and care to serve you.
I am your Graces Servant.
Antonelli,
And when this noble Lady visits me
Let her not wait.
What think you my Officious, Sir; his grace
Is pleased, you may conjecture? I may keep
Your Gem, the kiss was never yours.
Sweet Madam???
Talk if you dare, you know I must not wait,
And so farewell for this time.
It is in my brain already, and it forms
Apace, good, excellent revenge, and pleasant!
She's now within my talons, it is too cheap
A satisfaction for Columbo's death,
Only to kill her by soft charm or force,
I'll rifle first her darling chastity,
'Twil be after time enough to poison her,
And she to the world be thought her own destroyer.
As I will frame the circumstance, this night
All may be finished; for the Colonel,
Her agent in my Nephews death (whom I
Disturbed at Counsel with her) I may reach him
Hereafter, and be Master of his fate.
We starve our Conscience when we thrive in State.
Placentia, We two are only left
Of my Ladies Servants, let us be true
To her, and one another, and be sure
When we are at prayers, to curse the Cardinal.
I pity my sweet Lady.
I pity her too, but am a little angry;
She might have found another time to lose
Her wits.
That I were a man?
What would thou do Placentia?
I would revenge my Lady.
It is better being a woman, thou may do
Things that may prosper better, and the fruit
Be thy own another day.
Your wit still loves
To play the wanton.
It is a sad time Placentia,
Some pleasure would do well, the truth is, I
Am weary of my life, and I would have
One fit of mirth before I leave the world.
Do not you blush to talk thus wildly?
It is good manners
To be a little mad after my Lady;
But I have done; who is with her now?
Madam Valerie.
Not Celinda? Ther's a Lady for my humour,
A pretty book of flesh and blood, and well
Bound up, in a fair letter too; would I
Had her with all the Errata.
She has not
An honourable Fame.
Her Fame? that's nothing,
A little stain, her wealth will fe???ch again
The colour, and bring honour into her cheeks
As fresh; if she were mine, and I had her
Exchequer. I know the way to make her honest,
Honest to the touch, the test, and the last trial.
How Prithee?
Why, first I would marry her, that's a verb Material;
Then I would Print her with an Index.
Expurgatorius, a table drawn
Of her Court Heresies, and when she's read
Cum Privilegio, who dares call her Whore?
I'll leave you, if you talk thus.
I have done,
thou may be better company
After another progress; and now tell me,
Did ever hear of such a patient madness
As my Lady is possessed with? she has raved
But twice; and she would fright the Cardinal,
Or at a supper if she did but poison him,
It were a frenzy I could bear withal;
She calls him her dear Governor???
Who is this?
Her Secretary? Sir,
Here is a Letter if it may have so
Much happiness to kiss her Graces hand.
From whom?
That's not in your Commission Sir
To ask, or mine to satisfy, she will want
No understanding when she reads.
Alas,
Under your favour Sir, you are mistaken,
Her Grace did never more want understanding.
How?
have you not heard, her scull is broken Sir
And many pieces taken out, she's mad.
The sad fame of her distraction
Has two much truth it seems.
If please you Sir
To expect a while, I will present the Letter.
Pray do
How long has she been thus Distempered Sir?
Before the Cardinal came to govern here,
Who for that reason by the King was made
Her Guardian, we are now at his devotion.
A Lamb given up to a Tiger! may diseases
Soon eat him through his heart!
Your pardon Sir,
I love that voice, I know it too, a little,
Are not you? be not angry noble Sir,
I can with ease be ignorant again,
And think you are another man, but if
You be that valiant Gentleman they call ???
Whom? What?
That killed, I would not name him if I thought
You were not pleased to be that very Gentleman.
Am I betrayed?
The Devil sha'not
Betray you here, kill me, and I will take
My death you are the Noble Colonel;
We are all bound to you for the Generals death,
Valiant Hernando? when my Lady knows
You are here, I hope 'twil fetch her wits again,
But do not talk too loud, we are not all
Honest in the house, some are the Cardinals creatures.
Thou were faithful to thy Lady, I am glad
It is night, but tell me how the Churchman uses
The Duchess?
He carries Angels in his tongue, and face, but I
Suspect his heart, this is one of his spawns.
Signior Antonelli.
Honest Antonio.
And how, and how???a friend of mine, where is
The Cardinals Grace?
That will be never answered.
He means to sup here with the Duchess.
Will he?
We will have the charming bottles at my chamber,
Bring that Gentleman, we will be mighty merry.
I may disturb your jollity.
Farewell sweet???
Dear Antonelli??? a round Pox confound you.
This is Court Retorick at the back stairs.
Do you know this Gentleman?
Not I.
My Lady presently dismissed Valerie,
And bad me bring him to her bed-chamber.
The Gentleman has an honest face.
Her words fell from her with some evenness &amp; joy.
Her Grace desires your presence.
I'll attend her.
I would this Soldier had the Cardinal
Upon a promontory, with what a spring
The Churchman would leap down, it were a spectacle
Most rare to see him topple from the precipice,
And souse in the salt water with a noise
To stun the fishes; and if he fell into
A net, what wonder would the simple Sea-guls
Have, to draw up the o'rgrown Lobster,
So ready boiled? he shall have my good wishes,
This Colonels coming may be lucky. I
Will be sure none shall interrupt 'em.
Is her Grace at opportunity?
No sweet Madam,
She is a sleep, her Gentlewoman says.
My business is but visit, I'll expect.
That must not be, although I like your company.
You are grown rich Mr. Secretary.
I Madam, Alas!
I hear you are upon another purchase.
I upon a purchase?
If you want any sum ???
If I could purchase your sweet favour Madam?
You shall command me, and my fortune Sir.
How's this?
I have observed you Sir a staid,
And prudent Gentleman??? and I shall want???
Not me?
A Father for some Infant; he has credit
In the world; I am not the first cast Lady
Has married a Secretary.
Shall I wait upon you?
Whither?
Any whither.
I may chance lead you then???
I shall be honoured to obey, my blood
Is up, and in this humour I'm for any thing.
Well Sir, I'll try your Manhood.
It is my happiness,
You cannot please me better.
This was struck
In the opportunity.
I am made for ever.
Dear Madam, do not weep.
You're very welcome,
I ha done, I wo'not shed a tear more
Till I meet Alvarez, then I'll weep for joy;
He was a fine young Gentleman, and sung sweetly,
And you had heard him but the night before
We were married, you would have sworn he had been
A Swan, and sung his own sad Epitaph;
But we will talk of the Cardinal.
Would his death
Might ransom your fair sense, he should not live
To triumph in the loss, beshrow my manhood;
But I begin to melt.
I pray Sir tell me,
For I can understand, although they say
I have lost my wits; but they are safe enough,
And I shall have 'em when the Cardinal dyes;
Who had a Letter from his Nephew too
Since he was slain.
From whence?
I know not where he is? but in some Bower
Within a Garden he is making Chaplets,
And means to send me one, but I'll not take it,
I have flowers enough I thank him while I live.
But do you love your Governor?
Yes, but I'll never marry him, I am promised
Already.
To whom Madam?
Do not you
Blush when you ask me that, must not you be
My Husband? I know why, but that's a secret;
Indeed if you believe me, I do love
No man alive so well as you, the Cardinal
Shall never know it, he will kill us both, and yet
He says he loves me dearly, and has promised
To make me well again, but I'm afraid,
One time or other he will give me poison.
Prevent him Madam, and take nothing from him.
Why, do you think 'twil hurt me?
It will kill you.
I shall but dye, and meet my dear loved Lord,
Whom when I have kissed, I'll come again, and work
A bracelet of my hair for you to carry him,
When you are going to heaven, the poesy shall
Be my own name, in little tears, that I
Will weep next winter, which congealed in the frost
Will show like seed-Pearl, you'll deliver it?
I know he'll love, and wear it for my sake.
She is quite lost.
I pray give me Sir, your pardon,
I know I talk not wisely, but if you had
The burden of my sorrow, you would miss
Sometimes your better reason; now l'm well,
What will you do when the Cardinal comes?
He must not see you for the world.
He sha'not,
I'll take my leave before he come.
Nay stay,
I shall have no friend left me when you go,
He will but sup, he sha'not stay to lie with me,
I have the picture of my Lord abed,
Three are to much this weather.
Madam, the Cardinal.
He shall sup with the Devil.
I dare not stay,
The Red-cock will be angry, I'll come again.
This sorrow is no fable, now I find
My curiosity is sadly satisfied;
Ha? if the Duchess in her stragled wits,
Let fall words to betray me to the Cardinal,
The Panther will not leap more fierce to meet
His prey, when a long want of food hath parched
His starved maw, than he to print his rage
And tear my heart-strings, every thing is fatal,
And yet she talked sometimes with chain of sense,
And said she loved me; ha, they come not yet;
I have a sword about me, and I left
My own security to visit death.
Yet I may pause a little, and consider
Which way does lead me to it most honourably;
Does not the Chamber that I walk in tremble?
What will become of her, and me, and all
The world in one small hour? I do not think
Ever to see the day again, the wings
Of night spread o'er me like a sable Herse-cloath,
The Stars are all close mourners too; but I
Must not alone to the cold silent grave,
I must not; If thou can Alvarez open
That Ebon curtain, and behold the man,
When the worlds justice fails shall right thy ashes,
And feed their thirst with blood, thy Duchess is
Almost a Ghost already; and doth wear
Her body like a useless upper garment,
The trim and fashion of it lost. Ha?
You need not doubt me, Sir, My Lady prays
You would not think it long, she in my ear,
Commanded me to tell you, that when last
She drank, she had happy wishes to your health.
And did the Cardinal pledge it?
He was not
Invited to it, nor must he know you are here.
What do they talk of prithee?
His Grace is very pleasant
And kind to her, but her returns are after
The sad condition of her sense, sometimes unjoynted.
They have Music.
A Lute only,
His Grace prepared, they say, the best of Italy
That waits upon my Lord.
He thinks the Duchess
Is stung with a Tarantula.
Your pardon.
My duty is expected.
Gentle Lady.???a voice too?
S. Come my Daphne, come away,
We do wast the Crystal day;
It is Strephon calls. Da What says my love?
S. Come follow to the Myrtle Grove,
Where Venus shall prepare
New Chaplets for thy hair.
D. Were I shut up within a Tree,
I'd rend my bark to follow thee.
S. My Shepherdess, make hast,
The minutes slide too fast:
D. In those cooler shades will I
Blind, as Cupped, kiss thine ey.
S. In thy bosom then I'll stay,
In such warm Snow who would not lose his way.
We will laugh and leave the world behind,
And Gods themselves that see,
Shall envy thee, and me;
But never find
Such joys, when they embrace a Deity.
If at this distance I distinguish, it is not
Church music, and the air's wanton, and no Anthem
Sung to it, but some strange Ode of love, and kisses,
What should this mean???? ha, he is coming hither,
I am betrayed, he marches in her hand,
I'll trust a little more, mute as the Arras
My sword and I here.
Wait you in the first Chamber, and let none
Presume to interrupt us.
She is pleasant; now for some art to poison all her inno???cence.
I do not like the Cardinals humour, he
Little suspects what guest is in my Chamber.
Now Madam you are safe.
How means your Lordship?
Safe in my Arms, sweet Duchess.
Do not hurt me.
Not for the treasures of the world, you are
My pretty charge, had I as many lives
As I have careful thoughts, to do you service,
I should think all a happy forfeit to
Delight your Grace one minute; it is a heaven
To see you smile.
What kindness call you this?
It cannot want a name while you preserve
So plentiful a sweetness, it is love.
Of me? how shall I know it my Lord?
By this, and this, swift Messengers to whisper
Our hearts to one another.
Pray do you come a wooing?
Yes sweet Madam,
You cannot be so cruel to deny me.
What my Lord?
Another kiss.
Can you
Dispense with this my Lord? Alas I fear
Hernando is asleep, or vanished from me.
I have mocked my blood into a flame, and what
My angry soul had formed for my revenge,
Is now the object of my amorous sense,
I have took a strong enchantment from her lips,
And fear I shall forgive Columbo's death
If She consent to my embrace; come Madam.
Whither my Lord?
But to your bed or couch,
Where if you will be kind, and but allow
Your self a knowledge, love whose shape and raptures
Wise Poets have but glorified in dreams,
Shall make your chamber his eternal Palace;
And with such active and essential streams
Of new delights glide o'er your bosom, you
Shall wonder to what unknown world you are
By some blessed change translated; why d'e pause?
And look so wild? will you deny your Governor?
How came you by that Cloven foot?
Your fancy
Would turn a traitor to your happiness;
I am your friend, you must be kind.
Unhand me,
Or I'll cry out a rape.
You wo'not sure?
I have been consent with Hernando's shadow,
Here's none but heaven to hear me, help, a rape,
Are you so good at understanding then,
I must use other argument.
Go to, Cardinal.
Hernando, Murder, Treason, help.
An army sha'not rescue thee, your blood
Is much inflamed, I have brought a Lancet wi'me,
Shall open your hot veins, and cool your fever;
To vex thy parting Soul, it was the same
Engine that pinc'd Columbo's heart.
Help, Murder.
Some ring the bell, 'twil raise the Court,
My Lord is murdered, it is Hernando.
I'll make you all some sport,???So, now we are even,
Where is the Duchess, I would take my leave
Of her, and then bequeath my curse among you.
How come these bloody objects?
With a trick my sword found out, I hope he's paid.
I hope so to; a Surgeon for my Lord Cardinal.
Hernando?
Justice, Oh Justice Sir, against a ravisher.
Sir I have done you service.
A bloody service.
It is pure Searlet.
After such care to perfect my revenge
Thus banded out of the world by a women's plot?
I have preserved the Duchess from a rape,
Good-night to me and all the world for ever.
So impious.
It is most true, Alvarez blood
Is now revenged, I find my brain return,
And every straggling sense repairing home.
I have deserved you should turn from me Sir,
My life hath been prodigiously wicked,
My blood is now the Kingdoms balm; oh Sir,
I have abu'd your ear, your trust, your people,
And my own sacred Office, my conscience
Feels now the sting, oh show your charity,
And with your pardon like a cool soft gale
Fan my poor sweating soul; that wanders through
Unhabitable climes, and parched deserts;
But I am lost, if the great World forgive me,
Unless I find your mercy for a crime
You know not Madam, yet against your life.
I must confess, more than my black intents
Upon your honour, you're already poisoned.
By whom?
By me,
In the revenge I owed Columbo's loss,
With your last meat was mixed a poison that
By subtle, and by sure degrees must let in death.
Look to the Duchess, our Physicians?
Stay, I will deserve her mercy, though I cannot
Call back the deed, in proof of my repentance,
If the last breath of a now dying man
May gain your charity, and belief, receive
This Ivory box, in it an antidote
'Bove that they boast the great magistrall medicine,
That powder mixed with wine by a most rare
And quick access to the heart will fortify it
Against the rage of the most nimble poison,
I am not worthy to present her with it,
Oh take it and preserve her innocent life.
Strange, he should have a good thing in such readiness.
This that which in my jealousy and state
Trusting to false predictions of my birth,
That I sh die by poison, I preserved
For my own safety, wonder not, I made,
That my companion was to be my resuge.
Her's some touch of grace.
in greater proof of my pure thoughts I take
This first, and with my dying breath confirm
My penitence, it may benefit her life,
But not my wounds; oh hasten to preserve her,
And though I merit not her pardon, let not
Her fair soul be divorced
This is some charity, may it prosper Madam.
How does your grace?
And must I owe my life to him whose death
Was my ambition? take this free acknowledgment,
I had intent this night with my own hand
To be Alvarez lusticer.
You were mad,
And thought past apprehension of revenge.
That shape I did usurp, great Sir, to give
My Art more freedom and defence, but when
Hernando came to visit me, I thought
I might defer my execution,
Which his owe rage supplied without my guilt,
And when his lust grew high, met with his blood.
The Cordial smiles.
Now my revenge has met
With you my nimble Duchess, I have took
A shape to give my act more freedom too,
And now I am sure she's poisoned, with that doze
I gave her last.
You are not so horrid?
Ha! some Cordial.
Alas no preservative
Hath wings to overtake it, were her heart
Locked in a quarry, it would search, and kill
Before the aids can reach it; I am sure
You sha not now laugh at me.
How came you by that poison?
I prepared it,
Resolving when I had enjoyed her, which
The Colonel prevented, by some art
To make her take it, and by death conclude
My last revenge; you have the fatal Story.
This is so great a wickedness, it will
Exceed belief.
I knew I could not live.
Your wounds, Sir, were not desperate.
Not mortal? ha? were they not mortal?
If I have skill in Surgery.
Then I have caught my self in my own Engine.
It was your fate you said to die by poison.
That was my own prediction to abuse
Your faith, no humane art can now resist it,
I feel it knocking at the seat of life,
It must come in, I have wrecked all my own
To try your charities, new it would be rare,
If you but waft me with a little prayer,
My wings that flag may catch the wind, but it is
In vain, the mist is risen, and ther's none
To steer my wandering bark.
He's dead?
With him
Die all deceived trust.
This was a strange impiety.
When men
Of Gifts and sacred Function once decline
From virtue, their ill deeds transcend example.
The minute's come that I must take my leave too.
Your hand great Sir, and though you be a King,
We may exchange forgiveness, heaven forgive,
And all the world. I come, I come Alvarez
Dispose their bodies for becoming funeral;
How much are Kings abused by those they take
To royal grace? whom when they cherish most
By nice indulgence, they doo often arm
Against themselves; from whence this maxim springs,
None have more need of Perspectives than Kings.
Mr. Polla'd, wher's Mr. Pollard for the Epi???logue?
I Am coming to you Gentlemen, the Poet
Has helped me thus far on my way, but I'll
Be even with him; the Play is a Tragedy,
The first that ever he composed for us,
Wherein he thinks he has done prettily,
And I am sensible; I prithee look
Is nothing out of joint? has he broke nothing?
Nor Sir, I hope.
Yes, he has broke his Epilogue all to pieces,
Can thou put it together again?
Not I Sir.
Nor I, prithee be gone, hum? Mr. Poet,
I have a teeming mind to be revenged.
You may assist, and not be seen in it now.
If you please Gentlemen, for I do know
He listens to the issue of his cause,
But blister not your hands in his applause,
Your private smile, your nod, or hum, to tell
My fellows, that you like the business well;
And when without a clap you go away,
I'll drink a small-bear health to his second day;
And break his heart, or make him swear, and rage,
He'll write no more for the unhappy Stage;
But that's too much, so we should lose; faith show it,
And if you like his play, 'ts as well, he knew it.

ALl that the Prologue comes for, is to say,
Our Author did not calculate this Play
For this Meridian; the Banckside, he knows,
Are far more skilful at the Ebbes and flows
Of water, than of wit, he did not mean
For the elevation of your poles, this scene.
No shows, no dance, and what you most delight in,
Grave understanders, here's no target fighting
Upon the Stage, all work for Cutlers barred,
No bawdery, nor no Ballets; this goes hard;
But language clean, and what affects you not,
Without impossibilities the Plot;
No clown, no squibs, no Devil in it; oh now
You Squirrels that want Nuts, what will you do?
Pray do not crack the benches; and we may
Hereafter fit your Palats with a Play:
But you that can contract your selves, and sit
As you were now in the Black-Fryers pit;
And will not deaf us, with lewd noise and tongues,
Because we have no Heart to break our Lungs,
Will pardon our vast Stage, and not disgrace
This Play, meant for your persons, not the place.
THis turn was not expected, Prince Leonario
Is much perplexed.
I cannot blame his Highness,
So near an expectation of a blessing,
To be thus crossed.
The Day of Marriage set,
With the applausive Vote of both the Kingdoms,
By an unlooked for War to be put of,
Would vex a royal spleen.
It is but deferred.
I doe not like the hope on it.
I pity
The Princely lover, worthy (without blemish
To the excelling virtues of the Queen)
Of as much goodness as her sex contains,
So Noble in his Nature, Active, bountiful
Discreet, and valiant, if we may believe
What his young fame proffers to every knowledge.
This character is not flattery and yet
The Queen our Mistress is not lost in this
Just praise of him.
I have no thought so Impious,
My duty never taught me to commend
But to obey, her Virgin sweetness makes me
Her just admirer but when I observe
Her prudent manage of the State, a strength
Would become many years, her pious Laws,
But that without example, made to advance
Her sexes Chastity, I forget all
Beside worth praise, though every least of her
Desert would ask a volume. It is his Excellence.
Ther's one not sorry for these Wars.
It is his
Profession; Soldiers batten in a Tempest.
And he deserves employment; yet I think
He will never purchase with his pay.
Be confident;
Your worth will plead alone; the Queen expects me.
Your Highness humble creature;—so, ther's hope yet
After a time of ease, and surfeit, we
May cure our selves by letting others Blood.
My Noble Lords.
Morrow Captain, you look blithe, and bright.
I'll put my Sword to scouring that shall shine.
I thank Heaven my prayers are heard.
What prayers?
That honest men may cut knaves throats, and bid
Defiance to the Hangman; Musk and Civet
Have too long stifled us, ther's no recovery
Without the smell of Gunpowder.
But Captain—
It is he, we must not lose him,
He has credit with the Lords it seems.
He has spied us.
My honest friends, welcome to Court. My Lords
Pray grace these honest Gentlemen, they will
Deserve to kiss your Hands.
Our business
Is to you Captain.
Doe you think what these brace of Baboons come for?
Not I.
By this day for money, moneys that I owe 'em.
Is it possible?
I ha'mov'd your suit Gentlemen.
What suit?
Touching the Masque. Which you two in the name
Of the whole City, offered to present
At the Town charges to congratulate
The Queens intended Marriage; I know
This Egg was long a hatching and expected,
But that your Heads could not agree, they being
Of several sizes, some upon the shoulders
Of your long-winded Officers, whose purse
Was made of the Leather with their conscience.
Does he talk to us of a Masque?
Good Captain put your Masque off, and give us.
The money that you owe us.
Was it not meant nobly?
But you my good Lords know how much
The Queen and Prince are sorry, that so rare
A President of their duty should not be
Upon record; this villainous War distracts
All civil mirth, but you will be remembered.
We know not what you mean, we have no antics
In agitation; if your Captain-ship
Will pay your debts, so; there is Law and courses
To be taken, and you will find that Justice
Can deal Sir with the Sword as well as Balance.
The Puppies talk Philosophy; nay then
I must be plain, would I could tice 'em to
A little treason, theyl ne'er hang for felony.
Why, whither doe you think I am going now?
We care not whither so you pay us first.
Let their own Fathers swing, so they have money.
May be you are going to the Wars.
Yes Mongrels,
To fight for your chamlet Faces, while you stay at home
And catch the cramp with telling money,
Putting your Guts to Pension every Day,
And roots, until the wind cry out again you,
And with your belching backwards stifle Men
That walk the Street, until the Air be purged;
Must we Eat Bullets without Butter. Whelps?
Have our Throats cut, or drop like Sheep by the hundred,
Of the rot, to buy your Peace, you boding Screechowls?
And have your consciences so course a Nap
To ask money of us?
You had the conscience
To take up our commodities.
Reason good;
Should I go naked leeches?
No but there is reason
That you should pay good Captain for your warmth.
Pay you? for what? for Clothes, such things as these?
Your tribe is bound to keep us.
How?
Yes, and desire us to accept your wares,
To recompense our sufferings; it is we,
It is we that keep your Worships warm and living,
By Marching, Fasting, Fighting, and a thousand
Dangers, (you o'er grown moths) you that love gold,
And wo'not take an Angel sent from Heaven
Unless you weigh him, you that spend the Day
In looking o'er your debt — Book, and at Night
Can lap and lecher in your Feather Beds.
Then snort, and dream of fourscore in the hundred,
Afraid of nothing but the Gout, or what
Is a more just reward for your hard hearts
The stone, which puts you to the charge of Physic
To make you piss out your last Usurers Gallon,
Or of a Surgeon to cut you for
The Pebbles, which (if you survive Incision)
You keep in penny Boxes, like deer relics,
And show your friends, when you intend to visit 'em.
And beg a Dinner.
Let not passion
Make you too much abuse their qulaity;
The City does contain brave fellows Captain,
As generous, as bountiful, discreet,
And valiant too, as any boast themselves
In Court or Camp.
I grant you my good Lord,
And honour all the Noble souls within it,
But these are walking sicknesses, not Citizens;
Two such prodigious things with crooked consciences,
Though Young yet Old in Usury—
All this Captain
Wo'not pay us our money, which we must
Have, or Petition for to your disgrace.
Well since there is no remedy, will you take
These two Nobleman's words for what I owe you?
Withal our Hearts.
That bargain is to make.
Good Captain, at this time you may excuse us,
Why, doe your Lordships think I'd let you surfer,
Come, you're my honourable friends; pass, pass
Your word, Isle pay the money; hang'em dottrels
Isle not be beholding to 'em.
We had rather you should good Captain.
No,—come hither Capons
Will money content you; shall I walk the Street
Without a Head ache, with your bawling for
The debt when I have paid you?
It is but reason.
I'll fetch you money presently — you may follow
If you please, but these Noblemen shall see
And witness what I pay you, I'll not trust
Your Memorandums.
Withal our Hearts Sir.
We desire no more.
I'll wait on you again.
Fortune de la guerre.
My Lord Leandro? what papers that
He so intentively peruses?
I like it and could willingly allow
The change; the Queen grows mighty in her spirit,
And this match with the Prince would swell her State
Too much; my Lords.
We are yours.
See what dangerous Papers have been scattered
To wound the Title of our Royal Mistress;
My servant brought me this; our Enemy
Who calls himself Prince Ferdinand would fain
Have us believe him Cousin to the Queen,
She an usurper of his Crown.
We all know him dead.
I'm sure I did attend his Funeral.
I think I waited too.
This paper says he was conveyed away,
And so escaped his Uncles cruelty,
To whose protection he was left an Infant;
He dying, we translated our obedience
To his Daughter, now our Queen.
Here's an Impostor.
Heaven aid the Innocent say I; he has
Valentias aid and comes not to Invite
But force a resignation; I wish things
Were calm again.
Prince Leonario if she prosper not,
Is like to be a loser too.
For him
It matters not, we have more to think on now,
Than love and complement.
I thought he would be General
Against this pretended Ferdinand.
What else?
Her sweet Heart, that gives Cupped in his crest.
Alas! there needs no art, nor strength of War
To advance her cause. Justice will fight for her
In the Clouds, and victory sent from Heaven, without
Her soldiers sweat, will gloriously descend
To Crown his Head with Laurel.
May it prove so.
I could say things would stagger your belief,
But I forgot the Queen sent for me; to
You both a servant—
I do not like my Lord Leandros winding,
He has been faithful.
Always honourable. The Queen.
I take this as the greatest honour Madam
You could confer; my name is young in War,
But my affection to your rovall person,
Armed with the virtue of your cause, shall make me
Doe something worth your name.
It was your request.
Nor could we place our chief command, but where
It is equalled with your Interest in us
And your own merit.
Sure my Stars did mean
This way to make you know, how much my heart
Dares in your service; and if Ferdinand,
For so he calls himself, possess a soul
Above the vulgar making, we shall spare
The Blood of many, and conclude the War
In single opposition.
With your Highness pardon,
It not becomes you should Engage your Person,
And so great a cause so dangerously;
It will be too much honour to the Impostor,
And in the supposition of the World,
A strength to his pretence, to bring your Birth
So low, to humble both your self and fortunes
To his unworthy Level, a thing grown
Up in the Night, a Meteor hanging in
The Air, prodigiously, fed with vapor, and
Black Influence, ambitious to deceive
The World, and challenge kindred with the Stars;
It is too great a venture Sir.
Since there must be a War
Let the armies meet in Battle theres more hope
After the worst to reinforce and prosper,
Than when the kingdoms put upon one stake,
And one Mans chance to assure it.
I allow
Your Counsel Lords; but have more argument
Convincing me, not to run such a hazard
Of what must make Olivia rich hereafter;
A kingdoms loss may be repaired, but your
Life made a Sacrifice to tyrant War.
May find a welcome to the other shades,
But no tears can Invite you back, to share.
Or grief, or Joy with me; Isle have no Duel.
It is a command, and my obedience
Shall meet it, though I fear twill be a sin
To be too careful of my self, but I
Shall still remember I am your Soldier.
And this considered shall not make me rash,
But wisely teach me to deserve this title
Which lives but in your honour.
I'll pray for you,
And not so much for what concerns the State,
As what your merit hath already gained
Upon my Heart.
Blessings upon 'em both,
A curse upon these Wars, that spoil their mirth.
My Lord Leandro.
Ther's your Commission Captain, I suppose
You have found ways to empty your Exchequer.
My Bags are not brimful my Lord. I have
Defalk'd, and made an ebb for Wine, and Women,
And other things that keep poor men alive
To doe their country service.
Please you walk
With this Gentleman Captain, he shall pay you
Five hundred pieces that I owe you.
Me, your Grace owes me nothing,
I could not pay the debt in better time Sir.
Umh! I will take the money, and allow the miracle.
Did you observe the Princes nobleness?
Although the act become him. Yet the manner
Takes me especially, Heaven preserve the Captain
From being Mad.
I prosper in your Vote,
But shall I Madam, if that power, which Crowns
With victory guides me with fair success
In this your War, and triumph smile upon us,
Shall I at my return have that reward
My soul next Heaven affects? shall no delay
(Colder than Frost to lovers blood,) afflict
My expectation of our Marriage?
Although to doubt this be a sin, yet where
The ambition is so Just, I shall but right
My Heart, to have it oft assured, nor can
It make your eye less rich in smiles, when it is
Only my love Encourages me to make
The busy harmless question.
It does please me,
Nor can you ask so often, as I have
A cheerfulness to answer, that I love you,
And have propounded nothing dearer to me,
Than that which perfects chaste affection,
And chains two Hearts; the Priest with sadness will
Expect you safe again, but from this War
When you return, he shall not in his Register
Of Lovers, find one, with more wing hath met
The bosom of her friend, than glad Olivia
To make one soul with you.
I have enough,
And thirst for action in the Field, from whence
I will bring Harvest home, or leave my self,
Happy in life or death to doe you service.
Well, I'm afraid if Hymen should set up
His Tapers now, they would not last to light
His Priest, at their return to say his Office.
Hope fairly.
I allow his spirit, but
The Prince hath not been practised in
The School of War, where stratagems prevail
Above all personal resolution.
He cannot want fit counsel to direct
His early valour, besides
Ferdinand by computation as young as he
May poise the scale. See, the Captain.
We always thought you Noble, and we hope
You'll take no offence, that our occasions
Prevailed above our modesty.
I know
You two are very modest; well I'm glad
I am furnished for you: my good Lords I must
Entreat you to be witnesses of what money
I pay these Gentlemen, that have trusted me.
And will again; command our Shops.
No, sit there, and starve,
Or if you like it better take a swing
At your own sign Post.
Good words Captain.
They expect good money, and both good are too much.
We always loved you.
And doe so still most virtuously.
It does appear,
And you shall find us ready—
I'll make but one fair motion, it will be
Sufficient trial of your honesty;
I have five hundred pounds, you see me tell it,
Faith make it up a thousand twixt you both
Till I come back, you will be Aldermen.
Ne'er a whit the sooner.
Alas Sir, if it were at another time —
Hereafter, upon good occasion you shall find—
You both i'th'Pillotie, for selling Copper
Lace by a wrong name; well ther's no remedy,
I'll keep my word; the money's ready for you.
You are noble Captain.
May you kill all the Queens Enemies.
You would not scope,
That Cousin her liege people every day, then.
This payment Captain will come most seasonably.
And doe us as much good, as you had given us
The sum twice told, another time.
Before
These Noblemen, have you such want
As you profess? you have no Wives nor Children.
I protest upon my credit, I am to pay
This day two hundred pound, or be endangered
To an arrest.
And I must go to Prison
If before Sun-set—
Then twill doe you a pleasure.
Above expression.
Here is twelve pence a piece for you you're fit Men
To serve the Queen:
How Captain?
Why in the Wars, choose either Pike or Musket,
You shall have that favour.
We are both undone.
Ha, ha, but will you use 'em so?
Have they not ready money? why do ye stare?
No thanks for my protection?
Protection?
Did you not protest you should to prison else?
Why you unthankful sons of false light, Sergeant
Take 'em to thei'r Rendezvous
Captain, a word—we are content—
I'm glad on it, Why do ye stay then.
To abate half our money.
All, all good Captain, he shall have all, rather
Than be sent a soldiering; do ye know what it is?
It is no Artillery Garden, where you come off
With as you were.
This was his Project.
Umh'. You will forgive me both your debts?
And pray Heaven to forgive you too.
My Lords, bear witness,
These two would bribe me to abuse the Queen
And the present service, is this less then Treason?
Oh. Er. Nay, nay Captain.
There are not two more able Men in the Army,
I mean for bulk; ram me into a Cannon
If you shall buy your selves with your estates
From this Employment; Il not cousin you,
Your money is good debt still, you may live,
And ask me for it again, and I may pay you.
But shall they serve indeed?
That's at their peril
When they come to'th, field, but go they shall,
And they were my Cosen-germans.
Good my Lord speak for us.
You doe not know my Lords, but a little suffering
May save their souls and teach 'em, if they come
Off, with a quarter of their limbs, compassion
To other Men, that venture their lives for 'em,
Their consciences are tough, and must be supplied,
When they shall fast, and march ten months in armour,
Sometimes through Rivers, sometimes over Mountains,
And not have straw at Night, to keep their Breech
From growing to the Earth, in storms, in heats;
When they have felt the softness of a trench
Thigh deep in water, and their dung to fatten it;
When they shall see no meat within a month,
But chaw their Match like Liquorish, and digest
The Bark of trees like Salads in the Summer;
When they shall live to think theres no such thing
In Nature as a thirst, and wonder why
A Taylor was created; when they have
As much in ready shot, within their flesh,
As would set up a Plummer, or repair
A Church with Lead, beside ten thousand more
Afflictions, which they are sure to find,
They may have Christianity, and not put
A Soldier to the payment of his debts.
It is a Mad Captain, come my Lord lets leave him.
You shall have time and place to send for money,
Or make your Wills; set on, who knows but you
Hereafter may be honest, and prove Captains;
You may have preferment in the Wars for money,
And so my Gentle Creditors, march on.
THe hope, and care of many years, are in
One day destroyed; hath Heaven no stroke in War?
Or is old providence asleep? Leonar to
Is coming home with victory, and brings
Young Ferdinand, whom I expected to
Salute a King, his Prisoner, and the Queen
With her new Conqueror, glorious in the spoils,
By putting out this light, will mix their beams
And burn our eyes out with their shine; there is
No talk but of this triumph, and the people
Whom I by art and secret murmurs had
Made doubtful at the first noise of this Conquest,
As they had borrowed souls from fear, and folly,
Adore the rising Star, and in the praise
Of him and his great fate, wonder that Heaven
Should hold a Sun, and he so bright; nor with
This flattery content, but they condemn,
(As low as all their sins shall one day them)
Him whom the chance of War hath made a Prisoner.
There is no trust to policy or time,
The things of State are whirld by destiny,
To meet their period, Art cannot repair 'em.
My Lord, the Queen hath sent for you,
She is going forth to meet the Prince, and hath
Commanded none be wanting to attend
With all the State that may become her, to
Congratulate the triumph now brought home.
I shall obey. I must attend this glory;
It is not safe to wear a brow, but what
The Queens example first forms into smile.
I here contract my knowledge, and seclude
My wishes, since they prosper not. I am
Her Chancellor; as great Offices, and high
Employments, do expose us to most danger,
They oft teach those possess 'em a State-wisdom,
And by Inherent virtues of the place,
Our fear to lose, makes us secure our selves,
By art more often, than by conscience;
But I may be endangered to suspicion;
I like not things; but I delay my attendance.
Lieutenant.
Captain.
Ancient, what think you of the Wars now?
We are come off with Honour.
And our Limbs, Captain.
Is that all? who made you a Lieutenant?
And you Ancient? these titles were not born w'e,
You did not wear these Buffs and Feathers in
The memory of Man, when you received
The binding twelve-pence, it was otherwise.
But you received, if you remember Captain,
Beside what we releast in honest debt
Sums for this great Instalment, we have paid
I take it for our names.
And it became you,
Now you are Gentlemen my Comrades of honour,
And I dare walk and drink at Taverns w'e,
Your oaths become you now, and your splay feet;
You looked before like Magots, City Worms,
I have made you both brave fellows, fellows to Knights.
You may be Squires to Ladies too.
I think so.
We are all now of a trade,
For Mars is Master of our Company,
Our Shop is the Field, Resolution our Stock,
Honour our Purchase, and Fire and Sword
The Tools we work withal.
But now the Wars are done, I think
We may shut up our Shop, there is no more
Pay, is there?
Pox upon you; I see your souls bleat after
Profit still, a bullet in the right place would
Have knocked out this humour of getting money;
But fear not, though you come off with more
Limbs than you deserve, you shall have pay.
Shall we and not be troubled to fight for it?
Yes, it will be necessary you fight, you will
Have your throats cut else, and be sent off like Sheep,
Doe not fear payment, here be Mandrakes,
That will roar, and cudgel you to your hearts content,
You sha'not walk the Streets now you are
Officers without a quarrel: pay enough.
A Man had as good be no Lieutenant, as be
Beaten when he comes home what think you Ancient?
For my part I can endure beating as well
As another if that be all.
Will you to your Shops again?
I have no mind to Wasted Stockings again,
And Shoos that Shine, I would were colours still.
Well said Ancient come I'll take your fears off;
Doe not confess you are a Lieutenant, or you an
Ancient, and no man will quarrel w'ee, you
Shall be as secure as Chrysome Children.
Shall we? they shall rack me ever Isle confess I am
A Lieutenant or ever see the Wars.
Or I an Ancient. Isle tak't upon my death
I was never a Soldier in my life.
It is well done; now because I love you,
And see you have an Itch after honour, so
It may come without blows, Let me advise you,
You have moneys at command.
And good debts too.
You shall both turn Courtiers.
Shall we?
I say it; for if my physiognomy deceive me not,
You two are born to be—
What?
Coxbombs. I'll help to make you too;
You shall presently kiss the Queens hand;
You have moneys you say, You shall never turn
To your vomit of small Wares. I have friends
At Court, you may in time be great; And when I come
With a Petition to your honours, for moneys in arrear,
Or knocking out some rascals brains, such as you were
When you wore a girt under your chops, you two
May stand between me and the Gallows.
Hang us if we do not.
You shall buy places presently. But stay,
Have you a mind to be Officers to the Queen
In ordinary, or extraordinary?
Extraordinary by all means.
We scorn to be ordinary Courtiers.
I commend your judgement, that will be
Chargeable: But—
Hanged, we will find money enough, but I more
Resolve to be extraordinary.
I'll bring you to a Court-Merchant pre∣sently;
You will get infinite estates.
A ha Captain.
And so command the Ladies, if you be bountiful.
A ha Boy.
For I know you do love Wenches;
You will have all the business, and the Country
Come tumbling in upon you like the tide,
After a month: You must keep twenty men
Between you, night and day to tell your money.
Oh it is unknown what will become on you,
If you be ruled, and take this course: Had I
Moneys like you, I would be—
Come, we will lend thee moneys too hereafter.
Will you, come on, no more Lieutenant now
Nor Ancient.
Do ye think we long to be beaten.
Pray do not grieve for me, I have a heart
Tha• can for your sake suffer more; and when
The tyranny of your fate calls me to die,
I can as willingly resign my breath,
As go to sleep.
Can I hear this Rosania
Without a fresh wound? That thy love to me
Should be so ill rewarded, you have engaged
Thy self too much already; it is within
Thy will, yet to be safe, reveal thy self,
Throw of the cloud that doth eclipse that brightness,
And they will court thy person, and be proud
With all becoming-honor to receive thee,
No fear shall rob thy cheek of her chaste blood.
Oh leave me to my own Stars, and expect
What ere become of wretched Ferdinand,
A happy fate.
Your Council is unkind,
This language would become your charity
To a stranger, but my Interest is more
In thee, then thus with words to be sent off;
Our vows have made us one, nor can the names
Of Father, Country, or what can be dear
In Nature, bribe one thought to wish my self
In Heaven without thy company; it were poor then
To leave thee here. Then by thy faith I charge thee,
By this—the first and last seal of our love. Kisses him.
By all our promises, when we did flatter
Our selves, and in our fancy took the world
A pieces, and collected what did like
Us best, to make us a new paradise,
By that, the noblest ornament of thy soul,
Thy honour, I conjure thee, let me still
Be undiscovered; What will it avail
To leave me, whom thou love, and walk alone
Sad pilgrim to another world? We will
Converse in soul and shoot like Stars, whose Beams
Are twisted and make bright the sullen Groves
Of Lovers as we pass.
These are but dreams
Of happiness, be wise Rosania,
Thy love is not a friend to make thee miserable,
Society in death, where we affect,
But multiplies our grief; Live thou, Oh live.
And if thou hast a tear, when I am dead,
But drop it to my memory, it shall
More precious then embalming dwell upon me,
And keep my ashes pure, my spirit shall
At the same instant in some innocent shape
Descend upon that earth thou hast bedewed;
And kissing the bright tribute of thy eye,
Shall after wait like thy good Angel on thee.
There will be none to speak of Ferdinand
Without disdain, if thou die too: Oh live
A little to defend me, or at least
To say I was no Traitor to thy love,
And lay the shame on death, and my false Stars
That would not let me live to be a King.
Oh Ferdinand,
Thou dost not love me now.
Not love Rosania?
If wooing thee to live, will not assure thee,
Command me then to die, and spare the cruelty
Of the fair Queen: Not love Rosania?
If thou wilt but delight to see me bleed,
I will at such a narrow passage let
Out life, it shall be many hours in ebbing,
And my soul bathing in the Crimson stream,
Take pleasure to be drowned. I have small time
To love, and be alive, but I will carry
So true a Faith to woman hence, as shall
Make poor the world, when I am gone to tell
The story yonder.—We are interrupted.
You must prepare your self for present trial;
I have command to attend you to the Judges.
That Gentleman, and all that did adhere
To your Conspiracy, are by the Queens
Most gracious Mercy pardoned.
In that word
Th'hast brought me more then life; I shall betray,
And with my too much joy undo thee again.
Heaven does command thee live, I must obey
This Summons, I shall see thee again Tiberio,
Before I die.
I'll wait upon you Sir,
The Queen will not deny me that poor office;
I know not how to leave you.
Death and I
Shall meet, and be made friends; but when we part,
The world shall find thy story in my heart.
Is that the prisoner at the Bar?
He that pretended himself Ferdinand,
Your Uncles son.
Proceed to his Arraignment; my Lord Leandro,
You know our pleasure.
Although the Queen in her own Royal power,
And without violating Sacred Justice, where
Treason comes to invade her, and her Crown
With open war, need not insist upon
The Forms, and Circumstance of Law, but use
Her Sword in present execution;
Yet such is the sweet temper of her blood,
And calmness of her Nature, though provoked
Ino a storm, unto the greatest offender
She shuts up no defence, willing to give
A satisfaction to the world how much
She doth delight in mercy. Ferdinand,
For so thou dost pretend thy self, thou art
Indicted of High Treason to Her Majesty,
In that thou hast usurped relation to
Her blood; and under name of being her Kinsman,
Not only hast contrived to blast her Honour
With Neighbor Princes, but hast gathered arms
To wound the precious bosom of her Country,
And tear the Crown, which Heaven and just Succession
Hath placed upon her Royal Head: what can
Thou answer to this Treason?
Boldly thus.
As I was never with the height of all
My expectation, and the aid of Friends,
Transported one degree above my self,
So must not Ferdinand, though his Stars have frowned
And the great eye of Providence seem to slumber.
While your force thus compelled, &amp; brought me hither
With mockery of my Fate, to be arraigned
For being a Prince, have any thought beneath
The Title I was born to; yet I'll not call
This cruelty in you, nor in the Queen,
(If I may name her so, without injustice
To my own right) a Kingdom is a Garland,
Worth all Contention; and where right seals not
The true Possession, Nature is forgotten,
And blood thought cheap to assure it; there is some∣thing
Within that excellent Figure, that restrains
A Passion here, that else would forth like lightning.
Tic not your shape, which yet hath so much sweetness
Some pale religious Hermit might suspect
You are the blessed Saint he prayed too; no,
The magick's in our nature, and our blood;
For both our veins full of one precious purple
Strike harmony in their motion, I am Ferdinand,
And you the fair Olivia, brothers children.
What insolence is this?
Oh my Lord, let him
Be free to plead; for if it be no dream,
His cause will want an Orator: By my blood,
He does talk bravely.
These are flourishes.
Speak to the treason you are charged with
And confess a guilt.
He justifies himself.
If it be treason to be born a Prince,
To have my Fathers Royal Blood move here;
If it be treason, in my infancy
To have escaped by Divine Providence,
When my poor life should have been sacrificed
To please a cruel Uncle, whose Ambition
Surprised my Crown, and after made Olivia
His Daughter Queen; if it be treason, to
Have been a stranger thus long from my Country,
Bred up with silence, of my name, and birth,
And not till now mature to own my self
Before a Sun-beam; if it be treason
After so long a banishment to weep
A tear of joy upon my Countries bosom,
And call her mine my just inheritance,
Unl•ss you stain my blood with bastardy;
If it be treason, still to love this Earth,
That knew so many of my race, her Kings,
Though late unkindly armed to kill her Sovereign,
As if the effusion of my blood were left
To make her fertile, if to love Olivia,
My nearest pledge of blood, although her power
Hath chained her Prince, and made her Lord her pri∣sooner,
Who sits with expectation to hear
That sentence that must make the golden Wreath,
Secure upon her Brow, by blasting mine.
If this be treason, I am guilty Ferd nand.
Your King's become a traitor, and must die
A black, and most inglorious death.
You offer
At some defence, but come not home; by what
Engine were you translated hence, or whether
Conveyed? There was some trust, deceived, when you
Were carried forth to be preserved, and much
Care taken since, in bringing of you up,
And giving secret Fire to this Ambition.
There wants no testimony here, of what
Concerns the story of my Birth and Infancy,
If one dare speak, and be an honest Lord.
Hows that?
Whose love and art secured me from all tyranny,
Though here my funeral was believed, while I
Sent to an honourable Friend, his Kinsman,
•few safely to the knowledge of my self
At last, till fortune of the War betrayed me
To this captivity.
I biush at thee
Young man, whose fate hath made thee desperate,
And care not what mans blood thou draw along
•n thy black stream, or what mans faith thou make
As hateful as thy crimes.
That confederate
Sure has some name, declare him, that he may
Thank you for his reward, and lose his head for it.
We always see that men in such high nature•
Deformed, and guilty, want not specious shapes
To gain their practice friendship, and compassion,
But he shall feel the punishment; do you smile?
A women's anger is but worth it Madam;
And if I may have freedom, I must say,
Not in contempt of what you seem, nor helped
By overcharge of passion, which but makes
A fruitless noise; I have a sense of what
I am to lose, a life, but I am so fortified
With valiant thoughts, and innocence, I shall,
When my last breath is giving up, to lose
Its self in the air, be so remote from fear,
That I will cast my face into one smile,
Which shall when I am dead, acquit all trembling,
And be a story to the world, how free
From paleness Ferdinand took leave of earth.
Alas my Lord, you forget me, that can
Part with such courage.
I forget indeed,
I thought of death with honour, but my love
Hath found a way to chide me; O my Boy,
I can weep now.
A sudden change, he weeps.
What Boy is that?
I prithee take thy self away.
Your Spirit
Does melt it seems, and you begin to think
A life is worth preserving, though with Infamy.
Goodness thy aid again, and tell this great
Proud woman, I have a Spirit scorns her pity.
Come hither Boy, and let me kiss thee; thus
At parting with a good, and pretty servant,
I can without my honour stained shed tears:
I took thee from thy Friends, to make thee mine;
Is it not truth Boy.
Yes my Lord.
And meaned when I was King to make thee great,
And shall I not, when I can live no longer,
To cherish thee at farewell, drop a tear?
That I could weep my soul upon thee,—But
You are to slow me thinks. I am so far
From dread, I think your forms too tedious.
I expect my sentence.
Let it stay a while.
What secret flame is this? Honour protect me!
Your Graces fair excuse, for you—I shall
Return again —
And I, with better guard
After my silence in the Grave, to meet
And plead this cause.
He is distracted sure;
His person I could pity, but his insolence
Wants an example; what if we proceed
To sentence?
I suppose the Queen will clear
Your duties in it.
But I'll acquaint her.
My Lord Leandro's gone.
His censure will
Be one with ours.
Yet shall I publish who
Thou art? I shall not die with a calm soul
And leave thee in this cloud.
By no means Sir. —The Queen.
Whose service is so forward to our State,
That when Our pleasure's known, not to proceed,
They dare be officious in his Sentence? Are
We Queen, or do we move by your Protection?
Madam, the Prince—
My Lord, you have a Queen.
I not suspect his wisdom Sir, but he
Hath no Commission here to be a Judge,
You were best circumscribe our Regal power,
And by your selves condemn, or pardon all,
And we sign to your will: The offence, which you
Call treason strikes at us, and we release it,
Let me but see one curl in any Brow:
Attend the prisoner hither; —Kiss our hand.
Are you so merciless to think this man
Fit for a Scaffold. You shall Sir be near us,
And if in this confusion of your Fortunes
You can find gratitude, and love, despair not.
These men that now oppose, may find your title
Clear to the Kingdom too: Be Sir collected,
And let us use your arm.
What change is here?
What think you of this Lords?
I dare not think.
Affronted thus? O my vexed heart.
Isle follow still, and if this be no dream,
We have escaped a Brook, to meet a greater stream.
THough I believed her passionate, and like
A Sea, tempestuous in her anger, I
Never thought she would marry him.
She's the Queen,
But with what honour she could quit the Prince,
Who (without treason) did deserve her too,
Comes not within my reach.
If you consider
He has been valiant for her to great purpose,
And brought a prisoner home, to mount his Gannet:
It was a pretty service.
How does he bear it.
He's here, you may enquire it.
Be swift and faithful, Arragon bleeds here,
Nothing but War can right my cause and honour.
Expect an army great as your own thoughts
To cut the way to your revenge.
My Lords Rodriguez and Ernesto.
Your Graces servants.
A man may take the benefit of this Garden,
Without a Court offence, youh ave had the day
Of triumph, and the Queen already teeming,
To bless the Kingdom with an Heir; and yet
You see I walk like a poor Neighbor Prince,
And have my heart still.
I am glad you bear it so.
Nor have I a meaning
To run my self into despair, or strangle
My better hopes, out of pure melancholy,
I praise the influence of my Stars; there is
A fire in Cupids Quiver, that will scorch
Through armour; and what's women's flesh and blood
To make resistance, though I did not dance
Upon the marriage night, I wished her joys
In the morning.
Her heart showed she was pleased
With what she had done; she was as active as
The air before she went to Bed.
But I
Observed a declination in the King,
And as the night approached, which should have more
Enlarged his mirth, he grew more melancholy.
Strange! And such a Bride that took him from
So great a loss, to place him in her bosom;
But he was marked for the Queens thoughts, and I
By destiny to bring this pair of Pigeons
Together. I expect no more reward,
The Willow Garland Crowns me, but the Prince
Is here still.
Your highness hath a noble temper.
How ere he seem to cover it, his soul
Hath a deep apprehension of the affront.
Let's leave him, our discourse may be displeasing.
We are servants to your Grace.
You've honoured me.
Think I am tame still? let the inconstant Queen
Secure her thoughts, and glory in my silence;
This heart is laboring a revenge.
Captain, what news? the Court is merry still?
Not altogether so merry as it was hoped for.
Can there be an eclipse already?
I have not read the Almanac for this year,
But by my Court Astronomy, I find
Our Sun and Moon are in no Conjunction;
They take their fit by turns, the King was cold
And full of phlegm last night, and they that wait
Near both, report the Queen this morning looked
As she had wept.
O, tears of joy.
Of anger rather, if you saw her sullenness.
She frowns on every man, she turned away
One of her servants but this morning, for
Presenting her with Verses, that did praise
The King, and wish her fruitful. Her own Page
Was whipped, for saying the King lay with the Queen
And might for ought he knew, get her with child ere morning.
Thou art humorous.
And so are they.
This begins well; and what
Do people talk abroad of me, and my
Affront?
Why, they say they are sorry for you,
Especially the women.
Thou art pleasant.
Some that are chief in counsel, privately
Suspect it but a trick of State; and that
You had discovered underhand the Queen
Was not—
Leave this mirth; let me indear thy care
For my intelligence at Court; I must
Not off so tamely; and expect me here,
After a small dispatch, I have more to impart.
Your humble creature still Sir. Alas poor Gent'
Were I as capable to be entertained now, in revenge
I would mount all the Madams in the Court,
There should be nothing like a woman in it,
But I would touse and tumble: Who are these?
Save you Sir.
It may be so.
Pray Sir take no offence, we have been en∣quiring
About the Court for two Gentlemen.
And cannot your four eyes see two Gentlemen
In the Court?
Excuse us Sir, we have seen many, you
May guess we have relation to the City Sir,
And would be glad to meet two of our old acquain∣tenses,
A brace of our Tribe,
We hear, translated first out of the City,
To be Sons of the Sword, are since turned Courtiers.
Pray do ye know 'em?
Yes children of the Gown, but their employment
Wo not give 'em leave to attend such vulgar confe∣rinse,
And here comes one of the Moon-calves, does he loo•
Like a Haberdasher, that's one of the Maids of Honour
The Weasel loves a Hens-Nest, and I have settled
This persuasion, That no woman can hold out,
Now he is sworn a servant extraordinary.
Sir do you know us?
No.
We were your neighbours, and of the same trade
They'll make him sweat; how the Rogue gloats upon 'em
We were of your acquaintance, when you sold Garters.
Go hang your selves.
And Statute-lace.
What are these?
Poor men that had some losses late by fire,
And would become my Clients to procure
Some Letters Patents to beg by; alas, they are half distracted.
He's proud— I have a parcel of Periwigs
Please you, for old acquaintance, put 'em off for me,
Among some friends of yours at Court, whose skulls
Are but thinly furnished; the hair is of a
Gentlewoman's spinning.
I could love this Citizen, and ow him any money
For his confident abusing him.
He has bribed her absence with some Ring or Bracelet,
Least she should taste the discovery now.
Methinks you need not be so proud.
I would have you to know that I am an ex∣traordinary—
Proud Coxcomb.
Servant to the Queen. What I was,
I am willing to forget;
What you are, is apparent, I defy the
Dunghill I came from, and it is scandalum
Magnatum to be so saucy.
I will not leave your worship so.
What will this Rascal do with himself?
Here comes the other Fool to make up the Gemini.
Hum, I will not know him—Let me see—
The humble Petition of—
Save you Matter—
Prithee fellow do not trouble me—
Humbly praying— The Queen shall sign it.
Let me see this other—
Who the devil will bring him a Petition,
This Whelp has discovered him, and now would
Pretend himself most busily employed
About Petitions to the Queen.
Hum, shall daily pray for— Hum.
More wit and money a your side; for your
Extraordinary place will not hold out.
Sir I have a suit to you.
Is it Embroidered Satin Sir, or Scarlet?
Yet if your business do hold weight and consequence,
 may deserve to wear your thankfulness
In Tissue or cloth of Bodkin; Ermines are for Princes.
Alas my Suite is not worth your wearing.
Good faith Sir you must excuse me, at this time
My attendance is expected at the Counsel, come
To my Chamber by five a clock in the morning
Four days hence, and you shall be sure to find
Me—
A sleep.
But do you not know me?
Hum. Yes I have seen your physiognomy, were you
Never in a conspicuous p•ace, called the Pillory.
How, the Pillory?
A skirmish, and it be thy will.
If it were not in the Court Garden,
〈◊〉 would beat out thy brains.
Take heed, for I am an extraordinary—Sir
Ratcatcher.
You may beat out his brains here as securely
As if you met him in the market; Marry if you do
Not kill him outright, it is but the loss
Of your hand.
I would it were but the loss of my left hand
To beat one of thy eyes out— Are you an Ancient?
Thank you for that, so I might deserve
To be beaten. I am an extraordinary Sir.
And deserves to be beaten accordingly.
You may kick him without danger.
May I?
Look, your friend will show you a president
He is acquainted with the Court latitude.
This is no striking.
I know it is not.
They are subtle knaves, and know the Law▪
A pox upon 'em, I feel it.
At their peril say I, these poor things
Do not believe that we are extraordinary men,
I shall know you another time, I shall.
If you had known him now it had been better
For your honchos. Well, I have not done with
These whelps yet, till they are undone.
I shall never be sufficiently revenged for their affron•
At Court. The Prince commanded me to
Expect his return here, I'll not leave
The Garden. Who's this?
Is perjury no sin? or can Heaven be
So busy or a sleep? Such crimes of men
Pass with impunity? Let this wake your anger:
This; Ferdinand is married, all his vows
Scattered in the air, dispersed like witherd leaves,
And hurried on the wings of some rude Wind,
Whose pride was to deflower the Spring; Oh Ferdinand,
Could thou, whilst yet thy breath was warm with love,
With love of me, call back thy faith, and tear
Thy Heart from mine to plant it in her Bosom?
How's this?
What though she be a Queen? could any thirst
Of present title flatter thy Soul from me?
I that left all for thee, and would have called
Death for thy cause a triumph, now must live
The scorn of my own thoughts, despised by thee.
Here's a new business; this obscures me quaintly.
The King commands you not to leave the Garden.
He espied you from the Gallery Window, and
Would have you here attend him.
Sir, may I
Without offence, ask if the King be merry?
We are scarce yet acquainted with his nature,
But we observe no Jubilee in his eyes,
Nor is the Queen so pleasant as our hopes
Did promise after Marriage.
Pray excuse this boldness.
You'll expect his pleasure here?
It is my ambition once more to see,
And speak with him, and if his language break not
My Heart, I'll take my leave—the Queen.
He is a Servant to whom the King
Was pleased to show affection, when he had
No expectation of your Royal favour.
I do remember, I observed him once
Use more than common passion to this servant,
And if we may build any confidence
Upon a fair aspect, he may deserve it.
Say we would speak with him; my Heart's oppressed
With melancholy, something tells my spirit
I am too tame; have I advanced a thing
Without a name to perch on the same Cloud
With me, and for his sake slighted a Prince,
My Honour, and his Faith, transported with
My folly and his charms of tongue and person?
And dares he pay me with neglect and coldness?
Oh my vexed soul! but he shall find I have
A sense of my dishonour; and yet open
Ways become trivial and poor revengers,
I will doe something that shall sting him to
Repentance; my Lord you now may leave us.
Sir of what Country are you?
Of Valentia.
Your name?
•iberio.
My Parents not ignoble, yet too hasty
In the apprehension of Prince Ferdinand;
His Fortune (if I may yet call him so)
Gave me to be his page, I must confess
My diligence thrived so well since I came to him,
That he did value me above his servant.
Yet I've not seen you wait since we were married.
It was no want of duty Madam, I
Had late some wrestling with a Fever, that
Compelled me to my Chamber, and disabled me
For fit attendance.
Why dost weep?
I Madam?
I see the tears.
They are not sorrow then to see my Master
Possessed of so much happiness in your love,
And I am confident, his soul so full
Of Honour and regard to your great virtues
Will seal him worth your gracious favours Madam,
And the worlds Envy.
I'll not blame him now
For loving thee; and so much hath thy faith
And innocence prevailed, thou shall it translate
Thy service, and be mine, he shall consent.
I am to both most humble.
Prithee tell me,
Making so much of thee, he do's impart
Sometimes the secrets of his bosom to thee.
Tell me what fault he has, for thou know all.
Alas Madam I know none,
Or if I did, it ill became the trust
And duty of a servant to reveal 'em
Thou were it his bed-fellow?
Gracious Madam—
Do's he not wanton in the night, and talk
Of Mistresses.
By truth not to me Madam.
Dissemble not
know he has a Mistress.
If love were ever so unkind to him—
Unkind? why I'st a sin to love? I shall
Suspect thy Youth has not been free, thy looks
Betray some seeds of Love.
By all that's good
never was in love but with my Master.
Good.
He is not worth it.
Madam.
Be wise, and govern well thy hopes. I'll help
•hee to a Mistress; you have no Mistress yet?
But you self Madam.
It shall be no other.
•hy Master is ungrateful.
Goodness aid him.
And wisdom thee, thou art a pretty youth,
I will reward thee better, if thou can
Be faithful and obey.
In all things Madam
That shall become your creature.
It is not safe
To play with a Queens favours, you shall wait
Near us; forget thy Master, and be happy.
What clue can guide me in this Labyrinth?
I would when I had lost Ferdinands Heart
I had lost my understanding. She returns.
The King is coming this way; now be free,
Thou shall it have reason afterwards to bless
Thy fate, this cannot chose but vex him.
The Queen so pleasant? she has lost her sullenness,
Plays with his Hair, and smiles.
Madam, the King
Observes us.
Strokes his cheek too, she does want
A Ganimede; my poor Rosania
Art thou the path she walks on to revenge,
All is not well within her Heart but mine
Sinks with the heavy pressure—she is gone.
The Queen does grace you much Tiberio,
Those favours are not common.
She is pleased
For your sake Sir to cast some smile upon me;
I know it was your request she should be kind,
To keep my Heart a live.
You are not discovered.
Did not you discourse
My story to her?
I?
Take heed, yet this
Will add but a thin Feather to the scale
Of my misfortune, she knows all, and in
The pity of my sufferings says you are
Not worth my love, and calls you most ungrateful
We are both lost, till now there was some hope
How to repair thy sorrow.
Do not mock me;
It is a worse tyranny than to kill, to laugh
At what you have made wretched, it is as possible
To call past ages back.
Take heed Rosania,
And be not Judge of what thou know not, dearest.
I know too much.
That I am Married.
Ther's no truth in Man.
You are too rash; for there is truth in me,
In Ferdinand, though in thy thoughts held black
And stained prodigiously with breach of faith,
I have not broke my vow, do not compel me
By thy unbelief to do a Sin I hate
As much as I love thee.
Have you a Soul?
Yes, and thy Eye shall read it, be but calm,
That Soul, thou once did love, white with his first
Simplicity and faith; I wo'not urge
In my excuse the beauty of the Queen
Enough to melt a Scythian into love,
But call to mind my dear Rosania,
And do but put upon thee Ferdinand
So late forgotten by his Stars, a prisoner,
Slaved like a villain at the bar, expecting
At every breath his sentence, nay admit
Rosania, the best part of his Soul
Stood like a weeping fountain to take leave
Of what she never must salute again:
In this extreme, to preserve Ferdinand
And save Rosania, would thou scorn the breath
Of mercy, that did Court thee from the Lips
Of a great Queen? could thou love Rosania,
If thou were Ferdinand to lose thy self?
Whom she would follow in a stream of tears,
And when she had made an Island of thy tomb,
Striving to swim to thee, she could not choose,
But drown her self in her own waves. I prithee
Take reason to thee, and when you have considered—
Persuade me I am not Rosania,
And I will say it is virtue, and that yet
Your heart may grow with mine; is not the Queen
Possessed of that which should have been my title,
A Wife to Ferdinand?
It is confessed the world
Doth think it so, I did consent to ceremony.
Call you enjoying of the Queen but ceremony?
Pause there, and if thou hast but so much charity
To think I dare not blaspheme Heaven, I'll call
That, and the Angels boldly to my witness,
The Queen's to me a stranger yet.
A miracle.
Retain but love, as thou preserv'st thy sweetness,
And that will teach thee to believe that Ferdinand,
How ere saluted King is still thy subject,
And though her Husband, in my faith to thee
The Marriage Bed hath still our Virgin sheets;
A Brother might embrace a Sister, with
The heat I brought; that this is truth, the power
And name I have, shall only serve to make
Our flight secure into another Kingdom,
And when I part with these new shining glories,
Thy faith will be confirmed, and thou acknowledge
I ventured much to keep my Heart thy servant.
I know not what to say; is not the Queen
Displeased?
She is, but cunningly disguises
Her passion to the World; but I forgot
What must enlarge my fears of her revenge
If thou be known Rosania.
Lose that fear,
I am still safe, and now I see the cause
Makes her repent her favours, and thy greatness;
Forgive me Ferdinand, and yet I know not,
All is not well, ther's poison in this Balsam
Prepared for thee.
From whom?
Rosania.
When she shall but consent to have me dye,
She shall not trouble poison to send off
My despised life, my soul in just obedience
To her command will take a cheerful flight
In hope to serve her in the other World.
You shall know more hereafter, and let this
Secure your thoughts, she yet believes me what
This shape presents, but without wise prevention,
I fear I shall not live too long concealed;
I dare not say her honour is a bleeding,
But a Queen thus distasted may not find
That Ice within her blood; we are interrupted.
Your pardon Sir; it is the Queens pleasure
This Gentleman attend her in the Gallery.
He shall wait her commands—
I know not what to counsel, it is not safe
Sweet to neglect her, yet my fears of some
Ill fate, are round about me like a mist,
And dark my understanding; let a kiss
And silence teach our souls some new discourse.
Why here's a volume of Intelligence
I'll stay no longer to expect the Prince,
But seek him out immediately; disguises?
King by your leave, I shall untruss your Mistress.
I know not what I feel nor what to fear,
If love ever meant a Tragedy; it is here.
If we ne'er meet again, one more salute
Shall fortify our lives by joining breath,
Nor shall our last hard fate deny us this,
To change our faithful Souls at our last kiss.
I Know not what to think on it, but if I
Have any sense, there is some new state madness
Crept into Court.
Are we not all a sleep,
And these fine dreams perplex us?
No it is waking.
Show me the tenth part of a reason why
The Queen did Marry him.
It was destiny.
Why since should he be melancholy?
Or she so humorus?
Not lie together? pray Heaven the Gentleman
Be found with no defective title in him.
Observe her favours to that Boy, he was
His servant, now her minion. I like not
These violent wheels; the whole frame may be soon
Endangered, if these passions be not cured.
New lodgings for him, near her own, and he
Given free access to the Bed-chamber.
It is nought
Or will be so, I pity the good King;
Though she have raised him to the highest glory
Her power extended too, yet to make this height
His precipice, and throw him into scorn,
Nay poison the best hopes he had of honour,
And love from her, and in his sight to Court
A Boy, his servant? It would vex the best
Of all our tempers, if we felt the sting on it.
He's here, that Lady is the Queens Cabinet.
They are merry about the Mouth.
Another summons?
It is possible the Queen may Marry him too.
There is some mystery we cannot reach.
If we doe well remember, ther's a Law
Made by her self, as soon as she was Queen,
To keep Wives Pulses temperate, and correct
The insolent Blood of Women that had Husbands.
And Men were not exempted.
I say no more.
But Heaven maintain the Law, and the Law-makers,
And conjure down that Devil,
It is the King and the smooth Boy, lets leave 'em.
Was this the Ladies Message? does the Queen
Take thee into such favour?
I tell truth,
And though it sound but ill on the Queens part,
Because she thinks me what I seem my Lord,
You need not to wear one Cloud upon your Face
When you remember who I am, my fears
Are thick upon my Heart, how to secure
This shadow any longer.
That afflicts
Me most Rosania, for it pleases me
To hear she can affect thee; but what way
To keep her expectation high, and thee
(My dearest) safe? her passions may be violent.
They are already Sir, if I mistake not;
I wish to Heaven that you were reconciled
To do the office of a Husband to her,
That peace would keep her Bosom clear, and I
Should live to all the World except your self
A stranger still.
What language speaks Rosania?
Ther's death in every syllable; should I
Obey what thou desire, and do the office
Of a Husband, ha?
I'll wait upon you still,
And hope you will vouchsafe me now and then
A harmless smile; her beauty will deserve
Your whole heart, and ther's something in the memory
Of what she has advanced you to, will help
To make you kind.
Should I enjoy the Queen?
Because the misery of my fate compelled
A ceremonious sin? shall I betray
The essence of my faith, and leave a curse,
When thou art known, upon my name for ever?
If thou hast taken new resolves against me,
Punish my heart some other way; had she
More ornament than ever met in woman,
Mistress of more perfection than Poets
Invented for the Queen of love, to this
Were the proud Empire of the World her own,
And she would make me Lord of her, and these,
It would not buy me to the pleasure of
One Nights embrace, my body shall not carry
My soul so far astray; the Man condemned
To live in a perpetual Snow, hath not
A purer Frost within his blood.
This but
Engenders a new grief although it bind
Rosanias Heart there is yet one way left
And that ere I pronounce you must forgive;
There is a trembling in my tongue and I
Already feel such Winter in my breath,
My timorous Lips do wither.
Do not fright
My Soul too much ther's something threatens me
So like a loss of these, that I am left
A piece of shaking Earth, death cannot look
To make me tremble so; can thou forsake me?
Not in my Heart but give my body leave
To seek some other place my Lord to dwell in.
When I am gone into some wilderness,
You will find ease at Heart, and love the Queen,
And perfect all; I'll pray you may live happy.
And hold Intelligence with some gentle Winds
That shall convey my wishes and return
What joys do follow you; the purling Rivers
I'll teach your name and they which g•id this way
Shall bring thee something Ferdinand of mine;
My tears I know will not be lost, which I
Will send thee daily by the courteous stream,
Clear pledges of my faith; consent my Lord
I may depart and you shall choose your way,
To every blessing here.
Not till we meet
With one embrace, and take our flight together;
And I have thought a way to perfect it,
Observe my sweet Rosania, the Queen
Thou say affects thee, cherish it, with all
The softness of her creature; if she allow,
Kiss her, and promise what young lovers doe,
Examine not, but by thy love to me
Be free in amorous language, if she have
Heat to a private meeting in her Chamber,
Obey, this shall secure our loves ambition.
Enquire not, but resolve, and let me know
The time.
You will attempt no violence
Upon the Queen?
By this—
What if she have commanded me
This Night?
To meet?
In het Bed-Chamber.
Ha! obey it.
At a late hour.
It shall beget our comfort
If thou consent.
But shall I not expose
My self to danger, if her love pursue
Immodest ends, since you advise I should
Apply my self to her desires?
If she
Take too much flame, by some soft art delay her,
Till I come to close all; keep still thy person
Secret, the least discovery will destroy
Us both; the Evening with much hast prepares
Thy visit and our happiness.
I'll obey,
But be you sure to come.
Lose thou no time
Now to indear thee to her, let us part
Love will find balm to cure the wounded Heart.
Was he not cheerful when he promised thee?
He was, and he was not.
I have a strange apprehension, and this doth feed it.
I told him it was an honour worth his joyful
entertainment.
If it should prove successful, my revenge
Were perfect, I'm resolute to pursue—
It makes well
For your contrivement that the King and you do
Lodge at distance—stay, I hear a tread.
I hope it is he.
Prince Leonario Madam.
What comes he for?
Although I have small expectation
For my own sake, that you can pardon Madain
This bold access, and at so dark an hour,
Yet when you have heard my business, You will know
Your self so much concerned, I'll not despair
To find your mercy.
You prepare me for
Something of consequence.
Please you to dismiss
Your Lady, I have something to deliver
Wo'not become her knowledge.
Leave us—now,
Our conference is free, your Graces pleasure?
It must be matter of much essence, that
Could not expect till morning, but you're welcome.
This time and darkness Madam best becomes him,
Who for your sake blushes to see the Day,
But I came not to chide my wrongs have learned
A modest silence, my approach is not
To name a suffering of mine but to
Discover what already is prepared
Against your peace and honour.
Is it treason?
It is, but threatens not your life, you may
Live many years upon the wound.
You fright me.
Lose not the beauty of your cheek so soon,
Hide not beneath that cold and killing Snow,
One Rosie blush, and yet that pale would show
Like Innocence which you have lost; oh Madam
Had you not made a forfet of your truth
To me no storm could shake you but your soul
That made no change could know no fear; I come
To tell you what just providence hath done
In my revenge, your breach of vow is punished
With loss of faith in him to whom you gave
The Heart you promised me, the King, whose pride
You built on my dishonour, is as false,
As you were.
This is passion but be
Not yet too rash in censuring him. Whom I
Have placed so near, I must defend, nor will
He need my strength, to make their blood account
That dare traduce his honour; he has a Heart—
A false one. I was born without a fear,
And dare upon his bosom (wear he worth
The manly contestation,) write him perjured.
I would this were not envy; but admit
He be thus guilty, it is a fault in him.
No Madam, it is yours; that sin that poisoned
The expectation of my joys in you,
Hath made him false, and will excuse his story,
When you are named that broke your faith to me;
I can have no hope now to be repaired,
But if it be worth memory to know
The triumph waits on Innocence, the World
Shall say the Queen deserved to meet a scorn
Deep as her wrongs to me.
It cannot be.
Think so, and help to make the revenge greater,
Till the winds catch the black report and multiply
The shame, by scattering it about the Kingdom,
Sit still, and careless of your fame, encourage
His private lust, his Mistress now in Court.
A Mistress in the Court?
Yes Madam, in the Court.
And may one day think any second place
Too narrow to contain her greatness, she —
As you're a Prince no more; I have done ill,
And find the penance here It does agree
With his neglects, and adds new flame to my
Young jealousy; I feel a tempest rising;
By all your goodness leave me Sir; I cannot
Now right you more than mourn, and give belief to you.
No more I pray you, by all your love to honour.
I have done,
And take my leave, my everlasting leave,
It is time; how like the day, that flatterd us
With cheerful light, are my desires fled hence,
And left me here a prodigy of darkness,
A walking Hearse, hung round about with night,
Whose wings must one day cover all? farewell.
If any Star look forth, it is to call
Me hence, and light me to another World.
Our Lips are never like to meet again.
Farewell, if I but stay, I shall forgive her.
A Mistress in the Court? something is busy
About my Heart.
The Prince is gone.
No matter.
Affronted thus? but I forgot to ask
Her name that rivals me; how this passion
Befools our understanding, and prevents
The knowledge, and the cure of what afflicts us!
The Morning will assure all; but shall this
Strike me to ashes? I may find a way
To my revenge.
Tiberio is come Madam.
Wait carefully.
I know my duty.
Rise,
This meeting was not meant for ceremony,
Ther's something in this presence will deserve
We should put off all state, and speak like friends.
You must be covered too. I'll have it so.
We are private now.
These graces will
Undo a youth, whose birth, and careless Stars
Ordained him to be humble, and with duty
Wait on your meanest servant.
Thou shalt soon have cause
To think thy Stars are careful of thee, if
Thou can be wise.
Alas! my years are few.
Thy knowledge is not wanting to distinguish
Whose favours Court thee, and apply thy self
To understand, and thank the kind bestower;
It is in my power to make thee great.
You may
Advance this worthless walking shadow Madam,
And when you like the free and bounteous Sun
Have blessed me with your rays, it is but like
His glorious warmth bestowed upon a piece
Of rude and barren Earth, which takes not from
The lustre of your Beams, but shows more clearly,
By your own light, what poverty you shined on.
This modesty becomes you not, look in
My eye, and read what's there.
Some thing like anger,
Enough to strike me dead.
What now?
A smile,
And such attending sweetness—
Thus it shall
Invite thee still to gaze, and love, Tiberio,
No frown shall point on thee; I find my eyes
Were meant for thee, and all they graced before,
But objects of mistake. Here, here, O turn
Thy lovely face away, left I be seen
To blush, my heart hath chose to place my love
And the reward; this would become thy tongue
A great deal better, Come sit down Tiberio.
What still an Infants understanding? Think
I am the man, and learn a little better,
What beauty dwells upon this hand, What softness,
How like the Snow, or Innocence it shows,
yet fires my heart with every gentle touch.
Dear Madam; would the King would come.
This is a happiness that Kings should sue for,
And yet there are poor comforts in these Kisses;
Let hands preserve Society with hands,
And with there change of whiteness, and of Balm,
Make wealthy one another: But let what
Was meaned for kisses meet, and find out pleasure
By warm exchange of souls from our soft lips.
Madam, how like you this?
Madam.
I suppose you a Lady all this while,
And I the man, our lips must meet again,
Will this instruct thee nothing?
Gracious Madam.
And yet this recreation comes short,
Dear Lady, of what love might well allow us.
Admit you are a Queen, you are not bound
To th•n your Royal Blood with frost, but as
Your power, your pleasure should exceed; nay grant
You have a man (a man said I) that can
Keep love alive, and warm a yielding bosom,
Yet where from the invitement of your eye,
And amorous choice, I am become your servant,
You may be a little kinder.
Madam, I know not
How with the safety of my self, my duty,
And your own name and power, to understand you,
(Yet this to some would need but little Comment)
Can you place such a value on a thing
That not deserves to breath your name? Or should
I hope these charms of Language you have spread
To catch my heart which hath no wings, but where
It can believe; For you trauscend so much
In wonder of your love, a willing Faith
Not easily can reach it. But dear Madam,
I know all this is but to try my duty,
And you have pleased to choose me forth, to make
These silent hours more grateful, by the mirth
My weak replies may raise you,
Miracle!
I but imagined thee a woman, now
I shall believe thee one indeed; this coldness
Becomes no masculine habit. Come, we'll in,
And change our Sexes; Thou shalt wear my clothes,
And I will put on these, help on with thine,
And I will dress thee handsomely, and then
We'll act again.
Not for the world dear Madam, Not yet come?
The world? This confirms my jealousy.
I'll search you to the soul, Atones come,
I'll call thee so, and court thee with more charm
Than Venus did, when in the Italian Groves
To buy a kiss, she offered the proud Boy
Her flaming Chariot, and her Doves of Snow.
It is in thy power to make thy fate and heart
More happy by consent to meet with mine;
Tempt not the anger of a Queen despised,
Whose breath can like a whirl-wind snatch thee up,
And drop thee in a Wilderness, where with sorrow
For thy neglect, thou by degrees moist sigh
Thy self into a Mist, which no Sun-beam
Shall pity or take up into a Cloud.
But love me, and compose thy heart to mine,
We'll live with more delight, than fancy can
Enrich Elizium with. The soft hours shall stay
Till we allow 'em Wings, and while we kiss
And on each others Lips breath Incense thus,
We'll have ten thousand Cupids for our guard,
Whose Bows shall awe the destinies, and we write
The King and Queen of Fate.
Will this deserve your faith?
We must believe.
We are undone, the King.
False Keys?
It was time to come.
Had I not cause, my Lords, to appear sad,
When I suspected this so great affront?
My melancholy all this while was but
A mourning for this shame: Look but my Lords
Into your selves, and make this suffering yours.
Madam be raised again, I have an art
To fetch you off with honour, and the youth too.
I will persuade him there can be no cure
In this extreme. but to pretend himself
A woman; I will dress him in your Gown
Before they can be ware on it; they all know
This way he cannot fly, mean time put on
A confidence, and •et them know you are
The Queen, not to be shaken with their power;
This will gain time.
Prosper in this.
I will
Redeem my fault, or never sleep again.
She blushes not.
Were she nor Queen, what names could we bestow
Upon this want of modesty?
It is plain.
We came in time.
Most happily to prevent
Some further act of shame; can she look on us
Without a blush?
I see no such attraction
In your state faces, that I should desire
Much to look on 'em. Who made you King I pray?
Your power I dare not call it love, presuming
That I was fit to be your property,
Without a soul to see, or have a sense
Of these dishonours; This rank heat of blood,
Madam, what penitence can make this clear?
Admit your thoughts were wanton, and your flame,
Too great to be suppressed, could you find none
For your adulterate embrace, but one
That was my servant? my own hound devour me?
As if your lust had not enough of shame
And mischief to me, but your malice must
Appear in it too; with what security
Can I expect to live, when she begins
So soon to poison me?
We heard her say
They two would write themselves the King and Queen,
So we did all.
You may consider these.
It is impious
Madam with what grief do we
Remember now that Law you made
After your Coronation to preserve
The name of your sex chaste which gave our Hearts
Hope of your blessed progress; you made it death
To stain the Marriage-bed; where shall we expect
The life of that good act, when you begin
A breach of chastity by so black example?
If the King urge an Execution
Of what our vote confirmed by yours imposed
Upon the kingdom, you should prove your self
More innocent or give us cause to mourn
This fall from virtue
Madam we grieve for you.
So, so, have your great wisdoms said all yet?
I laugh at you (poor things) and am so far
From trembling at your thunder, that I pity you;
And first I'll let you know you selves, you are
I take it all my subjects, I will not
Exempt you Sir, since Marriage takes not off
My Interest, and Essence here all strength
Flowing from me, and your Derivative shine
Extinct, when I frown you to darkness; by
What power dare you take an account of me?
That am above your Laws, which must obey
Me, as their Soul, and Dye when I forsake 'em?
But I will reason coolely, and admit
They live in force; against whom? are you so shallow,
To think we that created, and decreed 'em
For vulgar reformation, must be squirt
And Levelled by 'em, as we meant to lose
Our Character and distinction, and stoop
To the common file of subjects? this were policy!
I speak not this with sense of any guilt,
So to decline it, for I here defy you,
And bring an Innocence shall strike a blush
Upon your Souls; that sinned in my suspicion.
Where is the Boy? Ernesto take him to
Your custody, and bid him not despair,
I have contrived the rest.
He's here.
Take it upon you, if it come to searching
We'll find a Jury.
You are deceived my Lord, with your good pardon, He is not here.
Who is not here?
The he you do expect;
And your Officious Ladyship might well
Have spared your pains, to put on all this trim.
What means the fellow?
It is no news to your Sir.
I could have told the Queen before and you
My honourable Lords, this was no Boy,
Though now he would but seem of the tother sex,
I knew her name.
My name?
Are not you called Rosania?
Ha! betrayed?
Yes indeed is she, you were present Sir
In the Garden when this fine Hermophrodite
Declared what sex was hid behind the Breeches,
And this I certified the Prince before.
Now it is clear.
There are some tokens too I can remember,
As kisses, and excuse for marrying with
The Queen, a Virgin still, &amp;c.
A Woman?
But are you a Woman indeed?
And now my Lords, if you have Hearts that are
Honest and daring come about again,
For this is but a cunning piece of treason,
Against your Faith, and the Queens honour.
We are both lost Rosania.
It is truth, or take my Head off.
You do believe this transformation,
And know this Lady, my good Lord, I did
Suspect before the cause of your neglects,
And meeting with some dark Intelligence
From the Prince, to perfect this discovery,
Did in my Chamber woo with aptest forms
Of Love, to try how long the sex would be
Concealed; you heard a part, and see us kiss,
And came in time with these wise Noblemen
To prevent further acts of shame.
I'st possible?
It was an ill contrivement to make me
Proof of the Queens dishonour.
An apparent Plot
Against the life and honour of the Queen,
Since he would urge that Law maliciously
Against her, knowing this to be a Woman,
And his close strumpet.
The same Law must be
Their trial.
What a change is here already?
You must not Lords deny me Justice.
It is insufferable
Against a common person.
Let his first
Treason, if you think good Madam, be urged
In accusation.
So, so.
You did us service Captain.
I am bound too't, here is more news for the Prince.
Use your pleasures.
What need we circūstance, let him dye to morrow.
Death will be mercy to so much ingratitude,
Command them both to several custodies.
The morning shall behold 'em dead—
Now more lost then ever.
Pray lets take
Short leave of one another, it is in vain
To reason against providence, or say
We might have lived; though I must dye, and after
Be hid in my obscurest name, and shade,
I must declare whose blood they will profane
In bleeding thee; farewell, our last, last kiss.
My heart would fain come to thee, I will make it
My humble suit with my last breath it may
Be quickly sent thee.
We shall both meet, when
This dust falls off, and our souls kiss again.
MY Lord you tell us wonders, it is high time
To open such a mystery.
This change
Will exceed all, and so convincing are
The circumstances of this great discovery
They do command our faith.
And you shall steer us.
Then let us lose no time; oh my good Lords,
Did you but feel the torment of my bosom,
Till I discharge the duty, which so long
Hath slept in his concealment, you would call
For wings to fly, and think all motion tedious;
For Heavens sake lets make hast, that we prevent
The morning, which will rise upon this knowledge
With cheerful beams, and put on all his glory.
Most gladly we attend.
I have no Heart to think of any thing
But my Rosania, all devotion,
When I remember her, flies off, and leaves
My soul no contemplation but her safety;
They were too cruel to divide us, night
It self looks now more black by this dim taper;
Rosania's eyes would brighten all, but they
Weighed down with sleep, and sorrow, are perhaps
At rest, a thousand Angels watch about 'em;
And let some one whose office is to wait
On harmless love, present me to her dreams;
O let her hear me often call upon her,
As I am led to death, and when the stroke
Divides me from my self, and from the World,
My Heart shall pay her tribute, and my blood
Do miracles, when every Crimson drop
My Body bleeds, shall not in vain be wept,
But fall into some Letter of her name,
To keep alive our story.
What lights are these?
This place sure is not wont to be thus visited.
They are spirits, ha! yet if I have a memory
Those Faces were but late familiar to me.
What mockery is this? if you be substances
Of things I know, go tell the Tyrant Queen
She might allow me death without this scorn,
This jeering Antimasque.
Long live the King.
What King?
Long live Ferdinand King of Murcia.
A dream, a golden dream. What fancies wait
Upon our sleep? and yet I wake, they are
Apparitions, I'll shut my eyes, and lose 'em.
They wo'not vanish Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto?
All your subjects.
Collect your scattered thoughts my Lord, and be
Assured, we now pay real duties to you,
You are our King, and must be.
Who says so?
I, whose cold fear, and frailty,
When fate of Wat had made you Prisoner,
Concealed the truth, and Justice of your title,
It was I that saved you from your Uncles sury
And sent you to Valentia, while I cozened
The kingdom with your death, till time might ripen
Your challenge to the sceptre; if you can
Find mercy to a treason, great as this,
I'll live, and study how to merit pardon.
Rise, rise all,
And if you be Leandro, pray come nearer.
Pray Heaven this unexpected happiness
Meet with no ecstasy, all senses are
Not armed for such extremes of Joy.
The Queen,
When she finds this, will fall into a Fever,
By instinct her Head must ache this very minute.
And shake too, for the Crown is tottering.
Pardon? thou should divide the kingdom with me.
But do all these believe it, will you not,
When I make second claim, deny me again?
Call me Impostor?
Sir forgive that first,
And I'll not ask Heaven pardon for my next
Denial, let death threaten all his stings;
And I have satisfied these Lords so well,
They are confirmed in your just claim, and person.
We lay our lives and fortunes at your feet.
I may command you then, fetch me Rosania;
I'll be no King without her; do not stay
To hear how much I love her 'bove the Crown,
And all the glories wait upon it, she
That was my Page, my fellow Prisoner, Rosania.
It is that name next to Heaven I bow too.
Good my Lord follow him, and if she be
Awake, oh drop it gently by degrees,
(The joy is mighty, she a sad weak Virgin)
That I shall live to make her Queen.
Stay you, and if I play too much the wanton with
My fate, or swell with expectation,
Speak something to allay my hopes, and say
There may be crosses yet, the Queen may want
Faith or consent, or put case the people
(A dangerous torrent to oppose) like not
This Innovation, where is the King then?
Doubt not their Loves, you had they•
Hearts before;
Let nothing shake you.
You are my better Angel.
Why then if my Rosania will be Queen,
The kingdoms ours again; she comes, she comes.
Thou make too little hast to be a Queen.
I am my self again, my name is found,
I shall live to, thus to embrace Rosania
Without a fear, these Lords are all thy subjects,
I am a King.
You are.
Then what must my
Rosania be?
Happy, if this be more
Than dream, my tears and sufferings are all paid for
If this be true.
Most true.
What a strong arm
Hath Heaven?
See how the Day hath made
Hast to salute Rosania, and to wait
Upon thy triumph, blushes like a Maid
When she is told she is in Love, the Stars
Are gone to tell the other World, thy beauty,
Till now Eclipsed with sorrow, hath thrown off
The imprisoning veil, and shines above their bright∣nos.
•ut how shall we Leandro now contrive
•or our Court entertainment, where the Queens
•repar'd to hear our Tragedy?
Leave me
•o order your appearance; but first Sir,
We must secure this Fort.
The Captain is
My creature.
Thou shalt be all our direction.
Come my Rosania, time hath turned a gen
Our Glass, and his keen sith this comfort brings,
•t cuts no scepters down but to make Kings.
So near?
We heard before of your affront
My Lord, and were prepared.
It hath outstripped my expectation,
These Letters say
Mendoza is their General new returned
With victory from the Moors; his fame I honour,
My knowledge never reached his person.
Sir, he brings old Soldiers with him, the Commanders
Are such, whose faith and valour in those Wars
Already tried, he durst name to the King
To be employed here in your highness cause.
We will to Horse immediately. I long
To salute the Army.
Which but wants your person
The Soul of their design; you may soon reach 'em.
I will.
Your Grace.
That we had wings, away, to Horse to Horse
Speed, and you be so hot of the spur, my business
Is but breath, and your design it seems rides post.
The Earth runs upon wheels; whom do I spy?
My extraordinaries, I'll have sport with them,
But first observe 'em.
I see no profit in these offices
That we have brought.
Not extraordinary, as the name did promise
The Rogues are poor, and now repent.
We were told by the cheating Captain
That we should want Men to tell our money.
This it is to deal with Soldades.
We should command the Ladies too, and we
Were bountiful, a small Pox take their beauties,
It is the greater curse, I have undone
My self in giving away enameld Rings
And Bracelets.
Well, if I trust a Captain again.
Or I.
I'm glad they are paid; I wo'not leave 'em
I feel my antipathy strong yet.
I would venture half my soul to be revenged
If I knew how.
True Rascals!
The Ladies love him.
They all Love Men of War.
Would his poop were a fire.
And Battles in Bed naturally.
Well, what Ladies give him hereafter to bu• new Feathers, may his body compel him to bestow upon a Surgeon.
May Diseases undermine his Flesh like Gun powder,
And blow all his skin up into blisters.
May they that look for his Nose, go about for want of a •ridge, and let him wear no Legs but what he buys from the Carpenter.
May his face break out, and undo him in taf∣fata, and may the patches at the last be so many, till his skin be invisible, and his goggle eyes look through a Mask.
May he live to be as much coward as we have been, and be beaten!
Abominably beaten, and may the miracle be on our side, that we may be valiant, and be the Men to doe it, oh I would have no more mercy.—
Save you Gallants, save you Courtiers.
My noble Captain.
It may be he did not hear us.
Hark you, what purchase have you two made lately?
Of what?
Of Lands and loggerheads, Lordships I would say,
I know you are both rich, you cannot choose,
But I will borrow no more of you, faith besatisfied
and leave off in time with the wealth you have.
Where is it Captain?
Can you tell where we may borrow as much money upon our extraordinary places, as will set up shop again? For this Court trade wo' not do.
How?
No indeed Captain we have made little benefit since we came to be extraordinaries.
Ye took not the right way then.
That may be.
Why, cannot you lie, and swear, and pawn your souls for six pence, the Devil could not furnish •he City with two more hopeful Borachios. You have a Carrot-colourd Beard, and that never fails, and your worships face is a prognostication of preferment
Is a Prognostication of preferment, where
Beside Dominicall Letters you have all the
Conjuring Characters of the Planets.
But all this is your cunning, to dissemble your estates.
By this empty pocket, I have but one Shirt
You jest y'saith.
And by all my no money, I have but half a one left
Come, come, you took up linen lately, I heard You did.
I, smocks.
Why they are in fashion with extraordina∣rye Courtiers.
But if you be in earnest, I can tell, where you
May furnish your selves richly.
Where? where?
W'y in the Shops for ready money, but you would Save charges.
I marry Captain.
Venture to rob a hedge, it is but hanging,
And whats that to men extraordinary?
But if your wants be real, be not dejected,
I'll set you up again my self, I have been
Beholding to you two for your good words
And wishes Gentlemen.
It pleases you to say so, I begin
To smell.—
Not to us Captain, we have been beholding to you.
And it happens, as if fortune had made you miserable
A purpose to bless you both with such a preferment, as wo'not be offered again in a Coronation.
On good Captain, for we are extraordinary miserable.
Then observe; you are not ignorant how things go at Court, the King is in prison.
So.
And his wench with him that walked in Breeches; The Queen resolves they shall both dye.
Good.
This morning too; now in regard the King is a person of quality—
I think he be.
And the tother a Lady, as some imagine, you two may do very well to undertake now—
Any thing.
To be a couple of Hangmen: do ye mark? to dis∣patch the Queens enemies in what horrid way, her coun∣sell shall think convenient, you will do service to the State, and have extraordinary rewards; besides the honour and reputation of your places; what say? it is my pure love to make this first offer to you.
Do we look like a couple of Hangmen?
No you have not so good a complexion; and now I think on it you sha'not live to have that preferment come, draw you that wear your Sword like a Bum-baly, do as I bid you, and that quickly.
It wo'not come out Sir—
No.—this shall in then—
I will put more strength to'c.
So, now, do ye mark—kill one another.
Kill one another?
Yes and do it religiously, with as much alacrity as you would devour an Orphan: and do it handsomely, that you may not be hanged when you are dead.
I'll see it done, he that is dull shall have my goad to quicken
him: —
So, good, good again, well offered—they fight by these Hilts
Furiously, now could I forgive 'em—so, enough.
This is very fine sport.
Necessity has taught 'em the noble science, come. if all fail, you shall fight challenges; ther's money and
broken Pates to be got that way, you can make legs, and gape like Gudgins for benevolence, cut scurvy capers, to show your Legs are well, when your Head bleeds; farewell; stay, you want money, I had forgot, there is twelve pence apiece for you.
How Captain? I hope not.
They are not hearty yet, they think I serve 'em with Press money again; no, tic my pure bounne. Go, set up again, and trust Soldiers, without impertinent asking for your debts; they I pay you.
As you have done.
I'll hearken how you behave you selves farewell. When you are rich, I'll visit you again, and borrow money.
Too much is too much; humh.
Now have I a great mind to fight with your Captainship.
So have I, now my Hands in, methinks it is nothing.
You are not desperate?
We are a little better, as good be Hanged for kill∣ling of you Captain, as live after the rate of our disgrace. I am resolved.
Two Mastives at once may worry me. I am put too't.
Must we have tother about.
This is enough at once we may come too't in time.
Why now I love you, love you, as well as you do Law.
Upon good terms we love you too.
Let's shake Hands, you sha'not to your vomit again. Now you dare sight, I'll tell you a hundred ways to get moneys, come, we'll drink and divide fortunes, Run not back into cows again.
I'll be Ancient now again.
And I Lieutenant.
Both my own Boys.
It is not so hard to fight I see, if a Man be but desperate, and give his mind too't.
Pox a Cowards; come Captain.
Let me hug ye my brace of Mirmidons, And drink a Tun of Wine to this conversion.
The Prince so early met upon the way
This morning say? and with a Soldier?
And in that hast too, Madam, I was told
The speed of Wings was slow, their fiery Horse
Bathing in foam, yet fled as if they meant
To leave the Wind, and Clouds behind 'em.
Strange!
I could have wished him with less discontent
To have left us, but my stubborn fate designed it;
Having thus snatched away himself, it will
Become us to compose, and make the best
Of our State game; I sent a Messenger
With our command, to the Governor of the Fort,
He should attend the King by the Water-gate
Leads to the Garden, we do purpose conference;
If Ferdinand wisely consent to break
The Magic that so chains his Heart to that
Idol Rosania, we'll be reconciled,
And Peace shall marry once again our Hearts.
Me thinks our Lords are cold in their attendance,
Where be our train of Ladies?—nay permit 'em,
A solitude becomes this sullen Day.
And our own thoughts; methinks thou dost not look
With thy own face upon me.
Not I Madam?
My eyes have lost their virtue, all I look on
Have not the shape and colour they presented.
What whispers that? have?
Here was none Madam.
I could be jealous of the Wind methinks,
And quarrel with the postures of those very
Shapes in the Arras; fie Olivia, call home thy reason.
O Madam!
What horror's in that voice? I see a treason
In's looks.
O Madam, I beseech your pardon.
Why? art a traitor?
Not I, but there are practices I fear
Against your royal person; the Court gates
Are shut, ell's in confusion within,
And I could hear abroad loud acclamations
And triumph for the King, as he were new proclaimed.
Which way come thou?
Over the Wall Madam; the gates are shut,
I'll tell you news; young Fordinand your Husband
Is in all state attended, and proclaimed
King in his own right, he is proved to be
What he did first pretend himself, Leandro,
And all the Lords confirm't, the Governor
Hath given him up the Fort, the wise City
Her Keys, and every officer on's knees
Is praying and drinking the Kings health,
Away and let thy face be seen no more,
But when the fatal noise of fire, some blood,
Or burial calls thee forth.
This my reward
For bringing news the King's alive? take heed,
Do not talk treason in your own defence,—hark
From what an expectation am I fallen!
Long live Ferdinand King.
We thank you; and will study to be worth
Your prayers and duty; Madam the Chancellor
Can clear, and bring your faith to allow the wonder,
We are no Impostor now, nor need we borrow
A beam from you to make us shine yet still
You are our Cousin, fair Olivia,
The Husband was a title long since due
To my Rosania, may it prosper here.
Our love and years grew up together, and
Our Souls by holy contract tied, when in
Alfonzo's House, her Father, and my Guardian
(To whose trust I was sent an Infant by Leandro)
We plighted faith; it is no blemish
To fair Olivia still to be a Virgin,
Though she have lost the Queen, she is a Princess.
And hath now found a Kinsman, that shall study
What shall become his love, her blood, and honour.
Upon your Lip I print this fair assurance.
And mine shall be to do you service Madam.
If this be true, you must command my duty.
We hear Prince Leonario is departed,
When he shall know the progress of our fortunes
He will quit his Stars, that hid their golden Heads
To mock him with a small Eclipse, of purpose
To light him with more glory to his happiness. Soft Alarm
Ha? what clamours that? the frightful noise increases.
Fly, and save your selves the Fort's surprised By the Prince of Arragon, whose troops have seized the City, reeling with Wine, and careless of their strength, in their joys for you Sir.
The Prince of Arragon? the fates cannot
Be so injust, so envious of our blessing,
To snatch it from us in a minute; ha?
Help, help, quarter.
They are in the Court already.
We are all undone,
Lets yield, and ask conditions honourable.
Dye he, that dares but think so yield? no, Ferdinand
Was here too late a Prisoner; let us sell
Our lives at glorious rates, the Evening puts
A Mask upon the horror, follow me.
To certain death; Ladies stay you, the danger
Will meet us here to soon, and yet your persons
In honour challenge safety.
Is there no end of my distractions?
Or hath my folly yet deserved more vengeance?
It cannot be Heaven will so soon destroy
The blessing it bestowed if thus you punish
Whom you advance, who will believe your gifts
Are more than flattery to betray our Peace?
This Lady is my prize.
How Sir, your prize?
Mistake me not, ther's no dishonour meant
Your person; yet I boldly may pronounce
You are, and must be mine. I am not ignorant
You are a Virgin all but name, be wise
As you are fair, and I forget what's past,
And take this satisfaction; if I meet
Contempt, where I with honour once more Court you,
You will create a flame shall never dye
But in the Kingdoms ashes; you were mine
First by your own election, sealed above,
If I must lose what Heaven bestowed upon me
The quarrel is not mine
But virtues, whose right Hand is armed with Justice.
Punish not where you owe your Heart, but let
Both our revenges meet in that Impostor;
I find your noble Soul return; Lord General
While I retire with this fair Queen whom not
One violent accent shall affright, much less
A rude attempt, take hence that counterfeit,
And cut his Head off.
O my dearest Lord?
The rest may if they please find mercy.
I were best be of this side.
Away with him.
Insulting Prince, thou dare not.
How Sir, dare not?
I said it,
Thy better, being a King in my own right,
Without her charity, proclaimed and justified,
By Birth a Prince.
All this is truth Sir.
You must not Cozen thus my faith, away;
Cut off his Head.
Dispatch you with the Queen,
Let me alone to make his Head secure.
Nay take mine too. I'll wait on him in death,
It shall begin my service.
Cruel Prince.
What fate must I obey?
My death will add some lines
Unto thy bloody Chronicle; pray let us die together.
You shall speak, her sentence Madam.
She must live then.
To all we offer mercy, but to Ferdinand,
His doom is fixed; come Madam.
Whither Sir?
I know the way to your Chapel, he that loves us
Make hast, and bring the Priest.
That's I, I know
Her Chaplains, they are my friends, and all good fellows.
Pray can you tell me, where, or what I am
Or what I must do next?
Yes, you must dye.
Let not that grieve you Gentlemen, it is nothing
To part with life, and if but my Rosania would not weep
Methinks I could shake off this dust, and leap
To Immortality without a guide,
And in that cheerful flight prepare the blessed
With so much praise and wonder of thy virtue,
They shall be more in love with thee, than I,
And double all their prayers to bring thee to 'em.
No, we will dye together.
You shall.
How?
Both live, and love, and bless my age the witness.
Do ye know me?
Father?
Guardian.
Alfonso, my noble Kinsman.
How joys flow in my Heart, to see this constancy!
How came you to be his?
I have deceived the Prince our forces are Valentia's,
Not Arragons, which he by Letters sent for
In his revenge, but we met the Intelligence
And arrived sooner to pretend our selves
The Army he expected; you shall know more hereafter.
I want a knowledge where to begin my gratitude,
The joys you bring are mighty, and overcome us.
O my Rosania?
This was beyond hope.
So, so, it is done, he has mumbled up the ceremony;
A compendious Priest may do much in few words;
They are fast enough; the Queen was wise to take him;
You are only like to be a loser Sir; they come.
All joys to the Prince of Arragon, and the fair Olivia.
Why not the Queen Olivia?
Not while this Gentleman's Head is on, believe it.
Where is Mendoza?
Hid within this bush—
But here's Alfonso General of the Army
Sent from Valentia to assist King Ferdinand
To his native right.
Valentia?
My Master having failed in his first aids
To Ferdinand, intended not sit down
With so much loss, but raised another Army,
Which in our march consulted our security
By Interception of all passages;
Your messenger by a party was surprised,
Him, stubborn to discover what he was,
Imperfect in his answer, we Interpreted
Some spy, and searching found your Letters fraught
With mischief and revenge, these sent to our King
We had command to hasten our design,
And steer our course by Sea to Carthagena,
How after we arrived, we gained your faith
And purposes, Your highness knows.
Betrayed?
Sir, be a Prince, and just to your own honour,
And having perfected your fair desires
With her, we hope you will account your self
Most happy that you mist a power to serve
Further revenge upon a lawful Prince,
My Soldiers will obey me now, although
To help your Marriage I appeared no friend
To Ferdinand.
Who was the Prince preserved
By me, and sent an Infant to this Lord,
My noble Kinsman.
Him I bred, till time
And strength might arm him to return, and claim
His own.
Leandro denied this before.
To my dishonour, it was a coward fear
To lose my self unprofitably
I apprehend with wonder.
If you repent not-love and our alliance,
She shall be worth your best embrace, and we
Forgetful of your passion, entertain you
With all affection to our blood.
I meet it,
And satisfied in this story, Joy I was
Prevented; I congratulate your Stars Sir;
Nor is this treasure of less price to me
Than when her Temples were enchac'd with Empire.
This love will give my soul another form.
Our story hath been full of change, but love
Hath met a glorious victory, and tied
Our souls together with most firm embraces.
My Lord Leandro you shall to Valentia,
With our best thanks and greeting to the King;
His Armies charge is ours, beside what else
We owe his Royal bounty. Once more welcome
Alfonso now my Father, witness I
Preserve my faith to my Rosania,
I hear the Priest call us to other rites,
His Altar doth expect another pair,
Make hast to light his Tapers with thine eyes
And make our hearts each others Sacrifice.
I Am no Epilogue, I come to pray
You'd tell me your opinion of the Play,
Is the Plot current? may we trust the wit
Without a Say-Master to autorise it?
Are the lines Sterling? do they hold conceit?
And every piece with your allowance, weight?
That when you come abroad, you'll not report
You are sorry to have given white money for it?
So, so, I know your meaning, now pray tell
How did the action please ye, was it well?
How did King Stephen do, and tother Prince?
Enough, enough, I apprehend, and since
I am at questions w'ee, tell me faith
How do you like the Captain? ha? he saith,
I'll tell you, you're my friends, none here, he knows,
I mean you of the Gentry, t'whom he owes
No money, will enter a false action,
And let the rest look too't, if there be one,
Among his City creditors, that dares,
He hath vowed to press, and send him to the Wars.

DOes this look like a Term? I cannot tell,
Our Poet thinks the whole Town is not well,
Has took some Physic lately, and for fear
Of catching cold dares not salute this Air.
But ther's another reason, I hear say
London is gone to York, it is a great way;
Pox of the Proverb, and of him say I,
That looked ore Lincoln, cause that was, must we
Be now translated North? I could rail to
On Gammer Shiptons Ghost, but 't wo' not doe,
The Town will still be flecking, and a Play
Though ne'er so new, will starve the second day:
Upon these very hard conditions,
Our Poet will not purchase many Towns;
And if you leave us too, we cannot thrive,
I'll promise neither Play nor Poet live
Till ye come back, think what you do, you see
What audience we have, what Company
"To Shakespeare comes, whose mirth did once beguile
"Dull hours, and buskind, made even sorrow smile,
"So lovely were the wounds, that men would say
"They could endure the bleeding a whole day:
He has but few friends lately, think o'that,
He will come no more, and others have his fate.
"Fletcher the Muses darling, and choice love
"Of Phoebus, the delight of every Grove;
"Upon whose head the Laurel grew, whose wit
"Was the Times wonder, and example yet,
It is within memory, Trees did not throng,
As once the Story said to Orpheus song.
"Johnson, to whose name, wise Art did bow, and Wit
"Is only justified by honouring it:
"To hear whose touch, how would the learned Quire
"With silence stoop? and when he took his Lyre,
"Apollo dropped his Lute, ashamed to see
"A Rival to the God of Harmony.
You do forsake him too, we must deplore
This fate, foot we do know it by our door.
How must this Author fear then, with his guilt
Of weakness to thrive here, where late was spilt
The Muses own blood, if being but a few,
You not conspire, and meet more frequent too?
There are not now nine Muses, and you may
Be kind to ours, if not, he bad me say,
Though while you careless kill the rest, and laugh,
Yet he may live to write your Epitaph.
I Like not this last Proclamation.
Nor I.
It startled me to read it.
Did you read? tic a fault Strozzo a fault
I'll have no thief hereafter learn to read;
Threaten us with long winded Proclamations?
We are safe within our Woods, and Territories,
And are above his Edicts; Have not wee
A Common-wealth among our selves, ye Tripolites?
A Common-wealth? a Kingdom; and I am
The Prince of Qui-Vala's, your Sovereign thief,
And you are all my Subjects.
We are—
And is there one so base to change Complexion,
Because we are proscribed? I'll be no Prince.
I have a grudging on me to be honest,
And leave you to the fear of hemp, and hunger;
Have I by stratagems so oft preserved you,
When you were howling out your lives, and lead
A way in Dog-couples by rusty Officers?
And are you struck dead with a Paper pellet?
Your blood turned Whey, because there is reward
Promised to bring our heads in? I renounce you—
Land Rats—
Most excellent Frapolo, they recant;
A little humane frailty may be pardoned.
Shall thieves, whose predecessors have been Kings,
And conquered worlds, be factious, and schismatic?
I speak not for my self, but your own sakes,
Whose Impudence, and art in valiant theft,
Hereafter, may advance you to be Princes.
You have confirmed us.
You were best be rogues, and one betray another,
To get the base reward; do, lose your honour,
Live branded, and be pointed at in the street,
There goes a Rascal that betrayed his Prince,
Or cut the throat of his Comrade, this will
Show well i'th'Chronicles— Stand fair you varlets,
Because we cannot tell whose heart is treacherous,
I will examine all your Phisnomies,
And in whose face soever I can find
A scandalous line, or look that may beget
Suspicion of a Man that wo'not die
An honourable Rebel, and defy
The Laws, I'll shoot him presently.
Hang Laws,
And those that make'em, Conscience is a Varlet;
Stand fair and show complexions.
Ye are all valiant, honest thieve lenders,
And I will be your Prince again, and die w'ee,
As boldly, as they dare invent—
Hang Cowards.
I will not have you thieves among your selves.
How's that, and please thy Excellence, not thieves?
Not thieves one to another; but Religious—
There is a kind of a Religion
We Outlaws must observe.
I never knew
Religion yet, and twill be now unseasonable
To learn.
I'll be of no Religion.
Who was so bold
To say he would have no Religion?
What man is he, hopes to be drunk, to whore,
To sc•pe the wheels, the Galleys, and the gallows
And be of no Religion?
He says right.
Ye shall be of what Religion I please.
Tic fit we should, Frapolo is our Monarch.
And yet I must consider of some fit one
That shall become our trade
And constitutions; hum! Silence.
Nay, nay Prince, take time to think on it,
Ther's no hast.
I have thought,
And you shall be no Pagans, Jews, nor Christians.
What then?
But every man shall be of all Religions.
I like that well.
Why should I clog your Conscience, or confine it?
Do but obey your Prince, and I pronounce
You shall live Grandees, till the State Fangs catch you,
And when you come unto the Wheel, or Gibbet,
Bid figo for the World, and go out Martyrs.
A Prince, a Prince!
Provided, that no thief
Makes a Confession at his Death, or peach
His Tribe, or make a show of penitence,
To make the Butter-women melt, and draw
Compassion from the toothless musty rabble;
This will exclude the benefit of that Canon
Declares you Martyrs for the Cause.
Scout and discover.
Tic a howling voice.
What Cry was that?
Of one, whose pocket has given up the Ghost,
And with the fear his body should do so,
He howls O'this fashion.
Bring him to our presence.
Gentlemen, tic very cold, I beseech you
Do not strip my Skin off, you are not sure
I shall go to a fire when I go out of
This World; and yet as I am, I confess
I shall yield very little burned.
Knock out his brains.
Pistol him.
Cut's throat.
Gentlemen, hear me— I am very sorry,
I had no greater sum— but if you please
To reprieve a poor wretch, I may do you service,
And if you knew my inclination,
You would not be too Cruel.
To what are you inclined Sir?
I have been commended for a Dexterity
At your felonious trade; for Gentlemen,
I have been a Pickpocket of a child, and have
These many years been thought a pretty house-theef,
Mary I have not yet breeding abroad
With such deserving men, but I shall be
Most glad to learn, and if you please to accept
Me to your tribe, I have Intelligence
Where money lies hid, and very few Spirits
To guard it.
Be confident, and be covered.
Let him be one of us.
Be brief, where is this treasure?
I have an old Father, and Mother, Gentlemen,
Please you bestow a visit upon them;
They have some Goldfinches, having new sold
A piece of Land, was given 'em by the rich
Vincenzo, Father to the famous, proud
Pauline, now his heir.
The glorious Daughter
Of old Vincenzo? she's a Semiramis.
The very same; if you would visit her,
I am acquainted with the house.
We'll take a time to think on her; to th'point.
What ready money has your Father Sir?
Tic but two days ago since he received
Six hundred Pistolets, I can direct
To a Cedar Chest, where the fine sum lies dormant.
What Servants has your Father?
Alas none, they are miserable Hinds,
And make me all the drudge, you need not fear
The Court-du-Guard; if you please let me go
An honest thieves part, and furnish me
With a Devils complexion, to hide my own,
I will conduct you.
A very honest fellow!
I do not love to be ungrateful where
I'm kindly used, my heart is honest.
Is he thy own Father?
My own Father and Mother Sir, the cause
Would not be so natural else, and meritorious.
A precious rogue, fit him instantly
With a disguise, and let him have that face
The Devil wore in the last anti-masque.
It cannot be too ugly Sir to fright 'em.
But if he fail in any Circumstance—
It is not far off, I know the nearest way.
Or give the least suspicion to betray you,
Be sure you cut his throat.
We shall.
I thank You Sir, do ye think I'll be a Traitor?
Come first along with us.
You heard this fellow name the proud Pauline,
Her Chests are worth the rifling.
The Castle is impregnable she lives in.
Was that spoke like an understanding thief,
A true Bandit? How I do blush for thee?
Was not the Orchard of Hesperides
Watched by a fierce, and flaming Dragon, robbed?
Shall wee despair to reach her golden Apples?
We'll make discovery of the place, and persons,
Put it to Fate, let Stars do what they please;
Mercury is a Stronger thief than Hercules.
What a brave time have we had, since our
Old Master died?
Though he were a gallant man, his Daughter
Makes his Memory burn dim, and (compared
To her) he lived but like a Hermit in a Cell,
She is all Magnificent, a Bererice,
Every hair of her head worth stellyfying.
But my Lady, for so we must call her,
May be of kin to Lucifer for pride;
How many brave Gentlemen hath she despised,
When once their blister of Love broke out,
And they made offer of Marriage?
Here is her Sister Angellina a virgin
Of another constitution, their two natures
As different are, as the two Poles, our Mistress
Cannot be so Tyrannically proud
As she is sweet, and humble.
That's the reason her Father left her only
As much as would commend her to a Nunnery.
Her Uncle dotes upon her.
He does love her.
Tic an old blunt brave fellow; but he has
Quite lost our gallant Ladies good opinion,
He is out of grace.
Because he would correct her insolence,
Who obliged by her father to the care of
Her governor, wo'not tie up his Counsel,
Which he enforces sometimes so passionately,
It is a sport to hear her contempt of his gravity.
He has met my Lady, I see a quarrel
In their looks already, let us withd raw
Behind that Lobby, we may hear, and
Laugh securely.
How long have you been speechless? am
Not I your Uncle? why do you look so scurvily?
I do not think you are a Princess yet,
And therefore take the boldness to salute you,
Without the Ceremony of Petitioners
That haunt your Ladyships charity; or if
You thought me despicable, your Sister has
Deserved your smile.
It may be so—
Buffoons,
That make an Idol of you, and can pawn
Their Souls to flatter you, should be entertained,
And Courted to your vanity. I blush for you;
Will nothing bring you into sense of Honour
Or Modesty? I ha done.
It will become you;
You do presume too much.
Presume? why, are
Not you Pauline am not I Antonio
Your Uncle? speak.
I do remember Sir,
I called you so, while you preserved your wits,
And may acknowledge you again, upon
Sober Conditions, and your Senses perfect.
Sober Conditions? am I Drunk, Gypsy?
What flesh is able to forbear. Dost hear?
Thou hast drunk a Devil.
I did not see him in my Cup.
And he has swelled thee to this monstrous pride,
More than thy Sex beside; if thou goosed on
At this rate, thou wilt make Lucifer an Ape,
He must be thy Disciple.
The Old thing raves.
Thing? what thing? thank heaven thou
Art a woman; I would beat thee into a Poltise—
When did thou say thy prayers?
You know I keep a Chaplain.
Thy Soul wants desperate lancing;
Ther's an eternal Ulcer in thy heart,
Te Witches cannot suck it dry, there is
A bath of Poison in thee.
I shall pity him;
A Posit, and to bed with him, his head
Does want the benefit of sleep; how wild
The good man looks?
Thou art—
The Mistress of this Castle as I take it,
Without your Legacy.
I could rail upon the dead for it; dost thou not fear
Thy Fathers ghost should haunt thee?
I never think upon him, and it was
His providence to leave me an estate,
To keep me from those Melancholy fancies,
And I will have you my caprichious Uncle
Know, in the Circle of these my Dominions,
I will have no Competitor.
Dominions?
Was ever such an insolence? are not you
ome Queen concealed?
I am Independent, and sole regent here.
So so,
Whore's your Nobility? they are to blame
Not to attend—
Who waits?
But they do want white Staves, this is
Not State enough.
It shall be mended, let them be remembered.
She's in earnest—and
If I were worthy to advise you Madam,
Your grace should be a little more reserved,
And entertain none that did treat of Marriage
To your private conference, until they had
In public received audience like Ambassadors.
I like the Counsel well, it shall be so,
The next that comes shall find it my good Uncle.
She's incorrigible.
What if you commanded those that do attend
Your person to observe you on their knees
Sometimes, they must be humble to your highness;
I can forget my gray hairs, name, and blood,
And teach your Servants duty.
The example
Will edify the household, and you may,
By fair degrees rise to our Princely favour.
Madam, the Lord Contarini is arrived
The Castle.
He comes a wooing to me, let it be
Your Office reverend Uncle to acquaint him,
Our pleasure is to give him Audience
To Morrow in full State, until when Uncle,
Make it your care his entertainment be
Such as becomes the greatness of his blood,
And one, on whom the Prince, we know, bestows
His special grace.
Do ye hear sweet Niece? be not you transport
This is no dream, the man is no mock-lord.
I'll be a Princess here, as you directed,
If he can humble himself to Ceremony,
Promise him honourable access, and freedom,
If the Conditions please him not, he may
Return, and leave our Court.
Is this in Nature? well I'll follow her,
And if she be not past all shame, and senses,
I will humble or confound her.
AH sweet Gentlemen, we are very poor,
And have a great Charge.
We do come to ease you of your charge.
Pity my age.
You must then pity our youth.
Here, share and share like.
Alas we are undone.
What shall we do with them?
If you have bound her hands and feet, you
May try whether she be a Witch or no, there's
A Pond in the backside, if she swim, so—
For him?
Have some compassion, tic our whole estate.
You have a Son, a pious child we hear.
He will not let you want.
Alas poor boy, he little thinks what we
•ith care and providence laid up for him
•hold thus be lost. O pity Gentlemen.
Boh—Lets away.
I begin to find a kind of a compunction,
•et us be charitable thieves for once—
And return half,
•hat say you?
Not a gazette, you're not such foolish thieves;
•art with present money? part with my life first.
Not to your Parents?
We use them well, because we do not carry
Their Cowes away; there they have Cheese, and Butter,
Bread comes by nature, and they both can glean,
There's water in the Well too; not a penny—
If you will be so charitable, defalk
From your own shares, mine is a just thieves part;
I look for thanks, distribute your own alms;
These things must be employed to better uses.
Is a Father, and Mother considerable
To ready money; oh! fie—boh!
Then we must over-rule you.
Ah what do you mean?
Bale and betray your self at your own peril.
We will be bold with your thieves part—
Come nearer—Look you good Woman,
You shall not lose your thirds, say you have met
With honest thieves; this shall suffice at present,
Which we but borrow neither, that you may not
Suspect our payment, you shall have security,
This honest man bound for it, and so we leave you.
Tic money.
And left one of their fellows bound.
Do we not dream Wife? I dare not come near
Him.
They are gone, I'll see his complexion;
Who's this?
Our own Son Piperollo?
Pray Father give me your blessing, ah—
Mother do not stone me to death with that
Money bag, I am your Son.
My Son? I know thee not.
A liar, you know Mother, is worse than a
Thief; do not destroy the hopes of your Family,
Alas, I was drawn in, and made a thief
In my own defence, they swore to cut my throat
Else, do you think I had so little grace—
Did they so? I'll try what I can do.
Oh my quibibles! sweet Mother, remember
You were a woman in your days, that knew
What's what, and the true difference of things.
I am a man yet, your forgiveness may
Make me a true man. Libbing, and hanging
Are no helps to posterity, I am your own
Sweet flesh and blood—Oh.
Kick him out of doors.
I thank you, this Correction may do me good;
Gently, ah gently; shall I not ask you blessing,
A twelve-month hence?
Never.
I wo'not.
My Mother has a deadly lift with her leg.
Boh, you tadpole.
I shall do no good o'this trade.
Now to my wits, this is no world to starve in.
This is very fine; do not these Staves become us?
But will my Lady be thus mad, and give
The Lord Contarini Audience in such State?
She takes upon her like a very Princess.
But is it not strange, her Uncle should thus humour her?
He gave her the first hint, which she purfues
To his vexation.
But will my Lord stoop to this mockery?
He is prepared by her Uncle; 'twil be sport,
If she but carry it with pride enough.
Let her alone.
And if my Lord wants confidence—
I think her impudence will make him blush,
And put him out; I have seen a Counterfeit
With such a Majesty compose himself,
He thought himself a Prince, could frown as scornfully,
And give his hand out to great Lords to kiss,
With as much grace, as all the Royal blood
Had mustard in his veins.
Some Monarch
Of Innes a Court in England sure; but when
His reign expires, and Christmas in the grave
Cold as the Turkeys coffind up in crust,
That walk like Ghosts, and glide to several Tables,
When Instruments are hoarse with sitting up,
When the gay triumph ceases, and the treasure
Divided, all the Offices laid up,
And the new clothes in Lavender, what then?
Why then the man that kissed his highness hand
O'er night, may justly him for the wall next morning,
And have it too; if he come off with all
His wits, the Play is paid for, and he fit
For travel.
My Ladies Uncle, and the Lord Contarini.
My Lord Contarini expects when he
May have the happiness to present his service
To your great Lady.
We shall Sir acquaint her.
Your Office Sir?
Her Steward.
Yours I pray?
Mine, Treasurer.
Mine, Controller.
I kiss your hands; this may be worth my Lord
Curiosity.
For the mirths sake, my Lord be pleased, you ma•
Do an act of Charity and restore her Senses;
I'll wait on you again.
Now Vergerio?
The expectation is increased, her Officers
Observe the State; were your affections earnest
And I my Lord your Mistress, I should trust
Her pride.
Unless she ravish me.
She's upon entrance, her madness holds,
Your confidence may convert her, shees my Niece
And I am sorry for it.
Give him access.
What Ladies that stands on her right hand?
Her younger Sister, that does vex me as much
With her humility, as the other with
Her impudence.
An excellent piece, Vergerio.
Which my Lord?
Madam, the glory of your time and Nation,
Whose looks do shine with Majesty, and shoot
A flame to undo the admirer, O call in
Some beams that wait upon the thrones of light,
Or I shall fall your sacrifice, and not finish
What my great Master gave me in charge.
Has the Prince a mind to her himself.
Tic not impossible.
Speak on my Lord.
Gypsy, she does believe the lightning 〈◊〉 her eyes
Will blast indeed, how scornfully she 〈…〉
I come from the great Sovereign of hearts,
Whose glorious monarchy uncircumscrib'd,
Extends to all the habitable world,
Where ever land or lover stretched his arm,
Whose Scepter's not like that of common Kings,
But a bright golden shaft feathered with sighs,
And headed with a flame, which finds access,
Like subtle lightning to the most secure,
And stubborn Cell that ever yet enclosed
A humane thought—
He flies high.
Tic his arrow—
Speak this great name.
The most immortal Prince of Love—
A high and mighty Prince indeed.
Tic not our Prince of Parma then?
Unto your beauty Madam, that makes sweet
The breath of Fame, in his name I am sent
To offer up a Servant, rich with wonder,
And humble thoughts that honour you; who can
See those perfections and not adore
The Divine Owner? Brightness that offends
The inhocent eye that gazes, is in you
The cure of blindness, and the films that hang
Upon the humble sight, fall off and vanish,
That it may take new life and light from you.
Is she not yet ridiculous to her self?
I can leave Cupids Court to live with you,
And all those bowers, where an eternal spring
Makes every flower in love with it's own beauty.
The wind whose airy wings convey all sweetness
That sense can entertain, I would exchange
But to be near your breath; and think there dwells
A harmony in your voice, above the airs
Of all those charming Birds by love selected
From every wood to be his quire. I fear
I am too bold, and may be thought to wander;
If Madam you accept my amorous vows,
Which live yet in the weak expression
Of him that honours you, time will produce
A white and fortunate hour to crown our loves
With nuptial happiness.
You have relation
To the Court of Parma, your name Lord
Contarini, you have no Message from you Master?
Madam your same hath filled his Court, and he
Presents by me his Princely wishes of
Your happiness, and should he see your person,
Like mine, his heart I fear would melt into
A stream of Love and Admiration.
Sir, we accept in good part greeting from
The Prince, but you have no commission
To treat for him; the substance of your own
Affair will ask our pause, we will take time
To answer, which till you receive, you may
Command our Court.
Proud folly!
Prodigious impudence!
What think you Signior?
I am confounded, I'll to her again.
When shall I awake?
This sure is but a dream, the Gentleman
Cannot so much mistake his time and Language.
I came with Curiosity to see
Her pride so talked of, but my heart I feel
Is taken with an object of true sweetness.
Is it not a lovely figure? say Vergerio.
If but her mind answer that fair proportion,
My Lord she is worth love, but being Sister
To a woman of such pride—
I prithee leave me.
She is very beautiful; my Lord is taken.
Lady, but that ther's story for your births,
I should make judgment by your modest face,
This arrogant woman could not be your Sister.
Sir, if your expectation be not answered
With her full worth, I shall beseech you name her
With less disgrace, (our blood so near) it cannot
Be grateful to my ear, to hear her blemishes.
I was prepared before to meet this goodness;
These words and looks become that innocent spring
From whence they flow, virtue hath such an army
About your heart, ther's nothing can approach
Ill to betray it, or proceed from you
But warranted by honour.
I know not,
But sure my Lord, you talk too fine a language
For me to understand; we are far from Court,
Where though you may speak Truth, you cloth it with
Such trim and gay apparel, we that only
Know her in plainness, and simplicity,
Cannot tell how to trust our ears, or know,
When men dissemble.
By your own love
To truth, you must believe me, when I say,
Although it took beginning from this visit,
I love no beauty but your self.
You said you loved my Sister, and expressed
Your passion in such mighty phrase and fancy
I thought your soul had made a business on it,
Pardon the weakness of my faith if I
Dare not believe this change.
Your Sister, Lady,
I came to visit, not affect, I heard,
And had a purpose but to try how near
The wonder of her pride (pardon sweet Virgin)
Came to a truth, nor did I Court her with
The language of a meaning lover; but
Prepared by your Uncle, meant to make her see
Her miserable folly; I dare not
Present such Mockeries to you; suspect not
This hasty address; by your fair self, I love you.
My Lord, If I believed this, real Courtship,
I should not entertain your honour with a
A fruitless Expectation, but declare,
Besides my want of fortune, beauty, birth,
To make me worth your love, I am already
Contracted by my Father to Religion,
Whose will I cheerfully obey, and wait
When my good Uncle will dispose me to
A Nunnery.
A Nunnery?
Where for
So great an honour you pretend to me
A most unworthy maid, I'll offer up
My prayers, that you may choose a heart more equal
To your own love, and greatness.
Nay you must
Not leave me so, we are interrupted, you
May trust me fair one with a nearer Conference.
Alas poor old man.
The Old man before your borrowed Ladyship
Is bold to keep his head warm, and to tell you
You are a Puppet, take that to your title;
Of honour.
So Sir, none restrain his insolence?
I'll make him swallow down his staff of Office
That stirs. I haven't done. Can be so impudent
To think his Lordship does not laugh at thee?
Your eyes the thrones of light? a brace of Lanterns,
In which two snufs of Candle close to th'socket,
Appear like fire-drakes, and will serve to light
A traveller into a Ditch. You Madam Majesty,
And the glory of a Nation?
Tho'art a disease to Honour, Modesty,
A Fever in thy Fathers blood, a Gangrene
Upon his name, a Pox upon thee for it;
Ther's one disease more, yet I have not done.
My Charity may invite, if these fits hold,
Some close provision for you among mad men;
I do command you leave my house.
I wo'not,
I'll fire the house; dost hear? thou wo't burn well,
You have Oil enough about thy face, and all
Thy body Pitch, very combustible.
But I'll not be damned for thee, now I think on it,
And since no Counsel will prevail, I'll save
My self. Before I go, give but a reason
Why thou dost slight this gallant Lord, and squint
As if he were Groom or Foot man.
I'll tell you,
You would have the truth.
If thou can speak any.
I do esteem my self
More equal for his Master.
Who, the Prince?
No, the blind Prince of Love, you are wise Uncle,
But I am out of Poetry.
I think I were best cut off thy head, and save
The Laws a labour—Ther's no talking to her.
I am of your mind Uncle, you may edify
Your charge, my younger Sister, she's not proud,
Pray take her w'ee, she'll become the Cloister;
Go, and be mortified together, take her,
I am weary of her.
And I of thee;
She shall be further oft too, thou'lt infect her,
Although her foolish Father, (yet he was
My Brother) I have not power to speak
Well o'th'dead, gave thee his whole Estate,
I have a fortune, dost thou hear? I have,
And to vex thee, thy Sister shall have that,
I'll see, and I can make her proud, I'll do it;
She shall have Servants, Suitors, Fiddlers, Flatterers,
Fine Clothes, and all the food that can provoke
To glorify her sense; I have bags to spare,
She shall not to a Nunnery to vex thee,
I say again she shall not, we'll have humours;
The to'ther Pox upon thee, and farewell.
I fear he's mad indeed. Let me have Music,
This talk has made me Melancholy.
FOr thy Mothers sake thou shalt be entertained.
An under Butler would fit me rarely,
Ther's none i'th'house that shall be sooner drunk,
Nor oftner for my Ladies credit Sir.
Can you write?
And read in print Sir.
Art thou faithful? may a man trust thee?
For more than I'll speak on; trusted? I was boun•
For two Gentlemen lately, that could not take up
Five hundred Pistols upon other security,
My Father and Mother knows it; I shall never
Endure a thief for a thing that I know, alas
You know I am a neighbours child, my mother
Was your good Ladies nurse.
Do not I know thy Mother?
Better it may be, than I know my Father.
Till some Office fall i'th'house, you shall serve me,
And ride with me, to receive my Ladies Rents.
Mr. Steward, yonder are the rarest fellows,
In such fantastical habits too, they call
Themselves Mathematicians.
What do they come for?
To offer their service to my Lady, and tell fortunes.
Have they no chief?
Yes a quaint philosophical fellow, they call
Him a Caldean, a great Scholar, they do
Not come for money like your starched faced
Egyptians, but carry things for the credit of
The Mathematiques honourably; my Lady hath
Given the Caldean her Nativity, who is to consult
With the Ephemerids, and give account how
The Stars will dispose of her.
We shall know all our fortunes then.
The worst of his train can decipher hands,
Tell foreheads.
And Noses.
One at the first sight did but whisper to my
Ladies Gentlewoman, and she did so blush
Through her Tiffany.
That's no great matter, I have seen one blush
Through a Plaster of Paris.
How's that?
A kind of French painting Sir.
Well said Piperollo;
I have entertained him; but my Lady.
The Caldean
Pleases me, I long to hear my fortune,
If it be good he shall have a reward
To cherish his great Art, and worth my bounty;
What if my Stars should frown?
Did bid 'em follow?
They are all ready Madam.
Musical knaves.
Beauty and the various grace,
That adorn the sweetest faces,
Here take their glorious throne; may be
That is the God of Archery,
Never aim one angry Dart,
But soft, and gentle as your heart,
Court it with flame, and rich perfume,
To light, and sweeten, not consume.
Not the Caldean come yet? my thoughts are
Inflamed with fierce desire to know my Destiny;
You have skill Gentlemen; but I'll expect
The judgment of your Master on my Fate;
When the great man of art returns acquaint me.
Come my friends, lets lose no time; Sir.
I am for you to the extent of my Art Seignior.
If it please you, let me peruse your hand.
It is at your service.
Please you to examine my Palm; can you
Tell me learned Sir, what is past?
You know that already.
Twill be a satisfaction to me, if you can
Make it appear, that you know something
In that point.
A Fracture in the Mercurial line, and the
Mount of Saturn ill characted I you are
Near a misfortune Sir.
Jupiters Mount is well formed and coloured
A Cross conspicuous, the Suns Mount well
Figured, and linea solis, without any intersection,
Your Judgment upon that Sir?
More Antics yet? What Nation have we here,
Fortune flingers!
You shall know yours immediately.
Her house is open for these Mountebanks,
Cheaters, and Tumblers, that can foist and flatter
My Lady Gugaw; Every office open,
When Poor men that have worth and want an Alms,
May perish ere they pass the Porters lodge;
What are you Sir?
One of the Mathematicians noble Signior.
Mathematicians? Mongrel,
How durst thou take that learned name upon thee?
You are one of those knaves that stroul the Country,
And live by picking worms out of fools fingers.
And something out of your trunks, my reverend Cato.
Busy the raskals are, how the rogues stink?
I'll send your Regiment a Quarter-master.
Now to my other gamester.
You have been—
What Sir?
In your ear—a thief.
He has a Devil; good Sir not too loud.
And you shall be—
Hanged I warrant you.
Let me see tother hand.
Shall it scope with burning?
You shall be a Lord.
A Lord.
Hum, yes, a Lord infallibly.
You shall be a Knight Sir.
Of the thieves Order, and wear my rich
Collar of hemp; is it not so?
An honourable Knight, upon my word.
A Lord— Pray give your opinion.
Your hand— you shall be a right worshipful—
One of your tribe told me I should be a Lord.
And shall be used accordingly, Lords are transitory.
Let me see tother hand. I marry Sir, this line
Clears the doubt, and marks you right
Honourable, which makes up the tother half
Of your fortune Signior, these two parallel lines
From the dexter angle to be the Mount of Sol,
Has made all plain, you must be a Lord.
He has given you a very good reason Sir,
A man can have but half his fortune in one
Hand, and two right worshipfulls makes up
One right honourable; these are rare fellows,
I am predestinate to be a Knight,
The Stars may do their pleasure, I obey.
This should be the Caldean.
I have narrowly observed the Castle, and
Where the treasure lies, I know my Lady
In honour will entertain us this night, and
When they are asleep we'll take our opportunity
To rifle her Exchequer, boys, mean time
Let me alone to humour her proud Nature;
I will so claw her ambition.
In the interim, I'll put a question to
His Astrology. Sir, If you please till my Lady
Return to satisfy her Seward, and oblige him
By your Art, one of your under Mathematics
Has given me a Comfortable Destiny.
Your hand. When were you born?
I know not Sir.
A Lord—
No Matter, Venus in the Ascendant with
Sol, being Lady of your seventh; hum, hum,
With Iupiter, designs you to be a Lord.
They all agree; the miracle of learning!
One question more I beseeth you Sir, I
Am to ride with my Man to receive my Ladies
Rent to morrow through the Forest—
Go to.
Now I desire to know, whether we shall be
Robed in our return or no?
What time do you think precisely to come
Back Sir, for we should know the very minute.
The Money is ready Sir, and we do purpose,
In your ear—
Yes, you shall be robed, ther's nothing in
Nature to prevent it.
Will they kill us, and please you?
No, they shall not kill you, they shall only
Take your money, and break your pate, that
Will be all.
Why let 'em rob us Sir, the loss of our Money
Will be an evidence of our preferment, and you
May have more assurance to be a Lord, and
I of my Knighthood— My Lady Sir.
Madam, the Stars shine with their full beams
Upon you, Who by me their interpreter, salute
You with a glorious fortune: For Leo's Lord of your
Horoscope in the right angle of heaven, and a royal
Fixed Sar called Regulus, or the Lions hart, culminating
With him, and a natural reception between Mars,
And Sol Lord of the tenth, being in the first with
Mercury and Venus in the house of honour, besides
A Conjunction of Iupiter and Luna in Pisces, in
The house of Marriage. I must give Judgment.
I shall beseech your clearer language.
You shall be Married to a Prince, it is inevitable.
A Prince?
May not I come to be a Lord then?
And I a Knight?
When shall I see him?
He shall within few days visit your Castle,
Drawn hither with the fame of your person,
And bravery. I need not instruct you to entertain
Him with State and Ceremony becoming his
Excellence, but if he Court you not into his arms,
I will renounce the Stars, and say there is no
Truth in Astrology.
How my thoughts swell already.
She has swallowe'd it.
Give him five hundred Pistolets.
Do not wrong so much
One that does honour you; as I bribe not
The Stars to tell me their Decrees, I dare not
For money sell their Secrets, and if any
That have relation to me presume
To take a Iulio—
By no means Madam—
I like it that no Mercenary ends
Guide 'em to flatter me.
Is not that a March?
If it entrench not too far upon your art,
This Prince, Sir, has a Name.
And rules this Province,
Fernese is a Bachelor.
The Prince of Parma?
My blood refines in every vein already,
Dull heavy Souls that are content to drudge
In humble thoughts.
I Fear we are betrayed;
The Countries up and marching to the Castle,
We may be all surprised let us to, horse—
Deny not, Sir, this night an entertainment,
Such as my Castle yields, it sha'not spread
To receive guests more welcome.
A Drum Madam.
Must we not stay and rob the house to night?
Madam, my art foretells I cannot be
Safe to remain here, at my return
I wo'not balk your Castle, in the mean time
Cherish high thoughts, your Stars do call you Princess,
So kissing your fair hand—
Make me not so unhappy.
There is no dispute with Destiny,
I take my humble leave, away to horse.
This more amazes me, what danger should
Provoke this hast, if it prove their concernment,
I must believe they do converse with Fate,
And trust to them as Oracles; a Princess?
Was not my Soul Prophetical?
Madam, some accident hath raised your tenants,
They march in fury this way, in strange postures
And Arms, as if they came to storm the Castle.
Madam, we are all undone, the Clubs are up,
Your Tenants are turned Rebels, and by this time
Entered the Hall; and threaten to surprise
I know not whom; But the Caldean, and
His troop are vanished, they foresaw this tempest.
What should this mean?
Come on you men of lusty Chine, Dear Lady
Be not affrighted, Captain of thy Guard
Am I, thy natural Tenant, and thy Vassal;
Where be these Sunburned Aethiopians?
I wo'not leave one Canting Rogue alive.
What Aethiopians, what Canting Rogues?
Do not your Clounships know me?
Know our Princess?
We honour thee, and rise in thy defence;
Where be these thieves? we heard there were
A Regiment, that came to Cheat and Plunder.
You're a Knot
Of knaves and fools, and shall repent this insolence;
You that command in chief, good Captain Bombard,
May teach your Raggamuffins face about,
Was it your stratagem to fright my guests?
Your Uncle told us Madam, and commanded.
Was it his plot? he's still my enemy.
Pard on us Madam,
We came simply hither to do you service;
Kneel, or we shall all be stripped out of our Tenements.
My Uncle has abused you,
But this submission takes our anger off,
Continue dutiful to my Commands,
And you shall be remembered; Piperollo—
I know the Buttery Madam; follow me,
It is my Ladies pleasure you be drunk,
And thank her grace ye keep your Copiholds;
Dee you bring up the rear, I'll march in front.
Passion O'me, it is to great an honour,
Refuse a man of your high blood and name,
That Courts her honourably? I could beat her.
It is not impossible at my return
To find a change. I must to Court again.
The horses my Lord are ready.
Vergerio—
What a Baggage it is, shees all for the Nunnery,
She sha not have her will, I'll undo my self
But I'll destroy this Modesty; if I could
But make her proud there were some hope on her.
My Lord you may command, but how unfit,
I am to manage this affair.
Thou hast a powerful Language, it prevailed
On me when I first saw thee, since which time
I have not deserved unkindly from thee, and
This trust speaks more than Common favour.
Make me his advocate to Angellina?
My Lord, if you can still preserve these thoughts
Of honour to us, leave her to my Counsel.
Most cheerfully, I am not desperate;
This Gentleman I'll leave to wait upon her,
Who is privy to my Counsels, and affection.
Your Lordship hath found trust in him, but that
Sha'not excuse my care, to make her know
Her happiness, and the Honour of our Family,
By meeting your commands. She's here.
Francescina tell me, what hope of your Mistress?
How does thy Counsel work? does she pray less
Then she was wont? or listen now and then
When thou talk wantonly, does she smile upon it?
Between our selves, I put her to a smiling
Blush.
What said she, tell me on thy modesty,
When she found her dear delight, the legend
Of the Saints removed, and Ovids tales of
Jupiter put in the place?
She said, that Iupiter
Was a most sensual Heretic, and the cactus
That Venus wore was not St. Francis girdle.
How did she like the picture of Lender,
Swimming the Hellespont upon his back?
How that of Cleopatra kissing Antony?
She Says that Queen was none of the poor Clares,
But one bread up in black Egyptian Darkness;
All I can say, she is not desperate,
I sing no Anthems to her.
What says she to her dancing Master?
She is past her honour; that's a precious fellow,
She'll laugh to see him gambol with his limbs,
His head flies like a Ball about the room,
You'd think he were at Tennis with it.
Though in the guilt and knowledge of my own
Defects, to answer such an honourable
Esteem of me, I dare not yet presume
To meet it; I shall want no pious thoughts
For this so great a bounty to a poor
Desertlesse Virgin.
Hang your pious thoughts
And love my Lord.
Not for the wealth of Parma
Should my Cause force one cloud upon her face
Or put her eyes to the expense of tears,
It shall be argument for me to hope,
If she accept this youth to wait upon her,
Who may in some auspicious hour, prepare me
A gentle seat within her heart, mean time
I leave upon your Virgin lip the faith,
Of your true Servant Lady.
I'll attend you
To horse my Lord.
Poor miserable maid,
Fallen now beneath the pity of thy self;
My heart, on which so late a flame of Heaven
Streamed comfort in my holy resolutions,
Is filed with love, but not of Contarini,
Whose passion may deserve another welcome.
I prithee Francescina take thy Lute
And let me hear thy voice.
I can sing Venus and Atones to you.
Any thing.
Or will you hear the pleasant Ditty
How fair Calisto first became a Nun.
I prithee do not name a Nun, the flame
That I feel here deserves no Vestal name.
I'll do my best to fit you,
Ther's no such tool in nature as a Chambermaid
To work upon her Mistress.
IT was a fatal business to lose such
An opportunity.
My Lady was wound up so rarely.
We were betrayed for certain; it was high
Time to scud, and get into our Territories;
Now we are safe in our Grots, secure as
The Minotaur, and keep the clew of our
Own Labyrinths.
We lost a rare design, but in my opinion,
Tic better scouting here with our heads on,
Than have 'em carried in by Clowns at the Court rate.
The ignorant Rogues would ne'er ha 'sold
Them to their worth.
And they dare as soon venture upon Hell,
As Shoot their heads into this Furnace.
But this Claridiana sha'not scope so,
I am resolved to visit her again, and I am
Glad I prepared another expectation, these
Difficulties shall make our next attempt
More glorious.
Those shapes will conjure up the Bores again.
She does expect the Caldean.
Hang the Caldean. I have a new device
Shall scour the Castle, and make Dame
Guinever with all her pride, thank and adore
The invention.
How dear Frapolo? how?
Scout and discover, Strozzo.
I see but two men coming down the Hill.
Cannot their worships travel with less noise?
They durst not be so confident without a number,
It is good to be secure, the noise approaches,
Lets to our shells.
Do you lie perdue still.
I do not like their confidence, these may be
The enemies scouts, lets non engage to soon
For fear of a reserve. The State has threatened
To send their Vermin forth.
Obscure: close, close.
What dost thou mean?
Thou hast a mind to be robed indeed.
I would have art maintained in reputation,
You know my Lady is to be a Princess,
And you must be a Lord, and I be dubbed,
But if we be not robed, I know not how
To trust the Mathematics or the Stars;
I am afraid all the Bandits are hanged,
A thousand Pistols should not fear to travel.
It is not wisdom to proclaim our charge,
Though I could be content to be a Lord,
I am not over hearty, thieves are thieves,
And life is precious, prithee lets make hast.
Illo ho ho,
Think upon your honour, are there no Gentlemen?
No wanting Gentlemen that know how to spend
A quantity of Gold?
There is no thief in Nature.
The Gentleman
Is very merry, they that mean well, and
Have their wits about 'em, do not use
To call upon our Tribe. This is a plot,
A very plot, and yet the Coast is clear,
Now I may reach their voice.
It wo'not be, was ever men distressed so?
Come we are well yet Piperollo, if
The Stars Decree our robbery, it will follow.
I pray Sir lets sit down here, as you hope to
Be a Lord, we must do our endeavour and help
The Fates. Do but hear reason Sir.
It is my proud Madams Steward, and our quondam
Fellow thief; they were told their fortunes
To be robed; Here had been a purchase lost
If I had not lain perdue. You shall be
Dispatcht presently, never fear it.
What's that? I do not like that tune.
Hum, I am not in love with that Quailpipe.
I could dwindle, but that I have a strong
Faith in the Mathematics. Thieves and be
Thy Will.
If they should cut our throats now—this is
Your folly; would I were off.
Would I were a Knight in an embroidered
Dish clout. Have a good heart Sir, ther's
No more to be said in it, let the Stars take
Their course, it is my Ladies money—and if
We be robed, we are so much the nearer to preferment.
Ah sweet Gentlemen take but the Money—
It is ready told; nay, nay, we are friends;
Give us but a Mote under your hands for
My Ladies satisfaction, that you have received
It Gentlemen.
You need not trouble your selves to tell it Gentle∣men,
It is all right.
So, so, we'll take your words.
I should know that vizard, the garments
That you wear too I have seen Old acquaintance?
Does he know you? cut his throat.
No Sir, I do not know him, nor any man, nor
My self, I was not once robed before, neither
Did I help any man to rob my own Father and Mother;
I knew no Cedar chest I, I disclaim it, nor
Was any man that I know left bound for the
Money; ye are all honest Gentlemen,
And I congratulate our good fortune, that you
Came so luckily in the very nick, we had carried
Home the money else in good sadness— Sir,
We are made for ever—rare Mathematicians!
What's that you talk sir of Mathematicians?
It pleased some of the learned tribe to visit
My Lady not long since, but they are well I
Hope, they told us we should be robed, and
It is done; blessed Caldean!
What became on 'em?
They escaped a scouring, for my Ladies Cynical
Uncle, in mere malice to learning, raised
The Towns upon em, persuading the hobbinolls
They came to rob the house; but honoured
Be the Stars, they brought 'em off at the
Back gate.
They seem honest fellows, let 'em live, and Pass.
We humbly thank you Gentlemen, come Piperollo.
And yet, now I remember, there wants a
Circumstance, my pate is not broke yet,
That was a Clause the Caldean was a little
Out.
I had forgot, will you be prating sir?
Now tic done, I thank you, dear Gentlemen,
I thank you, go forth and be a Knight;
Mathematician I adore thee, it bleeds;
Where are you Sir? all is complete, and my
Head is broke according to prophecy. Oh
Admirable Caldean!
We have not lost all my Ladies money, but
To your plot Frapolo.
This hath repent it, and I appear a
Blazing Star already.
What's the mystery?
You know I am your Prince.
It is Acknowledged.
We will in State visit the proud Pauline,
I am the Prince Farnese, and you
Are all my Lords and privy Counsellors
Bear up for honour of your Prince.
I apprehend it, it is a most rare design,
She will be mad to meet it.
Will you marry her?
I cannot tell, there may be a necessity,
But when I have the wench, her Plate and Jewels,
And other sums, I have cast already whither.
We must transport our selves—we'll divide all.
And the wench too?
No not the wench, until I cast the Concubine;
Remember who I am, the choice of flesh
Is my prerogative; no murmuring,
You shall provide our Robes.
Now we are rogues to purpose.
I am your Prince, and the worst thief
A States-mans.
Where is Vergerio?
I know not Madam.
Madam? I prithee leave that folly,
I am no Lady, call me Angellina.
I'll call you Madam, it is a name in fashion,
What do you want to justify that title?
Have you not Beauty, Jewels, Gold at pleasure?
Fine Clothes, high Food, and men as motley, as
The Ambassadors to wait? does not your Uncle
Allow you all that can make up a Lady?
Pardon my boldness Madam, I beseech you.
What are these?
The Gentlewomen were commended, Madam,
Most excellent in their Art about great Ladies;
And come to tender you their humble service.
Most proud if you accept our duties Madam.
Look you, they're proud already, they have no∣thing
But their trade to live on; she with the face
Spotted with Ermins, hath been late in France,
And knows the mode to a Mathematical point,
She has the theory of Song, but lost
The practick part by sitting up a nights;
She dances still, can talk in several languages,
And has the art of every game, to instruct
A novice Lady—
To lose time.
And what
Age, do you think the other Gentlewoman
Carries? that simpers so? the miracle
Of Painting! she presents scarce five and twenty,
But if you credit Church Records, she numbers
But five short of threescore, Medea had
No charms like her, to preserve youth, and beauty;
She hath the art of making eyes, new hair,
And Ivory teeth, hath skill in making fruitful,
And is an excellent Midwife; she hath cured
A man that had no Nose, and a Court-Lady
That had no Tongue.
These are transcendent qualities;
Since tic my Uncles pleasure, they may wait,
But not to serve me.
Who's that knocks so modestly?
It is not your Dancing-Master, nor the Doctor,
They have more confidence.
It is the Parsons Nephew, come from the University,
Some say a pretty Scholar, and a wit;
Hath an Ambition to kiss your hand
And tender his first fruits.
What's that?
Some Poetry.
By any means Madam, you must be flattered,
Great Ladies cannot live else.
Let him enter.
Darling of beauty, fairest Angellina,
Thus low the Muses bow, and send by me
An abstract of your self; oh make the Paper
More white by kissing your fair hand, and with
Your breath, like a soft Western gale, perfume
These lines created in your praise.
What's heer?— I am
A stranger to you Sir, and to your language,
These words have no relation to me;
I pity men of your high fancy, should
Dishonour their own names, by forming such
Prodigious shapes of beauty in our sex.
If I were really what you would commend,
Mankind would fly me; get a Painter Sir,
And when he has wrought a woman by your fancy,
See if you know her again; were it not fine,
If you should see your Mistress without hair?
Dressed only with those glittering beams you talk of?
Two Suns instead of Eyes, and they not melt
The forehead made of Snow; no Cheeks, but two
Roses inoculated upon a Lilly?
Between, a pendent Alabaster Nose?
Her Lips cut out of Coral, and no Teeth,
But Strings of Pearl; Her Tongue a Nightingales;
Her chin a rump of Ivory; and so forth?
Would not this strange Chimera fright your self?
And yet you take the boldness to present us,
And think we must applaud, and thank you for
Our selves made Monsters by your art; no more
Of this for shame; lose not your time and honour
In this fantastic Idol; you will say,
The world is peevish, and not kind to virtue;
Give him ten Pistolets to cure his poverty,
There are good seeds in him and they may
Grow with some Cherishing.
You are enough
To vindicate your Sex, I shall not blush
To write your story.
You shall owe me Sir
An Anagram, and a Poesy too for
My next Ring.
You shall command my faculty,
My dearest Abigall
Thank you sweet Sir Roger.
Is her Ladyship at leisure?
What are these?
We are humble suits Madam for your Favour.
Speak your request.
I am a Tailor Madam
That holds intelligence with foreign Courts
To furnish Ladies with new Fashions.
And I have patterns of the strangest shapes
That ever Ladies longed for.
I believe it.
I have the ambition to own the name
Of your Perfumer Madam.
I your Jeweller;
What think you of that Carcanet sweet Madam?
The Pearls are Orient, I have a Diamond
The Sultan gave one of his Concubines,
It weighs —20 carat, if it please you Madam,
To wear it in the Court, and I'll attend
Your Ladyship six months hence to pay me for it;
I know your Uncle Madam.
This is his plot.
By all means take it.
Excuse me; what are you? speak your desire.
I would present you Madam with a pair
Of curious Spurs.
For what use prithee?
For what you please, I see all men of trade
Apply themselves to gain relation to you,
And I would be your Spurrier.
Do Ladies wear Spurs my friend?
They may in time, who knows what may be done,
If one great Lady would begin, they ride
Like men already; it is all one to me,
So I may have the Credit of your name,
And privilege to swell above my neighbours.
When I stand, Gentlemen, in need of your
Professions, I'll send for you, in the mean time
You shall need no Solicitor.
Your Servants.
Buy a Spur.
I prithee let me not be troubled with
This kind of People Francescina; Ladies
Have a fine time, if they be all thus visited.
You are rude and saucy fellows to intrude
So far without my Ladies licence.
What makes thee so impatient? will they not
Be gone?
Gone? here's a new regiment is pressing forward
What are they?
Beggars.
How?
And tell me I abuse your Charity,
To keep off their Petitions; we must have
A Court-du-guard, I think, and Centuries placed
At every door.
I prithee let 'em enter.
The room will not be sweet again this three days;
But if it be your pleasure—know your distance.
The blind, and lame, what's your condition Sir?
1 As miserable Madam as the Sea,
That swallowed all my wealth, can make a man,
That once commanded thousands, I blush to beg
But Nature too impatient of starving
Compels me to this boldness, you may soon
Peruse my tragic story there.
Good old man!
What is his loss to you?
2 My Petition too;
A poor blind man, that hath lost more by fire
Than his estate valued a thousand times;
And it is but equal, fire should spoil my eyes,
That ravished me of all, was precious to 'em,
A wife and pretty Children.
Burned?
2 All burned;
And what my eyes cannot afford their memory
My poor heart weeps in blood.
3 I am a Soldier
That in my Countries service lost my limbs;
I've had more lead in bullets taken from me
Than would repair some Steeple.
Ring the bells,
That was a loud one!
3 I have given wounds have killed the lookers on
With horror of their gaping, and have marched
Ten miles a day thus deep —
In dirt?
3 In blood.
Upon those wooden legs?
Poor souls! I pity 'em, here honest men,
Divide this bag, and pray for my good Uncle.
Blessings on you, Madam.
2. Equal division, come.
1. Stay, in the first place, I brought you hither,
Therefore my part is most considerable.
3. I'll have no Prerogative.
2. Nor I.
1. But I will.
Do not I know you both for cheating Rascals?
Thus are good meanings cozened, and you sha'not
Lose your reward; send for some Officers.
2, 3. We are betrayed.
My Uncle.
They have found their eyes and legs again,
Niece I observe your Charity, but you see not
The inside of these things, and I did mean
And hope these sums might serve your self;
Some Ladies would have considered
A new Gown and trinkets; Francescina,
I see little amendment, she'll undo me
In pious uses.
She has entertained these Gentlewomen.
And that young Gentleman does good upon her.
I like it well, he's careful of my Lord,
And if she meet his honourable treaty,
She may learn Pride at Court, should our Art fail.
She smiles — I wo'not interrupt 'em.
My Lady entreats the presence of her Sister.
Do's she entreat? Yes, you may visit her
Sir if you please, I'll trust her to your conduct.
It is my ambition to attend her.
Hark you,
Remember who you are, and carry things
For the credit of my heir, and one that must be
Right Honourable shortly, if I hear
Thou flout'st her, thou shall it have another Gown
And Petticoat embroidered, or but beat her
And put me to a pension; fare you well,
Frantescina wait, wait all upon your Mistress.
No news yet of the Prince? he filled my dreams
Last night, it was a golden glorious slumber;
Me-thought we both were led into a Temple,
Where all our rites of Marriage were performed
In the presence of a thousand Angel-Cupids.
It was my devotion, Madam, to present you
The News, I could not break my neck upon
A better cause.
Is the Prince come?
The Prince is at your service; though I slipped
At Chamber door, it is my happiness
To be the first Messenger.
Of what?
I desire no reward Madam, it is sufficient
I know what will become of us all, you
Remember the Caldean; all has happened,
I thank Astrology.
For what?
Your money is gone, your rents have been recei∣ved,
And my head broke to purpose; things are visible.
My Master can confirm it.
What's this prodigy?
Madam it is done, we have been robed.
How?
As the Caldean and the Stars would have it,
Just to a minute.
Rare Mathematician!
I'll hang you both,
You may, and be no Princess.
Did he foretell this loss?
Is my pate broken? Do I live, and hope
To kneel, and say, If please your Grace, to call
Him Lord, and answer to a Knight? — we're made.
Be at a distance,
If there be truth in the Caldeans Art,
These inconsiderable losses are
A new presage of my approaching greatness.
One from the Prince.
His Highness Farnese, Madam, greets your
Ladyship, and int•nds to be your Guest this night,
It will be an honour
My life must ow him duty for.
Do not you feel a Lordship creep up
By your short ribs?
His Grace is not far off.
Present the humble duty of his handmaid,
And say my Castle droops till it receive him;
I shall Madam.
We must prepare to meet and entertain him;
All things have been Prophetical.
My very good Lord.
Right Worshipful Piperollo.
In my pity
That so much innocence should not be lost
On faithless Contarini, I have landed
Upon your knowledge this unhappy secret.
Promised his faith to another? it was ill done,
To work my Uncle, and destroy my thoughts
Of a religious life.
You may collect
Those pure desires again,
Heaven will be soon invited, and a second
Resolve confirm that happiness.
May we not,
Without so strict forsaking of the world,
Be capable of blessing, and meet heaven
At last, though erring Nature guide sometime
Out of the nearest way?
Yes Angellina.
I must be no Votary,
But when you turn a Fryer then.
How Lady?
Sir you have merited for this discovery
All that I am to serve you, and unless
You help me in this Labyrinth, I must
Live in despair of Freedom.
Any service;
There's so much sweetness in you, I could lay
My life a Sacrifice, be confident
I must be left of heaven, when I forsake you.
And I dare trust your Virtue with a secret
I have not told my Ghostly Father.
I know not what opinion my Lord has
of his smooth Advocate, but I should gather
By Symptoms of my Mistress, she is sick
Of the younger Gentleman.
I dare not hope
This blessing, it is an honour placed on me
That has no value, I am a stranger,
You are no stranger here.
Your Uncle too—
May err in his election.
But his anger—
My prayer and tears may soften.
Do not dress
Your eyes with sorrow Angellina, this
Too gracious an influence upon
Your servant must command my utmost duty.
Upon this white hand I breath out my heart,
And when I pay affection to another
Mistress, in your revenge, her beauty blast me!
But we may be observed.
Be all my guide.
This must be managed wisely, we are lost else.
We are now arrived the Castle Francescina.
We attend.
I am ••scur'd sufficiently.
My life on it.
Here are great preparations, and the people
Flock as to see some triumph, this Pauline
Will be adored in the Country.
But her Sister,
With an extreme of sweetness and humility
Will take the wonder off, she so transcends.
Your words fall from you,
I have observed my Lord, with too much passion;
She's but a woman, and may be no miracle,
When a clear eye is Judge.
Sir I owe
All that I am in fortune, name and greatness
Unto your person, next whom, give me leave
To say I rate no expectation
Equal to be her servant, yet I find
Her cold to those desires, that court her with
All honour, I shall humbly beg, your grace
When you converse, will interpose your favour,
And by your Mediation perfect all
That can be named my happen•s.
You express
A strong Captivity in so small acquaintance;
Well my Lord trust to me; is this her Castle?
By your favour Sir.
Speak quickly whats your business?
Is this Paulina's Castle?
Plain Pauline? and is this her Castle?
My friend you want some breeding, she that owes
This Palace, for a Prince hath made it so,
Is not far off; turn your eyes backward Sir,
And tell your self without a perspective
What man is coming towards us?
Worthy Sir.
Put of your hats and hear his name, Farnese
The Prince of Parma's there, I kissed his hand,
My breath is since the sweeter.
The Prince, where?
You'll find him with my Lady whom he came
To visit, if you'll promise to be drunk,
Take what's a secret yet, he comes to marry her,
Or ther's no truth in Stars, she is to be
His spouse; farewell, and thank my worship heartily.
This fellow's mad!
He kissed the Princes hand,
What mystery is this?
See, they approach.
I am not lost sure in this cloud, they march
In State this way.
Loud Music.
How, an Impostor?
Sure I know the Prince.
Conceal it yet.
What Gentleman is that?
The Prince of Parma Sir.
This will be worth observing.
Do we not both dream? that Pauline?
How disdainfully she moves?
That's her younger Sister upon whom
Vergerio waits.
He knows I am the Prince.
How do you like her Sir?
Ha? tic not fit to tell thee.
Does she not answer my Character?
On my heart a fair one?
Pray tell me how you like her Sir.
Not yet.
I am lost in wonder of her sweetness. Bid
Vergerio bring her to Antonio's;
I'll be his guest to night.
I shall obey Sir.
Make room for the Prince, fellows bear back;
You are not to be Knighted friend I take it.
Thus can the flame of Heaven with subtle art,
Leave the skin whole, yet quite consume the heart.
MY Niece has had a pretty warm night on it,
It is a bold knave to take the Prince upon him
I did believe the noyes, and was considering
How to contrive my peace with her good grace.
You have no fear to suffer now?
I thank
Your Lordship, that has made my house and knowledge
So fortunate, by the presence of our great
Farnese, it is an honour makes me young;
And yet this Rascal troubles me, that durst
Come in the Princes name, and charge my Niece
So home too; Is it not Treason Sir?
Of highest nature.
Let him then taste the Law; yet I commend
His Spirit, that would scorn to die for Felony,
And when his head goes off, the shame and grief
May help to break her heart: I do not love her,
And then my Girl, my Angellina's heir,
And you her Lord and mine.
My hopes are fair,
The Prince himself having vouchsafed to be
My Advocate.
He must command all here.
It is a good Prince, and loves you well, and let me
Without boast, tell you my Lord, she brings
No common Blood, though we live dark in the Country
I can derive her from the great Ursini,
But we have been eclipsed.
Contarint leave us. You may stay Antonio;
Is it not an honour to your Family
A Prince should court your Niece into his arms?
I must confess, it is good enough for such
A Baggage, they will make together Sir,
A most excellent show upon the Scaffold.
The Impostor, and Paulina's pride, takes off
Your understanding; I do court your Niece
Fair Angellina.
How Sir?
And as becomes a Princess.
Your Grace is merry.
I know not, but there's Magic in her eyes.
Magic? and she be a Witch, I ha'done with her.
Does he love Angelina? Please your Highness—
Do you affect this Girl?
Religiously.
And have you all your Princely wits about ye?
This Language is but coarse. I tell you Sir
The Virgin must be mine.
Your Whore?
My Princess.
That's another matter.
Show your obedience,
You have commands upon her as a Father.
I know not what to say, but I'll persuade;
Hark you Niece, you hear what the Prince says,
It is now no time to think of Nunneries.
Be ruled then, and love somebody; if you have
Promised my Lord, I say make good that promise,
If not, the Prince is worth considering.
The Gentleman will make you a round Jointure.
If thou be free, love him, to vex thy Sister,
Who may upon submission be received
To Grace, and rise in time a Madam Nurse
To your heir apparent. I have done my duty.
But this is no great honesty, to cheat
My Lord. I see the greatest men are flesh
And blood, our souls are much upon a making;
All men that are in love deal with the Devil,
Only with this difference, he that dotes
Upon a Woman is absolutely possessed;
And he that loves the least is haunted
With a Familiar.
Old Fabio Sir your Tenant, with much business
Jn's face, desires to speak with you, I could hardly
Keep him from pressing in, his Wife he says
Is Lunatic.
We shall all be mad shortly,
Where is the Knave?
I dare do Sir as much to show my duty
As any Maid alive; I dare dye for you.
And yet you dare not love.
Not in that sense
You invite me to.
My Courtship carries
No stain to fright you, what I have propounded
Is worth the Ambition of a greater Lady;
Though you profess so liberally, I find
Your cunning, and because I have so much
Descended from my Title, you assume
This unbecomming Nicety, take heed,
I can be angry.
As you are a Man
That passion may come near you Sir; and as
You are my Prince, you may command my death
To follow and Appease it, but you said you loved me.
I doe, if you can wisely entertain it.
Then you must love my honour,
A Virgins wealth, for every honest Man
Or Woman has an honour, and that has
Engaged my heart already by a Contract;
This tie dissolved with justice, I should kneel
To ask your Princely favour.
I am answered.
Who waits? call my Lord Contarini hither.
Sir.
You might have mocked another person,
And not have made me a ridiculous story
To your Mistress Sir.
I understand you not.
Engage me to mediation for her love,
With a pretence how much my act should honour
Your faint hopes, when you are conscious of a
Contract, already past between you.
Contract Sir?
She never yet gave me any language
Did promise hope, she still concluded me
With going to a Cloister.
How's this fair one?
It is most sure I am contracted.
To whom?
Vergerio your Lordships Agent.
That boy betray me?
In whom I took delight, made him my friend,
He play the Traitor? I'll be revenged upon
His heart.
Contain your passion Contarini,
Her beauty had apower a bove my friendship,
It well might shake his faith, and yet'tis strange.
Call in Vergerio.
I have heard all,
And come to meet my sentence. You're a Prince
Against whom I dare not lift a thought; I see
What storm is rising, yet let this, great Sir,
Invite your mercy to me, I have made
No breach against your love, and that which wa•
My fault to his, may be excused, by what
He felt himself love not to be resisted.
This Virgin I lay claim to, and her vows
No Subject must compel me to resign;
But if the Prince think me unfit, and call
This treasure from my bosom, and can place
His love, where I so chastely have delighted,
I will not keep a thought that shall rapine,
When I am miserable in her absence,
But give my interest cheerfully; to you,
My Lord, I answer, I have made no trespass,
And shall, so please your highness to be Judge,
Make it appear.
Was ever such an impudence?
This presence does protect him, I should else
Write treason on his heart; But Angellina
I pity thy undoing, how can thou
Expect a truth from him, betrays his Master?
My Lord, you have been faulty sure, and this
(not worthy to be called a loss of me)
Was meant by Providence to wake your faith,
That's owing to another.
Possible?
The Vice-roy of Sicilies Daughter? Pulcheria.
Pulcheria here?
Here Contarini.
Ha, proved a Woman, oh my shame and folly!
Pardon my too much love, that made me fear
You had forgot Pulcheria, though you left
Your vows and me at Sicily, when you were
Ambassador from the Prince.
Whence embarked
Thou brought'st me news Pulcheria was dround,
And thou for her sake entertained my servant,
Welcome, at once receive me and forgive me.
I had your promise, were this contract void
In honour, nor will take from my own merit
To think when your considerate thoughts come home,
You can pretend excuse to your own happiness,
Which lest you may suspect, let us in state
Visit Pauline, and unmask that counterfeit
Which hath usurped our name.
Sir we attend you,
This blessing must require a spacious soul,
Mine is too narrow to receive.
I am not yet created honourable.
Sir, things must have their time, but will his high∣nos
Remove so suddenly, and carry my Lady
To the Court with him? tic a most sweet young Prince.
Order was given to pack up her plate,
Her gold and Jewels, for he means to have
Tiltings and triumphs when he comes to Parma.
There it is fit we should expect our honours.
I will attend the Prince.
Signior Lu•io.
Your good Lordship.
Pray tell my Lady, I would kiss her hand,
And shall present news will secure their welcome.
I come from the Prince.
The Prince my Lord?
He is within—
A small march off the Castle, and commanded
Me to prepare her, that he comes to be
Her guest.
My Lord, I will acquaint some of the bed-cham∣ber, but,
When did your Lordship see his Highness?
I left him at the Park gate.
This is the nearest way unless his highness
Have leaped a window, or can walk invisible.
Your Lordship may have some conceit. I'll go Sir.
What is the meaning that ther's such a guard
Upon our Castle? it is besieged, and no man
Suffered go forth; this is some Lord or other
By his straddling.
From the Prince? that he?
It is as I tell you Sir, ther's a little army,
Surrounds the Castle.
They have no order from his highness.
We are betrayed again.
Sir, would you speak with the Prince?
Why have you such a thing within the Castle?
Who dares be so much Traitor to usurp
That title? Wher's that Puppet, Gentlemen?
That is his Secretary.
The rest are Lords and Privy Counsellors.
We are undone.
Tic he, the very he, I dare not look on him;
Oh for an impudence worth a Chronicle,
To out ace him now, it were a possible thing,
If People would believe—
I'll tell my Lady, they are vanished; hum,
I do not like that face.
Come hither fellow, whom do you serve?
I know not Sir.
What Prince have you within?
The prince of Darkness.
What is this fellow?
a Knight of the Post, the Pestle is too honourable.
Where is your Excellent Lady?
I have a guess
If things go on, as I suspect, she will be —
Where?
At her wits end very shortly.
An ingenious fellow?
I have conversed a little with the Mathematics,
Sir, Who is that Gentlewoman, not that I am ignorant,
But to satisfy a doubt?
She is one that may be
The Prince of Parma's Lady, when the Priest
Hath done his Office.
If I be not mistaken
Here comes the Princess, that is Angellina
The younger Sister.
It is my wonder you that have the face
And garb of Gentlemen, should dare to be
So insolent, to affront our person,
And his, to whom your hearts and knees owe reverence.
Command the Impostor forth,
Seize on the Traitors.
His Grace will be here presently, fear not Madam,
I would venture a Neck-breaking at some window,
And be content to crawl away a Cripple;
But there's no hope to scope the Multitude
That will be scrambling for my limbs. Great Sir,
I challenge the privilege of the last Bando,
He that can bring Frapolo the chief Bandit,
Beside what was proclaimed other reward,
Shall have free pardon for all past-offences;
To that Grace I appeal, and here produce
Frapolo.
This amazes me.
Can you stand
The dazzling Sun so long, and not be struck
Blind for this bold affront? what wildness brought you
In multitudes to fright my happy peace,
And this good Ladies, my most virtuous Consort?
He bears up still!
Have all my cares and watchings to preserve
Your lives, and dearest liberties, deserved
This strange return, and at a time when most
Your happiness is concerned, since by our Marriage
With this sweet Lady, full of grace and beauty,
You may expect an Heir to bless your Country.
Will you suffer him?
It is time your Prince were dead, and when I am
Companion to my Fathers dust, these tumults
Fomented by seditious men, that are
Weary of Plenty, and delights of Peace,
Shall not approach to interrupt the calm
Good Princes after Death enjoy. Go home,
I pray depart, I rather will submit
To be deposed, than wear a power or title
That shall not all be dedicate to serve you;
My life is but the gift of Heaven, to wast it
For your dear sakes, my People are my Children,
Whom I am bound in Nature and Religion
To cherish and protect. Perhaps you have
Some grievance to present, you shall have justice
Against the proudest here; I look not on
Nobility of Birth. Office, or Fortunes,
The poorest subject has a Native Charter
And a Birth-right to the Laws, and Common wealth,
Which with an equal, and impartial stream,
Shall flow to every bosom.
Pious Prince!
I am at a loss to hear him; sure I am
Farnese, if I be not lost by the way.
Stand off Gentlemen, — let me see — which?
Hum! this — no, the other. Hum! send for a Lion
And turn him loose, he wo'not hurt the true Prince.
Do not you know me Sir?
Yes, I know you too well, but it stands not
With my honour; what composition?
Who am I? Gentlemen, how dare ye suffer
This thing to talk? if I be your Farnese.
I say I am the Prince,
Prince of what?
Of Rogues, and please thy Excellence.
How?
You must excuse, I can hold out no longer
These were my Subjects Sir, and if they find
Your Mercy, I'm but one, whose head removed,
Or noosed, this Lady will be soon a Widow,
Whom I have not deceived, it was her Ambition
To go no less than Prince, and now you have one,
During this Gentleman's pleasure.
What scorn shall I become?
Let him be guarded, and all his puppet Lords.
News, news, excellent news; I shall leap
Out of my flesh for joy. Sir I have undertook
For your pardon to this reverend couple,
They heard my Niece was to be married
To the Prince, and thought it treason to conceal —
What?
Pauline is not my Niece, no blood of mine;
Where is this Lady and her Pageant Prince?
The truth is, she is not Pauline, but their
Own Daughter.
Possible? then we are both cheated.
Whom she obtruded on our Family
When our Pauline died an Infant, with her,
A Nurse to both; Does your Grace apprehend?
We do beseech your pardon.
Now Angellina thou art heir to all.
By all this Circumstance you are but my Sister!
The Prince is proved a Prince of Thieves.
Why ther's a Baggage and a Thief well met then.
I knew she was a Bastard, or a Changeling.
Where shall I hide my shame? O cursed Ambi∣tion!
Give you joy Sir, my most illustrious Nephew,
Joy to thy invisible Grace.
Thanks to our loving Uncle:
Take hence the Traitors.
Sir I beseech a pardon to their lives.
Let nothing of my story be remembered
With such a Tragedy, it is my first Petition.
I must not deny thee; all thank her Virtue;
Live you, and love that Gentlewoman; But
It were a sin to innocence, and our honour
Would encourage Treason by example,
If they should scope all Justice, take 'em to Custody:
Frapolo, we confine you to this Castle,
Where If she please your Bride may accompany you
Till we determine otherwise.
It is some mercy; but
I shall be getting Children, and two nothings
Wo'not maintain a Family, it were as good
To hang me out o'th'way, here Charge come on,
Or take away my tools, I shall be working.
Provision shall be made you shall not starve
Nor surfeit Sir.
Because I called her Sister,
I will contribute something to their fortune.
What thy own goodness will direct; and now
Remove the Scene to Court, to perfect there
My own, and Parma's happiness; pride has
Met with severe reward, and that high justice
(That Governs all) though envy break with her
Own Poison, calls the Amazed World to see
What blessings wait upon Humility.
Gentlemen, do not say you see me; I have made an escape from the Prince and Pauline; his graces word is but mortal, and not security enough for me; for all this Sun-shine he may hang me, when I come to Parma, for an example, and therefore I have chosen, rather to trust to my legs, than a reconciled State-Enemy.
Two'not be worth your glory to betray
A man distressed, whom your own mercy may
Preserve to better service; rather then
Go back I'll stand your Justice Gentlemen.
I've plaid the thief, but you, as the case stands,
May save or kill, my lif's now in your hands.

