WEe've cause to fear yours, or the Poets frown
For of late day's (he know's not (how) y' are grown,
Deeply in love with a new strain of wit
Which he condemns, at least disliketh it,
And solemnly protests you are to blame
If at his hands you doe expect the same;
He will tread his usual way, no gaudy Scene
Shall give instructions, what his plot doth mean;
No handsome Love-toy shall your time beguile
Forcing your pity to a sigh or smile.
But a slight piece of mirth, yet such were writ
By our great Masters of the Stage and Wit,
Whom you approved: let not your suffrage then
Condemne't in him, and prayse't in other men.
Troth Gentlemen let me advise ye, spare
To vex the Poet full of age and care,
How he might strive to please ye, and beguile
His humorous expectation with a smile,
As if you would be satisfied, although
His Comedy contains no antique show.
Yet you to him your favour may express
As well as unto those whose forwardness
Mike's them your Creatures thought, who in a way
To purchase fame give money with their Play,
Yet you sometimes pay dear for it, since they write
Less for your pleasure than their own delight.
Which if our Poet fail in, may he be
A Sceant of Mirth in their next Comedy.
YO' have given him then his answer?
Forced by you,
Heaven knows with my much sorrow. Such a Lover
So in all points deserving of true worth,
And best endowments to make up a Man
That I shall never see—your pardon sir,
Though you pulled back, by violence, my hand,
In which my heart was freely given to him,
It is not in your power or strength of art
To beat a sigh back, or restrain a tear
Which I must offer to his memory.
Such storms soon wast themselves in absent Lovers
When light of Reason, and good Counsel shall
Break forth and shine upon 'em: and for your part
Daughter, I know it shall. And, presently,
I thus begin to dissipate your errors,
You love this Frederick.
Love knows I do.
You say he is deserving in all points.
My love emboldens me to tell you he is.
Charissa, take me with you. Is he not
Deficient in that only absolute point
That must maintain a Lady, an estate?
Love weighs not that.
What can he show you more
To take you with, then a wild head of hair;
A very Limebush to catch Lady-birds?
A Tissue Doublet; and a Rebind shop
Hung in his Hatbands, might set up a Peddler?
Can this maintain a Lady?
You but look
Upon his outside sir.
I trust you have not
Bin over inwardly acquainted with him.
Sir, he has Valour, Wit, and Honour, you well know
Hoe's of a noble Family extracted.
What's that a year? those parts may be acquired
In winning of a strumpet. But what Joincture
Can he propound to you? or, (in case he dyes,
Your Dowry being spent) what personal Estate
First like he will leave you, but his Powder glass,
His Comb and Beard-brush, and perhaps a Trunkfull
Of Elegies, Raptures, Madrigals and Sonnets?
No let him go; discard him: and embrace
The hopes that I have for thee in the hopeful,
Exquisite Cavalier, Courtier and Soldier,
Scholar, (and what not!) brave Sir Ferdinando:
There's a Man rising in the favour Royal,
And may in thee Charissa, make me happy.
Sir you have given me liberty of speech;
And may be pleased to let me tell you now,
You aim at your own fortune, not at mine.
I seek no fortune, but for thy advancement:
All that I shall call mine must be thine own.
I would be plainer yet; beseeching you be not thought too lose in my obedience.
Speak freely Girl.
Your aim has bin to raise
You state by Court-suits, begging as some call it,
And for that end you left your Country life,
And Lands too ever since my Mother died,
Who while she lived with best of women's judgement
Which held you from that course of selling fair
Possessions to enable you with money
To purchase wit at Court. You pardon me?
On, on.
And for the Exchange of a fair Mansion-house
Large fruitful Fields, rich Meadows and sweet pastures
Well cropped with corn and stocked as well with Cattle,
A park well stored with Dear too, and Fishponds in it,
And all this for a lodging in the Strand now—
But doe I not offend?
No, no, on still.
Your own fed Beefs and Muttons, Foul and Poultry
Loaded your long boards then; and you had then
Neighbours could boast your hospitality,
And poor, that for the remnants prayed for you,
Now all concludes upon a two-dishd table.
And whereas then you had a numerous Family
Of Servants and Attendants, out of which
For profit or for pleasure you could call
Your Bailiff, Groom, your Falconer, or your Huntsman,
Now sir, a Varlet Coachman, and Footboy
Are all your Retinue; and for the Hounds
You kept, that made you sport and Music, now
None but your project Beagles, that smell out
Where such a forfeiture is to be begged;
Where one would purchase a Reprieve, another
A Pardon or a lease of Life Rope-free
For ready money: Then where Goods or Lands
Are found of men that make away themselves,
And so of fools and madmen; All to set
Your trade of Begging up▪ and still you beg:
But your own want of favour holds you back
From reaching any profit by it, because
You beg by Mediators tongues, which you
Call Favourites, who reap the crop of all,
And leave you but the Gleanings; some small pittance
To keep alive the itch of begging in you—
She speaks home and within me, to the purpose.
Still wasting your own fortunes; till at last
You have no hopeful project left to thrive by
But to put me upon this supposed favourite
To beg for you when it is doubtful yet
Whether he will take me with the Dowry, which
Mine Uncle left me, though you add your projects.
The noble Gallant loves thee, Girl, and holds
Thy Person and thy virtues Dowry enough,
He is a wanton Lover, full of change,
And at this instant singularly devoted
Unto that humorous Lady, the young Widow.
The Lady Strangelove?
She is ambitious
To draw all men's affections to her service,
And then abuses all by scorns or slightings,
And this (they say) has made him almost mad.
He mad! believe it not: his reason is
Married to him better then so. How now!
Have you seen the noble Knight from me?
How did he entertain my Message? ha!
Why speak thou not? what answer has he sent?
Hoe's not Sir to be spoken with or seen
•o any purpose, but by his Physicians.
So suddenly and dangerously sick,
Where are my hopes?
I cannot say how sick
•e is; nor can himself give any account
Of his condition: for he is mad sir.
How I mad?
Stark staring mad; as mad
•s you can think a Courtier must be
•hat is more mad then all the rest.
If this be true I sink, what is supposed he cause?
That sir has puzzled all the Doctors
• weighing all his several wild affections;
•no finds he was ambitious of Court favour,
•nd guesses he was crossed in some great suite;
•another takes him as he was a Soldier,
•nd losing cost and travail in the war
•used lose his wits for that. A third collects
•e was a Poet that drunk too deep of Helicon,
•nd turned his brain in climbing of Parnassus:
•… fourth considering that he was a Gamester
•…ng and much favoured, and upraised by fortune
•… mountainous heaps of Gold, conjectures, that
•…me late unlucky hand or chance at play
•…th with his money swept his wit away.
Fie, these can be no causes to remove,
•… shake his settled judgement or his temper.
Then sir a fifth and youngst head among
•…e learned men (what call you him for a Doctor?
•…y that affects gay clothes and Flanders Laces,
•…at trim effeminate Gentleman) he
Has known this noble patient to have been
An extreme Amorist, desperately devoted
Unto the service of some threescore Ladies,
And honoured every one the most in costly presents,
Banquets and Verses; and thinks the disdain
Of one or all of them has turned his brain.
I told you sir, the cause before; and named
That humorous Lady for it, whom in heart
I can no less then thank.
Go, get you up.
And stir not from my Chamber on my blessing
Till my return, nor admit any one
Unto a conference with you.
I obey you.
Some of your project searchers wait without si•…
Laden it seems with new intelligences.
They may come in: but as I fear they bring
Me little comfort, I am sure I shall
Afford them none. Now sirs, your business?
We wait upon your honour my good Lord
To crave the knowledge of what good success
Your honour finds in our late suits my Lord.
Why honour? why my Lord?
We stile you now.
As all must doe hereafter.
Yes, and that
In a short space of time, the world holds no
Proportion else, nor shall it more be said
That money can buy Land; or great Estates
In Lands and Mannor-houses be called Lordships.
Or wealth joined with desert attain to ho•…
So now the Game's a foot. They hunt in full c••…
My Lord it is most apparent.
How you torture me!
We'll maked appear most plainly on our lives.
And credits too.
Their Lives and credits, ha, ha, ha.
That in the space of one whole year our projects
Shall bring in fifty thousand pounds to us,
And hundred thousand to your self; and to
The Coffers Royal for full seven years space
64 Thousand 783 l. 7 s. 9 d obe. q. per annum,
Tic here already cast. Which to make good
We'll venture Lives and Goods.
Our Wives and Children.
We can engage no more.
A wondrous strange engagement
Your lives and goods; your wives &amp; children gentlemen!
That's too deep set, and questions the Kings Mercy:
Me thinks it were enough, for non-performance
You would submit your bodies to perpetual
Imprisonment at the Kings charge; and leave
Your wives and children to their several Parishes
You are still faithless sir, in all projects.
But when you shall perceive the wealthy sons
Daily brought in, and be, continually,
Troubled with the Receipts (if you may be trusted
That have so little faith) when you shall soil
And gall your fingers ends with telling money,
Yet find the lickings of 'em sweet, you'll then
Sing other Notes.
Mean time entreat my Lord
To put you to some Tellers Clerk to teach you
Ambo-dexterity in telling money.
Do you hear sir? Can you give me two sixpences
For a shilling—or any single money?
Cry mercy, you wear none in ready coin,
But all in Bullion locked up in your brave-chests,
And there you have the treasure of the Indies;
Of deeper value, could it be dug out,
Then all the Hollanders have waited for
These 7 years out of the Spanish plate fleets.
But put mine eye out (now I dare you to it)
With any single piece of ready money.
My Lord your man abuses us here strangely
With his old misbeliefe. But still we doubt not
Your honourable good opinion of us.
You have pervs'd this weighty paper here.
It weighs not all twelve grains.
No more?
Nay the whole platform of a stately City,
Or a design to conquer a whole Nation,
But doe you note the grounds, the Rules and Reasons,
First for the easiness of the several grants.
Next for performance of our undertakings.
And then the certainty of the propounded profits
Both to the King and us.
Without all grievance unto the subject.
That's no little marvel.
Take 'em into particulars my Lord,
First this for Perrukes. The Monopoly
Of making all the Perrukes male and female,
Through Court and Kingdom.
There's a capital project.
Note the necessity, that they be well made
Of no diseased or infectious stuff, of dead or living,
No verminous or sluttish locks or combings,
But harmless and sound hair, of innocent,
And wholesome people.
They must then reap none
From Gallowses, nor Hospitals; from whence
They have had great supplies.
You have in that
Said very well; For here's a Reformation
Of that abuse intended in these words
Innocent and wholesome.
How if a man or woman shall desire
To wear a friends hair so departed; as
You his; or your wife yours; may it not be had?
Or if your friend or Mistress dye so, you
Procure the hair and bring it from the Gallows
To the office, and it may be done accordingly.
You have in that said very well Sir too.
Now out of this provision, what an infinite
Profit will rise in the general use of 'em,
And multiplicity that will be worn
By people of all sorts, degrees and ages:
The old to hide their natural baldness, and
The young and middle-ag'd their artificial
Or accidental.
By the pox or so.
They shall be brought into that reputation
That none shall be esteemed so sound or wise
As public wearers of them: which to effectuate
Tic requisite that you obtain a Mandate
Unto all Courtiers, that would be thought wise
To wear false hair: because clowns have been noted
To ralke like fools or mad men in their own.
No more of that.
What say to this my Lord,
Touching new fashions of apparel; suits,
Hats, Boots, Swords, Belts, Ribands, &amp;c.
For every wearer of his first of the fashion
To pay a great to the King; and every Tradesman
Two pence on every several piece he sells
Of any such new fashion the first year?
And what may this pride money amount unto
Per annum, can you guess?
I will not meddle in it.
No my good Lord.
No, nor your Perrukes neither.
What say to this my Lord of the Balconies?
Nor that.
This then for sucking out of corns.
Away with it.
This then: that on the birth of every Girl
The Father pay a great; to hearten men
To live soberly and get Soldiers.
Away.
This makes amends for all then. A new project
For building a new Theatre or Play-house
Upon the Thames on Barges or flat boats
To help the watermen out of the loss
They've suffered by Sedans; under which project
The subject groans, when for the ease of one
Two abler men must suffer; and not the price,
Or pride of Horse-flesh or Coach-hire abated.
This shall bring floods of gain to the watermen
Of which they'll give a fourth of every fare
They shall board at the floating Theatre,
Or set ashore from thence, the Poets and Actors
Half of their first years profits.
Fie away.
This is a weighty one: For massy sums
That may be freely given out of the City,
To have but this assurance, that hereafter
They may engross the getting of their own
Children: by order tan that Cavaliers,
And Courtiers may no more invade,
Or mix with Tradesmen's wives: whereby tic thought
So many City Prodigals have been gotten;
Only the thrifty country Gentlemen
To be excepted: for by them it is guest
So many Citizens grow landed men.
Were not they gotten by Projectors think you?
My Lord your servant jeers us.
To deal plainly
I doe allow't in him —
Heaven has heard my prayers.
And will hear him or any man oppose
All that is put to me by way of project
To put me by all further hopes in 'em:
For (with hearts grief I speak it) he by whom
I only hoped to climb (alas) is fallen.
What out of favour?
No, out of his Reason.
The noble Cavalier sir Ferdinando.
That late stood candidate for the favour royal,
Is he now fallen besides himself?
Even he.
What have you then to doe my Lord
In lieu of all your service but beg him?
His greater and his nearer friends at Court
Will prevent me.
They shall not, never fear it.
Come we will make quick work of this.
My Lord you shall disburse but twenty pieces.
Among us three. 3. And we will instantly
Find his estate. 1. And lay you down a way
So plain that you shall say Ell's yours,
Before you stir a foot.
But when he has travelled
Till he has tired himself, he shall return,
And say Ell's lost, first not so Gentlemen?
I will not part with any money sirs.
Trust me you doe not well to put my Lord
Off of his benefit, by disheartning him
In this small venture. Will you then be pleased
To give us but ten pieces.
Not a penny.
Five you shall my Lord,
And stand no longer thus in your own light.
Or but a piece a Man.
Not a denier.
A dinner then my Lord, but of one piece.
My answers cannot please you. Answer 'em you.
I wonder how you having stretched your throats
With the loud sounds of thousands, hundred thousands
Can, after all, so faintly whisper forth
One piece; and that as much in vain, as all
The massy sums: for all but brings you nothing,
It shows you Gentlemen of resolute patience;
And would take thankfully I warrant you
An od half crown amongst you: and what say you
To every man a kick on the condition?
What say you to one with tother?
This abuse
Shall lose your Master a hundred thousand pound.
Go coin your bullion brains into the money
And come again. My master was
Your Lord even now, as he was Lord of Beggars.
I hope to live to see him beg of us.
Out hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, hundred,
thousands, Millions, ten Millions, Millions upon Millions
Away, i'll stamp your buttocks into coin else.
The Devil ride that hindmost of 'em, for
A raw boned Jade: Sfoot he has lamed my toes.
I am glad I am so rid of 'em, and now
As you are my Servant and my loving Kinseman—
To follow you in all things but in Projects.
Look to my House and Daughter, that she start not;
Nor any entrance be allowed to Fredrick
To re-intangle her in his Love. I know
Thy virtue and thy valour can make good
My trust imposed in thee.
You need not fear sir
But, good sir, no more projects.
I have but one,
On which I'll set my rest. Thoult say tic good.
Except it be the begging of this Madman
It can be nothing.
Tic the very same:
By which I will advance my house and name.
The Beggars best is that he feels no shame:
Sprecious what mean you? Have you forgot so soon
Your Fathers strict command, and he scarce gone yet?
Alas he will then meet Fredrick and divert him,
I saw him at the window making this way.
He gets no entrance to you. I must obey
A master though you can neglect a father.
Be not so cruel. Thou may live to love,
And need the pity of a friend.
I pity you,
And will do no more then you know how to ask
For your own good. I understand your cause
And can relieve you if you'll yield to council.
You are my Kinsman; and have bin my friend,
Though you observe my father who, I fear,
Has not a fathers love towards me.
His love is great and certain,
And all his travel is for your advancement:
But he goes blindfold on unprosperous ways
Led by credulity. Projects! pox of projects
The patron of his projects is (it seems)
Peppered with madness. Tic but Justice on him,
And now i'll give you a secret if you'll promise
To be ruled by me.
You shall rule me cousin.
This Ferdinand, your fathers great Court-godling
Ne'er sought you for a wife; but to have whored you:
(That is the English on it) and to appear
A right great man in you have, he would have made
By hopes and promises your credulous Father
The instrument of your prostitution:
Which to effect, (though still he undertook
His hopeful projects) cunning Lawyer-like
He crossed or lost him still in all, on purpose
That poverty at length might urge him to
Give you to his dispose.
This was my fear.
Away: some body comes.
Tic Fredrick. I must see him.
You'll never see him more then. Go to your cham∣ber. A little patience and he shall be yours.
So dos a heart consume in lingering fire,
When cooling hopes are cast on hot desire.
Poor heart I pity her, and will labour for her.
O Gabriel! I am happy in finding thee,
Thy master absent, whom I saw, in hast
N•w passing towards the Court. Whore's my Charissa?
You may not see her.
May not see her sir?
May not! nay must not: shall not see her.
You're very plain with me.
Her own command
Warren•s me speak it sir.
A villain speaks it.
I have a sword speaks other language for me.
Can she whose thoughts are truth, and written here,
Here in this breast, giving me ample welcome,
Give thee a countermand to bar me from it?
Would thou make her a double hearted monster?
Or like another woman?
Repent thee of thy trespass yet and live.
Sir, if you think to fight, talk not too much;
Or, if you needs must talk, then hear as well.
What would thou say?
Sir, I have more to say
Then fits this place, since you are apt to quarrel;
And this no ground to bustle on: nor indeed
Where I dare for my honesty and trust
Allow you longer stay. If therefore you
Will walk, I'll wait upon you; and direct you
In a more ready way to find Charissa.
Is she not here in the house?
O sir, a man
May come within his arme-reach of his money
In the Exchequer: but he must walk about
To find due order ever he draw it out.
The fellow's honest, valiant, and discreet,
Full man, in whom those three additions meet.
Sir, dare you trust me?
Yes I dare; and why?
Because if thou dare fight, thou dare not lie.
HEre in this gallery Gentlemen you may, at your pleasure,
Until my Lady comes, walk or sit.
Or lie down if you please.
If you so, wrong not my Ladies Couch with your Spurs I pray: take heed you leave not a Rowel there.
If one should, your Lady has no Lord to call her honour to question, whose Knight-hood it belonged unto.
You have a good country wit sir.
My name is Swayne-wit; and for all you twit me with the Country, I am a Gentleman though.
I honour you the more sir, for I am a Country Maid my self.
Thou art a baggage, and a bold one, I am deceived else.
I would be further acquainted with you though.
Have you done now? You will have time enough for
Further and better acquaintance.
Thou art a Jackanapes of the basest tricks that ever I saw, for a halfe-penny. Shoe's your choice, is she? Could not you let be though? I have bin acquainted with thee but two days, and forgi 'me for swearing, I have found thee beating ripe a skore of times at least. Take heed I be∣gin not now, and handsel your Ladies house, that is so much talked on, and your Gentlewoman's presence here with a fist about your ears.
Not for a thousand pound.
That's a great deal of money. I could find i'my heart to do it though.
Slife we are all undone then.
He sets my teeth on edge to look upon him: He looks so like a wilding crab, good neither for drink nor sauce.
Why would you press him then?
Thou hast a verjuice wit.
For my poor sake forbear sir.
Let him stand further then, and look of toe side.
Well sir, this is no cause nor place to fight in, when—
What says he?
Nothing, you hear he whistles tother way.
Tother way, what backwards?
What new guest have you brought here Mr. Court-wit, for my Lady to laugh at?
One for that purpose Phil, you have spoke the man, But what company has my Patronise, that she is yet busy.
I that! If she be long busy I will not stay, and she were ten great Ladies, or one as big as twenty, for all she is your Patronise, must we wait out of our wits, because Chalivere ran mad for her?
Have you heard of that sir?
My Cozen Court-wit's question was who's with her?
O sweet Mr. Court-wit, when will you bring the fine civil Gentleman, that maintains himself so gal∣lantly by picture drawing?
Here's a new business! Fare ye well, pray tell your Lady I came not from Pensans to grow here.
Nay sweet sir stay, there is sir with my Lady none but the grave and witty talking Knight. Some call him the metropolitan wit of Court; he that loves Ladies so∣ciety so much, and yet has vowed virginity.
As much as in man lies Phil; Hee is a perpetual vowed bachelor indeed, and as constant to his vow as to his fashion in apparel, which is ever the same, sir Raphael Winter-plum.
That old witherd piece. I know him.
Thou wilt bear up again.
He has licked up a living with his tongue; makes all great tables his own; and eats for his talk. He may be conversant with women: for (they say) he guelt him∣self
beyond Sea for spite one did him; and now preaches chastity to Ladies, and love to their husbands. Hoe's a Lay-gospeller among the married sort, and an especial pedant to the youth of Court.
Fie, thou speak too much.
There's another humour I could beat thee for with all my heart, thou wilt speak outrageously of all men behind their backs, and dare not answer Ba —to the face of a sheep, O I could pommel thee.
This is not yet a cause to fight for, when —
But will not that fine Gentleman Mr. Dainty come, Mr. Court-wit?
I expect him presently.
I'll see if their conference be ended, or break it if I can, and hasten my Lady to you.
This wench has a dainty wit.
She may, living with the prime Lady-wit in town.
But what Dainty is that she talks on so affecti∣onately?
Troth a Gentleman that lives at a good rate; very civil in conversation, keeps good company; yet none of his acquaintance that I am acquainted with knows his beginning, or his present means.
A Gentleman borne.
I know no more but by his port, and fashion, you saw him with me last night.
Forgi' me for swearing, First he?
He was at the Play with us too, doe you not re∣member that?
Yes, that I was at the Play, by sure token and a sad one.
I'll show you somewhat of him. A Gentleman borne did you ask?
Now he bears up again.
Hee cannot be a Gentleman by birth or place. A fine-handed, and a fine headed fellow he is; and pre∣tends great skill and practice too in Picture-drawing, Watch-making, and such like finger works; which he says he uses as a Gentleman's exercise, not as a trade to live upon; when either he does live on it; or else hee has some more secret way, as perhaps pimping or pursing for ought I know.
There he is again! Art thou bound in conscience to wrong all men in their absence, till I beat thee into better manners?
Hold hold, I prithee hold.
Yet still the cause is insufficient, when—
Here comes the Gentleman.
Is hee come? Noble Mr. Dainty—The well∣come in the World. I protest I suffered by your absence.
You do me too much honour Mr. Cit-wit.
Oh sir, your humble servant.
Ha, ha. Forgi' me for swearing, what a Spaniel's this?
Gentlemen you are well found, I was a little stayed by the way upon receipt of monies. Have you seen the Lady yet?
Shoe's yet a little busy. We shall all instantly take the opportunity together.
But Gentlemen; you that have better knowledge of this Lady inform if you please, why are we summoned hither?
Thou speak as if thou had guilt upon thee; fear nothing man.
I that's the thing that I would understand too. And why me of any man? They say indeed she is a hue∣morose Lady, and loves to busy her self. But what are we to her? are there not greater men, and Lords enough
for her to fool away the time with, but we must dance attendance on her humours?
I protest Mr. Swayn-wit, I admire your inge∣nuity.
You will be meddling still.
Tic to your question sir, which I will answer.
I there's another of your cockscombly tricks, to answer any question, that's asked another man, out with though.
This Lady sir, this humorous witty Lady is a wit-sponge, that sucks up wit from some, and holds as her own, until she squeeze it out on others. She will make use of ours, or any courser wits; and search 'em out to sift 'em. She will collect from market-folkes; and hold conferences with the poor Trades-people that cry their wares about the streets, She will rake wit out of a dunghill Ragwoman.
So there he is again! dare thou abuse a noble Lady, in her own house too? I dare not now but beat thee.
Forbear good cousin.
Still, still, the cause is nought, when—
Odds so the Ladies coming I think.
Gentlemen, my Lady cannot yet be rid of the tedious talking Knight. But she will cast him presently. He is now following her into this room, pray pass into the next; my Ladies Music room. There you shall find a collation of good Tobacco and Sack and one to attend you, you know the fashions of the House Mr. Court-wit.
Come away Gentlemen.
I could even love and look upon that sweet Mr. Dainty a whole hour methinks.
Go your ways down Maid, and if any ask for Sir Raphael here, say that I hope hee will have done anon.
You would be rid of me: but pardon me Madam, I must hold your glass to you.
That's a poor Chamber-mayds office; and ill becomes your gravity Sir Raphael.
I'll open then the book to you of your errors.
Now you speak scholler-like, and your self: But have we spent all this while in by, and idle talk, and have that volume to be opened yet? Pray read me for the first Lesson for this Mornings Exercise, and my Edification, the last Chapter of my book of errors as you call it.
You are a mocker of instruction, and good counsel.
Begins it so? whom is that spoken to?
I speak to only you; to conjure (if I can) that spirit of scorn out of you; which you have taken in, and long affected for a humour, your singular own humour, till it is grown so familiar, so inherent in you, that you have won the title of the humorous Lady by it; and drawn a scorn upon your self.
Why then ell's paid, and welcome good Sir Raphael.
I am not gone so; nor is all so paid:
For there's a greater reckoning yet of Railings,
Reviling, Curses by the many that
You've scorned and slighted, shot at you in hot volleys.
They hit me not. I am sure I do not feel 'em.
You may in time be sensible of their sufferings,
Whom you have violently, and wilfully abused
With scorn and pride; if you call to mind
The cause, bred merely out of humour; cause you would have it so.
You come too near me sir, cause I would have it so?
Can it be otherwise? Has it not ever bin
Your practise, since your time of widow-hood
To catch all men's affections? Tic indeed
An honour to a Lady to have many suitors;
But to lay bait for 'em only to delude 'em—
Is impiously dishonourable.
Have I done so?
Yes, and have gloried in it for your humour
To lead men into brakes with foolish fire.
If they will follow it, I cannot help it.
You might though have prevented the mishaps
Of many, by a fair and free resistance
In the beginnings of their suits of Courtships,
And not to set your self at gaze to draw them on,
And then allure them with assured hopes
Of love and favour till you have wound their follies
Into the reach of your disdain; and then
To torture 'em, or having taken 'em captives
To slave and sell 'em to the worlds derision.
O sir Raphael—
She feels compunction!
I will pursue it to the quick.
On good Sir Raphael.
Consider then good Madam, since I know,
And your own conscience knows, that you have made
A secret vow from your late husbands death
Never to marry, how better and more glorious
It would be for your honour to declare
Your constant purpose to a single life,
Then to fall into the transgression
Of robbing men so of their wits and reason,
And all by wilful humour; as this late
Unhappy accident of madness in
The hopeful Knight Sir Ferdinando cries
Loudly to your disgrace, and the worlds sorrow.
Half the worlds sorrow is mine own
For that sad accident, I would I cooled redeem't
With half my health or life. But let me tell you
(Now you have justly chidden me) that you
Have a fault too.
What first in your construction?
As I concealed my vow of single living,
And gave men leave to court me, by which means
I won them into hopes, and robbed their wits,
You in declaring to the Court and City
Your vow of chastity and single life,
Yet daily, nightly, hourly frequenting
The company of Ladies, with your sweet,
No less then grave discourse and conversation
Have robed (nay I may say deflowered) more Ladies
Of chaste and honourable thoughts, then all
The cavalry of Court.
Who I Madam!
Even you sir Raphael (if unchaste desires
Must be held sinful) I know some of them,
And one (I fear) too well, that have bin subject
Unto the breach of any vow for you,
Yet you to vow a single and chaste life;
And publish your intent!
Tic with intent,
And a religious purpose to decline,
And divert women's fond affections from me.
O, but forbidden things are women's longings!
You have read, you have read (sir Raphael) you have read.
And travelled too: yet never could discover
Such an example.
Pray sit down by me.
Good thoughts possess you Madam. I mus• hence.
I'll not be tedious to you. One word I pray sir?
Virtue, be thou my armour. Briefly then
Let me entreat you Madam:
Pray refuse not
To sit down by me.
Sanctity protect me.
Sir, you are famous, and cried up by all
For your great wisdom, Moral and Divine:
You are the Ipse dixit of the Court
As I have heard you styled by men of learning,
The Court Philosopher—
Madam to the point.
What is our strength, and what is not our frailty?
Where is she wandering now? Bee plainer Madam.
Doe not my blushes (which I hope you pardon)
Deliver you a message from my heart?
Which I want words to utter? O these vows!
These rash and ill-made vows! dos not your judgement
Read something on this face? pray look upon me.
I am no good interpreter of looks.
I dare not speak, till you have first removed
A weighty scruple, which doth much perplex me.
You must first speak it Madam.
Whether these vows,
(I mean your own, and mine, for single life)
May safely be dispensed with or absolved,
And we become a lawful pair in Marriage?
Pray sir resolve and bless me in a Match.
Madam I'll pray for you.
You will first kill me
With your disdain, and then you'll pray for me!
Is that your Charity?
I dare not hear you.
Leave me not so.
Who waits upon my Lady here?
I had no other way to shift him, would he would make
An errand now to Rome to quit my scruple;
And rid the Court of an officious fool:
Women some times have sent wise men to school.
Is the Knight gone?
And blessing of himself,
As witch-craft were in the house.
But whore's my favourite Court-wit, has he brought his country Kinsman and the rest?
They are all in your wit-office Madam (as you call the Room)
Passing the time among the Pipes and Bottles,
And singing catches. Here you may hear 'em Ma∣dam.
Marry, this takes past all sir Raphaels Lectures,
Go call 'em down.
This Madam troubles me, 'would he were right again;
Or I quit of the scandal.
O Gentlemen! you're welcome,
And chiefly you that are the only stranger,
I have been so troubled with an overtalking sir, that he
Has wound me into melancholy—
I wish you mirth Madam. I come not as one of you fools to make you any though—
Be not so brief with me, let me entreat you though.
Forgi'me for swearing doe you mock me though?
Mistake me not sweet sir—
Sweet with a mischief! How sweet am I? I come
not as a suitor to your great Ladyship, I am a Gentleman of two hundred a year though.
Not as a suitor to me sir?
No you are too great for me. Nor to your Mopsey without, though she be snout-faire, and has some wit shoe's too little for me, I understand degree and quality, respect and difference; and am scholar enough to know my unde and my quare.
You ga' me his true character. You are a com∣pleat Gentleman sir (if I mistake not) the Kinsman of my favourite here, who has given me an ample relation of your worth and virtue.
Yes, Patronise, it is he, who though not thoroughly versed, or conversant in the Court or City garb, he under∣stands both Men and Manners.
Prattle for your self sir.
But to the business Gentlemen.
I that I would fine know if it be any.
You have heard I doubt not of a disastrous blot lately cast upon my fame, out of my own free∣ness.
Concerning the Mad courtier Madam, when it is as likely, that his Taylor made him mad as you, for not hitting the fashion right in his last rich suit. But tic most like he fell from a reasonable man, by over-studying him∣self what Lord he should be at the next creation, when∣there of Gleek, or Cribbage; In and in, or Hazard.
Hark how this shotten headed Cocks-combe prates! And how he, that can endure beating, dares speak any thing, or abuse all men! can not give the Lady leave to speak though?
Since there is an aspersion laid upon my freeness in giving entertainment unto persons of great and noble qua•ity, the world deeming it to be done by me merely
for ostentation, to cry my own humour up, by drawing them into Love-knots, and then to slight or scorn them: My resolution is from henceforth, to exclude those great resorts, and friendly and freely be merry within our selfes. I have four thousand a year to spend; and will be huswife good enough to keep in compass. I will not entertain a servant, friend or guest above your rank or fortunes—
Why— (forgi'me for swearing) what do you think of us?
I think you Gentlemen of worth and quality: and therefore welcome. I think you able to maintain your selfes midle-sis'd Gent.
I am Middlesex indeed; borne in the City.
Give the Lady leave to speak though.
I'll give access to none, that the censorious world shall dare to judge a suitor to me,
Or to find favour further then meat and wine.
Yes, faith a little money to; and mike's your Fiddlers.
Pray give the Lady leave to speak though.
Maugre the greatness of my former visitants
I give you my election for the chiefs
Of my familiar society.
I may perhaps call in, (at least admit)
People of meaner garb, without (I hope
Your grudge or envy. But they shall be men
Of Science, Art, and Action.
Of action Madam? who do you mean? the Players?
Why not? I love their quality and them, and mean to have the use of some of 'em shortly: Besides Musiti∣ans (Poets in the first place) and Painters: In which last mentioned art I hear you are excellent, though all this while so silent.
I boast no skill or practise Madam: but I have drawn some pieces that have been worth my pains in my Rewards.
I must commend their ingenuity for whom you took those pains. But (where I left) I must make use of wits, of arts, and actions.
Here in your house Madam, I would be glad to see the Actors but I saw 'em at their own too lately: for I lost my purse there, no matter let it go. There was 15. pound in it tho!
Sprecious! How now! my Fob has been fubd to day of six pieces, and a dozen shillings at least. No∣thing but a bowd great left as I hope for my Grannums blessing.
Sure you have been in some ill company.
Pox of ill company I say. My watch is gone out of my Pocket too of the right side.
You rose of the wrong side to day it seems, were you in no crowd or quarrel?
I never was in any quarrel i'my life. I always run from 'em.
I dare swear thou dost.
I only stood to day at the Coranto-shop to read the last great news; and I was hooped in I remember by some that seemed to wonder as much as I.
Then certainly there was a cut-purse amongst 'em.
I'll go to honest Moll about it presently.
But first stay and hear my Lady though.
I Madam you were speaking of the use you would make of Poet, Painter, Music, Actor and the like.
True favourite for a Masque that I intend to have shortly, you shall perform the poetical part, your
servant Citwit the Musical. And by your skill and direct∣once the Painters office for the scenes. Dancers and spea∣cares I have in store.
I must be something too though, must I not Ma∣dam?
Marry and thank you too sir.
Now your News.
Sir Andrew Mendicant desires to see you Madam.
You should have told him I would not be seen by him.
I told him you were busy. But hee says hee is to speak with you upon a weighty business from the Court.
Tic the Court-begger. You know him favourite.
Go not away, I'll bring him in amongst you,
And (as you love me) put some ridiculous projects to him.
What's that sir Andrew Mendicant? doe you know him well?
Thou ask still a question like a guilty person, with a look resembling fear upon thy face.
My countenance is too blame then; not my con∣science.
I'll tell you what he is.
Still answering others questions?
He is a Knight that hanckers about the Court, ambitious to make himself a Lord by begging. His brain is all Projects, and his soul nothing but Court-suits. He has begun more knavish suits at Court, then ever the Kings Taylor honestly finished, but never thrived by any: so that now hoe's almost fallen from a Palace B•gger to a spittle one. His business to my Lady now can be no∣thing but to borrow money to buy a pair of wheels
to set some Project a going to Court for a Mo∣nopoly.
Thou were in hast even now to look after th• money; but and thy Life lay on it thou must stay to abuse a man hehinde his back, who is a noble Gentleman thou know, and I have heard, yet (speak in thy conscience) would thou not be beaten now?
Forbear, they come.
Sir, since it is requested by those great ones
Whose power cannot command me in this case
(For tic my charity and not my duty)
I am content that the mad Ferdinand
Shall sojourn in my house for his recovery.
Tic thought you were the ground-work of his frenzy
The Doctors therefore moved their honours to it
For that your frequent presence may be helpful
Towards his care.
He shall have it then
Towards the expiation of the crime
They charge me with. But in case sir Andrew
He should be cured by this means, I should then
Cross you in fortune and your future hopes
Of his estate; which you have begged you say
If he recover not.
I must leave that to fortune Madam.
Will you be pleased sir to take notice of
These Gentlemen my friends. They may be useful
For they have all projective brains I tell you.
Pray of what nature are your Projects Gentlemen?
Sir my affection leanes much to Poetry, especially the Drammatick.
Writing of strange Plays?
I am glad I speak sir, to your understanding.
And my project is that no Plays may be admitted to the Stage, but of their making who Profess or indea∣four to live by the quality: That no Courtiers, Divines, Students at Law, Lawyers-clearks, Tradesmen or Prone∣tises be allowed to write 'em, nor the Works of any lay-Poet whatsoever to be received to the Stage, though freely given unto the Actors, nay though any such Poet should give a sum of money with his Play, as with an Apprentice, unless the Author doe also become bound that it shall doe true and faithful service for a whole Term.
Here's a trim business towards, and as idle as the Players going to Law with their Poets.
I have another sir, to procure a Patent for my self to have the only privilege to give instructions to all the actors in the City, (especially the younger sort) the better to enable them to speak their parts emphatically and to the life.
You were best take heed in time then that you well preserve your own voice, for fear you doe a spoil among 'em in teaching 'em to utter in unsavoury tunes. Doe I come hither to be mocked?
Will you hear mine though? I am a Country Gentleman, young, healthful and lusty. I hear com∣plaints of barrenness in the City; and of men that can∣not get their wives with child; Get me but a Patent for it I'll undertake by my self and deputies (provided that the woman be sound and handsome) to make them mule∣tiply, and upon reasonable conditions: we will deal with the rich for money, and the poor for cha∣rity.
This is foolisher then tother. Doe you abuse me Gentlemen?
Is that a wise man's question? you cannot tell th'o.
We have our projects too Sir.
I would have yours first, you see me a civil and substantial Gentleman.
In more private if you please Sir.
I like well his reservedness.
Sir I am a Picture-drawer Limner, or Painter (if you please) and would gladly purchase authority, by my self and deputies, for the painting of all the Kings, and Q•…enes-head signs for Taverns, Innes, Ale houses, and all Houses and Shops of Trade throughout the King∣dome upon this ground that they draw and hang up their •…yall Images for signs in so hideous manner that men bless themselves to so ever.
I marry this hangs upon some ground. But are you an exquisite workman in that art sir?
I am an Artist in that mystery sir, and have drawn some of his Majesties Pictures (by copy only but) so to the life, that Gentlemen have kneeled to 'em for suites, and knight-hoods.
Indeed sir!
Yes sir, and great Lords I have pictured so power∣fully, their own followers suddenly rushing into the room have started back and solemnly stood bare to 'em as they hung of the walls.
First possible!
I drew a sterne Judge, and a civil Lawyer so to the life, that after their corps were in the Grave, a man durst not look upon their pictures without a bribe, or double fee in's hand.
I do admire you!
I have drawn Ladies too, with that alluring beau∣tie, that men have loy'd their dead pictures, for their pain∣ted looks, more then their living persons for all their virtues.
Thou boy! in truth you abuse me most merrily Gentlemen.
An excellent fellow: I like him for that fancy more then all the rest.
Pray hear my project too sir?
Yes good sir Andrew, you shall not part so ab∣ruptly.
Mine is a good common welds business, against the common Plague, that reigns in the City of Pick∣pockets, and Cut-purses. I my self have bin robbed to day, and am going to a good member that deals in private for the recoveries of such goods: One that shall under∣take if you'll but get a Patent, for a Cutpurse-hall, or Office, to help all men to their own again, allowing but the Tithes of their Losses, and freeing the offending parties.
Fie, fie. Here's tithing indeed.
Provided that notice be brought to the Office within four and twenty hours after any such loss.
Enough, enough.
Wee may by the same course secure the Coun∣••… too, and make the hangman hang himself.
Let every man be wise enough to look to his purse, and there will be no Cut-purses, nor need of your patent.
As wise a man as you may lose his purse though, as I have done my self in a crowed.
He puts me in mind of a crowd I was in once to day of company I liked not—ha—. For hey∣ven it is gone: And I dare not discover it for being laughed at.
It seems none of your Projects will pass with you sir Andrew.
Come sir, they are but (as you said) merry with you.
Be you merry with them good Madam, you know the serious work I came about. In which
I suddenly shall presume to give you a re-visite.
Pray do sir Andrew, bring your Mad-man. My garden Lodgings shall be his bedlam. Come gentlemen tic Dinner-time.
We are your waiters Madam.
THese are the Lodgings, that my Lady appointed▪
For your distracted patient.
Like you 'em Doctor.
Exceeding well. Excuse me Gentlewoman
That now entreat your absence.
Willingly. I am not taken with the sight you bring
For I see mad-folkes enough every day.
Here set him down. Unbind him, and unblind him.
Am I then taken prisoner in the North?
Wounded, disarmed and bound? I shall be ransomed
To which of your rebelliously usurped
Castles have you brought me? you sir Presbiter,
That better can pugnare then orare,
And so abjure all duty and allegiance—
Hee takes you for a Northern Pastor Mr. Doctor.
No matter what, let him run out his fancy.
You were best to use me well; and like a soldier
Order will else be tan (though you know none.)
You shall have all best usage sir.
And use my horse well too, and let my horse and armour
Be decently preserved and seen forth-comming
At my redemption.
With all best care sir.
For I shall soon be sent for, or fetched off
With ruin of your country about your ears.
You shall have all content the country yields sir.
I shall have Oat-bread, Ale, and Bag-pipes, shall I?
If you'll be merry sir.
Merry! why not? come let's have cards; and you and I to cribbage
For an od hundred pound, I mean not Scotch,
But sterling English pieces, whore's your money?
All gone in Ammunition, and charge Military.
I'll find you money enough.
O here's a third man, let's then to Gleek.
Crown Gleek sir, if you please.
Crown Gleek! no more?
You seem to be a thrifty Covenanter
To play but at crown Gleek, whole piece Gleek or nothing.
High as you please sir, we'll find money enough,
And pay us but our buyings.
Sir, you must bare me Aces. You will play Tib and Tom.
All in the Cards sir.
Away with cards. Bring dice, set all at hazard,
And though I lose all, I have yet a project
That at the end of the war, and the great sitting
Shall fetch all in again. But O my Muse!
How dare I so neglect thy inspirations?
Give me Pen, Ink and Paper.
Ell's ready.
Now will I write, nor will I emulate
Ovids smooth vain, or Petraks buskind stile.
Nor Laura, nor Corinna did deserve
To have their prayers written in such Verse
As i'll bestow on her that I adore.
Listen to me you blessed Intelligences,
And, Phebus, stay thy course to hear me sing
Her praises, for whose love the enamoured Gods
Would leave their proper seats, and in stolen shapes,
Converse with mortals, your soule-ravishing spheres
Send forth your sweetest harmony whilst I sing—
But O she is disdainful; and her scorn
Hath blotted all the glory of her praise,
Away, away with all.
Now sir, doe you observe the root of his Disease?
I guess at it, know you the remedy?
Disease! what's that? who is diseased? who wants a Remedy?
Are you sir a Physician?
This Gentleman is, and brings you remedy, be you patient.
O you will move him.
You are a brace of Quacks,
That tie your knowledge unto days and hours
Marked out for good or ill in the Almanac.
Your best Receipts are candy for a cold;
And Carduus Benedictus for an ague,
Could you give life as Aesculapius
Did to unjustly slain Hippolitus,
You could prescribe no remedy for me.
Go study Gallon, and Hippocrates,
And when your rare simplicities have found
Simples to cure the Lunacy of Love,
Compose a potion, and administer't
Unto the Family at Amsterdam.
I'll Physic you to morrow and allay
The heate of this strong fit, or Leach it out.
I have ventured to this house again, assured
That now the humorous Lady is from home
Forgetting not her Love-trick put upon me
Which she already boasts to my disgrace
For which I may requite her Ladyship,
How dos your patient? a sleep! That's well.
No hoe's but silent sir, and it is well
That he is so, so long.
The Lords in honourable regard unto
His health directed me to visit him.
Who's that?
Do you not know me sir?
You are (I tak't) the Ghost of Dionisius
The great tyrannical Court-schole-master.
Your Friends at Court commend them to you Sir.
What hither, unto hell? Extend their loves
So far, to find me out? Pray let 'em know
That here's a troubled world in want of Statesmen.
But tell the youths and beauties there, they never
Shall find a happier opportunity
To raise a new Plantation. They'll drive all
Before 'em here. For pride is at a stand;
Fashions are all worn out, and no invention
For new here to be found: all beauty's lost;
Nor have the greatest Ladies here the act
To make so much as their poor Chambermaids:
Let 'em come down, as many of the Gallants
As are made weary of their Wives or Mistresses;
And, of those Wives and Mistresses, as many
As can their husbands, or their servants spare:
And what a year of Holy-dayes, a Jubilee
Shall we have in hell then? Have old Lad!
What a wilde fancie's this!
Cross it not good sir.
Pray give me leave to touch it though, a little.
But above all, find out the Lady Strangelove
That humorous Madam, and tell her from me,
The many Lovers she has sent before her
Into these shades (where we can find no torments
Like those that she inflicted) have prevailed
With the great Queen Proserpina, that she
Shall be in place next to her royal person.
The Lady Strangelove! you are in her house sir,
Where doe you think you are? or who you are?
Pray call your self to mind sir, are not you
The noble Cavalier and hopeful Courtier
The most accomplished Knight sir Ferdinando?
Forbear sir, you will move him strongly else.
I have authority for what I do sir,
Can you forget your self sir, or neglect
The bounteous fortunes, that the Court and Kingdom
Have in store for you, both for past Achievements,
And for the large endowments of court-vertue
Are found still growing in you, studied and practised
So to the life, as if you were built up
Virtues own Mansion, on her four firm pillars?—
I hope he cannot flatter him into's wits
When it is the way to fool men out of 'em.
The Wisdom, Justice, Magnanimity,
And temperance of court you are exactly
Framed and composed of, and endued with all
The excelencies that may adorn a man
By Nature, Fortune, Art and Industry!
And all this glorious light to be eclipsed;
And such Divine perfections seem to sleep?
Pray sir your ear.
Sir, most attentively.
What do you think of Salsbury steeple sir,
For a fit hunting spear to encounter with
The whore of Babilion? might I not firk her think you?
Your Doctrine dos not edify sir Raphael.
Is Orator Demostines grown dumb
Of the sudden? what! no answer? give me a Knife
He is but tongue-tied.
Guard me Divinity.
I told you what you would doe.
Patience good sir.
Patience in tortures?
Help here suddenly!
Do you sally forth in troupes? Have I no troupe?
Give me my horse and arms, and come a hundred.
We'll arm and horse you, since you're so unruly,
Away with him into his Bed-chamber.
O doe you make me then your Knight of the shire A tun of Wine for that. Shoulder your Knight, advance your Knight, bear him out.
A Ferdinand, a Ferdinand, &amp;c.
This now to me is Music, Golden-chimes
That rings all in with an assured advantage,
How now Sir Raphael! Frighted?
In all my disputations all my travails,
And all conspiracies that have bin had
Aagainst me, never met I an encounter
By man, or spirit that I feared so much,
Yet here's another fury.
By what oppression or tyranny (for Law
I'm sure could never do it) is my house here
Confiscated or usurped, and I become your slave?
How Madam?
Your slave, lay your commands on me, wh• drudgery doe you appoint me to?
Shoe's mad too.
Did not your Ladyship give way?
To make my house a hell?
The noise of Bedlam is soft Music to 't.
Could your Projectorship find no house else
To make a mad-man madder in but mine?
And me as mad as he too with the trouble.
I was no principle in it good Madam.
Was it your plot then sir Philosophaster,
That so you might under pretext of reading
Philosophy to him, to cure his madness
Make your address to me to prosequte
Your Love-suite when I thought I had answered you,
But if you must proceed, overcome me if you can,
Yet let me warn you to take heed withal
You pull not a disease unto you, that may
By your ungoverned hast post into
Your grave: for I shall prove a torment to you,
Though you'll take no denial, take yet a warning.
I take it to forsake your house; and never
More to resort where madness reigns. Did I
Make love to you?
Pardon me virtuous sir, it is my love to you that tortures me into this wild distraction. O sit Raphael.
Now virtue guide me. I will shun this place
More then I would the Spanish Inquisition.
I shall in time be rid of all such Guests,
And have the liberty of mine own house
With mine own company, and to mine own ends
Where are you Phil? I were but dead if I had not this wench to fool withal sometimes.
Madam.
I must be a little serious with you, shut the door.
Now am I called into correction,
When she is vexed and wants the company
She likes, then come I into question,
It is common among Ladies with their women.
Why that down look, as if you meant to fetch
An answer, or excuse out of your Apron-strings
Before you are charged or questioned? what new faule
Has past of late?
Doe you read any Madam
Upon my face or looks? I never was in love
Much with my face, nor ever hated it. But if I thought
It had upon it, or in it, any trespass
Against your Ladyship (my heart being clear)
These Nails should claw it out.
Nay be not passionate Phil. I know you cannot
Forget the care I have had of you; nor should you
Distrust me in the promises I have made you,
Bearing your self according to your covenant Phil,
Of which one Article is to laugh with me.
Go, you are such a Lady, ha, ha, ha.
Now thou come to me wench: had forgot?
You said you would be serious.
Dost not thou know my seriousness is to laugh in private,
And that thou art bound to stir that humour in me?
There's but two things more conditioned in thy service;
To do what I bid thee, and tell me the truth
In all things that I ask thee.
I Madam, you had never known that same else.
Of the clap thou had in the Country ever I took thee,
But hast thou faithfully kept thine own ever since?
Yes most severely Madam on your promise—
Well we will have a husband then to solder up the old crack,
I have already made my choice for you:
Your sweete-heart Cit-wit makes most suite to you,
And has a good Estate, and wit enough
Too for a husband, and a handsome person.
I find no fault in all that. But he is
So base a coward, that he may be soon
Beaten out of his wit and money.
But if he should prove valiant!
If he were valiant now I could say something,
But to wait for growing to it were such a loss of time.
What say to Swayn-wit?
Hoe's the others extreme. I might fear him but never love him.
What think you of my special favourite Mr. Court-wit?
As of a Courtier Madam, that has tasted
So much of all waters, that when he has a fountain of his own
He will be too jealous of it.
And feared that every man will drink of's cup
When perhaps none dares touch it, were I it.
What say to Dainty then the curious Limner?
I am bound from lying. Madam hoe's the man.
Well i'll take thy cause in hand wench: But yet we are not merry. I am inclined most jovially to mirth me thinks. Pray Jove some good be towards. Laugh or i'll pinch you, till you doe.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, Madam, ha, ha, ha. O the picture drawer! ha, ha, ha.
I, come, the Picture drawer.
O, I love drawing and painting, as no Lady bet∣la,
who for the most part are of their occupation that profess it. And shall I tell all Madam?
By all means Phil.—now shoe's entered.
I hope I am handsome enough too. For I have heard that Limners or Picture-drawers, doe covet to have the fairest and best featured wives, (or if not wives, Mistresses) that they can possibly purchase, to draw naked Pictures by, as of Diana, Venus, Andromeda, Leda, or the like, either virtuous or lascivious; whom they make to sit or stand naked in all the several postures, and to lie as many ways to help their art in drawing, who knows how I may set his fancy a work? and with mo∣desty enough. We were all naked once, and must be so again. I could sit for the naked Shepherdess, with one Leg over the tother Knee, picking the Thorne out of her Foot most neatly, to make the Satire peep under.
Well thou shalt have him.
Mistress Philomel.
Let in the Boy. Now sir your news?
The mad Knights Doctor Madam entreats to speak with you.
Now seeks he my assistance in his cure.
And Mr. Court-wit, and the other Gentlemen are below.
Go you and entertain the Gentlemen, while I consult with the Doctor, let him enter.
Now Mr. Doctor! you come to ask my counsel I know for your impatient Patient. But let me tell you first, the most learned Authors, that I can turn over; as Dioscorides, Avicen, Galen, and Hyppocrates are much discrepant in their opinions concerning the remedies for his disease.
Madam—
Therefore I trust you'll pardon my weakness, if my opinion jumps not altogether with your judgement.
Madam, my purpose was not—
My purpose is to advise you though, that, if his Frenzy proceed from love as you conjecture, that you administer of the roots of Hellebore, destilled together with Salt-peter, and the flowers of blind Nettles, I'll give you the proportions, and the quantity is to take.
Mistake not me good Madam—
But if his Malady grow out of ambition, and his over weaning hopes of greatness (as I conjecture) then he may take a top of Cedar, or an Oake-apple is very sovereign with the spirit of Hempseed.
Madam, I seek no counsel in this case, my cun∣ning is—
To let me know, that that part of my house which I allow you is too little for you.
Shoe's surely mad.
But you must claim possession of the rest, You are come to warn me out on it; are you not?
Mistake not so good Madam.
Or do you call my attendance on his person, by way of a Nurse-keeper? I can do little service.
For my part Madam I am sorry we are made the trouble of your house, and rather wish me out on it then your favour. But if your Ladyship will bee pleased to entertain with patience the little I have to say.
Come to it quickly then.
First, let me tell you Madam, as it is manifest
You were the cause of his distraction,
You're bound in charity to yield such means
(With safety of your honour and estate)
As you may render for his restoration
Which of all the earthly means depends on you
If I know any thing in my profession.
Come to the point, you'd have me visit him.
True Madam: for a sight of you, shall more
Allure his reason to him, then all medicine
Can be prescribed.
By your favour sir, you say
Saving my honour and estate I am bound,
But may I with the safety of my Life,
And limbs, and a whole skin dare venture.
My life of that.
You might more safely lay
Lives of a hundred Patients.
Now hoe's calm,
Now shall he see you, but at most secure
And modest distance.
Come for once i'll trust you.
Come out into the Garden here; and let them talk within, I say he shall talk with her; and his belly full, and doe with her too, her belly full, for all thou: an honest discreet Gentleman, and thou a coward and a cockscomb. Besides he has an art and quality to live upon, and maintain her Lady-like, when all thy money may be gone. And yet thou prat'st of thy two thousand pound at use, when thou and thy money too are but an ass and's load though.
Well, you may speak your pleasure. This is no cause to fight for.
I'll make thee fight, or promise to fight with me, or somebody else before we part, or cut thee into pieces.
But tell me seriously dost thou love my Ladies woman so well as to marry her, and suffer the Picture-drawer now to court her privately, and perhaps to draw and carry her from thee?
Why he here will have it so you see, and pulled me out.
It is to doe a cure upon thee, coward.
Coward! pish! a common Name to men in buff and feather. I scorn to answer to it.
Why dost thou wear a Sword? only to hurt men's feet that kick thee?
Nay you are too severe.
Pray hold your peace. I'll jowle your heads to∣gether, and so beat ton with tother else. Why dost thou were a Sword I say?
To fight when I see cause.
Now he says something, yet, and may be curable.
What is a cause to fight for?
I am not to tell you that sir, It must be found out and given me before I ought to take notice.
You may safely say for Religion, King or Country.
Dare thou fight for Religion? say.
Who that has any Religion will fight I say?
I say thou hast none. Speak, hast thou any?
Truly, in this wavering world I know not how to answer.
La you. He will say he has no King neither, rather then fight.
Why if he will not fight for him he is no Subject, and no Subject no King.
I thank you sir, I would have said so.
O thou would make a special Soldier now!
Well sir, all are not choice dogs that run, some are taken in to make up the cry.
And for thy Country, I dare swear thou would rather run it then fight for it.
Run my Country I cannot, for I was borne in the City. I am no clown to run my Country.
Dare thou tell me of clowns thou cockney chick∣en-hearted whelp thou?
Forbear good sir, there are country Gentlemen as well as clowns, and for the rank I honour you.
Sirrah you lie, strike me for that now; or I will beat thee abominably.
Up to him man: wilt thou suffer all?
I would —but—
You lie I say again.
I think I doe, I think I doe, and why should I maintain an evil cause?
The wench thou love and doatest on is a whore.
Sir, if she be it is not my fault, nor hers: somebody else made her so then I warrant you. But should another man tell me so!
What then?
I would say as much to him as to you. Nor in∣deed is any mans report of that a sufficient cause to pro∣folk me unless she her self confessed it, and then it were no cause at all.
Here's a true City wit now.
I should have wit sir, and am acounted a wit within the walls, I am sure my Father was Master of his company, and of the wisest company too in the city.
What company's that?
The Salters sir. For sal sapit omnia you know.
Your Father was a cuckold though, and you the Son of a whore.
Fight now or you'll die infamous, was your Mo∣there a whore?
Deny it and dare, say, was she not?
Comparatively she might be in respect of some holy woman, the Lady Ramsay, Mistress Katherine Stubs and such, ha, ha. Is that a cause?
What! not to say your Mother was a whore?
He may say his pleasure, It hurts her not: she is dead and gone. Besides, at the best she was but a wo∣man, and at the worst she might have her frailties like other women. And is that a cause for me to fight for the dead, when wee are forbidden to pray for'em?
But were your Mother living now, what would you say or doe?
Why, I would civilly ask her if she were a whore? If she confessed it, then he were in the right, and I ought not to fight against him: for my cause were nought. If she denied it, then he were in an error, and his cause were nought, and I would not fight, it were better he should live to repent his error.
Nay, now if I do not kill thee let me be hanged for idleness.
Hold I am unprepared.
I care not—unless thou swear presently, and without all equivocation upon this sword—
Scabbard and all I pray sir, The cover of the book is allowed in courts to swear upon.
Well sir, now you shall swear to challenge the next that wrongs you.
Yes, if the wrong give me sufficient cause.
Cause again! suppose that fellow within should take your wench from you? which very likely he has done already: for I left 'em close on a couch together Kissing and —
Give me the book, i'll have her from him, or him from her if he be without her belly, or Kill him if he be within her.
Tic well a cause may be found at last though.
I like a man, whom neither Lie, Kick, Baton, scandal, Friends, or Parents, the wrongs of Country, King or Religion can move, that will, yet, fight for his
wench. Thou wilt be one of the stiff blades of the time I see.
A wench is a moving cause:
Help, help, here help—ha—
Why dost not draw and run in upon 'em?
After you I will sir.
A pox upon thee art thou down again?
No sir, I am drawn you see.
Help, help, a rape, a rape, murder, help!
Tic time to fly then.
I come my Philomel.
What's the matter Phil?
What cry was that?
Was it not you that cause it sir?
Was it not here?
Was it not you that cried?
Is there help, help, help?
O tic my Lady in the Madmans chamber. Is her mirth come to this?
Where, which way?
Here, here the dore's made fast.
I'll break it open.
Help here, help the Lady; help the Lady.
We are a coming, you shall have help enough
I warrant, what's the matter? you shall not lack for help —
Away Medusa. Hence, thou hast transformed me. Stone, stone, I am all stone. Bring mortar and make a bulwark of me.
O that's the Mad-man! How madly he talks!
Hold me not down.
Stones to make a bulwark quoth a! If he had
but to make a brace of Demy-culvering bullets, they were thumpers I think.
Hold me not down, but rear me up, and make me my own statue.
Was ever such a practice?
A mere accident of madness.
I say it was a practise in the Doctor.
Yet he called out for help.
You had broke up the door first. That was but to colour his treachery.
A new way, and a very learned one I promise you; to cure madness with a plaster of warm Lady-gutts.
He would have had a mad bout with my Lady it seems. He would have vented his madness into her. And she could have drawn better then the Leaches.
If you believe this Madam, though sir Ferdinand be by his madness excusable in the attempt, you ought to be revenged upon the Doctor.
Let's cut him into pieces Madam.
I'll think upon some way to make him a dread∣full example to all the Pandarean Doctors in the Town. Come in Gentlemen, and help me with your ad∣vices.
You shall want no advise Madam. No strength,
Let's go sir.
What mean you Mr. Cit-wit?
I have sworn. Therefore I say no more, but I have sworn.
THou art so honest, that I am ashamed
The vice of Anger blinded so my Reason,
As not to see through thy transparent breast
A true and noble heart; such as becomes
A Kinsman and a friend to her I love;
I can see now, and read thy integrity,
And, by the light of that th'inhumane false-hood
Of that Court-monster, that compacted piece
Of Rapine, pride and Lust.
Yet this is he
That did aspire to be a glorious Courtier.
Courtier? A mere vain glorious imposture;
Pretending favour, having nothing less.
Witness his want of Merit. Merit only
It is that smoothes the brow of Majesty,
And takes the comfort of those precious beauties
Which shine from grace Divine: and hoe's a Traitor
(No way to stand a courtier) that to feed
His Lusts, and Riots, works out of his Subjects
The means, by forging grants of the Kings favour.
What my master has suffered by his forgeries
I know to be the Shipwreck even of all
Except his Daughter, and what his aim at her
Was I think appears to you; And what she might
Have suffered by it we both may guess: only we hope
Her virtue would have bin a guard to her beauty.
Tic plain he never loved her virtuously
That is fallen mad for another.
That madness is his fate; which renders him into my masters hands to restore all again. I, note the Justice of it.
But as his fortune by the others ruin
Shall be advanced, I shall be more rejected.
That foul mistrust much misbecomes a Love
Rejected sir? by whom? Charissa's constant to you,
And time will clear his frowns: and put you on
Now, the same confidence you had before;
His wanting fortune raised a storm against you,
Your noble friend Sir Raphael has already
By learned reasons and court-oratory
Prevailed for you to visit her: and now
You're come within the verge o'th'house, do you shrink?
See, a good Omen, they issue forth to meet you.
I'll hear no more on it sir, and am much sorry
That so much Lip-labour is spent already
Upon so vain a Subject.
Give me leave then
To wonder at your light inconstancy,
Your want of resolution: yea of judgement.
He is flown off again.
Did you not give me leave to send for him;
Who, now is come to tender his affection
Unto your Daughter?
Did not you first promise
To give assurance of fit joincture for her,
Proportionable to her dowry, which
You now are started from?
I understood not
Nor can yet understand more of her dowry
Then a thousand pound which her Uncle left her,
And answerably to that I will make good her joincture.
O you are short sir,
I mean to make her worth ten thousand more
Out of my estate in the mad Ferdinand.
Another ten thousand to redeem my Land,
Ten thousand more, i'll keep in bank for purchase.
A judgement's fallen upon him: Hoe's mad too;
Struck lunatic with his o're-weening hopes
Sprung from the others misery.
And so sir, as you came you may depart:
For 'lesse you bring a thousand pound per annum
T'assure upon her, shoe's no wife for you.
O sir, you had better left me in that peace
I lately slept in, without any hope
Of seeing her again, then by your summons
To startle me back from a quiet death
To Kill me thus with Tantalising tortures.
Thank then your learned friend, who failed me in
His undertaking for you, and for her
If walls and locks can hold her, she no more
Shall tantalise you.
Wherein have I failed sir?
Sir, in assuring joincture to her Dowry.
Sir to no possible dowry you can give her,
But you propound the estate you have in the Moon;
When shall you take possession, think you, of your
Lordship of Lunacy in the Cynthian Orb?
I shall climb thither sir without the help
Of your Heaven-scaling ladder of Philosophy.
Nay then sir hear me.
What in private sir?
Remember, sweet, your vow.
Most constantly. And let me conjure you by this.
And this—
That you forget not yours.
Quick, quick! i'll stand before you.
And time at length will point us out a mean•
After a short long-seeming separation
To meet and reunite our vows and faiths
With greater strength and fervour.
Ha! i'll part you.
Was it for that you whispered, politic sir?
And could thou stand their screen? thou treacherous varlet out of my doors.
For what offence?
Dare thou expostulate?
Thou death deserving Villain.
And Huswife get you in: you may depart sirs
Has your love blinded you? i'll lead you then.
Madness at height.
Will you along!
O sir you are unkind.
Love then a wilful father is less blind.
Friend, has he hurt thee?
I am sure I bleed for it.
Why how now Frederick? despair not man.
He has vexed me; and out of my vexation
Shall spring thy comfort. I will labour for thee,
I'll study nothing more then to beguile
This watchful fury; this Hisperian Dragon.
Say to thy self and boldly shoe's thine own,
And for thy means, (Basta) let me alone.
You are my noble Patron.
Turned away:
As I was his serving-man, I am rewarded;
Tic common with us creatures to served so:
But, as I am no more his servant, I
Am free to vindicate my self out of
The wrong done to my blood (which is the same
With his,) by him rejected and despised.
Sir Andrew Mendicant at home?
Not to be spoken with at this time sir.
Pray let him know that the Lady Strangelove
Requires him suddenly to remove his Madman
Out of her house; or she must take a course
Much to his disadvantage.
In good time sir.
This is a surly fellow, and though I have sworn
The humour of fighting is scarce warm in me yet,
And she advises him to find a better Doctor for him,
For this has taken a wrong course.
Say you so sir?
I'll tell't you as a secret. The Physician thought to have cured his patient, (who has bin a notable Game∣ster at In and In) between my Ladies legs. If I and two or three more (but chiefly my self indeed) had not rescued her, the Doctor had held the Lady-cow to the Mad-bull.
May I believe this?
He thinks I lie now. And should he give me the lie, the virtue of my Oath were questionable.
Is this upon your knowledge sir?
True upon my life. So farewell honest friend.
This may prove sport and business too.
We will do something suddenly.
What if you take me into that something too?
I guess it is some stratagem to beguile
The cautious father of his injured daughter.
This fellow will betray us.
I will venture
•ll that I have, my fortune in Charissa
〈◊〉 his fidelity, sir his thoughts are mine.
Cupped and Mercury favour our design.
YOur judgement (by your favour) Mr. Doctor
Much failed you in that case.
Your reason yet may plead
Mine innocence, that drew her but to visit him.
But that drew on his fury; and though reason
May argue much for you, she can hear none,
Nor any understand: The swift affrightment
Upon her strength of passion, struck so deep
A sense into her, that is has deprived her
Of all her proper senses. She is even mad sir.
Not past my cure; and by a present means
Pray, win her hither to see a madder object
Then is her self, and see how that will work.
I'll gladly ad my pains unto your skill.
Come forth into the air. Conduct him gently.
Into the air! Set me upon Mount Lathmos,
Where I may see, and contemplate the beauty
Of my adored Diana; or carry me
Up to Hymettus top, Cytheron, Othris or Pindus
Where she affects to walk and take the ayre;
Or tarry, stay, perhaps she hunts to day
In the woods of Marathon, or Erymanthus.
That's a long journey sir.
You're a long bearded fool.
I thought I had been a Physician. But sir
You shall not need to expose your self to travel,
Your Goddess will descend into this Garden,
Pass but time here a while and she'll come to you.
We will have jovial pastime. Shall we run
At base, or leap frog, or dance naked
To entertain her, or what do you think
Of downright drink and singing?
That's best of all.
Let's have a mad catch then.
Here Madam may you see the Madmans Revels.
And after that the Doctors Tragicomedy.
Are not your wind pipes tuned yet? Sing
A Catch.
So now a Dance, I am all ayre—Ahaigh—Ahaigh
I thank thee Mercury that hast lent thy wings
Unto my feet. Play me my Country Dance,
Stand all you by. These Lasses and these Swains
Are for my Company.
How now! all vanished, ha!
It is no marvel that the lesser lights
Become obscured when Cynthia appears,
Let me with Adoration fall before
Thy Deity great Goddess.
Keep him from me.
You must approach no nearer sir. The Goddess
Is not so confident in her Divinity
As to trust you in reach of her.
Keep back sir.
What Hydras, Gorgons, and Chymaeras are you;
Centaurs and Harpies that dare interpose
Between my hopes, and my felicity!
Doctor, away with him.
Carry him to his Chamber,
And hold him down. His raging fit is on him
Was Night made to surprise men at Noon-day?
Or shall the charms of Heccate take force
To damn Appolle's brightness? So't must be,
When Gods themselves give way to Destine.
They are enough to hold, and bind him too.
Come you before the Lady.
What's her pleasure?
Tic to do Justice upon thee O Doctor
Stir, or cry out, or give the least resistance,
And I will cut thy head off before judgement.
What outrage doe you intend?
Outrage! Can you think of an outrage above the horror you offered to this Lady, To violate her cha∣steady? her honour?
You cannot say so.
Tic said, and you are guilty. Proceed to judge∣meant Madam.
I first would hear your censures.
And mine among the rest good Madam. I have taken care that a new Doctor shall be brought. Therefore in the first place my censureis, that this be presently hanged out of the way.
That's too high strained. What think you Ma∣dam, if to rectify his judgement, wee picked all the errors of his brain; First, opening the Pericranion, then take out the cerebrum; wash it in Albo vino, till it be throughy cleansed; and then—
Pox of your Albo vino, and his cerebrum taking out, that were a way to kill him. Wee must not be guily of the death of a Dogleach, but have him purged a safer way.
How? Proceed.
We will fill his belly full of Whey, or Butter-milke, put him naked into a Hogs-head, then put into
the same an hundred broken Urinals, then close up the Vessel and roll your Garden with it.
I trust they cannot mean any such mischief.
Hark ye Gentlemen. Do you hear?
Yes Madam; tic a Sowgelder.
Fetch in that Minister of Justice.
Who Madam? the Sowgelder?
We'll make a Doctor guilder of him though, and my Lady be so minded.
That will be sport indeed.
But will you see the execution Madam?
Why not as well as other women have
Seen the dissections of Anotamies,
And executed men rip'd up and quartered?
This spectacle will be comical to those.
They dare not doe the thing they would have me fear.
Now Doctor you look heavily methinks,
You shall be lighter by two stone presently.
You will not murder me?
Stir not; nor make least noise
As you hope ever to be heard again.
I would I could pray now to any purpose.
I have brought him. The rarest fellow Madam,
And doe you thank your fortune in him Doctor,
For he can sing a charm (he says) shall make
You feel no pain in your libbing or after it:
No Tooth-drawer, or Corne-cutter did ever work
With so little feeling to a Patient.
Sing then, he shall not suffer without a Song.
What must he be stripped now; or will letting down his breeches be enough?
You dare not use this violence upon me
More rude then rage of Prentices.
Doctor it is decreed.
You cannot answer it.
Better by Law then you can the intent
Of Rape upon the Lady.
That was not to have been my act, nor was it done.
When this is done we'll talk w' ye, come lay him cross this Table. Hold each of you a Leg of him, and hold you your peace Dodipoll. And for his arms let me alone, do you work Guilder.
Hold, I have a secret to deliver to my Lady.
You shall be delivered of your secrets presently.
If I tell her not that shall give her pardon
Then let me suffer. Hear me sweet Madam.
Forbear him, let him down.
Sweet say? Thou art not i'll be sworn.
Well sir your weighty secret now to save your trifles.
In private I beseech you Madam: for I dare but whisper't.
You shall allow me so much wariness as to have one at least to be my Guard, and witness.
This Gentleman then Madam.
We are shut out of council.
No matter. I list not be no nearer him: no more would my cozen had he my nose. But whore's Mr. Dainty and your finical Mistress Phil all this while though?
No matter, but I have sworn you know. Therefore I say no more, but I have sworn.
What a strange tale is this! I can't believe it.
I doe, and did before suspect it: and framed this counterfeit plot upon you, Doctor, to work out the
discovery: would I have seen you guelt dee think? That would have rendered me more brutish then the women Barbers. Look sir this is no Guilder, but one of my house Music. (Go, your part is done —
And for the affright you gave me, Doctor, I am evenw'ye.
The Devil fright him next for a spurging, skitter-brooke. 'T were good you would call to burn some perfumes Madam.
But for the secret you have told me i'll keep it secret yet, I will keep you so too; and from your Patient.
There's a new Doctor come already Madam to the madman.
From sir Andrew Mendicant?
His servant brought him.
I pray what Doctor is it?
Engage your self with no desire to know,
But, for the good you find, fit thanks to owe;
So come with me, and come you Gentlemen.
Heap yet more Mountains, Mountains upon
Mountains, Pindus on Ossa, Atlas on Olympus,
I'll carry that which carries Heaven, do you
But lay it upon me!
Forbear you'll stifle him,
Take off the needless weight of your rude bodies;
Unbind him and stand off, to give him ayre.
Sir though you are a Physician, I am no fool.
Take heed what you doe. Hoe's more then six of 〈◊〉 hold when his hot fit's upon him. He would now tear you to pieces should you let him loose.
The danger then be mine. Let him sit up. Is not he civil now?
I, for how long? do you note that Hercules eye there?
I charge you quit the room.
It is but to come again when we are called.
Be not within the hearing of a call,
Or if you chance to hear me, though I cry
Murder, I charge you come not at me.
Tic but a Doctor out of the way; and that's no loss while there are so many, the best cannot live by the worst.
Keep the door fast. You are much mist abroad sir,
And chiefly by the Ladies, who now want
The Court-ships, Banquets, and the costly presents
In which you wonted to abound to 'em.
Ha—
Nay, nay, sit still sir. They say you're mad;
Mad with conceit of being a favourite
Before your time, that is, before you had merit
More then a tumour of vaine-glory in you,
And in especial care for your recovery
I am sent to administer unto you: but first
To let you blood.
Ho! Murder, Murder, Murder.
Are you so sensible already? do not stir
Nor cry too loud. Dos the mere apprehension
Of blood-letting affright your madness? Then
Reason may come again.
The Battle of Musleborough Field was a brave one.
O do you fly out again?
This is pretty: but back from the purpose.
Will you come to the point sir?
We but lose time in this sir: Though it be good testimony of your memory in an old Song. But do you know me?
Not know my Sovereign Lord? Cursed be those Knees, and hearts that fall not prostrate at his Feet.
This wild submission no way mitigates
My wrongs, or alters resolution in me
To Cure or Kill you quickly. Do you know me now sir?
Or have you known Charissa? do you start sir?
There's sign of reason in you then: But be it
By reason or by chance, that you awake
Out of your frantic slumber, to perceive me,
My cause and my Revenge is still the same,
Which I will prosecute according to
My certain wrong, and not your doubtful reason,
Since reasonless you laid those wrongs upon me
When you were counted wise, great, valiant, and what not
That cries a Courtier up, and gives him power
To trample on his betters.
Who talks this mortal to? I am a spirit.
Sure I shall find you flesh, and penetrable.
I would but live to subdue the Pisidians,
And so to bring the Lydians under tribute—
You would but live t'abuse more credulous fathers
With courtly promises, and golden hopes
For your own lustful ends upon their Daughters.
Think (if you can think now) upon Charissa.
Charissa who was mine, in faith and honour
Till you ignobly (which is damnably)
By a false promise with intent to whore her
Diverted her weak Father from the Match
To my eternal loss. Now whether you
Have wit or no wit to deny it, or stand to it,
Or whether you have one, or ten men's strength,
Or all, or none at all i'll fight or Kill you
Yet like a Gentleman, i'll call upon you
Give me the Swords. They are of equal length
Take you free choice.
Pish.
I cast that to you then. Hand it, or die a Madman.
O ho, ho, ho,—
All this sir to a Madam.
I have a cause to be more mad then he,
And in that cause i'll fight.
He knows not what you tell him.
I tell't the Devil in him then to divulge it
When I have dispossessed him. I have further
Reason to kill him yet, to cross your Master,
Who has begged his Estate. Now fight or die a Mad∣man.
Hold Frederick hold. Thou hast indeed awaked
Me to see thee and my self.
Hoe's not so mad to fight yet I see that.
I'm glad you are your self sir, I shall fight
Now upon honourable terms, and could
Suppose before your madness counterfeit.
Yet hold. Has Mendicant begged me?
During your madness. What should hinder him?
Put up thy Sword.
Upon no terms, and you alive.
Not to obtain Charissa?
As you Guest sir.
It shall be by means if gold can win
Her Fathers grant.
That's most unquestionable.
Not that I dare not fight, doe I urge this,
But that the other is your safer way.
Your gold's too light. I will accept of nothing
From you while you dare tell me you dare fight,
Perhaps you doubt of odds, go forth. Nay I
Will lock him out.
You may: For I dare trust you while I go call the Lady.
Now are you pleased, or dare you now to fight sir?
I neither will nor dare fight in this cause.
This is a daring Courtier!
How durst you wind your self in so much danger?
And why take madness in you, to be bound,
And grappled with so rudely?
Keep my council,
And take Charissa.
Tic a fair condition.
First, for the wrong I did thee, noble youth
In my design against Charissa's honour,
It is confessed, repented; and her self
For satisfaction to be given to thee,
I'll fall upon thy Sword else, or be posted,
And Ballated with all disgrace.
Well yet.
And for my show of madness; it was put on
For my revenge on this impetuous Lady
To cool these flames (as much of anger as
Desire) with her disdain, and tempting malice
Had raised within me.
You would have ravished her.
I rather thought, she like a cunning Lady
Would have consented to a Madman, who
She might presume could not impeach her honour
By least detection. Monkeys, Fools, and Madmen,
That cannot blab, or must not be believed
Receive strange favours.
And on that presumption
You feigned your madness.
True.
But rather then to fail,
With your bawd Doctors help you would have forced her:
And that's the council you would have me keep
On your assurance of Charissa to me:
That your proceeding in your madness here,
May yet find means and opportunity
To exercise your violence.
Suppose so.
Thou art not worth my Killing now.
Justice will mark thee for the Hangmans Office:
Nor, were Charissa in thy gift, were she,
In that, worth mine or any good acceptance,
And for your council, had within there Madam.
Frederick—
The Lady of the house! where are you?
Will you be pleased to hear a secret Madam?
Strangely discovered?
I doe not sl•light your act in the discovery,
But your imposture sir, and beastly practise
Was before whispered to me by your Doctor
To save his Epididamies.
O your pardon.
I am disgraced, undone.
Tic in my power
To make you the perpetual shame of Court;
And will assuredly do it, if you comply not
With me to make this injured Gentleman's fortune
In his beloved Charissa.
Madam most readily, I have offered it.
I have forecast the way and means already:
Which we must prosecute with art and speed▪
Good ends oft times doe bad intents succeed.
I'll be directed by you.
Noblest Lady.
COme Sir, must I take you in hand again?
My Lady will convery her Madman to sir Andrew Mendicants it seems.
Tell me that I know not; and answer my questions.
She and the Doctor, and the tother Doctor's gone with him too.
Leave you by flim flames, and speak to the pur∣pose.
You know I have sworn. Doe you not know I have sworn?
To live and die a beaten Ass; a coward hast thou not?
Prithee forbear him: Hoe's not worth thy anger.
Anger! Is every Schoolmaster angry that gives Discipline with correction?
Would he were at Pensans again.
Did not thou tell my Lady that I was a coward in my own Country, and Kicked out of Cornwall?
Comparatively I think I did in respect of Corine∣us, that wrestled and threw Giant after Giant over the cliffs into the Sea.
Pox of your comparative lies; And did not thou say that he here was peppered so full of the what∣sha callums, that his spittle would poison a Dog or a Rat?
That was comparatively too in respect of a pure Virgin; a chrisome child or so.
He never shall move me, I forgive him.
Merely comparatively I speak it.
Forgi' me for swearing i'll make thee speak positively, or beat thee superlatively before I have done with thee.
Gentlemen, my Lady—
Hold a little. Did thou not say this child here was a Pickpocket? and that he picked thine of thy money, and thy watch, when he was singing between thy Legs to day?
Who I a Pick-pocket?
Forbear good Lady it was comparatively.
A pick pocket?
Forbear and hear him Hercules.
Lend me a sword i'll kill him, and hear him af∣terwards.
Nay I must hold you then. How was hee comparatively your Pick-pocket?
That is as much as any man I know; That is I accuse nobody; that is all are as innocent as the child, and hee as the innocent unborn. And let that satisfy you.
Live. I am satisfied. Now Gentlemen my Lady prays you to follow her to sir Andrew Mendi∣cants.
I know the business, It is about our Revels.
Suffer a child to beat thee!
His cause was bad you know.
Incorrigible coward! Say now; art not thou thy self a pick-pocket, and a cut-purse? say.
Comparatively it may be said, I am to a Church-warden, a Collector for the poor or such.
The conclusion is, that if ever I hear thou men∣tionst my name again in any sense whatsoever, i'll beat thee out of reason.
In my good wishes, and prayers I may: Heaven forbid else.
Not in your prayers sir, shall you mention me, you were better never pray.
Heaven forbid I should then!
And make thine Oath good on that sly fellow that has taine away thy wench, or—
He has not tan her yet.
You have not seen her or him these two hours; has not my Lady called too, and she not to be found?
True, true: and if I be not revenged.
Do it then now, while thou art hot. She comes, here take, and keep her while thou art hot and hast her.
Is she at your dispose sir?
Your Lady gave you me.
Or am in her gift?
You are in my possession, nor shall Lucifer dis∣possess me of her.
So valiant on a sudden!
Have I not cause?
You'll have me with all faults?
Yes, and a match forever.
How means she by all faults?
A word she always uses in waggery.
By all means take her from him. What! afraid of a coward?
You must do it or take the share, hee should have had a down-right beating. Forgi' me for swearing, hoe's a verier coward then tother.
Hee will serve the better to flesh him. And do but note his tiranicall rage that is the vanquisher.
You will on.
Sir she is mine by promise.
Shoe's mine by act and deed sir according to the flesh, let her deny it and she can.
That shall be tried by Law.
By Law of arms and hands it shall, take that, and let her go.
Bear witness Gentlemen he struck me.
O pitiful Picture-drawer!
Will you not draw? I will then.
What would you have sir? If she be yours take her.
That's not enough, I will make thee fight, what blindness have I lived in! I would not but be valiant to be Caesar.
O brave Cit, O brave Cit.
Why dost not draw thou fellow thou?
Shoe's his he says; and she denies it not, shall I fight against him for his own?
I'll make thee fight, or cut thee into pieces.
He turns your words over to him.
Why dost thou wear a sword? only to hurt men's feet that Kick thee?
Doe you observe? Nay thou art too severe.
Pray hold your peace, i'll jowle your heads together and so beat •on with tother else.
Forgi' me for swearing. He will beat's all anon.
Why dost thou wear a Sword I say?
Some other time sir, and in fitter place.
Sirrah you lie, strike me for that, or I will beat thee abominably.
You see this Gentlemen.
And I see it too, was ever poor wench so couzend in a man?
The wench thou love and doat'st on is a whore.
How's that?
No, no, That was not right, your father was a cuckold though, and you the son of a whore.
Good, I shall love this fellow.
I can take all this upon account.
You count all this is true then. Incorrigible cow∣art! what was the last vile name you called me Mr. Swain-wit? O I remember, sirrah thou art a Pick∣pocket and a Cut-purse; And give me my money again, and him his or I will cut thy throat.
I am discovered.
Doe you answer nothing, doe you demur upon it?
Hold sir I pray; Gentlemen so you will grant me pardon, and forbear the Law i'll answer you.
Agreed, agreed.
It is confessed; I am a Cut-purse.
Comparatively or positively doe you speak?
Speak positively, or I will beat thee superlatively.
Forgi' me for swearing a brave Boy.
Here is your Watch, and Money; And here is yours. Now as you are Gentlemen use no extremity.
Beyond all expectation!
All thought.
Miraculous! O the effects of valour!
Was ever woman so mistaken of both sides?
But dost thou think thou art valiant for all this though?
You were best try; or you, or both, or come all three.
I swear thou shalt have it to keep up while thou art up.
Is this your picture-drawing? are you the Kings Picture-drawer? A neat denomination for a Cut-purse, that draws the Kings Pictures out of men Pockets.
Come sir, come in with us.
Pray use me Kindly Gentlemen.
Yes, wee will use you in your kind sir.
THis is the day of my felicity,
And is the same with that the Poet Sings
Is better then an Age. Come forth Charissa,
Now you appear my comfort; and I can
No less then thank thy sweet obedience
That hast complied with my directions,
Bride-like and glorious to meet a fortune,
So great as shall beget the present envy
Of all the Virgin Ladies of the Court,
And a posterity, that through all ages,
Shall praise and magnify thy act.
Your acceptance of my duty sir
Is all that I can glory in.
How are we bound unto this noble Lady
That sent us our instructions.
Sure I am. If this be a true Copy.
Let Music in her soft but sweetest notes
Usher their welcome, whilst unto my thoughts
The loudest harmony resounds my triumph.
Madam most welcome.
In fewest and the softest words sir Andrew.
(He sleeps) and let him gently be conveyed
Only with those about him to his Chamber.
Charissa, go: be you his conduct, softly, softly,
I see you've brought a Priest Madam.
By all best reason,
For when we found he used Charissa's Name,
When he was calm and gentle, calling still
Charissa! whore's Charissa? a good space
Before he slept, and being then demanded
What would he with Charissa? He most readily
Replied, Fetch me Charissa and a Priest.
The Doctors in their judgements (unto which
My full opinion assented) might
Foresee, that in removing him, where she
Might be his immediate object, when he wakes,
That fresher flames to instant marriage
Would then arise.
Incomparably judicious Madam.
Yet not without your leave would I attempt it;
Without your leave, knowing your watchful care
Over your Daughter.
And that care of mine
Was (Madam) by your favour
Principal motive to this great effect.
Take all unto your self, I am content.
I'd fine steal in and watch the event of things.
But have you heard sir Andrew the mischance
Of the unfortunate Lover, distracted Frederick?
How! what of him?
H'has made himself away.
First possible?
(Hee has by this time, or the Priest is tongue-tied.)
He has left no estate worth begging, that's the worst of't.
My joys come flowing no me —yet I would see.
And hear me good Sir Andrew, for the Love
I bring to ad unto your joys: for I
Foreseeing the event of this nights happiness
Have warned some friends to follow me with Revels
To celebrate the Marriage of your fortunes.
See they are come. Pray entertain 'em sir.
The Gallants that were to day so merry with me.
The same: but very harmless.
All but one sir. Did you not lose your purse to day?
What's the meaning?
We'll tell you Madam.
My purse? (I mist it at my Lady Strangeloves.)
This Picture-drawer drew it, and has drawn more of the Kings-pictures then all the Limners in the Town. Restore it sirrah.
I will not take it, it was my nelect that lost it, not he that stole it. This is my day of fortune; it comes home to me; more then I dare receive. O my joys, let me be able to contain you.
Have you another purse to lose?
I have a purse; which if I lose, i'll blame my self, none else.
Let him but come so near you as to ask forgive∣ness for the last, and if he doe not take the next, though it be six fathom deep in your pocket i'll hang for him when his time comes.
I'll watch his fingers for that.
Observe good Madam.
Sir at your feet I beg your pardon.
It needs not, prithee rise.
Never, till you pronounce that happy word
I pardon thee: or let me have some token
Of sweet assurance that I am forgiven
Which I beseech you—I beseech you grant.
In sooth thou hast it. Heaven pardon thee as I doe.
I have it sit indeed, and as your gift i'll keep it, promising before all these witnesses, i'll never venture for another.
Fore me an expert fellow; Pity he should be hanged before we have more of his breed.
Did not I tell you sir? And these are but his short arms; i'll undertake, when he makes a long arm, he shall take a purse twelve skore off.
I doe not like Thieves handfell though, This may presage some greater loss at hand.
Now Gentlemen you know your task, be expedite∣os in it.
I have cast the design for it already Madam. My inventions are all flame and spirit. But you can expect no great matter to be done extempore or in six minutes.
What matter first so wee skip up and down? our friend Jack Dainty here, Mr. Cut-purse dances daintily though.
And Mr. Cit-wit, you have worthily won my woman sir.
I have her Madam, she is mine.
I'll make her worth a thousand pound to you, besides all she has of her own.
Her faults and all Madam, we are agreed of that.
Suppose this Boy be mine.
I would he were else, that I might have him under lawful correction, and the cause of my side: for he beat me not long since.
And you be my father, and do not make much of me and give me fine things, i'll beat you again so I will; and my mother shall help me.
Agreed Billy, agreed Philly. Never was man so suddenly, so rich; Nay never look Gentlemen, she is mine, and hoe's mine own, I am sure I have got him now; And all faults are salved.
Her word in waggery is made good in earnest now though.
To your business Gentlemen; if you have a
short speech or two, the boy's a pretty Actor; and his mother can play her part; women-Actors now grow in request. Sir Andrew! melancholy?
I was thinking on the omen of my purse.
Fear no further mishap sir; tic ominous to fear.
Pray let's go in and see how things proceed.
Pray give me leave to make the first discovery;
Walk down into the Garden, i'll come to you;
And here are some would speak with you.
Into the Garden, good, let's follow him.
Tic not the repulse he gave us in the morning shall quit him of us.
No now his superintendent's turned away, we'll once more fill his head with millions.
I'll make the Dance, and give you all the footing.
Stand further off of my Pocket though.
No matter if we lose any thing, and he within ten miles of us i'll make him answer't.
I want a fifth man, I would have an od.
The Marriage is performed. The Priest has done his office—
Doctor can you dance?
And sing too, I have forgot much else.
I'll speak the Speech: Have not I forgot my Actors tone trow? I shall remember't, I could have acted 'em all ore.
I can speak a Speech too Mother, must I call you Mother now?
I my Boy, now I dare vouch thee.
What think you of this tune sir for your dance?
Tay dee, dee, &amp;c.
I'll borrow a Viol and take it of you instantly.
Pray sir, is sir Andrew Mendicant in the house.
Umh—
Is he within sir, can you tell? He's too busy it seems.
Can you tell me sir I pray, if sir Andrew be within?
Very strange! among what Nati∣on am I arrived?
Here's one in civil habit sure will answer me,
Sir may I be informed by you? saw you sir Andrew?
Te precor domino Doctor.
They are no Christians sure.
Sir may I be informed by you?
Bless me; the people are bewitched.
Do you belong to the house sir?
I hope for courtesy here Lady will you be pleased—
O by no means, we must speak Charon fair,
Or he will not waft us o'er the Stigian Flood,
Then must we have a sop for Cerberus
To stop his yawning Chaps; Let me alone
To be your Convoy to Elizium.
This is most heathenish of all.
I'll pass that snarling triple-headed Cur
Which keeps the pallace-gate of Pluto's Court,
And guide you safe through pitchy Acheron.
What Woman Monster's this? Sweet young Gentleman, let me ask you a question.
Grim death, why rather did thou not approach
My younger days; before I knew thy fears?
Thy pains are multiplied by our years.
All Lunatic? or Gentlemen, do you want leisure
Or civility to answer me?
Have you done the speeches Mr. Court wit?
I have already from the forked top
Of high Parnassus fetched 'em.
And shall my wife and Billi boy speak 'em?
As i'll instruct you.
You write admirably I confess; But you have an ill tone to instruct in; I'll read to 'em my self, you give your words no grace.
You have the tune right, will you instruct the Music men?
And you all in the Dance immediately.
But shall we have no silken things, no whim whams
To Dance in though.
Perhaps the Bride can furnish us.
With some of her old Petticotes, can she?
No, no my Lady has tan care for all.
Come, come away to practise, and be ready.
Never was I in such a Wilderness.
But my revenge upon Sir Mendicant
Shall answer all my patience, in the Jeer
I mean to put upon him.
I will possess him with a braine-trick, now, wherein
A mere invention of mine own
Heaven pardon me for lying) shall so nettle him.
Go back and be not seen till I come to you.
Hoe's come. Have you heard the news sir Andrew?
What sir Raphael?
That Ferdinand's restored to's wits.
I am glad on it.
Do you take the loss of his estate so mildly
Which might have bin your own?
I hope you think me a Christian sir, but how should he arrive at such a sudden knowledge of it, if it be so? I will pretend tic true, yes sir, he is in's wits.
I thought I had lied when I did prophecy:
But sir my Nephew Fredrick—
Has made himself away, I heard of that too.
(I hope not so) yet there's another accident
Of which you have not heard, may touch you nearer,
And that indeed's my business, you sir, furiously
Wounded your Man to day.
Not dangerously I hope.
Flatter not so your self; Hoe's on the point of dying.
How!
Nor be too much dejected,
His life you may get off for (as it was done
In heat of blood) marry sir your estate
(You'll pardon me) is begged; my self has don't,
And therein, begged the Beggar.
Ha!
Take not too deep a sense of it: For if you'll yield
That Frederick yet shall have it with your Daughter,
I will remit the Estate.
O is it so?
Do you move this for a dead man?
No, he lives.
Do you practise on me? Madam where are
Here sir, and am become your Usher to such guests you?
As you must bid most welcome.
She here! i'm then again confounded.
Nay sir Raphael, I potest we will be friends notwithstanding I have outstripped you in your plot of matching your Nephew Frederick, here to his love Charissa.
But is it so?—
It is, in which I hope sir you are not offended,
Who gave me leave by any opportunity
To take her, I broke no locks nor walls for her.
I beg your pardon, and your blessing sir.
And is it so with you sir Ferdinand?
It is, and sir in testimony of my recovery, I make demand of my estate: of which you thought your self possessed.
What hopes am I fallen from? and what misery fallen into; when the little I have is begged for Man-slaughter!
I quit you of that sir.
How could thou deal so with me?
To show my gratitude.
You overpaid me for all my former services,
For which I justly thought I ought you this.
Nor think your Daughter undervalued sir,
Three thousand pound I give him to augment
Her fortune in him.
Dreams, dreams, All these are waking Dreams.
All real truth sir, whither fly you from us?
Am I of all defeated; and by all
Abused and mocked? More room there: let me go.
You mistake strangely.
Hark! the Revellers.
That come to celebrate your joys, which wilfully
You will not apprehend.
Tic all but show, Let go, and I will do
Something shall ad to your delight immediately.
Let him go and wear out his fit by him∣self.
Venus and Cupped, my Mother and I—
Help me.—I have it now.
Venus and Cupped; my Mother and I
Help me again; No, no, no.
Venus and Cupped; my Mother and I,
Let me alone.
Venus and Cupped my Mother and I.
There's an Actor now!
How doubtful of himself; and yet how perfect he was!
A self mistrust is a sure step to Knowledge.
Sententious sir Raphel.
Quarrels are ended Madam.
Come hither Cupped.
From my Italian Mount I did espy
(For what is hidden from a Deity?)
How faintly Hymen did his Office here
Joining two Lovers with the hand of fear;
Putting his Torch out for obscurity;
And made the Chamber (which belongs to me)
His Temple. But from hence let fear remove.
See here, the Champions for the Queen of Love.
Courage, sent from Mars; The Muses kill.
From wise Apollo. And the God, which still
Inspires with subtlety, sly Mercury
Sends this his Agent. Here's Activity
From Jupiter himself; And from her store
Of Spies, the Moon sends This to keep the door.
With Art of Action, now, make good the place,
In right of Love to give the Nuptials Grace.
Lay by your Jollity, forbear your Sport,
And hear a story shall enforce your pity.
What black Tragedian's this?
Some Nuntius sent from Hell.
One of my Masters Minions, a Projector.
You had a Master: But to all I speak.
Your ••actises have sunk him from the Comforts
Of all •is hopes in fortune, to the Gulf
Of deep despair; from whence he rose inflamed
With wild distraction and fantastic fury.
Hoe's mad; is he?
Mad, and has hanged himself—
Alas my Father.
How! hanged himself?
All over sir, with draughts of Projects, Suits,
Petitions, Grants, and Patents, such as were
The Studies and the Labours of his Life,
And so attired he thinks himself well armed
T'incounter all your scorns.
Room here: a Hall for a Monopolist,
You, Commonwealths informers lead me on.
Bring me before the great Assembly. See,
Fathers Conscript, I present all I have
For you to cancel.
Here's a brave show, and out-shines our de∣vise.
This is a Patent for the taking of poor John and Barrell-cod alive, and so to preserve 'em in salt-water for the benefit of the Fishmongers.
There's salt in this.
I this has some savour in it.
This is a fresh one sir, For the catching, preser∣vation, and transportation of Butter-flies: whereby they may become a native commodity.
That's a subtle one.
This is for profits out of all the Common-Cryes in the City, As of—Oysters—Codlings—wood to cleave, Kitchen stuff, and the thousand more, even •o the Matches for your Tinder-box, and all Foreigners •o pay double; And a Fee out of the Link-boyes profits. •…t no cries to escape. Tic for a peace.
What if some should cry Murder, murder?
Or Thieves, thieves?
Or Fire, fire?
Or women cry out five Loves a penny?
All all should pay. But I submit
My self to you most honourable censure.
What dos he take us for?
Powers, Powers; A lower house at least.
And all my patents to be concealed.
Our Projects would not take with you, we'll take yours though.
He shall dance out of 'em: Music! Play out our Dance, we will disrobe you presently.
Yes, and dismantle his Projectors too.
An excellent Moral! The Projects are all can∣cel'd, and the Projectors turned out of doors.
True Gallants, and now I am my self again,
I saw th'event of all with good esteem.
And would as well as you a Madman seem,
And now my blessings on your Son and Daughter.
This Bride, Dame Venus here, cools all this while though.
By Mr: Bridegrooms leave, i'll stir her blood a little for the good meaning she had towards me.
You may doe so. He dare's not pick her pocket,
And for her Maidenhead I dare trust him though he should
Dance quite out of sight with her.
It is well: And all are friends.
You have my potestation: and in that,
Madam, my faith before these noble friends.
Upon those honourable terms sir Ferdinando I will be yours.
Sheel' have him, it seems at last.
Shoe's a wise widow by it: for sure enough, she saw something in his mad naked fit, when hee put her to it, to choose a husband by, wo' not out of her thought yet.
What is there more to say now Madam?
You question well.
But to Supper and to bed?
You consider well.
We have had other pastime enough.
You reason well, Would all were pleased as well
To absolve that doubt, to those we must appeal.
Ladies, your suffrages I chiefly crave
For th'humble Poet. Tic in you to save
Him, from the rigorous censure of the rest,
May you give grace as you're with Beauty blessed.
True: Hoe's no dandling on a Courtly lap,
Yet may obtain a smile, if not a clap.
I'm at the Cavaliers. Heroic spirits,
That know both to reward, and achieve merits,
Do, like the Sun-beames, virtuously dispense
Ʋpon the lowest growths their influence,
As well as on the lofty: our Poet so
By your Phebean favours hopes to grow.
And now you generous spirits of the City
That are no less in money then brain witty,
My self, my Bride, and pretty Bride-boy too,
Our Poet for a Boun prefers to you.
And though you taste of no such Bride-ale Cup,
He hopes y' allow the Match to be clapped up.
And, if this Play be nought (yes so he said)
That I should give ye my Mother for a Maid.
And why you now? or you? or you? I'll speak enough for you all, you now would tell the Audients they should not fear to throng hither the next day: for you will secure their Purses cut-free, and their pockts pick-free. Tic much for you to do though. And you would say that all
your projects are put down, and you'll take up no new: but what shall be (spectators) to please you. And you Poetic part induces you, t'appologize now for the Poet too, as they have done already, you to the Ladies, you to the Cavaliers and Gentry; you to the City friend, and all for the Poet, Poet, Poet, when alls but begging tho. I'll speak to 'em all, and to my Country folks too if here be any o'em: and yet not beg for the Poet though, why should we? has not he money for his doings? and the best price too? because we would have the best: And if it be not, why so? The Poet has showed his wit and we our man∣ners. But to stand beg, beg for reputation for one that has no countenance to carry it, and must have money is such a Pastime!—If it were for one of the great and curious Poets that give these Plays as the Prologue said, and mo∣ney too, to have 'em acted; For them, indeed, we are bound to ply for an applause. Because they look for no∣thing else, and scorn to beg for themselves. But then you'll say those Plays are not given to you; you pay as much for your seats at them as at these, though you sit ne'er the merrier, nor rise the wiser, they are so above common understanding; and though you see for your love you will judge for your money, why so for that too, you may. But take heed you displease not the Ladies though who are their partial judges, being bribed by flattering verses to commend their Plays; for whose fair cause, and by their powerful voices to be cried up wits of Court, the right worshipful Poets boast to have made those enter∣lutes, when for ought you know they bought 'em of Un∣varsity Scholars though, and only show their own wits in owning other men's; and that but as they are like neither. As thus, do you like that Song? yes. I made it. Is that Scene or that Jest good? Yes, It was mine; and then if all be good it was all mine. There's wit in that now. But this small Poet vents none but his own, and his by whose care
and directions this Stage is governed, who has for many years both in his fathers days, and since directed Poets to write &amp; Players to speak, till he trained up these youths here to what they are now. I some of 'em from before they were able to say a grace of two lines long to have more parts in their pates then would fill so many Dry-fats. And to be serious with you, if after all this, by the venomous practise of some, who study nothing more then his destruction, he should fail us, both Poets and Players would be at loss in Reputation. But this is from our Poet again, who tells you plainly all the helps he has or desires; And let me tell you he has made pretty merry Jigges that have pleased a many. As (le'me see) the Anti∣pods, and (oh I shall never forget) Tom Hoyden of Tanton Deane. He will bring him hither very shortly in a new Motion, and in a new pair of slops and new nether-stocks as brisk as a Body-lowse in a new Pasture.
Mean while, if you like this, or not, why so?
You may be pleas' to clap at parting though.

OƲR Playmaker (for yet he won't be called
Author, or Poet) nor beg to be installd
•ir Laureate) has sent me out t'invite
Your fancies to a full and clean delight:
And bids me tell you, That though he be none
Of those, whose towering Muses scale the Throne
Of Kings, yet his familiar mirth's as good,
When tic by you approved and understood.
As if h' had writ strong lines, and had the fate,
Of other Fools for meddling with the State.
Readers and Audients make good Plays or Books,
Tic appetite makes Dishes, tic not Cooks.
But let me tell you, though you have the power,
To kill or save; They're Tyrants that devour,
And Princes that preserve: He does not aim,
So much at praise, as pardon; nor does claim
Laurel, but Money; Baize will buy no Sack,
And Honour fills no belly, clothes no back.
And therefore you may see his maine intent
Is his own welfare, and your merriment.
Then often come, twill make us and him the wetter,
We'll drown the faults of this, in one that's better.
YOU have your Money; full a thou∣sand pound,
Sir Humfrey Dryground.
And you have my Mortgage.
All well and good; all well and good. But, now,
Sir Humfrey Dryground, let me counsel you.
You have already spent a fair Estate;
A goodly, great estate: I do not taunt,
Nor tax you for it.
Because its pumped into
The purses of such wretches as thy self.
But give me leave, now, fairly to admonish
You, to a care, how you do part with this.
You spirited men call Money Dirt and Mud.
I say it is the Eel.
And you the Mud
That foster it.
It is an Eel, I say,
In such sleek hands, as yours; from whence it glides—
Into the Mud, oft-times, from whence it came.
I know you doe conceive me. Therefore, Sir,
(As I before was saying) Hold it fast.
According to the Ballad. 
Youth keep thy Money fast,
And tie it in thy Purse:
For that must be thine only Friend,
For better and for worse.
So so, I see it going already.
I, to thy comfort. This is the Usurers Scripture;
And all that they pretend Salvation by:
To give good admonition with their Money;
Though, in their hearts they wish the quick subversion
Of all they deal with. This is all they plead
Against the curses of oppressed souls:
Did not I warn you? Did not I say, take heed?
And so, and so forth. I must thank you Sir.
You say, you'll make a venture of this Money.
Yes Mr. Vermin, in a Project, that—
Out upon Projects. Fie fie, out out out.
I 'm confident shall set me out of debt,
With you and all the World; and reap, again,
All, that I formerly have sown, with profit.
Sown! There's a word! Prodigal wast is sowing.
We shall call Shipwreck, shortly, sowing too.
Hark you Sir Humfrey Dryground, may not I
Be privy to your Project? Will you tell me,
If I guess on it?
That I will in sooth.
Is 't not to dreine the Goodwins? To be Lord
Of all the Treasure, buried in the Sands there?
And have a Million yearly, from the Merchants
To clear the passage.
You have had your blow.
No Sir, my Project is in the behalf
Of the poor Gentleman, you overthrew
By the strong hand of Law, Bribes, and oppression;
Brookall: Do you know him Sir? whose state you sucked▪
That wrought him to a poverty that cries
Your sinful Covetise up to the height;
And renders you the Monster of our time,
For avarice and cruelty.
No more of that.
You should do well to add a sum, like this
To his relief: To wave the bitter curse
That will in time fall on you and your house.
O ho! I now remember, you have reason.
That Brookall had a Sister, whom you vitiated
In your wild heat of blood, and then denied
Her promised Marriage; turned her off with Child
A dozen years since, and since that, never heard of▪
Ha! Is it not so? Pray, did you know her Sir?
I wish I could redeem that ruthful fault,
By all expiatory means: But thy
Inhumane cruelty is inexpiable:
Unless (it comes from Heaven into my heart
To move thee to it) thou take a speedy course
To give him threefold restitution.
Isle put thee in the way. He has a Son,
A hopeful Youth, a Student in the Law,
If his poor Fathers want of means have not
Declined his course: Give him thy only Daughter,
And make his Fathers own Inheritance
(By thee unrighteously usurped) her Dowry;
And pray a blessing may go with it; And then
Thou may regain a Christian reputation,
Till age shall lead thee to a quiet Grave.
Come, is it a match? Will you bestow your Daughter
On Brookalls Son, and make your way to Heaven by it?
You have your Money.
And thou hast Adders ears
To all such Counsels.
If you break your day
I shall think of your counsel.
Farewell Vermin. 
And farewéll Dryground.
This parcel of thy Land, Isle keep from wetting: 
Tic not in thee to turn an Acre of it
Into pure Liquor, for a twelvemoneths day.
And break that day thy payment, and the Sun
Sets not more sure, then all this Land is mine.
My Daughter! ha! Can't be in thought of man
To dream of such a Match? A wretch, a Beggar?
Within there! Where▪s my Girl? What Ally? Ally? 
Here Sir—
Myblessing, and good morn: Now hear me Girl.
Now for a Speech—
The care of Children's such a startle-braine,
That had I more then one, I should run Wild-cat,
(Then one I mean, to care for) that▪s thy self,
My sober discreet Daughter. Note my care,
Piled up for thee in massy sums of wealth;
Too weighty for thy weak consideration
To guess from whence it came, or how together
So laid in mountainous heaps.
It is indeed
As strange to me, as are the stony wonders
On Salsbury Plain to others. But my duty
Persuades me it was your thrift, and that great blessing
That gives increase to honest Industry,
Drawn on it by your prayers and upright life,
That wrought these heaps together.
O, Ally Ally,
Tic well if thine with all thy Housewifery
Can keep 'em so. I thank thee for thy judgement
And charitable thoughts. But—
You had other ways.
I say, thou art the only Child I care for▪
Thy Brother (though I loath to call him so)
Is, now, an utter stranger to my blood;
Not to be named but with my curse, a Wolf
That tears my very bowels out.
Your Money.
A riotous Reprobate, that hath consumed
His last, already, of my means and blessing.
But he yet may be turned Sir.
Out of the Counter!
May he be so, dost think? Could I but dream
His Creditors, that have him fast, could be
So idly merciful, or that his youthful Ghing
Could stretch, to get him out, Isle lay, my self,
An Action on him weightier, then the strength
Of all their poor abilities could lift:
His Jacks, his Toms, his Nams, Nolls, Gills, and Nuns,
The roaring fry of his Blade-brandishing mates
Should not release his Carcass: If they did,
I'd force him to a trial for his life,
For the two hundred Pieces that he pilfred.
Out of my Counting-house. He shall up.
I will not forfeit my obedience Sir,
To urge against your Justice, only I crave
Your leave to grieve, that I have such a Brother.
Thou shalt defy the name of Brother in him,
My only, only Child; and but in one command
Obey me further, all my estate is thine,
Tic that I called thee for.
I do not crave
More, then your daily blessing; but desire
To know what you'll impose upon my duty.
Thou shalt, and stile thy self a Lady by it.
Now Love defend me from the man I fear.
This day Isle match thee to a matchless Knight.
The Western Kite Sir, that was here last Term?
Even he, this day he comes to Town.
Would I
Were out on it first. A matchless Knight 
Indeed, and shall be matchless still for me.
I like those blushes well: I read his welcome
Upon her cheeks.
Sir, I have heard, he has
But little Land.
But he has Money Girl
Enough to buy the best Knights Land, that is
A selling Knight, in the West part of England.
He's well in years.
A lusty Bachelor of two and fifty,
With, O, the husbandry thats in him.
How came he by his Knighthood? Cost it no∣thing?
No: He was one of the Cobbe-Knights in the throng,
When they were dubbed in Clusters. 
Sir, the Knight,
That you expect this day, is come to Town.
His man has brought's Portmanteau.
Fetch the Man.
The welcomst man alive is come to Town.
Ally, my Girl, my Daughter, Lady Bride!
What title shall I give thee? Now bestir you,
I know his thrift, he has rid hard to day
To save his Dinner 
Welcome honest friend.
And how does the right worshipful Sir Amphilus?
My Master is in health Sir, praised be Go—
A little weary, or so, as I am of my carriage,
Which I must not lay down, but in the hands
Of your own Worship.
Tic of weight and locked: I guess the worth;
And warrant him the safety under these Keys.
But whore's thy Master?
At his Inn in Holborn
Telling a little with the Host, till I
Bring word from you.
No, I will run to him
My self: you shall stay here. his Chamber
Fitted against he comes, Ally, bestir you,
And think no pains your trouble on this day,
To morrows Sun shall light your Wedding way. 
Unless some unexpected Fate relieve me,
I shall be hurried to my endless ruin.
You are sad, me thinks, young Mistress, I can tell you,
My Master, when he comes, will make you merry.
How? As he is a Fool?
No: But as he has
The soul of mirth and Music at command;
Money, the all-rejoycing spirit, that
He will make you merry with: Not that alone,
But Dignity, which Women prise 'bove money,
You are a Lady by it: Mark that. And if
He has a weakness, which you reckon folly;
It lays you open way to Sovereignty;
The thing which is of most esteem. You'll be
His Lady Regent; rule all his, and him.
This Fellow talks not like a Serving-man:
A forty shilling wages Creature, but
Some disguised spokes-man. What may be the trick o'nt?
You cannot, in th• estate you are, imagine
What tic to be a Wife to such a man.
No more then you perceive the pains you loose
In fooling for him thus. But spare your breath,
And take this brief taste of his Entertainment.
First know, that J do know the man you speak of,
To be a covetous Miser; old and foolish.
Not worth in my estimation the worst Meal
That ever he himself paid three pence for.
Who do you mean? Sir Amphilus my Knight.
Yes Squire, J know him and his qualities;
The ways he got his Wealth by, casual Matches;
Of forty, fifty, and sometimes a hundred
For one. When bounteous Fortune (seldom failing
Men of his Brain) cast all into his mouth,
The Gudgeon gap d for. And how slight a thing
It is, for such base Worldlings to be rich?
That study nothing but to scrape and save.
That have no Faith, but in their ready money,
Nor love to Worldly pleasures above those
Poor Cobblers use.
Cheap Whores, and Duck-hunting:
There s his delight indeed.
J hate to think of of such a Dunghill Scarab.
A water-Dog Knight!
But Wedlock, to his age, will bring him home
To choicer pleasures, and abandon such.
His Age is fit for nothing, but to rock
Another Child; and to rejoice through Spectacles,
At the strong Guess he has, it is his own.
You slight him strangely yet: but when you see
Him, and his weighty reasons to confute you.—
J will nor weigh, nor see him, or his reasons.
And if thou ow'st him so much Service, tell him;
Go back and tell him strait: save him the end
Of his intended Journey. For to come
Hither, will be to drive me hence. And tell
My Father, ere he shall enforce me, take him;
Isle fly into the Arms of one he hates.
Are you in earnest?
Yes, by all my hopes.
These are the arms that must receive thee then.
Nay, be not frighted Sister; look, tic J. 
Beshrew me but J am. How got you hither?
Could not the Counter hold you?
So it seems,
My Virtue was not to be so obscured.
Noble Sir Humphrey Dryground, Sister, was
My frank Infranchiser. O, J have wonders
To tell thee Sister. Thou must go with me.
But first, lend me some money. Borrow some;
(And let it be a good Sum) of my Father,
Now in his absence. Come, supply, supply
My Pockets and thine own. For we must hence.
You are made for ever, Sister. Quick, dispatch.
What's the meaning of all this?
Twill be too long to tell it here.
The Rascal fool, to whom my Fathergives thee,
Is come to Town: And should he now surprise thee,
Here in my Fathers power, thy strength might fail thee.
Be therefore at a sure Guard, O, Sir Humphrey,
How are my Sister and my self bound to thee,
That plottest this escape. Dispatch good Ally,
And hear thee rest by the way.
Why? Wither? What▪s the matter?
Say thou will have that Coxcomb, Isle but kill thee,
And leave the here: And all my care is over.
Isle sooner dye then have him.
Why do you not shun him then? O, sweet Sir Humphrey,
Is thy care slighted thus, in my delivery?
In my disguise? In sending out my Father
On Tom-fooles Errant? While a Coach is sent
To the back-doore here; All to save my Sister,
My thankless Sister here, from worse then Rape.
Why, whither would you have me?
But hard-by.
But till the Wilde-fire of my Fathers Passion
Shall be run out. Slid, J had even forgot.
Bear money with us, Sister; pretty store.
Who knows occasions? Let him keep in pawn
My rich Portmanteau for▪t.
There's some good stuff in▪t.
More then hee ll thank me for. We'll talk in the Coach
In, in, and furnish; &amp; so through the Garden,
And, whirre, we are gone. If we should be prevented;
By this good steel, if J but hear one knock,
Jle make sure work o thee. J can but truss for t.
There's a fair end on's both. And what will he
Do with his money then? Look how thou standst.
If you respect your Father, or the Dog-Master,
To be your Husband, better then me, then take
You your own course: Mine shall be known next Ses∣sions.
Better then you, don't you respect your Father
Better then me?
No, if J do, let me be hanged for nothing:
And that would anger any man I think.
Slid, thou and J had one Mother, (which
We both take after) so had not he and we.
And he takes after no body, that J know.
He loves a stranger better then's own Child:
And that mans money, better then that man,
The Devil 'bove all J think. Thou dost not know
What Coals we stand on.
Who shall look to the house?
Wilt loose thy self with keeping that? Is that
All now? Away, away.
You're a precious Brother.— 
ALL this needs not Sir Humphrey.
Do but hear patiently, and do your pleasure.
J go not about to stop your course, Mr. Bumpsey.
Nor J yours, Sir Humphrey; Nor your Sons here; Nor his Wives there: Only this Gen∣tlewoman, in mine own right J may be bold withal, while you depart my house, if you may be entreated, so. Is not this right? Is not this plain?
Yet hear his Worship speak, good Bump.
Good Whirly, what can his Worship speak? Or your wisdom twatle for him, in this 〈…〉 J do not understand already? Has not his 〈◊〉 wedded our Daughter? How directly, 〈…〉
rectly, who meddles with his match? Nay more, has he not bedded her? How, directly or indirect∣lie, who meddles with that either? Let him have and hold, possess (Hmh.) and enjoy; do his worst, and make his best of her, though she be an Heir, J will not sue him out of her: No, J protest; were it Ante Copulam, as it is post, J would not cross 'em. Is not this right and plain enough.
But good Mr. Bumpsey, Brother Bumpsey, I would call you—
Keep your Brothers and your Goods to your self, Sir, I have no need of 'em.
You are a Knight, and a man ot Worship—
He will speak all himself.
J am a plain Fellow, and out of debt.
J, let him run on.
J sought none of your Alliance, J—
Has he the speed to run beyond himself?
Yes, and bring himself about, J warrant you.
Nor to be joined with houses of great sound,
Whose noise grows from their hollow emptiness.
J could have matched my Daughter here, that was,
But now a Barronettesse in Reversion,
To a substantial Heir of two fair Lordships.
Perhaps no Gentleman.
Yet honourable, Land-Lordship's real honour,
Though in a Trades-man Son: when your fair Titles
Are but the shadows of your Ancestry;
And you walk in'em, when your Land is gone:
Like the pale Ghosts of dead Nobility.
Ha! First not so? Is not this right and plain?
Yes like the privilege you use in your own house here.
Nay I come up to you now Sir Humfry Dry∣ground;
Up in a point of Chivalry. You are a Knight,
A Baronet to boot: Your son is like
T'inherit that dear paid-for title, but
(You'll give me leave to use my plainness)
Freely.
Your son (I say) is Heir to your bought honour.
Which may hereafter Ladifie my Daughter:
But where s the Land you once were Lord of? Ha!
The goodly Cornfields, Meadows, Woods, and Pastures,
That must maintain the House, the Gowns, the Coach,
With all by complements of Horses, Hawks, and Hounds.
Now hes in.
Where be the Parks, the Warrens, Herds, and Flocks?
Besides the Gardens, Orchards, Walks, and Fish-ponds?
For that hear me.
Odds pity, give me leave,
You, that had all these once, in three fair Lordships,
To be wrought on, and tonyed out of all,
But a small pittance of Trois Cents per Annum,
By Providence intayld upon the Heir,
(Or thad had wasted too) which now maintains you,
In a proportion of Smoke, and Sack,
To wash your mouth with after, where you live
Confined in Milford Lane, or Fullers Rents,
Or who knows where, it skills not—
Must I hear this too.
Now he has almost done.
Can you (I say) think your good husbandry
A lawful Precedent for your Gamesome son
To make my Daughter happy in a Marriage,
Though he had twice my Fortunes?
Now hoe's coming:
Bear but with this; and if he offer not
More then you would request, Isle lose your love
But here's the substance of't, you have my Daughter,
Your Son, sir, has my Daughter, that must have,
And shall, my whole Estate at my Decease;
(No Law exacts it sooner) This Estate
You safely may suppose ten thousand pounds,
Which J have got by thrifty Industry.
Only one thousand, J confess, my Wife
Improved my Fortune with, Here's the just sum▪
I give her leave to give it to her Daughter:
She may endow her Husband with it. So,
Is not this plain? Now note me further, sir;
What J have left is my own; and you, sir, may
Which what is theirs take hence your Son &amp; Daughter,
Till you shall hear old Bumpsey is deceased.
Then let him come, and challenge all—that's left;
Mean time J know my course.
Now chop in with him, Mother, you know how apt
Hee is to cross you in these Moods.
Dear, worthy, honoured, sir,
sh't, sh't, sh't; Woman come you with me.
J Bump. Let us go our way, and let them take theirs agods name.
Pray hear me, sir.
At this time, sir, he shall not.
Shall not! He shall sure: Odds pity! shall not: Are you pleased to speak, sir.
not to offend—
Not to a Fiddlestick. Shall not! Can you speak or not?
If not, pray yell me so.
J married, sir, your Daughter.
You may thank her Mother for it, not me.
Well, will you speak?
J married her in a firm hope to win
Your Love and favour.
Well.
Which, since I have not yet; and time must work it,
I would make this my suit.
Would I could hear it once.
That you would take
With re-acceptance of this thousand pound
Your Daughter and me into your Family.
And why the thousand pound; doe's't burn your Fingers?
Give us but meat and lodging for t: My Father,
Out of his little left Estate will give us
A hundred yearly for other necessaries.
With all my heart.
And as you find my regular life deserve
Your future favour, so extend your bounty,
When Age shall call upon you to dispose
Of all your fair Possessions.
Humh! A pretty od speech this! I would I knew
The meaning on t.
I mean, Sir, as I speak; that till you find
Strong probability in me to manage
A good estate, you trust me not with any.
Ha! Is it so? Then J come to a point with you.
Mark him now, Sir Humfrey.
You look, Sir, in my Daughters right, to have,
After my death, my whole Estate, by showing
Me, in my life time, your good husbandry, by husband∣ding of nothing:
Y' have tan off half my purpose; for J meant
To have kept it in my power, whether to leave her
Any, or nothing: And, perhaps (do ye hear)
By an odd course, that J was thinking on
To have made all nothing ere J died: But now
Half of that power Isle put into your hands,
Isle try what you can do with something.
Half? What mean you half?
Even half of all J have.
J hope you will not deal so.
And as he deals with that, Isle use the rest.
Pray be advised.
Never by you against this:
Isle give him instantly the free possession
Of half J have: Now mark; if you increase,
Or keep that half, then, doubtless, J shall do,
As well with tother for you: If you diminish
Or waste it all, isle do the like with my part.
Husband.
Isle do it: Together we will live:
And Isle along with you in your own course,
And, as you play your game, you win or lose all:
Thrive and isle thrive: Spend you, and J will spend:
Save, and Jle save; scatter, and Isle scatter.
You won't be mad.
Isle do it: Let him throw Money
Into the Thames, make Ducks and Drakes with Pieces,
Isle do the like: till he has made a match
Or no match of my Daughter: There's the point
And the whole substance on it.
Will you do so?
Will I? Tic done. Isle make him a good husband,
Or be no husband for him: And so see
Whats mine, out of the danger of his waste,
And have some sport too for my Money: Ha!
I love to do these things.
Nay, but in one thing, Bump. let me advise you.
In nothing `against this course, good whirly: no,
Tic so set down. I know I shall be counted
An odd old humorous Cockscomb for it by some:
But the truth is, I love to do these things:
And so God go ye joy.
Isle take my leave Sir.
Not so I hope, Sir Humfry.
I have business,
And go well satisfied with this agreement:
And, Val. take briefly this my Charge: You are now
A Husband, be a good one: Y' have my blessing.
But (hark you) do you remember against the evening?
All Sir, all: I have spread my Nets already.
Sir, fare you well.
At your pleasure Sir.
Isle shortly visit you.
At your own good time Sir- 
These shall stay here, Isle blindfold them with Money,
And by a new way try, if they can grope
The right way into the World. Come your way.
ANd why this Gullery to me, good Ambrose?
J swear J am serious, and you may may believe it.
What, that there can be in the World an Ass
(Were thou a fool to credit it) that would keep
A House, by way of public Ordinary,
For fashionable Guests, and curious stomachs;
The daintiest Palates, with rich Wine and Cheer;
And all for nothing, but alls paid and welcome?
Val Dryground told it me, whose truth deserves
So well my credit, that, prove you it false,
Isle pay all Ord'naries and Tavern reckonings
You shall be at this twel'moneth.
J have heard
Of all the Mockeries, the Ape, the Ram, the Horns,
The Goat, and such tame Monsters, whom poor wits
Have sent wise Tradesmen to, as to a Knight,
A Lord, or foreign Prince; to be his Mercer,
His Taylor, Semster, Milliner, or Barber:
When those, that have been mock d, still sent their Neighbours,
Till half the City have bee fool-found. Ha!
First not some such poor trick?
Here comes my Author. 
O Mr. Bridegroom, that stole the wealthy match! How got you loose so soon? J thought you had been tied up by the Loins, like a Monkey to the Bed-post, for a fortnight at the least. How does old Bumpsey, that Freecost Drunkard, thy mad Father-in-Law, take thy stolen Marriage? I am sure he knows on it.
He found's abed last night in the nick, as we say.
But we are pieced this morning.
Then he wrangled it out, of himself. J know his singular humour.
What has he gi'n thee?
Half, of all he has.
How?
On this Condition, that, if J save
That half until he dyes, the rest is mine too▪
What if thou spendst thy half?
Heel spend the tother; and the same way, hee swears.
He will ne'er keep Covenant.
Isle tell you how he runs at waste already,
This morning the French Taylor brought a Gown home,
Of the fashion, for my Wife. He bought one
Straight, ready made, for his old Gentlewoman,
That never wore so rich in all her life.
O brave old woman! How will she carry it?
I spoke but of a Coach, and he bespoke one.
Wonder upon wonder! Name was telling one
Before thou came.
What the new Ordnary?
Dost know the man that keeps it?
They call him Osbright.
A brave old Blade. He was the President
Of the Can-quarrelling Fraternity,
Now called the Roaring Brotherhood, thirty years since,
But now grown wondrous civil, free, and hospitable,
Having had something fallen to him, as it seems.
That Osbright has been dead these many years.
It was given out so: But he lived beyond Sea.
There s some strange plot in it.
O thou politic Noll.
Judge thy self, Val, what can the mystery be?
He tells me there's no Gaming, so no Cheating;
Nor any other by-way of expense,
By Bawdry, or so, for privy profit.
Such a suspicion were a sin. But now
I will unfold the Riddle to you. This feasting
Has been but for three days, and for great persons,
That are invited, and to be prepared
To venture for a prize. This very night
There will be some great Rifling for some Jewel,
Or other rare Commodity they say.
I cannot name t: tic twenty pound a man.
Is not that gaming prithee?
Thats to come:
But, hitherto, nor Dice, nor Cards nor Wench,
Is seen in the house, but his own only Daughter▪
O! has he Daughter there? Mark that Name.
No gaming say thou? Odds me, and they play not
At the old Game of old there, I dare—
I dare be sworn thou dost 'em wrong.
Shees too stale, is she?
Tic above twenty years since he went over,
And was reported dead (they say) soon after,
In France, I take it: But, then, it seems, he lived▪
And got this Damsel there? Is she French borne?
Yes, she was born and bred there: And can speak
English but brokenly. But, for French behaviour,
Shees a most complete Damoiselle, and able
To give instructions to our Courtliest Dames.
She must be seen.
But see who here comes first. 
Thou hast undone me Villain.
Out alas!
I was as ignorant of the deceit,
As your own innocent worship ever was
Of cozening any man of Land or Living.
Was ever man so cursed in his Children!
Tic the wretch Vermin.
What makes he here, trow, in the Temple Walks?
What should he do elsewhere, when Law's his Lechery.
The Devils itch dry up his marrow for it.
He undid a worthy Gentleman I know.
I, Brookall, thrusting him out of his Land.
Hoe's fitted with an Heir for it; one that can
Justly inherit nothing but the Gallows.
Wheres Brookalls son? He had a hopeful one;
And, at sixteen, a Student here in the Temple.
Alas his Fathers fall has ruined him.
Mere want of maint'nance forced him to service,
In which hoe's lately travelled into France.
Go back to the Recorders: Fetch the War∣rant,
Isle search the City and the Suburbs for her. 
But Vermin has a daughter may prove good,
A good one like enough: Isle lay a wager
Hoe's poshing among the trees here, for a Broker,
To match his daughter to a landed husband.
This is their walk.
Let's try if we can fit him.
Thou'lt ne'er endure his breath, it stinks of brimstone.
Isle take the wind of him: You are well met, Sir.
They say you have a daughter you would match, Sir.
It may be I have; it may be not; How then?
What's that to you?
Pray be not angry Sir.
The worst of us has land, and may deserve her.
Pray let me ask you first, if you be not
The knaves confederates that stole her from me?
Is she stolen from you Sir? In troth I am glad on it.
Tic the first news we heard on it.
Though J assure you
We heard none ill to day: But very good,
As that of the New Ordinary.—
Then the good success
This Gentleman had lately with a wife—
And lastly, this you tell us; which, but that
It comes from your own mouth, were even too good
For our belief, me-thinks.
Pray, is it true Sir?
That your daughter's gone, lost, or stolen, as you say?
May we report it after you, good Sir?
What are you? J would know.
Gentlemen, Sir,
That cannot but rejoice at your affliction,
And therefore blameless, that desire to hear it.
Cannot this place, where Law is chiesly studied,
Relieve me with so much, as may revenge
Me on these scorners? How my Slave stays too!
Yet I may find a time.— 
Ha ha ha.—
Look, look, what thing is this?—
Trebasco, Skip-kennel.
....
It speaks, me-thinks.
Yes, and its shadow answers it in Cornish▪
I know him; it is the wise Western Knight, that should
Have married Vermin daughter.
Skipkennell, you shall turn Footman, now, Skipkennell.
I'll ne'er keep horse more—
You must be Footman then your self Sir.
No nor Mare neither.
You need not Sir, now you be determined to marry, and live here in the City altogether. And truly, Sir, she could never have dyed better, nor been taken from you (as they say) in a better time, so near her journeys end.
His Mare's dead it seems.
Was it well done of her, dost think, to die
to day upon the way, when she had been i'my purse to morrow in Smithfield: Poor fool, I think she dyed for grief I would have sold her.
It was unlucky to refuse Reynold Pengutlings money for her.
Would I had taken't now: and she had not dyed mine own, it would ne'er have grieved me.
Pray bear it Sir, as they say—We are all more∣tall you know, and her time was come, we must think.
And't had not been the first loss that ere I had in my life, I could have born it.
And grace og (as they say) it shall not be the last.
I would thou could ascertain me that; but mischiefs are tailed to one another, and I must grieve as well for the what's to come, as the departed.
We will have a bout with him: Who is depar∣ted, Sir?
My Mare, my Mare Sir: It was the prettiest
Tit—But she is gone—
How, is she gone Sir?
You will not talk to 'em.
How is she gone, I pray Sir?
Sir, as it were, because she could go no fur∣there.
Good angry man give us leave to talk with thy Master.
Good Sir, a little more of your Mare.
I would you had her all to do you good Sir:
she lies but a quarter of a mile beyond Brainford.
Did you leave skin and shoes, and all behind Sir?
Shoes all behind? I thought how wise you were: Come away Master. No, while she lived, she never wore but two behind Sir.
Gramercy honest fellow, thou hast wit in thy anger.
Sirrah, answer not the Gentleman so snap∣pishly.
How can I choose, when they do nothing but make a fool of your Worship before your Worships face, and your Worship perceives it not.
Good Sir, fall from your man to your beast a∣gain.
There again, another main mock: He would have him fall from a man to a beast.
Give me the shoon; let 'em go I say, I will have 'em.
Pray take 'em then, he will ne'er be wiser.
These were her shoon Gentlemen, I'll keep 'em for her sake, that little Tit, my little poor Gonhel∣lie, that would have carried me on this little iron from Pensans to S. Columb on a day. And that's a way would try a stumbler you'll say, if you know it.
It is enough, I know you Sir Amphilus, and have fooled enough with you. Adieu; my business calls me. Gentlemen, will you meet me to night at the Ordinary▪— 
Yes, and perhaps, be there before you too▪
Come Ambrose— 
Od Gentlemen, me-thinks
Why did you talk with 'em?
What had you to make with 'em?
True, wee have other matters to think on: Your first course Trebasco, after we come to our lodge∣ing, shall be to Turnbull-street, to the Cobbler,
Your Dog-tutor.
Yes, and see how my whelp proves, I put to him last Term.
Yes, Sir.
And know of him what Gamesters came to the Ponds now adays, and what good dogs.
Yes Sir.
And ask him—Dost thou hear? If he have not done away his own dog yet, Blackswan with the white foot? If I can but purchase him, and my own whelp prove right, I will be Duke of the Ducking-pond.
Never misdoubt, your whelp's right I warrant you; for why, he could lap before he could well go: And at ten weeks old he could peace under leg.
He was a fine forward Puppy, true enough: But and that be a sign of short life, and he should peak away after my Mare now—Here, prithee take her shoon again: What should I keep 'em for? They put me too much in mind of mortality, do 'em away, make money of 'em, and Isle convert it into a Dog-Collar—
Isle try the Market with 'em.
the frumping Jacks are gone.—
See my Aldermanicall Father-in-Law! How do ye do Sir? I am come. I keep my day you see before I am a Cittiner among you. How does my best beloved I pray, your daughter? You do not speak me-thinks.
Ask you for my daughter? Let me ask you first what was your plot to put me in this fright, to make me trudge to your Inn, whilst knave your man here.—Is not this he?
I doubt Sir he was taller.
Having first left a bag of Trumpery with me,
stones, and old iron, steals away the baggage.
This is abomination! What Inn? and what old iron? I came at no Inn to day, nor touch old I∣ron, but that with sorrow enough, my poor Mares shoes, she left me at her sad decease to Brainford. I had rather have lost the best part of five Mark J wuss: From whence I came by water, landed here at the Temple, to leave a Letter to a kinsmans chamber, now right as sure as can be. Say Trebasco.
He tells you true.
But is your daughter gone?
Gone, gone.
All ill go with her: Did not I say I should hear of more mischief, and that one was ever tailed to another?
You said so indeed: but if she had been tailed to your Mare, I should have seen her sure, when I stripped her.
This is the day of my affliction,
This day Isle cross out of my Almanac
For ever having any thing to do on it.
Why then, you will not seek her out to day?
Although me-thinks the day might serve as well
To find her, as to lose her, if luck serve.
What else did you intend Sir by the warrant?
Best lose no time Sir.
No, no, we'll go.
First take my execration with thee, Monster.
Hell vomits all her malice this day on me.
Hell sends by me this commendation to thee,
That thou hast there a most deserved Possession,
That gapes to entertain thee.
Who's this, a Conjurer that knows hell so?
No, but a certain Spirit, that my Master
Conjured out of his Land.
If you can conjure,
Here's money to be got Sir, but to tell us
What may be now be•id of this mans daughter?
Himself, and his Posterity must all
Sink unavoidably to hell.
You are most deeply read! May not a Son-in-Law—
Why talk you to that Rayler?
Pray Sir, may not
A Son-in-Law escape in your opinion?
No Sir: it was by Law he made the purchase.
And by his Son-in-Law, or out-law'd, down he must:
If he set venturous foot, as his Inherltor,
Upon the mould, was got by his oppression.
Pretty mad reason me-thinks; whore's that
Land?
Sirrah, Isle tame thy tongue▪
No, wretch, thou can not,
Nor fly out of the reach of my fell curses,
That freedom (being all that thou hast left me)
Thou can not rob me of.
I shall find means
Then to confine it, and your self in Bedlam.
Thou can not be so just sure, to exchange
Thine own inheritance for mine.
Have you made
A purchase there too, Father-Law that should be?
How am I tortured! I will fly this place.
Nay prithee stay a little, good old man,
Give something to my box.
Out on thee Baggage.
A little something, prithee; but a tester.
Out, out.
Thou look like a good Penny-father,
A little of thy money would so thrive here,
It would grow, by that I were ready for a husband,
Up to a pretty portion. Pray thee now—
What can thou be?
Insooth a Gentlewoman, but a By-blow,
My Father is a Knight, but must be nameless.
Can Knights get Beggars?
Why not? when such as thou get Knights.
Nay, prithee, prithee now give me a tester.
I ne'er ask less: My mother's a poor Gentlewoman,
And has no means, but what comes through my fingers.
And this is all my work: Come, wring it out.
Oh how I love a hard-bound Money-master,
Whose countenance shows how loath hee is to part with it!
It comes so sweetly from him, when it comes:
Nay, when? I pray thee when? Pish, make an end.
It is the prettiest merry Beggar.
Huswife Isle have you whipped.
J, when I beg in the streets.
I have allowance here, as well as any
Brokers, Projectors, Common Bail, or Bankrupts,
Panders, and Cheaters of all sorts, that mix here
Amongst men of honour, worship, lands and money.
O rare Beggar-wench! 
I come not hither to in∣trap or cozen.
My work lies plain before me as my way.
With, will you give me? Prayed, hard old man.
Away, away.
What though thou come to deal
For this mans Land, or sell another right,
Or else to match thy daughter, if thou hast one
To this young Gentleman—Thou wilt give me something.
The Devil haunts me.
She makes a youth of me.
Yet I prithee make not
Thy money such an Idol, as to think
Thou shalt dishonor't, or impair this bargain,
That match, or whatsoever thou hast in traffic,
By parting with a silly silver sixpence.
Shalt not i'fecks la, shalt not; Isle strike luck to it,
Thy match shall thrive the better. Look, I have got
Here, four and sixpence, Prithee make it a Crown,
Twill ne'er be mist in thy dear daughters Dowry,
If (as I said) thou hast one.
Hellish baggage!
He will gi't me by and by. I prithee find
Thy money out the while. Come out with it man▪
Pull her away,
I fly thee, as I would the Devil that sent thee:
Yes, let's away, tic time, she begs of me now.
The Devil is not surer to o're-take thee.— 
Good child I thank thee: Thou hast some∣what eased
My pensive heart by his vexation:
She spake as Divination had inspired her
With knowledge of my wrongs, and his oppression,
To take my part: Take thou a blessing fort
Who ere thou art, whilst I recalculate
The miseries of a distressed man,
Cast out of all. Unhappy chance of Law!
More false and merciless then Dice or Strumpets;
That hast into thy Hydra-throated maw
Gulped up my lives supportance; left me nothing;
Not means for one days sustenance, for breath
To cry thy cruelty before my death.
That Law, once called sacred, and ordained
For safety and relief to innocence,
Should live to be accursed in her succession,
And now be styled Supportresse of oppression;
Ruin of Families, past the bloody rage
Of Rape or Murder: All the crying sins
Negotiating for Hell in her wild practise.
A man I hope for my purpose, and save me a going to the Church for one: Will you make an Oath Sir?
An Oath? for what?
For two shillings; and it be half a Crown, my Client shall not stand w'ye; the Judge is at leisure, and the other of our Bail is there already. Come, go along.
I guess you some Attorney: Do you know me?
No, nor any man we employ in these cases.
He takes me for a common Bail; a Knight of the Post,
Thou art a villain, and crop-ear'd I doubt not:
What, dare thou say, thou see upon me, that—
I cry you mercy: I must up (I see)
To the old Synagogue, there I shall be fitted— 
Can I appear so wretched? or can grief
So soil the face of poverty, which is virtue,
To make it seem that Monster Perjury?
Rather let sorrow end me all at once,
Then virtue be misconstrued in my looks,
Which I will hide from such inter∣pretation. 
Alas hoe's sore afflicted, and my news,
I fear, will strike him dead; yet I must speak.
Sir, give not misery that advantage on you,
To make your self the less, by shrinking under
The buffetings of fortune.
I desired you
To seek my son. Have you found him at his Chamber?
Or has not want of fatherly supplies
(Which heaven knows I am robbed of) thrust him out
Of Commons, to the Common World for succour?
Where is he, have you found him?
No, not him.
But I have found what may be comfort to you,
If you receive it like a man of courage.
Hoe's dead then, farewell my tender boy!
Indeed, Sir, hoe's not dead.
Phew—
Pray, sir, hear me.
You'll tell me, man ne'er dies; But changes Life,
And happily for a better. He is happiest
That goes the right way soonest: Nature sent us
All naked hither; and all the Goods we had
We only took on Credit with the World.
And that the best of men are but mere borrowers:
Though some take longer day. Sir, J know all
Your Arguments of Consolation—
Indeed he is not dead; but lives—
In Heaven.
J am the surer on it; for that he lived
Not to learn Law enough, to—hush. No more.
Substantially he lives in flesh, as we do.
Speak that again.
A Gentleman of the next Chamber told me so.
Only, sir, this; if you can brook his absence
Without fear, or mistrust; then he is well.
How thou playact with me!
He's gone to travel, sir. Here comes the Gen∣tleman.
J am sure he does not know me. If he could,
J were as sure this Charity would be rejected.
So much J know his Spirit. Is your name Brookeall, sir?
My losses, wrongs, and sorrows, speak my name.
You had a Son late of this house.
And do not you infer by that he▪s dead?
Good, do not mock me, sir.
If this be gold,
He lives and sent it to you; forty pieces?
Pray, sir, from whence, or where might he achieve
So great a Sum? Not in this World, J fear▪
A handsome possibility he had once,
Could J have kept it for him.
He's in a way,
Now to a hopeful fortune. A Noble Gentleman,
Late gone to travel, taken with good affection
Towards your Son, has taken hen to his care:
And like a Father, not a Master, keeps him.
From whose free bounty he received this means.
Do you think the Boy did well to send it me then:
When it was intended for his Masters honour,
To fly in Silks and Feathers? Tic not Servant like
To wave a Masters meaning so.
J had a Letter too;
Though most unhappily mislay'd.
What from my Boy?
In his own hand.
Ha!—but mislay'd, you say. Ha, ha, ha,—
What is the Gentleman? Or whither travelled?
That's all J crave excuse for.
Keep your money.
If you can render me my Son, Isle thank you.
You speak not like a Father: wanting means
Your self for his advancement, would you bar him
The bounty of another full ability?
J speak more like a Father, then a Beggar:
Although no Beggar poorer. And J fear,
J am no Father: for J would not give
My Son to gain a Province, nor except
This Coin to save my life: If he be lost,
Let me look nearer on you, sir.
I hope
He will accept the Money. Poverty
Was ne'er so coy else.
J cannot remember,
J ever saw this face: But J have seen
(Many years since) one, that it so resembles,
As J could spit defiance on it—
What mean you?
And charge thee with the Murder of my Son
Pray, sir, collect your self.
Your name is Valentine.
Right, sir.
Sir Humphrey Drygrounds Son:
Most true.
Even so thy Father looked, when, at like years
He was my Rival: For young man, I tell thee
Thou had a virtuous, well deserving Mother.
He won her without loss of my known Friend-ship:
But, since her death, you cannot but have heard,
He basely wronged my Sister, and, in her,
Me, and my Family: Whored her, and cast her off,
On the appointed Marriage day.
O, sir.
You cannot but have heard on it. Nay, it seems,
My Boy has charged thee with it, before his years
Could warrant his ability in Combat,
And so is fallen; Or thou, not daring stand
Trial in such a cause, by treachery
Hast cut him off; And come to make thy peace:
Presuming on my Poverty, with money.
Worse then the base Attorneys Project this!
This is mere madness. In an Act so foul,
As your wilde Fancy gathers this to be;
Who could escape the Law?
The Law; Ha, ha, ha.
Talk not to me of Law, Law's not my Friend.
Law is a Fatal to me, as your house.
I have enough of Law; pray stand you off.
Will you, sir, furnish me, but with a Sword;
And bring me to fit ground to end this difference?
Will you do so, and like a Gentleman?
What shall J do for pity?—Now J have it.
Talk not to me of Law. 
Pray hear me, sir.
Now sir, your will before your end Be brief.
You know me for a Gentleman, though an E∣nemy.
(I must speak in his phrase) and by that honour
A Gentleman should keep sacred, two hours hence
Isle meet you in this place—
Pray stand you off—to Friendly.
From whence we'll walk—
Silent, as nothing were—
As nothing were betwixt us—to some other Fit ground, (as you propounded) where we'll end the difference.
By the Sword, no otherwise.
No whinnelling satisfaction.
You shall see, sir.
Go set thy house in order. Here Isle meet thee, 
I Shall repent me, sir, that ere I yielded,
In that fair Noble way, if you express
Your self in this regardless of my honour.
I like a Whore, withal my heart, that talks
So like an honest woman.
Can you expect
A Chaste and constant Wife of her, Whom you
Have wrought to Lewdness before Marriage?
Or may I not as well deserve as well in bringing
A Maidenhead into your Marriage-bed,
As a polluted Body?
Here's a coil,
For a poor bit afore-hand! Is it so?
'Heart, if a man bespeak a Tavern Feast
For next day Dinner; and give earnest for it
To half the value, (as my Faith and Troth
I think, is somewhat towards your Marriage payment
To be to morrow) Will not the Hostess give him
A Modicum o'er night to stay his stomach?
Your Father comes: Isle whisper yet more reason.
Now pretty Mr. Alice, you see the end
I had upon you: All the scope thereof
Tending to your contentment. Are you pleased?
So well, that could I but shake off the fear
(Which is most dangerous) of a Fathers curse,
I durst prouounce; nay, boast my happiness,
To be above my Virgin hopes, or wishes.
Let your fear vanish then: And, if this night,
The happiness you are ambitious of,
Together with your Fathers leave and blessing
Crown not your Bed, let all the Infamy
Due to all perjured Wretches, that have wronged
Beauty and Chastity be branded here.
The fair respect I have, sir, to your Nobles▪
For what you have already shown me, bars
Mine ears against protestation. I dare trust you.
As I have trusted you with my whole project,
My discreet Alice, further then I dare trust
My Instrument your Brother; though he thinks
He understands it all. Yonder he is,
Profoundly Love-struck too, I make no doubt.
Fie! Can you be so lewd? Is that your rea∣son?
Yes; can the Parish Parson give you better?
His Parish Bull's as civil.
Well no more.
Isle talk with your Father about it.
I with your Sister, and to better purpose.
Now Wat, what think you of my course, and habit?
As I love mischief, and desire to live by it;
It is the daintiest course.—O, brave sir Humphrey,
How I am taken with your Shape! Old Osbright,
The Father of the Swindgers; so much talked on
Could ne'er have borne it up so. Nor his Daughter,
That was French born indeed, could ere have clipped,
And Frenchified our English better, then
She counterfeits to Coxcombs that do Court her:
With her fine Fee-fees, and her Laisse-moys;
Her Prea-awayes; Intrat a you make a me blus•a.
O, I am tickled with it.
A, ha, my Lad.
slid I could dote upon you. Had I been
Your Son now, how I could have honoured you!
Though I had kept a Precept by t, I care not.
Notable Reprobate.
The Devil sure
Ought me a mischief, when he enabled that
Old Wretch, my Father to beget me. Oh,
Tic in my bones; I feel it in my Youth:
I know from whence the Pocks is now descended.
The Gout begets it. There's no Usurers Son,
Butt's born with an hereditary spice on it.
Had I raked Limbo, as I did the Counter,
I were not better fitted with a Copesmate.
'•light, I could ask you blessing.
And I think,
That courtesy you have seldom done your Father.
Ne'er since I grew to any understanding:
Nor (as I know) before, but whipped and held to it.
Well Wat. You see how far I have trusted you,
To have the second hand in our great work;
Our Project here. Though you must seem my Servant,
You are like to have the better share, if you agree.
Upon the Match, and make your self my Son.
How like you your new Mistress, sir, my Daughter▪
The Maidenhead here, the new Ordinary—
The Damoyselle, or what you please to call her?
What first a Match Wat? Condescended she?
No man shall be her Husband, but my self;
Who ere she lies withal, before or after.
That she has roundly promised. But she balkes,
And Boggles with me in a less request.
She shall deny thee nothing. What first Wat?
You may command her duty, if you please.
What is it man?
'Troth, sir, but one nights knowledge
Of her aforehand. One word of your mouth,
I know would do it, sir.
O Devilish Rascal,
That can imagine this a Fathers Office!
Patience good Wat.
But that I am afraid
My Father would be pleased with it, Il'd take home
My Sister else, and presently.
In Maids about your work. And hear you Frank
Discharge the Butchers, and the Chandlers Bills.
They wait below. The Baker and the Brewer,
I have made even with.
And the Vintner too.
The Bottle-man too, and Tobacco Merchant.
Do as I bid you, go. Now Wat Observe me:
As an ingenious Critic would observe
The first Scene of a Comedy, for fear
He lose the Plot.
I do observe you, sir.
I have, you know, released from your thrall∣dome.
Upon condition you should steal your Sister,
To be at my dispose. You have performed it:
Honestly, sir.
Yes▪ honestly, as you say.
And though it be for her own absolute good;
Yet was your Act so grateful to me, that
I promised you my Daughter.
Right sir, on.
I shall be brief: you know my Fortune, What
Are sunk, and you have heard, I make no doubt,
Amongst other of my follies, of a Child
I got on Brookealls sister, on the by, Wat.
And this is she, I love a bastard naturally,
Ah thy are bouncing spirits: Now I love her
More then I did Sir.
You come fairly on.
But now, my poverty affords no portion.
Now, Wat, to raise a portion!
J, now, now.
Now I come to it, Wat: J took this house,
And in this habit here, turned pimping Host,
To make the most of her, and find a Husband
To take her with all faults.
That's I, that's I Sir: this has music in it.
You will be secret Wat.
No dumb Bawd like me.
Nay in a plot of villainy I dare trust thee.
In troth you cannot think how much I love it;
How I am tickled with it! Good Sir, on.
This I have designed to put her off
(I mean her Maiden-head) at such a rate
Shall purchase Land.
How, good Sir Humphrey, how?
She shall be rifled for.
How! Rifled Sir?
Yes, rifled Wat; the most at three fair throws,
With three fair Dice, must win and wear her, Wat.
You'll take her with all faults?
Can you suspect me?
It is the rarest invention, if the Gamesters
Be stiff and strait, that ever was projected!
What is it a man?
But twenty Pie ces, boy.
I vow too little, less their number help us.
How many Gamsters have you?
A full hundred.
Two thousand pound! A merry portion,
And worth as many Maiden-heads in the sport
A man shall find in spending it▪ Me-thinks
I feel my self even flying with it already.
What art thou thinking, Wat?
That here may grow
A danger Sir, the Gamesters being so many.
Why, there's but one must use her.
Phew, for that
I were indifferent, if'twere all or more
(As it is possible a wench might bear it)
If they come single, and in civil sort,
Allow her breathing-whiles—
Here's a ripe Rascal!
But my doubt is, that such a multitude
May fly into combustion, blow up all
The business and our hopes.
Now your doubt
Reflects upon my Judgment: did thou note
How quietly those Gallants here to day
Parted with their gold?
Yes, very gallantly.
They shall agree as well for the Commodity,
As I have cast it, What; so well my boy,
That no distaste shall be or taken, or given,
Anon you'll see.
She knows not on it you say,
Nor shall she What, till at the push I charge her
To be obedient in the undertaking.
And that's a sweet obedience: I could kneel
Before my wretched Sire in such commands.
Anon Isle make•t all plain to you. How now Frank?
There are two Gentlemen in the next room,
That by all means would speak with you: I have had
The foulest coil with one of 'em, that persuades
Himself you keep a Bawdy-house, by somewhat
He gathered Eavesdropping, by your discourse here,
While t'other held me talking; who is civil,
And loves me with a modest fair affection.
Where is his sister, Alice?
Unseen I wrrrant you.
Then let them enter. Whip into your disguise Wat— 
And be at call.
Presto, Anon, anon Sir. 
Did they Eavesdrop me? I will Eavesdrop too.—
Did not I tell thee't was a Bawdy-house?
I cannot think so yet: there is some other
Trick in it; the Maid you see is very modest.
That is the trick on it man, she must seem so.
Her Father deals for her.
Fie! Can there be such Fathers?
Yes, and such Mothers too: The Towne's too full of 'em.
Come, shoe's a Juggling whore I warrant thee,
For all her Fee-fees, and her Laisse-moys.
Pox of her counterfeit Gibberish Isle make her speak
In plainer English, ere I have done with her.
I have enough. You are welcome Gentlemen.
He looks like such a Blade. Are you the Master here Sir?
I am the man that's much rejoiced to see
Such sparkling Spirits underneath this Roof,
Where all you find is yours. Sirrah Varlet.
Each syllable he speaks bewrays him.
Varlet I say.
Here Sir.
Give me the Complement. Gallants,
Wilt please you taste your welcome in a Cup,
The spirit of whose never dying Liquor,
Speaks ore the brim in this high Language to you.
Full six and thirty times hath Luna wan'd
The strength she got in six and thirty growths
From Phoebus virtuous beams, into this Juice,
To make it Nectar for Phoebean wits.
Tic this inspires their brains with fire Divine,
By which to write high strains; and herein lurks,
The gift, One has to bounce up his own works.
Your meaning is good Sack, and three years old.
To put you by your Beverage and your Bombast,
I will nor drink, nor talk of other thing,
But the choice thing of things, your Daughter Sir.
Thou shalt not woo my Daughter, nor no man for thy sake, 
Unless thou come until her by her Daddy naked.
Her Mommy's gone to Heaven Sir. And I pray,
Let Fathers poor breed Daughters as they may.
Your care, no doubt, is great what will it hold?
The Rifling Sir, I mean. Is your number full?
May not a man put in Sir for a chance?
What do you mean Sir?
May not we
Come it adventurers? Here are twenty pieces.
I find you have overheard me. Call my Daugh∣la. 
Now Isle disclose a secret to you. But Gentlemen,
As you love wit and mirth, censure me mildly.
I am a Gentleman decayed in Fortune.
And can thou be so base to sell thy Child
To Lust and Impudence?
Be not too rash.
My Child's as dear in my respect, as you
Were ever to your Father.
Devil thou lie— 
Nay, hold, good Ambrose; you even now were angry
With me, that did oppose your fair Construction
Of this good Gentleman and his virtuous Daughter.
My ignorance wrong▪d us both.
Good modest Ambrose,
What do you think of this discovery?
You had discovered more, if his impatience
Had not prevented me: But now I am dumb to you
In all, but this. If you'll be pleased to sup here,
I shall afford you welcome. I have business. 
What can we make of this?
I know what to do.
If City Justice, grave Authority
Protect it not, Isle surely spoil the sport.
Can thou be so malicious, that, but now
Did love this Wench so dearly, as to run her
Into the hazard of Correction?
Stay: Here she comes, and the Pimp whiskin with her.
Do thou take him in hand. Isle handle her.
Now Madam, twenty pound a man! Nay do not
Coy it too much? Your provident Father left us,
To make our selves more known to you; as your price
Is known to us already: Look upon us.
Pre ye Sir, have you been ever in France?
In France? No surely, nor in Doctors hands
Since I was Placket high. Why ask you Lady?
For, if you could speak French, I could the better
Find what you say. I can no understand
What tic you mean by price. What is that Price,
If it be no Welch Gentleman?
I mean
The price of three throws for your Maidenhead,
Tic twenty pieces. If I win it (Hark you)
What will you give me out of your gross sum
To take it neatly off; and like an Operator,
Put you to no pain?
Parley Françoy Monsieur, Je vou pry.
Thou art a handsome Hyppocrite: And this
Cunning becomes thee well. Isle kiss thee for it.
Fee fee Monsieur. O fee! tic no good fashion,
For the young Man and Maid to no ting but kiss!
Tic not so good indeed; nothing but kiss.
A little of tone with tother will doe well.
Fee fee, you no understand. That Gentleman,
Speaks he no French?
Yes yes. He speaks no French.
He Monsieur vou mosque de Moi.
Owe par ma foy.
Ha Monsieur vou parley francoy. Je sui' bien aisie.
Easy! Yes yes, I think you would be easy
To one that knew but how to manage you,
For all the boast of your Virginity.
Excuse me Sir, I can no understand.
Me thinks you should. Come prithee leave this fooling,
I know you can good English, if you list.
Indeed I can. But, in my best, and all
I cannot understand you Sir, nor frame
An answer to your rudeness. When you know me
Better, you'll speak in better phrase, and then
Tic like you may find better language from me:
Till when, pray give me leave to leave you Sir.
Nay hark you Lady, hark you (still more my∣sticall!)
Nay since you can speak English, I must talk w'ye.
So you'll be civil.
Civil I swear, and private. 
Does she not know on it, say thou?
No Sir, no:
Not the least inkling of it: The old man
Carries it so discreetly.
Bless me Heaven?
Discreetly say thou. To betray his Child,
To sale of her Virginity.
Yes, discreetly.
She dreams of no such business; such intent:
No more then the Cud-chewing Heifer knows
The Butcher, that must knock her down in faith.
O, twill be bravely carried! I my self
Knew nothing till this hour: though I saw
Money put in his hand by divers Gallants:
Men of great place and worship; which I gather
Are to be of the Riflers.
Prithee who?
All must be nameless. There are Lords among 'em.
And some of civil Coat, that love to draw
New stakes at the old Game, as well as they;
Truckle-breech'd Justices, and bustling Lawyers,
That thrust in with their Motions; Muffled Citizens;
Old Money-Masters some, that seek the Purchase:
And Merchant Venturers that bid for the
Foreign Commodity, as fair, as any.
Was ever such an outrage! Hark thee fellow— 
Sir, I have heard you with that patience
(And with no better) as the troubled Pilot
Endures a Tempest, or contrary winds:
Who, finding nerethelesse his Tackling sure,
His Vessel tight, and Sea-room round about him,
Plays with the waves, and vies his confidence
Above the blasts of Fortune, till he wins
His way, through all her threatenings, to his Port.
You may apply this.
And you may be plainer.
Is there not such a project for your Maidenhead?
It deserves no answer.
But to be rid of you, together with
The Devil, that inflamed you to that question;
Know, that knew I of such a plot or project;
Or, that I had a Father (as injuriously
You have suggested) could be so inhumane,
To prostitute my spotless Virgin honour
To Lust for Salary, I would as sure prevent it,
As there is force in poison, Cord, or Steel,
At price of both our lives. Sir, I have said— 
This Wench amazes me. Could I believe now
There could be truth in Woman, I could love her.
Well, Isle make one: Meet me there two hours hence,
And fetch my twenty Pieces.
I will not fail you. In the Temple Walks— 
Where, if I fit you not—
Name! What discovery?
A villainy enough to blow the house up.
And I have found (I think) a virtue, that
Might save a City: But let's hence. We may
Confer our notes together by the way. 
NAy, nay, I know he is flown out, and I
Am prettily provided for like flight:
And if I do not pitch as high, and souse
As deep, as he, while there is Game to fly at—
Five hundred Pieces he took out you say?
And said he would venter't at the Ordinary.
Thats hee, thats he! Why this is excellent.
This was your folly Bump. He was content
To have walked moneyless you saw, but you
Would force him. At a word you did la' Bump.
I force him, ha?
I, at a word, you put it in his head,
And put the Sword into the Madmans hand,
As one would say.
Good Mrs. At-a-word.
Let not your fine French Frippery, which I bought,
Turned of the Taylors hands (as one would say)
Huffle you up to Sovereignty: Nor your Coach,
Which I have but bespoak, whirl you away,
Before tic finished) from obedience.
Good lack fine Gentleman, that wears the Purchase
Of a pawned forfeiture. Must I not speak trow?
Excellent Magdaten!
Sir, J will speak; and be allowed to speak.
And speak allowed too; will you Magdalen?
J, at a word; Since you have put me to it,
J will uphold the Fashion; Learn, and practise
Behaviour and carriage above my' parrell.
J at a word, J will la, that J will.
This is most excellent! My old Beast is
Infected with the Fashions; Fashion-sick!
Pray Ma-dame take your course, uphold your Fashion:
And learn and practise Carriage to your Clothes:
I will maintain my humour, though all split by it.—
Mr. Ʋermine desires to speak with you.
In faith I will Ma-dame.— 
My Husband, Mother,
Reports of a rare Creature come to Town,
Of a French breed; a Damoiselle, that professes
The teaching of Court-carriage and behaviour:
The rar'st he says—
Can she teach the elder sort?
All ages from six years to sixty six.
Unless they be indocible he says.
Indocible! What's that?
Stift in the hams, I think.
Nay, then we'll to her.
I can yet bow my Haunches, come and go
With them, as nimbly as the barren Doe.
My Gimboles don't complain for want of Oil yet▪
We'll have this Madame; and we will be Madams
Ourselves, or it shall cost us each a Crown
A month the teaching. In a Month we may,
Practising but one hour in a day,
Be Madams, may we not?
Yes, if we give our minds to it; and but steal
Fit times to practise.
We'll find Lecture times:
Or balk St. Antlins for it the while. But mum.
Do you wonder at my bravery? Look you here:
This is my Wife; and this my Daughter, sir.
You have lost yours, you say: Perhaps for want
Of Hufty-•usties, and of Gorgets gay.
Ha! first not so?
The World's turned prodigal.
You do not well to mock me, when I come
For comfort and advise.
Shall I be plain w'ye;
My best advise is, since your Daughters gone,
To turn your Son after her. He lies not in
For much above a hundred pound. Pay it,
And let him take his course: If he be not
Got loose already. Then (observe my Counsel)
Spend you the rest of your Estate your self;
And save your Heirs the sin. It is the course
I have in hand, and mean to follow it.
You like it not (it seems) but thus it is,
When men advise for nothing. Had your Lawyer
Now for his fee, given Counsel, might have damned you:
You would have thought it worth your Gold, and followed it.
Will you go with me to an Ordinary?
Venture five hundred or a thousand Pieces,
To begin a new World with.
Mrs. Bumpsey, I take it you are she.
An old Ape has an old eye.
He knows me through all my cuts and slashes.
How long I pray, has my good friend your Hus∣band
Been thus distracted?
But when I am perfect
In the quaint Courtly carriages, that belong
Unto this habit: in which, I confess,
I am yet but raw; how will you know me then?
She is as mad as he.
How Lady-like she talks!
Or, now my black Bag's on, I hold a penny
You do not know me. Bogh-who am I now?
Most unrecoverably mad! young Gentlewo∣man:
Nay, I entreat your favour for an answer?
As you can pity a wronged mans distress.
Give me what light you can of my lost Daughter▪
You have been inward always, and partook
The nearest of her Counsels. Tell me fairly
I do beseech you in this gentle way.
Though I profess I have a strong presumption
Against your Husband, and his young Associates
I met to day; and bore their mocks and taunts:
On which I have good ground for a strict course
To force 'em to examination.
Yet I entreat you see.
The World is turned
Quite upside down: Else I should wonder
How you could make requests, that 〈…〉
You have (too much) by Rapine and O〈…〉
Do you upbraid me?
What's the matter Jane?
The Fox here learns to sing.
Isle fox him out of the hole if he sing here.
Will no Prey serve you but new married wives, Fox?
Why do you abuse me thus?
I heard you, sir, with too much patience,
Abuse my Husband with your foul Suspicion.
Who is as clear, I know, from wronging you,
As your own Son.
Your mocks are monstrous.
Were not he fast enough, I would resolve
No other friend had robbed me.
Is your son a friend? At a word, hoe's like you.
J pray, if my man ask for me, send him to me, by your Masters leave. By your leave Sir, I made bold to follow a Father-in-Law of mine that should have been, into your house here, with much ado to find it. Any good news Sir yet? Have you heard of her? J cry these Ladies mercy; though you may take me for a Clown, J must not forget I am a Knight, and give you the courtesy of my lips—
In the name of Peasantry, what Knight art thou,
If not the Knight of the Plough-share?
A fine spoken, and a well-bred man, at a word: He called us Ladies. To see what Apparel can do! How long might I have trudged about in my old coats before J had been a Lady? And then hee would do us the courtesy to kiss us: Sure, sure, as courtesy makes a Knight, so clothes makes a Lady.
It seems she's lost then. All ill go with her.
What old youth can this be?
Your warrant, perhaps, may find her though.
And J tell you what.
J have sent my man to lay the Ducking Ponds for her.
Do you think she would drown her self?
Who knows what toy might take her? Is she not a woman, as other flesh and blood is? I had another occasion to one that belongs to the Ponds. I tell you as a Friend, I had not sent else: Come Father-in-Law that should have been; hang sor∣row. You have had but one Loss to day. I have had two. Isle gi't you in Rhyme.
My Mare and my Mistress I lost on a day,
T'one of▪em dyed, and t'other ran away.
You are acquainted among the Poets it seems, sir?
Truly but one that's a Gamester amongst us at the ducking Pond; a Cobbler, but the neatest Fellow at Poetry, that ever was handicrafts-man; &amp; no School∣ler, to enable him by learning, to borrow of the An∣cients: Yet he is a Translator too. And he makes the sweetest Posies for Privie-houses.
Ha, ha, ha.
What a youth's this for a Knight!
Isle tell ye Ladies—O Trebasco. Good news at last I hope.
J can never find you any where, but jeered and laughed at, and are fooled, (as I have often told you) to your Worships face, and your Worship perceives it not.
To the point, man. How does my Whelp? He
is grown a tall Dog by this J hope: resolve me quickly.
Why, to put you out of your pain; your Whelp's grown a tall Dog.
Good
You said you would tell us, sir; What will you tell us?
And a handsome Dog.
Good again.
What a Dog-trick's is this?
And he has learnt, besides the main Game, all the rare tricks and qualities his Tutor could teach.
Excellent.
Will you not tell us, sir, about your Poet?
Hang him, my Dogs worth 'em all, in ready money.
I pray, sir.
I will not give his ears for the swolnst head∣full of wit among 'em.
Are not his Ears finely curled Trebasco? Like his Dam Flapses.
Yes, and his Coat all over, sir, they told me.
Told thee! Did thou not see him? My heart misgives me.
See him? No indeed, sir; but J pray bear it as well as you may:
And set not your heart too much upon transportable things.
Ha!
The Dog is gone, sir.
How!
Stolen from School, sir; and sold to a great Monsieur,
And Shipped away four days ago.
O my heart will break.
Do not faint Knight; Cheer up your heart with your Muse.
My vein is yet too dull; But I will o ffer at it.
Three Losses I have had; gone, past all help.
My Mare, my Mistress, And (which grieves me most of all) my whelp.
That line is long enough to reach him.
I would it were else.—o—
Od's pity. Look you, sir, your Son-in-Law, that should have been, is in much passion too. But you'll be ruled by me, you say. And if J lead you not to comfort, never trust Neigbours counsel while you live. Is not this plain enough? My own case at this time is as dangerous as yours.
That's all that comforts me.
Neighbourly said. I thank you. Come, Sir, will you join with your Father-in Law that should have been, and me in a Cup of Wine to order a design.
There's a reckoning towards.
It shall cost you nothing.
To the next Tavern then. Ladies adieu.
To part with such as you to some are crosses.
Yet Isle not put you down among my Losses. 
Daughter while they are gone, let us fall on our project.
For Courtly carriage and behaviour.
I long to see this French young schoolmistress.
The Damasin do you call her?
The Damoiselle, Isle wait on you.— 
You Rogues, Slaves, Villains, will you murder me?
To the Pump with him: To the Pump, to the Pump.
Prithee beat off the Curs.
No, to the Thames, the Thames.
Why do you use the man so? Is he not a Christian▪
Or is he not Christened enough think you, that you would dip him?
Pray Gentlemen forbear: It is thought fit,
Upon request made by a Noble Friend,
Favouring his Person, not his quality;
That for this time the Pander be dismised,
So all depart in peace.
Away, away, lets go then.
1. A Noble Friend! Pox of his Noble Friendship.
He has spoiled our sport. O! how we would a soused him?
Now, Mr. Hackney-man, if you have so much grace▪
Render due thanks,
I thank you Gentlemen.
I thank you for him too.
On both your Knees; unless you hold it better
To kneel yet to the Pump: which you had done,
My most officious Pimp, had not his pity
Prevailed against our Justice.
So, arise; enough, enough.
Troth tic a shame be should get off so easily;
Let him be yet but ducked, or showed the way
Over the Garden Wall into the Thames.
Good Ambrose, be not so severe▪ who knows
What need we may of him? We are all
Flesh and blood Ambrose.
Thou art a Wag I warrant thee.
Are not you married?
Mass, it was so late, I had almost forgotten it.
No, tic so late you have not yet forgot
Some Office he has done you in his way.
Did ever pimp for him? Protest by what thou feared most.
No, as I hope to escape this Gentleman's fury.
Go, get the hence, insufferable Villain.
I could even kick thee into twenty pieces, 
Soon, at his Rifling.
Think whilst thou liv'st what tic to be Pander.—
A Pander,—Pander—there's for your remembrance.
Enough. Amb. This touch, &amp; I have done—▪
Away
Pray let him go, Isle school him 
This may work good upon the Rascal, if he
Have but humanity, although no grace.
We have discovered the great Rifling Val.
We know the Jewel now; the rich Commodity.
And think you have done wondrous wisely; do you not?
To sneak before me thither. I know all
You have discovered; and how far you are
Mistaken in the old man and his Daughter.
All shall be plain to you soon. Walk off a little.
We'll leave you till anon we meet at the Ordina∣rye. 
I protest, Gentlemen, I have not drown▪d sorrow
With so much merry go-down, these three half years.
As with your part of three half pintes of Sack.
We had no more amongst us.
How much was that a piece think you?
It was enough to show his Prodigality.
In over-wastfull Cost. You were not wont
To be a Boordsend-King; a pay-all in a Tavern.
But now I love to do these things.
Now if you could be drawn to the ducking▪ Pond,
To join your Great sometimes with me; or two-pence▪
There were a Recreation indeed▪
That Peerless Princely sport, that undoes no man:
Though cheating there; and rooking be as free
As there is square play at the Ordinaries.
Well the point is: My swaggering Son-in-Law,
Appointed to be here among the Trees.
My Daughter told me so. Walk here-about.
If he can give light of your light, he would chide.
Well try what may be done. Isle but step up
Into Ram-Alley-Sanctuary, to Debtor,
That prays and watches there for a Protection;
And presently return to you.— 
Let it be so; slid the old angry man!
 He'll cross us if he see us walk this 
These walks afford to miserable man,
Undone by Suits, leave, yet, to sit, or go,
Though in a ragged one; and look upon
The Giants, that over-threw him: Though they strut 
And are swollen bigger by his emptiness.
It was here, that we appointed, further meeting.
The two hours respited are almost run:
And he engaged his honour in such terms,
As I presume he'll come. Honour! From whence
Can he derive that Princely attribute,
Whose Father has descended to a Villainy?
His house was Noble though: and this young man
Had a right virtuous Mother, whom I loved,
Entirely loved: and was in Competition
For marriage with her; when high Providence
Allotted her to him; who since her Death,
Defamed my Sister, and disgraced our house.
My quarrel is not good against his Son
For that: But for my Boy! His doubtful talk
Of him distracts me.
See the Vermin,
That hath devoured me living, His Aspect
Adds to my Passion such a bitterness,
That turns me all to gall. I must avoid him, 
In truth Father-in-Law that should ha ▪been, or that
May be yet (come, who knows what luck we may have,
Though the dancing Planets have cut cross Capers over
Out heads.) I like this old fellows humour of cheering up
The heart well! And would I were lost too, after my Mare,
My Dog and your Daughter: If this warm Sack has not
Kindled a desire in me to play the good fellow, so it might
Be of free cost, to drown these dry remembrances.
See▪ one of the jeerers. Is this he, that stole the marriage?
Yes, and perhaps my Daughter too. His Father's gone
Now, and I know not how to question him.
Let me alone to question him. Did you see this Gentleman's
Daughter, sir, my Wife, that should have been?
Since when, sir.
Since she was stolen away, sir. It were good
You would let us have her again; and quickly too,
Ere she be worse for wearing, as we say.
Old Brookall is not come yet.
Will you answer me?
You are a busy fool.
I am satisfied. He knows nothing.
You lye, Sir.
I think I do, You know nothing of her I mean, Sir.
You lye again, Sir.
I think I do again, Sir. Pray be not so terrible;
Examine him your self, if it please you.
Were his eyes Basilisks; or did he bear
Upon his hellish Countenance the faces
Of all the Furies (that no doubt attend him)
Isle shun no place for him. Are they acquainted?
O most prodigious!
What do you know, Sir, of my Daughter, I be∣seech you?
That she has a wretch, a miserable Caitiff
Unto her Father.
How is that?— 
A villain that has scraped up by oppression
Law-strife and Perjury, a Dowry for her,
So mixed with curses, that it would consume
An Earls Estate to match with it and her.
And leave him cursed in his Posterity.
How blessed was J to miss her!
Can he speak thus to him? 
Dare thou confront me thus?
Dare thou yet keep a Great of thine extorted Wealth,
And see what Judgments fall one thee already?
Can all thy Gold redeem thy good opinion,
To thine own Son? And though thou would no give
(In case he wanted it) to save his life,
A Hangmans Fee, much less a Judges thanks,
Or price of a Lords Letter to reprieve him;
Yet may this Son survive thee; and hourly he
Unto thy last hour, thine Affliction be.
O happy condition of a Bachelor!
I like this well in the young man▪— 
How can you say you know this?
Prithee how can't be otherwise?
Had thou a virtuous Child (as here and there,
Some Mothers win a soul) it would be taken
Dead or alive from thee, unto thy grief too,
To scope the curse might come with a Child's part
Of thine ill-got estate: that's thy Daughters case.
Oh—
Brave young fellow!
But show me where an evil Off-spring has not
Survived to spurn the dust of such a Father;
And lewdly wast in one or two descents
(Unto their own destruction) what was purchased
At price of souls departed?
Will you vouchsafe to leave me?
Pretty odd Doctrine, this!
I have not done w'yee yet.
What corrupt Lawyer, or usurious Citizen,
Oppressing Landlord, or unrighteous Judge,
But leaves the World with horror? and their wealth,
(By rapine forced from the oppressed Poor)
To Heirs, that (having turned their Sires to the Devil)
Turn Idiots, Lunatics, Prodigals, or Strumpets?
All wanting either wit, or will, to save
Their fatal Portions from the Gulf of Law.
Pride, Riot, Surfeits, Dice, and Luxury,
Till Beggary, or diseases turns them after?
Have you done yet?
A word or two for use; and so an end.
Not so: It must be amplified a little further.
Torment and death! Is he come? Let me go;
Nay pray Sir hear them; though you pro∣fit not;
I may perhaps. Methinks it edifies.
You said, and you said well; His tainted wealth,
Got by corruption, kept by niggards,
Must fly as ill, through Luxury and Riot:
I add, that they who get it so, shall leave it,
To run at the like waste, through their succession
Even to the Worlds end: tic not one age,
Though spent in prayers, can expiate the wrong
Such an estate was gotten by, though the estate
Be, to a doyt, spent with it: But it shall
Fly like a fatal scourge, through hand to hand;
Through Age to Age, frighted by Orphans cries,
And Widows tears, the groans and Lamentations,
Of oppressed Prisoners, mingled with the curses
Of hunger-bitten Labourers, whose very sweat
Thou robst them of: this charming noise is up
Of many sad, some mad afflicted wretches,
Whose marrow thou hast sucked; and from whose bowels,
The nourishment was crushed that fed thee, and
That ravenous Wolf, thy conscience.
I shall trounce you.
What's here? Worrying of Vermin?
This noise, I say, of hideous cries and curses,
That follows thine estate, will not be laid
In thy dear life time; nor in theirs, the strangers,
That must be cursed with the division
Of it, when thou art gone: But, still, it shall
Pursue, to all succeeding times, all those,
That entertain least parcels of thy money,
When they shall find at best, it can but buy
Disgrace, diseases, overthrows at Law,
And such dear punishments; until, at last,
All hands, affrighted with the touch of it,
Shall let it fall to earth; where it shall sink
And run into a vein of Ore, shall reach—
To Hell. And they, that shall, hereafter, dig it,
Hundreds of Ages hence, must all compound
With the grand Lord of the Soil, the Devil, for it.
So they make hot Purchases!
Now Sir, you may instruct the Usurer, to make use
Of all he has heard, while I avoid his sight;
Heaven knows I am sick on it: you forget me Sir.
Fear not: I will not fail you.
No: Isle deliver him the use of all.
Oh the variety of my vexation—
And all is this (as I advised before.)
Spend all your self, and save your Heirs the sin;
The shame, the sorrows, and the punishments,
That are joynt-heritable with your wealth:
As very learnedly hath been related.
And there's the point, and the whole substance on it.
Bestow your Substance so Sir, if you like it.
Sir, my condition runs another way.
To the same end perhaps; following my Leader, here.
Your Son in Law? Trust me, a most fine man:
And, if his life be answerable to his Doctrine,
Tic like heel lead you to a fair end of all.
Doubtless he is a fine young Man indeed.
A proper teacher and an edifying.
Come Sir, lead on, I hear you are provided
Five hundred thick for this free nights adventure.
I am Sir, here it is.
I am so too Sir.
And here it is: And here it is, and here and there, and here it is.
O brave old man.
Isle make one w'ye at your new Ordinary,
They lay tic excellent.
For rarity and plenty,
There's no such Pension in all this City.
And all for nothing?
For less then kiss your Hostess.
And is there delicate Wine too? I must thither.
The flower of France, and quintessence of Spain
Flow like a Spring-tyde through the House.
O rare!
And all for nothing?
Hang nothing. Be it as twill,
I am for any thing; and as well provided,
As you, or any the best Gamester there.
Sir.
I love to do these things. But first, pray tel me
Can you tell tale or tidings of his Daughter here?
Not of his Daughter: But I heard his Son
Was freed, this day, from Prison.
How, how, how?
Yonder he is, still, busy.
Isle among 'em. Walk you back a little,
And, get I any money, Isle lend thee some.
Isle tell you how. Some friend has paid his debt,
The Action is discharged; and he's releas d.
You practise my abuse. Tic not in man,
To do me such a mischief.
Away Girl.
Thou art as hard, as this dry crust, here, was.
But he is better minded now, I hope:
Now, old man I am sure thou art for me,
Thou cursedst me before, but now thou wilt
Bless me, I hope, and not without a Cross
Of a fair Silver Sixpence.
Hence you Harlot.
Nay look you, if I could afford it, think you
I'd make two words w'ye: tic but a sixpenny matter
Between us; why will you be so hard: tic but
So little less left among all thy Children;
And Isle bate it them in their prayers for thee,
Though I be at the trouble, my self, to do it.
Troth, she begs prettily. I must give her some∣thing.
Here Wench.
What is it, J will see it.
Tic a good Shilling, and a vie; will you see it Sir?
Look you, tic covered.
Gentlemen, will you come in? will you vie it?
No we deny it.
You may revye it then, if you please. They come not in to bind it.
Will you come in again Sir?
Sir, after you, and't be to my last sixpence.
I will keep Covenant w'ye.
A shilling more on that.
Done Sir: there tic.
Why, these are Lads of bounty! Have you any mind yet Gentlemen?
What, to be Bankrupts?
Troth, thou would fear as much, should thou but break
Thy Porridge Pipkin.
Prithee what's thy name?
Nil, my Mother calls me. J ne'er knew Sire, nor Godsire.
Nil?
Yes: And tic as bonny a Beggars name, as ever came from beyond Trent.
This Girl, methinks, howere necessitated
Into this course, declares she has a spirit
Of no gross ayre: And J dare think her Blood,
Although, perhaps, of some unlawful mixture,
Derived from Noble veins. One may perceive
Much in her Language, in her Looks, and Gesture,
That pleads, methinks, a duty above pity,
To take her from this way, wherein she wanders
So far from the intent of her Creation.
Your meaning is, you would buy her out of her Calling.
Is it not so?
Ten Pieces J would give
Towards a new one for her.
Here's ten more
To bind you quite from begging. Can you afford it?
If yes, accept it. And let's see your back.
J make no Curtsies, nor send thanks that way.
No, Isle be forwards in them. May my thanks and prayers
Multiply years and blessings on your heads.
And when J beg again, may Beadles take
Advantage on my back, and lash the skin off,
So Heaven be ever with you—
Stay. Who would not have given this Money? Gentlemen,
Dost not move you to give a packing penny?
Nor move you them for me. J should, now, fear
One of their ill-got pence, here mingled, would
Corrupt and overthrow my righteous Fortune.
Ovillanous Vixen.
Each minute of this day augments my torment,
Yet J have cooled it with some patience;
Attending Sir your answer.
For your son.
J have no Son. J ask you for my Daughter.
Be this your penance for your misbeleife,
Hye you to the Counter: if you find not there
Your son; meet me an hour hence at my Fathers,
Isle tell you news of him; and he perhaps
May tell you of his Sister. This deserves
A fee. Your absence pays it me. Go quickly,
We have some business: And your stay will but
Make the Scene tedious.
Weel go. Will it please you?
Yes: we will off in Rhyme. There is no doubt,
If Wats be not ••he Counter, he is out.
Now, what's the next vagary?
Only this Sir.
You have played at small Game with me. Now there is
A greater try all of my Love and Bounty,
Instantly to be made. A Gentleman,
(J stay too long) an intimate Friend's arrested,
But for two hundred pound on execution:
Will you join Charity to fetch him off?
J would 't had been thine own case two days since.
One of your fine Companions, some poor Shark?
Ha, first not so?
Will you be pleased to see him?
J am half sick of this Condition!
J do begin, not altogether, now,
To love these things so well methinks. Humh ha!
Nay, if you go not cheerfully—
Yes: J go. 
GOod Child, thy tale is pitiful; yet it sorts
So with the fell condition of my Fortune,
That J crave more of it.
J came not to
Discourse of sorrow, but to bring you comfort:
Will you yet have a Crown?
J prithee keep
Thy Money Child; and forwards with thy story.
Thou said thy Mother was a Gentlewoman.
Jle give you reason. Since J can remember,
She never did a wrong, though suffered much;
Nor the least unjust thing: No, though her poverty
And care of me have pinched her very bowels,
She knew not how to seek another good,
So much as by request. She never durst borrow,
For fear to come so near the danger of
A promise-breach: And, for base ends, to lye
She holds it sacrilege. In faith she jerked
That humour out of me; for J was given
(I tell you as a Friend) a little to it.
It came sure by the Father. God forgive him.
Thou said, thou thoughtst, thy Father was a Knight.
How think thou he could lye then, •o abuse
A Virgin of that goodness, as it seems
She, that by him became thy Mother, was.
The Devil, sure, was powerful with him, then.
Nor do you hear me say▪ all Gentlefolkes
Are of one mind. Alas they could not live
One by another then.
Peace, stay a little:
How came thy Mother to decline her spirit
So low, as thus to suffer thee to beg?
Virtue goes often wet-shod, and is fine
To coble it self up to hold out water
And cold necessity: But sure, the quality
Came to me by the Fathers side too: For
Tic a more commendable, and Courtly practise
To beg, then steal. He was perhaps, a Courtier.
J rather would be robed of all J have,
Then steal one farthing.
Thou say thy Mother never would reveal
To thee, or any one, her Birth, or Fortune.
Answer me, prithee, how dost thou collect
The had such a Father? Or that he has thus
Wrong▪d thy poor Mother, by not marrying her?
Now you come to me indeed old man: How now,
What do you weep?
The sharpness of the Air
Strikes on mine eyes a little. Prithee say.
J first, as fain would know the hidden cause
That works this aptness in me, to discover
My Mother and my self to you. J know not
How to look off o'you. I•aith you weep.
I have heard some talk of natural instinct,
But know not what it is. Pray can you tell me?
Or any like reason, why J should
Thus dote, and hang about you? Or tell me this,
Have you not been of better Fortune? Are not you
Some decayed Knight? Be not ashamed, but tell me.
They cannot all be rich, there are so many.
Oh my heart!
Yea, are your Conscience struck?
Have at you for a father then: And yet
Me-thinks you are more old in goodness, then
To be, so late, so wicked, as to wrong
A woman of her sweetness. Yet Isle try you.
Here is a long-kept Paper. This is all
That ere I gathered of my Mothers wrong,
And of my Fathers cruelty, and condition.
It seems this was his hand, and ruthful farewell,
He turned her off withal. See, if you know it.
More then a thousand times I have observed her
Weep o'er that Paper; ever careful, though,
Her tears might not deface it. If by chance,
As when those tears prevented had her sight,
Some soft ones did on that hard Sentence light,
Her Lips took off the Trespass of her Eye;
And her hot Sighs restored the Paper dry.
This comes so near a Miracle; that my faith
I fear is staggering. How got, thou this paper?
I stole it from my Mother, (and in Troth
Tic all that ere I stole) because she should not
Weep out her eyes upon it. I do not love,
Although I am a beggar, to lead blind folks.
Do you not find there, that he is a Knight,
Though he subscribes no name? He tells her there,
And tauntingly, he knows she is more sorry
For the lost Ladyship he promised her,
Then for her Maiden-head. Let me hear you read it.
Mine eyes, are now, too full indeed; I cannot.
Are you the man then, whom I must ask bless∣sing?
If you bee, speak. Isle have you to my Mother,
Though, I dare swear, she had rather dye, then you,
Or any of your Race, or hers, should see her,
Whilst she has breath. Yet I will undertake
To prattle you both good friends.
And you shall have my Mommy,
And she shall have her Nil (that's J.)
The man shall have his Mare again,
And all shall be well. How do you?
Prithee forbear me good wench but a little.
I have kept my time you see; and shall not fail
In any Circumstance. Here are two Swords,
Pray take your choice. I have bespoke a Boat
Shall land us o'er the water, where you please;
Though, I Protest, I yet would beg your Love,
Next to my Natural Fathers.
This I fear d.
And charged the plain way. But't shall not serve.
You took my part of late, against old Vermin
Prithee who would not? This is another case
Why, if there be no remedy, pray accept
Your forty pounds. The money, Sir, may stead you
For your escape, when you have taken my Life.
Your money 'wou'ld hang me, Sir. Your lifes not worth it.
Tic your own money; sent you by your Son.
How know I that? Or that I have a Son
By thee unmurther'd.
I told you of a Letter I had mislaid:
Look you. Do you know his hand?
If it be not,
Much changed, and lately, here is that will match.
Was ever given Gold so weighed, and tried?
What Lawyer, Nay, what Judge would be so scrupu∣lous?
No want corrupts good Conscience: Nor excess
Allaies in bad, the thirst of Cov'tousness.
What do you think, Sir?
I think you beg again, and would be whipped.
I fecks, I do not beg; but came to offer
This grieved old man some of my infinite fortune
Found in your lucky money: Lucky indeed;
For I have found a Father by'c. I vow
I think my Father. I'st not a fine old man?
I shall know more anon.
Her money, sure,
Has made her Mad: How do you find it, Sir?
My wonder now, is, how thou can be Son
Of such a Father! Thou art honest sure.
Here is your Sword, I will accept the money.
Then I shall live, and so may want the money.
Will you forbear it for a day or two?
Your Sword again.
Now, I profess to you, I have present need on it,
And am as strict, Sir, for my right, as I
Before was to decline it.
Pray, Sir, take it;
And give me leave to beg your charitable
Construction of my Father.
How is that?
Did you but know the care, the cost, and tra∣vell
He has been at a thousand ways, to find
Your injured Sister, to make good his fault,
If possibly he might—
O fie, O fie!
Till all Opinion gave her dead; and then
The means he has sought to do you Offices
Against your knowledge. For he knew your Spirit
Would not except of his benevolence.—
Read that, and guess whose deed it is. Stand off Girl.
Yes forsooth Father, I shall learn in time,
Isle call him Father till he finds me another.
J know he could not shed those tears for nothing.
But does she live, to whom this was directed?
Speak low: is that your Fathers hand?
It is.
Along with me then. Girl, lead you the way.
Anon forsooth Father,
Show us to your Mother.
Shall he go too? What will the Neighbours think?
There's none but Beggars all about us. Odds so,
There'll be a show indeed.
No matter. Will you go?
Sir, they will hale you to pieces.
Will you deny me?
How shall I answer't to my Mother? She
Never saw man, nor has been seen by man,
That J know, in my life.
No matter: Will you on?
Isle save thee blameless.
Troth Isle venture.— 
TRes bien venue Madams.
You are very welcome.
Good lack! And is it you, Mrs. Alice? I'st possible: Are you come to learn Carriage too? I will make bold with tother Glass of Wine. At a word, J like your French Carriage the better, that it allows elder Women to drink Wine.
They have no other drink, except water. And Maids are allowed but that.
And young wives (they say) wine with their water.
Mingle your Glass, then, Daughter. This for me. Your father has so sought you Mrs. Alice.
My Father has mist us too, by this time.
But neither of 'em can dream French enough, to direct'em hither, J warrant you. And does she learn the Carriages very well, Madam∣silly?
Mademoiselle, si vous plaist.
What do ye call it? I shall never hit it. ▪How do you find your Scholar?
O, she is very good. She learn very well.
But how much carriage hath she learnt? Hark
you Mrs. Alice. Have you not learnt to carry a man? Has not a good Husband stolen you hither?
I can think waggishly I tell you: And an old Ape has an old eye. Go to.
No such matter, Mrs. Bumpsey.
What is that you say?
I ask you how much carriage she has learnt?
She come but dis day; And she carry both the hands already.
How say by that. I'st possible? Can she carry both her hands in one day?
Yes, and before to morrow, she shall carry the foot as well.
It seems, then, you teach handling before footing in your French way.
You may learn dat of de little Shild. De lee∣tle Shild you see will handle de ting, before it can set one foot to de ground. Come, let me see you make a Reverence.
Reverence! VVhat's that?
Tic dat you call a Curtsy. Let me see you make Curtsy.
Look you hear then.
O fee, fee—dat is de gross english Douck, for de swagbuttock'd-wife of de Peasant.
How like you this then? There's a Reverence I warrant you.
Fee, dat is worse. See how you carry de hands like de Comedian dat act de shangling.
Shall I ever hit on it trow? I must take tother Glass.
Take heed she does not take too much.
I hope she will not. But there's no crossing her.
Let me see your hands.
There they bee. They have been a little too fa∣miliar with Sea-coale fires, and much other course housewifery, which J shall utterly abhor, and wash off, when J have learnt to carry them Courtly.
But shall J ever do it, think you?
Yes, yes, and all your other parts and mem∣bers.
I may win my Husband to love me Court∣lie then.
To love, and lye with you Courtly.
That's but seldom, I doubt.
You shall know all de ways to win his Love,
Or any mans, to multiply your honour.—
J will so multiply then.
Not only in your looks, your smiles and sweet Caresses.
(Besides the help of Painting) that adorn
The face; But with the motion of each Lineament,
Of the whole frame of your well ordered body.
An Eye, a Lip, a finger shall not move;
A Toe trip unregarded. But your Geat
And your whole graceful Presence shall attract,
(Beyond affection) admiration:
As Isle artifice you.
Isle be a Nymph. Diana and her Dearlings, dear, dear, dear, &amp;c. 
But may I paint, say you?
O most allowably; nay, commendably.
Tother Glass for that.
Then for the Art of dressing, setting forth Head, Face, Neck, Breast,; with which I will inspire you.
To cover, or discover any part—
Unto de best advantage.
That is to say,
To hide shame, or show all: that's her meaning.
You shall have no defect perceived, no grace concealed.
I am for the naked Neck and Shoulders, then.
For (I tell you Mistress) I have a white Skin,
And a round straight Neck: smooth and plump Should∣ders,
Free from French Flea-bits, and never a wrinkle
Neare'em, though I say it.
Thas been suggested by invective men,
Women, to justify themselves that way,
Began that Fashion. As one tother side,
The fashion of men's Brow-locks was perhaps
Devised out of necessity, to hide
All il-grac'd forehead; Or besprinkled with
The outward Symptoms of some inward grief.
As, formerly the Saffron-steeped Linen,
By some great man found useful against Vermin,
Was taken up for a fashionable wearing.
Some Lord that was no Niggard of his Beauty,
Might bring up narrow brims to publish it.
Another, to obscure his, or perhaps
To hide defects thereof, might bring up broad ones.
As questionless, the straight, neat timbered Leg,
First wore the Troncks, and long Silk-hole: As likely
The Baker-knees, or some strange shamble shanks,
Begat the Ancle-breeches.
Sure the men
Took that conceit from us. What woman shows
A Leg, that's not a good one?— 
These among men, are followed for the fashions,
That were invented for the better grace.
(As our Attires) to set off Limb, or face.
Good lack! What knowledge comes from foreign parts?
I prithee Wat, have patience for an hour.
Not for a minute, Sir, Isle not be kicked,
And called base Pander for your baseness.
Nay, look you Wat.
And had almost been pumped,
And made a sport for Water-men in the Thames.
But Hear me, Wat.
Isle hear my Father sooner. (Give me hence
My Sister) were he a ravenous Beast, a Wolf,
J would obey him rather then trudge a foot
Further in your base way. Heart J am hip-shot.
Now, would his Bodies pains convert his Soul,
It were a good work.
J am in desperate fear
Of the Mourning of the Chine too with the kicks,
And hunches they o're-said me with. O base!
Without resistance. Give me hence my Sister.
But how was it my fault?
Was it not your project?
What may this mean?
No harm J warrant you.
Nay, it shall out. Your base inhumane Pro∣jest,
To sell your Daughters Maiden-head. (J care not
Who hears me, J.) And cunningly to make me
Your Hackney-jade to fetch your Chapman in.
Where are we now?
What did my Husband mean to wish us hither?
Baseness! J cannot call it bad enough.
You were as forward in it as my self,
And wooed me you might have her without all faults.
Mine eyes are opened now.
But J believe,
They were almost beaten out first.
And J vow
Ere J will marry so, Isle take a Beggar,
And join in trade with her, though I get nothing
But—My name is Vermin already, J
Thank a good Father for it.
A Beggar-wenches breed would propagate
Your name most numerously.
Much better then your Sale-ware, and more lasting.
J think J saw her to day must be the woman,
Good Madame Polcat, the trim Schoolmistress.
Isle make bold with your Scholar. What! you have more.
Isle carry her and her Virginity
Unto some fitter place of Execution.
You brought me hither, Sir, and here Isle stay.
What! in a Bawdy-house?
O dear! and is it so? What are we then?
Is this your boun fashion? Is this the carriage of the Body, that you would teach us? What, to bee VVhores? We could learn that at home, and there were need, without your teaching,
Mother; what do you mean?
Mrs Bumpsey; pray fear no harm.
O good lack ! what will become of us? where are we now, Jane?
Betrayed! betrayed! Our honours are betrayed. O my poor Bump. how will thou take this at my hands, though J carry them never so Courtly?
'Sfoot, she's in her Maudlin fit: All her wine
showers out in tears.
Oh, oh, oh,— 
Pray have her in. Look carefully to her,
I, I, I.
In all to the next Room.— 
Sir, she shall with me. Isle leave her where J found her.
Sir, no such matter.
'Sfoot, Gentlewoman, must I kick you out of doors?
No, nor depart your self, but by Authority.
J am provided for you. Friends come in. 
And do your Office.
We arrest you, Sir▪ Nay, we shall rule you.
Ha, ha, ha. Why, this is well, and very hos∣pitably done.
Would any man but an old Bawd have done this?
Sir, J mistrusted your Apostasy.
Since you revolt, J must recall my money;
Or lay you where J found you, as you threatened your Sister here.
Baser, and baser still. Are you a Knight?
A Knight, a Post-Knight. A Postilion,
That rides a fore-horse, o'er the Ears in dirt,
Three fingers thick, is not so base. You Varlets,
Do you arrest folks in a bawdy-house?
We do not find it so; Or, if it be,
The place may be as honest as our Office.
Will you walk, Sir?
Stay; Let me consider,
If now my Father (as some in like cases
Have done) would take a fine submission.
I could afford to kneel and whine, me-thinks,
Rather then back to my old Ward again.
Twill ne'er be handsome though.
The business Gentlemen.
My lucky friend.
Sir, you relieved me lately. Could you now
But add another Favour, it might teach
One, that ne'er learnt to pray, to pray for you.
Do you not know me, Sir? It was I you saved
Out of the Temple Sudds.
Hast thou been shaved since?
No, Sir, I was disguised.
Disguised!
Disguised in villainy, which I recant.
Who knows but he may prove an honest man?
Pray, Sir, a word.
We do not use to wait dry-fisted; nor dry throe∣ted.
I would you were as wet all over, as I was like to have been: Or, as you are Catchpoles, I would you had been but in those hands I es∣caped from.
You have prevailed, Sir.
Sergeants you shall not out of the House. Here's for half an hours attendance. Go into that Room with your Prisoner. You shall have Wine, and Smoke too.
Be of good cheer friend; if thou can be honest,
I can relieve thee: fear not.
Sir, get my Father but to say as much,
And you shall be Co-heire with me. I vow you shall have half. 
VVee'll talk anon. The Youth appears con∣verted.
There was no other means to work it by,
But that I used; to urged him past his Nature.
He was so free in's Villainy, that I
Giving the Spurs, ran him beyond his speed;
Quite off his Legs, and glad to be led home.
His Father comes on fairly: I have followed
All your Instructions concerning him,
And my fantastic Father 'Law. Both whom
Are hard at hand, with the wise western Knight.
He too's content to go to the best Ordinary,
While tic best cheap he says. Where are the women?
Your Mother-'Law, after she had got
As much French Carriage, as might serve to furnish
A petty Court; is fallen into a fit,
To over-throw it all again.
The better.
But is the house clear, Sir, of all your Riflers?
As I could wish; And well satisfied.
For, when they understood the honest end,
My Project aimed at; which, by an Oration
Well charged with virtuous Sentences, I forced
Into the nobler Breasts: they all recanted
The barbarous purpose; and as freely left
Their money for that Charitable use,
To which I pre-intended it. The rest
Pursed theirs again. But yet I have collected
In this odd uncouth way, five hundred Pounds,
That was laid down at stake for a Virginity,
To make an honest stock for Frank.
Tic good.
I may fetch in my Guests In the mean time
You may be pleased, Sir, to peruse this Baper.— 
How now! what's here? How might he come by this?
It is the scorn I sent my injured Love;
My abused Elynor: The hand, that threw
Her from me. O, that at the price of it
I could receive her.
Sir, by your leave,
We come to sup w'yee. Does your Rifling hold?
What, you are off of the hooks, me-thinks.
If there be no such thing, tell us the Riddle?
You shall know all, and briefly. Frank, come in. 
Now Gentlemen—
Let us salute her first.— 
She does not taste of sin. Fair Chastity
Sits crowned upon her Brow, with an aspect,
May beat down Lust to Hell, from whence it rose.
You profess Nobly, sir.
I vow, and do not lye to you: If I find
Your Father so inhumane, you against it:
VVee'll be your Rescue, if forty able sword-men
Which we have, at the signal of a finger,
Planted in readiness, can fetch you off:
Do you approve?
Yes, and admire your goodness.
Now we are for you, sir:
Then hear the story; which your late Im∣patience
would not permit.
You speak not now
In that high Phrase, or tone, as you did then. 
Stand here, unseen; and hear attentively.
I am a Gentleman, that by foul misdeed
(Heaven, Heaven I ask thee pardon) once did wrong
To an unfortunate Family, by rejecting,
After affiance, and her love abused,
A Gentlewoman—
You got with child, and then denied her Marriage.
It was so.
Ay me!
No passion, gentle Soul.
If this should prove my Father now!—
Well Sir, your Gentlewoman!
She, on the discontent, (poor haplesse Soul)
Now fourteen Winters since though sadly burdened,
Fled, and no more is heard of: at the first
My wildness took no sense of this dear Loss;
But drew me through the ways of careless pleasure,
By riotous expense, that mine estate
And Credit ran at waste, and was nigh spent,
Until my trespass cried against my Conscience
To render satisfaction: but in vain
We offer to the dead. My Genius therefore
Prompts me to grateful deeds unto her Blood▪
What can this come to?
She had a Brother, that lost his estate
By Law—
Means he not me?
To a Corrupt Oppressor—
Ha! How's that?
Was stripped out of the very Coat he wore,
Had nothing left him, but a Son—
What's all this to your Daughter?
Even all that may be; (see) His Sonne's my Daughter. 
Now do you find my project Gentlemen?
It has at Charge of three days House-keeping
Put halse a thousand pounds in's purse; Besides
A fair pull for his Fathers Land again:
For he has, by a lawful Church-man, married
The Daughter of his Fathers Adversary.
Why, here are wonders!
Bravely, nobly done
Come Mrs. Alice; and justify your Act. 
My Daughter, ha!
My sweetheart, hoe!
Your haes and hoes can not draw her from me, she is my Wife.
By what witch-craft?
By stronger Charms, then your Art can dis∣solve. You know me now, Sir—And my Project, do you not? 
Amb. Sir Humfrey Dryground.
I am struck dum with wonder.
O tic he, tic hee.
Alas she swoons, Sir cheer you up this Lady,
While I appease the rest. A word with you Sir.
I will not be appeased.
My love! my Elynor!
So, cheer her up Sir Humfry. To her again Sir Humfry; your Son and mine in Law has told me all your story, and reconciled your Brother Brookall to you before your interview. I know all, the full point and the whole substance; the flat and plain of the business; and now I love these things again. How now Sir Am∣philus
Drowned in Melancholy?
No: But and I were at the Duckingpond, I know what I know. But when I drown my self, I'll give you leave to hang me.
Your pardon, and your blessing, I beseech you.
Hence. 
Was this thy Journey into France my Boy?
High Providence hath made it good. But tell me,
Was Love your chief Instructor to this Marriage?
Indeed it was equal in her and me.
Pray Sir your blessing.
Away.
Turn this way for a blessing then my Daughter,
Shall I tell you Neighbour? Law has no re∣lief for you; And Conscience and you have a lunge time been strangers. Could you be friends and embrace Conscience now, all would be well. And there's the substance. Is it plain?
Conscience! do you know where she is?
Hears one has brought her in his true Conver∣zion.
Sir, If you can forgive, and can obey you—
I now can better kneel, then speak 
Do you note those tears, Sir? Had you lost your Daughter,
My Father had in this made you amends,
In finding you a Son. His Art converted him.
Sure, ell's but Apparition, or a dream.
Ha! Think you so? Tic your own flesh and blood: And by your leave and liking, may prove as ho∣nest a Man, as his Father. Is not this plain now? For∣give and bless e▪m all over, and so Kisse'em too. They are your Children.
O my dear Bump! Art thou there? Thou may kiss, and forgive me all over too, for any harm, or dishonesty; though the place be as they say-at a word, Bump. Thou may be∣leive me, I came but to learn Carriage of the Body, nor to carry no bodies body, but my own body, Bump. No truly, truly Bump. o—o—that ever I did that.
Peace, peace: Ell's well. At least I know your Disease.
Think me not drunk, good Bump, a little fashion-sick, or so.
Fashion-sick! a fine civil word. To be drunk, is fashion-sick.
I am awaked out of the Lethargy
Of Avarice: Blessed may our Friendship be.
I will not sleep, before the holy Priest
Has done the Office. Blessing on my Girl.
Thou hast made me young again: the best
Occurrents in this Project have been thine.
Thy Accidents exceeded my design.
They do not yet cease here: For see, the strife
Betwixt these long continued Adversaries
Perfectly reconciled; and both have given
The young and hopeful married pair their Blessings.
To which I have given my Consent most freely.
For it was Nolens volens as they say.
They are beholden to you. Mr. Vermin
Restores unto the Son the Fathers Land,
For Dowry with his Daughter: And is taken
So with the good you wrought upon his Son,
The Convertite here; that if he stand firm
Till' the determination of your Mortgage,
Heel cancel it, and send it Gratis to you.
That's sure enough. But Sir, the other business.
What's that?
The most to be admired of all;
He loves my Sister here; and has done long:
But, now, that he perceives her worth (being yours)
And, since you promised him your Daughter too,
He makes it his fair suit.
I'll talk with his Father.
And Wat stand you but firm, and live reformed,
Winning my Daughters love, you shall have mine.
That Fortune is not blind, that showed me way
To Father, Friends, and Husband in one day.
This binds us all into a Brother-hood.
And with a Brothers Love I now salute you.
So may we with a general embrace,
Create the Heart of Friendship, not the Face.
Come Gentlemen, your Ordinary stays,
Twill prove good fare (I hope) though no rich Feast;
And acceptable to each welcome Guest.
NO way ambitious yet of vulgar praise,
The writer of these Scenes desires to know,
By your fair leave, though he assume no Baize,
Whether he pulled fair for a leaf or no▪
If yes, then let your hands assistant be,
Tincourage him to climb Apollo's tree.

WE are not safe Lamot; this bawdy peace
Begets a war within me; our swords worn
For Ornament, not use; the Drum &amp; Trumpet
Sing drunken Carols, and the Canon speaks
Health, not confusion; Helmets turned to Cups;
Our bruised Arms administer discourse
For Tables and for Taverns, where the Soldier
Oft finds a pity, not relief: I'll tell thee,
Wee'r walking images, the signs of men,
And bear about us nothing but the form
Of man that's manly.
Wee'r cold indeed.
Yes, and th'ungratefull time
As coldly doth rewards us, all our actions,
Attempts of valour, looked into with eyes
Filed with contempt, when ye Gods ye know
It is our gifts they see yet: oh I am mad!
The very bread that lends them life to scorn us,
Our blood he's paid for, yet demand a bit,
Or ask of this old satin belli'd sir,
Or Madam toothless with her velvet sconce,
And you shall hear their rotten lungs pronounce
The Whip and Whip-stock.
Prithee contain thy self.
Thou know I can;
With what an equal temper did I breath
Under the frozen climate of the North,
Where in mine arms (the sheets of war) I slept,
My bed being feathered with the down of heaven?
I have lain down a man and rise a snow-ball.
There these have been my pastimes, which i've born
As willingly as I received them nobly.
The Queens black envy which doth still remain,
And peeps through every limb she bears about her,
Fated to ruin us, does not swell my Gall,
No nor this willing beggary I wear
To cloud me from her malice; by the Gods
This bastard-betting peace unspirits me,
A greater corrosive to my active soul,
Than all past ills what ever.
As you are valiant be wise too, this is no time
To vent your passions like a woman in,
Your sword, not tongue, should speak.
You are an expert Tutor, and I thank you;
Our wrongs would add a spirit to the dead,
And make them sight our quarrels;— but look here
The minion of our Queen, oh what a train
The painted Peacock bears! death, were I Jove
But only for this Giant.
Good your honour, our wives and Children,
Good your honour hear us.
Where are our slaves? keep off these dregs of men,
The scum and out-cast of the world; bring round my charict
To the postern Gate; these bell-mouth'd Rascals
Split mine cares with noise, make hast before
Lest my great Mistress wait my coming.
Good your honour.
The devil take your worship; we must follow.
These are the fruits of base upstarts and flatterers.
Tell me Lamot, can this same Merchpane man
Think, or commit a sin though ne'er so horrid,
But it is candied o'er, and from his vice
Excessive praise and plaudits arise?
Were I the King, but he is wilful blind,
And by the horns she rocks him fast asleep,
Before the wanton and hot-blooded Queen
Should have the licence but to be suspected
With such a Knight of Ginger-bread as this,
A gilded flesh-fly, I would lock her up,
Yea chain the evil Angel in a Box,
And house her like a silkworm.
Pardon me sir, the good old King's unable.
And therefore must admit an upstart Page,
Now raised to honours by her lawless lust,
Mayor of the Palace, and the Duke of France,
The next stepped is the Crown; now by my life
It were good the King would execute them both.
Alas he dares not, for the no chaste Queen,
Is as her birth, as great in faction,
Followed and sainted by the multitude,
Whose judgement she hath linked unto her Purse,
And rather bought a love than found it:
She he's a working spirit, an active brain,
Apt to conceive, and wary in her wiles;
Besides, her Sons, the pillows of the State,
Support her like an Atlas, where she sits,
And like the heavens commands our fates beneath her;
She is the greater light, the King a star
That only glares but through her influence.
Hark, the thunder of the world, now out of tune,
This peace corrupting all things makes them speak,
What means this most adulterate noise?
Why, are you ignorant?
This is a night of jubilee, and the King
Solemnly feasts for his wars happle success,
Besides his Sons and he are knit again;
We shall have Masks and Revelling to night.
Now the great Gods confound this pickthanck noise,
The Drums and Trumpets are turned flatterers,
And Mars himself a Bawd to grace their riot,
O I am mad, this grates my very Gall.
What man, bear up;
Although I wish all civil discord hence,
Yet I do hope a time wherein we Soldiers,
Shall like a moving wall of living steel,
Defend this City that offends us now.
My thoughts keep not your road, I think
The devilish spirit of the haughty Queen,
Will find employment for us yet, her brain
Is very active in exploits that breed
The Soldiers harvest, war and dissension.
What vision's this? it is Gold right and fair,
Sure I dream not.
I cannot tell, but he that takes this from me,
Shall soon perceive I do not sleep nor slumber.
It was the Eunuch.
That needs no deciding.
What speaks the Paper left behind?
If it be Chorus to this dum show, read it Dumaine.
As you are Soldiers truly valiant, I honour you, as poor, I pit∣tie you; therefore have sent you that will render you as com∣pleat Courtiers, as undaunted Soldiers: we know your present fortunes shame your parentage, which was not only great in it self, but fortunate in so fair an off-spring: Dumaine, Lamot, let it suffice we know ye; for our eye is every
where: whilst I remember your words, I shall forget your parents injuries; fear nothing, for your hitherto conceal∣meant, i'll get your pardons, and whilst I breath, breath your kind Mistress: if you dare trust me, appear at Court to night so adorned, as shall become your honours, our friends.
The Queen?
We are betrayed Lamot, what shall we do?
We'll take the gracious proffer of the Queen,
Shoe's princely vowed our friend; besides what ill
Can we expect from her, who might have sent
Her murdering ministers and slain us here,
If she intended foul play? but she's noble.
Noble, grant her so, yet—
What yet?
Her murdered Brothers memory.—
When he fell, we were too young for traitors.
But not for torments, had we been apprehended;
For in the high displeasure of the Queen,
All our posterity was doomed; some felt the wheel,
Some wracked, some hanged, others impaled on stakes,
With divers strange and horrid forms of death,
That you'd have thought, and fitly thought it too,
That all the torments which the Poets feign
The damned spirits exercise in Hell,
Had here been put in execution;
And had not we been then in Witenburge,
Beyond the fury of her mortal spleen,
We had added to the number of the dead;
Then think you still we shall not?
Now by my life it's murder to suspect her,
Our lives are all that we can lose, our fame,
Not time nor Art can murder, so we'll venture.
What conference did they maintain with thee?
None farther than the language of their eyes,
 They looked on me as if they meant me thanks,
Which their amazement robed me off.
Spake they not then at all?
No not a word,
They seemed to me as if they knew no language.
You know them not?
No dearest Lady, for th'appear'd to me
Like to the silent postures in the Arras,
Only the form of men with stranger faces.
Take u'm then, they are our enemies,
Whom I have angled with that golden bait;
Their parents waded in my Brothers blood,
For which i'll be revenged of all their kin,
Could they increase as oft as I would kill,
I'd ever kill that they might still increase:
This picture drawn by an Italian
(Which still I keep to whet mine anger)
Does represent the murder of my brother,
For ravishing this beauteous piece of ill;
A bloody and a terrible mistake,
To murder Clodimir for Clotarrs fact,
For which behold how Fredigond's revenged,
This old Dumaine and father to this maid,
With all his kindred, associates and alies,
(These brace of wicked ones, and that ravished whore,
The fair and fatal cause of these events
Only excepted) are here, here ini this picture:
Is it not a brave sight, how doth the object like thee?
How prettily that baby hangs by th'heels,
Sprawling his Arms about his mothers womb,
As if again he sought for shelter there?
Here's one bereft of hands, and this of tongue,
Finger thy Lute Maria, sing out Isabel:
Hark, hark Castrato, the music of the Spheres,
O ravishing touch, hark how the others voice
Echoes the Lute, is it not a divine softness?
Ha ah ha, I do expect they now should rail extremely;
I prithee scold at me good Isabel,
 A little of the woman; no Maria;
Within the clothed circle of mine eyes,
Anchor thy fingers, alas, thy nails are par'd,
Nor has poor Isabel a tongue to scold with,
And here's the Granddam with her glares out;
Saddle her nose with spectacles, or else
She'll miss her way to the infernal pit.
Tow whore Gray-berds in this angle lies,
Will find their way to Hell without their eyes,
Villains that killed my Brother; how does this like thee?
To execute men in picture, is it not rare?
Were but Chrotilda here, and these two youngsters,
It were a pastime for the Gods to gaze on.
Oh were I but a man as others are,
As kind and open-handed nature made me,
With Organs apt and fit for women's service.
What if thou were?
What if I were great Queen?
I'd search the Deserts, Mountains, Valleys, Plains,
Till I had met Chrotilda, whom by force
I'd make to mingle with these foot limbs,
Till I had got on her one like to me,
Whom I would nourish for the Dumaine line;
That time to come might story to the world,
They had the Devil to their Grand-father.
I find thee Eunuch apt for my employments,
Therefore I will unclasp my soul to thee,
I've always found thee trusty, and I love thee.
With thanks I ever must acknowledge it,
And lay my life at my great Mistress feet,
To spend it when she pleases.
We need it not
As yet Castrato, but we may hereafter.
See, their's the plat-forme of great Childricks death;
And they which must be thought his murderers,
Our Enemies, and now new Courtiers,
Whom hitherto I have reserved for policy;
 First, that they take away the guilt from us;
Next, being apprehended, studying deaths,
The heads of all our Engineers shall sit
T'invent unheard of torments for the slaves;
I long to see them here, here in this frame,
Greeting their kindreds bones.
You are the Goddess of invention.
Then i'll commend thee to my elder Son,
Where thou shalt wind into his secret thoughts;
As for the younger Boy let me alone;
And when we have them on the hip, they shall
Follow their Fathers unto Hells-black-Hall
Still better.
Will not this be brave? ha, how lik'st thou this?
Now by this light I'm taken strangely with thee,
Come kiss me, kiss me sir, tremble not.
Fie, what a January lip thou hast,
A pair of Iscicles, sure thou hast bought
A pair of cast lips of the chaste Diana's,
Thy blood's mere snow-broth, kiss me again:
Now see if you can find these gallants forth,
And bring them to our presence.
O sir you're welcome,
Your visits have been freer, but I grow old,
And you command the beauties of the time.
What means my noble Mistress? think you the blood
Runs so degenerate within these veins,
To stoop to an inferior embrace,
When I enjoy the best.
We are betrayed:
I'll tell thee a good jest Laundry, pray mark;
This morning dressing my head my husband came,
And with his switch (for he was then to hunt)
A gentle stroke he gave me on the back;
My fancy busied then to make me fine,
Supposing it was you that sported so,
(Not dreaming that the dotard was so near)
 Cried, well my Laundry, in story we still find,
The best Knights strike before and not behind:
The King who always understood too fast,
Quits suddenly my Chambers, what he intends
I cannot guess, unless it be our deaths,
Which if he speedily perform not, then
Know he shall never, for this night concludes him.
His Sons I weigh like him, they have rebelled,
And taken spirit of late t'oppose my will,
And contradict my pleasures in thy love,
For which it is not safe that they should live;
The Kingdoms Heir shall be a boy of thine,
And Kings and Queens shall follow in thy Line.
Madam, here are the Gentlemen.
You're welcome to the Court, and us, brave spirits you're welcome.
Take a Queens word you're welcome.
Your highness is as full of grace as mercy.
Rise and follow us, we'll be your Guardian and Protectress.
What are these?
Sheep for my shambles, whom I have fatted up
Only for slaughter; things are on foot decreed,
Shall make some smile to night, and others bleed.
My best Mistress,
What Angel brought you hither? for I know
Millions attend your goodness.
My Lord?
Why do you cast such stranger eyes upon me?
You were not wont to cloth your brows with scorn,
Nor dart such deadly looks; can my mistress
Be angry with her servant? my offence,
If slowness in my visits, i'll hereafter
 Grow to your threshold; why weep you now?
Trust me divinest fair thine eyes seed pearl,
Bracelets for Gods to wear about their arms.
I am too fond, and yet he swears he loves me,
I have believed him too, for I have found
A Godlike nature in him, and a truth
Hitherto constant.
Sweetest fair the cause?
If this should be dissembled, not your heart,
And having won my souls affection,
Should on a judgement more retired to state,
Smile at your perjuries, and leave me in love,
What ill-bred tales the world would make of me.
That jealousy i'll strangle; take this Ring,
As I that Diamond dazzled by thine eyes,
Whose beauty sickned' cause eclipsed by thine;
Be these the mutual pledges of our love,
Our Marriage before our Marriage,
And cursed be he that separates our love,
Though France be one, or what is greater Jove.
Are your fears over now?
My Lord, I dare no ill, and therefore doubt none.
Approach our person nearer, for methinks
You've honest faces, if your hearts keep touch
T'your outward semblance, you're a pair
Nothing but death shall force from me.
Good, good, this Physic works.
Madam, is it done?
I my black Genius, such a fatal dram
I have administered, will wing his soul
With expedition to the other world,
His part essential like a wearied Ghost
This night forsakes her Inn, when sled and gone,
Who knows where it shall lodge: mark his looks,
See thou not death throned in his hollow eye,
 Great tyrant over Nature?
With looks inquisite I have beheld him.
But see no alteration.
Thou art a fool, and want the optique nerves
To pry into my Arts; where I lay trains,
Death comes before the grief, the sulphurous match
Destroys the powder with a motion slow
To what I work with; as Antumn aged leaf,
In youth the prime and glory of the Grove,
Not to be grasped with hand, falls with a puff,
And what we could not touch but now, we tread on,
So Childrick —
Lend me thine arm Dumain, I now not what,
But on the sudden —
How the Nats play and buzz about the fire.
Must consume them.
It is rare, observant Cocks comes.
What Star's unshe'rd and walks upon the Earth,
Making our night a noon? methinks her sight
Does cure blindness, and lend darkness light,
Castrato —
No more, we are observed, my Lord.
What Ladies that?
That French India with a mine upon her back,
With whom your Brother holds discourse?
The same.
The chaste and beautiful Aphelia.
Indeed shoe's wondrous fair, nature hath much
Befriended her, art sure shoe's honest?
Snow's not purer;
No vestal Virgin at the Aultar bears
A soul so incorrupt, so void of flame
That's loosely active.
Castrato, be as our self, get but that Lady for me;
Thou understand me.
She dotes upon your Brother, by which means
I'll think upon some plot.
The Masque ended wee will talk further on it.
Defer our pastimes till another night,
I am not well at case.
Lights, lights for his Majesty.
How is it with your grace our Royal Father?
Your feet are in the snare,
Fredigond hunts, and when she hunts beware.
What says the slave?
No matter what, mind we his Majesty.
There is an Aetna in me,
The air I draw returns illuminate,
Philosophy thy Element of fire's here.
His Grace grows worse and worse, support him
Gently friends; O my dear Husband, O my gentle Lord.
I credit your report, &amp; will obey,
His mind is honourable like his parentage;
His single name has armed me, pray lead on.
O woe, woe, woe.
Horror and death.
O dismal fatal hour.
with Childrick end
The World.
Have patience gentle Queen.
Stand from me,
Preach patience to the Sea when the rude winds
Swell her ambitious billowes'bove the clouds,
And if thou tutor'st them to peace and silence,
I'll be as calm as they.
The treason here, and not the Traitor,
Quite confounds me.
Doubt ye the Traitors?
I've brougth a pair of Vipers to the Court,
Warmed and relieved them with a sting to kill us;
Who could be Authors of this dead but they?
His new bosom friends have slain him,
Lay hands upon the villains.
We are betrayed Lamot, basely beset with snares.
Justice fight thou my cause with thine own sword.
O villains, would ye let them scope?
Two men to pass the strength of all our guard?
This mads me.
Make after them and bring them back.
Or by my Fathers soul ye sleep your last.
Aphelia, oh Aphelia, she'll not from my mind,
I may command her now.
Come Mother, Brother, Friends, come let us go,
King ne'er received a Crown so full of woe.
I Left her midst the amazed multitude,
Where doubtless frighted with the sudden horror
Of the unlooked for murder of the Kings,
She has with other beauties of the Court,
Retired her self until the morning star.
It is very likely so, yet do ye hear—
I know not what to say, i'll not to bed,
My thoughts are full of tempests, dismal thinkings;
Where is my Son, why went he not to Court?
Your Son sir Charles, sir, is not yet in bed,
But why he went not to the Court I know not.
Perhaps she's safe, then why returns she not?
Why sends she not glad messenges of health?
No, no, she's lost, and I undone forever.
Go to your bed, I will not trouble you,
Go take your rest, yet pray be up betimes,
Yet stay and watch with me, she may come home,
She may come home, it's good to wait for her;
Yet now I've thought on it get you hence to bed,
And yet not so, run, run unto the Court,
O Villain how he moves; yet why so fast,
 Let me deliberate, that were to give
The Courtiers notice I have lost my Daughter,
Whom they will then suspect, and call her fame
Into an ill construction; no no no:
O sir you're welcome, where is your sister?
I must have her sir, and I will; where is
She Charles, where is she?
My noble Father.
Tut tut tut, noble me nobles, nor Father me
No Fathers, where is your sister sir?
My sister?
Your sister; this cunning shall not carry it;
Where is she? speak.
Within fir, is she not? otherwise this Gentleman
He's lost his labour, he's come to visit her.
Hoyday, hoyday, hoyday, hoyday, to visit her?
Plots, plots, mere fetches to delude me: to visit her?
What at the dead of night, when the whole world
Is sunk in slumber, and our lusty youth
As quiet as the Grave? to visit her?
O most ridiculous, to visit her?
Pray Gentleman consider, does your sister keep
Times so preposterous for visiting?
Makes she day of night, or he's been bred
As loose as Lais, to love night Courtings?
Do not distract me; to visit her?
Pray sir collect your self; this Gentleman
Even at that horrid point where the King fell—
I there's more mischief too; God for his mercy.
What a world is this!
Saw a Ring drop from off my sisters singes,
And at his best advantage took it up,
Which he had then delivered, but that fright
Which renders men forgetful made him so,
But knowing where she lived, (so he protests)
He could not sleep until it were delivered.
Pray let me see the Ring; yes it was hers.
And she would say she'd never part with it
 But when she meant to wed; if you've married her,
Or have her promise riveted to yours,
Tell me but where she is i'll be content,
For I in losing her have lost my joy.
Is she not then within?
Yes too much; oh no
The house contains her not, she is not here,
Nor is for ought I know at all.
O my prophetic soul, then it is no idle fear.
How the Monsiure? what makes he here?
There's something whispers me, go not to bed,
Go not to bed till thou hast found her out,
Be thou my Genius or what power else
(Suggesting lawful things) I will obey thee.
Still it cries, sleep not to night; had I tan Opium,
The drowsy Poppy, cold Mandragora,
Or all the sleepy sirrops of the world,
With such a powerful spell thou work upon me,
That should I take an everlasting sleep
Thould'st wake my scattered bones, and make them rise
To watch the horror of this fatal night;
Sleep ever waking envy and mistrust,
Yes things which never knew what slumber meant;
Ghosts keep your beds, ye Sentinels of night,
Goblings and Specters do not walk your round;
A general Lethargy seize on this hour,
Whilst I alone the Watchman of the night
Will wake in spite of fate, Argus Thine eyes
To find Aphelia and her miseries.
Pretty in good sadness, wondrous pretty;
Is he in earnest?
Sure he dissembles not, I little thought [When I did
Let him in, what person graced [Our Threshold.
Ah sir, what a Girl is this to be out of th'way,
He is in love that's certain; let me remember,
When I was first a lover as he is,
I'd just such wild vagaries in my brain,
Such midnight madness; this puling baggage
 May lose her self for ever, and her fortunes,
For this hours absence; go, begone,
Follow his royal person, comfort him,
Tell him my daughter will again be found;
And so good Angels grant we meet with her.
Into what Labyrinth doe you lead me sir?
What by perplexed ways? I should much fear
Had you not used his name, which is to me
A strength against terror, and himself so good,
Occasion cannot vary, nor the night,
Youth, nor his wild desire, otherwise
A silent sorrow from mine eyes would steal
And tell sad stories for me.
You are too tender of your honour Lady,
Too full of aguish trembling, the noble Prince
Is, as December, frosty in desire,
Save what is lawful, he not owns that heat,
Which were you snow would thaw a tear from you.
This is the place appointed, pray heavens all things go well.
I will go call him, please you rest your self;
Here lies a book will bear you company
Till I return, which will be presently.
Hither i'll send the King, not that I mean
To give him leave to cool his burning lust,
For Cloves shall prevent him in the fact;
And thus I shall endear my self to both:
Cloves enraged perhaps will kill the King,
Or by the King will perish, if both fall,
Or either, both ways make for me;
The Queen as rootedly does hate her sons,
As I her Ladyship, to see this fray
She must be brought by me, she'll steel them on
To one another damage, for her sake
 I'll say I set on foot this hopeful brawl.
Whilst she will hug and kiss me for the same;
Thus on all sides the Eunuch will play foul,
And as his face is black he'll have his soul,
How witty sorrow he's found out discourse
Fitting a midnight season! here I see
One bathed in Virgins tears, whose purity
Might blanch a Blackmore, turn natures stream
Back on it's self; words pure and of that strain
Might move the Parcae to bepittiful.
Methinks I stand like Tarquin in the night,
When he defiled the chastity of Rome,
Doubtful of what to do, and like a Thief
I take each noise to be an Officer.
She he's a ravishing feature, and her mind
Is of a purer temper than her body:
Her virtues more than beauty ravished me,
And I commit even with her piety
A kind of incest with Religion;
Though I do know it is a deed of death
Condemned to torments in the other world,
Such tempting sweetness dwells in every limb,
That I must venture my essential parts
For the fruition of a moments lust,
A pleasure dearly bought.
Alack poor maid,
Poor ravished Philomel, thy lot was ill
To meet that violence in a Brother, which
I in a stranger doubt not; vet methinks
I am too confident, for I feel my heart
Burd'ned with something ominous; these men
Are things of subtle nature, and their oaths
Inconstant like themselves. Cloves may prove unkind,
Alack why not? say he should offer foul,
The evil counsel of a secret place,
And night his friend, might over-tempt his will;
I dare not stand the hazard; guide me light
To some untroden place, where poor I may
 Wear out the night with sighs till it be day.
I am resolved, I will be bold and resolute.
Hail beauteous Damsel.
Ha, what man art thou
That hast thy countenance clouded with thy cloak,
And hid'st thy face from darkness and the night?
If thy intents deserve a Mustler too,
Withdraw and act them not. What art thou, speak?
And wherefore came thou hither?
I came to find one beautiful as thou,
And am a man willing to please a woman.
I understand you not.
But I must you, yea and the right way too,
Or my strength shall fail me.
Help, help, help.
Peace, none of your loud music Lady,
If you raise a note, or beat the air with clamour,
You see your death.
What violence is this? inhuman sir,
Why do you threaten war, fright my soft peace
With most ungentle steel? what have I done
Dangerous, or am like to do? why do you wrack me thus?
Mine arms are guilty of no crimes, do not torment'um:
Mine heart and they have been heaved up together
For mankind that was holy, if in that act
They have not prayed for you, mend and be good,
The fault is none of their's.
Come, do not seem
More holy than you are, I know your heart.
Let your Dagger too; noble sir, strike home,
And sacrifice a soul to chastity,
As pure as is it self, or innocence.
This is not the way, —know you me beauty?
The Majesty of France!
Be not afraid.
I dare not fear, it's treason to suspect
My King can harbour thoughts that tend to ill,
I know you're godlike good, and have but tried
 How far weak women durst be virtuous.
Cunning simplicity, thou art deceived,
Thy wit as well as beauty wounds me, and thy tongue
In pleading for thee pleads against thy self;
It is thy virtue moves me, and thy good
Tempts me to acts of evil; were thou bad,
Or loose in thy desires, I could stand,
And only gaze, not surfeit on thy beauty;
But as thou art, there's witchcraft in thy face,
I must enjoy thee, or not thou thy life.
You are my King, and may command my life,
My will to sin you cannot; you may force
Unhallowed deeds upon me, spot my fame,
And make my body suffer, not my mind;
When you have done this unreligious deed,
Conquered a poor weak maid, a trembling maid,
What trophy or what triumph will it bring
More than a living scorn upon your name?
The ashes in your Urn shall suffer for it,
Virgins will sow their curses on your Grave,
Time blot your Kingly parentage, and call
Your birth in question; do not think
This deed will lie concealed, the faults Kings do
Shine like the fiery Beacons on a hill
For all to see, and seeing tremble at:
It's not a single ill which you commit;
What in the subject is a petty fault,
Monsters your actions, and's a foul offence;
You give your subjects licence to offend,
When you do teach them how.
I will endure no longer, come along,
Or by the curious spinstrie of thy head,
Which natures cunnin'st finger twisted out,
I'll drag thee to my couch; tempt not my fury.
Hold, hold my heart—can I endure this—
Unhand me Charles and render me my self,
Lest I forget my self on thee.
Great sir;
 Remember it is your brother, and the King.
O that I could forget it, and shake off
Duty at once and Consanguinity,
That like a whirlwind I might rush upon him,
And bear him to destruction. Monster of men,
Thou King of darkness down unto thy Hell,
I have a Spell will lay thy honesty,
And this abused goodness: Is it not enough
That thou hast wronged Crotilda, ravished a Maid,
A Virgin of that purity of life
Might saint her here on earth; but thou wilt add
Unto the first a second violence the Gods must not forgive:
Don't arm your face,
Nor wear acount'nance of horror, I can't fear
Bearing a bosom innocent and pure:
Is it even so, then guard thy self Oh King,
For I am swift as thought that executes.
Hold, hold, my Lot forbear.
Beat down their swords, what do the Princes mean?
Ring out the larum Bell, call up the Court,
The Princes here will murder one another.
For shame for shame forbear.
What means this sudden outcry? oh my Sons,
Hold, hold; part um good Gentlemen.
Braved by a subjects hand?
Though nature by precedence of birth
Made thee his King, it therefore follows not
His Murderer: wherein is our Clotair
Greater than Cloves? the self same blood
That spirits thee, makes him as valiant,
The difference lies in Anno Domini.
Most accurate mischief, most rare Crocodile!
I grant thou art his elder, by which law
You're born his subject, not his equal Cloves:
Know Clotair's thy King, and subjects hands
 Without the deep and dangerous traitors name,
May not advance against their sovereignes head.
Neither shall his without Correction
Upon him slaves.
Hold, I command ye hold:
Oh Clotair thou art of a valiant soul,
And wilt thou basely thus beset thy Brother?
Fear argues spirits most degenerate,
And that thou fear, th'advantage argues it;
O set not on thy slaves, if he must die,
Let thy sacrifice not butcher him.
That argument sounds harsh, does Clotair fear?
Sacrifice me? it is not in his power.
Exquisite Philter, how it operates!
We hope so Cloves; yet thy brother King
Is as an earthly God, his will his law,
His power uncircumscrib'd, unlimited,
Whose Majesty can look a subject dead.
How? look me dead? I do not fear his frowns.
I grant th'as great a Basilisk as he,
As thou art merely man; but as thy King
Divinity doth prop him, he stands firm
That builds on that foundation; yet I know
Thy sword's as sharp as his, and where it lights
Imprints as much of fate; thine arm's as strong,
Thy spirit as daring, and thy will as prompt
To any action that may write man, Man.
He is your darling, you do well to praise him;
When I have slain him write his Epitaph.
My Epitaph? this Pen of steel shall first
Write on thy heart thine end.
Still, still better.
The venomed poison of a women's tongue
Is more sublimed than Mercury.
Hold, hold.
O dearest Madam, your maternal breath
Bears a Mandamus in it, and like heaven
Will lay this tempest.
As the wind the Sea,
Which makes it rage the louder,
Whore's our guard
That lets a tray tor pull me by the berd?
Upon him slaves.
O they have slain my Son;
Bloody villain, thy hands have made these holes,
Hell take thee for it.
Mother, rise and depart,
For I am bent on mischief.
Do thy worst
Thou murderous minded Prince, this blood is mine,
For in some sort I bleed; out Parricide.
How cunningly she spits her poison forth!
I know her soul is light, she's glad he's dead,
And joys in the opportuntie to curse the killer,
For which she gains the name of pious mother;
Here's pretty woman-villany and dissimulation.
If they have slain him, wherefore do I live?
O my swollen heart.
Remove the Corps, withal
Convey this Siren from our wandering eyes,
And hows her in a Dungeon; let no light
Peep through a cranny on her; mask the day,
Put the all-searching eyes of Phoebus out;
Lest accidentally he gazing here,
Here fix eternally, and so we may
Despair of night as once we did of day:
Bear her to prison; reason not the cause,
A Kings prerogative's above his laws.
Be merciful and lead to earth, away,
Since he is gone it is to die to stay.
Now we begin to flourish, this black night
Is only lighted by our stars, which smile
Upon these actions, and rejoice to see
Thee our sole favourite so near a Crown.
 But tell me Laundry, how did I play the mother;
Did not I seem a Niobe in passion,
A deluge of salt tear?
Most true, you wept.
As a good Actor in a play would do,
Whose fancy works (as if he waking dreamt)
Too strongly on the Object that it copes with,
Shaping realities from mockeries;
And so the Queen did weep: By this good night
I think I could become the Stage as well
As any she that sells her breath in public;
Come shall we Act Laundry?
Act Lady, what?
Nothing that's new, old Plays you know are best:
Eunuch is our bed ready?
Great Queen it is.
Come then my joy to bed, where we will Act
The truth which others doubt, and in that sport
We will laugh at death which triumphs in the Court.
Go sleep your last; i'll straight unto the King,
And he shall take them in the very act;
And then to cover my discovery
I'll set on fire the Queens Bed-chamber,
That so I may disturb them more secure,
And yet the plot not mine, i'll tell the King
Unless he present help, his mother burns:
About it then, this is a happy night,
The more it works their woe more's my delight.
LOok how it fiames, I fear some treachrie,
Beat at her Chamber door, cry it aloud,
And let your voice be thunder to this lightning;
 Cry, fire, fire, fire, the Court is all a hot-house, fire, fire.
Great Queen, royal mother, open your door
Lest you do sleep for ever; mother awake.
The God of sleep lies heavy on her eyes;
Force up the door; fire, fire, fire.
It's fortified against strength, you must call louder.
Mother, Queen, Mother, awake awake,
Your sleep was never more like death than now;
Lady, Great Princess; fire, fire, fire.
What saucy Groom
Beats our offendless doors thus daringly?
H'had better roused a sleeping Lioness
Than thus to have broke our slumbers; what art thou?
Look,
The fire will give you light, it is I your Son,
Fly from your Chamber else you are but dead,
Your Court is all a Bonsire.
Let it burn, I have lost my credit everlastingly,
I will not move afoot.
You must be forced then.
Lady,
Where is your wit now in necessity?
When shall be taken, and you shamed for ever.
Bethink, bethink your self, what shall we do.
I have it, it shall be so; there, put on that,
And as the door flies open meet him full
Appearing in his Brothers warlike form,
Thou wilt amaze and so pass by him safely.
Do not appear to me, I did not wound thee,
Seek out the beds of those that cause thy death,
And howl to them thy piteous complaints;
O do not look on me, be gone, be gone.
Whom do ye hold discourse with, with the air?
Bethink your self, this is no time to dally.
O my Son, such horrid apparitions full of dread
Have I beheld, have quite unwitted me;
 Thy brothers Ghost, young Cloves Ghost in arms
Has thrice appeared to me this dismal night,
You heard me speak too't.
True, I heard you speak,
But what of that?
Calls for Aphelia
To bear him company i'th'other world,
Or else he will nightly haunt us in our sleep.
O see, it comes!
Fear it not, Son.
What art thou that usurp this dead of night,
In metal like the age? why art thou sent
To cast a horror on me? If thy soul
Walks unrevenged, and the grim Ferriman
Deny thy passage, i'll perform thy rights.
O do not wound me with such piteous signs,
Lest I dissolve to air, and like thy self
Affright fool mortals: If that thou desire
Aphelia's death t'appease thy troubled soul,
Make some consenting sign, and so depart.
Thy sight afflicts my soul.
How fares our Son?
It was my brothers spirit; nothing but Aphelia?
She must die, you see it's requisite.
Would he had asked my life first.
Why should you be so fond upon a woman?
Woman's the least part of her, shoe's all Goddess.
It was your offer;
Remember there's no jesting with the Gods.
What might this mean? ha, where are my brains?
I had forgot my self, your pardon Mother;
Bear her from me this Jewel, I esteem
Equal with life; it was my brothers picture;
And with it, this, that she prepare to die;
Pray her to take it; and in death, but kiss
 This sad remembrance for the senders sake,
Although for his whose form it represents,
And I shall take it for the greatest grace
That she can give, or I ought to desire.
Tell her, and if you can be moved to sorrow
Express it in you tears, it is not I
Pronounce this fatal sentence against her life
Which needs must ruin mine, but the hid will
And providence of heaven, against which to rage
It were as impious as not obey.
My brothers funeral is her dying day.
Tell her, though reason and my will do jar,
My soul'speaks peace, although my sentence war.
Say I love, and pray her to forgive me.
Go, all attend my Mother; my estate
Delights not in Court Ceremony; stay,
Castrato stay,
And with thy Counsel cure thy dying Prince;
Thou art my bosom, Eunuch, and to thee
I dare unclasp my soul; what's to be done?
This is a damned spirit I have seen,
And comes to work my ruin.
What spirit?
My Brothers spirit in Arms, I swear it came forth here
Out of my Mothers Chamber as I knocked.
Was it in Armour said you?
Yes, in that Armour he was used to wear
When we have run at Tilt, till our cleft Spears
Have with their splinters scared the Element.
That Armour as I well remember, I did leave
In the Queens Bed-chamber as yesterday,
After the Trlumphs and the Tournaments,
Having unbraced the Prince; it is even so,
Ha, ha, ha.
Why this ridiculous passion?
My state requires thy tears, and not thy mirth.
The Devil came from your Mothers Chamber sir,
She has a circle that can raise a Spirit;
 A Mars in armour too, she is a Venus,
And through your licence Laundry is no Eunuch.
What killing sense thou utter'st?
There's someting in it I would understand,
And yet I dare not; Laundry? How know thou this?
Since I have gone so far, i'll tell you;
I looked in at th'Key-hole, and I saw
Him in your Mothers arms upon the bed,
As sportingly as ever I saw your Father.
Thou lie, take that; suspicion double sees,
Jealous informers no'r meet better fees.
King, thou had better far have struck thy Father,
Dug up his bones and plaid at logats with them.
Stricken?
I know not,
My Mother always had a scented fame;
His thoughts too have been mine; I was to blame,
Prithee forgive me; my passions but like lightning,
Flash and away, dead ever we say it is;
I am not always angry, let that assure:
My Mother may befalls, she is a woman.
Prithee deliver, come I will believe thee
Even to the utmost syllable.
Then, she is false.
And did thou see him mount my Mother bed?
Else pull these out.
Thou hast shot poison through me;
False with Laundry, her sometime Page?
Even with the same.
But wherefore would they have Aphelia die?
There lies the mystery.
They fear you will accept her as the Queen,
Of whom you may beget a hopeful issue
And frustrate their intents, who but expect
Your hop'd-for death, and perhaps plotted too,
That so they might become, what now you cross,
Lawfully man and wife, and govern in your seat.
This carries show of truth, or is it a lie
 Well sahdowed by the slave? I cannot tell:
My mother certainly is not so bad,
It is a sin to think it; hence and avoid my sight
Thou sower of debate, thy seeds are strewn
On sterile groan; and therefore ill bestowed.
Is it even so, work and about my brain,
I'm lost for ever if not close again.
Are all your Troops well furnished against resistance?
Are your men bold and daring, resolute
To run your hazard, indifferent rich, not poor,
That only fight for bread? such oft betray
The sinews of a well knit plot for gain,
When these as well fight to defend as win.
Noble Lanove,
Mine know, nor fear no death, souls of that fire,
They'll catch the bullet flying, scale a wall
Battled with Enemy, stand breaches, laugh
The thunder of a Canon, call it music
Fitter a Ladies Chamber than the field;
When o'er their heads the Element is seel'd,
Darkened with Darts, they'll fight under the shade,
And ask no other roofs to hid their heads in;
They fear not Jove, and had the Giants been
But half so spirited, they had disthron'd him:
Kill, till they are killed with killing, and oftner die
Wearied than wounded, being more oppressed
With giving wounds than taking; when they fall,
They fall not vanquished, but by fate betrayed;
Such are the men I lead.
They are Soldiers fit to sack a Kingdom then,
And share the spoil between them.
Were it come to that sport once.
Bourbon, it must, or some of us must fall.
Where shall we first attempt?
The Citadel.
I say no, it's dangerous.
It is the safest course.
Believe it not, it's full of hazard.
So is the general enterprise in hand.
But this of certain ruin.
Give me a reason, why you would invade
The Palace first, and I am satisfied?
Then understand, Lamot lives still at Court.
Disguised like a formal Surgeon,
To whom the Prince being delivered
To be embalmed and boweld, finding life
Yet in his Corps, which way he's very skilful,
He has balsomed all his wounds and cured him.
And what of all this!
Have temperance, and hear the rest:
For this the Prince he has promised him the place,
The grand Commander of the Citadel,
Whose aid can stead us infinitely.
Is it certain?
I did but even now receive this Letter,
Which constantly affirms it from himself;
He says it is not known in Court yet, that the Prince lives,
For divers reasons best known to themselves;
And herein doth require our secrecy,
Therefore dear friends be wary to divulge it.
Besides he says here,
That the great Monsieur's supposed funeral
This day's solemnised with greatest pomp;
And how Aphelia dies a sacrifice
That hour he is buried on his Hearse:
What if we made attempt to save the Virgin?
It may not be, better she fall alone,
Than all of us together. And now best friends
Let us behave us bravely, it's no base act
We undertake, but our whole Countries freedom
From slavery and bondage; men of worth stand bare
To pages and gilt Butterflies? besides the Queen
 Will grave us all rather than want sport
In spilling human blood; come, let's withdraw,
And lay the plat-form of this mighty work;
My soul sits smiling in me, I divine
Though now it lows, I shall see Sun will shine.
Strephon, for so thou nam'st thy self, thou'st made
Thy Prince thy subject by thy timely cure;
This is the hour I must be buried living;
And this the hour the fair Aphelia
Dyes on my Hearse t'appease my wandering Ghost;
Say Strephon, is it so?
Nay this the very minute: hark, I hear them Coming.
Stand close here, we'll observe the Mourners.
Come blessed Virgins come and bring
To this Goddess offering,
Offer to her kisses, such
As make good better by the touch;
Where her eyes let fall a tear,
Another Paradise springs there;
It's prepostrons cruelty
To saerifice a Deity;
If a true path should be trod,
To her sacrifice a God.
Set down, set down your honourable load,
Fitting an Atlas shoulder; burden of grace
And majesty immense, whose weight doth load
Heavens stooping Porter, under which he groans
More than the Spears, and sweats thy weight not theirs;
Let me bedew thy Hearse with pious tears,
Balm to wounds, repenting ones; look down
From heaven imperial and behold me stand
All flood in sorrow, drowned in mine own tears;
Behold this spotless sacrifice, a Virgin
As pure in thought as Vesture, an Oblation
To ransom Jove and Heaven had he been taken,
And so we yield her up.
O my good Lord,
This is conspiracy against an old mans life;
Have you no other way to murder me,
But to begin wit her? are these your plots?
You're weary of my counsel? and my place
May better be supplied by greener heads?
Pray cut off mine, do, do, a weak old man,
My absence were material, since your state
Requires Paricides about you,
Alas I may be spared; why must she die?
Because she's fair? or that a Prince
Once thought her so? the fault is none of hers,
Let nature suffer for it; if it prove Art,
Or that with plaistred cunning she did catch
Your Brothers love with an adulterate form,
I yield her up as not allied to me;
If not, why should she suffer?
Brissac, peace.
What pageant's this?
Be it no wonder Lords
To see a Prince an Executioner;
Far be it from the dignity of France
To let a soul forth so refined as her's
With mercenary hands.
Contain your self,
 You may prevent the danger when you please.
Behold the conquest of thine eyes Aphelia,
France at thy foot, tread on his Royalty;
Or if thy nature knows not to forgive,
which to believe were impious, take this sword
And search my heart, send me a sacrifice
T'appease the troubled spirit of thy love.
O Eunuch, that she would take him at his word.
I find a speaking pity in thine eyes,
Which thence will drop upon thy gentle tongue,
And cry in peace, Long live my Sovereign.
Long live Clotair, long live my Sovereign.
The motions of the Spheres move in that tongue.
Turn all your sables to the Tyrian dye,
Your dirges into sprightful wedding airs.
Why looks our Court so sad? is this a time
To anckor your aspects unto the earth?
By my blessed self, he's traitor to the height,
That do's not straight salute her as his Queen.
Long live Aphelia Queen of France and us.
Do you hear this? what are you planet-stroken?
Cloves, Prince, Monsiure?
What will Clotair do?
What heaven he's pointed for him, Marry her.
Thy Grave, thy Grave first Clotair.
Cardinal.
What evil spirit's crept into my Son?
Venomed his noble nature, sickened all
His wholesome faculties, slain's divinity?
Are these your vows? or can thou cousin heaven?
Necessity of fate depends on it,
Your know she must to earth.
I, but not yet:
Since she he's conquered me, that could do fate,
Had she joined with me, the awed destinies
Spin her decrees, and what she wills they act;
Sith then what must be must be, join our hands.
Now, now, prevent them yet, O statue Prince
Thou art undone for ever.
Where am I?
Awake? for ever rather let me sleep.
Is this a funeral, O that I were a Hearse,
And not the mock of what is pagented.
Amazement quite confounds me, Cloves alive!
Yes sir, by my Art he lives, though his desire
Was not to have it known; this Chest contains
Nothing but spices sweetly odoriferous.
Into my soul I welcome thee dear brother;
This second birth of thine brings me more joy,
Than had Aphelia brought me forth an Heir,
Whom now you must remember as a Sister.
O that in nature there was left an Art,
Could teach me to forget I ever loved
This her great Masterplece; O well built frame,
Why dost thou harbour such unhallowed guests
To house within thy bosom perjury?
If that our vows are registered in heaven,
Why are they broke on earth—? Aphelia,
This was a hasty match, the subtle air
He's not yet cooled the breath, with which thou swore
Thy self into my soul; and on thy cheeks,
The print and path-way of those tears remain
That wooed me to believe so: fly me not,
I am no spirit; taste my active pulse,
And you shall find it make such harmony.
As youth and health enjoy.
The Queen she faints.
Is there a God left so propitious
To rid me of my fears; still let her sleep,
For if she wake (O King) she will appear
Too monstrous a spectre for frail eyes
To see and keep their senses.
Are you mad?
Nothing so happy Strephon, would I were;
In times first progress I despair the hour,
 That brings such fortune with it; I should then
Forget that she was ever pleasing to me;
I should no more remember she would sit
And sing me into dreams of Paradise;
Never more hang about her Ivory neck
Believing such a one Diana's war,
Never more dote she breaths Arabia,
Or kiss her Corrall lip into a paleness.
Strophe See, she's returned, an with majestique gaze,
In pity rather than contempt, beholds you.
Convey me hence some charitable man,
Lest this same Creature looking like a Saint,
Hurry my soul to Hell; she is a fiend
Apparelled like a woman, sent on earth
For man's destruction.
Rule your disordea'd tongue;
Cloves, what's past we are content to think,
It was our brother spoke, and not our subject.
I had forgot my self, yet well remember.
Yon Gorgon he's transfrom'd me into stone;
And since that time my language he's been harsh,
My words too heavy for my tongue, to earthly;
I was not born so, trust me Apbelia:
Before I was possessed with these black thoughts,
I could sit by thy side, and rest my head
Upon the rising pillows of thy breast,
Whose natural sweetness would invite mine eyes
To sink in pleasing slumbers, wake, and kiss
The Rose beds that afforded me such bliss;
But thou art now a general disease
That eat'st into my Marrow, turn my blood,
And make my veins run poison, that each sense
Groans at the alteration: am I Monsiure?
Do's Cloves talk his sorrows. and not act?
O man bewomaniz'd; were thou not mine,
How comes it thou art his?
You have done ill,
And must be taught so; you Capitulate
Not with your equal Cloves, she's thy Queen.
Upon my knees I do acknowledge her,
Queen of my thoughts and my affections.
O pardon me, if my ill-tutor'd tongue
He's forfeited my head; if not, behold
Before the sacred altar of thy feet,
I lie a willing sacrifie.
Arise:
And henceforth Cloves thus instruct thy soul;
There lies a depth in fate, which earthly eyes
May faintly look into, but cannot fathom;
You had my vow till death to be your wise,
You being dead my vows were cancelled,
And I as thus you see bestowed.
Farewell;
I will no more offend you: would to God
Those cruel hands not enough barbarous,
That made these bleeding witnesses of love,
Had set an endless period to my life too.
Where there's no help it's boodles to complain;
Cloves she's mine; let not your spirit war
Or mutiny within you, because I say it;
Nor let thy tongue from henceforth dare presume,
To say she might, or ever should be thine;
What's past once more I pardon, it is our wedding day.
A long farewell to love, thus do I break
Your broken pledge of faith; and with this kiss,
The last that ever Cloves must print here:
Unkiss the kiss that feal'd it on thy lips.
Ye powers ye are unjust, for her wild breath
That he's the sacred tie of contract broken,
Is still the same Arabia that it was:
Nay I have done; beware of jealousy,
I would not have you nourish jealous thoughts;
Though she he's broke her faith to me, to you
Against her reputation she'll be true:
Farewell my first love lost, i'll choose to have
No wife, till death shall wed me to my Grave.
Come Strephon, come and teach me how to die,
That give me life so unadvisedly.
Let Cloves that way go, this way will we,
He's great with grief, we with felicity,
Mischief grows lean Costrato, all our plots
Turn head upon themselves, my brains grow weak;
And in this Globe the policie's not left
To kill a worm unseen; I am undone,
And all my plots discovered.
This is strange,
Some comic Devil crosses our designs;
How else should he revive, or yea prepared,
Nay in the arms Laundry, when desire
Had made you all a Venus, meet events
So barren in their expectations?
Their lies the grief Costrate; Had the Court,
So I had quenched these burnings flames within,
Been buried her cinders, I had cared not.
But yet Landreis escape doth qualify
The non-performance.
That sits smiling here,
It set my brains upon the tentors Eunuch;
Was it not a rare device?
And was not I
As fortunate to leave that Armour there;
But now what's to be done?
My dull Aethlope,
I will instruct thy blackness; learn to know
My reputation's sichned, and my fame
Is looked into with narrow eyes at Court;
Therefore it's thus decreed, I will remove,
And sequester my self from company.
Good!
Thou know where Childrick keep his Concubine
To none discovered by thy self and me,
For which she is no more.
Right.
There will I
And my Laundry securely spend our time,
 Revil, embrace, and what not my Eunuch:
The Cave that leads unto the postern Gate,
Which Childrick made, will give him entrance:
No eel acquainted, being thus retired.
What lust inflamed must be by lust unfir'd.
Excellent mistress, I applaud your brain.
I will away to night, I cannot brook
These loathed Nuptials, they have undone
My hopes on earth for ever, therefore my Eunuch,
Acquaint Laundry with these designs.
What else?
If by the engine of thy stronger brain,
Thou could remove—
Aphelia or the King,
Monsiure, or all; it is not so my Queen?
Thou hast a brain which doth engender thoughts
As regal as our own, which do beget
A race of rare events; what pity it is
Thy body should be sterile, since thy mind
Is of so pregnant and a fruitful kind;
Farewell, remember me.
Remember you?
Your Gibship shall be thought on fear it not;
And now bethink thee Eunuch, all thy plots
Find fruitless issues, only in the King,
His worship walked into the other world,
Like a tame suckling Pig that died of the pipp;
The trouble is behind, my hate extends
To the whole family, I must root them up,
And beldam first with you: but how? but how?
If (in her proud desire) I do prevent
Her lust this second time, before the third
She may repent and save her loathed soul,
Which my revenge would damn; yet were she crossed,
Her lust being now at full flood in her,
And no way left to quench her burning flame,
Her dryer bones would make a bonfire,
Fit forth Devil to warm his hands by:
 Stay, stay, Castrato; no, this must not be,
Nor Must the high and mighty Queen Aphelia
This night enjoy her Bridegroom, I must set
Some mischief instantly on foot to stop it;
If I miscarry in it story shall tell,
I did attempt it bravely though I fell.
Dissuade me not, Castrato I have sought thee
Through every angle of this spacious Court,
I've business to impart.
And so have I.
Mine is of honourable consequence,
And doth require thine aid.
So doth mine yours.
Aphelia is—
Your Brother Wife. and you
Would fain enjoy her too: why sir you may,
But time must work her.
Eunuch, thou art wide;
Those vanities of love are quite extinct,
Revenge doth swell the Monsiure, and his thought
Which burn within him must be quenched with blood;
I have incensed the King with yellowness,
With doubtful phrases on Aphelia's fame;
See thou this Letter, it is a script I feigned,
For I can counterfeit Aphelia's hand;
The King he's banished Laundry from the Court,
Because he wore the Jewel which he sent
To his Aphelia: light suspicions,
But this shall aggravte; find thou the King,
Show him his Note, it doth express great love
To Laundry from Aphelia; and withal,
It mentioned the Jewel as a Gift
To gratify her servant; this to the rest
Of poison he he's sucked already in,
Will so inflame him, that the Court shall burn
Too hot for his Aphelia.
Think it done;
But now your aid, since that your mind is bent
 On honourable ends, here's one will try you.
You would have me join my self unto the Rebels,
And with my person grace their cause, perhaps
That is not now to plot.
I find you high,
Worthy the name of Monsieur; yet your thoughts
Hit not my purpose, it is such that made
Your Brother quake to hear.
What is it Eunuch?
If that if bear an honourable sound,
Though death stood gaping wide to swallow me,
I would not shrink nor fear.
Noble; hear it then,
Your Mother's loose, and this night renders up
Her body unto lust, if not prevented;
I can direct you where and when, with whom.
My soul finds the man, is it not Laundry?
The same
I'll tear him all to pieces then,
Whore my Mother; Eunuch lead the way,
In what thou shalt prescribe we will obey.
WHat vulture gripes me here, ha, what art thou?
If thou be jealousy mount and be gone;
Fly to the vulgar bosom, whose cheap thoughts
Despair their own performance; in a Prince
Thou show a nature retrograde to honour.
Suppose she gave the Jewels, must it follow
She therefore is disloyal? poor consequence,
A Babble for a boy to play withal;
I am resolved, hark, I hear her coming;
O Juno, what a look and gate is there!
Mock me not Ladies with this Ceremony,
For I am fitter to attend on you;
I am become a servant and a slave
To every moodle passion of my Lord.
All that's behind I can perform my self,
Without this complement.
Sweet Lady,
You must not weigh these things so deeply,
Your Lord is of a noble spirit;
And you shall see how calm he will return,
Blessing your Bridal bed with fruitful issue.
No, no;
The Safforn-coated Hymen frowns upon us,
These Tapers here wre lighted at a pile,
As sit Attendance on the Grave, not Bed;
Juno denies her presence at this match,
And all the ill presaging birds of night
Sing fatal Requiems for a Bridal Song;
O Ladies, is not this ominous?
Yes my Aphelia, if that ragged fate
Lie in a kiss, then it is ominous.
Let me dwell here; I am ravished,
Am I on earth? no, heaven is here,
And all th'unimitable joys, that Poets feign,
Are bettered in thy goodness.
I hope your fears are satisfied now,
You bear a brow so sweetly pleasant.
What pretty foolery is this Aphelia?
I am not jealous, for by all that good
I cannot think thee evil; kiss me sweet,
There's no deceit lies here; again, again:
Her kisses melt upon my lip, if sin
Have so much heaven in it, i'll be a sinner;
Prithee forgive my folly that could be wrought
To such a senseless passion, come let's in
And shake this off as it never been.
We must a while my Lord entreat your absence,
We have some certain Notions to deliver,
Some pillow counsels; i'll assure your highness
It shall be no ways prejudicial to you.
You see she's not prepared, till that's performed
She's ours; that done, we yield her up
To the dark night, and mercy of your Lordship.
Go then unharnis your Lady for these wars,
For we are of the Camilli, and fight naked.
Ye powers that favour Lovers, infuse apt strength
Through every nerve and sinew of this frame;
Make me all pleasure; and unto the bride
Add every vein a Venus; guide me light,
Wherein on bed lies all the worlds delight.
Not yet in bed! O happy, happy minute,
Until this hour I ne'er was fortunate;
I have preserved my King, my Prince, my Patron,
From the loose ardor of a Strumphts bed.
What's this?
Be not this second time incredulous,
And scorn my honest heart; or grant you were,
Dishonests as the Suburbs, I am loath
To nominate her whore though it betrue.
True? ha!
Leave this Lethargiz'd passion which benumns
Your nobler nature; turn your eyes on this;
Whose Character is this?
It is Aphelia's hand, the very same
Which I have often seen Cloves peruse
In his loves amorous pursuit.
Read the Contents.
A Letter that she loves Laundry, with thanks
For his so freequent visits, which she repays
With the rich Jewel sent her by the King,
Wishing a perpetuity of embraces.
Ten thousand Ravens crook is this black paper.
 How came you by it.
I saw it drop from Laundry, but ne'er thought
Before I perused it what it did contain;
Which finding, in my duty I was bound
To save my Prince from ruin.
Hold my heart,
Oh what shall Clotair do?—it cannot be;
Do but behold her face, and thou shalt read
What we call virtue there, and modesty;
Here is a look would persuade cruelty
To sigh and shed a tear, bride Nemesis
To knot her steely scourge with Plume of Down,
And Jove himself to call her vice a virtue,
A book of Devils may have the Cover gilt;
Treason lies Cabined in the smoothest brow;
The Devil can assume an Angles form;
Your wife is fair, but fair to do you harm.
Oh say not so, she is the neatest cut
As ever was printed by the hand of heaven;
Here is a volume of Divinity,
Composed so rarely, that to add to this,
Or take away from hence, were such a sin
Repentance could not expiate; i'll not touch
With hands unhallowrd such a purity,
Could it change all my thoughts to peace and silence.
My Lord —
Peace slave,
Thou that infects all peace.
Why are you thus distempered? let not truth
Make you so wild a tempest; were it false,
Or that I sought the ruin of your house,
Your youth and honour, then it were a time
To swell beyond all charming down, but being truth
Truth! hence and avoid my sight, fly where the world
Promiscuously combines without distinction;
Where every man is every women's husband,
Or where it's thought a courtesy to have
A fellow labourer in the marriage bed.
 These were a people that might bear with thee,
And fit for thee to dwell with; hence away,
And if thou love thy life, acquaint thy feet
With such by paths that we may never meet.
This Prince is of a nature mild and genlte,
His mothers milk's too fluent in his eyes,
And much I fear his resolution:
Yet I will work him forward; she awakes
I'll after him and fetch him back; if then
She scope his hate, Hell has no power with men.
Oh, oh, oh, help, help my Lord and husband;
O my Father, my Lord and husband; help, help.
Bless me Divinity, is it but a Dream! ha the light
Gone; who waits there? Isabel, Julia.
It was my Ladies voice, do's she call for help?
I cannot blame her; were I in her place I should
Do so too, the Prince looks like a bungler.
Who's there? Isabel?
Did you call Madam?
Saw thou nothing? where is my Lord?
Is he absent? I cannot blame her then to cry for help,
I should do it my self; a Prince, a Puppit would have
Been more manly: how do you Madam?
All stands not well.
I believe that faithfully.
O Girl I've past the dismallest part of night,
As ever tortured fancy with extremes.
If all Brides should be so tortured, i'd for swear Marriage.
Methoughts I saw my Father in a Vault,
His silver hair made crimson with his blood;
My brother at his Hearse upon his knees,
Taking a solemn oath for his revenge;
Yet all this while fancy so fooled my sense,
Methought that I was here; where on the instant,
My Lord in preparation for my bed,
Was by an uglyfiend ravished from hence
And hurried to destruction; here I awaked,
 And they ready—
Laundry, blood doth swell
The Monsiur's thoughts, to send thy soul to Hell.
Wisdom bids ui shun the Court,
What great ones do, fame will report;
Here we may enjoy each other,
And no eye our loves discover.
I will make thee choice of posit,
Beds of Castia mixed with Roses;
Where we'll toy, and kiss, and vary
Pleasures till the mores disoloses
All our secrets, if thou's tarry.
If I will tarry, let me wither here,
Within these sacred walls let me expire,
And spend the remnant of my life that's left,
In service of the Deity lives here,
The air's perfumed each room thorugh which I walk,
Banquets the senses, courts the appetice
Of every faculty that makes up man,
To complement it into paradise.
If then Elysium's here; where are those shades,
Those blessed apparitions Poets feign?
Appear my Goddess and out sing the Poets:
Realty of fancy that excell'st
The faint expressions of a lazy tongue,
Whose house is roofed with flesh; to tell thy worth,
Tongues tipped with imortality would faint in it.
Excellent servant, what house do you write too?
Poet and Actor both? why, this sudden gaze,
Your cases are too narrow for your eyes?
Pray spare your Optiques sir for Venus service.
No,
I'll play the prodigal with my precious sight,
 And spend it all on you; to view your second
Were such a happiness, after the which
It were a sin to see more.
bless me Rahlais,
And all ye foster fancies of the French;
What ails the man? my Laundry Laureate.
It is my Queen that's Laureate, whose blessed sight
Creates a Poet; this divine feature
Heaven only made to make man ingenious.
Is this Extempore, or have you hired
Some hackney Muse acquainted with the road
Of vulgar exoricsms to charm cheap beauties;
Take up, at this speed else your Muse will founder.
Founder, and have her founders by? with patience
Here but these poor expressions of your worth,
Which faintly paint forth your perfections,
And you shall bless my Muse.
We'll hear your jig,
How is your Ballad titl'd? come pronounce.
From head to foot, Fredigond been
Far excelling beauties Queen;
Had Jason but beheld her hair,
The golden Fleece had ne'er seemed fair;
Those stars which mortals suppose eyes,
Were ascendant in the skies,
When it fell to Venus lot
That little Cupped was begot.
Her tongue in which the Spheres do move,
Organ of divinest love,
Was by Apollo framed, that be
From hence might learn more harmonies;
Who nets her teeth, and lips discloses,
Walls of Pearl, and gates of Roses;
Two leaved doors that lead the way
Through her breath to Arabia,
To which would Cupped grant that bliss,
I'd go a pilgrimage to kiss:
Those bills of snow which on her breast.
 Rise swelling with their double crest,
Mate Parnassus mountain, whence
The Muses suck their eloquence;
Whose parts which we will not discover
He will imagine that's a lover.
Like Juno she doth go,
Like Pallas talk and sow,
Like Venus in her bliss,
Each kiss a Cupped is,
And her hands as white as snow.
From head to foot my Mistress been
Far excelling beauties Queen.
Leave these ariall Viands, taste of that
Is here substantial; how like you the fruit?
Let me for ever dwell upon these lips.
You are too greedy of these rarities,
And must be dieted, lest surfeiting
Your appetite should sicken and so die.
Die on yuur lips, O death-bed for a Jove,
Who's buried here, his Grave's immortal love;
Here will I dwell, and know no age nor sorrow.
Yet Childrick knew them both.
A frosty Prince
Begot on January by a Dutch man.
And worthy of thee flames he now endures.
What noise is this? guard me divinity.
What has my harshness done? she is my Mother;
My conscience tells me I was much to blame
Thus to delude her fancy; she returns.
O Childrick I confess it was I that killed thee,
These hands administered the fatal draught
That set thy soul on wing.
What do I hear?
Oh do not snatch my soul from out this world,
Till I have bathed it in repentant tears,
And made it fit for heaven.
She faints again;
Who waits within? come forth and lend your aid;
O welcome Strephon; use thy best of skill
That masters nature, and doth life restore,
Beyond the Art of Aesculapius;
Apply thy gentlest med'cines.
Let us withdraw;
My life sir answer hers if she miscarry.
What are ye?
Musicians, whose obedience
Doth here attend the Queen.
Bawds, arrant-bawds;
I'll talk with you anon; in, in.
Stand close, stand close, I heard a bustling within here while.
Bustling, and they come this way here's that shall bustle them.
Fly upon him, hoe's drunk, and will betray us all.
I am betrayed, that Monsiure seeks my life,
All ways against m'escape are fortified;
O cruel fortune bawd to time and fate,
That sooth'st us up to make us ruinate:
For now thou know no tears, anon no glee,
But only constant in inconstancic.
Ha! what is here? great Goddess pardon me,
I have offended against thy Deity.
This shall delude the Watch; thrice blessed hap
That thus deliver'st whom they would entrap.
I will not stand, nor I cannot stand; do ye think
I'm drunk, what's that?
Bless us, Oblesse us; Diabolo, Diabolo.
The Devil, what a Devil care I, keep off Devil,
I say keep off, I do not fear thee; are you
Sneaking back, you cowardly Rogue, do ye budge;
I hate a cowardly rogue, as I hate, as I hate the
Devil; take that.
Oh, oh, oh.
Oh, oh, oh, i'll make you cry oh;
What Devil made you in my way?
I'll now see what money he carries about him;
Men say the Prince of darkness is a Gentleman,
By'rladie he he's good clothes; but yet for all that
He may have no money.
I know not were he is, or if I did,
Before i'd yield him up to thy revenge,
I'll die the thousand deaths.
Thou glorious light, that in thy natural Orb
Did comfortably shine upon this Kingdom;
How is thy worth eclipsed, what a dull darkness
Hangs round about thy fame? in all this piece,
To every limb whereof I once owed duty,
I know not where now to find out my mother.
The Devil and disobedience blinds your eyes;
O that I had no eyes, so you no shame;
Murder your Husband to arrive at lust,
And then to lay the blame on innocents?
Blush, blush, thou worse than woman.
Ha, ha, ha.
Hold my heart,
You're impudent in sin; has your proud page
Made you thus valiant? tell me, where he is;
For if you dally with me, know this hand
Shall rip him from thy heart, though Cabined there.
How dare thou cloth thy speech in such a phrase
To me thy natural Mother?
My Mother!
Adulterate woman, shame of Royal tie,
I blush to call thee mother; thy foul lusts
Have taught me words of that harsh consequence
That Stigmatise obedience, and do brand
With mis-becoming accents siliall duty:
Deliver quickly where this lecher is;
Here housed he must be, for he cannot scope,
Lest wildness conquering my foster sense,
 Thrust forth my hand into an act of horror,
And leave you breathless here.
What French Neronian spirit have we here?
•nsolent boy, wilt thou turn Parricide?
The justness of my cause would excuse me
If I should execute; speak murderess,
Where have you mewed your Monster?
Here lies the Monster, oh rare Monster; two Berds,
This is a comic Monster; a Periwick too, this is a Court Monister;
Do ye gape, what in the Devils name would you beg now?
Behold my Lord, the Woodcock's in the Gin,
Here lies the great Laundry.
O horrid sin.
This habit might have ruined all Lamot.
But Goblin now you are caught; what is he dead?
Scarce hurt my Lord; how is it? look up.
Where is the Queen?
Here Eunuch, as thou fee'st, in misery.
O my heart, how came the Monsiur hither? Lamot too?
All that I know is that we are betrayed.
I'll set them packing, fear not, —my good Lord.
Thou art a faithful servant.
Sir, the Rebels—
Give' hem a nobler Title, by my life
I do applaud their courage; come they on?
Yes, and Brissac is made their General.
A hopeful youth, fraught with Nobility,
And all the graceful qualities that write
Man truly honourable; my injuries
Have swelled me up to this.
His Father's dead.
Trust me i'm sorry, grief has broke his heart,
And mine Castrato too; can thou imagine
Who was the Author of our Fathers death?
Am I betrayed? then lend me impudence,
I'm sure I cannot blush: Royal sir, whom?
Our Mother with Laundry, and this Lamot,
They meant should bear the blame; this was Strephon.
Indeed?—would I were fairly off.
But what news with Aphelia and her Bridegroom?
As you could wish, hes lull of jealousy,
No Frenchman ever was more Italian;
I've wrought him bravely on, your Physic works,
Hither i've brough Aphelia; to morrow
You shall hear further sport i'll warrant you;
In the mean while, what will you do with these?
Castrato thus;
Nature forbids me spill my Mothers blood,
And Laundry is unfit for my revenge;
For I must study torments for the slave,
Therefore I give them up to your tuition,
Until I shall return victorious.
Observed you that? there is some comfort yet.
Then we'll determine of them, if we fall
Let Clotair point them out a funeral:
Reward these with the whip, these with my purse,
His merit is two hundred Crowns, perform it
Drink, I adore thee drink; good fellows all,
Sometimes we rise by drink, but oftner fall.
A moral drunkard, go away with them;
And on your life let them not stir from hence.
Now my revenge grows to maturity,
We'll to Dumain (Lamot) and join with him;
Now France thou least a bleeding, thou shalt prove
What it is to cross the Monsiur in his love.
FOr certain then the Princes are at odds.
Yes, and the ground the marriage of my sister.
The Ulcerous state is ripe, and we must lance it.
The King doth Whore my sister; she's not his,
 But true and lawfully the Monsiur's wife.
Did not one Strephon wait upon the Monsiure?
What's his condition?
A Surgeon, and famous for the cure o'ch' Prince.
Yes, such there was; but little noised at Court.
That was Lamot our fast and noble friend.
There's some design on foot that hinders him,
He would not else neglect us.
What noise is that Lanove, step forth and see.
O death we are suppressed, the Monsiure, suddenly
Snared, let each man to his charge.
Hark, still the noise increases.
By the sound, this is a shout of joy and not of dread;
Lanove the news?
and you the rest,
Think not I come a Traitor to your Camp;
I cannot gild my speech with eloquence,
If this will serve you sir, I am a friend.
The Monsiur's welcome, and his worth will grace
The dignity of this days work in hand.
My almost Brother once, suffice I thank you,
And fairly greet this brave assembly,
Whose souls do look for stirring opposites,
When your resistance I fear will be slender;
But were they centupul'd, i'll fight your cause,
Kings arm their subjects when they break their laws.
Long live the Monsiure.
Lead on, away.
Here sits our Beldam dieted for Venery,
And by her, her Laundry not sir feited;
Her Ladyship's allou'd a mouldy crust,
 He stinking water to piece out his life,
Between them both they banquet like one slave,
Condemned perpetually to the Burdello;
They think I know not that they thus are used,
When it is oily I that use them thus.
How wickedly they look, oh I could laugh
To hear them rail at others misery;
He curses her, and she sooth curses him,
And both each other damn for their offences.
Learn ye that pamper up your flesh for lust,
The Eunuch in his wickedness is just. Play louder, they sleep too long.
A mischief take thee keeper, hardened dog,
Whom no distress can melt or mollify;
The cruel King doth not deny us sleep,
Although the Nursers of it, food and ease.
Peace, peace, ye villains cease that ruder noise
That breaks your softer slumbers; gentle Queen,
I am not guilty of these harsh-voic'd words
Your wilder sense hurls at me; you mistake,
I am your Eunuch, one that weeps for you.
Oh Castrato, wast not those tears in vain,
Come hither and i'll catch those falling drops
Which prodigally over-flow their banks;
There's Nectar in thine eye, oh let me drink it;
These aged Cisterns are grown dry, and yield
Not one relenting drop to ease my thirst.
Castrato pity me, my veins are parcht,
And this same flesh which walls about my soul,
Chops with excessive heat; a little water
Castrato, but a little, though it hath been
The birth of Toads, or what the lepers bathed in;
O show thy love but in a little water,
What can a Queen ask less, or subject grant her?
Though I be tortured, for it yet i'll do it.
It hath quenched half my thirst to find some pity.
I cannot bite mine arm, their tyranny
Denies me what's mine own to feed upon,
 One mouthful would suffice; I cannot get it,
Poor unfit sides that pass along the street,
I now am sensible of what ye want;
Did I ever think to die for want of food,
Whose Table was the world, from whence I culled
The rarities of nature to delight me,
And more to feed my lust than Appetite?
One bit of bread, though it were gray with age,
Hoary and crusted with a second bark,
Whose loathed outside would not court a Dog
Armed with the edge of appetite, would seem
A rare rich banquet to my empty gorge;
Oh I am worn to nothing with this want,
Such emptiness he's hunger made of me
That you may draw me on another man.
Some bread, some bread.
Oh thou art welcome,
Quick, dear Eunuch quick; what needs this delay?
A way with form and ceremonious duty,
Respect in this is too respectless.
O give me leave, I will begin a heald;
It's very good, exceeding pleasant Wine.
Dost thou deride my sufferance?
No, no, not I.
Give me the drink then, i'm all flame and fire.
Say you so, say you so? then you must pardon me,
I love your safety, and it's dangerous
To drink while you are hot, pray cool and tarry:
In the mean while I will begin to you;
How tart and pleasing this is to the Palate,
A sweeter Pheasant Christendom affords not.
I thank thee Eunuch prithee give it me.
You'll let me taste it for you, will you not?
Are you so sharply set? fie, this sauce is nought.
Prithee make hast, hunger digest's no tasters.
Come sir, I must feed you, oh, oh, not so fast,
Be not so hasty; here, still you are too hasty;
Gentle sir it will digest the better.
More, more, oh it is excellent.
Madam, here's for you now.
May heaven reward thee for it, oh it's rare.
How do you like your banquet great Laundry?
Beyond compare.
And you your drink?
The Gods taste not the like.
Ha, ha, ha, you've both eat and drunk abominable poison.
Ha!
How!
It is true, I tell your Oracle;
There's not an hours life between ye both;
The poison's sure, I did prepare it for ye,
And have my self taken an Antidote:
What say'now to the other bout with Laundry,
I can procure a second meeting for you,
Indeed I can; think you not whoredom sweet
Now you are a dying? is not you soul at ease,
The murder of your Husband but a toy,
A flea-biting? alack you feel it not.
Inhumane slave, treacherous Rascal.
Good words, Lady whore, good words: what are you loose?
Miraculous famine, he's your empty guts
Persuaded you to valour? will it scratch or bite?
I'm sure't has no weapon, Monsiure disarm it.
Lan. He did so Rascal, yet your curious search
Ne'er pried into this sheath; do you see this:
With mine own hands it had let forth mine own life,
Had the proud Monsiure trusted us to any,
Thy self excepted, whom I now perceive
The only Author of our misery.
You're very nimble Hell-hound.
O Lord sir, you know the cause,
 I'm lighter by a stone or two than you,
Yet I am weight enough to keep you down;
Stir and thou dy'st—now sir, what say you to me?
How did you like your old Queen? was she gamesome?
Did she apply her self like an apt whore
Unto your loose embraces?
Dog, let me rest.
Good my Lord pardon me,
Under your Graces favour be it spoken,
You are our cushion, and i'll sit on you.
I am not very heavy, and I sir?
I do not altogether weigh a man.
Villainous Traitor,
O let him rise, and wreck thy spite on me.
You cog now, you'd rather I should kill.
O spare him, spare him; Eunuch save my servant,
And i'll forgive thee all thy sins against me;
There's not an injury thou dost to him,
But wounds me to the soul.
Pray then look here,
How easily this Skein is sheathed in him;
An Engine of his own preparing Lady,
And pittie't were so brave a Gentleman,
Such a neat hopeful whore-master as he,
Should die by any weapon but his own.
So perish all that love Adultery.
There, sit you there again: once more to you,
Who if your poison do not work too fast,
Shall see more sights like these before you die;
But lest you should prevent us with your tongue,
I will be bold to gag your Ladyship;
I'll leave a peeping hole through which you shall
See sights, shall kill thee faster than thy poison;
I am prepared now for Aphelia's death.
All things are ready, and behold the King.
Now for my part.
I am too pitiful, a watery flux,
Which soft and tender hearted men call tears,
 Stand on mine eyes, and do's express a nature
Too like my Bearer; it is now with me
Full tide in sorrow, my Cynthia governs strongly.
How fares the great Clotair?
What do the wise,
Castrato, call the moisture which presumes
To meditate betwixt my wrath and me?
Expressions of a weak and silly nature,
Passion of fools and women: are you a man
And bear so tame a soul, such a smock spirit?
The Distaff owns more spleen, more noble anger;
Pray let her live until the Pages write,
An hopping balladry verse rime upon you,
Great Clotair had a wife and she was fair,
Yea fairer than the flowerie meads in May;
Oh she was fair, yet foul; most riddling sense,
Oh it is horrid; then to conclude
In what a high streign you did take revenge,
How like your house and honour, hark, how she dies,
Strangled in tears fallen from the Cuckolds eyes;
You are her husband sir, and now must own
Her doubtful issue, and her lawless lust;
Although a Bull should leap her, you must father,
And have a drove of forked Animals,
Shall have their horns born with them to the sound,
Twill save their prodigal wives the reacky labour.
Marry a Whore? father a bastard issue?
I tell you truth, there's no avoiding it.
Come bring her forth.
Use not such violence good Gentlemen,
I'll walk a lamb to slaughter, not rapine
At any torments you shall put me too,
Only be modest: commend me to my Lord,
I doubt I never shall behold him more;
For by the calculation of your looks
I have not long to live.
True Aphelia, confess &amp; turn thy fate; give me to know
With what foul Monster thou hast wronged thy soul,
 Seam-rent that holy weed, Virginity;
And case me of a load that bears more weight
Than what my youthful sins have heaped upon me.
If ever my Lord—
No more of that, it tends to madness;
I'll force it from thee; bring forth the tortures there;
I'll try if in these fiery instruments
There lie a tongue, which better can persuade
Confession from thee; these red hot applied
Unto thy breast adulterate, shall extract
All future hope to suckle lawless issue;
The poisonous springs which from these hills arise,
Shall have their fountain head damned up by these.
I've heard you swear, that you were poor in words,
And knew not to express the happiness
Which you conceived was habitable here.
How much my Lord is altered from himself
It is thou art altered; true Aphelia,
That whilst thy purer thoughts did awe thy will,
I loved like an Idolater: I was possessed
That these two twins, these Globes of flesh, contained
All that was happy both in earth and heaven;
In this I could descry the Milky way,
The maiden Zone that girds the waste of heaven;
In this the seat of Paradise, and how
The wanton Rivulets played about the Isle
Which puzzel yet Geography: all this I could,
I could in thee my sometime chaste Aphelia
Find and rejoice in; but thou art now
An undressed wilderness wherein I walk,
Losing my self amongst multitude of beasts;
O savage actions! Come dispatch.
Sir—?
I'I hear no more.
Heaven will then;
And though it bear an ear far distant hence,
Both hear and pity me. O my loved Lord,
Should but a dream work on my fancy,
 That you were thus to suffer as I am,
It would conspire to kill me with more speed
Than these your threatening Ministers; alas,
I'll force a gentler nature in the steel,
And with my rainy eyes weep out their heat;
Which as it dies should hiss it self to scorn,
For offering to contain but fire to hurt you;
And will you then a bold spectator stand,
Smiling at what I suffer? shed but one tear,
Or counterfeit a sorrow for my sake,
A little seeming woe, and I shall die
Sick of your kindness, not your cruelty.
O my soft temper, her sweet harmonic
Will melt me into fool; to hear these words,
The Mother is to busy in mine eyes;
What shall I do?
Make a new Hell,
And if thou can, create more Devils, do,
And they will find employment all on her;
For since the general Creation,
Time never did produce a fowler sinner,
Or one more beggared hell in punishing.
Thou hast awaked me; Whore will you confess?
Do not enforce your death through wilfulness;
Speak stubborn silence, or i'll break thy heart.
My Lord and Husband, oh my Lord and husband,
Regard my misery and pity me.
You're cruel to thy self, I wrong thee not;
It is not I that tear this precious Fleece,
This glorious excrement, in validity,
Another Cholcos better seeming Jason.
I pull not off these curious sporting Tresses,
Fit braids to Captive Kings had thou been honest.
I wound thee not, confess, and live as free
As mountain air, I will not injure thee.
My gracious Prince, I dare not call you husband,
Your actions do forbid, which write me slave
And not your equal; if to be your wife
 Has plucked this misery upon my head,
Or cause in you this frenzy, put me off,
I will endure it patiently; but if ever—
The old tune this, come, come, the Irons there.
Oh, oh, oh, cruel my Lord, unmanly;
I will not curse yet heaven, no nor blaspheme,
Although mine injuries would half persuade,
Gods are not, or are deaf to innocents.
Arm, arm, my Lord, the Castle's walled about
With living Clay, three times ten thousand men,
Approved Warrlers, souls of blood and fire,
That only known to do, and not to suffer,
Make head against you; believe me sir,
A braver Troop, and spirits more resolved,
Life never put in action: young Brissac
Now old enough to quit his Fathers death,
Together with the ruin of his Sister,
He has vowed destruction to your name and ashes.
Let them come on, we'll dare them do their worst;
This Castle will endure a fortnights siege,
Before the expiration of which time,
My Brother with his fellow Peers of France,
Shall whip these Rebels for their insolence.
Know thou ought else; why dost thou shake thy head?
Fly, fly, my Lord.
Villain, it is no language for a Prince.
Then stand upon your guard; yet that's as bad,
The Castle's walled about with walking steel,
And you but tempt your death in your escape,
If you stay here, provoke it.
The Monsiur, like the God of war, bestrides
A bounding Courser, who is therefore proud
To be so backed, as knowing whom he bears:
So Centaur-like he's anckor'd to his seat,
As he had twinned with the proud steed he rides on;
He grows unto his saddle all one piece,
And that unto his Horse; who thus unmoved,
Sits like a Persons on his Pegasus,
 Stable and fleet. Who at head of all his Troops,
With words inflames 'em that did burn before,
But now appear much brighter; their glistening arms
Reflecting against the Sun, doth lightning mock;
Unto which blaze, their Drums and Horses hoofs
Do not want much of Thunder: such is the show,
As if great Mars, angry with humane race,
Did lead the Gods to battle against the Earth.
How does your Grace? how fares your Majesty?
The Monsiur? did he not name the Monsiur?
I did my Lord.
Is he joined with them too?
Then Dooms-day is at hand, I see my ruin.
Go to the Castle walls to summon them
To render an account of their intents.
Ask the proud Monsiur (though I know the cause)
Why his presumptuous and ambitious feet,
Have on the bosom of his mother earth,
Made a broad road of treason; go, begone.
Castrato thou dost love me, i'm sure thou dost;
I have such proofs of thy true hearted-love,
That I must put my life into thy hands.
Thou see how all things stand, my wife she's false,
Her brother seeks my life, the Monsiur's thoughts
(Backed with the ever factious souls of France)
Aim at the Gallic Crown and dignity,
Whilst I a catiff and neglected Prince
Must fall by traitors hands.
What mean you sir?
Look here's a Pistol in whose womb lies death,
A heavy leaden sleep.
Would you I should
Try the conclusion here? make her confess
By other instruments her horrid guilt,
In this there's too much mercy.
Hear me speak,
I'll trouble her no further; let her sin
Be punished from above, i'll wait heavens leisure.
 Here Eunuch take thou this, it was prepared
For the adulterate Laundry; here, receive it,
And if thou love me use it upon me:
Come shoot me through, I know I shall be slain,
(If not by thee, yet by the enemy)
And therefore to prevent the bitter scorn
Of the insulting foe (which is a death
So full of horror to the conquered,
No Tyranny is like it) use this handful,
The handsom'st weed that nature can produce
In the large Storehouse of her providence,
Can show no simple like it; for this cures
At once, the sickness of the mind and body.
Thou shalt, I know thou wilt, I prithee take it;
It is not murder, tender-hearted fool
Which thou commits, rather a sacrifice,
For which heaven will reward thee.
I do not know the nature of your Gods,
Yet on your words i'll try their kindness.
Nobly resoly'd, come shoot me quickly then.
I never was liker t'express my self
Than at this minute; do not betray me tears,
The Eunuchs nature must be harsh and cruel.
O spare him Eunuch, spare him, save my Lord,
And i'll forgive thee all thy sins against me.
Peace foollsh woman, it is thou that kill thy Lord,
Were it not for thee he might live long and happy;
Pray let me kiss your hand, and take my leave
Of my best best Master.
Do it and be sudden then: ah what means this?
Marry sir this it means,
That if this fail, this shall perform the deed;
Think not but I will kill you, do not fear,
I am the excellent'st he alive at these same toys,
Look here my coffined fool I do not bungle.
Are these dead then?
As sure as you live, pray ask them else;
Unless this Ewes flesh too intense in heat
 Be lingering yet behind; she's scarcely dead,
But in her dying ears i'll howl this noise;
Look Queen, here's the top-branch of all thy Family,
Mark but how kindly for thy sake'i'l use him.
Then I perceive I have been much abused,
So he's my chaster Queen; oh my cursed fate!
Oh, do you so, do you so.
Oh, oh, oh.
There broke a Strumpets heart; hear me King,
Thy Mother was a foul adulteress,
A cruel butcherer of innocents;
Witness thy brother, that thy Mother's false,
Witness thine own eyes that beheld the fall
And ruin of the Dumain! emily.
Thy Mother's deep in blood, for which she's damned:
You ravished fair Chrotilda; Clodimir
Your valiant Uncle, brother to this Queen,
Was for the foul fact slain; for which mistake,
Dumain, Lamot, Maria, Isabel,
And the abused Chrotilda, if by flight
She had not saved her life, had fallen with them.
I knowing this, and ever pitying
The wrongs that they endured,
Have found it time thus to revenge them.
What were their wrongs to thee?
I'll not Capitulate mine injuries,
I hear my time is short.
How fain would I preserve my life from death,
Since my Aphelia's chaste; to think her false,
(Not that I fear the foe) made me despair
Of future comfort. Eunuch, spare my life,
I will forgive thee, and reward thee too;
Remember who it is that sues to thee.
In that remembrance I have lost my self,
I cannot strike him, my relenting heart
Yerns on his Princely person: take your sword,
But on condition Clotair, thou shalt swear
By thy descent, thy princely parentage,
 By the wronged souls of all those innocents
To thy lust satisfied, by Aphelia's self,
Or any thing thy soul shall hold more dear,
Upon receipt, to guide the fatal point.
Directly to thy heart.
Why would thou so?
Pish, I'll teach thee to be speedy in the fact;
Remember how thy Royal Father fell;
Behold thy Mother murdered by this hand;
Into thy bosom cast thine inward eyes.
And view the sorrows I have heaped on thee:
Look on Aphelia, and let her wrongs
Prompt thy slow hand to this most timely flaughter;
I cannot brook delay, or do, or suffer.
A Heathen, and a Traitor die with thee.
A Christian Heathen Clotair if thou wilt,
Made so by thee; read that and break thy heart.
Force op the door, seize on his Royal person:now Clotair
Thou are the Monsieur's prisoner; Tyrant say,
Where is Aphelia your Adulteress!
It makes no matter where.
O my dear Sister, O my dearest life.
See Noble Lords,
Here lies that Hel-hound Eunuch; villain up,
And tell us who he's done these fatal deeds.
They are ne'er allied to thee that did these Acts,
Chrotilda and a woman.
Villain thou li'st, my sister's gone a weary pilgrimage,
And for this many years with grief I speak it,
Been travelled none knows where.
What am I?
What strange and uncouth thing?
A ravisher,
And better to instruct thee in thy self;
Had not Chrotilda been, incestuous.
Hold, hold your Royal hand; what will you do?
What else but follow her; shall Clotair live
 A Captive to his Brother, slaved to sin,
Inthral's in wedlock that's incestuous,
O ravisher and murderer of his friend,
There's no way left to rid me but my sword,
Of all these ills at once, Oh wronged Chrotilda / 
My sister
I Dumain, no Eunuch she;
No sun-burnt vagabond of Aethiope,
Though entertained for such by Fredigond.
I say here lies thy ravished sister slain
By me the ravisher.
Hold, hold, my heart.
Lend me thy hand Clotair, have I thy hand?
Thou most abused of womankind, thou hast.
I should have killed thee King, and had put on
A masculine spirit to perform the deed;
Alas how frail our resolutions are!
A women's weakness conquered my revenge:
I'd spirit enough to quit my Fathers wrongs;
And they which should have seen me act that part,
Would not believe I should so soon prove haggard:
But there is something dwells upon thy brow
Which did perfwade me to humanity;
Thou injur'dst me, and yet I spared thy life;
Thou injurd'st me, yet I would fall by thee;
And like to my soft sex, I fall and perish.
Speak, for ever speak: Chrotilda, Chrotilda.
My Sister's in mine eyes, this brave revenge
Should have been mine, and not thy act Chrotilda;
Away salt rheum, Chrotilda laughs at thee,
Her spirit is more manly.
I must weep too,
Mine injuries and hers are so near kin,
That they must bear each other company
In tears of blood and death;
For my grieved heart too long with earth,
Would gladly seek a way to find out rest.
Art thou joined with her too against thy self?
 Will my Aphelia leave me? pardon sweet,
My love is fatal, and too well thou know
The deadly proof in fair Chrotilda death;
Yet leave me not though I refrain thy bed,
And must abandon all those thoughts of love
Which married couples use; yet we may sit
And gaze upon each other, tell sad tales
Of ruined Princes, wronged Virginity;
And when our utterance is tired by speech,
We'll sit and sigh a sad parenthesis,
And then proceed again, then sigh again
A silent Chorus to our History;
Our tears shall keep our sorrows ever green,
Still springing, never ripe: shall we do thus
To lengthen out our grief?
For ever King,
The hand of heaven lies on me; for I feel
My in ward and external injuries
Wrestle with life, in which condition
My soul is worried by that Tyrant death.
I must forsake thee Clotair
Stay awhile, it is unkindly done to leave me thus:
O she is gone, for ever, ever gone;
And I stand prating here between them both,
The fatal cause of death unto them both.
Wilt thou not break proud heart, I prithee break,
Prove not a Rebel to thy Prince like these;
It's well there is some loyalty in thee yet;
Thou art commanded by me —
Gracious my Liege.
Charles I have injured thee, and thee Dumain;
Can ye forgive me?
Good your Grace
Call back your spirits, think what's to be done.
I consider well, and the now King,
The quondam Monsieur shall not deny me this;
Half of the honours of the deal Laundry
We do confer on thee, the other half
 Be thine Dumain; Charles shall be Duke of France,
Thou of the Palace Major: this is our will.
Great King, you are not yet so near your end,
Forsend it heaven.
Look up my Gracious Lord.
My Royal Brother?
I begin to faint,
A darkness like to death hangs on mine eyes;
Lend me thine hand Brissac, and thine Dumain.
Good gentle souls when ye shall mention me,
And elder time shall rip these stories up,
Diffected and Anatomized by you;
Touch sparingly this story, do not read
Too harsh a comment on this loathed deed,
Left you enforce posterity to blast
My name and Memory with endless curses;
Call me an honouralbe murderer,
And finish there as I do.
O Noble Lord,
Whose fame was very essence to his souls.
That gone, the other fled, choosing to die,
Rather then live a King in infamy.
A heavy spectacle of grief and woe
Have beheld since our arrival here;
Take up the body of the King, and these
That for his love on either hand lie slain,
They shall lie buried in one Monument:
And take up these; this was Royal Queen
When virtue steered her thoughts; but we may see,
When we turn foes to good, to vice a friend,
We fall like these, and like these thus we end.

NO happiness like the Fools, Comastes?
No, none Sir. Hoe's mirth it self, and the cause
Of it in others. They say, all pleasure
Is a shadow; then that which we enjoy,
Is only the shadow of a shadow,
Hardly the Picture of what he embraces.
Our delights are faint, thwarted with fears,
Disgusted by the conscience, and after
An hour of pleasure, succeeds a week of
Repentance: in which time we live by Rule,
And not by Nature; laugh not, though the jest
Be good; nor rage, though at a just cause;
But sickly whisper out our sayings,
As if they were our last. When the Fool lusts
With his whole soul too, and sins till hoe's weary;
Knows no conscience, but his Want-that-way, nor
Remorse, but Disability.
Ha, ha, ha.
Nature never showed her liberality
More, than to those she was sparing of her
Best gifts to. She houses Wisdom in a
Body full of decays, such as requires
Her whole strength to bear up the ruin;
Measures his legs with the Spiders, gives him
Pale, and wan looks, scarce altered from the earth
He was made of. Where to the Idiot, she
Bestows a body, equal with the Bulks
Of Trees, and arms as thunder-proof, makes him
A strong, a large, and healthy Fool.
Ha, ha, ha.
Fit Lectures for such a Scholar.
Well Comastes,
Thou shalt not want for a Coat, if that will do it.
Send me a Mind too with it, and you have not
A greater present for your Neighbour-Princes.
Come my Lords let's sit. And fill up our Cups,
Make them like our joys, still full and flowing.
Thus it should be my Lords in a state that
Knows no troubles: let unhappy Princes,
Whom losles do afflict, and fears a ffright,
Make Annual-Feasts; but we whose even affairs
Do follow one another, and do keep
Their just Periods, though the Reins are loose,
And their Guide sleep, seeming rather so to
Have faln-out, than so cause: each day shall
Be a Triumph, each hour a Feast.
We may chance to find one out for Funerals.
aside
A health to all, and a long peace.
You are melancholy Aratus.
You are rude Comastes, and let me tell you—
O let his Lord-ship alone. He's one of those
Which say their prayers backward for the State.
You are the Foxes that thrive by it.
Aratus your anger is unseasonable, And the King marks it.
How now Aratus,
What's the matter? Our Table should know no frowns,
And then least, when we our self forbears 'em.
Royal Sir, I ask your pardon. He waked me
Something rudely, and got a froward answer.
What, all dead? Fill another round, our Wine
Moves not. Here Polyander, to thee—
What think thou of Comaste's happiness?
I think Sir, it is as dull, as foolish.
There cannot be a sense of pleasure, where
There is so little sense. Greatness is the Centre
Of all happiness, and felicity,
Like our Lands at first, is tied to the Crown.
Kings comes near unto the Gods, and are like them
Both in power and pleasure; do command all,
Enjoy all, are miserable only in having
Of too much, and wanting what to wish for.
Theirs is the dazzling happiness. It is idle
Therefore to prefer Private joys before
The Crown-pleasures. The King may throw by his
Greatness when he please, and be poorly happy;
But the Beggar will ne'er sigh unto a Sceptre.
Why I Polyander, ther's some life in this,
A little heaven even in the apprehension.
Aratus art not thou of this opinion?
Not I Sir, nor of my Lord the Fools there.
Kings are more miserable, than they seem
Happy; flattered by themselves and others,
Into a joy that is not, and what they feel,
They rather do imagine than find so.
Yet I grant too, a King may be happy,
But not then as a King. Felicity
Is a Purchase, and no Inheritance,
Nor has the Prerogative more than one life
In it ever, it dyes still with the Buyer.
Troubles are the good Kings profession,
In the Wars the first Dart is thrown at him,
Where oft times his happiness is in a
Glorious death; or perhaps his God-like Rays
Are plucked from him by some accursed hand,
And so falls less happy, being after
Vainly wished so by a poor revenge he
Knows not.
Very Grave, and unseasonable!
Thus your Lord-ship gets the reputation
Of Singularity, which the Vulgar
Suspect to be Wisdom.
Sir you see
How this place and my freeness are injured.
Mirth, only mirth Aratus. He means
Thy speech would better have become a Council,
Than a Banquet. Timeus welcome. Nay
Keep your seats. Would thou had been partaker
Of our Mirth.
Sir, when my actions, or my age,
Shall make me worthy of your ease and pleasures,
I shall be a thankful sharer: but till then,
Your Troubles will become me better than
Your Sports, and Cares will sit more lovely on
My Brow than Roses. Sir, those that are about you
Seek to drown your Virtues.
Your Highness means
None here?
I name none here my Lord.
Nay Timeus,
Thou ne'er look friendly on our pleasures.
I must confess Sir, I had rather see you
Bloody than thus Wet; nor are my Wishes
Impious, Polyander.
My Lord.
How basely that Smile became thee. I had
Rather thou had answered me with a Blow
Than such a Look. I thought to have asked thee
Something, but I see thou art unworthy
Of a brave Demand. Thy Skill lies only
In the Curiosity of a Meal,
To say at the first touch of the tongue. this is
A Chian, this a Falernian Wine.
Straight by the colour of the flesh to know,
Whether the foul were crammed, or whether fed,
Prithee Polyander, how sat the Wind
When this Bore was slain? Were not these Apples
Pulled the Moon Increasing? Degenerate!
I have seen thee put thy face into a Frown,
And were it so constant in that look, as if
Thou had no other.
Sir, when you shall find,
Or make a cause, I'll put them on again,
Here they'll but sour the Entertainment.
You see, my Lord, they are not drowned, they live
Still under water.
Like thine, Beast.
Prithee Timeus let us enjoy our Mirth
While the Gods give it: the time will come,
That we shall wish for it, and not have it.
On my Conscience thou coldest be content
To have Enemies, only that thou might cut'em off.
I am sorry, Sir, if I have offended
Against your Mirth, it was not my intent.
I came to bring you News.
News? What is it? Good?
It is as you shall esteem of't Sir: There's
A Stranger Prince arrived.
Hither?
Yes Sir.
His Visit's forced by a Storm, as he pretends.
What ere the Occasion is, he shall be
Welcome. The time's far spent. Aratus, it
Shall be thy Employment. From us fairly
Salute the Prince, and tell him, though the Seas
Have been Unfriendly, the Land shall Court him.
Great Sir, you highly Honour me.
So, now we have time to speak: What think thou,
Aratus of these passages?
Well, bravely well.
Your speech struck desperately at the King:
He will not swallow it without some touch of jealousy.
It is no matter. He cannot cross us now.
We have not tan'e so many years to build
A Work up, and then to have it ruined
With a push. No, he that will shake't, must first
Overthrow a Kingdom, a Prince, a Law, so large
The Extents are: Ne'er did Plot thrive like it,
It has infected with the Holy Sore
The greatest part of the Realm, and catches daily;
Like some Unheard of New Opinions
Straightened at first, and prisoned in the breasts
Of two or three, gain strength by Time, and Ears,
And daily fed by curiosity,
Thrust out at last the Old, and most Received,
And grow the whole Religion of the Place.
When we have called our Party forth, the Work
Will seem done, the thin Numbers that are left,
Not deserving the Name of Enemies.
The Tyrant then will see himself no more
A King, but only the Wretched Cause of War,
His Power being ravished from him.
While the fruit's thus ripe, why doe we let it grow?
And spoil perhaps?
We will no longer, only
A little Ceremony detains us
To Crown our King, that past, our actions
With our thoughts shall then contend in swiftness.
How sped your visit to the young Prince?
Most happily: O had you seen with me
The Dear Cause of this our Danger, how Cheap
Would you have thought the Greatest for his Sake,
And stood contemning Life, thinking your blood
Ill-stored within your veins, when that his service
Called it? sure it was some such Shape and Sweetness
Which first slaved men, and gained a Rule, before there was
A Kingdom.
You forget your Message to the Prince.
It is true; pray bear me Company, we may get thanks
For our Complement another day.
Devil, whether wilt thou hurl me? The Ship
Sunk under so much Ill, nor can the Earth
Bear us both together: the greatest Hills
Press not her face with half that Load; one thought
Of Goodness made me lighter than the Waves,
And in an instant taught me how to swim.
Melampus!
Harpists!
Are we only escaped?
I hope so.
Then the Storm has plaid the Hangman,
And saved us Innocent.
Innocent! What's that?
It has saved us so much labour, and a broken head perhaps.
The Wrack was great, and full of horror.
How the rogues prayed, and roared above the Waves.
Vowed whole herds of Off rings for their safety.
But Neptune saved 'em Charges, and took the
Verier Beasts.
We escaped miraculously.
I hope you'll burn no Bullocks to the Sea.
No, my Vows were of another Nature.
I vowed to live well, and change my bloody purpose.
Thou did not mean in Earnest?
I did then, but I no sooner touched the shore,
And safety, but my Old thoughts returned.
Come, we'll go claim our Hire, and swear we killed him
Before the storm. Our Fellows dead-pay will
Fall to us. We'll demand for losses, I,
And our dangers too.
If my Eyes deceive
Me not, here comes one will deny the payment.
It is he, how the Devil escaped he? Be resolute, and second me.
How now friends, amazed at what's past? Dangers
Ore-blown are Dreams, no more to be esteemed of,
Within this hour you would have given a world,
To stand thus had it been yours; let not smaller
Losses then afflict you. The greatest Riches
Are trifles after such Deliverance.
Our Birth-day was not half to us so happy,
As is this Minute, then we had no sense
Of Life, now we perceive and joy in it—
What moved these Villains hatred? Sure they know
Me not: Nor did I ere see them before
This Voyage! They could not hope for Money:
There's more in it. Let me see—What's here, a beard?
Black patches? Sure it is their trade they are so
Furnished. Both are of the same profession.
He finds a Letter about the last. I am glad to hear you have found Pallantus, receive this man the bearer into your Company and Counsel, and if your secret practises fail you, assault him openly, and by violence perform the Murder; let the one or the other be done speedily, my employ∣mints here for you are many, and instant.
Your Lord and Friend, Timeus.
Art thou the Lord, my wonder then is o'er!
Thy l' reachery was ever greater than thy Hate,
And that too was something more than Malice,
Above the search of Innocence, a Knot
Unto the subtil'st Traitors, a Rid de
To thy self. Were not thy Home-Cruelties
Enough, but thou must maintain thy Factors
Out for lives in Foreign Kingdoms? I have
Lain hid so long, am now so New Formed by Art,
No friend can know me, Hate, thy Eyes are more
Perceiving far than Friendships. I have not
Dared to Name my self, because with it I doe
Name my Father, and yet thou hast me perfect.
Him, with many more, that were to Good to look on
So much Ill, as thine, and thy fathers Lives,
Were made away—Some God give me temper,
Or too much Rage, instead of a Revenger,
Will turn me a Stock, a Fool. Hear me ye
Banished Gods (for I may justly fear
If that your powers are absent any where,
It is from this place where Tyranny doth reign)
On this Altar I doe vow, to be your
Martyr, If not your surviving Instrument,
Ne'er to let fall your Vengeance, till it light
On those which slew the King, your King, the
Image of your Goodness. Which killed the Prince,
And dared to say that he was lost, lost indeed.
Which on the Princess doe intend a Rape,
Their Marriage is no better. Which slew
My Father, and last resolved on me.
Had I a thousand lives I'd' gage them here,
And think your judgement yet not bought too dear
In the name of wonder what are thou?
Why?
What am I Sir?
Nay, I know not,
Nor does any but an Antiquary,
Or a Conjurer, certainly, The art no Man,
Or if thou be, I am sure none of the
Last Edition
Were your Troop absent,
I'd make you find I were without those helps.
Tic so long since you saw a Man, a true One,
That you know not when you meet one. Your Lordships
Glass showed you none this morning.
Whence came thou?
I, that I'd fain know, here's no hole open
In the Earth.
From Sea.
From the bottom sure,
Above Water nothing floats like thee.
Of what profession art thou? a Soldier?
Yes.
Thou should be hanged for thy very looks
If thou were not, they are excusable
In no Calling else.
I know ye all, but
At this time will not be known unto you.
These are some insolent Scoffers, that breath
Their Wits on all they see weaker than themselves
Against they meet the Fool next, I wrong my self
To talk to'em.
Dost hear?
None of your wit yet.
Thou bleed!
Was it that made me such a wonder?
I do so.
And much blood is spilt upon
The Ground. Know thou the cause?
Yes, I was
Assaulted by two Rank Rascals, which I
Let blood, and cured.
Hast thou not killed, and rob'd'em?
Sir your thoughts are base. And you do ill thus
To insult upon my Innocence. Rob'd'em;
Money's more below my thoughts, than Earth:
My Education has been Noble, and
Though the Midwife wrapped me not in Purple,
Nor Princes Gossipped at my Birth, I have
Dared to be as Honest as the Greatest.
My Word hath commanded more, than all your
Lands and Money. Those Deeds which I have done,
Dishonesty dared not to have looked on.
They would have frighted your Lordship, if but
Told you toward bed-time.
I never saw
Such fierceness!
I begin to admire this fellow!
Where hast thou bestow'd'em?
behind there.
If you search' em you may find more. What Money
They had, the Sea washed 'em clean of before their deaths.
Why, were they cast away?
Yes, but it seems
They had a Land-fate.
Who's here, rogues limbs?
Their two heads a piece?
Here's a Paper speaks 'em
Most notorious Villains.
They were proper men.
They were so. Did kill'em both, alone?
I told you once so, and am not proud of't
To boast it o'er again, and tell you how I did it.
Trust me you are a brave fellow.
And I admire thy stoutness. Thou look
As if thou had been Nure'd in perils.
Dare thou with us confront a Bold One?
But as Honest, as'tis Great. What say thou?
Can thou like of us?
Thou shalt not find us
As we appeared at first.
While ye talk thus
I can. And in your Business, if Honesty
Go yoked with Danger, it cannot fright me then.
No, though all the Monsters of Sea and Land,
And Hell to boot, were framed into one Horror,
I'd face it, Charge it, and wager a life
I'd Conquer it.
Thy words go high as thunder.
Pardon my words, if my actions bear up
Equal.
I believe they will,
And dare promise thou wilt do wonders.
Let meimbrace the—You are welcome to our
Friendship. Mine eyes did look on thee unworthily
Before, me thinks you are Comely now, thy scars
Are so many Graces, not set by an
Effeminate, but by a manly, and
A War-like skill. Business calls us hence, thou shalt not
Part one Minute from me. Thy wounds needs help,
Come, thou shalt Heal before me.
Have you commanded all the Mariners
Aboard, each Captain to his charge, bid the
Soldiers fill the Decks with their full numbers,
And display their Colours, left nothing wanting
That may add to the Glory of the Navy?
Sir, all things are in their Pride and height.
The Captains Bravery seems to lend brightness
To the day, and like the Sun, throws rays, and light
About 'em: Nor lookstheir Gold less awful,
Than the Soldiers Steel. On the Ships appear
The Joy and Riches of a Conquest, and yet they
Keep the Order of a joyning-battel.
There wants nothing to make a War-like, Princely,
And well-commanded Navy, but your Presence Sir.
I would not have them think us such Poor Men,
That we are drove to seek for their Relief,
To sue for Bread and Water; but rather
That we come like Noble Wooers, full of
Rewards and Presents, able to return
All favours we receive, and equally
To honour Them, that honour Us, as Great
As they. It shall appear, that he that is
Master of such a Fleet, may style himself
Prince, though Lord of nothing else.
The people
Flock upon the shore, and with one Voice say,
You come to fetch their Princess. Sir, you have
More than their Consents already, you have
Their wishes too.
I marry Haimantus,
Such a Jewel would make the rest look dim!
There are two Ladies in this Isle (if fame
Say true) the wonders of the World! When Nature
Made them, she summoned her whole God-head,
And unwearied wrought till she had done,
Formed each limb as if she had begun there:
She seemed to practise on the World till then,
And what like beautiful she framed before,
Were but Degrees to this Height, these the Ascent,
From which she now must fall! They made her Older
Than the labour of a thousand years—
Ther's a great train, it seems from Court, coming
To your Highness.
Come, lets meet'em.
Sir, the King congratulates your safety,
And is glad of your Arrival, though the Cause
Were dangerous, You would have Obliged him
Much Sir, if you had been bound for Create.
The King is Royal, and chides me kindly.
He binds a Stranger ever to his Service.
His Majesty expects you'll honour him
With your Presence this night at Court.
My Lord;
I shall wait upon him. But I must fist
Entreat, you'll favour me with your Company
A ship-board. I shall not need to excuse
A Soldiers Entertainment, I doubt not,
But your Lordships knows it well; Coursnesse and
Plainness are the Praise of it.
Sir you are
The Envy of your Neighbour Princes, you
So far exceed them in a Brave Command;
I ne'er was happy in the like sight before.
And my Lord, they that can boast the strangest,
Have not seen one so Common, and so Rare.
Your Navy looks, as if she wore the Spoils
Of a whole Land, or came to purchase 'em.
My Lord you'll make me proud. Your presence yet
Will add unto its Glory.
Found dead upon the shore!
I my Lord,
Thrown into a Cliff.
Were they drowned?
It is believed not, my Lord: for many fresh Wounds
Were found upon their bodies; and yet their Clothes
Were wet.
It is strange! Were there but two?
No my Lord.
That's stranger yet. Reward the Men that found them,
And bid'm make no farther enquiry
After their Deaths, nor speak of it. Let it
Die with you too, doe you hear? The Villains
Have robed at their return, and got their deaths
That way. I ne'er could spare 'em worse; the State
Stands in greater need of theirs, than of the
Sword of Justice. Rodeo.
My Lord.
Is your Lady to be spoke with?
Always,
My Lord, by you. But now she's coming forth.
Save you sweet Sister.
O you're welcome Sir.
Sure Eudora, Venus and the Graces
Had their hands to day about you! You look
Fairer than your self, and move in the Sphere
Of Love and Beauty; Cupped has taken
His Stand up in your Eyes, and shoots at all
That come before him! Pray Venus he miss me.
When doe you grow serious?
These are the Fair Look•
Must captivate the Stranger Prince in a Free Country?
And th is the Dress that must enchant him? ha.
There is no Charm in it certainly; it pleased
Me the least of Many. No, it is your Fair
Mistress, that bears those Love-Nets about her:
If the Stranger'scape her, he's safe.
'Had better
Kill his Father, and then gaze upon the
Spectacle, than look upon her with the
Eyes of Love.
Nay then you are unjust.
Would you have him stronger than your self was?
If he for that be guilty, the same Doom
Must belong to both alike.
But I have
Prevailed so far, that he shall be free, both
From the danger of Love, and seeing.
Nor must You make up his entertainment.
I was Commanded to be ready, and
Attend there.
But now the Commissions altered,
And runs in the Other Sense.
I shall be
Content to obey either. May I not
Know the cause?
You may. We would not feed
The Prince here with hopes to get a Wife. This
Was the Storm that drove him in. Nor must you
Only for this time forbear his presence,
But while he stays. He's unworthy of you.
If you know him so, I shall then without
Excuse deny his Visits. But I think
This businuesse may be borne a Nobler Way;
Nor will the End Fail, though the Means be Fair.
Leave it to me: If he Sue with Honour,
He will take an Honourable Answer;
Though he gain none from me, I'll get his Love,
And send him home no less a Friend, than if
He were a Husband. By my Restraint, you'll
Only procure unto your self, the marks
Of Jealousy and Rudeness, and fouler Staines,
If that the Crime were named to the desert.
Besides, it does proclaim in Me too such
A Weakness, as I am much ashamed of.
Had he a Face adorned with the Graces
Of both Sexes, Beauty, and Manliness,
And these (after the Custom of the Roman
Princes in their Statues) Engrafted on
On the body of some God, I could look on,
Converse, I, and neglect him too, when I
Have reason for it. Fear not me then.
I doe not, I know thee strong, the Honour
Of a Kingdom may lean with safety on Thee.
But he will linger here too long, besot
The State with Feastings, and in this Jollity
Give Opportunity to Treacherous
Practises. He must be used Ill, there are
Reasons for it.
Is there then a Policy
In Rudeness? Why doe you not rather send
A Defiance to him? Proclaim him Enemy?
This were Nobler far, than to receive him
In your arms, and then Affront him; say Health,
And wish Poison in the Cup. Are you so much
Below him?
There are greater thoughts in hand,
Than Curious Points of Gallantry. If he send
Any Present to you, you must return it
Back with Scorn.
Pride is ill becoming,
And hateful, even to the next Proud man does
Practise it.
Then take'em, and laugh at him.
No, where my thanks are too much, I'll rather
Return Gifts for Gifts. I should shame to be
A gainer on such a Score, which the Meanest,
Honest Purchaser would blush at.
He'll take
Those Gifts for Favours.
They will not prove so;
Yet He will deserve some, as he is a Stranger.
Not from You. Presents the State will send him.
You hear my Fathers Will. You must not see him
While he stays!
I doe, and shall eas'ly keep
That I doe not care to break.
Farewell.
Must you be gone?
There's a little business
Calls me.
If it be but a little, stay.
Only the Welcome of the Stranger.
It is too much to hinder.
I see a Causeless, and a Needless Rage
Hid in your breast. The Prince may be Noble,
Valiant; if you receive him then with Scorn,
He will prove a stronger Enemy, than those
Unworthy Ones you fear at home, whose own
Actions daily ruin, and whose ill-made
Knots, will loosen faster than they tie 'em.
You have prevailed with me, I'll not be won
To see him now: but let it not Appear
By your Default, and that my Retirement,
Is only in scorn to him: which will be
Made plain, if that you change not this Face you
Have put on. It becomes you at no time.
A Prince should always Smile, or look indifferent.
He has no need of Frowns, as other men.
Life and Death are in his breath, and if any do
Offend, his Revenge is known, and need not
Be declared by Face-expressions. Where there's
Power to Punish, it is Tyranny to Rage.
Anger is no Attribute of Justice,
It is true, she is painted with a Sword, but looks
As if she held it not. Though Warbe in
Her Hand, yet Peace dwells in her Face. Learn once
Of me, and when you have no Cause of
A Distemper, express none. Now you have made
All sure, doubt not; but receive the stranger
With fearless and confident Embraces.
I will, or at lest I'll tell thee so, when
Thou perswad'st me thus. Farewell Eudora.
Thy subtle Plots will ruin thee at last.
Valour and Policy do seldom meet;
Yet here they are in their Extremes in One;
But do most strangely Divide the Owner.
Make him Dread none, and yet confirm him not
Within a Guard.
What can our Wishes deprecate,
When Vice is seen, both Law, and Fate?
When for the good of the Commonweal,
The Councel's called, to Plot a Meal.
And Beasts brought in with solemn Cry,
As Spoils got from the Enemy?
Whose life's the Table, and the Stage,
He doth not Spend, but Lose his Age.
The Kings eyes, like his Jewels, be
Set to Adorn, not to Fore-see:
And as his Crown, he thinks each thing,
Runs round in a continued Ring.
But Sacrifices Crowned be,
And Garlands fit for destiny.
Fates thus we fear have writ this Latt,
That Wint shall lose, what Blood hath Got.
IS this your Royal Entertainment?
A common Host would have given one as Civil,
Have shown his Guests their Quarter, and then left'em
To stumble out again. My Receivers are
Are all vanished—An undeserved Affront
Will trouble me—Neither of the Princesses
Were in the Train; they might have trusted 'em,
I could have gaged a Kingdom for their security—
Was not that fellow drunk? Now they begin
To Muster up again. Here I stand like one
That learns to make his first Honour in a
Dancing School—Sir by your favour. If your
Business calls you not, pray let me entreat
Your Company a while.
Troth and't like your Highness, I am in hast, in very great hast, The King has sent for me, and I know he's thirsty till I come. I would your Highness were as resolute, and as well Armed this way as I,  you'd be the welcom'st man—He loves a Royal-Drunkard to admiration; he never saw one yet, but in a Glass. Sir, have you any business with him? You need no other Orator than such as this; such a Mouth without a Tongue, will persuade any thing. Yet this is of the least, fit only for Physick-dayes, when he would not surfeit; a mere Toy that troubles the Waiters with often filling. But I have One, as high—Here's nothing to measure't by; but it was that made me so In∣ward with him; I always use to Petition him with it; it is bigger than any of his own, and pleased him above Measure. The first time he saw it, he commended the Gallon∣try of my Mind, and said it was a Noble Emulation in me! He has a Daughter Sir, a beau∣tiful Lady, my Hopes, unless some Neighbour-Prince do Reel betwixt us. Your High∣nos comes the right way, he hates a dry, In-land Traveller; but that you Kiss the Cup, when you should Drink; and have too much Bounce, and Down-with-him in you; which are things he surfeited of, some sixteen years since, and still the very Names turn his stomach. Besides, your Navy and Attendants are too great, he'd have esteemed more of you, had they been fewer, enough only to lean on, when you were Overtaken; or if you had wanted those, and borrowed his unto your Chamber, it had been better: Where he finds Worth, the Pomp delights him not. Your pardon Sir.
Why here's a fellow now! With what Licence
He belies his Master, or speaks Truths
Altogether as Unpardonable! Sure
He has his Patent for it! I find at my
Return from Travel, I shall want Names
For all the Monsters I have seen.
Though your Highness be here a stranger,
I may demand of you where the King is.
If none know more than I, my Lord, you've lost
Your King.
Sure he is not well,
I hope he is not: with a safe Loyalty,
I may wish, he hath a Dangerous Cause,
Rather than none, to take him from a Prince,
The first Night of his Arrival in his Court.
My Lord, I have found much Honour in you,
One that knows to show more Civility
To a Stranger, than he can deserve,
And you're unhappy only at this time
In an Unworthy Choice: but if still you
Can continue this Nobleness (though the
King frown) I shall gladly make some stay; at least
Till I have satisfied a Strangers Curiosity,
And may seem rather to have left the Place,
Than to have been thrust from it.
Believe me Sir,
Both your Reception, and this Necessity,
That you are drove to seek so mean a Service
As mine, doth shame me much. It is not the use
Of this Kingdom to be thus Uncivil,
Nor is it our Custom, as it hath been this day,
To Coop our Ladies up, as if the sight
Were Dangerous; their Beauties will endure
The Test, and we dare trust'm to it. It was
Unkindly done, I know one Look of theirs
Would have given a Welcome to a Young Man,
Above the highest Cost.
My Lord, you know
To speak a pleasing Language.
We have two
Princesses Sir, Few Nations can show such Jewels;
Yet only one is Oriental,
The other's Artificial, but an
Excellent Gem too; One of them, the True One,
I doubt not, but I have credit to show
Your Highness; but it is not to be purcha'st,
That happy Opportunitie's already past,
And the New Owner Esteems it above
His Wealth, his Life, I and his Honour too.
Yet, my Lord, bless me with the sight. I can
Rejoice at so much Excellence, though
Another doe possess it. And no doubt
As much of the Owners felicity, lies in Strangers
Admiration, as in his own Possession.
All but Jealous Men think so: and they count
Themselves Robed of all happiness in their Wives,
Others receive; engross as Covetously
Their Beauties, as their Persons, and think themselves
Cuckolded by a Women's Commendations.
But my Lord, I'll leave you. I was going
To the Princess before I met your Highness.
I know few words will gain so easy a request.
Tomorrow, and daily, I'll wait upon
Your Highness.
My Lord, you have engaged me
Your Servant, beyond my hope of freedom.
Nay, you must bear it patiently.
My Dominion extends no further than
These Rooms, and beyond them I grant nothing.
How will you endure the Strangers Delays,
That thus hardly brook his Coming? The King
In Complement, will not permit the Winds
To serve sooner than a Month, were that all
His stay: but here must be Masques and Triumphs
Before he goes, and the Subject yet not known
For the One, nor Ornaments made for the Other.
Perhaps a League must be Concluded,
And then I would not live to be so Old,
As to see the End of't. The Meanest persons
Require a Month to fit themselves, a Prince
Cannot turn in less than a Season.
May we not see the Garden, Madam?
Been. No, nor the Day, but through a Window.
We will petition to him, under the title
Of distressed Damsels, that must pass the
Hour of their Age in Imprisonment,
Unless he'll travel to his own, or some
Other Country, to gain 'em Freedom.
He'll think we are held by some Enchantment,
That his Absence, and not his Sword, must gain
Our Liberty. O Melissa welcome.
Now we shall see the Show, though but as sick
Persons, by Relation. Say, what hast thou seen?
The scurviest Entertainment—I did not
Think it possible, so short a Time could have
Prepared one so ill: It was thought on before,
And pains taken to Order it so much
For the Worse. This was the first day that ere
Me thoughts the King, and my Lord Timem,
Looked like the Father, and the Son. The King
Had on his Old Council Face, which all hope't
He had forgot, and this was the only time
These many Years, he should not have worn it.
They both embraced the Stranger as coldly,
And carelessly, as I have seen our Common
Fencers doe, that are immediately
To Fight with one another after. This
Behaviour in the Great Ones, was presently
Observed like a New Fashion, and in
An instant the whole Court was in it, from the
Bravest, to those that follow a Fashion
Only, when it is to leave off something, I mean
Our poorer Gallants that go in Cuerpo,
And look not as if they were Hot, but wanted
A Cloak. Marry their wits were not so Changeable
As their Faces, and having but One Suit
Of Complement, and that now Unfashionable,
They were fain to supply it with Legs, and Silence.
How looked the Prince at this behaviour?
Much above it, in my Opinion, two foot
Higher than my Lord Timem, though not
Altogether so tall. These sour Looks, were
All the Without-door Show, which ended,
In a solemn March, they returned all into
The Palace. The Strangers seemed, rather to
Follow with a silent Consent, than on
Invitation. There the press shook me off,
To find this out for your Highness Mirth.
And at my return, as I least expected,
I found the Prince all alone, where any body
Might have seen him for nothing. The Grecian,
And the Trojan Captains in the Hangings,
Were all his Company: with whom he seemed
Well suited, had they been alive, his Looks
Were as Daring as theirs, and standing so,
Bred much Comparison.
Know you the reason
Of this behaviour?
No Madam, yet
If I would, I might have learnt of many:
The whole Company were Politicians.
There was one Yeoman-Statesman informed most
About him; and his Conjectures, go for
Currant Truths next Post into the Country.
Well, now tell us what you have got there for
Our Mirth.
A precious piece of Poetry,
Which I have been the Patroness of from
The first Non-sense in it, that is, from the first line.
There's much mirth intended in it, and I
Doubt not by your Highness will find it.
The Author himself is an Emblem of
The first Comedies, in which One acted All,
And will make you laugh, though you saw him
Every day. I have brought him along with me,
He stays but till his admittance be granted.
No prithee Melissa, twill be too much.
I beseech your Highness. And do but smile
Upon his Learning. Domino, Domino.
Look, look. I told you what you'd do. You are
So forward.
I can presume.
Ha, ha.
Hold your peace with your presuming. You should
Let the Princess speak. This is the Author,
Madam.
Lad. Ha, ha, ha.
What think you your Play
Will do, when one Scene of your self breeds all
This Mirth?
Hum.
Melissa.
Your Highness—
Prithee discharge him, I am notable
To look so much laughter in the face, and
Contain my self, to save my Modesty.
So, it is well Sir. The Princess has taken
Notice of your Worth, and commanded me
To reward you. Attend to morrow, and
You shall receive it. And pray see that her
Highness have all your Labours, as you call em.
Oh it is well we dress us not. Here all take
Papers, and sit down, we'll choose our several parts.
Who were they past by?
I know not; but certainly
They understand what they do, they went on
With so much Confidence.
Where are we now?
Certainly in no danger Sir.
The Prince!
The Prince?
The Prince?
Madam, our bold Mistake has thrust us on
Too far, to retire without Excuse, which
We shall hardly make, unless your Favour
Meet us. We are strangers that thus have erred,
Unfortunately I must not say, that
Were a Rudeness greater than the other;
Yet we ought to esteem this your Disturbance
A Fault, though to us a blessed one, and
Hath conferred a happiness, our best Deeds,
Could not have deserved.
This Entrance was
Something abrupt, and beyond the Intent
Of our
A strange accident Been!
Was it the Prince that spoke?
Yes Madam; but
It was improper here.
Art thou sure it was he?
I am Madam. Her Highness is troubled,
I see a Prince is too high a Personage
For a Comedy, and spoils the Mirth of't.
Melissa, I have something to impart to you.
When the Company leave me at Night,
Attend me in my Chamber.
Madam, a little of your Company,
I beseech you.
My Lord Aratus save you.
A proper Salutation for so fair
A Lady, whose beauties are Destructive.
Your Lord-ship's very Conceited. It is the
First Jest, I dare say, was ever made on that
Poor saying.
What do you look at? Do you want
A Servant?
Bless me, my Lord! what Thing
To fright us have you there?
Why I pray?
Because he's Black? The fitter for a Lady.
For a Lady! I never saw such a Devils Play-fellow!
He's white within, all Snow, and Milk.
They are put into an Ink-bottle.
What, you'd have one that spends more Milk bout a
His Face, than he sucked in's Child-hood; that dresses
Himself in Gloves, as if one Part were too good
To do service to the other; and dares not
Show his hands for shaming of his Mistresses,
Nor commend Hers, because his own are Whiter.
This'is One neglects his Outside, beyond
A common Cleanness, and bestows that Care
Upon his Mind, there wastes his four Hours
Of Dressing. And what the other do's exceed
In Spruiseness, he'll make up in Service.
Pay Respects unto his Ladies Virtue,
Not unto her Muff. And if at any time
Danger do approach her, fearless he dares
Beat it back, or make it Welcome by his
Noble Fall. Himself in Presence guards her,
And his Memory in's Absence. Come, pray
Spoil not his Hopes among the Ladies.
He's a young Courtier, and wants a Mistress.
I am turned when I hear reason.
I beseech you my Lord, let me be she.
I thought it would come to this. You make the furthest
Way about, the nighest to your Ends, Love,
By discommending. Pray let him salute
You then.
Not unless you'll stand by me.
Well, I warrant you. My friend.
My Lord.
Pray draw near, here's a fair Lady, gladly
Would salute you, Now you're at Court, you must
Lay by your War-like thoughts, and Plot how you shall
Overcome in Complement, and Conquer in Civility.
My Lord, I should be ashamed to pretend
So much unto the Soldier, as to make
My self Unsensible of so great an
Honour, as this Lady does me by her
Fair Salutation. Though I am Unworthy,
I can be Proud to be her Servant.
What think you?
I know not what to think of
So much wonder! What Rarities shall
I be Mistress of, and none Envy me?
Well, to leave you in that Rapture; may I
Speak with the Princess?
Yes, she went hence but now.
May I adventure to go in?
You may,
But call my Servant along with you.
You are longing again, but not a bit,
It is Sweet-meat, not a bit.
while Morpheus thus doth gently lay,
His powerful Charge upon each part,
Making thy Spirits even obey,
The stiller Charms of his Dull Art.
I thy Good Angel from thy side,
As Smoke doth from the Altar rise,
Making no Noise as it doth glide,
Will leave thee in this Soft Surprise.
And from the Heavens will fetch thee down,
A lively Vision to express,
Thy Right unto an Earthly Crown,
" No Power can make this Kingdom less.
But gently, gently, least I bring,
A start in Sleep by sudden Flight,
Playing aloof, and hovering,
Till I am lost unto the sight.
This is a Motion still, and soft,
So free from Noise and Cry,
That Jove himself who hears a Thought,
Knows not when we pass by.
There he sits, and sleep hath seized on him,
Which seldom does so when the Season calls it:
But still he takes it when it comes, not when
It is due; when Weariness, and not the Warnings
Of the Night doe prompt him to it. He says,
To Sleep, because the Day is gone, is to
Perform a Duty, not a Necessity:
And to Eat at a Certain Hour, to
Satisfy the Time, and not his Hunger.
Nature is the Mistress of his Faculties,
Which are averse, and refractory to
All Custom; will admit no Laws, but what
Themselves Enact, nor strictly observe them
Neither. It is a strange Distraction for sixteen
Years, a Deeper Melancholy possesses him,
Than does those, that have run the Miseries
And Sins of a Long Life. This desolate
Happiness is all that he enjoys,
And this I am Commanded to take from him.
Cleander, what ho Cleander.
Why are you thus Cruel in your Care? Did you
But know the Felicities you have waked me from,
You'd have rocked my sleep for ever: Thought it
A greater Mercy to have killed, than thus
To have Disturbed me. I was wrapped into
The Company of Men, of Gods, if compared
With those we here converse with. Enjoyed the
Most Excellent things, by a Heavenly Vision,
Showed more Excellent and Glorified.
Sa•• Crowned a King ore all, and with a Trait'rous
Call, you have Deposed me! Alas, how fading
Is my Happiness, which a Small Noise, or
Motion can dissolve, and turn to nothing.
Let that Reason make you scorn'em, and aim
At Lasting Ones.
Were their longest life but
Three Minutes, and that time Uncertain,
They were yet to be preferred before those the World
Holds in highest Estimation. They are pure
And Celestial Pleasures, to be fed on
Only by the Fancy. I'll in, and again
Invite them with a Slumber.
I must for bear
My Remedies, it is dangerous applying
Physic in a Fit.
Polyander, Menetius. well met. Have ye
Seen the Thing yet?
What Thing?
The Thing that haunts
The Court. It hath something like a Man, and pretends
To be One. He comes to the Ladies, like
A rough Water-Dog among a Flock of Foul,
And they flutter as fast from him, scatt'ring
Feathers as they pass, I mean their Fans, and
Such Movables. The Guard dare not mingle
With him, he's too boisterous for their Company.
One Glance of him, as he past by the other day,
Broke the Kings Draught, which a Cubit-Cup could
Ne'er do—See, see, here he comes, with as many
Patches, and such like properties, as would
Furnish a Cashiered Company to beg with.
Sure he was Scar-Bearer to some Army.
Let's observe it what it does: look, look, its
Pleased with the Hangings.
He cannot be thus
By Nature, nor by Accident! 'has studied
To appear horrid!
Danger is not so
Dreadful in it self, as it shows in him.
Well, I cannot forbear, I must enter
Parley with it. What Rare things shall I know,
If I can get it speak! I'll enquire the fortune
Of the Kingdom for the next thousand Years.
That's not worth the asking. I'll enquire when
The Dissolution of the World shall be,
And where it's Treasure lies. He cannot choose
But know the very Heart of the Earth. If I
Can't persuade, I'll Conjure something from him.
By, Bull-begger, What art thou? Who let thee loose?
Where is any Gold hid? My fears were just.
Nothing but a Charm will do it. Anaell,
Ma•foe, Rachimas, Thulnear, Vemoby,
Save•an, Vernesa, Elty, Famelron
Ausculta &amp; obtempora madatis maize.
This was not terrible enough, it must be
More powerful yet. I adjure thee by those Boots,
Thy Velvet Eye, the Taylors work about thee—
Peace Fool, the King will hear, and thou't be
Whipped for bawling.
Prithee good Devil, something
Of the other World—
Ha, ha, ha,
I hope 't has
Satisfied your Curiosity Comastes? ha, ha, ha.
Nay, I'll not leave him thus; be baffled by
A Goblin. I'll follow it to the place
Where it shakes the Chain, that's certain,
Ha, ha, ha Come let's see the End of the Conjuration.
But these are things for the following Age
Timeus, we are hedged in beyond all fear,
If Loyalty can prove destructive, there is
Yet some danger.
Because you see a Calm enwrap all round
About you, you conceive twill be as Lasting,
As it is Pleasing; Tempests, Sir, may contradict you,
Even while you think so. Evils are silent now,
Not done away, they Couch, and lie in-wait,
Sedition walks with Claws bowed in, and a Close Mouth,
Which only she keeps for Opportunity
Of Prey. You're not to suppose, that all Shut Eyes
Do sleep; they are ne'er more watchful, than when thus
They counterfeit neglect; securely they
Pry into the Depth of things, by seeming
Not to observe the Face, and Out-side,
Your Ruin yet appears not, and you think
Because it Lurks, you're Safe. Enemies
Reconciled, are like Wilde-Beasts brought up to hand,
You have more Advantage given them to do Mischief.
Can the Urns quicken their Ashes into
Soldiers? Can the Graves and Tombs send forth a Race
Of Enemies? From those that Live we are safe,
They have no will to hurt us; and those that
Sleep in the forgotten Dust cannot. There's
Nothing remaining to our Care, but to
Give thanks; the gods are favourable, and if
We could be grateful, our Felicity
And safety were both summed and perfect. I tell
Thee often, thou let thy best days pass,
Without receiving of that Fruit, that should
Be cropped from 'em. I did expect thou should
Have urged me to thy Nuptials, such Cares
Befit thee best, how the Triumphs should be
Ordered, and Hymen's Torch well lighted.
Pray Heaven no other Flames break out,
But such as Mirth show forth. But Sir, I must
Be bold to tell you, a few flattering Lords
Guild o'er the Defects and Ruins of your State;
They make you call a Lethargy, Security;
And that a Kingdom, which like to Childrens
Houses on the Sand, reared up in Sport, and
Toying, will become a Prey unto the Wave
That first approaches it. They can perhaps
Judge well of Meats and Wines, good Table-States men,
Soldiers at a Banquet, strong to overcome
A Charger, or a Goblet: but Kingdoms
Safeties, are not owed unto the Palate,
And the stomach: if these were State-Affairs,
Your Council were most sound, and every Breast,
A Synod. If Music could now raise Walls,
And Cities as of Old, your Realm would be
Impregnable.
Hast thou yet done? Not all
The Ghosts that I have made, have been thus Cruel
To me; nor at yet their Graves have threatened
Half these Evils. Thy Mothers Labour, was
A Conception, to the pains thou hourly
Bring upon me.
Sir, I am sorry. Yet
It was my Love that so did dictate to me;
My desire that your sports might follow one
Another, and succeed so just, that they
Might seem to bring the season on, and not
The season them, that thus they might continue,
Ever; but it was then that they might continue,
And not fail by Treason—But Sir, I will
No more. I shall hereafter think it more Piety,
Hand in hand to fall in Perils with you,
Than my self to bring them.
What would thou have?
The Power I have, is wholly thine. If that
I never did deny, was not thought given,
Now I do. Use all the Means thou wilt, by Laws,
Or our Prerogative, to remove thy fears.
Sir, I thank you, humbly thus Low I thank you.
Nor will I in a Complement return
You back this Power, till I have made you safe.
I shall work like a Resolute, but skilful
Surgeon, that dares feel, and search a Wound,
And if he find Dead-flesh, dares cut it off,
Or more Corruption, will not spare a Limb.
My Lord, Cupped put his Hood-wink on you
Houses to Aim with, and then you could not
Miss the Mark. I fear, the second View will not
Prove so Ravishing. The most Excellent Things
Scarce please twice.
My Lord, think not so;
For were the World dark about her, or I blind
To all things else; in Her I could find
Variety enough; and so long as
Her Beauties were not Eclipsed, I could not
Envy him that were so placed, as to behold
The World as in a Map.
These Habits then
My Lord, will secure your Visit. Me thinks
Your Highness becomes them Rarely well!
You're a Person now most Sacrosanct,
Twice Holy, made so by your Dignity,
And Order. We'll go before Sir, and inform
The Princess of your Coming. You'll draw less
Suspicion likewise if you walk alone.
The King of Crete is a Usurper.
His Son's a Villain, by their Masters Blood
They have reached the Diadem, and by
The Violation of his Daughter,
Seek to support their Greatness: but this last
Evil is still in the Forge, not yet Completed;
And the fair Princess looks on her Destined
Nuptials, as her Rape: her Lover, as her
Murderer. Fates, I hope, have in their Blessed Decrees
Writme the Rescuer of this Royal Virgin,
The VVinner, and the VVearer of this Jewel.
And neither the Error that threw me
Unawares upon her close Retirement,
Nor yet the Flame conceived from Her fair Eyes,
Were merely Casual, but things of a Deeper
And Diviner working. Love, who art Ruler
Of the Destinies themselves, if Youth,
And Greatness powerfully do invoke thee:
If a Virtuous Mind, a Spirit bold, Affections pure,
And Constant Faith, are Oblations grateful
To thy Altar, favour my Present Hopes,
All these I offer to thee. And proudly
Do exchange my peace and Quiet, for the
Troubles, and perturbations of a passion.
Crown but the End, and let all the Doubts,
The Sufferings, and the Dangers, that ever racked
A Lovers Soul, be made my Portion.
possess me then with the Fullness of thy
Deity: let not thy Shades and Flourie Banks
Withhold thee, make Paphos but thy Refuge,
The Heart's thy Native Soil, thy Mothers Lap's
A Banishment to it. But idly I invoke
The God, while favourably he beckons me
To Receive my Vows, and the Happiness
I Sue for, does Attend me. The houre's already past
That Calls me to the Princess.
May I ever hope to see such Happiness?
To enjoy it long, Madam, and know no End
Ofit.
Can I be no way assistant
To the Business?
Only in your Prayers.
It is our Task to Subdue the Men; but the Gods,
Who must with piety be conquered, we will leave
Unto your Goodness: And yet, Madam, me thinks
The present Opportunity prompts us
With a Means, to add both Strength and Reputation
To our Affairs. This Gallant Prince (whose Visit
You expect) is not, I find, a Stranger
To the Interests of Crete, nor lightly resents
The Tyranny it groans under. The power
You seem to have ore him, may improve
This Compassion into a Zeal, to reinstate us
In the Liberty we have Lost.
My Lord
I'll use my best Endeavours, if I find him fit
To be Engaged; Leave this particular to me.
Madam he's now arrived. That's he, in the disguise.
So fell the Cloud from off the Trojan Lord,
Not able to Contain the Rays it held,
But being pierced dissolved at Once to Air,
Exposing to the Worlds Astonished Eye,
A Lustre rivalling the Mid-day Suns.
Sure I was Rude, and Barbarous, before
This Nobler Fire did touch my Heart, and from
The Wild Inhabitants of the Wood
Differed in Passion only, and not Reason:
That without more Amaze I could behold
Such Brightness; and with a Ready Speech Excuse
The Fault my Error had committed.
I cannot now find out a Word to suit
With my Desires; nor does the whole Store
Afford me One, but what must prejudice
Her Excellence, and my Estimation of it.
Pardon Madam, that like the Ascendants
To the Altar, by Degrees I thus approach you,
Pausing at each Step, and bowing to that Nearness.
Rashness was my Crime before, and should I
Throw that Blot a second time upon my Actions,
Rudeness might be justly thought my Nature,
And Barbarity my best Knowledge.
My Lord, that which you call your Crime, was the
Incivility of the Court, that left
A Stranger to commit an Error
So unhappy to himself. I dare not
Undertake to Patronise the Act,
Nor yet to Excuse it; I shall believe I have
Obtained much, If I may be thought wholly
To Disclaim it.
Madam allow me then
To beg your Pardon, for the Presumption
With which I made this Visit; that I thought it
A Hard, Nay Injurious Treatment, to be forced
To Quit this Isle, before I had the Honour
To look upon you: for since I have beheld
Those Wonders of Beauty you are Mistress of,
I find my Voyage was too Short, my Hazards
Too Slight, and Few, to be rewarded with so High
A Favour.
My Lord, had you directed
Your Words to my Misfortunes, I should have
Acknowledged then, you had seen a Rarity,
One in the perfection, and Excellence
Of Misery; but I have no pretence,
No Title unto ought besides my Troubles.
Please you, my Lord, to with-draw unto a place
That admits not so public an Access.
Your Visit to me is not without all Danger.
If I would set a Spectacle to the World,
It should be such a Close, Where Virtue
Adored Virtue, and Greatness bowed to Greatness.
Me thinks the Heavens doe open, and the Clouds
Are spun into a Thread, to let down some God
Unto this Meeting! Let us withdraw,
The Power is now descended, and all within
Is Sacred and Mysterious, and if we pry
Into these Secrets, our Curiosity
Will be punished.
while this Old Poppy thus doth sleep,
And doth in Vice, as Age, grow deep,
Benumbing all the Plants are nigh,
Into a Drowsy Lethargy.
Behold a Nobler Branch appears,
As far from his Manners, as his Years.
O shed Thou then thy Influence,
And we will resume fresh Beauties thence.
The Fiercer Sweetness of his Face,
Presents a Rigour, mixed with Grace;
And though there were a Want of Blood,
His Worth would make his Title Good.
Virtues so Grown, in so Few Years,
Make Him even Such, become their Fears.
On then, and cause the Sceptre bee
Thought but Reserved, not Snatched from Thee.
ARe all things ready for the Ceremony?
The Crown, and Robes?
They are, there's nothing wanting
If the Prince were come.
He's now come.
Your Highness is welcome: but I fear it may
Appear, to a strange Place, and Persons! What
Do you think my Lord? Are you not fallen,
Into the Company of so many
Traitrous and lost Men?
Say not so Sir,
You have not Warrant, though you rank your self
Within the Number. The Place and Persons
Rather appear to me, as if some Holy Rite,
Or piece of Sacred Worship were intended.
My Lord, you understand it right, it is a Piece
Of H oly Worship and Devotion that is
Intended by us. And I may truly say,
That this our private Meeting, and close Counsel,
Is more Just and Glorious, than the loudest Deed
In Court, that all our public Acts, Edicts,
And Forms of Law, are dark and impious,
Compared to it. Nay, that this Time, and Place,
Made holy by our Purposes, hath the Gods
More manifest and present, than the Altars,
And the Temples, long since made Void and Empty
Of a Deity, by those which sue for
Favours, and requests for Him (who justly
Heard) deserves their Horridest Vengeance.
We are not met here, to Plot a general Ruin,
For a private Injury; we know and teach,
That the Greatest done by the King unto
The Subject, cannot give him Cause to throw off
His Faith; Kings are petty Gods, and may tempt us.
Nor is it Want, or desire of Innovation
That thus stirs us; we are in the Best▪
Ill-State already. Nor Ambition,
To strike at that Laurel, which the Thunder
Spares; no, we Reverence it, and know, that
As Men are the works of Nature, so Kings
Of Jove. But it is our Oath, the Sacrament
We took, which still holds us, though our Lord be dead,
Until his Successor release us from it,
By taking of a New One. We are not
Subjects, but Slaves to Him we now Obey,
And therefore as Slaves, we ought to hate our
Master: He was born less than We, and hides
The Private Man, under the Public Gown.
The Purple which he wears, was dipped deep in
The blood of Innocents to colour't so.
But I vainly waste my self in Words, here
Are no Minds to be persuaded, nor Ears
To be instructed. The sins we are to punish
We all know, and the gods remember.
Our strength then is all we are to speak of.
Which is more than three parts of the Isle, sixteen
Years Undisturbed Provision; so carelessly
Was that secured, which was got by Blood.
There's but one Lord-ship, small in respect
Of others, the Tyrants Own Possession,
That will be Cordial for him; but they are
So besotted with their Fortunes, that their
Greatest Aid, will be but in their VVills to
Do him Service. They may offer up their Lives
Like so many Sacrifices for his sake,
But not like Soldiers, they are Unworthy
Of that Name. They may Dye, but never Conquer.
War was never talked of, but in their Banquets,
Nor dare they Fight beyond a Brawl
And if we would count part of our Strength
In their Weakness, we have no Opposition.
In the City where They and their Vices
Are daily seen, nothing is so Contemptible.
And in Remoter Parts, where Majesty
Is more reverenced, being known only
By the Power and Laws, and where the name of King,
Hears like the Name of God, even there, those sons
Of the Earth, as I may call 'em, dare menace him,
And pile hills on hills, to set their Bodies,
Equal to their Hates.
Here we are thee my Lord;
Can each of raise such Forces, which though
They failed to effect it, yet could make
The Kingdom fear a Conquest.
Your Highness
Is a Soldier, and though but Young, perhaps
Have seen already, what others whole Lives
Have not shown them; yet we'll play a Game
We dare invite You to, though you were
Accompanied with all the Ancient Heroes.
Who had they leave but in their Aerie shapes,
To set on a Tribunal, Spectators
Of the War, this their second Leaving of
The Earth, should be more grievous to them, than
Their former Deaths, and they would wish this Isle
Might be their Elizium.
You see my Lord,
How each can bring his Forces in, and prompt
The other; Those which have none on Earth,
Can bring them down from Heaven, in stead of Men,
Bring Manly Spirits, Words, and Looks confirming
More than Armies.
M Lords, I must confess, with no small pleasure,
I have heard the Justice, the Strength, the Courage
Of your Cause. And for the first of which, although
I never doubted; or from the other two
(Meant ever to withdraw my Aid) however
Weak; yet I am glad to see the Enterprise
So hopeful: For though most greedily I
Should embrace all Hazards for two such Mistresses
As Justice, and the Excellent Princess,
Yet where their Interests are Disputed, I cannot wish to see a Danger, what
Ever weight of Glory I might purchase
By it. My Lords, the small Force I am Master of,
Either in my Person, or those Commanded by me,
Reckon on till you see us Conquer, or lye
Upon the ground.
Our Designs are then successful
Above our wishes.
Phronimus introduced.
The Priest, we are now ready for him. Though
We need nothing to strengthen our Resolutions,
Yet we will take an Oath: it is good to have the Gods
Along with us. A Sacrament is the Tie,
No less of Loyalty, than of Treason.
Here let us all, before this Sacred Witness
Of Faith and Perjury, make a Holy Vow
Of Loyalty to Our Selves and Cause.
And as we draw near to so Divine an
Essence, consider that it is not Gold or Marble
That we touch, but a Mottle of a Sensible
And Living Power, which has Vouchsafed to be
Embraced by One Hand, when the Vastness of
Our Thoughts could not comprehend it.
Now we are ready for the Prince. Eurylochus
Conduct him in. Your Grace shall see a Stronger
Persuasion, than any you have yet heard,
The lively Image of Her you so much Serve.
He Knows not yet his Fortunes, but I dare
Warrant He'll bear them bravely. He has read
The Lives of Kings, though he never acted
Any; and you shall perceive he's Princely-Born,
Though not bred in Court.
Royal Sir, you're welcome!
Start not at the Name, it is your Due, You
Were born to the Title: and I doubt not,
Though you never heard it thus applied before,
It is not altogether Strange unto you
There was a Spark, which in the first Womb,
After a Special Manner was infused
Into you, and is another Soul
Within you; as the One Informs your Body,
So this Informs your Soul; we may call it
The Difference of a King. That will tell you,
We are all here your Subjects, and this
No Strange Philosophy I teach. And though
This Rich Perfume hath hitherto been wrapped
In this Disguise of Learning, and defended
From the air of the Court, it is not decayed,
But grown stronger by such keeping; which when
It shall be opened, will cast a fragrant
Smell ore all the Kingdom, and cure the Infections
Of the Former Age. To open it we
Are met, it is a Medicine we too long
Have languished for. And Sir, though it be a short
Warning to so Great a Matter, you must
Presently resolve to be a King. We
Have no time now to instruct you in
Your Right, and how you lost it. It was Years
In doing, and will require Years to relate it.
In the mean time, let what you see persuade you,
Our Serious Looks, Respects, and the Presence
Of these Holy Rites.
I need not excuse
My want of Answer, there's nothing fit for me
To say: Which way so ever I shall declare
My self to this Purpose, will appear Foolish.
Whether I Refuse, or Grant, both are alike
Ridiculous. It is not with Me, as with
Elder Years, They may refuse Offers like these,
And be admired for such their Moderation;
Or accept them, and for that Magnanimity
Be honoured. But should I assume an Action,
So many Years above my Age, I must
Expose my self a Pageant to the Beholders
Scorn and Laughter. My Lord, That which I have
To say is, only this. My Years are yet in Non-Age,
My Actions not my Own, to Others Wills
I am wholly Subject. you may Command me
Even to Wear a Crown, and to submit to
Accept the Highest Honours. Set me, if
You please, on the Throne you speak of, and when
You see a time again, remove me. Yet,
My Lord, I'd have you know, I am not so Young,
But that I understand I am a Subject, and that
I have a King; that thus, though but in Sport,
To Use his Titles is a Fault, But for
Any to Acknowledge such a Spirit,
As you, my Lord, have spoken, is no less
A Traitor, than he which strikes the Crown from off
His Head.
You have been heavenly taught, and shall
Be ever instructed in such Lectures.
But the Treason which is committed, is
Committed' against your self, your Spirit is
Usurped, and he that holds it is your Servant,
As I am, or at least should be so. Sir,
The time presses now, and we cannot use
The Circumstances necessary to
Persuade you; but what ever appears Strange
At this time to you, a few days use will
Render most familiar. Sir, please you ascend,
Yond place is provided for you—Submit
Now, and Command ever. My Lord, will you
Please to honour us with your Assistance.
The Gods preserve the King.
We have now performed one part of our Duty,
Which was to seat you thus, the next is,
With our Lives to keep you at this Height.
If I may yet take confidence to speak,
And it will become me to say something of
My self. I could tell you, how this Day hath
Been familiar to me, and in a Dream
I have seen these things so often, that did
Not these Shouts confirm me, which were then still
The concluders of my Greatness, I could not
Yet believe, but that I have now suffered
Is Aerie all, and the Shape I see merely
Fantastic.
It was a Good and Prosperous
Omen, which presaged your Quiet here.
The Gods would not suffer you to rest in
A Wrong place.
May it be so.
And shall I alone in such a Glorious
Action walk unseen? And as a Fault,
Perform my Duties in Disguise? I'll rather
Add a Trumpet, and a Flag to all my
Actions. Here fall my Mist away, Now
Thou only bar me from my Joys, to which
I am not near enough, unless I can
Embrace. Give me leave my Lords, that as my life,
So I may throw my Body at his Feet,
I have a share in him, I though a Stranger
To you. It was my Fathers purchase,
With his Life he bought it, nor desire I
To hold it by another Patent. May
Such be the Noted End Successively
Of all our Name, No Disease, but our Masters
Cause to Dye of. Here let me Kneel, and pray
All Happiness, and the Best things may fall,
And then rise, and with my Sword, procure the
Blessing s I have pried for. Know me my Lords,
I am Pallantus.
Jury. Pallantus!
Pallantus!
My dearest Friend, proved my nearest Kinsman!
Could I be so dull as to imagine
Such Valour could be in a shape so low
As thy Out-side promised? Or so common,
As to be met by Chance? That I could love
Thee so, and yet have no Interest in thee?
Where hast thou been so long Dead? Sir look upon
This Man, that turns our joys thus from you, your
Party is made strong by his Discovery,
'Has brought such Unexpected Aid within
Himself! You're to receive him Sir, not only
As a Servant, but a Kinsman.
My Lord,
I am as yet in a New World, and know
No more, than if I now began to live,
The most Common things, are Wonders to me.
You must excuse me therefore, if I know not
How to entertain such Accidents as these,
But I shall maked my Labour every day
To understand my Duty, of the which
I think it no small part, to give the due
Value to every worth I meet.
Sir, as a new friend let me embrace you,
But this Alteration shall not give me leave
To forget the former Favours I am
Obliged to you for. What I received in
Your Disguise, I shall be ever ready
To pay unto your self.
How it grieves me
To see thy Beauties thus blasted in thy Youth,
War hath been too rough a Mistress to thee,
And set thy Glories in too Eminent a place.
Had Vans been in the Camp, she would
Have covered thee with Mars his shield, although
The God himself had wanted it. I can
Remember when the Loveliest Face compared
With thine, could not have taken from thee. When
In the brightest Ring of Beauties, thou appeard'dst
But well-set; and had thou been attired like
One of them, thou might have won the Prize
Of fairness from a Cor of Ladies.
My Lord, they are well lost: but those which were
The Causers of it, shall receive Wounds as deep,
If not so disfiguring, and afford their blood
To wash the Scars they have made.
They shall,
And we will help to bath thee. It is time that
We broke up our meeting, our longer stay
May prove dangerous. Phronimus and Eurylochus
You must post this Night to your Commands.
Your Majesty must bear'em Company.
And now without more delay show your selves:
We will be ready here at the first News.
My Lord, your Navy also will require
Strict watch and guard, on our first Motion
That will be attempted.
Haimantus, you
Shall presently away, and take the Charge
Upon your self.
Pray do so my Lord.
All we have to do, is to mingle our selves
In the Court again. When once these troubles
Sir, are o'er, a perpetual Calm will follow.
My Lord, I never enjoyed safety, so pleasing as these Dangers.
—By the next Post I shall send your Highness the whole Design of the Con∣spiracy we have so long suspected; in the mean time, know Aratus, Phronimus, and Eurylochus are the three great Diseases of the Kingdom.—
But not incurable. I know which way
To handle 'em. There must be some sudden
Remedy applied, that will work strongly.
This Night I'll send it. Be absent all ye
Lazy Medicines which the Law administers,
Ye are more treacherous, than the Villain
Ye examine; and where there was none, give
Time to act Mischief: Your Summons are
The Traitors Watch-word, and drive him to take
That Opportunity, which otherwise
His Fears would have let slip. My self will be
The Accuser, and the Judge. When Public
Means are dangerous, each Prince hath the Courts
Of justice in his Breast—What Fiend is this,
That causes such Antipathy within me?
The Mid-night Ghosts take not shapes so horrid!
I have not slept, since first he crossed me!
We are alone. The Gods have given this time
For my Revenge.
What does he mutter to himself?
Coracin s, Argestes—Kill that Dog.
My Lord!
Kill that Dog—Cowardly Villains,
It were a justice to leave you to the Worrying.
He was a Devil! The Power of Hell was in
His Arm; Night threw her shades about him
To defend him! He could not thus have escaped,
Unless he had vanish•d! Is he o'er-taken yet?
No my Lord. But it is impossible he should
Pass the Court. Sure he has taken Covert
In some Lodgings there-abouts.
Let search be made,
And give Command, That when he appears again,
He that first meets him, without more Circumstance,
Do ki'l him. Promise a Reward to him
That brings his Head.
How do you my Lord?
Well.
Is your Highness hurt?
And may be again, if I look not warily.
Would your Lordships Sword were sheathed.
Sir, it was drawn
In your Defence: and if you're Jealons of it,
You wrong a Ready-hand to doe you Service.
Sir, is not the Traitor known that did it?
No doubt he is.
My Lord, you speak
Very doubtfully. I hope you doe not think,
But I am sorry for the Accident
I know not what to think. Your Disposition's
As great a Stranger to me as your Person,
I see, my Lord, you know to throw Injuries,
Though to confer no Civilities on
A Stranger.
Injuries are deservedly placed
On an Intruding Guest.
You're Unworthy.
And though I am encompassed with all the
Dangers I may Justly fear from so Barbarous
A Place, which dares doe any thing it Lusts unto,
Without regard of Laws or Hospitality,
I'd tell you so. And were you from this Dunghill
That you stalk on (it is no better) I'd pull down
That Unmannered Pride within you.
Let me go,
Nothing shall privilege him to talk thus.
They hold you in your safety. Nor is the Distance
Twixt your Life and Death, longer than this Space
'That parts us. If you dare, follow me,
I'll stay you out a Days Sail at Sea,
I Challenge you to a Princely Combat.
Where come with all your power, that I may
Destroy so many Brute-Beasts from off the Earth.
Shall I be tied while I am bated?—
I'll send those tha shall o'retake you, and cut
You off, before your Shipping yet. Argestes,
Haste unto the Port presently, and in
My Fathers Name, Command all speedy Power
Be raised to stop the Prince. Bid'em fire his
Ships i'th'Haven—
O my Lord, consider
A little more, before you lay a Blot
Upon the Nation, which Future Ages
Cannot wipe off. No Story can parallel
Such a Fact. Your Highness moved him much,
And gave him Cause of choler.
Does he help
Your Lordship with Ships? that thus you plead his Cause.
Shall I be Tutored by a Traitor?
Sir, you're happy if you can find a Tutor,
When you thus much need one. And for your other
Language, when I understand it, I'll return you
An Answer, in the mean time, you must take it
Home to you as you gave it
It is well Sir,
I shall find other ways, than Words to Answer you.
How now Timeus! What, bloody?
No more
Than you see, Sir. The Sword rather left it
On me, than drew it out.
Who is the Traitor,
That durst commit such Outrage?
He's escaped unknown.
Unknown? that cannot be, when he has past
Thus far in the Court, some must take notice of him.
Can you describe him?
He was habitat
Like a Soldier; but his Looks had more of
Devil than of Man.
Upon my Life
I saw him! but it is two days since. He must
Be known in all this time. Enquire who brought in
Any such Man, or was seen with him.
This can be
No body but my Hob-goblin. And't please
Your Highness, was he not in a Buffe-Coat?
And had his Face all bedabbled with Patches?
Yes, he had so.
Then doe I know him,
He belongs to my Lord Aratus there.
No body durst speak to him but he,
He showed his teeth at every body else.
He had like to have bit me once.
Aratus,
Doe you hear? They say, he, that committed
This Villainy, belongs to you.
To me, Sir?
He wrongs me that thinks so. I maintain none
That dare attempt such Insolence Poly. My Lord,
I saw him with you.
Who? pray make me know
The Man.
A black stern Soldier that followed you.
I fear I understand you now!
There is such a One that follows me; but
I never discovered any Disloyal
Spirit in him. His Out-Side, it is true, was
As you describe, not moulded after the
Common Frame of Men, but threatened more than
Any I have seen: Yet it was but his Out-Side
That threatened so. Within he was Gentle,
All a Courtier, to be wound and turned by
The least Civility. I must confess,
When he was Injured, then he was High, and
Lordly, Storms rose in's looks, and Thunder
Was in his Voice.
And you knowing this,
How durst you turn such a Wild Beast loose into
The Court? Whom had I met, and chance it to have
Angered, my fortune had been the same.
Lay hands on him. You shall find that such a Spirit
Dwells in my Breast too, and when it is stirred,
Will raise tempests as great. We shall find
Other particulars beside to examine you of.
Then the Gods send their aid, or all is lost!
Yet, Sir, hear me speak. The Jealousies you
Have of me, I shall not perhaps be able
At this present to Clear; and indeed I
Know not so much as what they are. But Sir,
To show you in this last Accident how much
I am Innocent. I will relate unto you,
How first I met the Actor of it. It was on that Day
I was employed on an Honourable
Message from your Majesty to the Stranger
Prince, On the Shore I found him, having lately
Escaped a Ship-wrack, and as great a Danger
On the Land; for he had been assaulted
By two Villains that were in the same Voyage
With him, the cause of whose hate he could not tell,
Having no acquaintance with them, but in
The Ship; but as he had before the Waves,
So in this Tempest too, as I may call it,
He bore himself above. In the instant,
While he was yet hot in his Anger,
And their Blood, we came upon him—
Pray Sir let me speak to you. There's a Wonder
Discovered to me by this Relation!
And under this Monster, he hath Spoke of,
A greater doth lie hid; One that you'd rather
Have in Chains, than all the list of Traitors
I have named. Sir, commit the Uucasing
Him to me, and suffer me to proceed
With Aratus, as I shall see cause.
Take your way, I'll leave him to you.
My Lord, with the persuasion of your
Innocence, I have procured your Freedom
Of my Father; and do desire in Return
Of this kindness (if it be such) to let
Me see the face of this my Enemy
Once more, if your Acquaintance (as appears
By your words) be not too late to know his
Abode. My Lord, I shall receive him otherwise
Than you expect. The Relation you have
Made of him, and what my self was witness of,
Have turned my Hate into Admiration
Of him, and if I can move his Love, as
I have done his Anger, I shall be happy
In his Valour. It is not the first time that
The Bravery of Enemies, have made them Friends,
And that Wounds, have been the first Seals of Love,
I do consider how much I injured him,
And that on such provocation, he could not
Have done less, At the first sight I called him Dog,
And without more Circumstance commanded
To have him killed.
Now Sir, I must kneel to you,
You have the goodness of a Prince. He shall
Submit for his Offence, or suffer for it.
And if you find not that Noble Spirit
In him, I have told you of, in the most
Dangerous Business you shall employ him,
Let him be punished for this his Ill-plac'd-Valour.
My Lord, I'll take no other Surety,
But your Word; ever oblige me thus.
But my Lord, though I can Answer,
I cannot give Credit to your smooth Tongue.
This last Accident might have lost all. I'll
Hazard no more by my Delays. And seeing
They know not their time to strike, I'll teach em
Both the How, and When to do it. Before
To morrow this time, I'll ring their Dull
Security such an Alarm—
My Lord,
Prince Clearchus Salutes you.
Ha! Prince Clearchus
Said thou? Come nearer friend.
Do you not know me
My Lord?
My Lord Haimantus! I crave your
Pardon. How fares the Prince?
Well, and both He,
And my Lord Pallantus (who happily made
His Escape to our Ships from his Pursuers)
Have sent me in this Disguise, to let you know,
The Block-house is privately surrendered
To 'em: in which they now are, with three hundred
Of our Selectest Men: and undertake
With this strength to rescue the Princess Hianthe
This Even, if the state of your other Affairs
Will suffer it. Our Navy besides rides Clear,
And disengaged near to the Block-house,
Where they can land what greater Force they please.
Hum. The Gallant Prince, and bold Pallantus safe,
The Block-house surrendered, and the Ships at hand
Both for a Reserve, and a Retreat—Why should
They not attempt it? My Lord, tell'em,
Their Design is Noble, and like Themselves,
Full of Youth, of Fire, of Bravery, of Justice:
That where such Spirits as theirs move in any
Action, all Designs ought to Follow, and
Not Lead; they make the Period, and the Points
Of Business. Say, I do not only approve,
Of this their Purpose, but will Assist 'em
In their Retreat, and at the same time give
A Divertisement, by some hundreds of
Great shot poured into the City. Come my Lord
I'll direct you a way to return less
Hazardous than that you came in hither.
The time of their great Plot is now complete,
The hours are finished. O let it not You,
Which look down, which favourablylook down
Upon this Isle, want your Power which first
Did strengthen it; let the same Hand that bid,
Disclose it too! Shame not at so Glorious
An Off-spring, when it is Heavenly, and doth
Confess the Father, when none but Gods dare
Call it theirs, nor without Blasphemy can
Own it. Ye were kind Parents at the first,
Show your selves still so, and Rear the Child ye
Have Gotten. Where Humane strength shall fail, there
Hold it up, and make that Want, the Strongest.
Madam, I now met my Lord
us,
Who entreats your Highness to keep within
Your Lodgings this Night, and to fear nothing
What ever Embroylments you hear abroad,
Or near you.
Madam, I come to tell you,
The Infection, which cause this your Retirement,
Is now cleared up, and vanished, and abroad
You may safely bless us with your Presence:
The Court has for these days suffered an Eclipse,
But when it shall again show forth its Beams,
Your Beauties, it will look more Glorious,
By its short Obscuring.
Weil said Timeus.
Now I like thee; here thy Cares and Services
Are bent the right way; would I could see thee
Once look pale in these. Can a young Man (when
He may have leave to breath in such a Paradise
As this) draw a common Ayre? an Ayre of the People?
I am loath to change thy present thoughts: but
The business I have to tell thee, will bring
Thee peace, and more leisure for them. The suspicion
Thou had of a Treason, was not Vain; since
It hath broke out; but it is already suppressed.
The two Chief of'em are taken in their passage,
As they went to Head their Forces. And I
Have commanded they be set so High,
As to enjoy a Large View of that Land they
Were Ambitious of, and then to strangle 'em
At that Height.
Are there but two, Sir, of Note
That you have taken? Flatter not your self,
Had they been thousands, they had left more behind.
Your Majesty counts that a Victory,
Which they scorn to account a Loss; and think
You're safe, when they are not endangered.
Is Aratus, Phronimus, or Eurylochus,
Among them? Is Pallantus one of the two
Are taken?
Pallantus! Thou dream of the Dead,
And the Ages past.
Sir, he's Living,
And if my Aims deceive me not, he has
Lately Walked among us, and makes up the Knot
Of Traitors—Ha!
What can this mean! Look out!
Sir, arm speedily, put your self within
Your Strength, or you're lost. The Block-house
Is revolted, Prince Clearchus pores Men
In Swarms upon the Shore, Aratus has
Seized both the Gate and Fort that lead unto
The Haven, and thunders, as you hear,
Upon the City.
These were the Evils
I was a Prophet of, I saw them when
They were Disguised. Sir, it is no time now to Stand,
But Doe.
Madam, we entreat your Pardon,
That thus we have offended against your peace,
And made you the first partaker of our Troubles,
That ought to have Known them Last.
Sir, your Trouble
Is too sad to be excused.
How likes your
Highness the Serenade of this fair Evening?
I like it well Melissa, but I fear;
My Solicitude and Care are too great
To admit a perfect Joy—
Stand, stand.
Gentlemen stir not, if you'll save your Lives;
We come to serve the Princess.
Madam, you're safe, fear nothing. If you please
To put your self into our protection,
You may for ever bid a farewell to
This your Hated Prison. My Lord, Pallantus,
Guard the Princess, and make the Retreat with
All the Speed you can. The Honour of bringing up
The Rear in this Action, I can impart to none.
Arm, arm, arm.
On the ground, my Lord!
Lower and baser yet,
Viler in my Condition Polyander,
Than this my Posture. Affronted, baffled, scorned,
Wounded by Traitors, and by Dishonour
Deeper. The Princess in my very sight
Born from me.
My Lord, these Wrongs dictate Revenge,
And not Complaints, show your Resentments with
Your Sword And let what you Have call your thoughts
To it, and not what you have lost.
Lead on.
While He that should be Eye and Ear,
Through Sloth doth neither See nor Hear,
Behold like Thunder comes a Sound,
Which doth at once Amaze and Wound;
" That Dart sure hits, which Clouds did hide,
" And safely Kills,' cause Undescried.
" Where Dangers urge, he that is slow,
" Takes from Himself, and adds to's Foe.
The are come beyond a Whisper now.
And boldly dare proclaim their Vow.
" When the Prey's sure, to show the Snare,
" Begets not Counsel, but Despair.
Like Lightning it awakes the Sense,
Only to see, and grow Blind thence.
" It is Love, not Faction, where the Good,
" Conspire to spill Usurping Blood.
BEsides this great Work, we must have two less
On either hand of it; and which must first
Be made, no less to secure the Work in doing,
Than when it is done; two common Horn-Works
Will be sufficient for this purpose. Would they
Were finished.
My Lord, commit the Charge of'em
To me, I'll both hasten the labour, and stand
Upon the Guard till they be done.
Do you hear the Rumour my Lords?
No, Madam.
What is it?—What Fatal Check can our Affairs
Receive, that it should want a Tongue to speak it?
Which hitherto have been so prosperous, so sull
Of fresh successes, that our whole Councels
Have been employed, but how to Entertain,
And make best Uses of'em.
It is reported,
That the King's taken.
Horror and Amazement
Seize me on the bare Relation! But such
A Prodigy cannot be! So Divine
A Person, was never thrown away so
Cheaply. Though the Gods abound in all Goodness,
They never Lightly yet Esteemed of any;
That were not to show their Plenty, but their
Contempt of Virtues. Excellent Lady,
Say the Particulars of this Report.
Was there any of the Kings Age made mention of?
No, the Account we have is this, That two Lords
That were in their passage to raise Forces,
Are taken by a Troop of Horse of the
Adverse Party. My Brother being yet
In his Disguise, and not known, is conceived
To have past for one of their followers.
Where are all our Great words now? Those
Mighty sounds which made a trembling in the Air,
And cause no less a deafness with their fall,
Than if Thunder, the Voice of Heaven were turned
Articulate, and spoke the Threats of Jove
Unto the Word? Changed to as great a Silence?
Such when a Tempest ceases, is the Calm
That follows, no noise is heard; as if the VVinds
With Blasts were Breathless grown, and the Seas
Sate down, and after so much Toil required Ease.
But a True and Noble Spirit, ought not
To sink under Misfortune, but bear up
The stronger; and if the state be Desperate,
To attempt Ways as Desperate to Change it.
No Action can be counted Folly,
Where no Counsel can be given for Any.
Rashness is Bravery, or Wisdom then, when
The Best Hope is but Destruction. I will do
Something, And where the gods have given a Will,
We ought not in their Service to sit still.
I was born, and bred up in Miseries,
And the Misfortunes I have past, were not
To excuse my following Age from more,
But to prepare me only to suffer
Greater yet, and stranger.
My Lord,
Recollect your self. This News may be false, and all
The Danger the King is in, may be from your believing it.
Give not your self cause to mourn hereafter,
All perished on a Mistake. If that this,
The worst of Evils, be befallen, yet
It ought not to be the reason of your
Neglect, but greater Care and Vigilance.
Though much be Lost, yet that Remains, may well
Expect your best Thoughts to it. Look upon
That Lady, too much swallowed up in Grief,
Through our so low Dejection. If you have
Lost a King, consider in Her you've still
A Queen, and such a One, as for whose Service,
You would not think your dearest blood too precious,
Were it not frozen with your present sorrows.
My Lord, I thank you, and will follow your
Advise. Pardon my Amazement, and if
I seemed dead, when the life of all my Actions
Was taken from me. Yet it was not a Slumber
I was lost in, but a Confusion of
Various thoughts, not knowing which to follow,
Till your Highness pointed me one forth.
We'll act something now so speedily, that
They shall not have leave to put an ill Design
In practise. Madam, revive your gentle
Spirits, happier things attend you, than now
You know, or hope for—The News—
What News my Lord?
Such as is not to be named
Without a Sacrifice! O see Madam!
Though we have lost, we are not yet Undone;
There's a Check, but not a Total Ruin
Of our Fortunes. The King, Paronimus, and
Eurylochu. are all safe, and never
Were in Danger; this Night they will be here
With their full Power.
My joys are then restored me,
I shall see my Brother
My Lord, who are they
Are taken, and have given occasion for
This Mistake?
Two that stood boldly for our Party.
More besides, their Name's there, and that they were
Honest, I cannot now instruct your Highness.
You may perceive, they, which have no such Cause
Of joy as we have, do lament them much.
We shall have a time too, I doubt not, both
To mourn and revenge their fall. In the mean time,
Let 'em rest in Peace and Honour. Such a
Farewell, were I in their Condition,
I should have expected. They have only
Out-stript us in the payment of a Debt
We all owe unto our Master, ours is Due,
Though yet not called for. Come Madam, we must
Prepare to meet the King, and after that what
Ever our souls can wish for. But whore's
Pallantus, absent from this happy News?
He went forth my Lord a little before
The arrival of the Letters.
We shall meet him.
Joys of this nature will never come too late.
Sir, though there are Troubles in your Affairs,
Let none be in your Countenance. Your Eyes,
Should like those blessed Twin-fires upon the Ship,
Display a Prosperous Flame, a light of Joy,
And Comfort round about; that they which toil
In the Rage, and Fury of this Tempest,
May from thence fore-see a Calm, and nourish
Hopes of safety. Thus you wrong your Power,
Destroying it your self, because others would.
The Soldier groans, just as you groan, their pulses
Have the same Motion, and their Hearts do beat
Both Hope, and Fear, according as yours doth.
All Omen comes from you, your Passion is not
A single Sadness, it is the Peoples too.
When you confess a Fear, none dares be Bold,
Courage is thought a Folly, not a Virtue.
Your Mirth were now Discretion, and a Face
Cheerful as at a Feast, were Policy,
It would be one kind of Succour.
Timeus
I thank thee: But these Joys come from Above,
And are not to be taken when we please:
No Man can pronounce, He will be happy.
Yet I will struggle with my Thoughts, and strive
To recover the Peace, that's fled from me.
But let not this thing Discomfort you,
Perhaps it is a course of Humours only,
And a little Physic may remove it.
With the Comfort and hope of this, I'll leave
You Sir. And if the Genius that attends
Your Person, smile upon us, no other
Evil shall dismay us. Shall I bear any
Commands from you to the Camp?
Only my Salutations. The Charge of all
Do thou take upon thee. To morrow if
This Fit leave me, I'll visit you,
How every thing is irksome to me! Clouds
And Darkness are before my Eyes,
All things dissenting one from the other,
Yet Conspire in this, that they present Death
To my View. I have that Idle Comfort
Only left, That he that Despairs of All,
Ought to fear Nothing. When things cannot grow worse,
All fortune then is on His Side that Suffers.
But my Injustice seconded with Murder,
Doe forbid Success. A Kingdom reared in Blood
Stands on a Slippery Foundation.
And I have been nourished in Peace thus long,
That being grown Specious and Great, I may
At last fall a Sacrifice worth Slaughter.
Thoughts urge Thoughts; Suspicion gets Suspicion;
Horror Horror; I have not that small Settlednesse
Of Mind, as to think one thing twice. Were I
But Innocent, I would provoke Misfortune,
Call for Fate with as undaunted Courage,
As the Lord and Ruler of it doth—Hold.
I command you hold.—What a Nothing it is
That I have thus much Feared, and laboured
To escape, when it was my Good! Childishly
Dreading every Thought of Cure, then most Offended,
When my Health was near. How Well I am
After this Little Wound! Quiet of Mind,
And Peace of Conscience, those Blessed Companions,
Begin to return unto me. I see
Nothing but blood can appease blood in Sacrifice;
That to the Guilty there's no Ease, but Death,
No Mercy, like the Cross, Oh!—Hold in your Rage.
Have ye not already acted Mischiefs
Enough by my Command, but ye must
Voluntarily thrust your selves on more?
You're deceived, though I have been hitherto
A Tyrant, now I am Merciful, and would
Gladly behold things Just and Innocent.
He faints. The Villain must not live.
I Command you hold. My Power is yet Good.
You are the Villains, the True Causers of
This my Misery, and you should Lay Hands
Upon your selves. How Ridiculous is this
Your Fury? Suppose I should give way
To your Desires, what were you the Safer,
Or I the Better? You would have One Foe Less,
And I one Sin more, that am already
Laden. Does not my Judgement affright you
Rather? I was not only Guilty, your
Hands were dipped in the same Blood with mine, nay,
Oft performed such Deeds, I only durst but Wish.
Had I given you my Commission, Obedience
Here would not have Excused you. Your Loyalty
To Me was but at Best a Broken Faith
Unto another, and when Ye observed
It most, Ye were most Perjured. What can
Ye expect? Ye see when I was Guarded
By an Host, was thought Secure from what the
Power of Earth or Men could doe unto me,
One Man, as I may say, One Handful of
That Earth, broke through all my Safeties, and with
A Single Arm has forced what a Million
Could not keep: and when no Humane Means was found,
Yet there was a Miracle to Conquer me.
To you I turn now no more my Terror,
In Return of this Favour you have found,
Show the like to These, and Others, that shall
Be guilty of that Name, Of Friends to Me.
Though You are Nothing yet, this Deed will make
You Powerful: and You that have given them All,
May demand back so Small a Part.
Now you have been so much my Enemy,
Change something to a Friend—How Vainly
I take Care for Lesser things, neglecting
My Chief Concernments. O my Timeus!
O my Poor Eudora!—Leave me not yet my Soul.
Thou can not mount until the Load be taken
From thy Wing. Thou coldest inhabit here
When it was Hell, now it is Paradise,
O stay—and dwell—
Though the Fall be Great, it cannot shake me,
When I know it is Just. The Malefactors
Penitence takes not the Justice of his
Doom away; though He be Changed, That remains
Unstained. He may die with Pity, but not
With Innocence. They mind me not, I'll take
This Advantage of their Sorrow for my
Escape; I will not trust their Obedience
To a Dead Command.
Leave your sad Embraces,
They'll bring no Comfort to you, though you persist
In'em, till you are such as this you hold.
This ground of Sorrow will afford a perpetual
Supply of Moisture, which your Eyes, like Suns,
May draw up, and pour down for ever; but
Never exhale a Satisfaction to you.
Let us to the Prince, and there unburden
Our hearts of this our grief, and if he have
A Service that commands our Lives, all hazards
Now will be welcome to us.
The Villain
That committed this Sacrilegious Act's escaped!
We were too soft to obey Dying-Speech.
His Entrance and Escape were ordained
Both by Fate, it was not in Our Power to hinder Either.
Give me a Power Mighty as my Rage,
That my Revenge may reach unto the Clouds,
And unthrone those Gods, that joined hands with Men
To commit so Black a Deed. It were but
Justice they should loose their Deity, that
So would throw it off. Oh my Father! did I
Unload thy Shoulders of the Kingdom,
That thou might fall under a less Weight?
And bereft thee of thy Jealousies, to
Ruin thee with more Assurance only?
Where are all those Flattering Tongues, that when
There was no Need, would, in a Complement,
Hourly Suffer for Thee? Not One to die
In thy Defence? Or by his fall to make
Thine more Decent? What ho, Charisius,
Erastus, Acmanthes, not one Voice?
How Dismal is this Place! The Graves where Death
Inhabits are not so dreadful! l I'll fly thee,
Though I run among the thickest of my Foes,
They can present no Horrors like this Lowness;
The Cries, the Sword, the Trumpet in the Battle,
Strike not so deep Amazement!—
I walk like
Aeneas among the Shades, all is Hell
About me! I see nothing but what my
Fancy frames in Horrid Shapes! O ye vain fears
Of Guilty Men! All are Unreasonable,
But yours Ridiculous. When you have contemned
The greatest and most real Dangers,
You tremble at a Ghost, a Thing less than a Man,
And when the Substance could not, the Shadow
Frights you. There is no way but this to set me
Above my Fears; when I am Less I shall
Be Equal to 'em.
O hold, my Lord!
Offer not up your Self a Sacrifice,
When there are so many, that gladly would
Redeem you with their Lives. Let that thought
Prevail with you, That you ought to Live for them,
That so willingly would Die for you.
You're the Prop of thousands, and if you sink,
You pull a Kingdom with you. Take your Sword
By the Other End, and so holding it,
Seek to appease this Royal Ghost. If you
Cannot regain a Crown, yet win a Memory
By the loss of it: This Object makes your Grief
A burden to your Honour. Lean on us,
My Lord, and we will conduct you to the Camp.
What Shout is this among the Enemies?
It is their Acclamations still for the Arrival
Of their Fellows, with whom they have now joined
Camps.
I am glad of't.
I hope we shall have Command, to try the Fortune
Of the Field to morrow. Would the Whole Knot
Of them were there, that we might make quick Work,
And like Alexander, untie it with a Blow.
I and a Wall round about 'em to keep
Them to the Slaughter; that we may not be
Troubled to kill a Thousand in a Thousand
Places. I like not this pursuing, it is
The greatest Evil, next to the being
Pursued; the Wine ne'er tastes well when it is so
Jumbled. Give me a Standing-Camp, that
Flourishes like a Peaceful City, and wants
No Necessaries. Here stand your Engines,
There Victual: on this hand a Palisade
Defends you, on the other a Barricade
Of Pork-tubs as impregnable: before
A Fose is cut of some two hundred paces,
And the Soldiers tippling in it, behind a Coop
Runs out of the same length, and the Poultry
Tippling in their Trenches; whose bodies are
Too delicate and tender to bear travel.
Here a Man may, even among the Tents, forget
To be a Soldier.
Ha, ha, ha, On my
Conscience Comastes, thou art weary
Of the Camp already.
Yes faith,
As your Selves are, if you'd confess the truth.
Why, me thinks there's no Pleasure like the Soldiers,
Who takes his Swing in all Delights, and sates
Himself with 'em, as if he were near to
Taste 'em more; and if Fortune be so kind
To grant him a second and a third Fruition,
Like Friends, which parted in the Morn two Dangerous
And Hopeless ways of ever seeing, they Meet
With a Multiplied, and Unexpected Joy.
His very Wounds, are Pleasures, and Elizium
Comesfaster on him, than his Death.—
When Honour is the Prize, and wronged Justice
The Cause that thrust him on, he throws off One,
That he may gain a Better Life, a Life
Of Fame, which is Eternal even in Death.
That he enjoyed before was Fading,
Sustained only by the Infirmities
Of One Weak Body, now it is supported
By the Memories of All, the Charge of it
Is committed unto a World of Men,
Nor is it Extinguished before the Frame of the
Whole Universe. None are so surviving
As the Sons of Glorious War. Jove gave
Life to Hercules and Theseus, but Mars
Eternity; they breathed from one, but gained
Heaven by the other. These were the great Thoughts,
Which when I was yet Young, and not able
To effect 'em, did dwell in me; they did
Suggest unto my soul, that I ought to raise my hand
Against the Gods, if they slept at Perjury,
And favoured Injustice.
Hello Comastes!
What Rapture's this?
To show you how easy
A thing it is, to talk like a Soldier,
And be as brave a fellow as either of you.
Ha, ha, ha.
Thou would make an excellent
Run-away-Souldier. Such a speech on the High-way,
Were greater Violence, than Bidding-stand,
A long staff would not get an Alms so soon.
What say thou now Comastes, to a jovial Round
Or two, beyond the Court-Healths? Those at the Kings
Own Table?
I believe I shall say more
Than you at this, as well as at the Other.
Captain, command 'em to bring some Wine in.
Come, in the mean time lets sit.
My Lords, stand upon your Guard. The King's slain!
The King!
Thou look distractedly, speak it again!
He's slain! My self was present at his Death.
By what accursed Hand?
That Devil, that
Awhile since wounded the Prince, has Murdered him.
But my Lords, I lose the time, and Betray you
In it. The Prince is come into the Camp,
And commands you strait to repair to him.
He finds the Army wavering in their Faith,
The City Bands are already Revolted,
And others begin to draw off. The Kings death,
And a Declaration from the Enemy,
Pretending that a Son of the former King's
Preserved by Aratus, heads their Forces;
Has almost gained them a Victory. without
A drop of Blood.
Away, we stay too long,
Lead us where you left the Prince.
Never did Justice show her self so Eminent:
This was a Deed, as if her own Hand
Had wrought it! Who can complain the want of
Providence? Or say, the Guilty and the
Innocent make one Heap in Judgement, when
This is told? A Tyrant in the Midst of
All his Strengths, guarded with Friends and Arms,
What ever Power or Policy could make him
Safe with, by a Single Hand strengthened with
Justice, was snatched from the midst of all!
The Ligt'ning melts not the enclosed Gold
With half that wonder, leaving that Contains it!
Nor doth the Plague, in a Multitude of Men,
Make a Choice so Curious.
My Lord, we may Sheath our Swords.
This Gallant Act of the Heroic and
The brave Pallantus, has not only
Removed a Tyrant, but, I may say,
Dissolved an Army, and Reduced a Kingdom.
The Praetor, in the Cities Name, offers
Allegiance. And divers Bodies, both of Horse
And Foot, have left the Enemies Camp, and are
Come over to us. What can we attribute
To this Noble Deed, that in any measure
May reach the Greatness of it? We ought to
Acknowledge it the Compendium of all
Our Future Fortunes; and what over High
And Happy shall succeed to us, to be
The Consequents alone of this. A Benesit
Of that Universal Nature, that like
The Suns Influence, our Enemies feel
The Good of it as well as we.
Sir, you weigh
This Action as you ought. And while you can look
Thus Nobly on the Services are done you,
You'll make this Isle a Land of Heroes,
The Princes Eyes breed Virtues when they shine
Upon 'em; and what ever has been found
To be his Temper, quickly grows to be
The Genius of the People.
What thinks your Lordship,
If we drew out, and faced the Body of
The Enemy, that yet holds together?
And with Fear, or Forces, sought to dissolve'em?
My Lord, what can we return you for this
Gallant Forwardness? But the Force that now
Stands against us, will not be worth your Highness
Hazard, nor yet pains to face our. A little
Shame, and Obligation to their Late Master,
Is all the Bond that holds 'em. And a few
Days, if not Hours, will scatter 'em, without
Our Swords. But this Message from the City,
Will require your Majesties attendance
To it. Please you to hear what their Demands
Are to you.
Spare no Opposition.
Bréak the Gates, add fire unto your Force.
O Madam, they break in upon us!
O my Father, when thou art slain I cannot
Fear what after does befall me! The same
That was their Cruelty to Thee, will to Me
be Pity.
Stand. No man advance to touch a Life,
Or doe a further Violence. My Rage
Has blindly lead me on to Violate
A place no less Sacred than the Temples,
And rudely ere I looked about, hath thrust me
On the Deity! So those that are led
To see some Glorious Sight, eager and longing,
Ask still as they pass, which is the way? and
How near? till they are engaged within its
Splendour, which opening suddenly upon them,
Makes 'em retire as fast again with Reverence!
What stays thee Monster? And makes thee pant thus
Ore the Prey? Here I stand ready, and doe
Invite thy Fury; Come, and save my hand
A labour: if thou art Surfeited, I'll
Whet thy Appetite. The art a Murderer,
A Villain; these Name thee not; They are but
Diseases of the State, Thou the Death. The Law
Comprehends them within her Verge, thy Giant
Faults doe so much O're-top Her, that Justice
Cannot reach thee, and if there were no Gods.
Thou then were Innocent, and would stand Safe,
Because thou art so Wicked. Thou hast Killed
Thy King. O no, thou had no share in him!
He was a King of Men, thou a Beast, the
Foulest, and the bloudiest that ever prayed
On Innocence.
My Revenge, how false
Thy Beauty was.
How Monstrous thou appear'st!
Thou represents unto me all Ill,
I ever heard of!
And thou all that
I ever heard of Good!
Thou move like so many
Living-Mischiefes! had the Priests beheld thee,
They might have Divined, all these Future Evils
So exactly in thy Form, that what they told,
Would rather have seemed a Story, than
A Prophecy, and have saved us from thee.
Nature was never Guilty of such a Work,
Some Hellish-Power hath given thee Birth, and Spirit,
And sent thee on the Earth to destroy all
That's Fair and Holy.
Sir, raise your Spirits.
Can you endure such words as these? Soldiers on,
And make Her feel those Evils She hath uttered.
Hold, hold, Thou Worse than she hath Named! dare thou
Command, or move to such a Sacrilege?
If thy Sins were told thee from the Heavens,
You would blaspheme the Voice that spoke to thee
Withdraw, thy Rage is too Unhollow'd for
This Place. Provoke me not with another
Offer. I shall not swollow your Bitterness,
Though gilded in the Name of Friendship.
What next intend thou? What Master-piece
Of wickedness wilt thou glory in alone?
Know, thou can not Force me; here within thy
Reach I am as safe, as if an Army,
All resolute to death, divided us.
This Hand, something weaker than a Women's,
Can resist all thy strength, were it as great
In Mischief, as in Will.
Though I seem all
That you have Named, and Fouler yet, this is
A sin I dare not do. O think me not
Worse than you have said already, and then
I may again wash off my Stains. The Beasts
Are Noble, meek to Chastity, and humbly
Lick the feet of Majesty. Judge me not
By show, our Eyes deceive us, and as oft
Persuade us to the Wrong, as do the Blind-
Mans feet; falsely do prompt us, All that is
White, is Innocent, and all that's Black, is
Sinful without exception. Should those
That look on you, be led so by the sense,
They must kneel down before you, and adore you
As some Deity, not being able
To fancy so much God, as they do see
In you! Such Forms their Powers have given you,
That you may become a Rival in their VVorships.
Why talk thou thus? Thy Tongue hath no more power
Than hath thy Hands.
Neither intend Violence
Would you could entertain of me one thought
Of Goodness, as hopeless as you think me,
I'd undertake to make it good, and Better't
Daily.
Why delay'st thou? What would thou have
Forgiveness, Love, I dare not say.
Love!
Thy Thoughts are more Misshapen, than thy self.
In thy very Hopes thou art Cruel. This Base
Imagination hath wronged me more,
Than all thy Actions: In those thou only
Sought the Ruin of Greatness, in this
The Ruin of my Name. A Rape were a Glory
To thy Affection, and though it had Lost,
It would have Got me Fame, the Honour of
A Ravished Virgin. Did thou Woe me with the
Highest Services, as thou come in my
Fathers Blood, I could Reward thee, but could
Never yield thee Love. I was too long
A Princess, and lost the name too Late,
To entertain so low a thought.
The World
Of Causes that part me, and Happiness!
Love is soft, and full of Courtesy,
A greater Opposite to Lust, than Hate.
The Flames thou feel, are more preposterous,
Than those which burn the Breasts of Satyrs, or
Of Beasts; which kill the Young, and in that blood
Enjoy the Dam. Think thou that any is
So bold in Lust, to imbrance the Fears thy Love
Brings with it?
My Youth, and Comeliness how
Are you obscured!
My Miseries have put
A new Nature in me, changed that Calmness
I had wont enjoy, into the Looks, and
Language of a Fury. How ill does Rage
Become a Virgins breast? I will suppress it.
And if it must break forth, dissolve it into
Tears. An Age worn out in thought, cannot present
One Comfort to me, I am so Wretched.
Oh! My soul's more Earthy than my body,
This War that is within me, I hope will
Gain a Victory o'er my Life at last.
Accursed that I was to be the Author
Of so much Misery. Is there no way to restore
That Peace which you have lost? If there be any,
Despair not of it, though it be held within
The jaws of Death, I'll snatch it for you:
Though it were lost in the Darkest Mass of things,
My Love would distinguished in a Chaos:
If it have no Being, but what your Thought
Gives Life to, I'll Wish it for you, so strong
My Fancy is to serve you Let it be
Any thing to be done, I'll do it. Can I,
The wretched Cause removed; bring ease unto
You Sufferings? Here on my Knee I yield my Life,
Unto your taking: or if you had rather,
I'll offer't up my self.
No, and yet
There is a way, and thou may do it.
Is there a way? O my joys! The Gods are
Merciful! Name it, name it to me.
If thou wilt vow to do it presently.
Need I an Oath to confirm I would be
Happy? It is my own Happiness, I thus
Eagerly pursue in yours. Every sigh
You give, doth make me breathless; and every
Tear which you let fall, doth bow me nearer
To the Earth, than all the years and Wounds that
I have suffered. Yet I will swear, By all things
Holy, all that I fear and reverence,
To refuse no Labours, Death, to gain your Ease,
And restore joy unto your Life again.
Now thou can not, thy last words have rendered
Thee Unable. The Ease was Death, which yet
I beg from thee.
From what a Heaven of happiness
Am I fallen?
Assist me all my strength.
Ye Gods this way ye have ordained I should
Come to you: pardon that Fate then, which your selves
Did give me.
O my Lady!
Stay, O stay that hand!
Let that Goodness in you, which would spare Things
Fair and Holy, preserve the Fairest, and
The Holiest! The Angels would be proud to take
Such Shape upon them when they Visit Earth,
It is such as Your self ought to look with Reverence on.
Ther's a Weapon hid within my Heart, which
None can take away: it wounds deeply now.
Death thou art a Lover, and dost Court me mildly.
Ladies O my Lady: help, help. O my Lady!
Give her more air.
She's gone, my time's no longer.
Our Lives were woven on the same Web, the
Destinies condemn' me to see her Death,
And then to follow.
She breaths, stand off.
My Brother, O my Father!
How doe you Madam?
Too well, my strength returns to fast unto me.
Were my Soul fled, that Voice would call it back
Again, it self would return, and choose this
Paradise on Earth. I'll not disturb her
With my Longer stay. Fair One, if your Lady
Shall need any thing, you may have it with
A thought; No less respect shall wait on her,
Than if her Father still Ruled all. The Guard
Shall be at your Command, and attend only
For your Quiet, and your Safety.
Soldier
You are Noble. The Gods reward thy goodness.
HE who Unjustly swayed the State,
Lives no where now but in their Hate,
There's Nothing left of him but Shame,
Which both Preserves and Clouds his Name.
When Civill-Beasts fall, let it be
Called Slaughter, and not Victory.
When that He dyes, that lived a Shade,
His Sleep's Continued then, not Made.
Arise thou Star of Honour here,
And in his Stead shine round our Sphere.
Grace thou the Throne, and let us see,
Thy Father once more Reign in thee.
We will now in nought but Love Conspire,
And no breast burn but with True Fire.
While that such manners rule the Throne,
Live all by his, he by his Own.
THis Quiet we enjoy, does strike Amazement
In me! Sure they have Slain the Body with
The Head, which makes this General Calm.
Madam,
It is much more Innocent. And though that part
Of it we find, by particular Command
Be Ordered so; yet it is but an Image
Of the Universal Peace that Blesses
All the Isle. No Noise of Arms, Rapine of
Soldiers, Tumults, Slaughters, are seen in any
Place, but Security and Joy doe reign,
As in a long and Settled Peace. The Conspirators
Having brought about their Great Design,
Desire to have it seen to all the World.
They Sought a Change, but not a Desolation.
Their Moderation is too Late; nor will
It satisfy the Gods, when they have spilt
So much Blood, that they will Spill no more.
O Madam, how far you wander, and are lost
In Error! and to all your other Miseries
Is added this, your Mistaking of the Ground
On which you Suffer: and whether with my Duty
It will stand, to inform you of the Right,
I know not: Yet while there is a Charity
In the Rudeness, I shall be bold to tell you,
This Last Alteration the State has suffer d,
This wresting of the Sceptre from your Name,
Together with your Fathers Life; has not
Befallen through the Impious and black
Contrivance of a few bloody and ambitious
Lords, greedy to assume the Royal Ensigns
To themselves: but in the Name of Justice,
And the Owner, they have made this Seizure.
And there stands up a King, to Countenance,
And Justify the Fact; a King not known
Unto the Latter Age, a Son of Him
From whom, with the like violence, but more
Injustice (pardon what I say) your Father
Formerly did tear the Diadem.
O Madam! Your Innocence, or Piety,
Or both, though you stood for many Years,
So Great a Person in the State, Kept you
From looking in this Mystery. And if
You doubt the truth of what I have said,
Or can suspect your Enemies Cause is pleaded
By me: ask of the most Zealous to your House
And Name, and you will find, I have not only
Declared a Verity, but restrained by Manners
And by Duty, concealed a Story of the horridest
Cruelty, that any Age or time can Parallel.
If this be true, our Sins are mightier
Than our Sufferings; and had we a greater Debt
Than Life, we ought to pay it. My Miseries
Are due to me, I was a Party, and
Enjoyed my Fathers Violence and Treason.
You are as Innocent, as at that Time
Your Age was; and only doe offend, in these
Your Tears, and too much Sorrow, which on this
Occasion showed excessively, is not
To Grieve, but to Rapine. The King was Old,
And taking his Latest Leave, and it is hard
To say, whether he were First oppressed with Years,
Or Vengeance. My Lord Time us, it is true,
Was Young; but waigeing so seaslesse and perverse
A War, against Virtue, and against Justice,
What wonder if at last he sunk in such
A Quarrel?
How ill these Words become thee
To speak, and me to hear'em? Think thou, the Shame
And Vices of our House, can bring a Comfort
To me?
I think their Shame and Vices, Madam,
Ought not to oppress your Innocence.
As the Glories, so the Dishonours of
A Family reflect upon the Rest
Of Kin.
It is the Error of the Blind
Mistaking World, that places either, where
They are not deserved.
Can any shift off,
With Honour, from themselves the Sad Calamity
That O're-whelmes their House?
If that Calamity
Be the punishment of Particular Crimes,
To dote on the Calamity is to Allow
The Crimes.
None can be suspected to allow
A Crime, that punish even their Innocence,
For their Alliance to the Vicious.
Nor none can be admired for Justice more;
That punish Innocence on any Score.
There's one of the Adverse party, that seems
Of Note, desires admittance to your Highness.
See Rodeo who it is.
Who is it?
Madam, I Know not! nor did I ever see
Any like him! His Grace and Form admit
No Parallel! He speaks like the Soldier
That first broke in upon us, but him
It cannot be, He was the Terror, This the Delight,
And Wonder of those that look upon him!
Whether will thy Unseemly Admiration
Carry thee? In Men Beauty's the Least Part.
Madam, it appears so in him! Yet where
Such Excellence of Form is seen, the Beauties
Of the Mind are seldom Common. He craves
Admittance to your Highness, and will not
Take it, before that it be granted.
Admit him. It will not become our State,
To deny Commands, much less when they Entreat.
The Kingdom owes a Sacrifice for your Life;
All will joy to hear of it: which had it filed,
Would have pulled more Guilt upon us, then the Sins
Of a whole Age.
It is my shame you tell me of,
And a great Share of my Grief that thus I stay
To Grieve.
My Offensive Tongue can utter
Nothing pleasing to you; so great are your
Misfortuues, and your Honour so tender
To you: Yet if my Blood could Cure the Wounds
I have given you, I would not stick to make
A Balsam with it.
Thou art not He
Which gave'em me.
If my Repentance can make
Me Clear, I am not. Otherwise it was I
Who blinded with the beauty of a Rash
Revenge, tore from you all your Joys, and with it,
Lost my Own.
You are strangely Altered
If thou be he!
Nothing so strangely
As my Hopes are. Which first appeared to me
In a shape most Heavenly, and told me
All should be as Blessed as their Form!
That if I would strike one Noble Blow,
I should remove the Numerous Wrongs and Evils
Of a Nation. But treacherously hid it
From my sight, that with the same stroke, I should
Produce One Evil, out-weighing all the rest
That I had Remedied.
Why dost thou Colour thus
Thy Cruelty with Outward show of Justice
And Compassion? Thou had no Cause for that
Which thou hast done, The Wrongs were General
Thou Urge so; and of a Public Nature,
And came not in the Compass of thy Private
Vengeance; but that thou had a Hand was ever pressed
And ready to act a Cruelty.
Yet I had
A Cause, pardon me that I say so, and being
That I saw not You before I did it,
A Just One. I lost a Sovereign, as near
To me in Blood, as Love. And if this Cause
Seem Remote, I had a Father Murdered,
Whose Death it became me to Right with Vengeance,
As it becomes you to mourn ore yours with Tears.
My self the First Prince of all this Isle,
Was drove a Fugitive to other Countries,
My Wrongs and Innocence were my only Guilt.
Nor did my Persecutors here give ore,
They thought too Much was Left me in my Life;
So Poor at that time, so Orewhelmd with Miseries,
It was hardly from a Death to be distinguished.
Their Injuries put a New One in me,
And blew the Spark unto a Flame, Consumd'em.
Look on this—It may bring you Comfort,
With making you Out-of-love with the Subject
Of your Grief.
Pallantus! are you Pallantus.
This is the first Day, I have dared to be so
And to all the Treason and Injustice named,
Here's signed, Timeus! Could thou be so Cruel,
So foully Impious? Degenerate Brother!
This hath made a Mercy of all that hath
Befallen thee: Nay thou dost deserve
To have thy Punishments out-Live thee;
To have this Blasting Character engraved upon
Thy Tomb to all Posterity. Here lies
The Bloody, Treacherous, and (to make thee
Monstrous, to have thy Age joined to it)
The Young Timeus; that was subtle in
His Youth. What remains for me? That Happiness
The most Wretched do enjoy, is taken
From me, A Worthy Cause of Sorrow. Now
I can neither Live or Dye without a Stain.
Can you find yet a Resemblance but of Justice
Enemy Actions?
I Know not how to Answer you.
The Tongue that can defend such Impious Deeds,
Must be as Wicked as the Will that did
Commit'em. Had Equity pointed all
Your Actions out, given you Rules to work by,
Told you how much, how far you must have gon,
You could not have done more Justly. There wants
Not any thing to Crown your Judgment, but
My Death, the only Surviving Issue
Of that Sinful Race: I have a long time
Loathd my Life, and now I loath My Self too,
I find, I know not how, a Guiltiness
Possess me; my Fathers Crimes, flow like his Blood
Within me.
O say not so! Forbear at length
To profane the Divine Goodness that dwells
In you! It is a Sin, though You Your self
Commit it. Shall Self-Slaughter be held a Sin,
A Self-Slander not be Noted as a
Greater Crime? If the first be Murder,
So much the Soul's more Excellent than the Body,
That the Last must be held a Sacrilege; a kind of
Blaspheming of the Deity dwells in us.
Take heed, while you would rather Dye, than bear
A Stain, you pull not the Greatest on you
By avoiding it.
They that will preserve
A pure and Spotless Soul; must punish even
The least Affinity in themselves to Sin.
Be yet advised. They that too Nicely Create
Sin where tic not, Condemn their Innocence
When their Judgment's Faulty.
Why do you thus
Reward me Good for Evil? Why would you
VVith-hold me from Perishing Justly,
That sought to sink you in all your Innocence?
Could my Imprecations have drove you
To Destruction, I had had but the End
I aimd at.
You're still a Judge too Cruel
To your Self. All those Imprecations
I deserved, as I then showed to you.
But doe you Ask, Why I would save you from
Destruction? O you have set too High a Prize
Happiness in That your Question, unless
Your Bounty too would show the Way, that we
Might Hope to Effect it! How should I despise
The proudest Honours that attend the Sword,
In which Robbers and Ruffians may be Sharers
With me, to win a Glory so perfectly
Illustrious? And could I bestow
So Matchless and Divine a Benefit,
As Your Preservation, on the World,
People would stile me God! And though from the Earth
I took my Being, with the Noblest of
The Ancient Heroes they'd fix my Name in Heaven,
Invest me with Diadem of Stars,
And Robe of Immortality! And what is it,
That Obstructs this Blessing to the World and Me?
If I look upon your Innocence,
I read a Book, in which, not only a Few
Finite Years are writ, but see an Age
Drawn out to all Eternity. If on your
Loss of State; no Injury of the World,
No Shock of Fortune can diminish
A True Greatness, That which was your Own,
Is still On you; and sets you forth the Example
And Adoration, both of the Present
And the Future World. Is it then last,
Your Loss of Friends, or all these joined together,
That withholds this Blessing we would so Dearly
Purchase? What is there in your Condition,
That is not to be paralleled in Others?
Look upon my Misfortunes, and you shall find
A perfect Sceme of all your Saddest Evils.
I lost, as you have done, a Father, a King,
The Second Hopes unto a Crown, the Joys
And Glory which doe wait on these: Nay more,
By you I lost them. Remember what your
Righ Hand, your Father, and your Brother, did
Take from me, what your Left, their Ministers,
And Servants. Learn then a Strength of me (that
Is the Worst Name for it) to bear a Change
Of Fortune: And pardon a Fathers Death;
Let the Innocence of Mine excuse my
Violence to yours. We are the Wretched'st Two
Alive, made so by Our Selves, and can be
Only Happy in Our Selves—No Beam of Joy yet?
No breaking of a Raie of Comfort,
From these Clouds of Sadness? No Dancing
After this Long Night of Sorrow? Madam,
Yet look up! Though hitherto my Comforts
Have been Air, and unable to remove
The weight of Grief oppresses you, yet here's
One remaining, I dare pronounce, will prove Successful.
Vouchsafe to cast an Eye upon this Paper,
That bears the Characters of your Living
Brother, and other Friends.
It is not so!
It cannot, it must not be! Your Safeties
Will not Suffer this; if the Sword of War
Have spared him, That of Policy hath Cut him off.
Forbear to Mock me thus, such Delusions
Drive my Sorrows to Distraction.
Madam,
He lives, and with him all the Rest, whose Names
Are there Subscribed; nor is there more than One
(Could you but pardon that) of any Note
Has lost a Life by these Late Troubles. Think not
I have mocked you with a Deceitful Show.
I know, to have given you Happiness,
As you imagine, had been Twice only
To have Snatched it from you. I shall say no more
To you, But Live as you find the Hopes true
I have promised you. And believe when I
Spoken this: my Life, my Honour, all that
I possess, and all that can be added
To me, are a Gage Short to that I have given you.
And till I present your Brother in Safety
To you, I'll never press to enjoy again
The Heaven of Looking on you.
Madam, clear
Your Spirits yet at last from these Clouds
Of Discontent. Many Noble Comforts
Court you on every Side; make a Truce
With Your Sorrows, but till you see the Issue
Of'em.
I shall at least so far, as till
I have proved this One that's promised me.
Jove, Neptune, Apollo, all the Powers
That favour Crete, preserve and bless the King.
Through the Happiness of my People. May
I know no other Joy or Bliss, but what
First passes you, the Middle-Way of Blessings
Between the Gods and Me.
The Gods preserve
Your Majesty.
Sir, I humbly crave your Pardon,
That thus tardily, after the People,
And your Enemies, I present my Duty
To you, and wish you Happiness.
I cannot
Be deceived, thou must be, th'Inimitable,
Matchless, not to be Counterfeited, or
Resembled, Great Pallantus! Whom as none;
Can Reach to in a Noble Action, so none
Can Equal in a Gallant Presence! Nor
Doe I wonder to see the Change wrought in thee,
Thy Deed hath thus Transformed thee, It sits upon
Thy Brow, and casts a Glory round about
Thy Face!
Me thinks till this Day, the Times had
Likewise a Visor on, a Looked not with
A True Face before. Sir, you shall hourly see
New Graces, and New Glories break forth from him!
My Lord, you promise too Highly for me.
Thou look sadly after all thy Honours.
So my-thoughts! What can be the Cause? Can He
That has given a Nation Happiness, want it
Himself? Speak thy Discontent. If it lie not
In my own Power to Remedy, I'll Sacrifice
In thy behalf.
Sir, low as the Earth I bow
To you. But that which is my Grief, will be
No longer mine alone, than while I doe
Conceal it; it is a Disease, that all Good Men
Will catch with the first Fancy, and Conceit.
Justice could never yet, with all her Care,
So carve out her Punishment, but that the Innocent
Were Wounded with the Stroke, and felt the Judgement
Of another Sin. While with her Sword,
She Cuts off the Offending Parent, the Child
Is made an Orphan in the Cradle, and mourns
In after days, the Crime he ne'er Committed.
Whither does this Sad beginning tend?
To this Sir. As we have slain (with all Religion)
A bloody Tyrant and Usurper; one
That was Greater in his Sins, than in the
Kingdom he purchased by them: So too we have
Unjustly slain the Father of a Lady,
That knew not so much Guilt, as to satisfy her,
Why she lost him. And for want of his Life,
She now Contemns her Own, a Jewel
Of Jnestimable Value to all the World,
But to her self. Sir you cannot call Her
An Enemy, though her Goodness stood against You
So Many Years, and preserved her Father,
In despite of all his Sins. It became her
To withstand the greatest Piety what ere,
If it were an Enemy to her Own.
Her Cause of Grief is Mighty, and if Care
Be not taken, as their Faults have done the Rest,
Her Goodness will destroy her. We that beheld
The past Deformities, can bear Witness
Of her Virtues. She was the only Mine
Of Honour, and when we had been wearied
In seeking one Grain else where, in Her
We could find a Treasure. Nor was this a Beauty
In her, set off only with the Blemishes
Of Others, And Foiled by General Vices;
But it was a Real, and a Native Excellence,
Which as it could not be obscured by Thickest
Darkness, so neither could it be out-shined
By the most Radiant Brightness.
Her Grief
Concerns us all, and ought to be provided for
Before our Feasts and Triumphs. Return.
In our Name to Her, and tell Her, be the Advantages
Ne'er so Eminent we have received by 'em,
We truly Mourn, for whatever Losses, may be Called Hers,
Say too, in Person we had come to Comfort her,
But that we thought a Visit, in the Freshness
Of her Sufferings, too much Violence.
What ever there remains, that can bring a Joy
To Her, shall carefully be sought out,
And offered to her. Her Brother with many
Of her Friends are fled into the Fort,
And are there shut up—Would I could give'em Life—
What say you my Lord? May I do this?
Will not Mercy in this place, be Madness?
Sir t'will be so in no place. You may do this,
Or any thing you have a mind too.
Even in your Suddain'st, Uncousidered Thoughts,
There is a Secret Counsel, and Depth of Wisdom;
And seeing all your Actions, Nay, all your Pleasures
Are in some Exercise of Virtue; we
Will not cross you in'em, but maked
Our greater Care, to see you no time Suffer
By your Goodness, or that your Mercy prove
A Cruelty to Your self.
You have given me
Resolution. Haste then in the first place
Unto the Fort (It was their desire this Morning,
To have Conference with one of Note)
And if you finde'em fit for Mercy,
Or to be made fit, offer't to'em
No Answer yet returned?
Not yet Sir.
One look out again.
I remember,
I heard thee once say, when I condemned thee
For thy smiles, That if there were a Cause, thou
Could Frown, Why look thou Sadly at this Time then?
Our Fortunes ought rather to stir our Indignation
Than our Grief.
Sir were they my Own Misfortunes
I were under, and not yours, the Heaviest
Pressures should not move a Passion in me,
Unless it were some Glory, but when I look
On you a Fellow-Sufferer with me,
Remember the State from which you're fallen,
Though in my Own Miseries I had a Heart
Of Flint and Rock, In yours I could desolv't
Into a Stream of Tears.
Sir ther's now one arrived.
Has certainly brought an Answer.
Letus
Seat our selves before he Enters, that he
May see on what strength our Demands are made.
Every Man put on a Face of Mirth and
Resolution; and fancy to himself
He's at a Banquet, that will refresh him,
After all his Toil—VVho's this? Do any
Of you Know him?
Not I my Lord!
Nor I!
Sir, You're Welcome But we Invite you only
To look on. The Liquor this Goblet holds,
Though it be Brisk, and of a Lu•tie Operation,
We cannot Commend so much for Purity,
Or help to Good Digestion. The Gods
Give not Life more Certain, than this gives Death,
Do you think you can behold the Drinking
Of it? Would Aratus himself were here,
That once he might be Glutted with
A Spectacle of Death! You look Pale on tic
Already. Fly Sir, while you may; for certainly
Your Enemies have a Plot upon you,
And sent you hither to take your Death in
By your Eyes. Had they none to send us,
To behold our Resolutions, but such a Trifle?
What Shape can I put on, and thou not Injure
Me in it? I never yet appeared to thee
In any Form, but Either I found thy Scorn
Or Hatred in it! At first I was thy Fear,
As all that were Innocent did Fright thee.
And because Thou were Guilty, I was Banished.
Not to remove me neither, but my Death.
Which standing firm against any Stroke of Law,
By Treachery thou would have reached it.
Am when by Miracle I escaped thy Plotted
Mischiefs, by Chance thou would have slain me
A Stranger, and Unknown to thee: My Disguise
Wronged thee not, nor coldest thou pretend a Quarrel
To it, more than to him that in the remotest
India draws his breath—
I know thee now!
Thou need not further declare thy self!
And thou art Come past all my Wishes
To Satisfy my Regenge.
Hold, I came
To bring Peace, and not Destruction. Doe you
Perceive yet how vain is all your Malice?
If thou art that man thou would seem to be,
And Equally with Me dost honour a Dead
Father; yet setting by these Seconds,
Let us Singlie try our Hatred. The Grant
Of This will please me more, then a Concession
Of all the Articles proposed by me.
I had rather see thee Dead, or by this Means,
Not see thee Live, then again be Master
Of the Fortunes I have Lost. I am unfit
For Life, And shall but curse the Givers of it.
If I thought so, I'd grant to your Request,
And Kill you; I could doe it, I have Strength
And Justice enough to make me Able.
But you are not so Bad as you suppose.
These are Despairing, not Malicious Thoughts.
Yet ere I goo (rest assured) one way or other
I'll give you Satisfaction, I came
For that Intent. Show me your Articles—
And last, That thus attended we may depart
The Isle, How poor are these Conditions!
Without more Commission I dare grant you
Better. Why these are demands within the Compass
Of a Subjects Asking. Be not Deceived,
You were not so Safe in your Own Reign,
As in your Enemies. The State is not
Translated from one Tyranny to another;
But a Prince governs now, which is a Name
Of Mercy as well as Power; which He truly Knows,
And in his first Deeds desires to show on you.
He does not think he's then like Jove, when he can
Thunder, but when he can shower down Blessings
On a Nation: Not when he is the Voice
Of Death, but when he sits Harmless with the Power
Of Death about him. Revenge, Torments,
Executions, are not the Attributes
Of a King, but a Destruction. He Rivals not
The Immortal Powers in Temples, Statues,
Adoration; but in Transcendent Virtues,
Divine Performances; the Saving, Helping
Qualities, not the Stern, and Awful,
Are the Steps, by which he Climbs above the Heads
Of the people, and appears a God on Earth.
Why should I be a Stranger to these Virtues
More then this man? I was not born for Less Things
Then He! Certainly, when Nature made this Frame
She intended it for the Noblest purposes!
What doe you yet Resolve, or Demand further?
How my Soul's Acquainted with these Excellent
Precepts, though it have been ever Kept
A Stranger to 'em! how it approves, consents,
Takes part with 'em at first hearing; even winding
And twisting with 'em, as if its Highest Good
Were in their Fellowship!
If you have no more
To Ask, or Hope for, hear what is Freely
Offered to you. Your Lives in the first place
Are granted you; In the next your Fortunes,
Honours (in a word) whatever with Justice
You can call yours. Why look you Wildly at this Gift
Of Grace? It is no Wonder to the Giver
Of it, nor them which live about him, though
The Consequence may seem Dangerous.
'I were not worthy the High Name of his Virtue,
If either the Peril or Offence were Less.
And it is but a Mean Expression of his
Goodness, to say, His Enemies were Courted
To Live by him. But presently you'll think,
This Offered Mercy is not to Save you,
But to Defer your Death. A Vain Thought.
When can it be done more Justly? Or more
Safely? You're as far from those to Pity you,
As to Help you: None but Himself has any Care
Of you. It is true, there is a Lady that had
A share in you, but Injuriously
You threw her off; nor can you claim an Interest,
When you have Neglected Her in all her Miseries:
Not in your Flight, your Articles, no not
In your Thoughts provided for Her. And had
She not fallen into the Hands of Enemies,
That were Servants too to Honour, You had
Thrown away a Jewel that had a First Esteem
Even among the Gods.
O Sir, you have undermined
My pride, and removed me from that Advantage-Ground
I stood on, to my Own Low Pitch. These your
Last Words come Near unto me, and make me,
With Reverence, believe all that you have spoken.
Your Virtues before did only stir my Hate
And Envy; but this Deed has taught me Admire you.
Nor can I doubt, there is a want of any Honour,
When you have shown such Noble Care, in preserving
A Distressed Virgin, whom I durst not think of,
Least I should think too of Dishonour.
Sir, keep your Transportation to your self.
We doe not think Our Selves such High Deservers,
In doing that which Barbarous People
Would have done. They which would have burnt the Temples,
Would have Knelt to Her; and what Duties their
Want of Faith denied unto the Altars,
So Visible an Image of the Deity
Would have called from 'em! Think you, we could desire
To save such Enemies as you, and not
Adore an Enemy of Her Virtues?
Give me not Scorn, and Honour in the same breath.
You cannot so Nicely, so Abstractedly,
Confer a Benefit on the Unfortunate
Eudora, but it will Reflect on me.
Your Words besides, with a kind of God-like
Power, have removed, not only my Despairs
And troubles; but like Heavens Lightning, shot into
My Soul, has torn me from my self; burnt and
Consumed all that was Vicious and Corrupt
Within me. Be not then Unlike the Powers
You have yet resembled, to scorn the Person
That your Grace Converted.
All Virtues, crowned
With Happiness, flourish in Timeus.
I meet you to the fullest of your Wishes.
And believe, as my Body is now One
With yours, my Soul is no less joined.
I perfectly Forgive, whatever you
Have done to me: Forget, what I have done
To You. Next, believe with This, I throw away
All Danger that does threaten you. In the last place,
Follow me whether I shall Lead you.
I breath, am warm, alive all over; feel, smell, hear (but when I look on  Thee, I thank God) I taste not. I see too, and more particularly, that it is not Death, but a Dream of Death one∣lie that hangs on me; Some ill Vapours of the Spleen, bred from Noise of War, hearing of Murders, Variety of Danger, and no Feasting. The King, my bountiful and loving Master, was killed suddenly; his Son deserted by the Army and the whole Kingdom, on the News, escaped hardy with his Life, a few friends and followers to this Fort: where, with as much ado, we shut our Selves in, and our Enemies out; But Honour, a subtiler and more pernicious Adversary than all the rest, shuffled it self into the Hold with us, and has never ceased one minute since, in its Own Name, and the Name of Honesty, of the Condition we have Lost, and the Disgraces we were to expect, to present us with Halters, Daggers, Poison, any thing that might give us (as she termed it) a Noble End. I must confess, I am not for these Melancholy Things, my Ends have still lain otherwise. It is true, I bear on me the Dignity of a Lord. But how? As a Peddler does his pack, upon my Shoulders, not in my Heart. And what is Honour at the best? But a bare Name only; and not always so much to me: the Title was never given me Seriously, but by Rascals; with my Fellow Peers (if I pleased 'em in the Feast) I was my Lord Comastes, If not, Comastes-with-my-face-full-of-Sauce, and my Locks of Liquor, my hair and beard dropping like a Wine-presse, as if my being there were not to Drink the Wine, but Make it. But again, I have a Lordship in Land to loose, as well as Title. What then? shall I sell my Life for Dirt? My Soul for a few Acres? I'll batter the World too for a Grave, and main∣tain't I make as Wise a Bargain. But say this Land be taken from me, pray how came I by it? Was it the Inheritance of my Noble Father, or the Purchase of my own Wit? Good Yeoman-of-the-Bottles Sleep in peace; your Sons Being was from you, but his Well-Being, and his Dignities, from his proper Virtues. Which as the Philosopher wisely observes, in no fortune leave the Owner. And while the Sciences of Eating, Drink∣ing, Fooling, and the like, are held in Estimation, I cannot want a Lordship. Fare∣well therefore all Dreams and Meditations of the Other World, my Making was for this; your Elizium with Sweet Shades, and purling Streams, does not one whit entice me, for when they have said all they can, it is still to be Dead, to be there. And having happily broken from the Company of my Noble Associates, I'll yoke no more with 'em, till I see what becomes of their Magnanimities: but thus as I am, alone, with wary steps I'll march unto the New Court; and doe not Despair, though the King and State be Changed, to continue still the same Man.
My Lord, I beseech you attend here
Till I give notice of your Coming.
Oh! Is it Real, that my Arms embrace?
Or do they Idly thus enfold a Shadow?
Liv'st thou Timeus? Or are we Dead together?
And on the Elizeum Banks enjoy this
Meeting. Say, and confirm me. For so lost
In Misery, so weakened and perturbed
With Grief are my best Faculties, that what
I doe, and what I see, I Know not.
Dearest Eudora, I excuse thy Weakness;
Nor is it a Wonder, if thy Softer Nature
Feel these Impressions of a Potent Sorrow;
When the like Passion disorders even
The Strongest of my Powers, and leaves me broken
With as great Distemper. O my Eudora,
Well may we rave of Shades below, and
An Hereafter-Being, when we have lately
Suffered such a Change, as to a Death
May well be Equalled. Turn, and cast thy Eye
Upon these Miserable Relics of our
Former Fortunes.
Yet we doe Live, my Lords,
If they doe Live, that have a Doubtful Death
Still hanging o'er 'em. But my Timeus,
I am o'rewhelm'd with Griefs, they are parted to me
By an Unequal Hand: my Share of Common Losses
Is the same with Yours; and then my Private Troubles
Are no less than they. No sooner were the
Transports o'er I owed your Safety, but Like
The Pangs of Death these seized on my Soul.
What can thy Goodness suffer, that's set beyond
The reach of all I can Imagine?
Which way shall I begin? I dare not speak
My Troubles; the beholding of thy present Evils,
Forbids the Office of my Tongue. O my
Timeus, thy Misfortunes are so great,
That they render thee something Sacred
To my Thoughts. And as with Religion
We Impale that Oak, which by Joves Thunder
Has been struck, to keep't hereafter from a
Profaner Wrong: So Thou, by thy Misfortunes
Struck from Heaven, seem Consecrated and Exempted
From all Violation of a Mortal Tongue.
Yet look on This, and read thy Self, those Thoughts
I dare not utter. And though it show but One
Small Line of that Vast Sceme of Cruelty,
Designed or Acted by thee, it may serve
To bring the Rest into thy Mind. This Paper
Was found in the Villains Bosom, that should
Have done the horrid Act, by Him that should
Have suffered it.
Eudora, though on a
Mind of Blood and Guilt, this Paper, and thy Words
Attending it, might rush with no less Horror,
Than that Thunder thou now spoke of: Yet on me,
These Bolts and Flashes are like those Brute
And Idle Ones, which dash against Rocks and Mountains
Without harm. Know, that before these Wakenings
Came from Thee, all Heavens Artillery has been
Emptied on my Soul; and those Celestial Fires
Have wholly purged, nay calcined, and burnt up
The Old Timeus. And what is seen remaining
Of his Substance, is of a Holier
And Diviner Nature; such as admits
No Commerce with a Sin, unless it be,
Like the Religious Magistrate, to Hate,
And Punish it. Such as dares look on all
His Vices past, nay, bear 'em purtrai'd, and
Blazoned in his Banner, as the Enemies,
And Monsters, against which he is to wage
A Trucelesse-Warre for ever.
And when Timeus
Shall begin his Race of Virtue, who is there
To be found, that can Out-strip him, or bear up
A Pace that's Equal! O let me embrace
You again, my Brother! Twice Saved, twice Restored
Unto me; and much Dearer in the Last
Than First Gift of you. Before my Arms
Enfolded but my Comfort, but now they
Contain, and hold their Wonder! And know Timeus,
These Virtues Heaven has sent thee, are in no Idle
Useless Season given thee, but bestowed
With as much Providence as Bounty; when
An Occasion Great and High Calls on 'em.
Say then, my Brave and Virtuous Brother,
Say, From thy New and Changed Soul within thee,
That Radiant, and yet Sparkling Virtue,
From Heaven so Late descended, What Course
Does Honour point forth unto our present
Fortunes. What does its Sacred Laws exact
And Command from us. Take thus from me the State
Ofour Condition. On the One Side, Our Lives
Are granted by our Enemies, and not
Only so, but we are Highly Courted
To accept 'em, have all the Flatteries
And Temptations, can make us Love them,
Even Obtruded on us. On the Other,
We have lost a Father, nay more, a Crown,
They say, Usurped. This Mystery you better know
Than I. Yet still Consider (for twill no less
Concern our Honour to weigh this thing)
Whether a False and Usurped Power (being still
The Sovereign and Highest) doe not Create
Something of a True and Real Greatness
In the Persons that have borne it, which forbids'em
To Act a Second, and a Lower Part, on this
Worlds Stage. And if in this Scrutiny, the Verdict
Be cast against our Lives, Know it is not
In Our Enemies powers to give us that,
Which Duty, our Higher Master, Commands us
To throw from us; but either thou art Obliged
To show me the Way to Death; or it is expected,
That thou Learn it from me.
O Eudora,
Thou Wonder of Virtue, thou Miracle
Of Honour! How sordid Low, how despicablie
Poor is all the World beside thee! What Noble
Heights thy Soul does mount to, no less above
The Following, than President of others!
And shall I presume to Judge those Daz'ling-Flights,
Which no Eye less Heavenly than thine Own
Can reach to? Shall Timeus? A Truant?
A Novice in the School of Virtue?
A Proficient but of Yesterday? No.
Eudora, pronounce boldly what thy Soul
Shall dictate, as to an Oracle I will submit,
But never teach thy Virtue. If the Question
Thou hast put be Hard, I dare not speak in it,
It is Eudoras Life: if it be Easy,
It was yet her finding, and poorly I will not
Rob her of the Glory.
Alas, alas,
How far I am mistaken! Thou give me Glory,
And I need thy Pity. Thus Children have a Sword
Put in their Hand, when both their Hand and Sword
Need holding by another. If I had
Vanity to take unto my Self the Powers
Thou speak of; yet at this time,
Like a Physician that's himself Distempered,
My Learning and Experience serve me Nothing.
No Timeus, my Reason's darkened,
The Clouds of Discontent obscure my soul,
And in the Mazes of a troubled Mind
I wander without a Cleu to guide me.
Death with his Horrors, and Dismay laid-by,
Dressed in a Form bewitching, and Uncommon,
And waited on by Crowds of Sweets, and Pleasures,
(As if with Love again he had changed his Arrows)
Most powerfully Charms and calls me to Him!
One while presents before me, the Famed Examples
Of the Roman Fortitude, the exalted
Glories of those Ancient Worthies, that preferred
A Noble Death, before a Life of Pleasure,
And of Shame. And then pursues this Theme
Of Shame, though all those steps of low Contempt;
And Scorn, I opened to you at the first,
Or the Worlds Censure can be thought to blast
The Gallant by. Life on the Other side,
With a Deportment Sad, and Face Austere,
Without all dress, or show of Blandishment,
But with a kind of Awful, and Divine
Authority, forbids me hear the Allurements
Sung by Death; tells me, though the Notes be Sweet,
They are most Pernicious, and that a Siren
Sings 'em; that the VVorlds Opinions, as her
Pleasures, are False and Impious, and by
The Virtuous both should be contemned, Opinions
In Truth, and not in Number, take their VVeight.
Now well I understand, when Both have Pleaded thus,
It is neither Life, nor Death, the Noble should
Desire, but Duty. The One, and Other,
Ought to be held Indifferent: and this Third
Alone with Passion be pursued. But now
In which of these two Our Present Duty lies,
There stands the Scruple I am troubled with,
There stands the Doubt I would have Solved. For when
I dare meet Death in any Form, I would not
Have it said Eudora forfeited the Belief,
Of having a Diviner soul, while through Fear,
Like a Plant or Vegetable, she clove
To a Being on this Earth. Nor yet, when
I have Greatness enough to look on Life,
In the most Frowning and Unpleasing Aspect,
That unequal to my Miseries, Out-fac'd
With Troubles, I poorly fled my Station
In this World, and Crept into the Calm of Death
To seek my Peace. Like Boasters thus playing
The Coward under a Masque of Valour.
Eudora, this part of your Philosophy,
That Life and Death ought neither to be Considered,
But as they may Conduce unto our Virtue,
None more firmly does embrace than I.
Nor in the Days my Soul was tainted with
The Blackest Crimes, was an Unmanly Fear,
Ere part of that my Guilt. And yet Eudora,
I must say, I see no reason, more than
The Scruple, the Ruputation of thy Question
Put into me, why the Prolonging of
Our Lives should be Dishonourable to
Either of Us. And if it be Duty that calls us
To our Death, it will not be hard to show
Where that Duty is set down. If the Worlds
Opinion only, what that Opinion is,
Thou hast already spoken. Thy words import
Beside, that the Discontented, Passionate,
Vain-glorious, obtain not, by their Contempt
Of Life, the Honours of a Noble Death:
But Those alone, who have no Other Way,
To save their Virtue. So that, it was not Rome'•
Cato, or her Portia which deserved this Crown;
But her Curtius,, her Regulus, her Decius.
And if any do Object, that the first
Of these, were also Highly Virtuous,
I readily confess it: but all that
The Virtuous do, is not always Virtuous.
This is an Immunity of the Gods,
And not of Good-Men. And though One Comm on
Glory belonged unto the Lives of Both
Of these, the Glory of their Deaths was far
Unequal. The One sought Themselves, the Other
Sought their Duty To bring all this home to Thee
Eudora, Remember that thy Virtue's
Courted, thy Honour's safe, no way Assaulted.
But adored. And then for Thee to think of Death,
Is Idle, Vain, or Scrupulous; Error,
And not Virtue; Superstition, and not
Duty, nay worse, it is Dire and Impious;
Something that might Suit perhaps, with the Foul Deeds
Of Timeus former Life, but not with
The Fairer Actions of Eudora.
How like a Sky troubled with Clouds and Meteors,
That Heavenly face appears! The most Propicious
Aspects from on High, shine on their present
Councels. I fear some Deadly Maxim governs,
And guides their Consultation.
Timeus,
This is the Time allowed us to work out
To Our selves, an Everlasting Honour.
If we let-slip the Opportunity,
W'are lost unto a Noble Name for ever.
Eudora, there's little danger of an Error,
Or Omission there, where neither Will,
Nor want of Care betrayed the Business held
In Consultation.
For should we think
To Resume again hereafter, our
Councell's now laid-by; Our Neglect at present,
Would not be looked on as an Error, but
A most Wretched Poorness; and our best Pretences
Be judged a pitiful afflicted Folly.
There is but one Particular I know
Can hinder, in Eudora, the Choice of Life,
From being just, and truly Honourable.
There spoke my Noble Brother! That, that particular
Timeus! That Particular is Undoubtedly
The thing we have so long been searching for,
And never found till now.
It is this Eudorn,
That thou be well persuaded and assured,
Of what thou put in Act: for the most Just
And Lawful Action performed with Doubting,
Becomes Unlawful.
Timeus, I thank you,
For your Reproof; I shall believe it seasonably
Given me. It has awaked me, and no longer
Will I hover in a Doubtful Mind; It is true,
This sense you have delivered, coming to me
From another Hand, I held suspected;
Thought it not safe, too hastily to Credit it,
From you: But seeing you do not only Affirm,
But Abide and stand in this your Sentence:
I likewise as an Undoubted Truth, will
Accept, and rest upon it.—Say now Timeus,
Do you know yond Person, that did Conduct you
To this place?
Know him, Eudora! Yes,
When he wandered in Remotest Nations,
My Fears held Intelligence on his Motions;
When first he set his Foot within this Land,
My Spirit, by a kind of Antipathy,
Did feel it. In his Disguise I knew him.
There is no Place, or Shape he can be Hid in,
But my Soul would find him. He was the Meteor first,
That hung with Direful Threats ore my Impiety.
But since the Auspicious Star, that lead me,
Both to Honour, and to Life. It is the Valiant,
Virtuous, and Heroic Prince Pallantus!
My Obligations are no less to him,
Than yours. Too long we do neglect him,
And having once resolved to accept of Life,
We ought to acknowledge it to Him that
Gave it us. Let us join our Thanks together.
My Lord—we come to acknowledge our Lives,
To have been your Gift, and in no Common way
Bestowed upon us. Mercy must be allowed
A share in the Act; but had not your Honour,
And Prudence, wrought more Effectually,
The Other Virtue had been Useless to us.
As you are thé Greatest, Bravest, most Glorious
Person of this your Age; may you be likewise seen,
The most Fortunate, and most Happy.
Eudora, like the Gods, when she Says happiness,
She Gives it. But what thanks shall I, and all
The World with me, return for the Unvaluable
Benefit, she acknowledges Received,
But is indeed Conferred on us, The Conservation
Of her Life?
Madam, the King's hard by,
Coming, as it is said, with an intent
To visit you.
The King!
Tic true Madam.
I had it in command from him, to say,
He was a Suitor to you, to admit
A Visit from him;
What will you do, Timeus,
With your self!
Not willingly meet him
At this time.
My Lord, you need not, you may
Withdraw. I believe too, a fitter time
May be found to present you to him.
Madam, fall not so low; too much already
We have Dejected you, and gladly would
Descend our selves, to raise you Higher.
Yet look on that Majesty the Gods have
Enthroned in you, your Matchless Virtues,
And Divine Perfections, and you will see
Not only there's none Above you, but none
Can be found your Peers. Our Visit, is in wish
To Comfort you; and we hope, while our Highest
Vows are such, you will not scorn the Offer,
Though from your Enemies; your Enemies,
By Fate, and Fortune Madam; by Design,
And Will, your vowed and perfect Servants.
O Sir,.
Permit me to throw my self before your Feet!
It is not fit I stand an equal Height,
With Majesty and Virtue, so much Above me.
What hateful Name, and by the World abhorred,
Is due to me, when you have called to Your self
An Enemy? If you are One, it is to
Your own security, in preferring thus
Your Mercy, before your Peace. You've given me,
And my Brother Life, to bring your own in danger,
And Removed our Grief, which may hereafter
Cause it to your self. Sir, think me Unworthy,
But not a Scorner, of these Favours. I know
To weigh both my Losses, and Obligations
To you.
If you will make us happy,
To partake hereafter our Joys with us,
With you we will observe your Days of Mourning.
Count all your losses Ours; with most Obsequious Rites
Adorn the Dead; remember, and lament him,
As a common Parent.
None, Madam,
With so high a Confidence, can wish you
Comfort, as my self; who in so long, and sad
A Night of sorrow, knew none, but what you gave me.
Be Favourable still to me, and grant me
A time to pay 'em back; be favourable
To the Age in the same Grant; your Name will bless
Its Annals, while it has leave to boast,
Not only its own Virtues, but all the former Years
Could justly Glory in.
Fame, thou spoke loudly
Of these Ladies, and yet thy Voice was narrow
In their praise.
I have Past hitherto,
And perceive no great Alteration.
I thought the subversion of a State,
Would have changed the form of the Houses, and the Streets.
It has not shifted a suit of Hangings here.
Yonder's our princess too; I am among Friends.
Now Fortune direct me, which is the King—
The Least-Change that e,er I saw. Nay, then
I perceive, I may even do what I list.
My Lord Comastes! Faith this was kindly done,
To make the King a Visit.
Your servant
My Lord. I hope you have forgot the little
Unkindness, which past betwixt Your Lordship,
And my self, and will speak a Noble Word
In my behalf unto the King.
Ha, ha, ha,
Would thou be Fool again?
No my Lord,
You know I was never called so in the Last Reign.
Ha, ha, ha, Why I tell thee, the King's too serious.
He never Laughs, nor Smiles, but very seldom,
And then it is still in Approbation,
Of something Excellent. He hates a Jest. Look,
Twice he has cast his Eye upon thee, and yet
Keeps his Countenance: Despair of ever Pleasing him,
There's no Buffoonery can come from thee,
So Ridiculous, as thy present Misery.
My Lord—Who's that?
One Sir that was Master
Of the Dead King's Mirth, he never laughed without
His Allowance. It was in's Power to have jested
The best Head off in the Kingdom: Yet I think
He was guilty of no worse Crime, than Lunary.
What does he expect?
To hold the same place
Under you.
Sir, we understand you,
And your Desires. Go, leave the Court; be not
Seen in it after this day, upon your Life.
And look warily to your Actions,
If you shall deserve the Lightest Punishment,
The Heaviest shall fall on you.
Stay my Lord—
Sir, you have Doomed him, as if you had been Witness
Of his Follies, and were there not hopes he might
Redeem the Life he has so ill spent,
A weightier judgement were deserved by him.
Sir, I beseech you let me entreat for him,
He's yet Young, and if he have Leave, may be
Virtuous Continue Sir, as you have begun,
To Change the Men, and not Destroy 'em.
He thrust himself with confidence on your Mercy,'
Let it not be said, that that was a Snare to any.
Besides, Sir, you have made this Place a Sanctuary,
To All that can claim an Interest
In that Excellent Lady.
My Lord, I would
Be ever taught thus by you. Sir, I recall
What I have said, and wish to see those Virtues,
We hope in you,
I'll not despair Sir,
To be Master of 'em, It was the desire
Of Favour with my King, that made me what
I was before, and shame now to Remember.
But seeing I am to please another way,
And make Virtue my Endeavour, Unwearied
In those Rougher Ways I'll toil to gain your Smiles.
My Lord, having weighed the Necessity
Of your Voyage, I shall not with unseasonable
Complements importune your stay, but rather
Give my best Assistance both to make it
Prosperous, and your Return more speedy.
We have ordered a Fleet, my Lord, to attend
On your Designs, not so much inferior
In Number of Men and Vessels to your own.
Sir, too profusely you bestow these large
Benefits upon me, without naming all
Conditions, or share of Venture with me.
Conditions, my Lord? Hereafter Ages,
That have forgot our Obligations,
May make Articles between our Nations,
But ours must ne'er know any; we cannot
Be Losers by you, from whom we have received
All that we possess.
My Lord, I am
An humble Suitor (if I may obtain
His Majesties leave) to be allowed a place
In this your Voyage. The Kingdom sends forth none
More useless to it, than my self; none that
With more reason seeks the Tumults of a War,
To cure the Troubles of an unquiet Mind.
My Lord, you hold the palm out to me,
In this offer of your Company. Victory,
I know, will follow, which way so ever you
Turn you. I shall be proud to serve my self
Under so Brave a Conduct.
This Accession
Likewise, my Lord, I shall be willing to grant
Unto your Voyage; but still that your Return
May be more Speedy. Yet I hope we have
A Gage in this Lady more powerful than
All Others, One that will put an Edge unto
Your Sword, and Sails unto you Vessels.
Sir, in Her Name alone I doe pursue
This Voyage, and in Her Name alone,
Shall hope a prosperous and speedy Issue.
Madam, though a Hard Fate, or Fortune no less
Cruel, has set me for ever at a Hated
Distance to you. Yet another power,
No whit Inferior to the Former, Commands me,
To direct all my Actions to your Service.
And however Unaccepted, nay Unknown,
To you, I pay these Devotions, yet
Constantly to pay them still. In Obedience
To this Power I have engaged my self unto
This present Voyage; an Undertaking
To me, without Design, without all Fruit:
But either, as I hope, by some Famed Action
To add a Glory more unto your Name,
Or by my Seasonable Destruction,
For ever to remove a Hated Object
From your Sight.
My Lord, while you strive to confer
More Glory on me than I dare Assume,
You take some from me, which I may justly Claim;
And Blast my Honour, while you seek to Raise it.
Wrongfully you Charge both my Innocence
And Clearness, when you say, I Hate you,
Or can be pleased with your Destruction.
I have already Acknowledged the Highest
Benefits received from you, offered my Vows to Heaven
In your behalf: and though, when these are once paid,
They doe not there take End: Yet to repeat them
Oft unto Your Self, would ill become
Eudoras tongue, and less the greatness of
Pallantus Ears. But if what's already past
Be too little to assure you, your Ruine's
No Part of my desires, by this Double Suit
I shall seek to confirm you further. First,
That you will be pleased to take my Brother
This Voyage with you. And let this persuade you,
I seek not your Destruction. Next, that you will
Obtain me leave to retire from Court, to pay
That Debt ofteares in quiet, I have so long
Owed unto the Dead. And this no less ought
To assure you, I cannot Hate that person,
By whom I seek so far to be Disposed of.
Madam, you have given me a Happiness,
Which neither Envy, Malice, nor the worst
Of Fortune can take from me.
You have set me the Only man above
The Stroke of Fate. Whatever you desire,
After your Own manner, and in your own Time,
Will be permitted to you; and you may command
Not only for your self, but in the behalf
Of Others. And may, I hope, after these Days
Of Mourning are expired, to see again
That Joy return into your Face, which I
Was never yet so blessed as to behold?
And shall in that Day a Servants Humblest Suit
Take place; which now his High Respects forbid him,
Even to Name to you?
Now first, My Lord,
I have seen a Weakness in you; but yet
I shall thus far Remember you. That the
Gallant Ask not their Fortunes, but they Make 'em.
A more Direct Answer I must not give you.
And if it appear hard to you, that I refuse
To Prophecy in that, I may seem so well
To Know my Resolutions; ask the same Question
Of those that have been held the most Allowable,
And wise Diviners in your present Case,
Your Virtue, Honour, Obligations to me;
And hear what they will say. Perhaps they'll Doubt,
Or Hide their Skill; if they doe, Excuse a Virgins
Silence, when such bolder Oracles make no Reply.
Madam, let me kiss your hand—I beg your pardon.
No further shall I provoke you with my
Disordered Passion, though I know, nothing
But my Wonder can be increased by your
Replies. Your Wisdom, Honour, Beauty,
All Incomparable, shall be the Incitements
Of my Actions unto Glory, in hope
They may hereafter prove their Crown and Ornament.
In the mean time I shall seek to know no other thing
But this, How most Worthily I may approve
My Self your Servant.
And Madam
If favourablie you shall admit him
In that quality, we All will glory
To wear the same Title. And think not, that
A Single Person Courts you, but in a
Single Person, the Interest of the Kingdom.
Even thus Divided I acknowledge Ye Both
To be the Chiefest Glory of your Country,
But when Ye shall be joined Yee'l add yet more
Unto her Happiness, and be no less
Her Peace, and her Security. But I
Anticipate the Blessings of another Day,
When my Duty commands me to give thanks
For those I have received on this. And hitherto
Our Kingdom, hath been like the Kingdom of
The Gods, Felicity has succeeded
To Felicity, and Joys have Crowned Joys.
And should this Day Conclude what it hath Begun,
I have yet reigned a Perfect Reign; having
Beheld in Few Hours, the Strange and Various
Changes of an Age.
Sacred Peans to Mars sing,
Notes of Triumph, not of Woe,
Hence your Ewe and Cyprus fling,
Who adorns a Trophy so?
These are the Spoils of our Great Enemy,
Hang Garlands on them of the Laurel Tree.
Hence impure and bloody Voice,
Far be from our Mysteries,
Bidentals are Joves proper Choice,
Holier than the Sacrifice,
Each Unskilful Hand and Rude,
At his Alter dares obtrude.
Touch not then with Lips profane,
What Heavens Fire hath purified,
Tears have washed away his Stain,
His Black Deeds his Blood hath died.
He for his Sins hath paid, with Death and Sorrow,
His Credit's more that Pays, than doth not Borrow.
Chor. He for his Sins hath paid, with Death and Sorrow.
His Credit's more, &amp;c.
Yet still you must allow a Fault.
And that by Death his Body ought
To Expiate Offences Higher,
Then purge if Sulphur, Salt, and Fire.
Least your too partial Favour this way bent,
Excuse the Ill, and Blame the Innocent.
Chor. Least your too partial Favour this way bent,
Excuse the Ill, &amp;c.
About the middle of the last Stanzo, Timeus puts a lighted Torch to the bottom of the Pile which gives fire to some Perfumes laid there on purpose; the which wraps the Pile in smoke, and smells ore all the Room. At the End of the Song the Curtain falls, and shuts both the Scene and Actors from the Beholders Sight.

