MAturity and age have now at length
Im posed on me a careful providence
Both for my Dukedoms safety, &amp; the good
Of our most hopeful Son Prince Prospero.
My Lord.
You grow to ripeness, and my thoughts are fixed
To have you troth-plight to some noble wife,
That in my aged years I may have comfort
In your fair issue, I would have you marry.
Marry my Lord!
I, marry Prospero.
I have laboured with a neighbour Prince, possessed
Of a fair Daughter, to confirm a match
Twixt thee and her, and it is concluded firmly;
Her name Valentia, she his only child,
By which a settled League grows twixt our Dukedoms,
And thou by this art the true hopeful Heir
Of both out rich and wealthy Provinces:
Your answer.
I am free, my Lord, as the uncurbed air,
That comes not within limit, as the light
That nothing can imprison. Shall I truly
Speak my own thoughts, and not dissemble with you?
I that am free amongst men, and uncaptiv'd
To any, save the duty bound to you,
Am loath to make my self a women's slave,
Briefly, my Lord, I have no mind to marry.
Not marry boy? Oh, knew thou what a sweetness
And harmonie's in loves blessed fellowship
Thou would embrace it gladly; this blessed union,
This true-loves knot the Gods themselves do tie,
And none but death dissolves. And what's Virginity?
A something-nothing, singularity
Unsociable, so slightly reckoned of
That either Sex, but to thy number grown,
Has a desire to leave it; be persuaded boy;
Thou hast beheld the Picture, and it promises
A perfect Lady; had thou seen the substance
Thou would condemn the workman for so scanting
Her rare comparelesse beauty. Marriage,
Why it is an honour, Emperors, Kings, and Princes,
From the Palace to the Cottage held it secret
And in a high religious reverence.
Well, my Lord, I will be steered by you;
Even through the turbulent Ocean of this life,
Where many dreadful tempests threaten us,
I shall be swayed by you, and entertain
This sweet captivity,
Then art thou wise—the news. 
Ambassadors from Mantua crave admittance
Touching affairs of state.
Admit 'em— 
Lords, your arrival is in happy season;
The marriage so long treated 'tween the Fathers
Shall by the Children be confirmed at length,
It is now on foot.
Your grace mistakes the tenor,
And the strange purpose our Embassy;
The Prince our Master lets know by us
That your alliance highly he disdains,
Contemns your love and near affinity,
And for just reasons, to himself best known,
Desires your opposition; for the marriage
Treated between you, esteems his Daughter
Much undervalued, and not rated truly
To her best worth.
Pause Lord Ambassador,
So high hath thy words incer s'd our spleen,
And set so just an edge upon our wrath
That we want patience to bestow an care
Unto thy harsh conclusion: Tell thy Lord,
We did not so much over-prize his love
As here his hate held in the basest scorn;
Nor can he so much undervalue us
As we his Contracts and Confederacy;
And for thy self-presumptuous Mantuan Lord,
We favour thee to let thee undisgrac'd
Depart our Court, be gone without reply,
Not Matuans, but Mantua we defy.
Let me conclude my Message.
Convey him hence;
Disdain our fellowship! Mantua shall know
His state shall lessen whilst our glories grow.
I, but, my Lord, I hope the match is not broke off
Between me and the fair Valentia.
Oh boy, did thou but know what marriage were,
How full of troubles and contentions,
Thou would forgo it gladly; who that's free
Would be confined to base Effeminacy?
But that which hath made in me the deepest impression
Is the rare Picture of the Lady Valentia.
The Painter flattered her, in having her
Thou hast a painted Mistress, of her self
The Lady is misshapen and deformed.
Nay, take me with you, my Lord,
I have beheld her Picture, and it promises
A perfect Lady; had I seen the substance
I should condemn the workman for so scanting
Her rare comparelesse beauty; these were your own words,
My Lord, or I much misunderstood them.
They were indeed, my Lord, I am witness to them.
Well since your Grace has no purpose to have me marry,
Shall I have your best furtherance to travel?
Yes, any thing to wear out the remembrance
Of Mantuas Daughter.
Another boon, my Lord.
What's that Cos?
That I may be his Partner in his travel, his associate
To bear him company, nothing else my Lord.
Have your desires.
I embrace your fellowship,
Isle travel, but whither? to have a sight of the fair Valentia,
There shall be the period of my Voyage;
What though her Father and mine be opposites, she and I
May happily agree well enough when we meet together.
My Lord, what limit shall we have to play the wan∣dring Knights in? Or how long shall it be ere we set forward on our Journey? We were best go well provided, for we must see Spain, France, and England ere we return.
Some ten days hence you shall set forward,
Your stay hath a years limit.
Then come, fair Cos, we must provide our selves;
Her Picture's lovely, and it much contents,
And I must see the face that it presents. 
Your youths cannot outstrip my gravity,
I have you boys, and aim at your intents;
This cunning suit for travel is a colour
To some close practice to deceive my age,
But I shall wind them both, Cosmo.
My Lord.
The manage of our State we leave to thee,
Whom we know wise and gravely provident;
Our purpose is to chase these travellers,
Whose voyage we mistrust.
It is dangerous
Unto your noble person, full of hazard
And doubtful peril.
I am confident,
Dissuade me not, for my intent is fixed;
In some suspectlesse shape Isle after them,
And sound the inmost of their thoughts, yet pass unknown;
Cosmo regard your charge whilst I provide. 
To find that craft they with such cunning hide. 
You have breathed defiance then.
I have my Lord.
And how did he receive it?
With such scorn
And proud contempt, that with far greater spleen
He threatened us than we could menace him.
No matter, this late difference pleases us,
You have demeaned your self even to our wish,
Now leave us to our private meditations. 
Come hither Sir, I repose in thee
Much trust and much assured confidence,
I have brought thee up of a youth boy, I have.
You have if it shall please your Grace.
Thy Father was a good old servitor,
I loved him well, I did, indeed I did,
Believe it, for I did so.
I believe your Lordship without swearing.
Thou know my Daughter should have been affied
Unto Verona's Son Prince Prospero,
I know thou know it.
I have had, if it please your Grace, such an inkling,
But a difference since
Hath fallen betwixt us, nay, in such a manner
That by our Leagers we have threatened war,
And war is like to ensue to come to thee.
If it shall please your honour, Isle save you that labour and come to you.
Conceive me, I will come to that concerns thee,
Thou know how dearly I affect my Daughter,
I, and how dearly I affect my Gold,
Speak, did I ever yet part with one piece
To guerdon thee, a sign I loved it well.
No, never, if it shall please your honour, Isle do you right in that, you everlov'd me too well to give me any thing, I have ever heard you reported for as covetous and niggardly a noble Gentleman as ever bore sway here, you are one of the most closse-fifted Carpenters that ever bare rule in Mantua.
To keep my Daughter that she marry not,
By which I like wise may reserve her dower,
I have devised this opposition
'T wean Valentia and Prince Prospero;
More Suitors are now resident in Court,
But to prevent them Isle devise a Tower
In which to shut my Daughter so impregnable
And full of doors, of which Isle keep the keys,
That she in vain shall strive to issue out,
Or they to enter in; this strong foundation
Is laid already, workmen are employed,
And all things promise prosperous success;
In this employment thou shalt have a charge,
An overseers place, because I know thee
Simple but sure of faith: wee i trust thy reach,
As far from craft as cunning, truly honest
Because not over wise.
I must entreat your Lordship I may have a pair of Chopeens, or some high Corked shoes, or else I shall never
play the overseer well; or if your Lordship will allow me but a Ladder, I warrant you I will oversee your workmen.
No more, there shall be order from our Treasury
To furnish this rich building—
Welcome Lords.
Our welcome would show better,
If we could hear it from the Ladies.
They come well that speed well, if we could find our selves well sped, then we should not doubt to presume we were well-come.
Lord Julio, are the toils prepared and set for our appointed game.?
They are my Lord.
Then Princes we devote this day to pastime
And chasing of the Stag, these beauteous Ladies,
That must this day take leave of liberty,
Shall in our sport associate us; Valentia,
And you most beauteous, and my dearest Love,
I here protest my self your Guardian,
Hoping to see you, ere two months expire,
The Mantuan Duchess.
I hope no such matter; but my Lord,
Am I your Dear, as you proclaim me?
My dearest Dear.
Then being in the chase I shall fear in the hunting:
To come near you.
Your reason Sweet.
Left being your Dear you should strike me.
Still is this Lady cross to my designs,
But time may work her; Daughter, mount your Steed,
And Lords to horse▪ the morning grows upon us,
And steals towards midst of day.
We but attend
Your Highness company.
Lady, this day I will not start from your side.
You'll be worse to me than a stitch then.
Nor will I leave you Lady,
And yet you shall have free leave to leave me when you please.
We trifle hours, found out your bugles sh
And the thick air with pleasing echoes fill. 
To ring thy knell, for this day thou art doomed
To perish by the hand of Iulio— 
The Mantuan Prince
Is now upon the Chase, I hear the cry,
But ere the stag fall the proud Duke must dye. 
Hark what a shrill applause doth welcome us
Unto the Mantuan Confines.
It seems the Duke or some of his train
Are in the Forest chacing some game;
Nay, it must needs be so of necessity, they would not else make
This noise unless they were all horne-mad.
If I should come a wooing, noble Cos,
I should presage the Music of these horns
Might, to my future match, prove ominous;
But now let's mix our selves amidst the Train,
And see what fair adventure may befall us.
Sever our selves, it may be that sweet face
Your Father praised may meet us in the Chase.
I like well this division, come let's part,
And let's be henceforth strangers, thus conditioned,
The first that can prefer himself, or service
Unto the Duke, or gain his sovereign grace
Shall for his friend provide some eminent place.
I am pleased my Lord, then come let's mount away,
The morning's old, and we shall lose much day. Exeunt. 
With these Italian tricks villains oft mask
Their grim bloud-thirsty fronts, and when they purpose
To act some horrid murder, if prevented,
Thus pass unknown, these bought I of a Jew,
A fellow that professes villain;
Isle dog the Duke, whom if I can but single,
Or light on from his Train, but thus, it is done,
The Dukedom seized, and fair Valentia won;
Auspicious hell I thank: thee, thou art still
True to black deeds, and friend to such as kill—
My horse hathfail'd me, and I forced on foot
To lag behind, my Train have left me all,
Led by the music of so fair a Cry,
To find a place where thou majesty fitly dye.
Who named death to me?
One whose powerful hand▪
Shall guide thy Dukedom, Daughter, and thy Land,
And at one blow gain all—
And we so nigh,
The slave that threatened death himself shall dye.
Prevented. 
Courage, my Lord, the traitorous groom is fled,
And you ingirt with safety.
Noble stranger,
The life thou hast given me shall be ever thine,
And thank the stars that brought thee to my rescue,
They owed thee a great fortune, thou hast saved
The Mantuan Duke from death.
Are you my Lord,
The noble Mantuan Prince? what Traitors hand
Durst threat your life?
I know not, gentle sir,
But for your self thus much presume from me,
You shall be ever ours, to none more dear,
By whom I am freed from treason, death and fear.
This way, my Lords, I saw the Duke in perils
An ugly slave, his face much Vizard-like.
Assailed the Duke, and with his weapon drawn
Fled through the Forest, I pursued the Traitor
Whilst I had breath, but fears and guilt of conscience
Gave his speed wings; but see my Lord's in safety,
Whose welfare I salute thus on my knee,
Glad in my soul that he from death is free.
My Father threatened I blessed be that fair hand
That wrought his safety.
Thank this Gentleman,
This noble youth, it is he by whom I live,
Never so near my death, never so near it,
So mortal men are still when least they fear it.
Oh do but tell me, thrice renowned sir,
How I may show me thankful to your love,
Whose noble hand preserved my fathers life.
Madam, your grace, your favour and good thoughts
Are gifts above my merit.
Stranger, thou haft won the opinion and suffrage of the whole Court, and bound the Prince of Florence to be thy grateful debtor.
We made hast
To the Dukes rescue, but it was thy fate
Our valours to prevent, we came too late.
Yet did Lord Iulio, with what speed he might, haste us to this great danger.
It was my duty
And service to my Lord, whom thus to see
Secured from death glads, almost frantiques me;
Legs for my life I thank, and thou my brain
For making up this broken flaw again.
We thank you Iulio, chiefly you fair stranger,
Whom for your service we will raise in Court,
And breast next our most dear Valentia;
But she is for the Tower bared with twelve doors,
And this the last day of her liberty,
That's our next business; once more welcome sir,
Attend on us to Court, our happy fate
Hath given me safety, and advanced thy state. 
Oh fair Valentia!
My Lord, if you had been born less than a Prince, yet you have wrought your self into grace.
Here set a period to our travels, make a full point here.
And that, my Lord, is the full end of a sentence; but shall we give over travel till we have seen something worth seeing.
Worth seeing sai'st thou? what's Valentia?
Travel from Pole to Pole, stand at the Center
And progress round about the spacious signs,
Or, were it possible, sit with the Sun
In his high noon▪ tide glory, and from thence
Survey the Kingdoms of this lower world,
Thou can not find her match, Apollo's hair
Is dull to hers, her fingers, hand, eye, front.
Take me with you my Lord: This marvellous thing you call her beauty, is it ought but ordinary flesh and blood? Are those gold wiry hairs with which Apollo might go string his Harp, are they ought but the plain hairs of her head? Her Ivory palm, that doth in touching melt, embroidered with blew artires, is it ought but a Ladies hand and fingers? And this strange thing, this wonder of the world, whose peer cannot be found between the Poles, are not all these nine wonders in one, she that was here even now, the Dukes Daughter Va∣lentia?
Oh my dear Montecelso, this I know,
But such an admiration hath surprised
The freedom of my senses, that it robs me
Of my true judgement.
Be advised by me▪ you love this Lady, but so strict is like to be her imprisonment, that you may as easily pass by the gates that Cerberus keeps, as through the doors of this Castle; you are already in favour with the Duke, do but prefer me to be overseer of the work, if I do not▪ work it so that I will bring you to oversee her, turn me out of my office as one not worthy the name of an Architecture.
I shall commend thee for a man well skilled a such great structures, it may be the Duke
May trust me on my word.
And if I do not make him dote as much on you for your valour, as you make him enamoured on me for my skill in buil∣ding, may this Tower turn to the Tower of Babel, and make a second confusion between us, there remains for you nothing but this, to win the favour of the Lady; and for your access to her, if I do not teach you to counterfeit all the Dukes keys, turn by all the wards of his locks &amp; lay open all the Jury of his twelve doors that he hath panelled against your entrance, re∣port me to be no man of my trade▪ Away my Lord▪ leave this melancholy, walk by her window▪ and cast sheeps eyes that way towards her Chamber, let me alone to stand Sentinel and watch if the Duke come▪ 
Come on my masters, the Duke has appointed me to be Overseer of his works, the building of this Tower is put to my indiscretion; therefore come every one of you, and from me take your directions; what are you?
I am a free Mason, and expert in squaring stone.
A good proper square fellow, if your trade be in stone,
I make no question but you will work hard.
I warrant you sir Isle do my endeavour; will you give us directions?
First you must make a fair large post at the entry.
I warrant you Isle make a large porch that any Lady shall go in and out at pleasure.
To see how you mistake; you must make it that no by∣die can go in and out at pleasure but only my Lady, it must be too wide for any that's less than she, and too strait for any thats greater than she, you conceive me.
Oh sir, it is not possible.
Tell not me of possible, such directions I had, and such an one I must have made▪ Then must I have fair bay windows that must always stand open and give no light, that they that stand without and look in may see no body within, and she that stands within and looks out may see no body without▪ the
reason is, my Lord means to keep his daughter in that Tower, where she must neither see nor be seen.
Then none must offer to look out from the inside, nor in from the outside, else it is not within the compass of work∣manship.
Tell not me of workmanship, such windows I must have made: Now Carpenter for you, you must make the doors of that fashion that women may go in but men may not, and they must be of such wood as will not let a Lover come near it, for my Lord will have no Lovers come near his Castle.
Then you must have some body to keep them out; here are wise directions!
For you goodman Padlock, you must hammer out your Locks and Keys with such Art, that if the Duke, or any from him, offer to open, the Key may turn at pleasure, but if any Lo∣ver or suspicious person come to enter, Nonsum, non possum, non Licit esse Domi.
That's as much as to say, they must have no entrance there.
Smith, you have hit the nail on the head; What's your place?
I have the charge of the brick-worke, and must build the Chimneys if you would give me directions.
Marry will I sir, you must have a special regard in your Chimneys that they cast heat, though there be no fire in them, and the Kitchen Chimney especially must every meal yield roast meat without sending to market, and so to work for a spurt, and after merrily to dinner.
A good motion. 
HAve you given charge, Lord Iulio, that my Duchess
Be nobly served as her whom Mantua loves?
I have my Lord.
And that Valentia be enclosed and shut
From all her suitors eyes.
I gave such order.
Enough now my Lords.
You give us fair words; but keep us from the sight of the fair Ladies.
Soft and fair, soft and fair.
We know they are both soft and fair, and that's the reason we desire so much both to see and feel them.
I would beneath the ground sells of this Castle,
By Miners craft, were placed some strong Petars,
To which I would give fire and blow this structure
Up into air that prisons thus my Love;
But Iulio peace, and some advantage wait
To show to her thy love, to him thy hate.
My Lord, I can compare you to none so rightly as to the King Aerifius, that shut up his Daughter Dane in a brazen Tower, but you know the end of it, there was a Jupiter that with a golden pick-lock broke through those brazen gates, and made the maid a mother. Now if
I were to choose a godhood, of all the gods that are
Would I, for her sake, wish to be a Jupiter.
For men to be made gods it were a wonder,
You Jove, and neither have his power nor thunder?
Shall I bail her my Lord? Isle put you in good security.
But not in better security than I have put her in already,
Yet better would do well; oh for a man
Skilful in Architecture, and composing
Strong frames and forms of building.
Now's my question;
My Lord, there is a stranger in your Court
Whose outside though it promise not much Art,
Yet is he so ingenious, and so apt,
Of such opinion and direction too,
That could you win him to be so employed,
As we shall hardly, for men excellent
Are curious of their skill, you cannot find
A man to match his skill in Italy.
Thou were I see, fair Knight, marked in thy Cradle
To do me all good offices, bring that man
To my employment, I will guerdon him
With more than he can ask.
I, but my Lord,
He is a man always so absolute,
And stands so much upon his excellence
In fine contriving and rare edifices
We shall have much ado to win him to it— 
Here comes the man.
Sir, your due praise hath, like a harbinger,
Gone all the way before you to provide you
A place in my regard, you are most welcome,
You have not seen my Castle?
Yes my Lord, I have perused it.
What think you of the work?
It is pretty, pretty;
It is well for modern builders, homebred workmen,
Twill serve: Yet let me tell you, worthy Lord,
They never looked on high Mauselus Tomb,
Never beheld a Grecian Pyramid,
Rich Crassus house at Rome, Diana's Temple
At Ephesus, nor the grand City Cairo,
It is well for them that are no travellers;
Saw you me draw a form, or a fine model,
The Fabric greatly would enamour you,
But yet it is well enough, pretty, not famous▪
Shall I entreat you to direct my workmen,
And I will weigh your pains down with reward.
Your Tower as it is, my Lord, will serve the turn,
Is finely seated, and to keep your Daughter
Close from the eyes of strangers, well contrived,
Yet could I by a plot, but why should I
Engage me in such work? it is well already,
Well, very well.
You can contrive it better, noble stranger;
Make trial of my bounty, by mine honour
It shall not fail your hopes.
Did not I tell you at the first, my Lord,
He would be wondrous dainty of his cunning?
So most men are in things they best excel;
Shall I prevail fair sir?
Well, I am won
To end that frame your workmen have begun;
I have perused the situation,
Find it secure and full of able trust,
Yet one defect I find: Could you pick out
Some noble Knight, whose valour did exceed,
To build for him a Lodging near that Tower
Where fair Valentia is to live enclosed,
He, as a Guardian, or a Sentinel,
Might keep continual watch, defend the passage,
And keep the place strong and impregnable?
Where should I find a man worthy that place,
Whose valour might supply this my employment?
Let me engage my person to that business.
Accept of me my Lord, Isle be her Guardian.
Let the Ferrari Marquess be employed
In this adventure.
List to me my Lord:
Amongst other quests, once as I travelled Greece,
There, at the sack of a most famous town,
I saw a Knight, now resident in Court,
Do such high deeds of Arms, that living Hector,
Had he survived to see his Chivalry,
Would from the Worthies nine have raised his name,
To have eternized him with golden fame.
In our Court resident?
Yes, that strange Knight,
What wonders have I seen him do in fight!
Would he attempt it, all the plot were sure,
Your Self, your Daughter, and your Tower secure;
But you shall hardly win him to attempt.
That he is valiant I must needs confess
To my lives safeguard I have proved no less;
Oh every way my friend; renowned Soldier,
Pardon me that I have not done you honours
Worthy your high deserts.
Alas my Lord.
My cares are deaf unto excuse, and shut
Against all denial.
I am exceeding loath.
I shall deserve it, noble Gentleman,
I must not be denied, this skilful stranger
Shall cause my workmen build you a fair Lodging
Next to the Castle, and adjoining close
Unto my Daughters Chamber: this is all;
Can you deny me this?
Your former honours
Bestowed so largely on my mean deserts
Have been with me prevailing Orators
Upon your part, and I at length agree
This skilful Artist shall dispose of me.
Again prevented.
On all sides happy, fortunate, and blessed,
Now my disturbed thoughts attain true rest,
Only one bar unto my best desires
Is the entire affection and true zeal
I bear the beauteous Duchess.
Oh my Lord,
You have entertained the most affecting wooer
In Europe, or the world, therein he's better
Than in his Architecture, he's but young,
Yet Tully ne'er had such a fluent tongue.
Hemmed in with all felicities about,
Having these helps what need I now misdoubt?
You shall sir bear from me most kind commends.
Who, I my Lord? Alas.
Come sir, you shall
Unto the beauteous Duchess whom I love.
You do not know my weakness.
You are strong
In your acute words, and praised for your sweet tongue,
A token I will send by you, that give her,
And in your own sweet words my love deliver.
If need's Isle do it my Lord: upon my life
The provident Duke has found me out a wife.
Follow us Lords, I am full of jocund mirth,
My fears are dead, my joys receive new birth. 
Now Prince, was not this wrought out of Adamant?
But what's the mark that all the several arrows shoot at?
This is the mark▪ mark it, I am made chief over∣seer of the work, and your Lodging is directly against the Chamber of the Lady: Now will I appoint a private door to be made through the wall, by and through which you may have access, ingress and regress at your pleasure.
Thou hast builded in my heart a Tower already
Of steady and firm hope.
Take my word I am excellent at Architecture.
But touching thy employment with the Duchess,
Art thou so mad to woo her for the Duke?
Yes, I will set him out in his lively colours, deal you as soundly with the maid as I will work with the widow, and I doubt not but we shall both live to be in the belief there are no Cuekolds but Bachelors, our stay is suspicious, be it your charge to hire—
A workman to make the private door through the wall,
And leave it to my wit to cover all.
That be my care▪
Thou wooest a widow, but I court a maid,
The way thou tread is easy, broad, and free,
But mine is strait, and danger ushers me. 
No marvel though Jove often went disguised,
And in his rural habit traced the earth
To hear and see the affairs of mortal men.
I being a Prince have in these lowly weeds
Seen more than being refident in Court;
But I am now in Mantua, and thus far
I have pursued my Son by common tract;
The Duke and I are dangerously opposed,
And therefore this disguise must shelter me;
The Mantuan Court Isle now search ere I go
For Montecelso and my princely Son—
Let me see, let me see, make a door so broad, I, so broad, and thus wide; now unless I had the Lady here to take mea∣sure of her it is impossible that ever I should make the door fit▪ if a man take a thing in hand, it is for his credit to do it work∣man like; now if I should make the door too straight to pinch her body, or too wide to sit upon her like a sack, what credit should I have by my workmanship?
Heaven save you sir.
Et tu quoque my friend; let me see, let me see, now have I forgotten whether the door must be made for her to come thus, with her arms broad ways, Pilcher-fashion, and a kembo; or thus side-waies, like a shotten herring.
Sir, without interruption to your business, shall I en∣treat a few words with you.
Hold here, hold here a little, thus high, I, thus high, just thus high; but now my friend, if I should make it just thus high according to my measure, and then the party being yet but young should grow higher, there were all the labour cast away▪ come, come, I must have a new measure.
Sir, what means this? I understand it not▪
Pray let me ask you but one question.
Hold again, hold again, say my friend I make it of this breadth according to my measure, just to a hair; very good my
friend, but now the party being yet but lean that it should be made for, say the party hereafter grow fat, or as the Fox that when his belly was empty crept through a small hole into a hen∣roost, and there filled his belly so full, that when he should come out again, there was no room; Colon was grown so great, and so poor Reynald was taken in the manner, no, my friend, this must not be.
I pray sir to what end take you this measure?
Why, my friend, because I would do nothing out of measure, I hope you have not plaid the old caves dropper.
No sir, but if your chief affairs be ended,
Let me discourse with you.
My friend, as you have lent a hand to my Line, so will I lend an care to your tale.
What's the best news in Court?
Troth sir nothing but this, that the Prince is magnani∣mous, the Courtiers egregious, the Ladies beauteous, the place conspicuous, and the building in hand most sumptuous.
What strangers so journe there, what men of note?
Troth sir there are only two, one is most brave at mo∣dels and buildings, and hath undertaken a most brave piece of work.
That's not my Son, he never studied that,
No, not his friend.
But there is another, the finest sweet-fac'd Gentleman, that saved the Dukes life in the Forest, if you know not that you know nothing, if you know not him you know no body.
What manner of man is he?
A most dainty man, much of my size, he hath a most leering lip and tempting eye, there is only this difference be∣tween us, for you would take us to be brothers, but that he has more hair than I, and I more wit than he; Father, you are not worthy to be held a good Subject, if you love not him that had like to have killed him that would have killed the Duke, he hath set me about this piece of work here, let me see, this block∣head of mine will never bring it to any purpose—Ent. Prosp. Oh here comes the Gentleman.
He interpose himself and save the Duke▪
That look, that face, that gesture is my Sons.
Oh well encountered, tell me honest fellow,
Hast thou dispatched the close and secret door?
Not yet my Lord.
What dost thou with that Line?
I am staying here, that if she should come down this way,
I may take measure of her to make the door fit for her body.
Away you ass, thou wilt betray my purpose;
But sirrah on your life use seeresie,
And with all speed dispatch it; but what's he?
A Fellow that wonders so young a Gentleman as your self should take the Dukes quarrel in hand, and save him from the sword of a Traitor.
It is Prospero my Son, shape, gate, and voice,
To hear his valour praised how I rejoice,
This fellow at a blush looks like my Father,
Such settled gravity lives in his eye;
Nor is there wanting ought save power and state,
Attended with the royal name of Duke
To make him the same man; but I digress;
Come to your private task, sirrah be secret,
Or thy life pays for it.
I warrant you sir, I would be as loath to hazard my neck as you the Dukes favour, his favour once lost may be got again, but my neck once broke, Isle not trust all the bone-setters in Mantua to have it new set; fear not me.
This aged man is still tossed in my thoughts,
And ever as I cast a look on him,
His face grows more familiar with my eye;
But to our task in hand, why do we stay?
His cloth of state cannot be turned to gray. 
Is this your travel Son? Oh heaven to see
The follies and the vain delights of youth,
How headstrong, and how full of violence!
Why should he take this way? why sojourn here
Within my enemies Court? If to revenge
My Injuries, why did he rescue him?
Oh mine own Boy!
I must commend thee yet that could'it win love
Even of thy enemies, and honoured fame
Amongst those, that if they knew thee, hate thy name;
Isle listen further till some fate bewray
The full intent of his enforced stay. 
My Daughter is securely closed and shut
In my new Turret, and the noble Knight,
As her bold guardian, hath his place assigned,
Those fears have end; now to my suit in hand,
The stranger whom so late I entertained
Is my solicitor, and is directed
To meet and court the Duchess in the garden,
Where from this place I may behold their gestures,
The manner of his courtship and conceit:
How is my heart disturbed 'tween hope and fear—
Comfort cold spirit, they now methinks appear.
The greatest instance of my love is, that I have given into your hands my liberty and life; my name is Montecelso, and that noble Gentleman that rescued the Duke Prince Prospe∣to, Son to the Duke of Verona, it lies in you either to save me alone, or to destroy us both; give me no denial, sweet Lady, ra∣there kill me than disclose me to the Duke, so shall you lessen the supposition of your cruelty.
In that you are a stranger, I can no less in curtsy, nor more in modesty than to say you are welcome, though I have been trusted by many, I never betrayed any; I could call you rash to trust so rich a Jewel as your life unto the breast of a woman, but though you be so over-bold to presume upon me, I will not prove so over cruel to tyrannise over you.
She talked a great long tale, and loud she spake,
To her again, do not that answer take.
Madam, by all the honours of a Gentleman, my love is as pure to you, and as free from blemish as is the element of fire, or the white robe of Innocence.
I know it is, I know it is.
All the comfort I can give you is this, the life you
have committed to me shall be kept for you, the love you have proffered to me I will ponder on, I will never marry till you are bestowed, nor ever assume the name of wife till you meet with a Lady to call you husband.
Give me your hand of that.
I may well trust you with my hand that have trusted me with your heart.
A match I hope, for see, they now join hands,
My heart for joy upon the tiptoe stands;
Follow it now, strike whilst the Iron's hot,
I ne'er was pleased till now with a fine plot.
But you forget in all this to speak for the Duke.
Madam, it is true, I did forget my self, I must entreat you to think of him, but I do not entreat you to think well of him, as ill as you can possible; I beseech you love to be out of his sight in any case, and to love him best when he is farthest off: I would have you in all humility to honour him, but I would not for a world have you to marry him; have I yet spoke for him sufficiently?
Good, good, well spoken, and well acted too,
He is not half so good to plot as woo.
My Lord, the love we now celebrate betwixt our selves should once have been solemnised between our parents, before these odds grew between the two Dukes.
Though the Dukes be at odds, let us make even,
Contracts are made on earth, but sealed in heaven;
Madam, let the Dukes love be the colour to our meeting: I must go tell him the manner, for with much longing he expects my return.
Once more let these our hands our hearts make sure,
So thrive I as my love is chaste and pure. 
Again, again, fair fortune be thy speed,
Once more join hands, and then it is done indeed;
I knew the good Knight would not choose a man
That should not fit my purpose, heaven I pray.
His place may take effect the other way,
And his intents as prosperously proceed;
But I must hence to meet him with all speed. 
You wrong mine honour, and I shall complain,
I charge you get you back the way you came.
Banish •…he heaven if you exile me hence;
My deed, though it seem rash, yet is begot
In as pure birth as truth, and as upright
As is the scale of Justice; I am free
From all mis-thoughts, then do not banish me.
What are you sir? whence are you? what's your name?
I am your friend, should you desire to know
What my name is, alas my name's your foe.
Being my friend, and court me in this kind
You should have come and left your name behind.
I should indeed, my name is Prospero.
Prince Prospero, and the Duke Verona's Son, Our professed Foe?
Give me some other name,
Call me your friend and I am not the same.
You're not the same, you are the advent'rous Knight
That from the forrest-treason saved my Father.
I was Prince Prospero when I refined him,
And so continued till I saw your face;
But as my heart within your eye was tossed,
At once my hatred and my name I lost.
It was a kind foes part to save a foe.
That kind foes part performed Prince Prospero
Such a fair foe that no more hurt intends
I should prefer before a many friends.
Lady, we should have been elpous'd together,
But that our Fathers differed in the Dower;
Shall Gold divorce them whom the soul of love
Links in an endless knot? I for your love
First hazarded my life to come disguised
Only to view your face, next I contrived
This private passage, known to none but us;
If this deserve no love, no friendly grace,
Confine my life if banish me this place.
If nothing but the rescue of my Father
Should plead in your behalf; it deserved favour;
But when your travel, and your servant love,
Attended with year feature and rare parts,
Your studious means to compass my consent
And hazard of your fortunes many ways,
When all these plead together forciblie
They draw me in a treble folded chain
Your zealous love to pay with love again.
I left my name behind me at Verona,
And now no more Prince Prospero but your Love;
Wear this for me, and use in these affairs
My art, fear not, I will devise a means
To win your Fathers grant unto this match.
So we, my Lord, shall doubly be made friends,
I take it as an earnest of your love,
And hope of my release from this strict bondage;
Accept of me in interchange this Ring,
My Father gave it me, keep't from his eye,
Or he will end our loves by jealousy—
As I have been, I will be firm and sure,
Long may the date of our chaste love endure—
I prithee, sweet Marquess, since my success is so bad with the Duchess let's walk by the Dukes new edifice, and see if we can take a view of the young enclosed Lady.
Content my Lord, the Dukes strictness adds but spurs to my desire; for commonly what we are most forbid that still we most covet.
Then should you with some engine raze these walls
That interdicts your passage to that Tower;
Had I such power I should enjoy such thoughts,
But Iulio is a Subject.
Now you put me in mind of such generous and noble thoughts, let's take a view of the Castle, and spy where it is weakest, that there, if hereafter we should invade, we may give the best and safest assault.
Now you speak like a politics Lover, come lets take a view of the building: But see, see, do you know him that's
talking with the Princess Valentia?
Is it possible, Isle in and tell the Duke.
Nay, leave me not behind, Isle second you.
Intreth Lad art good at that? you are a notable rascal, can you come to it
So closely? is this your courage my courageous Knight?
Isle see how Mantua applaud this fight. 
We are descried my Lord, then post away,
Get through the private door.
Fear not sweet Lady, Isle so blind their eyes,
That we will still live free from their surprise. 
Ten thousand times adieu, I am full of fear;
Where love inhabits danger still draws near. 
ALL is too good to be true, but tell me,
And answer every word upon thy oath.
Upon my oath I will.
Then tell me, tell me,
Did thou with all thy best prevailing words,
With all thy art, with all thy eloquence
Urge her to love? speak that upon thy oath.
Upon my oath I did entreat her love:
With all my art, with all my eloquence.
And did she grant thy suit?
She did my Lord.
Thou honest man, thrice happy be the hot
That I first met thee; now upon thy life
Tell me how speed'st thou?
Well upon my life.
And will she love?
She will.
Thou hast her promise
I have my Lord.
But hast thou, as thou art a Gentleman
As I am a Gentleman I have my Lord,
I should be sorry else.
Did thy word prosper, took thy suit effect▪
Will she be won to marry at thy motion?
And did she give her hand unto the bargain.
My suit and words were both effectual,
She's won to marry, and I have her hand
As witness to the bargain.
Friend, swear that.
Upon my life, my Lord, it is most true.
It is well, I thank my stars.
I thank my stars too.
I thank thee too, but for thy industry
This thing had never chanced.
Nay, that's most certain,
Had I not took my time and plied it thoroughly,
I had never won her heart.
But thou hast won it.
I, I thank heaven my Lord.
And I thank heaven my Lord.
She hath past her word and her firm promise to me.
It glads me at the heart, the very heart.
Nor have I reason to be sorry for it.
Once more I thank thee friend.
It is not so much worth my Lord.
That be my peril, Isle 'bide the venture.
You are like to do that howsoever.
There's gold, gramerey friend, I am thy debtor;
This is but the earnest of those rich rewards
Thou shalt receive from me.
I thank your grace,
And I protest I would not for a million
My labours had been fruitless, trust upon it,
The greatest aim of all my suit is won,
Her heart, her hand, her free consent is won
To match with me.
I thank my fate it is so;
But now about my other business friend,
To look unto my works; blessed be the hour
I met thee first, but all is in heavens power. 
An honest and a faithful Gentleman
Upon my warrant, and I dare rely
Upon his trust and certain honesty—
My Lord, you are wronged.
Disparaged.
And disgraced.
I bring thee news, thy Castle is surprised,
Thy Fort is taken.
And your Daughter seized.
How may that be Lords? it is not possible.
I speak no more, my Lord, than what I saw.
What I beheld.
And what these eyes have seen.
That stranger Knight, in whom thom most aff••st.
I saw in a bay window court thy daughter.
Emrbace her in his arms, and elaspe her waste.
She darting smiles at him, and the other.
Nor did they blush, change face, or cease their Courtship, but stood as at the gaze.
July, and Lords,
You make me smile; have you so late perused
The situation, and observed the passages,
And can you judge wit or the art of man
Can force access there and not use my keys?
Tush, you deceive your selves— 
Ha ha, ha, come hither Knight and laugh with me
At their three follies, they would needs persuade me
They saw thee court my Daughter in her Chamber,
Where thou did publicly discourse thy fill,
And yet these keys here at my girdle still.
They did me the more wrong; I scale your Tower▪
It lies not in the reach of humane power.
I know it well, tush, while these 〈◊◊〉 here
Were she fair Dane I not Jove would fear.
You Tower is stronger the Aerifius hold.
Besides, I am not Jove to rain down gold.
Is it possible my eyes should deceive me!
Sure it was he, or the devil in's likeness.
There's in this some witchcraft.
You might as well say that you see this hand
Reaching as high as unto yonder clouds.
I should have seen that Ring upon that hand
Once in my Daughters Chamber; oh my heart
Why dost thou make such traffic with pale fear?
He hath spied the gift, and knows the Ring I wear.
The same, the same, I will in and see
The issue of my fears, twelve locks, twelve keys,
And every door too double-barr'd with Iron,
She in the inmost rome walled round about,
It cannot be, and yet the Ring I saw
Urges my fears, and forces me withdraw. 
I know your, 〈◊〉 and must your speed prevent,
But I delay; it is high time I were gone,
Twelve doors the Duke must pass, and I but one. 
Shall I not trust my eyes?
Though mine should fail me I would witness yours.
It makes me past my thoughts.
There's some strange juggling could we find it out;
In all his acts your stranger let us trace,
And if we can, work him some deep disgrace. 
What hast thou done Valentia, given thy heart
Unto a stranger, and thy Fathers foe?
I wrong the Prince, who with a heart entire
Pursues my spousal love with chaste desire;
This match successfully begun may move
Our Fathers hard hearts to a League of love— 
Wonder not Madam at my serious haste,
Your Father on my finger spied the Ring,
And knowing it, is gone by the known way,
Mark you may hear the doors.
Oh my sweet friend,
Haste through the hidden way, leave it to me
To excuse it, and retort his jealousy.
Adieu sweet Lady,
Hark, hark the last door.
Deceit hath eyes behind, seems blind before—
What so sad Daughter?
Not sad but solitary.
I see no private passage, and my doors
Rank in their wonted order; prithee Daughter
Show me the Diamond I gave thee last.
The Ring my Lord?
I the Ring.
Why, would your highness use it?
She moves a doubt,
I fear there's guile, and I must find it out.
This is the Ring you mean:
I, it is the same;
Oh my own Girl, sie my suspicious thoughts
That you should lead me to these jealous fears,
But Rings may be alike; my Dear, farewell,
Thou shalt not long in this close prison d well.
So Prospero hath promised, and Isle rather
Trust him than you, although you be my Father.
I have observed sir in your troubled looks
Much discontentment, you seem in your appearance
To be some man of high and eminent place
With the great Mantuan Duke.
What's that to thee?
Not much sir, yet out of a genetous spirit
In Pilgrims bred, such as I am professed,
I would some cordial counsels willingly
Bestow upon you, did I know your griefs.
I have in me a natural melancholy;
I have long aimed at greatness, but between me
And that high point two strangers stand opposed;
Can play the skilful Surgeon?
Sir I can.
Travel hath taught me much, and though now poor,
Yet in my better days I have conversed
In Courts of Princes; would you grace me then
But to prefer my service to the Duke,
I would not doubt but to remove those objects
That so offend your eyes; what are those strangers?
The one a young Knight that professes Arms:
The other Architecture, both are frequent
In the Dukes ear, and I, that in times past
Had all his bosom and his private thoughts,
Scarce now remember how his Chambers hang,
So seldome's my admittance.
Had you so much interest
In his past favours as to make my tongue
Free to his ear I would remove those flatterers,
And plant you in your first deserved grace;
But might I see these Gallants—
Here they come;
The one I take to be a Conjurer,
The other his Familiar that he works with,
Isle show thee reasons for it.
Observe them sir.
It is true my Lord, this night the Duchess lies in the Castle with the Lady Valentia, it is by the Dukes appointment, because she may be a comfortable kind Companion to his Daughter; now this night I have cast it so, that we will be mer∣rye with them till past midnight.
But are the Ladies pleased it shall be so?
The bargain's made and sealed firm with a kiss,
I set it fast upon the Duchess lips;
But come let's part till the appointed hour,
We must not be seen too familiar together.
Thou art my better Genius, I agree:
I have no good but what I reap from thee.
Mo. Farewell my Lord, only take heed of eare-droppers. Ex.
Did you hear that my Lord?
Yes, and it strikes cold unto my heart;
Must they this night meet in Valentia's Tower)
The Devil hath made them picklocks.
Patience sir.
Bid me be frantic, rather rail and curse; at midnight must they meet?
Enough, at that fixed hour Isle rouse the Duke,
And put the Court in uproar, with his Guard
Siege round the Tower, and take these Incubus
Amidst their lascivious pastimes.
Hear me sir.
I am deaf to counsel, patience, grace and all,
Till in their midnight rapes these strangers fall.
Oh were I now girt with a potent host
Of mine own people, and my self in Arms
Engaged unto his rescue, I could then
Assure me of my noble Son again;
But I now fear his fall and ominous end,
Whose help bove men to heaven I must commend;
Yet Isle not hence, but note what shall ensue,
Heaven hear my prayers, thou art to just men true.
Madam, this night devote your self to mirth, whilst your Father sleeps secure in his Palace, Montecelso hath pro∣missed to keep his widow waking; I assure you Prince Pro∣spero will be here too instantly.
He cannot come unlooked for, nor unwished,
So long as their intents are honourable,
So long their welcome is unquestionable.
Troth Madam we have exceedingly forgot our selves, we should have had a banquet to have entertained them.
Methinkes it is better as it is without, for the time, that should have been spent in sweet-meats to taste the Palate, shall be now spent in sweet discourse to relish the care.
Fie, how long they stay, this hour is as long as three hours: I have observed one thing in Lovers hours, the time of
their absence seems hugely too long, and the time when they are present is three to one too short.
And three to one is odds, but you are an old woman.
That makes me long so much for a husband to make me even; what not yet come, nor yet? if they stay a little lone∣ger, I shall go near to swoon thrice before they be ready to enter.
No entrance if you love me.
Yes at the private door—
Madam.
Lady.
Imagine this night to be Saint Valentines day, when every bird chooses her mate, for that is the season when they couple; I am here.
And I here.
And I am glad, my Lord, that you are here; yet I would be loath, my Lord, have my Father know that you are so.
That I am so seated, and you upon my knee.
Upon my knees I beg that it may never come to his care.
Come, what shall's do?
Say what you will my Lord, but do nothing I entreat you.
If we should do nothing, of that must necessary come ill, Isle prove it too; of doing nothing comes Idleness, of idle∣ness comes no goodness, of no goodness necessary comes ill: therefore if we do nothing, of necessity we must do ill.
How well, my Lord, you can infer ill; but, my Lord, if you should insist much in this argument, it were more to ex∣press your oratory than honesty; but my Lord, I know your virtues, and the opinion of them hath prepared you a most kind and loving welcome; we have nothing to entertain you but words, and we can feast you with nothing but kisses; now you see your fare, fall to and welcome.
Madam, I could everlastingly feed here, and yet pre∣sum never to surfeit, I can but thank you, and now I have go∣ven thanks, Isle even make bold to fall to.
You say you could find in your heart to offend my father.
I madam, so for my offence he would everlastingly con∣fine me to this prison; why smile you Lady?
To think if my father should steal upon you, and find you here, what a cunning picklock he would take you for, he would questionless think you carried a false key about you.
Tush, he hath made a Jury of twelve doors already to pass upon my cause, and they have all given my case up not guilty—
Whore's the Dukes Guard?
Begirt the Castle round.
Her windows shine with lights like blazing stars.
They are in her Chamber sure.
Heard you that Madam?
We are betrayed.
The Castle round beset.
And hark, above I hear the Dukes keys, down the private way, and leave the excuse to us.
Nay, when my Lords?
This way my Lord, good night.
Nay, stand not now on trivial Complements,
The Duke's at hand.
Farewell, Ladies adieu.
Nay, if you love us leave us; Madam, how shall we answer this to the Duke?
Now my apron strings if I had one on, Madam take your Chair and counterfeit your self fast asleep, so will I, not a word now if you love me.
Thy very words are better to me than a Physical pot∣on, for they have cast me into a sound sleep already; see I am fast—
Soft, make no noise, the Chamber's whist and still,
There's not so much air stirring as would make
The trembling Aspen shake; ha, fast asleep?
Search round the Chamber.
I find no man here.
Here's nought but walls and Arras, and two Ladies
In depth of sleep.
Let's wake them my Lord and question them.
Not for thy head that hast deluded us,
And to this shame and mockery raised the Court,
Would I disturb them of a minutes rest;
Thy envy unto such as we have raised
For their desert in Court hath stretched it self
Even to our high disturbance.
Hell and the furies,
Am I again deluded?
Fie Lord Iulio,
To call us in a mockery from our beds!
Here to hunt shadows, sure the fellow dreamt.
Pray my Lord wake them, and resolve them how Lord Iulio hath possessed you.
Pardon me,
They both are charmed in silence, and their senses
Confused in innocent dreams; I oft have heard
That what a man or woman waking thinks,
If they be questioned in their depth of rest
Their Genius or their soul will answer for them,
As their affections or their hearts inclined;
Of this Isle make a true and prosperous use,
And sound them how their humours are disposed,
And to my Daughter first, Lords stand apart,
How sweetly doth my Girl become her rest!
How sound are her suspites! Valentia.
My Lord.
She answers me, now art thou happy Mantua,
For thou shalt sound the utmost of her thoughts;
Whom doth my Daughter most affect on earth?
I love none but my Father.
Oh mine own girl, and would thou not have a hus∣band?
Isle live and dye a maid.
There's no deceit in this, there's no dissembling,
She cannot study for evasive shifts,
I thank heaven I am resolved: now Duchess
Your turn is next, Isle try how she likes me,
What thinks the Duchess of the Mantuan Duke?
As of a fine grave noble Gentleman.
Now she speaks her heart, this is plain dealing;
And could thou be content to marry him?
That's my desire.
And live his noble Duchess.
I wish no better.
Mine own;
Most sweetly may you sleep, and nightly dream
Of these positions, not for half my Dukedom
Would I disturb their quiet; come let's leave them,
Nay pardon me, Isle see the Chamber cleared.
Could I be possibly thus mocked?
Nay Gentlemen,
Isle be the Porter, see I keep the keys
Of these two Jewels that I most esteem;
Iulio, beware hereafter you incur not
Our wrath by these suggestions of untruths;
Come Lords to bed, I counsel you the best,
Goodnight my girls, and sweetly may you rest.
Are they gone wench?
I, and so gone that till they have slept soundly, it is not possible to fetch them again.
Now Endymions fortune upon them, that being once asleep they may not wake again this forty years.
Was it not well apprehended of me to say I loved none but my Father?
And was it not as well seconded of me to say in my sleep I loved none but the Duke? Sure it must be in my sleep if ever I loved him, for yet I could never endure him waking; but what shall's do?
By my counsel let us even go to bed like loving bedfel∣lows, and see if we can dream of them that in time may be∣come our loving bedfellows.
With all my heart, now the Duke is confident of our affections, we may be the freer in the entertaining of those whom we best affect; come, come, let's leave talking of this
counterfeit sleep, and see if we can take a nap in sadness.
content, and let all men learn thus much from us, that sleeping or waking it is hard to o're-reach a woman. 
Yet all things go currant; if the Ladies were as nim∣ble in their excuse as we were quick in our passage through the private door, I hope neither the Duke nor any of his Court can any way trace us in our proceedings; some Lovers would think me a most happy creature to enjoy the love of so beautiful a La∣die, and for ought I know I may be so; but I have made a Vow never to marry a wife, but first to make some perfect and sound trial of her affection towards me; but because there is no wo∣man that loves a man living, but she will infinitely lament him dead, it shall be thought that I have drowned my self, of which I will give the Court some assured instance, and afterwards li∣avenge hereabouts in some odd disguise, I shall truly understand how she takes my death; if in any extremity of grief, I will revive her with as great a surplusage of joy; but if she take it coldly, as a business that little concerns her, Isle leave her to the mercy of him that bids fairest for her; and to my plot, I stay but for some company that may see me throw my self desperately into the River, hear my passion and report it—
My work and every thing belonging to the Dukes buil∣ding being brought to some good pass, I will study how to pass the time, and for the better recreation of my duller spirits take a turn or two here by the Rivers side to contemplate of the beauty of my Mistress; for indeed I am lately fallen in love.
No fitter man in the world to be the reporter of my death than this Coxcomb.
Upon a morning when I rose to breakfast like a glutton,
I don'd my doublet and my hose, and eat two legs of Mutton;
Her bonny looks forget I not, nor teeth as white as amber,
Her face did shine like pewter-pot belonging to the Chamber;
My lovely Mistress I espied as she a milking went a,
But oh me thought at every stride her smock that she had rent a;
Full pale she looked, for on her head a milk-paile was well placed,
Her lips were white, her brows were red, her body was strait∣laced;
But shall I now describe her legs, for I durst look no higher,
She went as if she trod on eggs most softly through the mire.
Now to my passion.
But oh a place besides all these above both knees and thighs a,
Which spring, as she looked for fleas, did make my stomach rise a.
Let Jove threat thunder, or bright Juno scold,
Mars threaten Arms, armed in Cyclopian steel,
He to my heels clap Bores brazen wings,
Or mounted on the back of Mercury
With greater terror scale the Olimpick heaven,
Then when the Giants mustered here on earth,
And darted mountain tops at Jupiter.
What mad fellow's this? he hath driven me quite out of my meditations, pray heaven I fall not into his figures.
But oh my beauteous Duchess, cause of this
My frenzy, lunacy, rage, and despair,
I love thee dearly; yet because my fervor
Shall no way cross the noble Mantuan Duke,
I am resolved to dye.
Of all the trades that are I love not this dying, poor Gentleman, would the Duke knew as much; but if love put a man into these perplexities, Isle take heed how I meddle with it, Isle even shake hands with it, and part with it as it came.
Whom do I see, the Duke of Mantua's Joy,
She whose bright beauty enamours Jove himself,
And makes him from his crystal throne descend
To 'bide with this fair mortal, thou art she.
Not I I assure you, I am a man and no woman, if you will not believe me, I have a warrant about me to show.
Come, thou art she, wilt thou dissemble love?
I am not she, look here I have a beard.
It is but the periwig fallen from thy temples,
And stays upon thy Chin, thou art my Duchess;
But stay, Isle place this border right again,
And set it on thy front where it should stand.
Oh sir, Isle bring the Dukes own barber that shall take
his oath upon a corporal book, that this is a beard and no parry∣wig; I am he that was overseer of the Dukes work, and not the fair Duchess that you take me for, put on your spectacles, and you will see I am nothing like her.
Then she is lost, and I undone withal,
Therefore Isle strip me to the Ivory skin,
And as Lender did lively leap in,
My head beneath yon River I will run,
Neptune spread wide thy arms, for now I come. 
Oh save the man, save the man, now he flounces, now he flounders, yet he swims above water like a walnut shell, yet he sprawls like a naked frog, yet he strives for life, oh save the man, save the man; but now, now, now he sinks by degrees, now he is swallowed, now he is choked, this is my comfort, he cannot choose but go with a clean soul to heaven, it will be so washed in the water before he come thither. Again, again, again; now he lies still upon his back and floats along with the tide, and now his soul is in the skies, he doth not offer so much as to strive against the stream, but swims as gently down with the tide as may be; but what a fool was he, that know∣ing he should go so long a journey by water, and the weather so could too, would leave his clothes behind him? Well, Isle even take up his scattered Apparel, carry them to the Court, and there report what I have heard and seen, the poor Gentleman is well onward of his journey by this time, they had need pro∣vide him good store of faggots, for he will be monstrously wet when he comes to his Inn.
LAdy, I understand and good tidings from you.
From me my Lord?
It is all one Madam, you at length are won
Unto a second marriage.
Hath Montecelso then told to the Duke
Of my free grant and yielding to his love?
Sir, I must have you freely reconciled
To the Lord Iulio that hath put upon you
Such slanderous imputations.
You my Lord
Can much with me, but were it for the reverence
I owe your Grace my sword had character'd
My wrong upon his body.
Come, all friends.
My Lord, I yield my self, and here confess
In what high measure I have injured you.
That's too much to receive injury and make satis∣faction too.
He slandered you most vilely.
Told the Duke
You were safe lodged within Valentia's Tower.
Made us to girt the place with the Dukes Guard.
And at the high'st of night search all her Lodgings
For you and the Architector.
But who found you?
None but two sleeping Ladies▪ and they fast
Surprised in innocent dreams.
Was this wrong
To be endured?
Where the guilt's confessed
There pardon is soon purchased.
Isle not believe
But there's in this some juggling, some strange feat—
Room for a bringer of ill news, for one that brings a tale will offend all your noses, and a discourse that will distaste all your ears; who knows this Hat? who knows this Doublet? who knows this Cloak?
These were Lord Montecelso's; why my heart Art thou struck cold with fear?
These were my friends.
If I mistake not these belonged to him
Whom I prefert'd to over-see my works,
What news of him?
You that loved him, out with your eyes, and wipe your handkerchers, and as you look upon this Cloak provide for a shower of rain.
Speak, what of him?
He is dead, he is fled, he is not wounded, but he is drow∣ned, he is gone for ever, for he is leapt into the River.
Dead!
Drowned!
How came he drowned? speak.
Marry with water, belike it got into his mouth and choked him.
There's one gone yet.
I mean discourse the cause that urged him to it.
As I was walking by the Rivers side, musing and medi∣tating on some passions incident to men of my complexion, I spied this Gentleman stark staring mad, exclaiming on the beauty of this fair Duchess, saying, that he run mad for her love; but because he would not be false to the Duke his Master, that put him in trust, he would rather show himself to be no better than a drowned Rat than deceive him, and so very court∣ously
casts away his Hat, very dolefully lays by his Cloak, very dissolutely hurls off his Doublet, very desperately leaps into the River, and very dangerously gives up the Ghost.
It drives me to amazement,
And I am wrapped in wonder.
Oh my Fate!
I am of all the most unfortunate;
Isle not out-live him.
Wherefore doth my Duchess
Show in her looks such sad distemperature?
I am lost, there steals a coldness through my blood,
The Icy hand of death plays on my breasts,
And where it touches turns all to earth,
And I am doomed—
Look to the Lady, see she faints.
How cheer you Lady?
Ha, am I called again?
Then like a soul disturbed in her departure,
And kept from rest and downy quietness,
Let me proclaim my anguish.
Patience Lady.
Isle not be patient, give me leave to drown
My soul in brine, and in a flood of tears
Swim to my Love.
The Duchess is distracted.
I am so, I am desperate, frantic, mad,
Go call yon Architector from the deeps,
And he shall build a Castle in the air,
Where we will live together amidst the Clouds
And laugh at these poor mortals here on earth.
The Laddie's mad.
You are deceived, not I;
Cannot a Lady weep, morn, or lament,
Or spend a few tears o'er a funeral hearse
But you will judge her frantic, pray give leave,
Which of you here can hinder me to weep?
I am a woman
I am a man.
Women command tears,
Then pray let me bestow some on a friend;
If you will dye go hang or drown your selves,
Isle do the like for you.
Yes, not for me.
Why should I weep for thee if thou did so,
Or thee, or thee, or any dotard here,
Yet if you please you may go try for me,
He clap at that well-acted Tragedy.
Oh save the woman, save the woman.
Follow her Iulio, see her well attended;
Sure she is Planet-struck, or some ill star
Hath in her bosom wrought this mutinous war,
Isle see well to her safety.
Oh my Duchess!
These are but women's passions,
And like a tempest, the more violent it is
Twill be the sooner blown o'er.
So I hope.
Fear not my Lord, perhaps she counterfeits
To know how you affect her, if in this
You will compassionate with her, and partake
In this supposed frenzy.
It is like so,
For if a man may trust a sleeping woman,
She loves me 'bove the world.
My Lord I know it.
Nay, I know it too, Isle never else trust dreams.
But leaving this, I have a suit unto your Grace.
Speak and prevail dear friend.
There is a Spanish Lady my first Love,
Who heating of my residence with you,
Is travelled thence to meet me in your Court,
I have notice that she shortly will arrive;
My purpose is to feast her in my Lodging
So lately built, next to your Daughters Tower,
Where if it please you with these Lords to grace 〈◊〉,
And taste a homely banquet, I shall say
To you I am engaged every way.
I will not fail thee, nor shall these our friends,
We'll grace the Spanish Lady with our presence.
I have a suit to your Grace.
Thy business Groom?
That for the good news I have brought you I may have some guerdon, some remuneration, as they say.
This thy reward be, since by thy occasion
My Duchess of her best wits is deprived,
Wander for ever like a banished Caine,
Till of her sense she be possessed again
Dare not so near our Court. Come Lords, let's in
To cheer her sorrows, and her fate lament,
But to the man that can her fren•ie cure
We here proclaim what ever he can demand▪
If in the compass of our populous Land.
Banish, what's that? can any man tell me what it means? let me see; Banished sure is some strange language, and for any thing I know the meaning of it may be, give him a hundred Crowns, or give him two hundred Crowns; and banished the Court may be come to the Court and there you shall receive them; the Duke was not wont to give me such hard words; if he had called me Rogue or Rascal, I had understood him, I had had him to a hair, but the word banished doth a little stick in my stomach; Banished! I will go feek out some wise man or other to tell me what the the word means, and what sum of money, I may demand of the Dukes Treasurer; Banished—
Save you sir.
And you my friend, what are you?
Sir I profess my self to be a wise man.
Then you are the man that I desire to meet, for I was seeking a wise man to tell me the meaning of a strange word.
Unfold thy mind; I shall resolve thee truly▪
Lye it within the power of humane skill.
Thus Stands the case: The Duke entertained a fellow to look to his buildings, and this fellow drowned himself, it was my fate to bring the news to the Court, which when the young
Duchess heard, she grew presently as mad as a march Hare; now demanding reward for my news, the Duke out of his bounty said, be would banish me the Court; now I would fine know what sum of money the word banished signifies.
It signifies, that if thou dare presume
To come within the Court gate, thou incur'st
The Dukes displeasure, it is present death.
You will not buy my reward sir, will you?
Not I.
Then I see thou art a wise man.
But is the Duchess frantic?
Isle assure you she's a mad wench.
And how did the Duke take it?
Oh very discontentedly: and he hath proclaimed to him that can cure her of her frenzy to have the next thing he shall ask without exception.
But art thou sure it is true?
I assure you my friend as true as I am banished.
That cure Isle undertake, and so prevail,
That I presume my cunning shall not fail.
Now sir I have resolved you of all these doubts, can you tell me how I shall bestow my self now I am banished?
I can, I am a stranger in this City,
And I profess dark arts, Physic, and Necromancy,
And for a need can conjure; but direct me
Where I may lodge and freely use my Art,
Isle entertain thee and supply thy wants
With all things needful.
As bountiful as wise; I am for you sir so you will teach me wit; I have seen the Duke and his Court, but never to my knowledge saw a wise-man before, you are the first of the name that ever I looked on; but if it be nothing but a Lodging you want, trust to me, I can furnish you with that at an hours warning.
Direct me to the place.
That I will sir as well as I can,
Be you the wise Master, Isle be the wise man.
Attend me then, her choice love I have found,
I made the hurt, and I can cure the wound. 
Her fits increase then daily.
They still grow,
Sometimes her eyes with salt tears over-flow;
She fills the house with Musique, and then wrings
Her Ivory hands, she dolefully laments,
At once expressing thousand discontents.
Proclaim to him that can her frenzy cure
The next thing he can ask.
I shall my Lord.
My Lord leave these discontents to some further leisure, we are now at the strange Knights Lodging to give entertain∣meant to the Spanish Lady.
True, we are his invited guests, and it is not fit that our grievances should any way appear to a stranger.
You counsel well, behold this is his Lodging—
And here's the Knight himself. 
Welcome my Lord to a poor strangers Lodging,
My beauteous Lady and my Love's arrived,
Whose grace I first won in a Tournament,
Bearing the prize from many Knights of Spain;
Please you to grace me at a solemn feast
Which I prepared this day to welcome her,
You shall do much honour.
Knight I will,
And for thy sake respect her to her worth;
How dost thou like thy Lodging built so near
This Castle where Valentia lies enclosed?
My Lord, it is well for prospect and for air,
Will it please you enter Lords, where be my servants. 
Is this the place?
It is my Lord; but I must crave your pardon,
We want that order, and that entertainment,
That observation and decorum now
That longs to your estate and sovereignty,
Yet our good thoughts above our power are large
And full of zeal.
Come, you are at too much charge.
May it please your Highness to possess your seat,
Homely your Viands, but your welcome's great.
But whore's the Lady?
She should be Mistress of the feast to day—
She is not far, see yonder where she comes.
My Daughter.
It is Valentia.
Sure it is Valentia in this strange disguise▪
Or can you once again deceive my eyes?
My Daughter on my life, her eye, her brow,
Her every part; ha, are my eyes my own?
Here hang my keys▪ the doors fast barred and locked;
Nor is she subtle spirit, composed air,
To creep though key-holes, or to crawl through chinks;
Tush, tush, one Lady may be like another,
And my suspect is causeless.
Let me entreat you
To take your seat, My Laddie's but a stranger,
And unacquainted with the Italian guise.
Observe her well my Lords.
She hath her blush.
Her lip, her front.
The right trick of her eye.
But is it she, is it possible the Knight
Would be so bold, she so audacious?
It cannot be; come, now I take my place.
In this your Highness doth your servant grace.
E•ha nos de boner dies benediga toda la Compania says &amp; bien venido.
What says the Lady?
She calls for wine and bids you welcome all.
The very touch and accent of her tongue.
Signeur yo b••• an de buen corac•n.
Her meaning.
She drinks to you with a good heart.
Tell her I pledge gladly.
Doubtless it is she, can it be otherwise?
Why spend we time in cups and banquets here,
When fair Valentia must be needs transformed
Unto this stranger-Lady.
Still the more
That I observe her I am more confirmed.
It is she, some devil or witch else.
When face, and tongue, and each thing proves her mine,
Why should I doubt to challenge her? Isle suddenly
Call on her name, and if she answer to it
Dobtlesse it is she, Valentia—no.
What means your Lordship?
Nothing, nay nothing; see the very Ring
Upon her finger, I can sit no longer;
My Lords, I must entreat your patience,
I have dropped a Jewel as I came along,
And must find it or it will go wrong.
A Jewel lost.
Let's help his Grace to seek it.
Pray do my Lords.
Some Torches there.
Lights for the Lords, it was dropped sure by the way,
Help him to seek it.
Look well there in the Rushes. 
Haste through the private door, off with that habit;
If this pass currant we are past all fear,
Your Father's gone in post, why do you stay?
I have the odds, for mine's the nearer way;
Farewell sweet Prospero. 
Seek till your eyes be blind,
You shall lose her though you the Jewel find;
How Fortune smiles upon our cunning shifts,
They are busy all at work, the Duke himself
Is like a Jailer jingling of his keys,
Which serves her as a watch-word to uncase;
If now our plot prove, there depends on this
All our succeeding hopes, and future bliss— 
Valentia, Valentia.
Here my Lord.
What, at your book already?
Yes sir, to pray
After these tempests for a calmer day.
The Duke's at hand, and seeking how to cross
Our loves hath all his Lords left at a loss— 
Body of me she's here; fool that I am
Her loyalty to mistrust, or his good thoughts,
She being chaste, he honest; how now Lady,
What at your book so close?
Books are Companions
To them who are compelled to single lives.
Thou art rank amongst Virgins.
Virgins would be wives—Why come you sir?
Only my girl to see
How well thou forest, thou one day shalt be free;
Fare well, in this my jealousy appears,
And this one fear begets a thousand fears. 
Not without cause, good Father, knew you all;
But I must down the next way through the wall. 
By this she's coming, be thou first fair love,
Or else our stratagem is quite o'rthrown,
But if it take place, Valentia is mine own;
How will the Duke look when he finds her here▪
And in his heart condemn his needlesle fear!
He hath not wit to trace us in our drifts,
True love is cunning and hath thousand shifts— 
Valentia.
Prince Prospero.
And in your habit too, all succeeds happily.
Hark, hark, my Father is at hand my Lord,
Isle keep my place as if I had not moved,
Who ever ventured fairer where they loved— 
How now my Lord, what is the Jewel found▪
'T was never lost, I left it in my Closet,
Where it was safe, it was but my jealous fear
And blind mistake, but now those doubts are past,
For where I found it I have locked it fast.
May it please your Grace to sit—
I have looked my eyes almost blind,
And yet I can no Jewel find.
Sure if it had been a Diamond, or any stone that had had either lustre or quickness, I should have seen it sparkle.
Lords, you may spare your pains,
The Jewel's found.
Lords, seat your selves, and grace this strangers banquet,
And speak what news is in the City rifest,
For you frequent i• most.
They say, my Lord, there is a Necromancer,
One of rare art and cunning, that can truly
Tell of things lost, one that hath Ephemerids
At his fingers ends; no frenzy, fever, sickness,
But he hath Cordials for, so his large bills,
Pasted on every post, speak in his praise.
And where resides he?
Here in the City Mantua.
Some Mountebank fellow.
It should not seem so,
For he hath much resort, and every mouth
Proclaims his skill.
I will make trial of him,
To know if my love-sute shall well succeed.
Isle try his cunning.
Isle be his Client.
So will I,
And in my deep affairs his best skill try.
Isle prove him in the beauteous Duchess cure,
In which if he prevail his pains shall be
Paid from the best of all his Treasury;
We sit too long, stranger, we praise thy bounty,
And if in any suit thou wilt use our love,
Suppose it, craved, granted.
I shall find time my Lord.
I cannot he at rest
Till I have once more searched her private Chamber to assure and
Of these doubts; strange: farewell,
Only my keys can these sad doubts expel. 
Haste, haste to meet your Father in the Tower.
Shortly will come the long expected hour. 
YOu see I have purchased you a Lodging at the house of mine own flesh and blood, otherwise called my Father; now sir, if you do not show your self a Master of your Art, or your Crafts-Master, you shall but disgrace your self, and call the reputation of my Fathers house in question.
Tush, fear not me, what cannot I perform,
A mask of naked wenches I could bring
To dance strange Antiques here, and none but we
To be spectators.
Oh brave man, when shall we see this sport?
Dost thou love sweet meats? I have changed ever now,
Against a Christening day, a shower of hail
To perfect Comfets that have served a feast,
And I can do it again, but tush it is nothing.
Oh sweet man, here's one that by his Art is able to undo all the Comfet-makers in Christendom,
What meat dost thou love best?
I love many meates well, and indeed scarce any comes
amiss, if it be come in his right likeness, when I have a stomach I can eat Capon and Rabit, but above all meats, not to dissem∣ble, I love a good piece of roasted beef.
Isle tell thee what once I did in Germany.
There was a hill lay just against the Sun,
I by my art changed it to perfect beef▪
Which the violent heat of the Sun roasted as
Perfectly as any sea coal fire, and still as it
Was enough the Country people came with their
Sharpe knives and cut it off in slices.
Oh that my journey had lain over that hill.
Now sir a brooke ran by of clear water,
And that I turned to perfect vinegar
For sauce to that rost-beefe, and the small sand
Was changed to perfect pepper; now sir, it
Was but bringing ••ead along with them and flicing away
A piece of the hill, and sitting down by the Rivers side,
And there was as good roast beef, vinegar, and pepper
As any man in Mantua could desire to eat.
This cunning man hath a trade would set any mans teeth a wat'ring that hath but a stomach— 
But soft, here come strangers.
If the wise man be as cunning as rumour reports him,
Isle know what shall betide me in my love-affaires;
This, I this, by my directions should be the house.
My Cousin the Prince, excellent, Isle put him
Into a pitiful perplexity ever we part.
Now will I try whether this fellow have any cunning or no, thou learned man of Mantua heaven save thee.
Thou worthy Gentleman of Verona, I thank thee,
Nay, I have given 't you, pick out the meaning of that.
He knows me to be of Verona.
I, and an enemy to the Duke of Mantua,
You wrong me sir, I love the Duke.
I, and his Daughter too, pray do you no•?
A rare admirable fellow, he knows all, I must cologne with him, or he will reveal all my secrets to the Duke.
Nay, herein, most learned, I must needs say you err;
and though I will not say your devil is a Liar, because I am alto∣gether unacquainted with him, yet in this I must needs tell you he is in the wrong, for this Gentleman is a true Trojan, a Knight Errant, and one that hath fought at the Tomb of adventures.
Indeed I am a Stranger.
Indeed you are a dissembler.
My name's Antonio.
Otherwise called Prince Prospero.
The rarest fellow in Christendom; upon my life he knows my very thoughts, my meditations.
Come hither you, you that can gull the Duke,
Make private doors into his Daughters Tower▪
And whilst your Noble Father, good old man,
Thinks you abroad in travel to see fashions,
You loiter here about a Ladies love.
Oh wonderful, I never heard the like▪
Now wheres the Ring the Duke spied on your finger?
When was the merry meeting with your friend
And the two Ladies when they talked asleep,
And by that sudden shift deceived the Duke?
Whore's the strange Spanish Lady? whore's the banquet
To which you did invite him?
He knows all, all by this light,
There's nothing left unknown.
Here's no roguery, here's no knavery, here's no villainy, and all confessed too, Isle even, like a good Subject, make all this acquainted to the Duke.
Sweet Conjurer, good Mephast ophilus,
Isle give thee here a hundred Ducats straight
But keep my counsel.
But if the wise-man will, the fool will not; nay, and there be such knaveries in hand, you had better never have let them come to my ear, the Duke shall know all, all by this hand, nay, that's most certain—trust to it.
Stay sirrah, or Isle bring you back with a whirlwind.
Not I most learned, you shall pardon me, Isle be no Traitor for no mans pleasure.
Prithee come back.
No such matter, have you such figures, Isle tell the Duke.
You doore-maker.
How most wise?
The Duke shall know of making of that door
By which the Prince had free way to the Lady,
You were his Overseer.
No more, sweet Doctor Faustus, no more.
Sirrah, you had better been a door keeper than a doore-maker.
Then I had better be a thief than a knave, silence noble Scholar, and I am at thy service.
Well sirrah, keep his Counsel and Isle keep yours, and whilst I speak a few words with this stranger, do thou watch there, and look steadfastly at the kitchen window, for about din∣ner time there will fly in Capons, Pigeons, Pigs, Geese, Larks, Chickens all ready roasted, with every one a knife at his girdle to cut himself up, do but thou watch and bring me word when they come flying in and call me; we'll to dinner.
Oh rare, ready roasted! I would I were a wise man too, as I shall never bee whilst I live; it is nothing but spreading a cloth, laying trenchers, setting a salt, providing of bread, and making platters and sauce ready, and your roast-meat will come as duly every one flying to his own dish and sauce as Crows in the evening fly to their own nests; Isle get him to tile our house with Biscuits, to pave the Kitchen with Custards, to make our Lo•…e-walls of Ginger-bread, and turn our Cheese-trenchers into Wafer-cakes; Isle watch, but if I bring him word till I have filled my belly, may my girdle break.
Montecelso turned a wise man!
I know that's more than ever thou did look for at my hands.
Beshrew thee Cos, thou hast put me into two pitiful plunges, first thy death, next for this needless fear.
Not yet!
I thought as surely thou had been in heaven
As I know this is earth: in truth mad Cos,
And hast thou gone beyond me?
Now I hope: no, that was a Crow that flew over our house.
Be confident for I have cast a plot.
How thou shalt steal away thy Love to Church,
And make her Father with his own free hand
Give her to thee in marriage; more than this,
Put strange disgraces on thy opposites
And such as are thy rivals; would thou think
Me a perfect wise man to contrive this well?
More wise than I first knew thee.
For this time part, early to morrow morning
Convey Valentia through the private door
Suited as at the Banquet; next invite
The Mantuan Duke to grace your Nuptials
In Saint Lauretta's Chapel; what remains
Shall all be mine.
My dearest friend adieu,
No cunning head had ever a heart so true. 
Hark, some one knocks.
Most prudent.
Leave staring to the ketch. till anon,
And let me in these Gallants.
Beshrew their hearts for me, belike they heard what good cheer was flying towards our house, and now like bold guests they are come to bid themselves to dinner; I will let them in, though I could wish them choked for their pains—
Who takes his turn first?
That will I so please you.
I know them all, their business, their affairs,
And I shall fit them finely; grave old man,
My choicest welcome I bestow on you,
And welcome Lords to all, but first you:
I know my Lord of Florence you affect
The amorous Lady fair Valentia.
Oh marvelous!
But you the frantic Duchess.
Possible.
Come, come, I know the inmost of your thoughts,
Then to be brief and cut off circumstance,
Hark you my Lord of Florence, do but this,
And Isle assure you fair Valentia's love,
Tomorrow morning must the stranger Knight
In Saint Lauretta's Chapel wed his Love,
The Spanish Lady, given him by the Duke,
Whilst they are busied watch the new-built Tower,
In which by Art I will contrive a door,
Which you shall find wide open.
Oh rare man!
Through which pass freely; now to blind suspicion,
Because you may not be descried or known,
Wear some disguise, this paper shall direct you.
Thou most ingenious Artist, take this Gold,
The happy earnest of my future love. 
Enough my Lord, now waite upon my skill;
And now to you, I know you love the Duchess,
But she is changed by sickness; yet my Lord
If you will marry fair Valentia,
Who for your love disdains the Florentine,
Isle set you down a course to compass it.
Either will serve my turn, I'm not so curious
To thy my fancy to one women's face.
Know, through my spirits help, I have dug a door
Quite through the Turrets door, which wall leads straight
Unto the Ladies Chamber, take this note,
This Paper shall direct you.
There's Gold for Paper.
Adieu.
My turn is next;
I am a stranger to thee, learned Friend,
Nor dost thou know my business.
No Lord Julio.
Iulio I'm called indeed.
And love that Lady
Whom these two Princes tenderly affect.
You are something near me.
Isle come nearer yet,
To the two strangers I could tell your hate,
Th'one drowned, t'other Guardian of the Tower,
But my Art's no accuser.
Noble Scholar,
Let this Gold bribe thy art to secrecy,
And teach me how I may prevent their plots,
Gain the Dukes Grace, and fair Valentia's love.
This Paper shall do all, peruse it then,
And let it be your Tutor, so now leave me.
with all my art Isle prove thy magic skill,
And to the utmost what thou plot'st fulfil, 
Adieu; you sirrah.
Most judicious.
Follow them with speed,
Watch them, and when thou see them near the Tower,
Run to the Duke and call his armed Guard
To apprehend these Miners that have dug
Unlawful passage through his high-built Tower,
See them well beaten, and after come to me,
And I will teach thee this rare Necromancy.
Fear not, Master Doctor, first Isle play my part,
And after come to you to learn your Art. 
Now sir to you.
And what to me sir? think not with your tricks
To draw me in opinion you are wise.
Were not your Grace a man I reverence.
My Grace, what Grace? you'd gull me would you not?
Nor can you gull me most excellent Lord,
You are Verona's Duke; nay, never start,
For to your care my tongue's close as your heart;
I know that Mantua loves you not, yet know
Your Son serves Mantua as a friendly Foe.
Pardon me sir, I now approve your cunning,
Conceal my being, and expect reward—
But see the Duke.
What liberal reprover, I perceive
You find some matter in this man of note.
Matter indeed my Lord, this is a man
Exceeding many other private men,
That are indeed but shadows, counterfeits,
This man hath natural gifts joined with his Art.
We like your praise, and will our self applaud
His excellence, if by his grounded skill
He can give case to this fair Duchess grief.
What Mortals can attempt Isle undertake;
This is the Lady, and I know her grief
Arises from a sullen melancholy;
She has lost some friend, the sorrow of whose death
Hath turned her sanguine streams of blood to black.
Black, lost, gone, sunk, fled, adieu, farewell,
The waves have quite undone poor Lucibell.
Tush, I can cure this madness presently.
How learned Friend? restore her to her senses,
And the next thing that thou demand'st is thine.
I know the perfect temper of her grief,
Which that you may perceive Isle cure with Art;
I will raise up the Ghost of him she loved,
So like in all things you your selves shall swear
It is the man.
Shall he appear to us?
Here to you all, but stir not, move no foot,
Take heed you do not question him too far,
But only hear and see, and stand aloof.
But will he not affright us?
Not a jot;
Look to the Lady, Isle about my Art,
And send the Architector presently, 
Well, if I see him I will chide him so,
That he shall never drown himself again.
Is it possible this can be done by Art?
Or means he to delude us?
So it seems, for I shall ne'er more see my Love again.
Sweet Lady be content.
You see I am.
The sound may give whole counsel to the sick,
Away, your counsel does increase my pain,
And I shall ne'er more see my Love again—
He's come already.
Lord how like he is!
Would you not swear it were the very man;
An admirable Artist I see he wafts the Lady.
Oh thou dear soul of my sweet Love deceased,
Isle follow thee.
Stir not, it is the Devil.
Spirit or fiend, his amorous shape so charms,
Did he grasp hell I'd fly into his arms. 
The Devil hath born her hence, follow and rescue her.
Not I my Lord, your Grace shall pardon me.
Oh what black trespass hath she done against heaven
That she should thus be hurried quick to hell;
Now is she hopeless, past recovery;
Isle hang that Conjurer.
Condemn him not before you see the event.
What can the event be but her utter loss?
Oh my fair Duchess, if thou perish thus,
Isle make that base Enchanter curse this day,
For thy lost blood his traitcrous head shall pay—
How cheers my Lord, did you behold the Ghost?
We saw the Devil, but speak, whore's the Duchess?
Safe in my Chamber, where before to morrow,
Your Grace shall see her perfectly recovered,
Doubt not my Art; but there remains, my Lord,
For you a further business, the strange Knight
Expects the Spanish Lady from your hand
In Saint Lauretta's Chapel, whither I promise
To bring your Lady perfectly recovered.
See this done,
And the next thing that thou demand'st is thine.
I shall make bold, my Lord, to claim your promise.
Claim it and take it.
You'll trust her in my Chamber for this night,
For I must physic her.
Do what thou please, it highly shall content me;
Come, let's return to Court, and there attend
Of our precedent fears a fortunate end. 
Thou hast no part in that fair fortunate end,
It belongs to me, and to my noble friend: Madam—
Oh my dear Love how could you so delude
A Lady that with such entire affection
And zealous love admired and honoured you!
Of that no more; the Duke for this great cure
Hath promised me what I shall next demand,
I have a boon to ask, I have set on foot
Many strange plots which must their full effect
Receive this night, the Prince is to espouse
The fair Valentia by the Dukes free gift,
Florence, Ferrari, and Lord Iulio,
His Rivals, are about their several tasks;
Something there remains for me, amongst the rest,
And you to act out of these confusions,
We must devise our fortunes to secure,
And save that love that is so chaste and pure. 
In this disguise who can know Iulio now.
Or guess the purpose that I have in hand?
This Paper tells me I shall find a door
Left open to Valentia's amorous bed: here Isle waite
The happy end of my auspicious Fate—
So I am fitted so un willingly
That I scarce know my self; yet as this Paper
Gives me directions may I find the Door
Left open to me, I desire no more—
A Carpenter I should be, would this Apron
And Rule bring me to rule in Mantua
By marriage of the fair Valentia,
I should applaud my fortunes, and commend
The wise mans Art; this can imperious love, 
Whose power hath oft transhap'd the gods above.
You shall be transhap'd Isle warrant you, we'll teach you to take upon you other men's trades before you be free of their Companies; if your Rule at your back will not rule you, we will; stand close Gentlemen, and though we find them broad awake, let's see if we can take them napping.
The door, according to to the wise-mans words,
I find wide open, Isle enter.
Why pause I being so near?
Isle enter instantly, but soft, I am prevented.
Company, now must I counterfeit to work.
To shun discovery,
Isle see how I can play the Carpenter.
Now to my Masonry.
Would I were ten Leagues off.
Upon them Gentlemen, upon them, these be the un∣derminers I told you of, up with your Poleaxes and down with them, see they have broken open a door already, they shall be arraigned of Burglary.
Hold, hold, and hear us.
Bombast them Gentlemen, currifeige them bravely, hear them after; palt the Mason with stones, hammer the Smith, &amp; over-rule the Carpenter, come, away with em. 
My Son is married to the Mantuan Princess,
A Lady of that presence and opinion,
That it offends me not; but to prevent
Any offence that may be done to him,
Or injury to me, I have at hand
A Royal Army under Cosmos charge,
Our trusty and approved Counsellor,
To offer War or Peace—the Duke's at hand. 
How naked is our Train, that of our Courtiers,
So few attend this high solemnity?
Whore's Florence? whore's Ferrari? whore's Lord Iulio?
That have not seen us given away this
Daughter I fear, for so my eye persuades;
Had I not in these keys such confidence,
And in the strength of my large edifice,
I should not doubt to swear, but these Isle trust,
When servants fail, keys and stone-walls prove just.
Thrice worthy sir, you have given me such a gift,
Should you impart you Dukedoms large revenue
It could not equal't; now your hand is past,
Which both your word and Church-rights have made fast.
It were best that I return to see all safe▪
And next enquire how my fair Duchess fares.
Fear not my Lord, you have committed her
To his protection that undoubtedly
Will see to her recovery.
So we hope.
Restore her to her senses and true feeling.
We doubt it not.
And apt her thoughts for love.
That's all we covet.
I have understood
By those that know him, so much he will make good.
Then are we truly happy—
Room for one good Subject that brings three bad Sub∣jests to answer Burglary before your Grace: see here my Lord, here are three fellows that have good faces and are ashamed to show 'em, they seem to be sound men, yet see if they do not strive to look scurvily?
What men are these? or how have they offended?
Why do they turn their heads thus and look downwards?
As if they had stolen a pudding.
These faces I should know, my Lord of Florence,
Ferrara's Marquess, and Lord Iulio;
Is this the cost you have so liberally
Bestowed to grace our feast? my Bride and I
Are much bound to you
These the men, perhaps they have some mask,
If so, let's see it.
Compel me not to answer.
Give me leave
To blush and be ashamed.
Hell take the Conjurer.
My Lords, what means this antique▪ if you have
Some sport to show us▪ pray my Lords let's have it.
So, so.
How well this suit becomes you! troth my Lord,
Might I advise you, I would still go thus;
Acquaint me with your Taylor.
Is this the newest fashion?
Would I were in the Indies
Rather than here.
But tell me sirrah, what means this show?
Call you these Lords! no, they are Loons, they look more like Prentices than Princes; these are they that have be∣leaguered your new Tower, and dug a hole through the wall, that an Ox or an Ass, 'blesse us, as big as your self may creep through; there's a door made into your Daughters Tower where she was kept, and the door being left open she is flown away: Valantia is gone, she is gone, and these are they that had their hands in the business.
Valentia gone, and by their practice lost!
By theirs; when they were boring at the hole we took them at it with their tools out, we took them in the manner before they could put up, and here we have brought them to answer before your Grace, that you may freely punish their weakness that would offer to go to your walls.
These injuries severely we'll revenge,
But most on thee false Iulio, for her loss
Thy head shall pay.
Pox of the Conjurer I say still.
Speak, whore's Valentia, can you tell me?
No.
Then for her loss your forfeit lives shall go;
Who can advise me best where I may find
Her I most loved, and hath proved most unkind.
Might I advise your Grace, I would have you should do as Archers do, that when they have lost an Arrow, shoot ano∣there after it; so, my Lord, if you have ever another Lady or Mi∣stress about the Court, shoot her after your Daughter, that you may either find one, or lose both.
Good Counsel.
To him that can reduce her to her Tower,
Or put me in possession of her hand,
What grace our Power or Dukedom can command
Shall all be his.
I take you at your word, see here my Lord.
This, this is the Spanish Lady.
She that spoke
In Spanish once is forced to change her tongue,
Pardon dear Father.
Ha! am I then o're-reach'd? is it possible
For all my Cost, Charge, Care, and diligence
A Wenches wit out-go me? could her subtlety
Make way through that which not an Army could?
What should I say?
Those Creatures that wear smocks
Will where they love pierce stone-wals, creep through locks;
Why thus you see, as well as we, a great man may be gulled,
Woodcocks are meat, but not to eat until that they be pulled. 
That private door, my Lord, I now perceive
Was made by him.
My Lord, remember you
The Ring you spied upon his finger once,
Then think upon the door.
You made us toss the rushes
And seek the Jewel, did you? Speak, what art thou
That thus hast gulled the Duke?
I am a Prince,
And every way thy equal.
I would to heaven it were no worse.
He is no less my Lord, receive him then to grace.
Of Whence?
Verona.
Mine enemy.
Was it not a friendly part
To lodge your only child so near my heart?
My Lord, remember he once saved your life,
And even for that deserves me for his wife.
Now as a friend a friendly League I crave,
Take not away what you so freely gave.
I will pause upon it, although it be past help,
And see what we may punish, what forgive;
But now my only comfort is stored up
In the fair Duchess, if she gain her health— 
And here she comes, I cannot choose but fear
So long as I behold you Ghost so near.
That Conjurer
Is a rare Artist that can raise a shadow
So like unto the Substance.
Fair Duchess, art thou recovered, speak?
Thank heaven I am.
It is well done to have heaven still in thy thoughts
Being so near a fiend, come from that Devil.
Fear not my Lord, I am so armed with faith,
And love withal, he hath no power to hurt me.
Art thou well?
Yes my Lord, I am well.
Come from him, but art thou very well?
Very well my Lord I thank you.
Perfectly well?
So well you cannot wish me better.
Come hither then.
I was of late but ill,
Then give me leave, my Lord, to keep my self
Well while I am well.
That's with me my Lord.
Can the Ghost speak too.
Speak, and talk, and walk,
Embrace and kisle.
I love no kissing Ghosts.
Believe me, that Magician was a man
Of rare experience, and deserves great praise.
Did he not say before what he should do,
That Ghost doth act his part exceedingly.
I say come from him, he's a spirit.
I do not love to do any thing but with a spirit.
He came out of hot hell.
He will make the warmer bedfellow.
Further than you have been, be not deceived my Lord.
That's far enough already.
I am the man I seem, no Architector,
But Cousin to that noble Gentleman
Prince Prospero, of the Duke Verona's Court,
That for this Duchess love have thrust my self
Into this imminent danger, as the Prince
Hath done the like for his Valentia;
You promised me if I could cure this Lady,
The next thing I demanded, her I crave,
Whom if I truly merit let me have.
I have been gulled on all sides, nor will I
Put up these injurious wrongs, you both shall dye— 
To arms, to arms my Lord, for I descry
A potent Army marching before our walls,
And by their Colours flying they should be of Verona.
Be they from whence they will we'll parley them;
Admit their General to an interview 
To know their cause of Arms— 
Our Clinic turned a Soldier I
Noble Father I crave your pardon.
I the like my Lord.
Stand on our party then whilst I debate
Our purpose with this Duke; these Arms we levied
With no intent of wrong to Mantua,
But to secure our Son, and this his friend,
We do protest it is no work of ours
That he is married, neither did we wished▪
But since by heaven and fate they are united,
We rather wish they may their Loves enjoy,
Than what heaven seems to applaud we should destroy.
To plead in Arms 〈◊〉 best way to prevail,
Where still the weak'st must yield; since our own blond
Hath had an equal share in this our wrong,
Why should we envy strangers, we will strive
From the worlds eye to hide this ominous scarre;
Heaven offers peace, why should we threaten war?
Each where they love join hands.
Our hearts.
A sweet Conclusion.
And now Madam Isle make you amends for mocking you.
Great men are sometimes gulled, but that's not common,
You have done more, for you have gulled a woman.
Your Son, Verona, and his friend hath much
Outstripped us by their wit, but the best is
We are not gulled alone,
You see your greatness is no privilege
From those that have quick brains, but now all friends;
Verona we embrace, and thus atone
All our difsentions; Marriage shall conclude
What Arms hath menaced; our united Dukedoms
Since by this happy fate they are agreed,
We'll strive which most in bounty shall exceed.

FEed my dear Sheep, faithful Companions feed
Through all those verdant plains from danger freed;
Thanks to my Shepherdess, we now be∣hold
An Age, as glorious as that Age of Gold.
But on the Gilliflowers, and Roses feed,
That spring in every place, where She doth tread;
Taste without fear, no food so sweet will prove,
Against Wolves; your Centinel's the God of Love;
He loves what She affects, and kindly looks
Upon her faithful Shepherd and his Flocks.
Flocks, which long since being marked for his own,
Feel no diseases, that in Sheep are known.
Charity, thou fair Shepherdess, whom we
Adore, the flower and choice of all in Brie:
How powerful thine eyes! how bright! how fair!
By which, thus to keep Sheep, thy Lovers are
Constrained! compared to their bright sparkling rays,
The Sun it self a gloomy light displays▪
Whose weaker Beams are but Reflexions vain,
When those of thy bright eyes begin to reign.
Therefore, poor Sun, thy fault's beyond compare,
That still presum'st to illuminate the air;
Quit, quit that care to the Object I adore,
Thy shame unto the world expose no more:
Lie close within the Seas, nor day, nor night
Thy Crystal Palace quit, nor Amphitrite.
But since thou wilt go on—it is best for me
To feast my self with this frugality.
Feed, feed my pretty Lambs, while I like you
Thus sitting on the grass, the same will doe.
Pan guard thee Shepherd, whither art thou going?
Art thou disposed to taste our Sheepherds fare?
I have some other fruits within my pouch,
And those we'll share, and feast the best we can:
And if we thirst, the River is not far.
Pray take your place.—
I thank ye, Isle not eat,
I have no stomach,—but good Sir, resolve me,
What great, important business brings you hither?
I like thy freedom, and I love thee for it:
To be inquisitive doth argue Wit,
And Curiosities when the are discreet.
O no more complement!—what art thou prithee?
What am I? Sure thou can not but discern:
Shepherd (I thank God Pan) I am a Shepherd—
But what remote Country dost thou inhabit
That art thus ignorant of the affairs of Brie?
For though thy garments differ much from mine,
I guess thou art a Shepherd too.
It is true,
I am indeed so, and perhaps to morrow
I shall more plainly show you what I am,
In the mean time, may I know your condition?
I'm too good Natured to deny thee that.—
Sit down.
Who ever saw such extravagance?
For thy sake, I'll put up my fruits again,
To me the Hour's indifferent, and you know
A good Discourse is better than a Feast,
Besides the brizes that refresh these plains,
Make the place very proper for our Story.
Know then that Love, (that Son of Chaos) who
So often doth disturb his mothers rest,
And were it not for whom we Sheepherds might
Scorn the felicity of greatest Kings,
This blind cleare-sighted God, this peevish Boy,
Endeavoured to enslave me from my youth:
But, knowing how he used to treat his Captives,
I still avoided that mischievous God;
And I had fooled him yet a thousand times,
If to subdue this heart so long assailed;
Finding that all his Forces were too weak,
He had not called Charity to his aide,—
Charity!—oh how that fair name doth ravish!
Shoe's fair then?
Fair? fair with Hyperbole,
Heap up a thousand fairest things together,
Think of the Lilies beauties, and of Roses,
And borrow for her eyes the Sun's bright rays;
Plant on each cheek the best Vermilion Dye,
Then with a faithful Pencil vively paint—(Scratches
Well Shepherd (to be brief) conclude her fair. his head)
Wonderful piece!
It was at Paris, where
Before I was a Shepherd I was taken.
And as she then took you, so you took her!
Could she hold out against so great deserts?
I shall not tell thee, what sweet Trances then
I felt, and with what Ecstasies transported,
Nor how to make her yielding to my sighs,
I died a thousand times, as oft revived,
I'll only tell thee, that my greatest bliss
Proceeded from a project which Love taught her.
Persuading her to come, and live in Brie,
Here to revive the ancient Sheepherds Life,
Some five or six days since she hither came,
And made my bliss that of the Gods exceed,
For truly I know none, so perfect, as
To live a Shepherd, and to sway the Crook.
Ther's neither Tree, nor Rock, in all these parts
Wherein we have not Character'd our Loves;
And were it not for one thing that I fear—
Dost thou fear ought?
Yes left some ugly Satire,
Lest some Goat-footed God, enamoured of her,
Find her alone, and maugre all her cries—
Fie, no, your Love's too apprehensive; here's
No Satire, but o'er whom I doe command,
Rest satisfied.
Doe you then give them Laws?
They know me well, and tremble under me.
Great Deity of these our sacred Groves▪
Accept the homage of thy prostrate Shepherd;
For it is to Pan I speak, who in my love
T'assist me, is thus purposely disguised,
Thy more than humane looks makes that too clear.
Pardon me that I knew thee not before;
Henceforth upon thy Sacred Altars, I
Will daily offer-store of Milk and Wine,
And every Month will choose the fattest Lamb
Of all my Flocks, to be thy Sacrifice.
What mean you Shepherd?
Suffer me this day;—
You injure Pan to worship Me for him,
Observe Me well; for such a Festival,
I doe both want his Horns, and cloven-feet.
Your mortal habit hides Divinity—
Ah Fool art there?
Cos Adrian! Is it you?
Yes it is, I'm tormented with thy follies;
Art thou come hither then to play thy pranks?
Would thou were it safe in the Hospital of Fools!
Peace; give me leave my reasons to allege,
(For that should be the refuge of us all)
This gracious Shepherd here shall be our Judge:
Deciv'd with his perfections I even now
Took him for Pan disguised like a mortal,
Nay—look you to it, he hath the countenance,
If not of Pan, of Mercury, or Cupped.
Oh Heaven! what Folly, what Extravagance!—
You blame the Sheepherds, but alas, too blindly;
Is any life more full of sweets than this?
Is not their Name, as ancient as the World?
And when Deucalion would mankind restore
Out of the first Stone he a Shepherd made.
And Kings of old (whom I am proud to follow)
Made their Sons Sheepherds, as the way to live.
The Gods, on Earth have often taken that habit,
And great Apollo kept Admetus Sheep,
And even those wandering Stars, we see above
Are Beasts, that feed within those shining plains▪
And who are fit to keep them but the Gods?
Then, for our Sheep, what is of greater worth?
We feed upon them, shear them, and receive
The yearly tribute of their wealthy fleeces.
And as they say (the more to be adored).
Jove once transformed himself into a Ram,
And Greece ne'er knew a nobler enterprise
Then when the Argonauts fetched home the fleece,
It is the first Sacrifice was made to Pan.
This is to let you know, (Cos Adrian)
That though the World revile it, yet to lead
Our Flocks to feed 's a noble exercise.
And to what serves your tedious noise of Cities?
Of Merchants, Officers, or Advocates?
Read Iulietta, and then tell me, if
Arcadia ever knew such names as these?
They all were Sheepherds, and lived free from care,
And I would have them here to be so governed.
Believe me (Cousin) leave your City trades,
Let us together dress our Pastures, bring
Your Wife, your Children,—here you'll live at ease:
She shall a Shepherdess, they Sheepherds be,
And we will all in perfect pleasures live,
And to the Bag-pipe, under Elms we'll dance.
Ah (Sir) you see, to what a strange excess
This poor Phrenetick Spirit is transported,
How much extravagance—
My dear Charity!
If thou dost kill me, give me life again!
While he talks to himself, be pleased to tell me
The hidden cause of that which troubles him,
I find his frantic fits, of a strange nature.
It's the issue of a vain, and cursed reading:
His Father was a Merchant and Citizen
Of Paris, and being rich, looked on him only,
And thinking to provide for him an Office,
To adorn his innocent, and harmless mind,
Cause him to Study, where all that he learned
Was to o'rethrow that little wit he had.
He read Romances only, and believed them,
Admired all the Sheepherds feigned adventures,
And his weak brain by those vain fables, did
So soon descend in the Air of Love, and Beauty:
That in a year or two he thus besotted
Would wilfully assume this present habit:
It was laboured with much reason to convince him,
But he still talked of Sheep, and of his Crook,
Yet studied more, but thought less of his office,
And though he still persisted in his frenzy,
Yet was it worse, when his good Father died:
The Romance of Astray was then published,
Where reading Hylas, and Sylvander's jars,
His brain being very soft in such a case,
He needs would be their judge, and hear them plead,
And so resolved to go into the Forests,
And, had not I still cause him to be followed,
He doubtless more had credited his book,
Than our advice. His Frenzy still continuing,
He oft would lock himself into his Chamber,
Where without let, pursuing his wilde fancies,
I've heard him act the Sheepherds part alone.
In fine, the Mode of these Romances ceasing,
His mind a long time seemed less distracted,
And certainly that Heat began to cool,
Had he not haunted Comedies last Winter:
When, earnest oft to see their Amaryllis,
H' again revived his thoughts of Flocks and Crooks.
He drew me too to see that cursed Play;
And cried at every line, O wonderful!
Scarce could he keep himself within his skin,
All seemed so ravishing, so rarely new:
Never was Man there, more intent than He,
It was Acted, and he there an hundred times,
So that embarked again by their lewd babbling,
And finding time to make his bundle ready,
And all trust up, he early in a morning
Came hither, thus to act his foolish part,
But I shall put such Fetters on him, that
He shall no longer thus dishonour us.
His humour's troublesome, but yet take heed
Lest your confining him should break his quiet▪
A Prison's terrible to soundest minds,
And the diseased it oft exasperates.
It is true; but what amendment can I hope?
If you'll advise with me, let him alone,
What dost concern you here? Y' are far from Paris,
Let him accomplish what he has designed,
Let him pursue this Sally of his thoughts,
Perhaps a week, or so, may cure his folly,
And he not finding in a Sheepherd's life,
The fancied pleasures that enticed him to it,
It may more easy prove to make him see
The error, which his books did first create.
Well, for a day or too I'll leave him then,
Although I came by chance into this place,
And have gone very far to find him out.
My affairs engage me to a quick return,
The are pressing, and of great importance to me.
Farewell; I'll have a care he shall not wander.
H' as left us here inestimable treasure:
Was ever fool of a more pleasant humour?
But what illusion's this surprises me?
What i'st? is all the world turned fool like him?
What! Clarimond it seems does hardly know me;
Oh Heavens! in what a shape dost thou appear?
I'st Anselme?
Yes I'm Anselme still for you.
But my Romantic Name is Polidore.
Do ye act a part in some new Comedy?
Or hath this Fool involved you in his follies?
You know him then?
Arrived here yesternight
I've almost learnt already his full story,
Himself did spend much time to inform me in it.
But there is one Charity much in's thoughs;
Who's that rare Object?
I'm pleased with this surprise:
You name Charity, and ask who she is.
What, is it that fair One now with Angelica?
Her Cousin?
The same: it is she that wounds him.
Being entangled in such easy chains,
Although his thoughts did err, his eye did not:
But since this beauty is the same Charity,
Whose merits I have oft proclaimed at Paris,
I'd gladly share the incomparable sport
This day to be a Shepherd, and his Rival,
Induced to this disguise by your example.
Faith do not wonder that you see me thus;
Tic Angelica's power over me.
Her service is so sweet a Law to me,
That knowing Pastorals did always please her,
I'm made a Shepherd, Charity a Sheepherdess,
She likewise acts her part, but one more gentle,
For her, among us, we have made a Nymph.
This needs must be as pleasant as tic rare;
But I must let her know what I intend,
She being a Nymph, we all must seem to court her.
Ah!—
What ail ye Shepherd?
It was a stretch of Love.—
I thought my soul was quitting its abode,
Musing upon that fairest fair Charity.
Indeed the are pleasant thoughts, and worthy of you,
But we must leave you in so sweet a rapture;
Farewell, the Heavens have care of what concerns you.
Courteous Sheepherds, Pan have you in his keeping▪
Fair Birds which daily in the Air do move,
And singing praise the Object of my Love,
What equal to her merits do you see?
What doe's this Fool alone? what are his thoughts?
But I to mutes in vain my speed apply,
I'd better speak to the Echo of these groves,
Who oft to reason with us Sheepherds love's.
I'll be his Echo, twill be a rare Scene.
Nymph I, of Love unheard-of torments, bear,
I've often spoke it, did thou never hear?
Here—
Good She replies:—but since my griefs, by chance,
Are known, how shall I cure their great abundance?
Dance—
Well sing or Whistle, and I'll dance with you:
Charity says she loves me,—is it true?
True—
But I can nought obtain, though I ne'er cease
T'entreat her ease the pains that me oppress.
Press—
Well said, I'll now believe thee, 't shall be done,
And to demand her aide I'll straitway run.
Run—
Farewell. So may thy minion every day,
Narcissus visit thee where ever thou stay.
Stay—
Stop me? did thou not say my torments by
Her sight should all be cured happily?
Ely—
Leave jesting, and my cruel pains abate,
What must I hope for then? her love or hate?
Her hate—
What shall I doe, alas, if weeping I
Cannot her mind appease? sad Tragedy!
Die—
But what death shall I choose, if, so abhorred
I beg her aide, and she will none accord?
A-cord—
A Cord? ah you surprise me now, you know,
I have no Cord, but that on Cupids bow:
Nymph, is not that the Cord for which you call?
Answer.
No it is a Cord to hang thy self withal.
Foolish, and sottish Nymph, you prate too much;
Whence comes this humour in you? are you drunk?
Or knowing you are less fair than my Charity,
Envy or shame hath made thee talk so fast.
I see her—my fair Star!
What are you doing?
Before a Goddess men ought thus to kneel,
And ever with all reverence receive
The influence of her Divine aspects.
No, Shepherd no, I hate all such respects,
These adorations may seem good at Paris,
But here men ought to live in a full freedom.
It is true, it was ever granted unto Sheepherds;
Oh high design, and rare, inspired by love!
To quit foul Paris for this pleasant place!
What a delicious life shall we enjoy?
The Gods themselves, the Gods do envy us.
Sometimes assembled, we shall laugh and dance,
Sometimes we shall retire again alone,
Sitting sometimes in shades, sometimes on Fern,
Where thou shalt call Me Shepherd, and I Thee
My Sheepherdess, and placing Love between us,
Play at a thousand pretty little games,
And sometimes gather—Charity—my soul—
Help—help thy Shepherd that's now swooning—ah—
Cruel dost thou recoil?
Have I not reason?
If you should swoon your fall may crush me too,
To me your body does not seem so light,
But that it well may hurt your Sheepherdess.
Go, you are inhumane, and I now perceive
You have no remorse for all the isle you have done me;
Thy heart's of Brass, Steel, Marble, and of Stone.
What have I done that merits this reproach?
Have I, that I should now be thus abused,
Provoked you by neglect, or have I scratched you?
Yes, but you have no sense (malignant Beauty)
The nails of your aspect do daily claw me.
And, the sharp rays of your so glittering looks
Have given me here a wound will ne'er be healed.
It is true; their force is somewhat terrible,
Yet do not think the wound's incurable;
Isle cure you—but farewell until anon.
Hard Anaxarete! art gone so soon?
See how thine Iphis grieves at thy departure.
I hast to find the Shepherdess Lucida,
The expect her at the Nymph's.—
Thou make me tremble!
Why dost thou aggravate so great a grief?
Do ye fear to see her?
Ah!—I've cause to fear,
No Shepherd hath more reason to complain,
I fly what me pursues, and love what flies me.
You still are angry when she follows you—
But oft disdain, conceals a real flame,
And y' are more tractable perhaps in private.
With her in private? no believe me, fair One,
The heart of Lysis is so chained to thee,
That thou shalt have it chaste, pure, and unmixed,
Entire: and sooner than Isle turn to change,
Or other beauty shall have power to ensnare me.
Rivers shall run revolted from the Seas;
Those liquid Courts shall want their Nayaedes
The Hamadriades, and the Fauns forsake
The Woods, and all the World new Orders take,
And Wolves against the Dogs our Flocks defend.—
This solemn Oath hath given me faith at once,
Farewell kind Shepherd.—
Sheepherds Farewell.
My heart's committed to you, have a care on it;—
Go my dear Lambs, seek Pasture farther off,
For Sol's too scorching rays by shining here,
Hath burnt the grass, and left these places bare.
A Little complaisance, and Sheepherds habit
Seem to engage you in designs of Love,
But pray no more of this disguise with me,
Impose not this constraint upon your self
And believe, without speaking more of Love,
Your word's sufficient to gain esteem.
Hath the mild violence of a love so pure
So little power to persuade you then?
And since your fair eyes set me all a fire
To avow it is complacency enough.
Thus credulous Spirits are too easy taken,
And though men are all Ice they'll swear they burn,
But this discourse of fire proves little heat;
The more you say, the less I do believe.
Your humour's contrary to Lovers hopes;
How can you know their flames if they keep silence?
And if they speak they are believed deceitful.
Love hath an idiom to explain it self
In the midst of silence, it speaks, and persuades,
And its least motion's filled with Eloquence.
One sigh oft in a moment utters much,
He must speak low whom th'heart not understands.
If the heart so well Love's language apprehend,
Would ye have clearer evidence of mine?
My heart hath sighed an hundred times near you,
My languishing as often hath declared it,
And daring not to express the wounds you gave me,
I oft strove to interpret with mine eyes;
But their sad looks could not express their story:
And, though some foolish hope may dare presume,
The cunningest sighs have but dumb Eloquence
If the heart consent not to its own surprise,
Nor can their correspondence well consist,
If Love persuade them not to lend an ear.
Then that's the cause I have not understood
What you pretend, your sighs have signified:
But two or three piping, and dying groans,
Have often proved false pleadings of true love,
And since you see I understand it not,
You happily do seek advantage by it.
Doubt not an Heart so subject to your Laws;
Be witness all you Trees within these Groves
How oft alas, there, seeking solitude,
I've entertained them with my sighs and groans,
How oft I've boasted of that glorious power,
Your eyes in secret practice on my soul.
How oft rehearsed the wounds their beams have given me.
When they tell me so, Isle believe my share.
Cruel, is this then all that I can now—
Hircan's my Brother, I depend on him.
Judge better of my flame, and know though it is
Extreme, twill ow your heart to none but you:
And that twill use in the pursuit none but—
Peace Montenor, the company is coming.
Sheepherds believ't my joy's beyond compare,
To see you so well act the Sheepherds part;
Blush not Lucida, Phillis and Lycidas,
Were often wont to single out each other,
And great Diana ne'er refused to talk
With Paris, or Syliander from the rest.
You make a just construction, yet I doubt
Who ere accuses me, may do the same,
If Polidor's discourse had pleased you less,
You would perhaps have sooner found us out.
Sister, she hits you home with her reply.
Sh'as reason, I confess, for what she says:
Our coming sooner might have more disturbed ye,
Had he had nothing private to say to me.
Thus may all four (methinks) live full content,
Mean while I have my share among ye too,
While sweets on sweets are heaped up for you,
I'm fain to entertain my self with thoughts.
Yet we are taught to understand thy worth,
Whose beauty has, this day, begot such Rivals.
Build not so much upon another ruin,
My time perhaps may come as well as yours.
I were an Infidel if I should doubt it,
Since Clarimond becomes a Shepherd for thee.
Knowing, that for my sake, our fool thus sighs,
He ought at least to swear it for laughters sake.
Yet faith, let him dissemble as he please,
We'll see at last how well he will escape.
Thou never speak to thine own disadvantage.
I hate the foolish use of a false virtue;
Who from himself expects nought, nought receives.
Methinks our Rival-Sheepherds tarry long.
It is here that Lysis leads his Flock to feed,
And we shall see him here ere it be long.
He has a Language may be called his own.
His discourse heretofore was less unsmooth,
But since he Virgil read, in Bombast verse,
His Tongue is laden with Fantastic Words,
And thinks that all the Gods speak just the same,
And concludes that the best of Dialects▪
He has an empty skull.—
So dull a head!
That he could not discern me by my voice,
When I instead of Echo answered him.
Can he endure your jesting, being mad?
But—hist,—I hear him sing.
Pray hide your selves,
And be spectators of our raillery;
Isle give him now his belly-full of Love.
Nay hold, pray first let's hear his courtly Air.
When Love to two united hearts,
The sweets of prudent flames imparts,
How pleasant it is the Crook to bear!
How sweet of Sheep to have the care!
Thus sitting by a Crystal brook,
A Shepherd sung, whom love had struck,
To love a Shepherdess how sweet!
How pleasant it is when Loves do meet.
Fair object of my flames, and my misfortune,
May this day prove more blessed to Thee than Me!
In vain thy flame, troublesome Sheepherdess,
Doth claim a compliment, not meant to thee.
When wilt thou cease, thus to make War upon me?
And lay aside these scorns that break my heart?
When Elms shall the embrace of Ivy fly,
And rav'nous Wolves with Lambs live peacefully.
Though thy severity doth still increase,
Isle be the same that ever I professed.
Ixion heretofore embraced a Cloud,
And so Lucida may embrace the Wind.
The raging Seas at last will leave their fury,
So may thy hatred have a time to cease.
As Rocks unshaken stand against those billows,
So is my heart unmoved by thy love.
For Pan's sake, Shepherd, and the Hamadriads,
Refuse me not a civil entertainment.
If they the maladies of Love can cure,
The had best go offer up thy vows to them.
Among Scythians fierce, at thy Nativity,
Thy heart was filled with Ice, nothing can thaw it.
Derive me (if thou wilt) from Caucasus,
So thou no more disturb me with thy Love.
May thy best Sheep be left a prey to Wolves,
If thus to rigour thou expose my Soul!
I'll suffer them to come within my folds,
When thou shalt have possession of my heart.
Thou Tiger, nursed up by a Tigress fierce,
Thy proud disdain will open me my grave.
So far am I from a design to kill thee,
I never had a thought to touch thy skin.
Thou dost distract my soul, and thy sharp talons,
Soon as I see thee, tear it into pieces.
I know not how to patch up a torn soul,
And, prithee, what should I do with the pieces?
You may cement them but with one sweet word,
And from an Hell of woes raise me to Heaven.
If such a thing as that can cure thy folly,
Of Honey, or of Sugar take thy choice.
Grant either of them to my constancy,
Of Hope the Sugar, of thy Faith the Honey.
If thy fond constancy do Honey need,
Farewell—you must seek other Bees than Me.
Stay thou bright Torch of my too amorous life,
Suffer my flames at least to live in hope.
Thy life's in danger to be wondrous dark,
If I'm the Torch that must enlighten it.
If for thy high deserts, that name's too low,
Se thou Apollo, and vouchsafe to cure me.
Thanks to thee (Sylvia) I must be gone;
If I'm the Sun I must be ever running.
Whither so fast, good Shepherd?
Prudent Nymph,
I'm in Retreat before mine Enemy.
Will not Lucida speak to us to day?
No, let her stay a while behind those bushes,
And give her time to recollect her Soul
From the trouble of her late rejected flame.
She then persists to persecute you still.
Any but Lysis would be tempted by her,
But though her love of me doth still afflict her,
Charita's still Charity, she Lucida.
And since my Shepherd all contemns for me,
He has most really my heart, and faith,
Our souls are both possessed with equal flames.
Truce to these sweets a while—you ravish me!
Oh.—
Sigh ye?
Sheepherdess my care—
It is a precaution that I thus doe sigh,
Lest too much ardour should at once surprise me,
And I soon find my heart reduced to ashes,
By the too active flames of my desires.
Did not the Air of these my sighs refresh it.
Why talk ye with the Honour of our plains?
We talk of Meddows, pastures, and of Flocks,
We must dissemble—
And we likewise talk
Of that fair shining eye, that cause my grief,
Yes, of thine eye divine, thou charming beauty!
Such language, Shepherd, does affront your Mistress,
The brightness of her eyes, you see's not common,
They both can charm, and yet you praise but one.
What Rapsodie of love doth make you talk so?
Why I assume the language of the Poets.
This style to them was ever held peculiar,
I purposely, like them, spoke but of one,
But yet with no design to offend my fairest;
For either of those Suns afford me light,
And when I swear her fair ey's skilled to charm,
I speak no more of the left than of the right
What say you now Nymph?
It is a prudent answer.
Silence!—I hear far off a Bagpipe's sound.—
Oh how melodious!—
It is by a young Shepherd,
Who not long since arrived from a strange Country.
It is true, his habit's different from ours.
To live amongst us he assumed another,
He's here.
You then desire, gentle Shepherd,
Henceforth to dwell with us, in these fair Plains?
Your change of Habit makes me so presume.
I'm come for cure of my consuming flames.
Shepherd, I then perceive you are in love.
Ah—it is too true, I languish night and day;
But say (I pray) before I tell my story,
Doe I not talk with the Nymph Angelica?
Yes, if on her depends your Remedy,
She's ready here to give you all assistance.
Great Drudge! famed for thy mirac'lous art,
I here attend thy Oracles effects!
Love make thee now propitious to my fires!—
What charming object forced from you that sigh?
Alas! that I dare not presume to tell you
Shepherd, you may, nor fear to hurt,
All here partake already of your grief.
I adore her in Idea though unknown.
Not know her?
Hear the story of my life,
My name is Philiris, in Arcadia born.
That Country always fruitful was in Sheepherds;
But to heare't better, let us all sit round,
It is the Pastoral Order.
Take your place.—
Here's green Turf.—
Oh my dear Sun—for Heaven's sake,
Mod'rate thy Rays, or thou wilt quite consume me.
Come now (Sir) all are silent, you may speak.
Know them great Nymph, and you fair shepherdess,
You gentle Sheepherds—such are my misfortunes—
In that blessed Climate where I first took birth,
Pan is less feared than is the God of Love:
For that no Hearts, no Sheepherds are so great,
Whom that fierce Tyrant doth not make his Slave:
(And would to the just Heavens that I could dobut
Whether his yoke be easy to be born)
But yet admire by what strange prodigy
My freedome's subject to his cruel laws;
Sitting one day beneath a shady Elm,
Free from all care, although I kept my Flock,
Surprised with sleep, congested beams of light,
Deprived my senses of their wonted vigour,
And then discovered to my blinded eyes,
A precious treasure of unheard-of charms:
A Sheepherdess, in whom the Graces seemed
To choose their places, as if there enthroned
A lovely Arrogance, a noble State
Seemed sweetness there to join with Majesty
Ne'er did the Gods in a more noble frame,
See forth the Image of their Deity:
Oh—Nymph—I saw her, judge then how I loved her,
How with those sudden flames my heart was fired;
And what strength the surprise of my sense
Could leave me, to resist her charms assaults!
But sad Catastrophe! when day was ended,
I found my Error so, but not my Love.
My soul possessed of so great rarities,
When I awaked still kept their strong Idea,
But so confusedly, that I never could
Retrive the Object, where those Beauties shined,
Yet still I loved that imperfect Idea.
Here did my freedom find its overthrow,
And from that instant I am so in love,
That I have no esteem for other objects.
Thus forced to love, and without hope of comfort,
I am constrained to burn, and yet be silent.
But though this sad constraint augments my pain,
I must detect the secrets of my heart:
A famous Drudge, that when he is private,
Seems daily to interpret Destiny:
Was the Oracle Divine, that by these words,
First gave my wav'ring spirit some repose.
Rejoice sad Shepherd, the Decree
Of Fate, shall soon accomplished be
Within the Realm of Lilies, near
The Banks of Marne, a Nymph thou there
Shalt find, Angelica by name,
Discover unto her thy flame,
Open unto her thy Heart,
The strange Original impart
Of this thy fire, then to thine eyes
The light of a new Day shall rise,
That soon the sacred Beauty shall discover,
Whose Image in thy Dream made thee a Lover.
But Gods! What see I now? What rays of light,
That in an instant thus unseal mine eyes?
Oh Sheepherdess, it is you that thus have charmed me,
Your wonderful Idea it was thus inflamed me:
You are the lovely object of my sighs,
You who—
Soft, Shepherd, you are pleased to say so,
Go to Arcadia there to act your Trances:
Charity is my Mistress.
And mine too.
This heat is very quick.
Yet it is extreme.—
Pity thy self, for Heaven's sake honest Shepherd,
If I'm thy Rival, what hope's left for thee?
Some promise to themselves more than they get.
My flame as the more ancient shall prevail.
That which I feel is full as great as thine:
Tic more than three years since my heart was wounded.
Gods how this wonder does amaze my thoughts!
What says Lucida?
The Shepherd does deserve
For all these services Charita's love,
And to possess her heart.
What you plead for him?
Ah—Nymph, I die, at least am very near it—
To lose no time in frivolous disputes,
Let's see what deeds will answer all these words,
My passion prompts me to a glorious project;
Charity is the object of our Loves,
And both of us sigh equally for her;
And since the cause of our dispute's so fair,
Let Combat here decide it in her sight,
And show which of us doth deserve her best,
She shall be judge.
Agreed, it shall be so.
Renounce her for a few dry bangs of the Crook?
You will be Conqueror.
I do not doubt it,
If thy fair eye stand second to mine arm:
Pan give the victory to my boundless love,
And I will hang his Crook between thy Horns!
Shepherd prepare thy self—
But what means this.
A sword? Art mad thus to defend thy self?
T'enjoy Charity you must take my life:
Think of death only.
I have no such thought.
I'm a Shepherd of Honour, and no Murderer:
Besides, though I were ne'er so stout in fight,
What can my Shepherd arm against a sword?
Courage brave Shepherd, I will make 'em equal,
Too happy to oblige the best of Lovers.
Oh Villain Sheepherds with their iron tools!
Here take this sword.
Not I.
Desperate Lysis,
Refuse a Combat for Charita's sake!
Why all the world must know this cowardice!
And why? I've heart enough to serve my turn:
But—
But what?
What need ye press me farther?
Isle not infringe our customs for a world.
What custom is it you mean?
Where can you show me,
That ever any Sheepherds fought with Swords?
Yes, once Filander for Diana fought.
True, to secure her from profane assaults;
But yet he fought with Slings, and to his cost.
W'ave said too muh t'excite this Sheepherds valour;
His want of love appears to fair Charity,
For his refusal gives her up, and quits her.
Brave stranger, come the victory is yours.
How much that sweet Decree makes me your Debtor▪
And thou ungrateful Shepherd that dost fear
To shed one drop of thy ignoble blood,
And durst not hazard for thy Love that little
Was wanting, to overcome and to possess her:
Go, it's apparent now thou were a Traitor;
Dare not to come hereafter in our sight.
Sheepherds let's go.
Ah cruel-hearted Nymph!
Than Myrmidon, or Dollop more fell.
Farewell sad Shepherd.
Ah what dost thou say?
The sentence being past we must subscribe.
Dost thou forsake me then?
I'm in despair;
Yet may the Gods permit us meet again:
In th'mean time die not, but live still assured,
Thou ne'er shalt see thy Rival in thy place.
Flatter my woes at least by sighing for me.
I grieve for both of us—but no more sighs;—
My heart is so locked up I cannot do it.
Oh of all fair Ones the most unrelenting!
Perhaps you suffer least in this our parting:
Farewell—Pan comfort and dwell ever with thee.
Let's yield to Fate and satisfy her rage,
And end our days within some salvage den:
Farewell ye dearest places, and my flocks,
Which feeding I have left on yonder hill,
Y' enamelled meadows, which too apt to please,
Have furnished me with flours to adorn my Love:
And pleasant streams farewell, despairing Lysis
In the horror of these Woods will ever dwell.
Good Gods! how thick, how dark it is! I think
No Shepherd ere its silence did disturb:
Hence all profane—take heed you come not near;
I fear to touch them as I cross these bushes—
Oh—they are the rustling leaves—I think I see
A man that walks there with a staff in's hand,
And murmuring to himself, does seem to read.
Doubtless it is a Druid skil'd in Magic—
I must accost him.
Great and learned Druid,
If that divinity, that here presides,
Did ever comfort an unhappy Shepherd,
Vouchsafe thine aide to offer him my vows.
This certainly's that Fool wed's Pastoral life,
Whose pleasant madness is so much discoursed.
May thou be so content as thy offered vows
Ought to be heard, by those great Gods I serve,
Haesus and Taramis are to Sheepherds kind.
I 'mbrace the happy auspices to see you,
And for so rich a blessing thank my fate:
Deign then to cast your eyes on a poor Lover,
Ell's possible to you, move but your staff,
And nature straight is subject to your Laws.
He takes me for a conjurer. Isle comply
With his mistake—Shepherd all shall be well;
Thy griefs shall be redressed what ere they be,
All things give way to this mysterious charm,
Ask, and be sure I can do any thing.
No Sheepherd's so unfortunate as I,
By the fatal sentence of a cruel power,
I'm banished from the house of Angelica;
So lose Charity, and must never dare
Henceforth, so much as to approach those walls.
And is it this banishment that so afflicts thee?
Was ever Lover more severely punished!
I, in despair of aid, entered these Woods,
Against me to provoke the Bears and Tigers.
But if by Magic skill, you shall vouchsafe
To let me see my Love at Angelica's,
By rendering me invisible or transformed.—
This is the easiest secret of my Art:
All w'ave to do is to disguise your sex,
To cheat the Nymph, and see your Sheepherdess
Take women's habit, and go thither weeping,
Require them to relieve your great misfortunes,
Fain that the fatal influence of your stars.—
This Metamorphosis is very Past'rall:
So once Austraea did embrace Alcais,
Not knowing that it was Celadon disguised.
But to appear a Maid indeed, how shall I
Be rid of this excrescence of my beard?
How shall I this correct?
That's a slight Scruple;
Oh—let thy beard alone, fear nothing, I
Can by my Art give thee the countenance
Of a young Shepherdess, extremely fair.
Thy maine so modest, and thy port so taking!
Charity scarce can be a minute from thee.
Then judge thy happiness, shoe's sure thine own.
What privilege shall I have thus disguised?
I am impatient till it be accomplished.
Let's to my Palace to begin the work.
I See at length that Lysis company
Hath power to draw you from your solitude,
Allowing us excuse for our disguises,
While you partake of our divertisement.
I must confess his folly is so pleasant,
It much exceeds all that is spoken of him:
For my part I much wondered when I saw
My Sister was a Shepherdess for him,
And certain pastimes which she then pursued,
Scarce could I yield to such a low design.
But things unknown with injury are censured:
And Lice▪ humour is so pleasing to me,
That were not by's error pre-engag'd,
I could resolve to take the Crook up too;
But yet I hope to make you all confess,
There is some pleasure in a Druid's part.
You only study then to come off well;
In Comedies variety is pleasant,
And I am confident this will be so.
Some Sheepherds, I a Nymph, you Conjurer.—
But yet it is! have made the best adventure.
Yes doubtless, it will be an excellent Scene,
When to appear a Maid hee I thanked enough,
To imitate the Gestures, and the Habit.
Yet I did nothing, but with Ceremony,
I prayed to Tharamis, invoakt his Genius,
Then casting round my eyes to every place,
Thrice to the East I fixed my countenance,
And thus with a grimm look without ought else,
Removed all obstacles to Transmutation.
The Shepherd is disguised without suspicion,
And the better to assist me to delude him;
The Metamorphosis was finished, as
Montenor with my Sister did arrive,
Who instantly perceiving my design,
So well reserved their countenance, they treat
Him for a Maid without the last suspicion:
And thus out enterprise succeeded rarely.
Faith you provide us very excellent sport.
Il't ravish not, at least, twill make ye laugh;
But now to personate the Shepherdess,
Fair Nymph, you know what tic we have to doe.
Yes, I know well of what me must accuse him:
Sure he will be very desperate in's defence,
When I to aid him shall employ my engine,
The Hall is most convenient for the purpose;
〈◊〉 troubles, represented here,
〈◊◊〉 pretty lights to my invention.
I thought I'd lost ye, and was much perplexed.
We took the Air upon the Fountain's side,
While you and Hircan have resolved how
Extravagant Lysis must be entertained.
And did the breath of Zephyrus delight ye?
My Sheepherdess did make it pleasant to me.
Your cares are constant.
Do ye wonder at it?
Did ever any see me, and forsake me?
Clarimond gives good evidence of that.
To whom more justly could he render homage?
I dare engage with less baits heretofore,
Fauns were from Woods by Shepherdesses drawn.
I have a quick, sweet look—
And a vain humour.
Not without reason, I come from the Fountain,
Whose moving Crystal since I have consulted,
A little vanity may be allowed me.
Sure it flattered
Not so much as you think,
But guess whom I am like in our Romances:
What's rare, there by a Past'rall pencil drawn,
Is all but Copy I'm the Original,
In this disguise I'm nothing but is lovely,
I surpass Philis, if not equal Astrea.
You highly prize your self in my opinion.
Charity is too fair to speak otherwise,
The best of Beauties may commend it self.
So wise a Druid; Who would not believe?
I credit but my heart in this great Truth,
But as you've no defects, so be not cruel:
And to my perfect love vouchsafe to grant
A favour to adorn my Crook—this shall
Suffice—
What doth this Shepherd from Arcadia?
Expressly come to honour you in Brie,
And you refuse him that? You're strangely cruel.
Can he complain? I give when he demands.
Willingly?
Yes, frankly Philiris, without disguise,
Provided Clarimond have no share in it.
Why that Reserve so contrary to my vows?
Explain your self for Love-sake.—
It needs not.
But in fine—
No more, here's Montenor.
Well gentle Shepherd.
Sister do you think
the Shepherdess is come to see you?
brings her—and you fair Charity—
I pray prepare your self to entertain her.
Be confident I will doe what I can;
He is confirmed then of his Transformation.
He relies wholly upon Hircan's skill
We then shall see the effects: Where left ye him?
Some thirty paces hence I came before.
Isle go then and prepare what's to be done.
It's very necessary I withdraw,
Lest if he find me here, he should suspect
My art, that hitherto has hit so well.
I must appear like a Magician here.
That you may then avoid him, go this way,
I hear Lucida's tongue, the are in the court.
What do you ow to this excess of Love?
In Pastorals I shall be very famous.
Anselm knows nothing of this Raillery.
He'll be surprised then with the more delight.
Let's here our Sheepherdess's complement.
See, there she is.—
A very comely person!
Fie laugh no more, in faith you'll spoil the Scene:
All contain your selves.
Fair Nymph to whom the Gods
The most mysterious Secrets doe impart;
In this unhappy Maid you see the Signs
Of griefs, which they have destined you to heal.
Thus saith great Hircan; and I took the care,
(Following his order) to conduct her hither.
She is most welcome from so great a Druid.
You much oblige a distressed Sheepherdess,
Who will conclude her cruel fate most mild,
If she may have that blessing to be with you;
And that is all she begs.
Grant her desire;
To live among us Nymph she is prepared,
If you love our content refuse her not,
Most taking person!
She has excellent features
What you say nothing?
I know what I think:
My debt to you imposed this silence on me.
No, Philiris may even do what he please,
And yet he must be just to this rare beauty,
That excellently fair, deserves his homage,
See what quick beams are scattered from her face,
What eyes more fair ere captivated hearts?
Fair Shepherdess, pray spare my modesty,
You'll else soon raise Vermilion on my cheeks.
So fair and perfect, all must needs commend you.
Far short of meriting such Eulogies.
I'm but a Star compared to that bright Sun.
Perhaps you would boast more of your perfections,
Did you spend fewer tears in their possession.
And what sad object can provoke her tears?
To understand it Nymph, hear my misfortunes.
If the injurious Star that ruled my birth,
Had always had for me kind influence,
I had appeared here in as high condition,
As splendour of illustrions blood allows.
For I was born a Dam'sel (thanks to Heaven)
As you now see me reasonably fair,
And such, that truly from my youngest years,
I won the hearts of many thousand servants.
(Sad memory, which only serves t'afflict me!)
I was styled every where fair Celimena,
And by that famous name did sweetly ravish,
Eclipsing many beauties that then shined;
But cruel Atropos killing my Father, I
Was soon constrained to be a Shepherdess:
I needs must yield to force, and then assumed
To please my Tyrants, the name of Amarillis,
Poor Amarillis, whom miseries in Troops,
Pardon my sighs that intercept my voice.
I can no farther go.—
A pretty story.
She and my Brother have agreed to this.
But—this my form, to me alone unhappy,
Unchanged beheld the sad change of my fortune,
So far from leaving me in this new habit,
That tic fame filled all our villages,
All praised to envy, the new Sheepherdess:
Every one strove to see me, and to please me.
Happy till now—but on—this high report
I wited three foul Satyrs from the Woods,
The infamies of whose lascivious loves
Were echoed every day through all our streams,
And these, to violate my chastity,
Dogged me in every place to ravish me;
And as last night I to the Fountain went,
Without the Shepherd Feline, in their snares
They caught me—This hath cast me at your feet,
These foul Goat-footed Fiends, the Nymphs obey:
Purge then from that base race ore sacred Groves;
Their whole employment is dishonourable.
All that they do's injurious and immodest.
Preserve the same of my Virginity:
Once, twice, and thrice on this I do depend:
Purge me from Satyrs, and I shall be spotless.
Your fate is cruel—but yet cease to grieve,
You here have met with a safe Sanctuary:
The highest insolence, within this palace
Dares not attempt your Chastity; live here,
From trouble free, Charity shall take care
Of those diversions are needful for you,
Will you accept of her good company?
Her affability speaks so high for her,
That instead of refusing I will strive
To follow her, as shadows do their bodies,
And night and day, if I'm so blessed, to please her.
Do ye doubt it, fair and virtuous Sheepherdess?
How all my senses are transported! thus
To be possessed of Amaryllis heart!
This glorious Model of supremest Beauty!
This Star!—
Reserve these titles for your self;
If any thing in me seems radiant here,
It is by reflection of your eyes, fair Sun!
If you talk more, by these your kindnesses,
You'll rob me of my Mistress heart, I fear:
Come it is enough.
Indeed you may be jealous,
Having gained Amaryllis I scorn you.
By this you may oblige me to change too.
To enjoy an Angel, I shall lose a Mortal.
Is then my service of so little value?
Let us end this discourse. Here's Polidore.
We complained Shepherd of your too long absence.
In that I'm honoured, and if I dispense—
But O ye Gods!
What Shepherd, you're surprised?
What is it that troubles you so suddenly?
A sudden brightness having struck my sight,
My senses all are charmed, my soul disturbed!
What Sheepherdess is that?
Do ye not know
The late felicities prepared for us?
And that fair Amaryllis hath made choice
Of these our coasts, to embrace the care of flocks?
Most glorious coasts! oh spend here all your days;
The Spring to please you here shall ever reign,
Many new Flowers in the plains shall rise.
Excuse me, for I talk to my Companion;
Having heard nothing, I shall answer nothing.
In fine, pray let's know wherefore we lost you,
What business made you dis-appear so long?
I was extremely troubled for poor Lysis,
Lest after your Decree fatal despair
Might make his Rival happy in his death;
So to prevent his violence on himself,
I ran thorough all the Woods with extreme care,
But can learn nothing of him, and I fear
The streams of Marne have finished his fate.
So after less injustice Celadon
Sought in the floods of Lignon a Precipice;
Doubtless hoe's dead—oh this guilty beauty!
But you're too quick thus to conclude him dead.
A secret horror which doth seize my mind
Of this sad accident's a sure presage
To me, that he is drowned—oh envious fates!
The goodness of the Gods could not permit it.
He'll be their care, believe it Shepherdess;
He hath found necessary aid, Isle warrant,
Some Nymph or other will restore him to you.
Alas, my dear Companion, I've lost all,
He doubtless did deserve a better end,
For of all Sheepherds he was the most faithful.
His name was brought even to our Villages,
Where all extolled him for's fidelity.
Dear Amaryllis, had you known him, he
Was the most perfect Shepherd Heaven ere saw,
His extreme mildness, grace, and his demeanour,
Would have constrained you to have wished him well,
He gained all hearts!
For Love sake be contented.
You lose a Lover, and I fill his place,
The homage which I pay to your divine.—
Away vile Shepherd speak no more to me;
Thy journey from Arcadia cause my grief,
Destroyed my quiet and my Sheepherds life,
Into these floods that drown my happiness:
Thou, and thy love did me precipitate.
Mod'rate thy passion.
Dost thou desire it? Then
Remove thy presence from my just displeasure.
Ever so full of rigour?
It is resolved.
Thus to endure unjust disdains too much.
Ungrateful Shepherdess, respect till now,
Made me suppress my flame, now 't must break forth,
And I affirm, to brave your fury, that
My heart and eyes are sensible as yours.
Fair Amaryllis, the mildness of your charms,
Force me with pleasure thus to yield my self,
I break your former chains to obey your laws:
What, you look down? Give me at least an answer;
Allow some hope unto my amorous soul.
Maids are ashamed to hear discourse of love,
Approve my silence, or else change your Theme.
Oh wonder! Beauty fatal to my rest,
How from those Rosie lips one kiss obtained,
Would ease the Wounds which that fair eye hath given me!
Keep your designs in bounds of honesty:
You injure much my modesty, I ought
To keep my self as chaste as is Diana.
One kiss is lawful; What power interdicts it?
I and Charity mutually may kiss,
Without the censure of incontinence,
This sign of love to us is lawful, but
To kiss a Shepherd who doth authorize it?
Yet having none but chaste designs for you,
I sure may swear it upon these fair hands.
Away Profane, thy fault's without compare,
You may as well a Vestal touch as me.
You lose respect Sir.—
I confess I do.
But who knows what he does, that dies for love?
You ought—but Gods! how is my soul confounded?
Mine eyes deluded, or I see a Satyr.
Be not amazed, fair Nymphs, that we do now,
To haunt your Palaces, forsake our Woods,
Friends of Tautates, and Demi-Gods of Nature.
We soon perceived that we were injured,
And hither we are come with just displeasure,
To demand justice for your selves and us.
Against whosoere it be you shall receive it:
From Amaryllis snares we would secure you.
My snares? what's that you filthy ugly Lecher?
Pray, without injury, let's hear him out.
The false report of that perfidious soul
Made you believe that she is chaste, as fair▪
And that that glorious Lamp, which gives us light,
If he shine brighter, yet he is less pure;
But we must tell you, her incontinence,
With great God Pan, till now hath past in silence,
And our respect made us endure it, as loath
To speak of it, at all, to her dishonour;
But since with too much vice displeasing him,
She with the God Sylvanus was surprised,
And with a Faun too in Adultery,
She hath armed your indignation against us,
Deceiving you by a base Artifice:
We therefore hither came to beg your justice.
Then answer Shepherdess.
My heart even bleeds:
How have I sinned? What fault have I committed?
This plot is laid by envy against my virtue:
Thus Phoedra ruined chaste Hyppolytus.
Guilty or not, since they accuse you, we
Must purge you from suspicion for our honour.
Oh Christian Chastity, clear Innocence!
With this attempt, alas, they vow my ruin.
Such crimes as this were never disavowed,
But instantly they offered proofs by fire.
You Nymph do understand our Country's laws,
And to what end the sacred Plate's ordained:
Then let her touch it burning, we shall see
If that chaste and pure fire will spare her body.
What say Barbarian?
Dear soul of my soul!
Expose thee Amaryllis to the fire?
Leave me to dissipate their wild suspicions;
Thus chaste, I safe can walk on burning▪ coals.
This ancient custom, although rigorous,
Was never yet injurious to the oppressed;
If wrongfully accused, the fire will clear you.
Why should I reverence this unjust law?
No, Amaryllis falsely thus accused,
Shall ne'er be subject to it, Isle first die:
Let's see who dares accuse her?
How bold Shepherd!
Will you provoke the anger of the Gods?
In this condition I fear not their anger:
My Gods, are my fair Shepherdess, and Love,
And rather than lose her, they may oblige me.—
Take hence this insolent Shepherd from my sight;
Satyrs away with him.
Heavens! Earth revenge!
The oppress him that defended innocence.
Unhappy maid! they envy that thou livest.
Aid me, sage Hircan, wisest Hircan aid!
Strange Lightning!
Where shall be my Sanctuary?
I cannot stir I am so full of fear.
Thus by me Horror through these places flies,
And I those dangers break to which fates throw
Thee Amaryllis, raise thine eyes,
And the Author of thy Transmutation know;
Since every day they threaten thee,
I in my flying chair come to thine aid;
Behold! how thy Foes insolence is staid,
And see how my approach they flee,
And how the fears of death do make
Their vanquished fury all its force forsake!
Vouchsafe, illustrious and learned Judge,
To free me from a trial forced upon me.
I know it but little could their force prevail,
For thou art chaste, and hast overcome the fire.
Yes, I as Amaryllis, had prevailed;
But having once consulted with my soul,
I feared your charms enfeebled by the fire,
I should be Lysis more than Amaryllis.
Fear not; I come through midst of clouds, and crossed
An hundred unknown paths in this my chair.
Is the way safe?
Yes—but it will be best
That for prevention you blind your eyes.
I willingly obey the wisest Druid,
Whose will commands ore the decrees of Fate.
It is time to part, up and take courage, know
No dangers dare affront thee where I go:
HIs eyes betray the secrets of his soul,
The have more than once informed me of his flame,
And I've too well observed Lucida's lsforgetove
Alone engaged him to become a Shepherd,
So that from the first moment that I knew it,
I fed his fires in suffering them to rise;
And I can now no more, without injustice,
Forget a secret promised consent,
Montenor's worthy, but, for all his merit,
The interest of my Sister more weighs with me;
I am her Brother, and she must remember,
That though she give her self, he cannot have her.
Think not that his extreme affection
Would employ any but himself to gain her;
And in that conquest he presumed his strong
Endeavours should prevail 'bove humane Empire:
But do he what he can, a brother's needful
To force that duty so resolved in silence,
And which, though you consent not, will not suffer
A sigh escape, that may detect his secret.
If this sole obstacle thwart his desires,
He ought to praise the effect of a fair cause:
But Isle take order strait to stop its progress.
For mine own interest, I presume to press you,
For (if I must explain my self) I saw
Less in my self, than in fair Angelica;
I adore her, and her brother aids my vows,
But yet to crown them he must first be happy:
That's passion finding kind effects, may let him▪
See, without Envy, my Felicity.
Heel see it doubtless, and's contented mind
Shall have that fair success your love attends:
But now it is time our Past'rall Sports give way
To pleasures of a nobler quality.
Lysis too much is fooled, and w'ave too long
Cherished an Error which ere this had ended.
Your Art's incapable of such a cure.
Yet it is by that I make him tractable:
In our last Scene he so relied upon me,
That in a flying Chair I sent him home.
Yet more of Amaryllis?
Somewhat of Mystery
Made up the charm and spoiled the Sheepherdess:
Then with a secret Spell's unerring power,
I was to force the Nymph to entertain him.
You know the entertainment, what address
He made to's Mistress in that interview,
Which moved her on the fiction of his death
To speak, and countenance his airy Fables.
He's very full of them.
The are all his study:—
But as I long to be alone again,
Charity, who I see's arrived in the Park,
Is a fair obstacle to one would muse,
I therefore must avoid her—fare ye well.
It is a dark solitory humour, this.
What, without Lysis beauteous Sheepherdess?
The Nymph in the Hall at leisure entertains him,
Where Maugre all his love respect retains him:
But why doth Hircan shun us with such cares?
Faith he's injurious to Charita's beauty.
But Isle be satisfied since't has no witness.
It is solitude that busies all his care,
And any pastime that's without himself,
Is a great torment to his musing mind.
You will not find it in that kind consent,
Which he gives freely to an happy Lover.
Montenor.—
Sister pray admire with me,
That Plain, which gives us here so sweet a prospect.
But—Sister there is mystery in this language.
Does your mind wander with your eyes or no?
What, you blush?
Pish away.
Well, I pardon
The so secret disorder of your heart:
I fine.—
You credit then this Barber's talk?
No, no, give no belief to what I say.
Farewell, Isle seek one that in this affair,
Shall have more Rhetoric to persuade you: I
At least am sure, upon such pleasing terms,
Montenor rather will hear me than you.
But Sister, is he gone without more words?
I endure all from you who only seek
To laugh.—
Indeed—but let us speak in earnest;
Let's call him back again to explain himself.
Wherefore should I desire his explanation?
Oh the sad Virtue that now stings thy mind!
Doth Montenor, in all his service to you,
Show mean effects of an indifferent zeal?
If I believe his sighs, I reign in's soul.
Doubtless you are ungrateful to his flame.
And wherefore should his hopes by me be flattered?
Can he be ignorant of what's my desires?
If he hath gained my Brother, what needs more?
Indeed this modest answer fits our times;
It's worthy you, and I my self esteem it:
But among our selves let's lay by all disguise;
Confess with me our minds are easily
Led thither, whither we desire to go,
And that they need not struggle for obedience,
When as our Duty, and our Love agree.
But when that Love, which does command in chief,
Finds in that Duty that which would depress it,
It quickly cures us of that ancient error,
Which would debar us to dispose our hearts.
No, no, if Montenor could not have pleased you,
Ye would not in that choice believe a brother:
Your flames would find a very weak support,
If they were fed but by another order
You do assault me with such cunning, that
At length you force me to confess my weakness.
I love him, and my heart before possessed,
With love's perplexed.
Is the great secret out?
And why should love in this our age, in us
Be weakness, and a virtue in the men?
Why should we blush at our so faultless flames?
Do we want eyes to see, or hearts to love?
I know that ancient modesty required,
We should seem shy even at the name of Love.
And if a servant do pretend to court us,
We must cry out before we hear him speak:
But though w'impose a silence on these sweets,
We nothing less seek than obedience;
And any servant would court us but ill,
Who to talk Gazets should suppress his love.
Those kind refusals to hear no such language,
Are but fair invitations to say more.
In fine, we all desire that they should love us,
And often run by secret plots to meet them.
Gods! you know all.
More, happily, than you,
But your desires contented make less show:
Yet since that love is ready now to fix you,
Isle gather flowers to compose your Garland.
If Love oblige you to compose a Garland,
He'll give it by your hands to Clarimond,
And see how full of joy he comes to take it.
And yet in love Lucida must know nothing.
No, I know nothing but the common rule,
That to two Lovers any third's a trouble.
It is she—I see her gath'ring heaps of Flowers
In this enamelled Park, of divers colours.
Th'approach is Past'rall, but my new Feline
I've right to answer as your cruel Sylvia.
Take heed.—
How carelessly you hear these lines,
Without a thought of him that lent 'em me:
He was unhappy, but I hope I shall
Once touch the heart of my fair Shepherdess.
It is not of stone, and your continual cares
Deserve esteem, perhaps a little more:
But whither can the flames that rule us go?
Sometimes we wish a Lover would deign it,
That he may force our hearts, and that his fires
Surprised by a look may read the secrets.—
Too happy Clarimond! what can pretend?
Let not our want of understanding make us
Mistake, and, if your freedom answers mine,
Let's divide Philiris from Clarimond.
But what proceedings yours can equalise,
To make one happy, and reject the other?
You easily may guess the reason; one's
A Courtier, t'other is a simple Shepherd.
For me, if I may their defence assume,
I ever loved the freedom of the Sheepherds;
Those cheating outsides of your begging sighs,
Those so well studied, languishing aspects,
Those affectations of a wandering mind,
Are not the colours which their love appears in:
They express themselves in a serener air,
And when they vow they love, they love indeed,
And in the sweet transports of guiltless flames,
They promise nothing which the heart denies.
And so when kindly Philiris assured me,
That ore his captive▪d heart I reigned alone,
Not fearing to be sacrificed to fraud,
I told him that I something did believe,
But far from a resolve to flatter him
In his desires—If Clarimond spake thus
With more reserve, and more retention.
Oh pray, pursue not a discourse that kills me;
And, since his freedom answers for his faith,
Let Philiris now speak for Clarimond,
For he will keep his passion very secret,
If Philiris dares not to interpret it,
Under that borrowed name which he assumes,
He opens you his soul, and speaks his heart,
And his pure flame, aspiring to extremes,
When he does say he loves, he loves you truly.
This satisfies not what I ow my self,
To dare to credit Clarimond on his Faith,
No, no, it is for his honour, he swears to me,
That nothing's comparable to what he suffers,
But all that I can do, mine not engaged,
Is to endure complaint, and not believe.
Are you then doubtful of so true a flame?
To wish it so, I am too just, for know
I Clarimond do understand, at Court
It is Virtue quaintly to dissemble Love
That it is gallant to declare to all,
You are a friend to the Brown as well as Fair,
And without giving bounds to your desires,
Your sighs can menage as you see occasion.
Oh cease to injure the sincerest flame,
That purest love ere kindled in a soul;
Do I insensible of constant love
On all occasions, divide my heart?
And sigh in every place at any object?
I know that nothing▪s easier than to say so,
And flatter thus our foolish vanity,
That breeds in us too much credulity.
Thus to persist so long in vain alarms,
Is to distrust the power of your Beauty,
It is true, to please an hundred several objects,
Men may dissemble wounds they never had,
That it is easy still to say I love you.
But you may know it is not the same with you,
And it is impossible to see your face,
And say I love you, and not love you truly.
And would you have me to believe you now?
But see our Fool.
Base hindrance to my Joy!
To vex him for the mischief he hath done you,
I will abuse him with pretended sleep:
Farewell, leave me alone, I think it is best
That you and I be not surprised together.
But—
Leave me I say, or I shall break with you.
And must this fool disturb such pleasing minutes?
But to please my Charity, Isle avoid him,
And let her sport with his extravagance.
Sweet places, where my Sun beneath your shade,
Having scorched me, repairs to take the air,
Though to be lightened be your great advantage,
Yet suffer a poor Shepherd to share with you.
Hide not Charity from the most ardent—but
Gods! I'm deluded, or I see her sleeping.
It is she—oh happiness! hush gentle Zephyrs,
Breath without noise, my Goddess is asleep—
I must advance, but slowly, lest I wake her.
Trees, let your leaves be silent for a while:
Ye Brooks stand still, and you, ye foolish Bees,
That buzz so busily about her ears,
Fly hence, touch not the Roses which I see;
My fairest hath no flowers but for me.
How hippie's Morpheus? O transcendent beauty,
In the worlds fairest eyes to have his Palace!
How he tastes Nectar sweet and most delicious!
And how his happiness thy Shepherd envies!
Oh if it were lawful—but thou insolent Fly,
Which on that fairest Nose presum'st to sit—
Isle make thee know what it is—
Gods how you use me!
Why did you not awake me gentlier?
Oh!—
Pardon an act of justice to my Flame,
Which thought it duty so to sacrifice.
What have you cause me suffer by that blow?
Love seldom gives a wound he cannot cure.
But though you feel some little pain by that,
Yet might that cursed Fly have stung you—for
You know that once Eudoxa.—
She did well:
But if it were her fault, it is not mine.
At least for pity-sake.
What Shepherd?—
Cruel.
Thou daily dost permit the Sun to kiss thee,
And will not suffer that this amorous heart,
Should by thy snow seek to refresh his heat.
The sad condition that your heart is in.
Thy hand of milk congealed may make the proof.
Good Gods!
Absolve a Lover from that error;
I know the love of Sheepherds should be chaste,
But yet their souls sometimes may be transported,
And Nature of her self is vicious.
Oh how the impure flames I find in you,
Constrain me to regret my Amaryllis!
Amaryllis?
Oh!
Did you love her?
I love her
More, though she's absent, than I do my self,
That I might see her?
That you may easily
Remove what hides her from thy abused eyes,
See here thy Shepherd.
What is it you would say?
That Amaryllis only breaths in me,
And my excessive love that could not be
Prevented, made me change my sex to see thee.
You would have changed to force the obstacles.
That's nothing—Love works many other wonders.
Was it you then that in so neat a way,
Under a Women's habit did deceive us?
You that sage Hircan rescued from the fire?
It was I, it was Lysis, thou light of my soul!
How ought thou then to prize such rare attempts!
Go guilty Shepherd, go approach me not;
After an act so shameful, and so base.—
Oh you would try me,—
No do not believe it.
I hate a Shepherd, whose besotted love
Shall dare to borrow aid from magic arts,
Heaven shall revenge me on thy injuries;
Fly then from hence, fly far from these our coasts;
And thus polluted with the greatest crimes,
Ne'er show thy self to my incensed eyes;
Tic my last order.—
Lestrigonian Beauty!
More fierce than is the Asp, or Dragon, come
Feast, if my death can satisfy thy rage,
Thy flesh-devouring eyes with that sweet sight.
Wherefore doth Lysis mourn?
Oh Shepherd, tremble,
For all the Gods confederate against us;
Thou ne'er shalt see the Sun to set again,
The Woods shall be afire, the Rivers dry,
Meadows shall lose their flowers, Echo be silent,
In fine, all is destroyed—Charita's angry.
Gods!
Did not see her violent transport?
It was a Tigress with her sparkling eye,
Yet Montenor, I must confess that I
Never did yet behold so fair a Tigress,
And that her fierceness something had of grace,
Even when she did pronounce my banishment.
Ah—could she banish thee?
With great injustice.
Why dost afflict thy self? Be cross as she;
Thou sure can change thy vows, if she be changed.
No, Isle attend the afflicted Lovers Fate,
Whom when the Gods to such rude storms expose,
Touched with their miseries they oft transform them.
That once was good:
And so continues still;
For wherefore should the Arm of the Gods be shortened?
No, Mercury this night came with his wand,
To let me understand their pleasure towards me,
And I must change my form.
On that great Hope,
Thou scorn Charity, and no more wilt see her?
Would you that I provoke her with my presence?
Yet I may see the place where she inhabits,
And here, at distance, mounted on this Tree,
With my last homage may adore her beauty.
I see it! what hid that Palace from my sight—
But O miraculous issue of my hopes!
At length I find the Gods have not abused me—
And Lysis now, in earnest, is transformed,
I am become a Tree—O divine wonders!
My feet I feel already stretched to roots,
And my flesh changed to wood, with sudden shoots
Produces branches at my fingers ends.
Strange madness this!
But O thou ocular witness
Of this my change, to Lovers Ordinary
Go, and disperse the fame of my new fate,
And if thou ever did love me, guard my flock.
No, to reduce him fear no obstacle,
We leave him to ye—but what pleasant sight▪
Shepherd what dost thou there?
It was but ill judged—
I am (I thank the Gods) no more a Shepherd.
What then?
I am a Tree.
Ah fool, dost still
Persist to credit thy ridiculous dreams?
Adrian (I should abuse my self too much,
To call thee Cousin) you assume a freedom—
Such trees as I of an immortal nature!—
And who made thee a Tree?
A rare adventure:
But I don't wonder that profaner eyes
Can dive into the secrets of the Gods.
But wilt thou dwell within that rotten Trunk?
Ah, my Wood's sacred, pray speak better of it.
I do believe it, but see, night comes on,
Do you intend to lie in this fair Trunk?
How brave twill be to see my spacious Arms▪
Extend, within a bed their earthly roots!
Know that a Tree is fixed, and if sometimes
Its Country Deity, forsake his Wood,
It is but to go by night to revel with
The Demi-Gods, and ye fair Hamadryades,
For they by Moon-shine always use to meet.
Then thy fool-Demi-gods, thy Nymphs—and Loves.—
Take heed, lest to revenge their injuries,
I throw down some one of my branches on thee.
Pardon his fault, at least this once—but since
Thou needs wilt be a Tree, it must be so.
But what's thy hope?
All that I hope for is
My love at length may touch my Shepherdess,
And that about my Trunk, to recompense me,
She with her company will come to dance,
Then will I use for pressing speeches, sad
Complaining murmurs of my trembling leaves,
And to declare to her my excessive pains,
Isle use th'assistance of a gentle groan;
Then bidding her farewell prodigiously,
In token of respect Isle bow my Trunk.
Thou fool, if this be all the good thou look for,
Think thou to seem a Tree?
Yes—for I am so.
And do Trees speak?
Oh then, is that your wonder?
Thou hast read nothing of Dodona's Grove;
There (by the will of the Gods) the Trees did speak,
Know that my Fate's as glorious. I, like them,
A Prophet am, and my fore-telling Wood,
Shall make as great a noise as Delphian Tripos.
Make trial then—
Thou greatest of all fools!
The hast felt these blows, had thou been what thou say.
Villain what dost thou do? where tends thy rage?
Never till now hath iron injured me:
I was a Virgin—now my Trunk is open;
Oh stop, at least, my sap, that flowing's lost,
And know what ever strength their verdure shows,
Trees without radical moisture cannot live.
It is tedious to hear thee—come, come out here.
I must obey the Destinies decrees,
Hold sacrilegious—oh, use violence!—
Let a poor Shepherd live in that weak bark;
What has he done to thee?
Do not provoke him;
No violence will ere do good upon him.
Let's grant he is a Tree, and I have thought on
The means to hinder, that he take no root:
Isle tell you what's my project at the Castle.
Alas, he's now a greater fool than ever.
Farewell fair Tree.
Farewell, Heaven make thee grow.
The are gone: now I may know my self again.
O silver-horn'd Moon, if thou know where
The Demi-gods my Brothers meet this night,
Refuse me not a Boon which I demand,
Lend me thy rays to find them where they are,
I am not mortal now, and in their sports,
The Nymphs may me receive without suspicion:
Dear Trunk, permit me leave thee, since it is night,
For my first visit now is due to them.
Farewell, to share their pleasant sports Isle go
Into the woods to seek their Rendezvous.
At length, since Heaven propitious to my prayer
Doth not oppose the vows of Montenor,
But seems to have a care that they be crowned,
I may give up my self to th'sweets of Hope,
If without crime, and a too great presumption,
A Shepherd may pretend to love a Nymph.
It is very quaintly pleaded to engage Me,
To praise the Shepherd and reject the Nymph,
But let this satisfy your pressing Heart,
That now my brother takes your interest;
And as love once did flatter you, so his
Consent's sufficient to confirm your wishes.
How this reply affronts a lovers will!
And if you limit there his best advantage,
How ill when he explained his vows he told you?
How scrupulous love is in his designs;
He look's with scorn on fairest victories,
When they may cast a shadow on his glory,
By his own merit he would be absolute,
He loves no Triumph by another will,
Nor can endure, what ever's the attempt,
That foreign succours should secure his conquest.
Tic so, a Lover's never satisfied,
He doubts his happiness when he enjoys it.
And his unquiet flame, resolved to fear,
In the most fair success will still complain.
Oh—refuse not, to this inflamed heart,
The sweet, to see it self entirely charmed,
And if it move your soul, when it doth sigh,
Deny me not the bliss to understand it;
It is not enough that Montenor's content
Assures me of like happiness with that
Must make him perfect to fulfil my joy,
It is needful you unfold your heart with me.
That loving passions may your thoughts detect,
That a kind qualm may answer to my sighs,
And that by your consent my flame confirmed,
May be the glorious prize of loving you.
Why surely, here the shadows of the night▪
Have made you quite forget what we designed,
You still go on, and never have regard,
That happily our Fool sees you far off,
And if he know you, he will strait conjecture,
Seeing our Demi-gods, what's our design.
Alas!—to allow of what they do propose,
He has too strong opinion of his change,
And it is but vain to think, your feigned Deities
Can draw him from a Tree he holds so dear.
Though he was tractable with Hircan, yet
This his last act seems to exceed my faith;
For since he speaks, yet how can he presume
That Heaven would shut him up within a Tree?
By that I strove to make him understand,
That he is not what he believes himself:
But, against all reason hoe's a Tree, his Gods
Ought that rare Destiny to his deservings.—
A curse on Ovid, and his Sectaries!
If the Moon lend us but a constant light,
I'm of opinion you'll be satisfied,
And vainly fear he should be long a Tree—
He's out of's Trunk!—
Good Gods! I cannot believ't.
You well may doubt it in a darker night.
I thank the Gods, that of his own accord,
H'has left a Trunk to which he was so charmed!
And that to draw him out your Nymphs o'th'woods
And foreign Demi-gods are of no use;
They far from curing him would have a fresh
O'return'd his mind, and troubled his sick brain.
Well, he's now out of it, but you may fear
The rising morning may replant him there.
You believe him too soon demetamorphoz'd.
While he is absent now the cure is easy,
Let us cut down the Tree; Isle labour all
I can to stop the progress of his folly,
And Isle renounce my pastimes, that I may
Facilitate the means of your departure.
Isle hast to borrow succours to defeat him.—
Lysis at his return will play the Devil.
And your designs being spoiled through his departure
Make—
I am sorry for those two young Beauty,
Who mad to play upon this simple fellow,
Have in vain dressed themselves like Nymphs of the Woods:
Troth it is an ill adventure for the first.
Which of us did foresee he'd quit his Trunk?
But yet we want Charity, Where is she?
I left her with our Demi-Gods, perhaps
She does expect the signal to advance.
A little absence is a pain to Lovers.
Tic true, I suffer, and, when far from her,
Soon find a certain trouble in my soul;
But yet this trouble, though't be nothing gentle,
Is not the greatest torment I endure,
That which afflicts, and makes me to complain,
Is that I hope much, and see more to fear,
That is, I have a heart inflamed with love,
And yet I doubt whether I'm loved again.
You understand too well your own deserts,
To think you have nothing gained upon Charity;
But if you will persist thus to alarm
Your self in vain, know Isle assume your cause,
Then love, and hope.
It is a charming promise.
Since Love, with me, has interest for you,
The victory is easy.
Would it were so.
Room for our Tree; for he is coming hither.
Where did you find him?
In that little Grove,
Which joining to the Park makes up the Lantskip—
There hearing him to hallow.
But what could he do there at midnight?
There
Making Orations to an Oak, he laboured
To induce the Nymph to render her self visible:
Our Deities that followed at a distance
Played their parts handsomely upon occasion:
He takes their word—but when he did propose,
To show them where he was transformed, our care,
To give you notice, made us come before.
Since the occasion's offered lets embrace it,
Though honest Adrian has cause to curse it;
But since we can let us make up the jest.
Then we must hide our selves, I hear 'em there—
—
No, take no care of me Charity,
Lest he should seize again upon his Trunk,
Isle be a Tree, and act the Demi-god.
But he perceives you.—
Oh good Gods—speak low.
The hole is so profound he cannot see me.
At length dear Sisters (for I am persuaded
I ow that title to all Hamadryades)
Behold that famous Trunk, which in that place,
By Fate's decree enclosed a Demi-god.
Scarce had the Sun given place unto the Moon,
When we had tidings of your happy fortune;
Neither had we this night our barques forsaken,
But to perform our homage, and to see you.
As I'm a jucie-tree, I am o'rejoy'd,
To have so fair, and so good company:
I'm sure my leaves to morrow will assume
A far more fertile, and more lively green.
But you fair Nymphs, ever by me adored,
Where are those pleasant places you are planted?
We dwell by day in a Wood far remote.
That we may there behold our fruits in safety;
They are not common, and 't had been injurious,
If Heaven had left us to be pillaged by
Passengers.
You are Fruit-trees I perceive.
Fruit-trees, most excellent, as you shall find.
I shall be ravished to hear your story.
Know then, when mortal, we were Comfit-makers,
And gave them such an high exalted taste,
That even Diana could not but commend 'em,
At her return from chase she oft would eat 'em,
But when we foolishly divulged this favour,
She was so angry, that, with sudden rage,
She changed us both to trees, as you are now.
What trees?
My Sister is a Cherry-tree,
And Destiny made me bear Apricots.
But, tell me Nymphs, are these the fruits ye bare?
Yes, that's a favour granted to our Deities,
They all grow Comfits.
They taste ne'er the worse.
You cannot say so, if you do not try 'em:
Gather 'em.
I gather 'em?
They are very pleasant,
The are served in at the table of the Gods,
And you may eat'em.
Think it not strange that I
Excuse my self—a tree nor eats, nor drinks.
Who is so foolish, but must know your tree
Can neither eat nor drink? But you, that are
As it were, the soul unto its feeble nature,
Are not exempt to take your nourishment,
Thus to subsist, Trees that are Demi-gods,
Come almost every night to pull our fruits,
Their sap without it would be very barren.
It is true, my trunk I find is somewhat weak,
And by these instances I do conclude,
That Tree cannot live long that does not eat.
Then follow our example, eat apace.
What you devour your own substance—ha!
That's to invite you to be led by us.
Sweeter than is thy Nectar Ganimede!
How happy are wee Trees!
Well our dear Brother.—
Troth Sister Apricot, your fruit are rare,
Such Saturn in the golden age did eat.
But is our Sister Myrrh still alive?—
Her Trunk is very old.
I never saw her:
Is she of your acquaintance Sister? Speak.
Myrrh was never seen in these our parts.
Her Tree lives only in Arabia,
And to say truth, that Country's far from yours:
But do ye never visit one another?
We very seldom leave our native Soil.
Hark Nymphs, I hear a very melodious sound.
It is a young Cypress—see there, where he comes.
And that grave Beard?
Oh speak with reverence,
He is a River-God of the best rank,
We here must pay the duties that we ow him—
He will receive you kindly when he knows you.
Great Father, may your waters clear and pure
For ever flow, as we by your embrace,
Receive the sovereign height of our content.
Never could we believe, a God so great,
Would leave his watery bed to visit us.
And knowing us to be such Demi-gods,
Should us prefer before Neptune and Thet is.
Sisters, he answers in an uncouth way,
Pray what's his language?
It is a Rivers language,
He can be understood by Fishes only.
This venerable God grunts like a Hog;
Your Fishes methinks, speak a foolish language,
He stares upon me with one ugly eye.
He wonders much to see you in this place:
Father pray know this stranger Demi-god;
It is he that once the honour was of Brie,
The glory of Age, and past'rall Life.
He's now a Tree, and will people your banks
With many branches springing from his body.
He beckons you, go and receive his kindness.
What do you mean to squeeze me as you do?
Must your arms thus supply your want of voice?
Good mute God hold, and do not crush my Wood.
What, fly from his embrace?
Ah—Hamadryade,
I do not like such kind embraces, I—
The God holds out his arm at your loud cry.
Truce to embraces, Isle be there no more.
Truce if you please, but let's do something else,
Let's consecrate with songs your Metamorphose;
Father shall we obtain to it your consent?
This grunting God does very much displease me.
Come, who begins?
Why Demi-goddess, the
Dispute's between you two, I'm not concerned.
Will it shall be I.
We will sing afterwards.
Good Brother Cypress lend me (pray) your Lute.
O Fate, most worthy Envy!
Ye Gods! Why was not I a Tree at first?
Divine Amphion!
Silence, hear.
Thy voice
Charms me, as much as did thy Apricots.
sings.
Oh Fate most worthy Envy! we
Lysis possess that glorious Tree:
Whose virtues him a Demi-god have made
To enjoy a life shall never fade.
Oh envied Destiny!
He is worthy of this glory,
His Sheepherd's noble acts, which him renownd,
Declared, that thus he one day should be crowned
And engrave his name in story,
He is worthy of this glory.
Well, what think ye?
Sweet Nymph Apricot, may
I not inoculate such Trees as you?
It is time now to appear, let us advance.
Gods! I perceive some Mortals coming hither.
Isle to my Trunk again, and do you vanish.
And why?
But what see I?
A Rural Demi-god!
My incredulity the Gods have punished,
And I no more doubt thy Divinity,
I am a Tree like thee.
A tree dear Brother?
But it was not needful thou should have my Trunk:
Be a Tree if thou wilt, not at my cost.
That's he, that was my Shepherd once, I know him.
Ye mighty Deities, excuse our boldness,
We come to trouble you unhandsomely,
But it is to pay our duty to a Shepherd,
Whom Heaven of late has rank't among the Gods:
They tell us hoe's a Tree.
Yes—but my Bark
Another.—
I obey the fates that forced Me.
what Polidore? is he a Demi-god?
No, he is no such thing, for if he be,
He's but a Bastard-Demi-god: for Trees
Of honour, and of good Original,
Will ne'er take root within another Trunk.
If Heaven have so decreed—
We may not doubt it.
Give me my Trunk again.
Will you resist him?
For love-sake cross him not, but be again
A Shepherd, and love me thy Shepherdess.
No, I ought be a Tree and must, yet trust Me,
Tree as I am I keep my faith to Thee.
If so, for my sake then renounce that stock.
Alas, they rob me, and that's it afflicts me:
But you, Tree-ravisher, restore—
I cannot,
Heaven it forbids.
Unhappy that I am!
What ail you?
Ah—Sisters look to my affairs.
If I'm displanted, I can live no longer.
No, no, fear not; since hoe's so obstinate
To rob you of a Trunk ordained for you,
Let him live there, hated by our companions,
More than the meanest shrub in all this country.
But what shall I doe then?
Why are there not
More pleasant places, and far better trees?
We there will plant our selves.
May that be done?
Our power's great, what say you Father? Is it
Not your opinion, that his place be changed?
This Devilish Hog, me think's is a strange God,
He would have you plant in Angelica's garden.
It is well, the place is not at all unpleasant:
But sure when we live so far from our Trunks,
The vegetative soul need's nutriment—
If I must planted be, my amorous Nymphs,
Engraff me on some Tree as far as you;
O sweet A pricocks!
Ye shall be satisfied
You'll make me truly then a fruit-Tree?
Truly,
Come;
Shepherdess farewell.
Let me be present
At the secret mystery that there transplants you,
I'm sure that very night our Troup will dance,
About the sacred Trunk that shall enclose you.
Then follow at a distance.
Oh what comfits
At the Sun-rising will spring from my branches!
Yes doubt it not.
And thou! thou cur'st theif-Tree,
Know to bear fruit, thy wood's nor fair, nor good,
And the ever dance, at distance, round about thee,
Thou't serve for nothing, but to make a gallows.
By this device they lead him to the Castle,
Then thus I my new destiny renounce,
And have too little share in that old stock,
To expose my self to what he did prognostique,
Only great Nymph you knowing to oblige Me.
Come no more Nymph, and Shepherd let's return
Home to the Castle, and let Crooks alone,
Lysis untried, our Comedy is done.

WE with pure Conspersions thus,
Sacred rites, and hallowed Thus,
To render every Lover true,
Do Element Love's dominions new;
That no heart too strongly beat,
We give his Fires temperate heat;
We give his Waters virtuous force,
To assuage um taken in their source;
•ogg of perjured Vows and Oaths,
Which fair Truth, and Candor loathes,
We purge the Air from, and the Earth
From every fowl and monstrous birth;
For, as some Lands their Monsters fear,
Unruly Lust's our Monster here;
As others poys'nous Beasts molest,
So Avarice is our poys'nous Beast,
From which, when once a Realm is freed,
Then Love's d•ominion it is indeed.
YOu wo'n't be mad?
I will be nothing but
For Love, and for Love I will be any thing.
Pray unhand me—shall Bellinda, the
Divine Bellinda, who is to Beauty what
Beauty is to others, all Grace and Ornament,
Shall she be banished hence to day? and shall
Euphanes live to see it?
And shall Euphanes,
The gallant, and the brave Euphanes die
Only to prevent death? how low
And poorly would it show?—and that's the worst
That can come on it,—but I hope better still;
Venus, the Goddess of this Isle, has oft
Done greater miracles than this, to make one young,
And fair, to love.
"Who has only miracles
"For Hopes, has Hopes but nigh Despair.
Yet Time's
A mighty Qualifier of Fortune's harms,
And he who headlong throws himself into
Despair, precipitates his life, whilst he
Circumvents death, who lets himself down into 't by
degrees;—But pray consider, has she not promised
you, If any in Cypress she loves, it shall be you? and
Is this no hope?
No comfort?
Just as much
As among the numerous and unhappy throng
Of excluded Lovers, to stand next the door,
First exposed to affronts, and most concerned
In the disgrace.
Nay, if you give your self
Despair, there's none can give you Hope; at worst
If Euphanes loves Bellinda, as he says,
What hinders him following her whersoe'r she goes?
"Bootlesly and idly does he complain
"Of Winter, who but following of the Sun
"Might still enjoy the Spring.
But following an
Eclipsed Sun, what should he gain by it,
But only dark and dismal visions to
His Eyes, and to his Heart black
Melancholy thoughts?
Well Euphanes, as the Experient prove,
There are strange turns, strange mysteries in Love,
Who oft (as by experience we find)
Changes the most obstinate, obdurate mind:
For know, the Temple of Love is not composed,
As by the gross ignorant vulgar it is supposed,
Of the dull materials, Of dead senseless stones,
But he has more sensible and living ones,
The hearts of every one which he do's fit,
And apt at pleasure for composing it,
Of which some Nature makes so fit to love,
They with small difficulty Lovers prove:
Others so stuborn and unapt again,
They love not, but with mighty toil and pain;
And those who finally so useless prove
They are wholly unfit for the fabrique of Love,
As in Bellinda, ('t may be) you'll see to day,
Offended Love do's cast'um quite away—
But far be the omen from my words, for though
't be more yet to be wished than hoped, it is
Impossible she should not feel Love who
Do's make so many feel it, nor have no fire
In her herself, who kindles it in so many breasts—
But see Philena here makes me behold you as
A thing of pity.
Go haplesse youth, and sacrifice to Love,
Whose Deity you must have highly offended sure
Inflicts on you so heavy punishment,
To love one who neglects you, and neglect
Her here so dearly loves you:
Stay, you will
Not go I hope?
Excuse me, in the quarrels of Lovers
it is dangerous interposing.
I'll warrant you.
Love shoots not his darts so fast and vehemently
From either of our encountering eyes
You need fear being shot.
How ever I'll not trust you,
For in these pretty skirmishes
None knows
When you are friends or foes:
For now ther's falling out,
Now truce, Now war,
And then
Amity and peace again.
So if you be foes, I'll not hinder your making friends;
If friends, Love keep you so.
NOw shall i
〈…〉 to madness with her importunity,
Lest 〈…〉 her, and with one importunity
Expel another—Philena happily met,
For in you I meet my wishes.
Most happy I, if my hopes now don't delude
And flatter me into deceit.
Thou know my life
So much depends on the Fortune of this day,
As should Bellinda part hence, I of
Necessity must part with Life and all,
Whose Love the Fates have with so strong a Tie
Fastened to my very heart strings, they cannot snatch
Her hence, but they must rend and tear my heart
Out of my bosom too—Go prithee, go then,
And in this last moment when the Fates are busiest
At work in finishing their design, Indear
Thy diligence, and redeem thy Tardiness.
"Time is a Treasure few or none do care
"To save till 't's almost lost—
Thou know those softer minutes when Nymphs minds
Are best disposed for the Impressions of Love:
Could thou but instamp me in her bosom then,
And glide a thought of me into her memory,
Just as she passes to the Temple, thou should infi∣nitely
Oblige Euphanes, and make him ever happy.
And my self ever unhappy by it, ah me!
Was ever any more miserable than I
To be made confident of my Rivals Love
Against my self?
What should I say more? tell her
How much I love her,—yet that is not enough,
How much I Reverence &amp; Adore her, dost thou hear?
I do;—&amp; will you hear me now?
If the hast any thing new to say I will;
But of old businesses I pray no more.
That cannot be old that's every day renewed.
Rather that cannot be new, that every day
Needs renovation,—but of this enough.
See how thou stand now • as if my life were not
Concerned in thy hast; Go, prithee go;
And if perchance the art ought concerned in it, know
'Less thou dost this to day, you have seen the last
Of wretched Euphanes.
And if I do it to day,
The world has seen the last of more wretched
Philena,—Oh me! I now do see
"Love is a burden two hearts equally
"Should bear, and then it is light and pleasant, but
"Grievous and intolerable when the one
"Does bear it all alone.
Mean time what shall I do? he well deserves
To find no pity, who affords me none:
But •ova ne'er stands upon such nice respects,
Who there where unfeignedly 't does Love profess▪
't does never sin, but in officiousness.
I am resolved to plead for him then against
My self; and though my heart do disavow
All my tongue says, spite of my heart, (in fine)
't shall say 't, or I'll not avow it to be mine.
HAy,—whurr,—there bolts another wench;
The Warren's full of them; and I do but think
What dainty sport I shall have
In ferreting um;
The very name o't•' place had Attraction
Enough to draw me hither, where I expect
To find all Women as coming and tractable, as
Kids-leather gloves, one gentle pull or two
Will easily draw um on. I do not like
Your difficil ones, who come as hardly off
As a wet Summers boot;—
Hey! there's another; and
Alone too? this opportunity
Is the shell Love's hatched of, and the wenches here,
Like Lap-wings, run away with it on their heads.
I'll accost her;—shoe's right I'll warrant ye.
FAir Nymph, might I be so bold (I pray)
To request the time o'th'day of you?
With all my heart Sir, take what time you will,
It shall be any thing of the clock you please, for me.
Le ye there now?
There's never a Sextons wife in all Cypress
Could answer you more courteously—Lets see,
What's next now? pox on 't, we young practitioners
Of complement, and dabblers in Love,
When once w' are out of our legs &amp; face•s, are present∣lie
out
Of our discourse,—•, it shall be so—
And how, and how have you done Faith since I saw you last?
Most methodical! how do ye, and whats a clock?
I'll wager with any one now, next is, what News?
Or somewhat about the Weather; the ordinary
Discourse of those who can discourse of nothing:
And when (I pray) was it you saw me last?
Why in Plato's great year, don't you remember it?
When just after such an encounter as this, I took
You by the hand, and kissing it, offered
To lead you just into such another Grove as this.
Just no such matter,—pray, pray Sir stay,
Sure you do n't remember well?
Most perfectly,
By the same token I offered to salute you too.
I knew you were quite wide,
And out Sir, I?—not me I can assure you.
You cannot deny 't I'm sure;
Think, think, and you must needs remember it,
I do as perfectly as if 't were but to day—
And how I told you, having so fair an opportunity,
But lose it, and you'd never have the like again.
Wider and wider still from my remembrance.
And that such kind offers, from such kind youths as I,
Came not every day;—and I added too withal,
That I assured my self the Nymphs of this Country
Were so well learned, their Husbands on the marriage night
Could teach um nothing, but what they knew before
Bless me! I never heard
Man talk a this manner.
And for your particular,
I durst be sworn first time y' ad Liberty,
After fourteen to walk abroad alone,
Returning home, you found that you had left
Some such odd toys, as your Scarf, your Mask, &amp; gloves,
And perhaps your Maiden-head, behind ye too.
Thanks Love, thou hast redeemed me—
Oh! cry mercy Sir.
Now I remember it
Perfectly well: Lord what a Treacherous
Memory have •!
Oh do ye so? I knew you would at last—
Now she's mine own, I'm sure on it.
By the same token, just
As you talked thus wildly and licentiously
Philostrates, Love's sovereign Pontif, and
Governor of the Isle past by.
Mas, and I think
Yonder he comes indeed.
When I
Addressing me to him, and complaining of
Your unworthy rudeness, he presently
Invited you most honourably to dance
To a certain sprighly Instrument, called a Whip,
Worth a hundred of your Pochets and Violins
To make such Gallants as you to frisk and caper.
I remember nothing of all this now—
But beshrow me I begin to fear, next Plato's great year
I shall indeed, if I tarry longer here.
Hark ye, hark ye Sir,
Now I can tell you what time of the day it is too.
I know it now, I thank you, well enough,
it is time for me to be gon as I take it.
Farewell then my
Platonic Lover, and a fair riddance—But to
My business. I wonder where all
The Nymphs are, that none of them appears. I must
go seek um out.
ANd what dispatch to the Provincial governors,
Touching Platonic Love?
Tell um we're men, pure spirits, and had no other end
But only the propagating Ideas, this communicating
Of minds to minds might pass, which now has
So slippery a way to go:
It's outre tendance most commonly falls fowl
Of the Body in its passage towards the Soul,
Yet in those colder climats have Phlegm enough
To quench their amorous flames, 'tmay be allowed,
But no ways to those hotter Nations,
Whose sulphurous Spirits presently take fire
At presence of their Mistresses; Nor Is it but with
Much caution to be permitted to different Sexes,
Unless of age more different: for distinction
Is the Art of Wisdom, and who imagines
One measure for all Bodies may suffice,
And one rule for all minds, are equally unwise.
The sacred Philostrates speaks divinest truth.
So amongst these Chimerical speculations,
Like the Alchemists great Elixir, rarely
Or never are reducible to Art,
And practice, it may pass—An other abuse
They much complain of (and deservedly)
Is the confounding Love with Liking, and
Calling of every trivial passion Love;
Each Peasant now who likes but a dairy Maid,
Crying out, He is in Love, profaning so
The Divinity of Love, by making him companion
Of every vulgar breast.
As every School-boy too
Once past the School, and School-boys toys, next toy
He gets, is a Mistress, whom he straightways courts
In the canting language of Enamourists,
Of darts and flames, and dying and languishing,
Which he calls Love forsooth, so many degrees
Removed from it, tic scarce the coverture
Love is enfolded in, (a duteous heart,
Obsequious services, and sincere respects.)
True Polydor, such affected triflings
Are as far from Love, as Valour is from Boast,
Or Wisdom from Levity; But who can hinder
The ignorant from being ignorant still?
So let us leave um, and pass to our other Affairs:
Let the Chorus advance singing in praise of Love,
Whilst the Mysti explicate its sacred mysteries,
To inform, and indoctrinate the tender minds
Of Youths and Virgins in its Religious rites;
For Music and Poetry,
Are the Language, and the Accent of the Gods,
Speaking unto us in a diviner strain,
And moving our minds with far more Energy;
Than plain dull Rhetoric▪ Religion
Still entering easilier, and penetrating more
Profoundly, those hearts the ave softened before.
Praised be the Deities above.
We Loved.
We Love.
And we shall Love.
Thus by succession we go,
Love to Love connecting so;
Whilst link of Age to Age we knit,
W' eternize, and perpetuate it.
Now our doctrine to begin,
From Love's diviner origin;
Know two different Loves there are
In hearts, incessantly do war,
The on a lustful brutish one,
Tother Venus Urania's Son,
With his Celestial darts and fires
In chaste hearts kindling pure desires,
Distance twixt whom as much there is,
As twixt high Heaven, and deep Abyss;
As by the effects you'll easily find,
Since th'one imbrutes and soils a mind,
Whilst the others purity ne'er can
Admit of blemish, spot, nor stain.
As unconsistent too as night
And darkness is with clearest light,
"For in the same place, on the same day,
"The Swine and Ermine never lay.
In a word then for to tell
What virtuous Love is, mark me well,
it is a just temper of our Souls,
All vicious extremes controls,
it is the gust we have and sense
Of every noble Excellence,
It is that whereby we know
Whether our Souls have sense or know,
It is the main spring that our minds
To fair and virtuous things inclines,
And 't's that and only that in fine,
Which makes men next unto Divine▪
I better can tell you what it is—
it is a mixture and compound of all
We happy and unhappy call,
it is a contradiction again
A bitter sweetness and a pleasant pain;
In one word what Love is to tell,
Look in Bellinda's Eyes it is a Heaven,
Look in Euphanes Heart it is a Hell.
So now march on before,
And as you have initiated so proceed,
And finish the solemnity of the day.
Praised be the Deities above.
We loved.
We love.
And we shall love.
THus by succession we go,
Love to Love connecting so;
Whilst link of Age to Age we knit,
W' eternize, and perpetuate it.
Now to the rest
Of our affairs: Is the Nymph summoned to
The Temple yet?
It is yet not time.
When it is,
Be it your care to see it done, and all
The rites and ceremonies in prepare
For the great solemnity:
This day peculiarly Love is thine
Work miracles on it, and show thy self divine.
YE aged Oaks, the semi-gods aboads,
And who your selves in ancient times were gods;
Ye silent walks, and solitary groves,
Places which melancholy passion loves,
You I make only Confident of
My secret thoughts; I love. O dissipate
My words some gentle wind, in such minute,
And aerie particles, none in soft Characters
May ever read, nor ever find impressed,
This most important secret of my breast;
But who're my loved Philander live, or no,
Heaven knows, I do not know
By other Argument than that I live my self,
Have so dear sympathy with him, infallibly,
Were he but dead, I instantly should die,
Our Loves and Lives having but one third, one knife,
And once but cut our Loves, and cut our Life:
Mean time my daily musings; which only are
But waking dreams, and nightly Dreams, which are
But sleeping Actions, both testimony bears,
"Love's a solicitous thing, and full of Fears,—
But soft, I've blabbed too much I fear,
See Philena coming here.
MY dear Bellinda! and where have you bin so long
Without Philena! to call me your life, and live
•o long without me! to call me your heart, and make
•e such a stranger to your breast! tree•st me it is most
•nkindly, most unnaturally don.
•weetest Philena, until my heart was all
•epleat with bitterness, I called you my heart indeed;
•nd till I was a weary of my li•e,
•esteemed yon as my life; but now all the joy,
•alight, and Comfort lost, Bellinda has
•y heart and life, being all comfited
〈◊〉 bitterness and woe,
〈◊〉 is not fit I longer call you so.
• sad Complement, this Bellinda, and such
•little shu'd have attended from so dear a friend:
Complements in friendship being like Sinister ba•s
〈◊〉 Heraldry, but marks of Bastardise;
Why serve friends, but when cares and woes molest,
•o lighten the heavy burden of our breast?
But to be confident w'ye, I much suspect
You are not so with me, and that ther's somewhat
Of Artifice in it, you decline my company
So much, and make me not partaker of
Your secret thoughts.
Of all I know, I will,
And do Philena; but the gods know ther's
Somewhat in my breast I do not know my self;
You who are my heart, divine it if you can.
Nay if you know it not, how should your heart
That's but a part of you? But give me leave
Bellinda to admire, that in so general a
Commotion and solicitude for you,
You should appear so little solicitous,
So little moved, and so unconcerned to day, whilst all
Are concerned so much for you; Trust me it is
A Temper, or above, or below humanity.
I'll tell thee Philena, I have considered,
That of all Creatures, Man's the most ingenious
In's own own affliction, and in's consolation the
Most dull; and that in the navigation of
This life, in this frail bark of ours, where the Gods
Are Pilots, and the World the Sea, our solicitude
For the future no more avails
Than that of every common Passenger, how
The ship is governed: Whence I conclude that best
Way for our quiets and rest,
Is to leave all our solicitude to the Gods,
To whom w'are dearer than w'are unto our selves,
They having a hundred times more tender care of us;
And this it is now makes me for the future no more
solicitous,
This Bellinda for our sex
Is high Philosophy, but the gods making
Every one Architect of their own fortunes; what
Should hinder you to day, to make a fair
And noble one of yours? and but declare
You love Euphanes, as already you have declared,
If any one in the Isle you love it shall be he.
And so I do again, let that suffice,
And seek not Philena, I prithee, to advance
An unprofitable knowledge, Time will, but too soon,
Accelerate, and bring to light.
Ay me! what says my friend?
To explicate
My meaning clearer, too soon, for you I mean,
Are interest by your Goodness and Gentleness
So far in my Affairs, you necessarily must
Or lose a friend, or Lover by it.
NOw gentle Polydor,
What news from the Temple?
All there is in prepare
For the great solemnity, and only fair
Bellindas presence expected; Into whose breast
May the God of Love propitiously inspire
As many loving thoughts, as ever yet
Were crowded into any's breast,
Or amorous bosom had capacity to receive.
Come Philena, let's away then.
So sudden, and so unmoved!
I suspect her more and more; to doubtful things
We run not with such hast and Resolution;
And if she be resolved, there's somewhat in it,
That she conceals it from me!
It is happy Augury,
(No doubt) this hast of hers: Love has invisible
Attractions, and chains, which who follows, visibly
Perceives at last, this gentle force of his
Does but conduct them to their greater bliss.
SUch a Wench
Would I give a Limb for now, although I begged
On Crutches ever after, and were confiscated to
The Hospital,—I must needs have her; and this
Same fellow shall be my agent in the business,
D'e hear Sir? do you know
Any of these Nymphs, I pray?
That I do Sir, very well,
What then?
Why then I should desire
Your better acquaintance: For look ye Sir, suppose
A man should have a mind to one of them.
A mind! What mind d' ye mean?
Why a months mind or so.
Why then Sir after a month, for ought I know
You may be rid on it—This is
Some foolish stranger, rather deserving my
Pity than Anger.
I hope you do not mock me Sir?
Indeed Sir but I do.
•tic well you confess it, otherwise
• should be very angry—But since I see
You're a little dull; in plainer terms, I'd fain
Have a bout with one of them; do ye apprehend me Sir?
I think I shall do—But know you Sir where you are,
That you dare talk thus?
Why, in Love's Dominious,
Where should I be?
In Lust• rather, for Loves is not for you, if you
Be such an one, and so as Loves Minister,
Less you better know to temper your Tongue, and mend
Your behaviour, I command you sir
Straight to depart the Isle.
I hope you are not in earnest?
Indeed sir but I am.
Tic well you are so, for I
Don't love to be jested with I tell you plain.
It seems you love to jest Sir, but
Look to it, and so farewell.
Slut, this is the unreasonablest Fellow
I ever met withal in my life, a man
Cannot talk of a Wench but he is angry!
Temper your Ton•ue, and mend your behaviour,
When can you tell? Loves Minister d' ye call him,
If he teach no better doctrine, he scarce deserves
To be Minister to the Family of Love.
what? my Enamourist again!
Sure then, being so well accompanied
I'll have some sport with him.
Gods so, she here!
I'll away then.
Do ye hear do ye hear Sir? pray come forwards here,
And don't turn Sea-crab,—do ye behold that Gentlemā?
He is one of the terriblest persecutors of young nymphs▪
He has no mercy with him; And's so in love with himself,
He imagines all women are in love with him too;
Nay, will swear it, if they but look upon him once,—
There is nothing so cold, as to hear him talk of flames;
And it were enough to make a body forswear love, but
To see how he makes it;—nay, be n't ashamed
Of your own Commendations.
Commendations do ye call it? what are your Reproaches pray?
•f these be your Commendations?
Then if he pretend
To Poetry (that's Riming with him) he wearies Phae∣bus
And all the Muses, to find him out similitudes
Of R•bies, Pearl, Gold, and Diamonds,
To compare with his Mistresses lips, teeth, eyes, &amp; hair:
If not, he is yet a more solemn fool in Prose,
Wed's speech embroidered, just like your Masquing clothes,
With Ooze and Aspirations, and never a word
Of sense in them,—see now how he fleers and grins,
The common put-off of the Fool and Impudent.
To have an Anatomy Lecture
Read over me alive thus, there's no enduring it.
Nay, I'll promise ye
You shall endure it, and twenty times more to boot,
If I meet with you again.
You've met with me
Already, I thank you, but if I meet with you
Alone, I'll make y' endure somewhat too for this.
Threatened too? nay then have at you with
Another trick; well Sir, having sufficiently tried
Your patience, and finding it invincible,
I'll let you see now all the Nymphs here are not
So cruel as you imagine thē,—meet me but hereabouts
When Bellinda's gon to the temple, &amp; I'll promise you
I'll bring you to the gentlest Nymph in Cypress,
So far from coy, you may do what you will with her,
She can deny you nothing nor say nay to any thing.
I marry Sir, &amp; such an one would I meet withal,
I knew I could not be so grossly deceived
In the dispositions of the Nymphs minds here,
And Constitutions of their Bodies.
Look you fail not now.
Nay, if I fail at such Assignations,
Call me Eunuch.
And if I don't fit you, call me fool—but hark,
The pomp draws nigh, and the procession
From the Temple, dilating of it self,
And swelling with numerous multitudes, fills up all
The spacious and ample Plain.
HOly Love that dost command
In Fi•e, Water, Air, and Land,
Gently thy commands inspire
To all in Land, Air, Water, Fire,
Now is the Nymph come?
Behold great Sir shoe's here—
Know you the reason Philena why Euphanes
Is not present?
He misdoubts his temper,
And therefore wisely do's absent himself.
I feared some other cause, &amp; am glad he's so discreet—
Stand by there.
What are you there whiffling again?
Goodly, Goodly, heir's more ado
With your under Officers
Draw nigh then Nymph, and t'understand
What Sacred mysteries in every Ceremony
Involved lie, Know first
By this sprinkling's signified
How minds are to be purified
Er' they receive the Deity,
Who deigns in purified breasts alone
To make on earth its habitation:
Next for your Eyes and Ears by which two ports
There often issues forth, and enters in
Much pollution and sin
(And by one sluice bootlesly we should drain
Out Objects, if by another we let them in again)
Veiling your Eyes w'are to conduct you to
The sacred Cell, where far from noise
Of Tumult and the public voice,
Only attending to holy orisons
An hour enclosed you're to remain:
No bosom (•in fine) but wholly abstracted and
Sequestered from humane consortship,
Being capable of Divine—
So before (for compliment of all)
We charm you silent, If you have ought to say
Now freely spake
Unto the Gods
I need not speak seeing they know my mind,
And to men I will not, seeing it is not fit
They know it yet—what should I say then, but
Behold the entirely resigned Bellinda here stands
Ready to obey your holy orders and
The Gods Divine commands.
Reach us the sacred wand then, whilst we thus
Invoke with due solemnity silence to come,
And in its softer chains bind up her Tongue.
Still born silence thou that art
Floodgate of the deeper heart
Offspring of a heavenly kind,
F•oct of the mouth, and Thaw of the mind,
〈◊〉 Confident, and he
That makes Religion mystery;
Admirations speakingst tongue,
Leave thy desert shades, among
Reverend Hermits hallowed cells,
Where retir'dst devotion dwells,
With thy Enthusiasms come
Seize this Nymph, and strike her dumb,—
Now give us the sacred veil
To veil her eyes,—thus Nymph
We close your eyes tow'rds Earth, and open um
Tow'rds Heaven—
Now whilst the air you sweetly move,
Gently excite her mind to Love,
"For Music to Religion,
"'s just like those who temper and mold the wax
"For the seals impression
whilst with her Lily and Rosie hands
Nature molds beauteous forms, Love stands,
And ever as he does •spy
A fair and gentle one,
This, this, is fit for me
To work upon, says he,
And lays it by.
What fools are those then who can miss,
So grossly to suppose
Bellinda, and mark how gentle she is
And fair: were none of those
Wh•m Love's own hands had chose?
Now let the pompous train move on, and let
The Music in sweet harmonious strains,
O'er all these spacious plains,
Resounding higher yet,
Invoke Loves sacred Deity
To impose blessed end to this solemnity.
HOly Love, that dost command
In Fire, Water, Air, and Land,
Gently thy commands inspire,
To all in Land, Air, Water, Fire.
Here's a do indeed!
I could have dispatcht her my way
In half this time, and with half these Ceremonies too;
But let her go, and•now if this Wench
Perform but her promise, she'll redeem
Her self and this Isle from my ill opinion;—
And see just where she comes.
Oh! it is well you're here.
The Nymph I told you of—
I, where is she? where is she? I long
To see her.
You shall find
Sleeping in the wood there▪
Excellent opportunity!
And is she so kind say you?
So kind (as I told you) and so far from coy,
You may do what you will with her—she can
Deny you nothing, nor say no to any thing.
And I'll put her too't presently
Behold her there,
But look you don't disturb her.
Ah pretty Rogue?
Have I caught you napping?
She sleeps as snug &amp; soundly as
A sucking pig—you can scarce hear her breath,—
Shoe's handsome, exceeding handsome, I see that,
A very Goddess;—the gods make me thankful,
Hey, hey,—how jocund shall I be?
Softly, softly.
Oh! I'd forgot,—soft
• think she stirs,••what a sloven was I
Not to put on a clean band to day?
No it was only the leaves,—I'll jog her softly,—
But first I'll steal a kiss of her whilst she sleeps,—
Ha! how's this?
Ha, ha, ha.
By this hand
A Maukin, a Mammet, a very Moppet with
No more life in it than a Scar-crow, or
The Puppet of a Tire women's stall▪
Ha ha ha,
Make much of your Mistress Sir.
D' you laugh too? shame on her how she has cozened me;
Is this your Gentle Nymph with a vengeance▪
So far from coy you may do what you will with her,
She can deny you nothing, nor say no to any thing:
So me thinks indeed—hey
This is the Log now
And tother the stork, it is question which would make
The better Mistress—only this I may mock
While tother mocks me—farewell to your Ladyship.
HAil happy land, where if the Oracle prove
But true, Philander again shall find his Love,
Whom six Moons now have just been in their wain,
And six with light replenished again,
Since in a storm I lost, whilst I detained,
A woeful Captive have ever since remained;
Until at last releast, I suddenly
Addressed me to the sacred Oracle, to know
Whether my dear Bellinda lived, or no,
And consequently to know, who're I
Should either live or dye;
When this answer I received,
That as on Cyprian Seas I lost her, where
Venus, Loves Queen, floating did first appear,
So I should find her on Cyprian Land again,
Where Venus fixed perpetually does remain.
IMpatient of expectancy, I'm come
Hither to the Temple, to await my doom,
Fear of which made me absent my self before,
Until in lieu of one fear, a thousand more
Soliciting my breast, I did conclude,
Still more in absence, than presence, solicitude
Does urge our bosoms, as Terrors do more affright
In the dark, than in the light.
Strange! the houses should be all so desolate,
As some Plague had swept um, and the land depopulate,
As the Enemy had mow'd it with his sword!
But see one here to inform my wonder,
And curiosity. Gentle Sir,
Might a stranger newly arrived here, desire to know,
Why all do flock unto the Temple so?
Is it any annual feast (perhaps) they celebrate?
No Sir, but one
Mere Accident has produced to day,
For understanding which, be pleased to know,
That by this •lands Laws all Strangers, after
A six-months residence, are solemnly
To swear they love some one here, or else
Abjure the Isle:—
Now Sir, six months to day are just expired,
Since there arrived here one of the most admired
Nymphs, as ever in Cypress yet was known,
And most deserving Admiration,
By tempest cast on shore here, surprising so the while
With her excellent beauty the Inhabitants of this Isle,
With pious error they all adored her
As a second Venus, a second time
Ascending from the Sea. Nor was this Idolatry
By Venus punished as any crime at all,
Since Cupid's self did on the like error fall,
Imagining her his Mother, she was so fair,
And so at all parts most resembling her.
The Time and every Circumstance agree
It should be she,—and her Name I pray Sir?
Bellinda—
Her name too, then
No farther evidence nor circumstance do's need,
For to confirm me it is she indeed—
And whore's this Nymph Sir now?
•'th sacred Cell
Straight to be produced to take the solelmn Oath.
And i'st supposed she'll take it?
That's doubtful yet, but this I know,
That less she do, you behold in me here Sir
The woefullest Lover as ever yet for love
Sighing and groaning gasped out his latest breath,
The Dreggs of life, and Harbingers of death.
Ha! I like not this—
And has she given you no hope Sir of her love?
For love without hope's but a dry morsel, and goes
But hardly down.
Only this Sir, that if any one she loves
She as promised it should be me.
Nay then you have enough, for Nature gives not
Youth and beauty, but of the condition
Of loving, and their sex gives pledges unto love
Reciprocally again—But why go I vainly thus
Hunting with mine own curiosity,
Mine own disquiet—I've taken in poison already at
Mine Ear,
And feel it working—defend me Reason from
Thine Enemy Rage, and thou defend me Love
From thy more deadly Enemy Jealousy,
Thou bring forth just as the Viper does its brood,
When all its endeavour after all its strife,
Is to give death to thee who give it life—
But see in happy time variety
Of other objects to divert my mind
From farther thought of it.
NOw you Virgins all draw near,
And most needful doctrine hear;
First be modest as you go,
For each looser glance you strew
Will be interpreted a snare
To catch those youths that present are,
And your rolling eyes betray
A heart that rolls as well as they.
O Fly then far,
Glances that are
But sparkles of a wanton fire,
And pledges of a loose desire,
Fly rolling eyes that but betray
A heart that rolls as well as they.
Here's Doctrine' with a •urren, able to infect all
The young Wenches in the Parish.
Then for kisses, Oh be sure
Never Virgins those endure,
Are but bellows blows the fire
Of Lascivious desire,
But seals of Lust, and poison, that
Infect the Mind and Body strait;
And your lips with kissing used,
Are but just like Cherries bruised.
O Fly then far
Kisses, that are
Incentives of foul Lust, which no
Virgins lips should ever know;
Whose lips once with kissing used,
Are but just like Cherries bruised.
Heyday! no kissing neither?
God help the poor Country wenches then,
For all their sport is marred.
But 'bove all Virgins again,
Look you fly the Touch of men,
For you're flowers, and every Touch,
Does your fresher beauty smutch:
And Youth's a thing so delicate,
But touch it, and it withers strait,
Which once fading in their hew,
Youth and Beauty then Adieu.
O Fly then far
Touches, that are
Things, Youth and Beauty chiefly blasts,
And on them foulest blemish casts,
Which once fading in their hew,
Youth and Beauty then Adieu.
Pity a their breeding! these wenches will be quit• spoyl'•
With this Education, and good for nothing, but
To make Inckle and bone-lace.
Lastly, for enjoying, I
Need not warn you that to fly,
For flowers gathered there's no talk,
Ever to piece um to their stalk;
And it is only that the while,
Makes you so contemned, and vile,
Men, what ever they did before,
Never care for Women more.
O Fly then far
Your men that are
Only born for to destroy you,
Since if once they but enjoy you,
Whatsoever they did before,
They never care for Women more.
Were not Love's Inquisition here so severe,
I could teach um other doctrine, whose Liberty
Would please um a great deal better; but well,
Would I had my Moppet again,
At all adventures, for that's the likeliest thing
To a Wench I'm like to get here, for ought I see,
If they be taught a-this manner.
By Philostrates return
They should be coming; oh how my heart does burn,
And throb now, with doubtful expectation
Of the event!
SO now produce her.
Behold great Sir she's here.
If there be any Sympathy
In Lovers hearts, it is she.
Draw nigh then Nymph, and laying your hands
Upon this sacred Volume here,
Where on the skins of Doves and Swans
Love's holy Laws recorded are,
Swear; But swear truly, on penalty of no less
Than forfeiture of life if you transgress:
Unveil her there.
Ha, tic she! ye Gods it is she,
But Oh my jealousy, tell me some one
Skilful in deciphering Love's Character,
Whether that glance the superscription of
An amorous heart was directed to him or me.
What ails this stranger!
What means these sudden starts of hers,
And change of colour.
Veil her presently again, since she so ill
Governs her eyes, they are straying still—
Fie Nymph be more Religious-wise
And restrain those wandering eyes,
Who in objects takes delight,
Brings distraction with the sight,
In their breasts do never find
A holy recollected mind—
Now approach her nearer.
Now I shall know my destiny,
And whether I'm to live or die.
Now Philander thou shalt know
Whether she be true or no.
Now Philena thou shalt soon
Prove her faith, and know thy doom,
Proceed and swear then, thus I uncharm thy Tongue.
Then by Love's sacred Deity I swear,
I love one here.
Enough.
O blessed voice which heavenly minds applaud
With their celestial wings;
Oh me most happy!
And most unhappy I.
Did I not tel you it was impossible
But she should Love. O day ever to be
Recorded in the Calendar of Love,
For holy and festival; Which never may
Oblivion, that like a torrent rolls
All things along with it to the L•thean Lake,
Abolish the happy memory of.
Oh the Dissembler, how she 'as deceived me!
Conduct her again now to the sacred cell,
Where yet an hour she's to remain,
Ever we dissolve our magic spell;
And then with indicible joy we are again to produce her,
And solemnly deliver her for ever to repose
•n's dear embraces she has for Lover chose.
Praised be Love, that does command
In Fire, Water, Air, and Land,
And so gently does inspire
All in Land, Air, Water, Fire.
• should laugh now, if I were he she loved,
•s who knows but she may be enamoured
Of my person, as I of hers, there's nothing impossible.
•ell, for her sake I'll ne'er trust Stranger more.
•air Nymph, I should desire
The honour of conducting you to your lodging, If
't might not be troublesome.
Troublesome? who doubts it? why
You are nothing else but trouble.
Fie Flamette, this is discourteous,
And to a stranger too!
She tells you true,—pray be gone,
And don't trouble us,-you see there are some will ac∣cept
Of my Curtsy now, though you won't
Neither would she, did she know thee as well as I,
But let her go, when the ast abused her courtesy,
As thou dost others, to molestation, she'll know thee better.
But this sudden turn of Bellinda's affection
Is wondrous strange!
BEllinda false! O ye Gods where then
Are Faith and Vows and Oaths; nay where are you
Your selves; for I shall doubt who're Love
Have any Divinity now at all, and think
Ell's but Idolatry, and women that you're Angels
Till we make you Devils by our adoring ye.
There's no joy like your unexpected one
•t comes so striking—not falling upon
The expectation first, that dead and dulls
The blow. This intermixing difficulty
With Love, and leading you unto the very brink
Of despair▪ and then hoisting you up again,
There is the Art on it, and that she
Grand Artifex of it as she is
•ull well did understand.
The more I think on it, the more
•t puzzles my belief and imagination, I will
•uspend my faith and patience then until
•er farther Declaration may confirm me,
•nd give my passions their full carrier.
Heavens! I am so over-joy'd,
•o ravished with it, and in so high transport,
Me thinks like Motors I even walk in Air,
And have nought of Earth about me, nor other fear
But only presently to expire and die
•n Bellind•'s sweet embraces.
Nay then
Were my patience bound in Adamantine chains
•'d break um all—know Sir you have
Another Victory to obtain before
You triumph thus—and perhaps too the Fates
Have provided you another death to die
Than what you fear so much.
What's that I pray?
Why, to die by Philanders hand, for know Sir Bellinda
•'s my espoused.
Yours?
Yes mine, for all your scorn Sir,
And be assured, long as I live, that man
Is not alive shall enjoy her besides my self.
How's this? but this
Must be prevented
Wherefore or quit and relinquish your claim of her,
Or follow me strait to the shore, where she first
Set foot a land, that so that ground she then did tread
May receive one of us dead,
Who cannot be enjoyed by both of us alive.
Although bold stranger I might well decline
Thy challenge, not knowing who're thy quality
Be equal unto mine, and assured
Our conditions are not (by thine own confession)
I being as happy in Bellinda's love
As thou unhappy, which makes thee desperate of
Thy life perhaps: yet know I'll be so noble
For Bellinda's sake to kill thee this once my self,
Who else might leave
Thee to a hundred more ignoble deaths:
Nor is this Arrogance in me, but Confidence
That those who have honour of Bellinda's love
Cannot but come off victorious in fight.
•lated by good Fortune, you talk high Sir,
Pray Heaven you do so,—but Love
Shall straight determine who has the better cause,
The injust possessor of Bellinda, or
The injuriously deprived of her, If thou dare but fight
•n so unjust a Quarrel.
Ha, ha, ha, if I dare? for that never fear,
•'ll but instantly arm my self, and meet thee there.
STay,—
By order from Philostrates I'm to
Secure your persons.
Mine?
Hold,—
In Love's Dominion, where no force is offered,
•n vain is all resistance.—
Now though bold stranger the disturbance of
The peace here, and sowing of
Enmity and Dissention in a happy soil
Produces nought but Gentle Peace and Amity,
Deserves a more exemplar Chastisement, yet here
Where favours are to th'utmost extended, &amp; punishment
The most contracted,
Confinement to your Chamber shall
Be all your punishment.
And is it a-this manner then
Lovers in Love's Dominion are treated, not only
To be deprived of their Liberties, but of
Their Spouses too?
What Spouse?
Bellinda.
And is she then your Spouse?
All Greece can witness it.
Too much of witness already you have here,
If this be true. But this must be examined
More narrowly by Philostrat•s; mean time
Indiscreetly have you done▪ in publishing a secret
Might better have bin concealed, which now tic known
May prove Bellinda's ruin, and your own,—
You Euphanes
Have your Chamber for prison—you must along with me
I obey you Sir.
And I necessity.
SO now Sir my humble thanks
For the honour y'a pleased to do me.
Nay Lady, I'll
Wait upon you in, that's certain, I'm not
So coursly bred, nor so ill mannerd.
I should be at least Sir, to trouble you farther—and
Engage your curtsy so much▪
No trouble in the world,
•tic pleasure to me rather.
Pray Sir excuse me, I am presently
To go forth again on visit.
Why I'll accompany you,
And wait upon you thither too.
By no means Sir, it is to a friend of mine
You're not acquainted with, besides I have
Some business—
Nay an't be to a friend of yours
I must needs
Be acquainted with them, being so much your servant as I am,
And for your business, my presence
Shall no ways hinder its dispatch.
Now I think on it too, I must visit by the way
A friend of mine there lately brought abed,—
Won't that shake him off?
I'll wait upon you thither too. I
Am the welcom'st man amongst the Gossips,
You won't think how they love my Company.
Tic a sign I'm none then,—no getting rid of him!
Oh see in happy Time Flamette here.
Prithee Flamette, and thou love me, get me rid
Of this Im•ortune heer; is more tedious
Than a painful-sleepless night, and worser than
A Fever or Catharr, I am even sick of him.
Oh! have you found him then?
This comes of your complacency, I told ye so,
All courtesy is cast away on him, and discourtesy
Is no discourtesy to such as he,
Who either brag of favours they ne'er received,
Or el•e abuse those they receive of us.
I, I shall be sure
Of your good word still, but no matter what
You say, she knows me well enough, and I
Know what I owe too, to such Nymphs as she.
Nothing but a blanquetting as I know of.
Come Lady shall we go?
What shall I do to rid me of this Importune?
Why and take my counsel, a flat denial's best,
And if that won't do, a good Cudgel; I know
No other way.
Come, come, let her talk
Till her tongue's weary, and let us go.
Still does this Burr
Stick on me?
Burr? he is Pitch rather, defiles all those
He touches; it is imputation enough of Courtesan
For any Nymph but to be seen in's Company:
But hear you not the News?
H•h! she must come
Tattling with her News now!
No, what first?
The lamentablest and dolefullest.
As ever yet was heard in Cypress,
Will leave, I fear, no heart without a sorrow▪
No eye without a tear.
For heavens Love what?
Why Bellinda,
The lovely Bellinda, and so beloved of all,
Who merited to live beyond the natural bounds
Of life, this day untimely is to die.
Ay me! how so?
Condemned to death
By our Lands Laws, for falsifying her faith
To Gods and men, in swearing she loved one here,
Whilst it is proved she was betrothed before
Unto another.
And how's that known?
By a Stranger's arrival here
Just on the point she took the sacred Oath,
And proving her forsworn.
Strange! but on a strangers bare information
This may not be believed, there may be malice,
And consequently falsehood in it,—and may it not be
That other to whom she was betrothed, she swears she (loves?
The Oath you know admits no such equivocation,
Being expressly limited to some one in the Isle.
•nd so may he be for ought we know,
•hat probability of that?
•nd you at her lodging ne'er know of it!—
•o no, her guilt's but too apparent.
•gh, ugh, ugh.
•hat ails the Fool?
•h I've lost the best Wife, the best Wife
•s ever poor Husband had—what shall I do?
What shall I do?
Why prithee go hang thy self,
So we were rid of thee.
Oh, oh, such a Wife! such a wife!
• see now
The man is vain and foolish,—but this is wondrous strange;
The patient gods latter or sooner still
Follow (it is true) all crimes with punishment,
But just in the Act to meet her punishment
Declares them mightily offended—I can't believe it yet,
Where there is gain in sin, there is excuse
For sinning, but he sins twice who commits
An unprofitable crime, as must be this of hers,
To lose her life for nothing, for an Oath,
A breath.
Unhappy breath the Whilst,
And most unhappy she▪
That what is cause of others living should be
Her cause of death—but see where Polydor comes,
We shall know all of him.
FOr the Prisoners now you may restore um to they• liberties;
With prohibition only of wearing arms,
Death being their Rival▪ ther's no fear now
Of their farther Rivalship.
O Polydor
Is this news true?
Too true alas, unfortunate she the while,
Unfortunate we, unfortunate all the Isle.
Never gave Fate then a greater document,
If the fair Bellinda be to die,
No beauty's proof against death and calamity—
But this comes of dissembling, and now I see
That Falsehood and Dissembling are but twins,
And where t'one ends, the• other but begins.
OWelcom, welcome, and in this general dismay,
Tell us, since Love so gentle was of old,
As w'ar by Ancient Sages told,
Whence is it, that to day
He so tyrannical and cruel proves?
That's Fortunes fault, &amp; none of Love's,—for know,
Love and Death of the way once meeting,
Having passed a friendly greeting,
Sleep their weary ey-lids closing,
Lay them down themselves reposing;
When this Fortune did befall um,
Which after did so much apall um:
Love whom divers cares molested,
Could not sleep, but whilst Death rested,
All in hast away he posts him,
But his hast full dearly costs him;
For it chanced that going to sleeping,
Both had given their darts in keeping
Unto Night, who, Errors mother,
Blindly knowing not the one from the other,
Gave Love Death's, and ne'er perceived it,
Whilst as blindly Love received it;
Since which time, their darts confounding,
Love now kills, instead of wounding,
Death our hearts with sweetness filling,
Gently wounds, instead of killing.
Next, pray tell us with what fire
Our breasts are charged, that our desire
And hearts so vehemently should move
Towards the Object of our Love?
That speculation is more high,
And deeper the Philosophy;
Know, thât from the Impulsion
Of self-divided things does come,
Which separated, are in pain
To re-unite and join again,
As branches we asunder bend,
Forcibly again tow'rds one another tend;
For Nature did both sexes knit▪
At first in one Hermaphrodite,
Till finding by conjunction so near,
Both but more dull, and more unactive were
To edge their Appetite again
She severed and dis-joyned them,
Whence does proceed that gentle pain,
And longing appetite to conjoin again.
BEllinda to dye!
O ye just gods, whom yet I will not blame,
Nor asperse with foul imputation and stain
Of such a horrid crime, till she be dead;
And then though you shower down all your punish∣mints
And plauges upon my head,
I'll say it was cruelly and unjustly done.
O Heaven and Earth!
Why do's not to one sink under me? and tother
Fall on my cursed head, am guilty of
Bellinda's death? but yet it is needless too,
For though they both
forbear to punish me, I do so loath
My ha•ed life for it, I'll die in spite of them,
If flames, or steel, or precipices have any force
To take away a life.
To be conducted by Love only to Hope,
And have only a glimpse of Hope to light
Me to despair! if this be to Love and Hope,
Happy who hate, and those who desperate are.
To have sought her only to find her false!
And found her, only to be the loss of her!
Cruel Fortune thus to have lifted me up,
Only to throw me more violently down again.
But I dally and trifle, a friendly Sword
Might do me a pleasure now; and see in happy time
Euphanes who for need could help me.
Art thou there murderer? complete thy wickedness then
And take my life too, Bellinda's but half dead yet;
When thou hast slain me, thou shalt find the other half
Here panting in my Bosom.
I prithee spare
Thy reproaches Euphanes, and do not add
Affliction to Affliction; have more humanity
Than to wound a dying man: know I am more
Miserable already than Miseries self
Can make me, or thou thy self could wish.
Bellinda's murderer?
Yet killing of me thou might add unto thy crime.
But it would take from thine
By killing me▪
If thou know no better way
To die, than by my hand, I wish thee no
Greater punishment than still to live:
The Sword is Angers weapon, faint-hearted Coward,
Grief has a keener one, if thou can find it out.
Thou advisest well, a single death
Suffices not for Philanders crime indeed,
And I shall but redouble it, by seeing of her die.
THat a Nymph so fair and young
Should rush thus voluntarily upon
A sacrilegious Oath, and so incur
Her own destruction, 's a folly and rashness to
Be expiated equally with a prodigy.—
Go let a Sacrifice presently be prepared,
In appease the angry Deity.
Too much of Blood
We have already, the water of mine Eyes
Shall furnish out the rest of sacrifice;
As who's so hard-hearted, so avaricious
Of sorrow and grief, he would not spare a tear
From all calamities, to spend it here?
But see Euphanes. Now still and still
Do ye persevere ill-advised Youth to love,
Where you're not loved, and prefer Bellinda's
Falsehood to Philena's Truth?
Thy heart then never by experience it seems did prove,
Only to love where w'are beloved again
Is bargain, and not Love,—
And what, silly Nymph, avails it you
Toward the obtaining of Euphanes love, that Bellinda's false,
Who but collects from thence, no woman can be true?
Bring forth our sable robes, and let
The Executioner with the fatal Ax
Be ready against the hour expires.
Behold'um here.
Then whilst we vest us all in solemn black,
Let Music make a Funeral doleful moan,
For her, whose sad disaster moves the very Rocks
Unto compassion.
WOE to what we virtuous call,
Wo to fair and sweet withal,
Since she must dye who was um all.
Let um seek in all their story
They shall find she was their glory,
Oh! what heart then is not sorry?
Come Music with thy doleful tones,
Come Sorrow with thy sighs and groans,
And assist our grievous moans.
Since all love had of sweet and fair,
All the world of good and rare,
Is to perish now with her.
ROom, room before there.
She comes, she comes; now to declare
A Resolution great as its causes are,
Dare thou Philander, when her death we see,
Resolve to die with me?
For my resolve Euphanes, never fear,
I will not say to die with you, but her.
Now unveil her, whilst thus it is with pain,
O open the port of speech,
Shortly by deaths hand to be closed up again.
Ha! what means this deadly Tragic spectacle,
This Funeral Livery, &amp; those bloody Ensigns of cruel
And abhorred death! is there any thing can be
In Philanders presence able to frighten me?—
How's this?
Ha! he unkindly reject me,
Nay then away with all
These deadly preparations,
The shadows of death it self,
The Axe and the Executioner too,
For one unkind look of Philander's
Can kill me sooner than all the rest can do.
Thy Falsehood Nymph makes him behold thee so,
Occasioning all this affliction and woe,
To swear thou lov'dst one here, betrothed before
Unto another.
And what else should I swear,
Beholding my betrothed Philander here?
When passing along to take the sacred Oath
And hearing of his voice amidst the Throng
I glanced mine eyes aside,
And instantly espied
My dear Philander, For Lovers are quick sighted,
Though Love be blind.
Error of Humane minds.
How were we all deceived then.
Strange, but so it is in Religious minds,
Still in high contemplation
Error of humane things is often found,
As those who most do contemplate the Stars
Do soonest fall to ground.
But that I of all men should be so deceived?
Knowing my Bellinda so well, is an Error I
Shall ne'er pardon in my self, nor do I know
Dearest who're thou can ever pardon or no.
Well, well.
See how she sweetly nods, and smiling
Out the rest do's seem to say,
Well, well Philander, I'll be jealous another day.
Away with these doleful preparations then,
And resume your former joyful ones again.
Ugh, ugh, ugh,
I have lost the best Wife, the best wife,
As ever poor Husband had—But soft what this?
Alive again! and in another Arms!
How comes this about? this is fine gear I faith.
Why thou perpetual Doult,
Thou unconscionable Ass Thou; make People
Kill themselves with laughing at thee, If she'ave
〈1 line〉
Philander's, both before she arrived here,
And since, and now, when should she be thy Wife
I prithee?
Why even when she pleases,
I am ready for my part.
I dare swear thou art for any one.
See how hand in hand,
These happy Lovers stand,
So lost in joy for their escape from death,
As yet they do not know,
Whether they live, or no▪
Mean time you may perceive
By their ey-beams twisted, their fixed regards,
Their unmovable posture, and their minds surprise,
Ther's nothing glows so fast as Lovers eyes.
O happy pair!
Now safely to your Port arrived are;
Happy whose former suff'rance and annoy,
Does now but heighten more your present joy;
Happy, who after you've so long
On Fortunes rough tempestuous Seas been tossed,
May truly say, y'ad been lost indeed,
Unless you had been lost.
Oh my dearest, and don't my eyes deceive me?
My dearest, dearest heart,
Come, come, let's go, and take from Love,
And Fortune both, the power they had before,
Of making us ever miserable more;
For yet some farther proof there needs, and some
More true and real joy, to let us know,
Who're that w'enjoy be real, true, or no.
Lead on unto the Temple then,
There to conjoin them by Hymens sacred hands
In eternal, and inseparable bands,
And as unto the Temple they pass along,
Let the Chorus sing aloud their Nuptial Song,
ALL the joys that unto heart,
Heaven &amp; Earth did ever impart,
All the pleasures that the Spring,
Or Love, to Youth did ever bring,
All contentments too, that ever
Yet in any's bosom were,
With a Ravishment to boat,
At all parts answerable too't;
May blessed Hymen all, and more
In these Lovers bosoms store,
Till satiate with it, they may cry,
To piteous heaven,'t would let um die,
And to a better life translate um,
Where joys, pleasures, contents ne' teat um.
And won't you go along?
No Flamette, to a heart
And palate so sad and so out of taste as mine,
No Music, no Feast can relish, and the sight
Of others wealth and happiness, would but make me
More sensible of mine own poverty and misery;
Let them abound with happiness then, and surfeit with
Deliciousness, I envy not their fortunes,
But pity and lament my own.
Excellent sweetness! Heaven's my witness I
Heartily pity her.
But see where Euphanes stands, turned musing Statue▪
Who knows but now may be the fittest time
To move my Suit again? to love beyond
The possibility of enjoying, is Hope
Too far stretched beyond the end of Love;
I'll try then, now Bellinda's love
Is probably extinct in him, whether Philena's yet
Have any flame to enkindle it again,—
Euphanes—
Hence troublesome and importune,—
Out of how profound a slumber, and sweet
Reverie has she awaked me, whilst I imagined
With grateful Error, Philander's happiness
Might possibly have been mine own, had Love
And Fortune pleased,—the more fool I the whilst,
Who with these fancied joys, and imaginary wealth,
But feed my Thoughts, whilst I am starved my self.
Cruel and pitiless! Is this then all the thanks,
And reward I have, for preferring thy Loves
Interest to my own? and betraying mine own
Love, in pleading for thee to Bellinda
Against my self?
And what's the effect of it?
The ungrateful only judge by the Event,
The Grateful by the Act and the Intent;
Thy face belies thy heart, for that is gentle,
And full of Love; but with my heart now what
Shall I do, since thou, whose it is, reject'st it?
Would I could gratify thee with it any ways,
Though I tore it out of my bosom.
Prithee
If thou't gratify me, let me never see thee more.
And so perhaps (cruel as thou art,)
Thou never shall it;
My mind condenses with multitude of thoughts
I feel transporting me to somewhat high and brave—
Let's see;—but for that which we approve our selves,
And cannot be approved by others until 't be done,
There needs but small deliberation.—
Flamette, a word with thee.
FLamette,
Thou know the secrets of every herb and plant,
And nothing's in Nature so hidden and abstruse,
Thou penetrat'st not with thy skill; Amongst the rest,
I remember the other day,
Feeding thy Flocks in the pasture there below,
And spying suddenly one of thy tender Lambs
All-trembling, stretching out its fainting limbs,
And closing its dying eyes, thou straight cried out
A venumous herb had poisoned it, and bid
Lycisca bear him to the River with all speed,
And drive thy Flocks from thence.—
It is true;—and what of this?
Nothing, but the seeing these wondrous effects,
Gives me a curiosity to learn of thee
A little of thy skill; and to know what herb it is
That works so by surprise, it steals away
A Life so insensibly, one scarce perceives it,—
A friendly office it might do to some,
Who weary of living▪ fear not so much to die,
As the pains devancing death—
Take heed Philena,
This is a Curiosity more dangerous
Than knowing the cheats of Gaming, by how much life
Is more precious than coin,—and those
Who know these tricks, tic feared at need will use um.
Thou art deceived, they'd rather know them to
Avoid them; therefore I prithee tell me
What herb it was.
If you desire, as you say, to learn my skill,
I'll teach you the natures of a hundred
More soveraignly virtuous.
Malicious wench!
That wilt not understand me.
I fear I understand you but too well.
Must I be put to it then,
To discover a secret to thee that concerns
My life so nearly?
I, that's it I fear.
Yet why should I dissemble?
Dissimulation is child of Fear,
And how fearless are those who are resolved to die,
Not only of those lesser Tyrants, Want,
And Misery, but of those greater, Love,
And Fortune, of whom now I q•it all my fears,
Being Deaths subject, and no longer theirs—
Know then since thou't needs know it, weary of
Repulse upon repulse, weary of
Euphanes scorns, and finally weary of
•y wretched being, I am resolved to die.
•h! far from so gentle a bosom be
o cruel thought.
•hey are rather cruel would divert me from it;
•ruel as those would keep poor wretches still
•pone the Torture, rather than dispatch their pain,
•ut do ye know what it is to die?
I know what it is to sleep; the afflicted'st ease,
Repose of the weary, comfort of the distressed,
When all our troubles, all our cares do cease;
And sleep, and death; but in the length, and the
Continuance nothing differ, so as deferring
My death, thou but defer'st my happiness,
For know Flame•te when life is misery,
it is happiness to die.
You talk the while
As if all were fabulous of the other world,
Furies there were none, nothing
Their Torments, and no
Gods to punish those Impiously leave
There stations here on Earth ever they command.
Troublesome ignorance; those who understand
Their Language, the Gods perpetually command:
So when we virtue eagerly pursue,
They bid go on, when we abstain from ill
By repentance or avoidance, it is they who still
Recall us, or prohibit us, and finally▪
When we feel in us a desire to leave this life,
it is they infallibly command us for to die.
But consider—
Prithee no more consideration; Flamette I ask help,
Not counsel of thee, wo't do
What I desire?
I'll see.
Nay, who give us doubtful help,
Do but deny us in necessity;
Say it shall be done, yet that's too slow, prithee say
it is done.
Since bootless it is to deny you, I'll but run
To the mead, and instantly be here again.
Thou shalt find me in the Cypress grove—
So now my minds at ease, and it rejoices me
To think how I shall triumph over Love
And Fortune, yet o'er Love for Euphanes sake
I'll do it more gently, and not insult too much; but o'er Fortune
I'll march in state, while she to her despite shall •ee't
How I'm above her, now tramples me under feet.—
But stay, being to divest me of this life;
And strait to die, it is requisite I make
My latest Legacy; first then my sufferance I bequeath
To desperate Lovers, my constancy to death,
My sighs to the winds, to the ocean my tears,
To Bellinda my hop'd-for joys,
To Fuphanes my memory; and lastly, my hopes and fears
•o those would live in longer misery;
Philena will not; for the rest,
All other passions die with us, only Love
Accompanies us to the blessed Mansions above.
Just like a Dog wed's mouth watering at
A Frumetty pot had scalded his chops before,
I look after these Wenches now, who are all too hot for me;
Besides, that which keeps me most in awe,
Is the inkling I have of an odd punishment they have here,
To marry unruly Youngsters to old women, just
Like Dogs no•es, beyond all possibility
Of ever heating um, and this they call forsooth
Mortification, in the Devils name,
A good cooler for him, but too cool for me.
But see where my quondam wife comes here with her Gallant,
Who took her from me, my stomach rises at him,—
Scurvy fellow,—none but my wife serve his turn?—
A little thing would make me bombast him,—
If I thought he would not bombast me again.
NAy I could tel you too
A hundred other stories, as how the Cabin,
Wherein y'ad enclosed me from seeing
The danger of the storm, by a violent wave
Being washed away, and driven here on shore,
I ever since have only sustained my life,
With expectation of your arrival here;
My dreams, the faint shadows of our waking thoughts,
And oftentimes obscure representations
Of future Events, being so favourable still,
To promise me that happiness, and your life,
Till at last, wearied out with long expectancy,
And my six months Residence here almost expired,
I took resolution to abjure the Isle,
And depart in search of you, just as you arrived here,—
Mean time, I'll warrant ye, you ne'er thought of me?
Alas! no sooner I saw
Your danger, and was of the point
(Had I not violently been withheld)
To cast my self after you into the Sea,
But Pirats making tow'rds us
All resistless took us Captives, we paying so
At expense of our Liberties the Ransom of our Lives,
So straightly guarded the whilst, as till the other day
I was released, (I as soon could tell
To send to the other world, as well
As when you were) when repairing to
The Oracle, by its directions I found you out—
But tell me,
How have you past your time here ever since?
And pray, who is that Philena and that Euphanes
You've contracted so straight an Amity withal?
O you're jealous are ye?—I could find in my heart I faith
To defer answering you, till I had informed my self
What Mistresses you have had since I saw you last—
But not to hold you longer in suspense,
Know that Philena is a noble Nymph
Of Cypress here who when I was cast on shore
First found me, and hospitably entertained me,
And Euphanes one would needs love me against my Will:
To avoid whose importunity,
I promised if any in the Isle I loved
It should be him; now are you satisfied?
Or shall I bring you all Cypress to testify
How like a Salamander midst of other flames,
To all their admirations, I have still lived here as cold as Ice,
And yet you are jealous?
Not jealous sweet, but so covetous of the dear
Treasure I've in thy Love, as I confess
When thou pray in the Temple to the Gods above,
I even do grudge um part of it.
Fie, to those who have given't you all?
That is too much Philander,—but oh my dear
What would I have given a few days since for
The happiness I now enjoy, to which,
Through how many miseries have I past?
That, dearest, is it that gives our present joys
The sweeter taste and relish, none being more
Happy than those were miserable before;
But who are these come here?
Some neighbour Swains it seems,
Who in kind expressions of their loves, are come
To present us with some Pastoral show, or Rural masque.
WE, whose due Affections move
Us to congratulate your Love,
Are come in Dance, to personate
The Emblem of a Lovers state;
As how wav'ring twixt Hopes and Fears
He stands distracted, till appears
The Mistress of his soul and mind
To's love propitiously inclined,
When Hopes and Fears no more annoy,
But are converted all to Joy.
Can Joy be ne'er sincere, but still some grief
Be intermixed, to bitter all its sweets?
And is there nothing permanent here below,
But all, like the Sea, perpetually must ebb and flow?
Away with all light jollity then, and lets
With heavy sorrow prepare to weep again.
Alas! for what?
For poor Philena, who yonder lies
A dying, or rather by this time dead,
The lamentablest spectacle was ever exhibited
On Fortun's Theater!
Alack! alack, the woeful day!
Nay, nay, draw nigh,
Know you that hand? read there,
Cruel as thou art, if thou can without a tear,
And whē the ast read it, thou must have a heart of stone
Or rather none at all, if it be not mollified with it,
By Philena's own hand writ twixt tears and blood,
Who, after thrice she had cried out on Euphanes
Name,—as if it were he, cruel he alone that killed her,
Poor Gentle soul she dyed.
Cruel, barbarous Euphanes,
Nursed sure with Tigers milk, if a Tigers self
Were not the Dam of thee.
What writes she here?
—Hum!
Now triumph in your victory,
And glory in your triumph, to have slain
An innocent Nymph, with scorn and with disdain,
So great a glory t'ye, as Euphanes name
Amongst Nymphs and Virgins shall ever be the mark
Of infamy and shame, to shoot their hatreds at.
But why defer we to seek her out, and see
If possibly there may be any remedy yet
To save her life?
I am awaked
By their reproaches, but much more
By somewhat here within, now lets me see
I was to blame to use her so cruelly,
And now I perceive, for all our corporal and
External sight, we nothing see, till Heaven
Do give our souls within Internal light—
And art thou dead for me, for me?
O extremity of love, beyond even life it self—
And shall I nothing do for thee again?
I, it shall be so, thou'st got the start
Of honour of me, but I may o'retake thee yet.
NOt so fast I pray,
H'ad like to overthrown me,
And I'm little better than overthrown already—for
No Wenches! no Wenches! for love nor money;
Tic a hard case, this you'll say—but I'm
Well enough served, I longed for change of• Pasture,
And see what's come on it,
I shall return home again nothing
But skin and bones—but no flesh at all to be got—
But soft, what's this?—
What another Moppet?
They shall catch me no more I'll warrant um,
They know what baits to lay for me it seems,
And would make a Gudgeon of me,
But I'll watch um well enough for that.
A Nymph slain in our woods!
Unheard of prodigy, there are no savage beasts
And much less men so savage and barbarous
To violate the lives and Honours of our Nymphs—
Stay, is not that she there? alas it is
Too true, behold Philena dead—
Hum Philena, it is a strange case this
One cannot know the Moppets from the Wenches here,
They are all so dead and spiritless.
Stay! who is that
Stands suspitiously there, is it not he has murdered her?
Cease on him, and till he can acquit himself
Of the crime, let him stand charged with it.
Ah! now I'm paid
For my following of Wenches,
No warning, no warning would serve my turn,
And see what comes on it▪
Now if I be hanged, what a goodly exhortation
Shall I make, with an—oh good people,
Let all young men take warning by me; for
This comes of following of Wenches,
I've been a wicked liver in my days,
And one of the greatest Wenchers—and
See what't has brought me to,
The Gallows, a wry-mouth, a neck as long
As a Cranes, and so with a thump on the breast,
There'll be an end of Pamphilus.
I, Here she is—
Rest gentle soul, and may nought heavy lie
Upon thee, to press thee to the shades beneath,
But ever in the Elision fields, among
The blessed Quires o• Lovers, may thou be honoured, a•d
Adored as Love's Martyr, and in his Calendar
Be ever recorded as a Rubrique Saint;
Mean time, upon thy Anniversary day,
Each year, we'll pay our vows unto thy Tomb,
And to the King and Queen of Shades erect
Two grassy Altars, whereon we'll offer our
Libations every year, so as all living Lovers
Envying thee, shall wish them dead to have the like
Obsequies; and lastly, we'll
Inscribe an Epitaph on thy Sepulchre,
In reading which, all passing by shall know,
A gentler soul walks not in the shades below.
Room, room, for the most concerned
In this Catastrophe—Fair sweetest f•over,
By rigid Winter of Euphanes frowns and scorns
Untimely dead, what parentations
Shall wretched Euphanes use now, to appease
Thy angry Ghost?
And with what sad Libations shall I invoke
Thy blessed Manes? take here this hair of mine
I offer on thy Tomb; and fairest soul,
For ever wailed, for ever pitied, if
Thou't deign to look upon me from the Groves
Of fair Elizium, behold, behold
E•phones so strangely metamorphosed
Who living loved thee not, he now loves thee dead,
Thus ready wed's life to expiate the crime
Which he committed, in being the loss of thine.
Hold, hold, and know
Philena is not dead.
We trifle both,—away.
I adjure the sacred deity
She is not, but only by my Art entranced,
So deceiving and deluding her despair;
In witness oft, besprinkle but her face
With water, and you'll see she'll instantly return to 〈◊〉 again
Nay, if water may revive her, no other than my tears
Shall have the honour of't,
And if those will not do it,
I'll let out all my blood on her to boot.
Oh! happy we if this be so.
See, see, she begins to stir already.
Marry and I'm glad on it, for I began to stink
With the fright they put me in.
•a! where am I? in Hell I cannot be
•ince Euphanes who's my Heaven is here with me,
Nor can I be in Heaven, until I know
Who're Euphanes will be kind to me or no▪
Alas, alas, it is I rather my dear Philena am
In Hell until I know
Who're thou can forgive my unkindness to thee or no.
Nay, if it only does depends on that,
There is no fear, I can resolve thee strait,
W'ar both in Heaven Euphanes since for me,
I do desire no great• Heaven than thee.
•oy unto both, and joy then to us all
In the accession to our Festival,
Of the glad conjunction of his happy pair,
•the joy of which each has peculiar share;
Let us conduct um to their marriage then,
And whilst to the Temple they are going,
Tell um this most worth their knowing▪
Love that tends but too enjoying
•s satiate soon and eas'ly cloying,
Only that of the Soul still do's
Wax perfecter, and more lasting grows▪
So we compare those light desires,
Only unto blazing fires,
Whilst these like fire of the Element,
•ast always, and are never spent.—
Now what will Bellinda and Philander do?
For us here, where we have found our happiness,
We are resolved, better to conserve it, even to remain,
And exchange our native Country for this happy soil.
Beshrew me so wo'n't I,
For I've enough on it, if there be no Wenches here to be had;
Perhaps I may come here again when I'm old,
And have a mind to be good.
Mean time who put off goodness to old age, are just like those
Who defer their Creditors till all their moneys spent.
For you,
What should we say then for Conclusion,
But you're most welcome to Lov•'s Dominion.
You're most welcome to Love's Dominion.

WHat? The death of the brave General has begot discourse and change in Madrid; I hear the Action too, though most Noble, traduo'd by his Enemies; Wretches that durst not look upon the dangers his gal∣lant Mind broke through daily: Their Envy will not let him find peace in his Grave neither.
That cloud is dispersed now; it is true, at first we had the report of a total rout, and that the Enemy advanced to Pam∣palone, with which the affrighted people began to fall into some passion against him, who had been so unlucky as to command that day.
But when they were for certain informed of the following Action, How, contrary to all hope, he had engaged and stopped the Enemy, and at the rate of his own life purchased their safety by throwing himself into certain dangers, The whole City lamented his loss, and he has been honoured and mourned for as a General Parent.
And with Justice he might expect it; for Decius fell not more vowed the Roman Deliverer, then our General a sacrifice for his Country; But he is gone, and with him a Soldier, and such a one, Johanne, as his Enemies both admired and feared; We shall see how his Successor will redeem those miseries we are fallen into by his Envy and opposition of the dead General in all his design•.
Of this some other time, when we have paid those joys are due to the return of our Friend and Patron; Who if he hold his good humour still, there is news in Town will concern him much much more; The famous Paduana, Angelica Bianca.
Who? The Italian, our dea• General brought from Main? What of her?
The same; She is now the discourse of the whole Town; all the youth in Madrid dress themselves for her sake; Their Horses prance in no street but hers, hers are the Colours they all wear in the Prado; Where her Coach drives there is the dust, there is the throng; No song in fashion but her praise, her Story is the Theme of all the Muses in the Town.
Prithe• be quick and serious this is strange to me; Why now more then when her Patron lived?
That's the news; Know then, since the Generals death she is exposed to sale; Her price and Picture hangs upon the door, where she sits in public view dressed like Aurora, and breaks like the day from her window; She is now the subject of all the Love and Envy of the Town▪ it is sport to hear the Men sigh for, and the Women rail at her. And if Don Pedro be a Lover still, there is no need of Fairies, old Women, or Confessors, to deliver or return a Message; Now it is but so much a Month, and you are Patron; four days and nights in the week are yours.
You amaze me; it is true, I Love the Girl with all the passion youth can with Honour spare one of her humour; (but no farther) And if money or a sword can purchase her. I'll bid as fair a• another but I'll enjoy her.
Now do not I see that witchery, that M•go•k inner face; she is to me no such excellence, but that a Ma• may ••d greater Beauties in the two Sisters, especially in the Sar•ta.
Old Carlo, constant Carlo still; Thou art one of those believe it is a duty to love a Mistress till her Eyes change colour for fear he should get the name of an inconstant Lover.
Faith, Sir, we are the same Men you left us, I am for Pauline still; Yet I believe, it is rather laziness then constancy; we are acquainted; and though both are weary, yet both are ashamed to say so; and till she can find one that pays better, or I one that
pleases better, it is like to be the same dull Matrimony it has been.
You are patient men; keep to one Wench a year! I would wear one shirt, one pair of shoes, or eat of one dish as soon as let the Sun set twice upon the same sin of their form in my com∣pany; I would flea a kennel of Spaniels in the Dog-days as soon, for the Quarrey and skins of the vermin; I dare say, I have had a hundred since; all praised and adored by some body, though for∣got by me; such Saints as these I could never pray to; there is none of them have any charms in their eyes, no fear nor terror in their frowns, nor can their kindness surprise a heart; I never found my self grow greater, or less in my mind, when they were pleased, or angry, unsavoury, flat, insippid beauties, good meals meat, but no Feasts; no Banquet in their faces, Carlo; there's no Music in their Caresses, no Empire in ruling over such hearts; yet it is truth, Sa∣retta's voice and humour is good, and her skin not ill, but she is dull; a soul that neither youth nor beauty can awake; she only works in her trade, and sells so much love; a dull sufferer only, no acting party in the Bed.
That's not her Sisters fault; a Squirrel in a Cage, or a Dog with a bottle at his tail, will lye still as soon as Pauline; she has indeed as much fire as her Sister has Phlegm.
I, she burns her Cake, and the others comes out dough; their Ovens, Johanne, would be better heat if the fire were dive∣ded; and I cannot but wonder to hear thee praise her for being kind; I have beaten her to make her lye still; their kindness to me is like Dogs that leap upon me, and dirty me; a fawning dis∣sembling whore that frisks to all men, and is as free of her bones as her Sister is sparing of her flesh; she is the Emblem of a lean Prodigal that spends all; and Saretta of a fat Usurer that will spend nothing.
Yet she was once such an Humour, such a Dancer, such a Wit, such a Shape, such a Voice; it was Comedy but to see or hear her.
I, for once she was, and for once she may be all this again; and but for once, whoever shall practise her longer shall find her the other; besides, I am now weary of purchasing beau∣tie by the peny-worth; here one for a voice; there another for a shape or humour; no, Johanne, if Carlo's news be true, I'll sell all those ends of Gold and Silver; and turn out all those common peo∣ple of my heart; and fit the Palace for a Princess, and purchase that Jewel which is now at sale; and trade no more for days and nights, as I have done with these Cattle upon the Common; but raise a sum, and in the divine formed Angellica purchase all those several beauties contracted and united there in one which we find scattered and dispersed in other women.
Now is your time for a thousand Crowns a month; four days and nights in the week she's yours.
A thousand crowns a month! sure she makes but few Musters in the year.
Faith, it is thought she has vowed chastity; and takes this
way to be private, and I am of their opinion; for sure there are few will give so much money for a cast Mistress of any mans, bred in craft and dissimulation, and Mistress of her trade as she is.
That's ridiculous; for though a wife cannot be too igno∣rant which is honest; yet give me a Hawk in flying, a Hound that's made, a Horse that's dressed, and a knowing wench, so she learn it in her youth; Come, let's go to the Piazza, I long to see how she bears her humour; haste you home, Diego, and tell my Sister I am arrived; have either of you seen the Girl lately?
Not since the last feast, she comes not in the Prado.
You shall dine with me to day if you be not engaged, because we will talk the Town over, and her news.
Faith, and there have been some changes since you went will make you confess all are not guilty of ove-rconstancy, that de∣spiced, old, out-of-fashion virtue.
It was they and Don Pedro, which it seems is newly are∣riv'd from the Army.
Prithee stay till they are gone out of sight; those hungry Dons will think to make a meal with us else upon the remnant of their Sabbaths days dinner.
They have my curse that made the decree against Jews; my lean Portugese pretends Christianity now, and doth so devour my Bacon; a flitch, heretofore, would have lasted him as long as the old Law.
Would the Army were drawn into Garrison; I long for some fresh Lovers to dress our house; these grow so withered and poor they scarce keep Cobwebs from before our mouths, which they break with lean bits, God knows; mine only sighs of late, and in Poetry whines his passion; I told him last night I could neither feed nor cloth my self with Anagrams, or Sonnets; but desired him to let his Pen alone, and express himself with his Purse; so he gave me this Ring, and I returned him his Ode again.
And there is Shuttlecock, Cork and Feather too, their Pa∣tron and Comrade together, Don Pedro, now he is returned; we shall have all their visits in the afternoon, for fear of the charges of a meal.
My life upon it, they are gone to the Piazza to see the Picture and the Petti-coats of the Italian; if I had thought any man so mad as to give such a sum, we could have taken that course too; I hate the whores impudence for setting such a price upon her self, and undervaluing all us by raising the Market up∣on the opinion of her own flesh, as if we sold Carrion only.
It is the humour of most men, they love difficulty and price; slight them, they are yours for ever, Riches and a fair House, Plate, Jewels and Furniture, Petti-coats too; Death,
they'll make love to Petty-coats; nay, some Fools Court Quality a great Lady, though she stink above the Allay of Amber; One that never goes to Bed, all, nor sleeps in a whole Skin, One whose Teeth, Eyes and hair rests all night in a Box, and her Chamber lies strewed with her loose members, High shoes, false Back, and Breasts; while he hugs a dismembered Carcass, such as is fitter for an Anti∣quaries study then a Lovers Arms.
Peace, and hide close, what are these?
It is a proper Fellow, would I had Opportunity to tell him so; has he not something of the English Colonel in his face?
He has, and they are strangers; and strangers are our Plumbs.
And we their Wine and Banquets.
What do you mean? S'life, affront a Lady! prithee be Civil.
Pox on it, there's no Jest in abusing Ladies; We that are strangers to be first known by a Barbarous insolence towards Wo∣men!  prithee consider.
Why, good home-spun, honest, ignorant Country Gentlemen, what do you think these were?
Why, we see by their Men, what they were, some Ladies, Persons of Quality, going privately to their devotion; you see they are entered the Church.
These two are Ten whores in Essex.
Prithee speak softly; this rude humour of Scandal∣zing Women is ugly, and we shall be beaten for being in your Company.
Pray, Master Justice, give me your warrant; and if I do not prove them Whores, whip me.
This humour is worn old and stale, and to me as trouble∣some as straight Boots, or sore Eyes.
A king Teeth, a Salt Itch, a tired Horse, or a galled Arse; Death, will you believe me when you lie with her? It is strange Logic because your Bond is better then mine, I must not know Spain better then you; I'll be your Baud but I'll satisfy this scruple.
Do you hear? I shall be an unbeliever too, if I thought
you would give such satisfaction to all that have weak faiths in this point; for if these be of that Gentle-craft, I'll not give six pence for an honest woman for my use.
Yes, Sir, they are right, though they will neither be drunk take Tobacco, nor speak Bawdy; these won't swear neither, and yet they are whores; in all those fine Clothes and Jewels, which are their own, and right ones too; No bright blazing Bristow's amongst those Diamonds; These are sweet too, and wear clean Linen; None of your Roostlings, that lie in Cock-lofts, in the Suburbs; These have houses in the City, and lie in Beds, and in sheets as large as those Beds, which no Rug adorns, nor yellow Curtains stained with some Martyrs Story, without; and all to be hanged, and pinned like a Frippery, within; no Sea-coal, Faggots, nor fowl dishes, with broken bread, lying under their Beds: yet they are wenches.
Prithee, where do these Lady whores live?
Where no Constable, lousy Watch-man, Beadle, or Saucy Bell-man dares break into their Chambers; These will not be kicked neither; nor suffer your Blades, inspired with Sack, to break their Windows; These are not of Turnbal-Street, I dare assure you; For their feet do not stink neither; yet they are doxies, and shall be yours; or I'll be subject to your Character, of barb∣rous and rude.
Nay, nay.
A pox on these English humours, you come abroad to learn, and yet take it ill to be informed; Do you think the wise world will spend their fortunes al'Inglese, where you must pray, and pay, and not be suffered to tell neither; Hear you cannot in∣jure a Woman more then to conceal her kindness, nor give a greater glory to a Mistress, then by describing handsomely every part, and lively painting every Beauty of her Body, and her heart; who hides or conceals his Mistress favour here calls her ugly, or unsound; If you doubt what I say, follow them to the Church, and try your Fortunes.
By this hand, such a Wench would pass for a Person of Quality in any County of England.
Few Ladies, I have seen at any Sheriffs Feasts have better Faces, or so good Clothes; and if these be wenches, such Arguments as these may reconcile me to this unpromising Town, a place in which if we find not the Bowels, (hight the Kitchen, and the Cellar) better then the Prospect, or the Seat, I shall swear, Never King but Ours was ever so betrayed; is this all they can af∣ford him out of his Sixteen Kingdoms? By this Light, a Smiths Forge, and his Trough, are as cool as the air, and as deep as the Ri∣ver in the Dog-days.
I, that River; What a Devil made them build the Bridge so big?
It was in Imitation of the Ancient Romans, who, in their Conquests buried great Spurs and Bits, big enough to ride and rule Elephants, only to beget Admiration in succeeding Ages.
Two and twenty Arches, over a Kennel of Snow water! By this hand, there is not stream enough to quench the Mules shoos as they pass; the Coach wheels hiss as they drive in it, while Don Phaeton sits in the Box, and Apollo flaming about his Ears; it is the first River I ever saw Coaches take the Air in.
I dare say there are twenty Coaches cast away in it for One Boat; and a thousand Whores caught in her stream for one Fish, all the Summer long; The Curso looks like a Sea Triumph; Just so some Inland Painter makes Galatea sport; if you show us no better Pastime at Madrid then Don Neptune, and Dame Thetis coached in a River, I shall believe you a better Poet, then a Judge; and sooner read your descriptions then travel your Journal.
Those marinated Men and Women were not very Cu∣rios to day; Who saw them bathing in their Pickle; It was like Ovids description, when Phaeton fell; Me-thought, they looked like those afflicted heads of Rivers, and stood gasping like run-hounds in thick puddles, half above, and half under water; Meza Cotta, Meza Roast per Diana, and then watered high ways; Bless me what a Mountebank art thou, to praise this Nest of Turds which are laid with a kind of Pride, in such Order, at Every mans door!
Have you done? if not, I have so much pity and pati∣ence as will hear you out.
Done? No, by this light, as long as my Arms burn and itch thus; I'll as soon stand Sentry till my Pike grow in my hand, as put my self naked again in the power of their Inbeds; I would not suffer such another night for their Indies; By this light, a Leaguer Osteria Louse bites as venomous as a mad Dog, and then a new vermin called Punesies, more offensive then Garden Toads, or house Spiders in our Country; a Gnat here wounds like a Scorpion; a Bee not only stings, but stabs as mortally as a poisoned Dagger, and would destroy the People, were it not for Relics and Ma∣donas's that protect them.
Prithee let's forget these Calamities; and if it be possible save our selves by a wise and early retreat; a Town Quoth you! I have seen the Dust fly in many Towns; But I never saw Dust crawl but in Madrid, enlive•ed Dust, part Moor, part Castilian, all Louse.
Essex has none of these Grievances.
No, by this hand, it is Paradise to this; and our Oysters are worth their pearl, but this is from our business now; Either let us follow, and take our Fortunes; I have marked those partridges, let us find them, or the Ambassadors house.
To let you see I have more kindness then you deserve, I'll do either; yet I would willingly call Arrigo, at the Ambassadors, to witness what wretched things you would have been if you had •in seven years longer slept in Ale and Beef broth at Croydon.
Prithee do not name those savoury things; you know, there is no Jesting with my Stomach, it sleeps now; but if it
wakes, woe be to all Our shares at the Ordinary.
It is in this street; see, there are the Arms.
Who would you speak with, Friend?
Old England still, Gown and Staff: I warrant he would not have a Swiss seen at his Lords Door, for a Rose Noble; Friend, I would speak with Don Arrigo, if he be at home.
He is at home, Sir, you are sure; for it is Noon; This is an Englishman you may swear; how they are bred! Knock at an Ambassadors door at Meals!
Pray tell him, here are some Friends of his would speak with him.
His servant is already gone, they are in good Clothes; yet they look as if they had rather eat with him; Sir, I shall tell him.
How now, why do you shut the door upon us?
Friend, this is no time to leave the Gate open; it is noon in the Ambassadors Kitchen, and the silver dishes are loose about the house; besides, if I should let the steam out, there would be such a swarm of Castillians at the door, feeding upon it, here were no li∣avenge; Alas, Sir, we are forced to shut up all when the pot is un∣covered; and if you have not dined I advise you to retire, lest the smell overcome your Stomach, in this pure Air; These are a Na∣tion of the finest clean Teeth; if they use their Swords no oftner, a Scabbard would last an Age.
Prithee what Countryman art thou, that put so many R's into thy English?
A Britain, Sir, Glamorgan-shire, Srie, and Dam.
Take heed, dost know what thou hast done, to ask a Welshman what Countryman he is? By this light, it is ten to one but he falls into a fit of Heraldry or Genealogy, and then you have brought your self into a fair noose, to be bound to hear, how many aps, and ap Williams, ever he comes to Adam ap Munmoth.
Gentlemen to speak with me, and why do you keep them at the door? My Friend, the Wanton Wanderer still; what  new ill luck drives thee hither again?
Salute my Friends, and then I'll answer you; They are true blades, Hall.—Remnants of the broken Regiments; Royal and Loyal Fugitives, highly guilty all of the Royal Crime, Poor and honest, Hall; you see his Majesties marks upon us, English, and that gave us a safe Conduct, and here we are to snuff our wits.
The same man still; I see, Winning nor losing can •ange your humour; you must wander still.
The same, self-same still, and would not change for all the Sun hath shown; or the Sea hid; I would not be the Catholic
King, confined to one place, one company, one any thing, nor marry the Infant, though she had as many Graces as Nature could crowd into one Woman and be faithful; Change, change, Hal, of Places, Clothes, Wine, Women, Faces; It is the great and sir∣pricing Pleasure, variety is the Soul of Pleasure, a good unknown, and we want faith to find it.
Yet there is one exception to your rule, a secret which we'll discourse of at leisure; And I believe a Woman that may purchase you from this life, in whose Embraces you may find such varieties of Joy, as you may keep your Humour and your Faith too.
Who, me? I will not be tied to one Woman, Hall, for all the sword has won or lost; All that Love has given, or Lust has cost, all that Treason has bought or sold, could it be told down; I would not sell my freedom of that of span of days that's left me, for it all; I am no Mutton to be folded, Nor Bird to sing, though in a golden cage: Home, Hal, is all this to me, till in a Grave, I'll not be found at home; I am resolved those tame Spirits that can be conjured into a wedding Ring, and dance in that dull Matrimonial circle all their days, I pity their Bodies that must suffer this slave∣rye, and despise their lean starved Souls that threw them into those Chains.
We are of one Country, though not of one Mind; I'd name my Prison as you call it, and sing all my days; Yet I have seen the world too, and know a face would reclaim a wilder Heart then yours.
Tell not me of faces, Child; when I wink and call to mind the thousand beauteous volumes these Eyes have read over, whose stories I can scarce remember, though we set marks under their Peti-coats; Think not then a face can bind me, when her arms could not; My Heart will digest a Mistress in a night, and hunger again next morning; Surfeit to day of Youth and Beauty, and yet thirst all night for a new Friend; and those are the strong healthy stomached Lovers that thrive upon Love; A pox on your whining, sighing, Consumptive Platonic humours, your water∣drinkers, they cannot believe it, Hal, they cannot; else they would too, and only out of craft insinuate themselves to make their weakness seem Virtue.
Gentlemen, he is your Comrade; and though I will not pretend to know him better then you, yet I dare say, he does not only doubt our Faith when he says this, but I am consident he does not believe himself.
Sir, we know not what to believe, and yet, for mirth, we let all pass; He is one has past all Fortunes by Sea and Land; surfeits, and want of bread, loved, and been beloved again, and of that passion has tasted both the honey and the sting, thrown from his cradle into other men's grounds, naked, and unthought of by his Parents and Friends, and what was cruelty then, is his happi∣nos now; for being bred with the wolf he grew wise enough to thrive in the forest.
Those miseries set an edge upon his mind, with which
he eats through the difficulties of Fortune, and now emboldened by success doubts nothing; I have seen him in a morning put his hand as confidently into his pockets for money as if the Devil had been his cashier, when he knew he put them off at night, as empty as his gloves.
Why, if I had lived at Croydon all my days, I could have found money in my pocket in the morning, if I had left it there at night; Why, either of you can fetch a penny loaf for a penny, though you are Country Gentlemen, and if you can do this, why will you not allow our experience in the other?
Pray leave this discourse, and pursue your promise; The Church and the Ladies, shall we not see those sinners? Prithee let us not lose the occasion, we have but young Faiths and great doubts; Assure us these are wenches, and we submit, else we re∣bell for ever.
We are covetous fisher-men, and for want of Faith in better luck, would fain keep these in the Net; Prove these Mer∣chants of Love and his small ware, and we are ready to be cozened; A Heart, a piece or so we have to spend, and if they be kind, I care not how quickly I'm undone.
Who are these they speak of?
Our old Friends the two Sisters, that passed by even now; I staid Pauline, but she did not know me, yet she looked earnestly; A periwig and seven years misery, will change a wiser Man then I pretend to be.
I left them in the Church just now, if they desire to see them a Credo's time ill spent will satisfy that curiosity; Will you go, or shall I lead you the way? Come, I'll be your guide so you do not mistake it for the Welsh-man in me.
Come lead, and we'll follow you without this Apo∣logie. 
THey are strangers, I know by their staring, and Eng∣lish, by Don Harrigo; If he has metal he follows me, and if I have wit he's mine; for they say it is a kind hearted Nation, when they come first abroad; But frequent ill usage hardens their Hearts, a People that loves every thing, even them∣selves, and so kind to their Mothers Son, that they believe all women are so too; If this be one of that foolish Family, I shall so fit him for a Mistress. See, here comes Sanco, now, the news, where is he?
Gazing upon the two Sisters, they have formerly known one of them; It is the English Major that served here under Don Pedro's Father, he went hence in the beginning of the rebellion; You know him, he was Paulina's Servant, a wild fellow.
It is he, I thought I had seen him, Thomaso, it is Don
Thomaso; But let him pass, how goes our own business, did you speak with the other?
There was no fear of that, for you no sooner left your seat, but he flew to me; I find by his wheeling, he's an old Cock of the game, he'll follow strait and come alone, he would not let his company see us talk together; I am to expect him here, haste you home, and put on your best face.
Tell him, I am in Love with him, and Daughter, Mistress, or Wife, to some great person; Lament in my behalf the sad condition of a Woman of quality in this Nation, whose jealous customs will admit no occasions for Men to make their addresses to us, which exposes us thus to their censure, forced against the modesty and custom of our Sex to speak first; But were we so blessed to enjoy the liberty of other happy Nations, where Men and Women meet and converse without scandal—
What large heads, and herds of Cuckolds would Spain breed?
Leave fooling now, I am serious, say this in defence of my modesty, and that I beg he will not mistake my desires of seeing him; whose Eyes have taken such venom from his, as nothing but the Scorpion can cure the Scorpions wound; This secret tell him, I blush to you, my Friend and Kinsman; This, and some very very fine things, such as fools use to be tickled and taken with, Dear Sanco.
This is fine, by St. Iago, I could find in my heart to for∣swear your service; Death, have I taught you your Trade to be∣come my Mistress? Do I wear a sword, am I a Castillian, and shall a foolish Peti-coat, a shallow Woman, tell me what's to be said or done, to cousin a dull greasy brained phlegmatic Tramontano, how oft have I brought you dead dogs for visits? When I do, give me the tail for my pains; Till then, play your own part, go home, and attend your Q and leave me to guide this small vessel to your Port.
I am gone and will expect you.
These Girls with good faces, have the true magnetic virtue, and if a Man be a Blade, his steel will incline to them; I am but a scurvy Philosopher, else, me thinks a Man might prove the Load-stone; and the steel, the Fornication of the Earth, sure we are, there is a he and she in that Mass; and why not these the two Sexes? But observe how kindly she takes it to be ploughed too, and the deep∣er you put in the spade or culture, the sweeter; If I could read, per∣haps I might find some odd book would prove this further. At the Gate I'll stay for him.
WHat dull things were we not to know him? yet I am to be excused; But for you to forget a Man that had got your Maiden-head, what will thy Memory retain?
I confess he was not in my thoughts; the absence of seven years, that beard and Periwig, all conspired against me; yet I am glad to see him, he keeps his old humour still.
Thou love him, and I do not know for which of the two Reasons best; whether for taking thy Maiden-head, or giving thee Plums; it is much what seasoning will do, those kindnesses will taste still; else, to me he's none of those men I could dye for, or live with; there is too much of the Curd, and Dutchman in him; he is too white for my eye; if I were to take my choice of the three, the black should be he, I love the Raven in a man; those Pigeons do nothing but bill and prune themselves; nay, they ex∣pect a woman should Court them; and when they are won there goes such a deal of care for fear of spoiling them; Hang them, they cannot last a nights watch, nor stand the shock of a day of Battle.
The Raven dost thou love? the Raven then pursue thy choice, for he looks as if he were right Ravens Chick, a Bird that any Carrion will please as well as Venison; I am glad to find we shall not be Rivals, take your Crow, give me my Dove; there is beauty, youth and sweetness in him; a flower fit to be worn in a Ladies bosom; yet, if I mistake not, I have seen as stout and as high flying Hawks of the gray Male as any of your Kite-colour; would he were at home to try if I could get my Maiden-head from him again.
Why truly the man is civil; and it is odds but he will be persuaded to leave it where he had it after seven years use; it is al∣most as long as thou kept it.
And yet if you had not been weary of it first, I believe he had not had it so soon.
Faith, as good I sell it while it was there; for I was afraid thou would have plaid with it till thou had lost it thy self.
It made me a friend then, I do not know what he is now; and though they have an ill name in the world this last seven years, for bloody and cruel; yet I never saw any of them that were not kind, well natured, and frank to their Mistress.
An improvident sullen race of men, that will spend or give a hundred pound rather then pay five shillings; governed by a nature cross to all other Nations, I have known them take a kick from a stranger, and kill one another for a wry look; they are go∣vern'd by no Rules; either impudent beyond Mountebanks, or else blushing sneakers, bashful as Girls in the Novitia; I know no∣thing good in them but their humour of giving to their shirts when they drink.
If I mistake not the Nation, you have made but an ill obe∣servation; Dull and Phlegmatic as you believe them; their ac∣quaintance will tell you Don Thomaso has no such fool in his fore∣head as you read there; step before, I see they follow us.
SEE, there they go; halt a little, and give them law enough; the Course will be the fairer.
Not too much law, pray; consider, it is but a Puppy-lover that runs.
Gentlemen, whilst your mirth hath so good a jest as this in chase, I am contented with any part of the sport.
Where is Edwardo?
He has lodged a Deer of his own; I saw him steal out of the Church, and follow a good woodman that gave him the sign.
Why so, there is one of the Covey flown; if I were to give an account of him to his Parents now, it were fine; to cry a lost English Boy of thirty, it would be welcome news to his friends if he had any; this it is to travel with a Justice of peace, when he is out of his Clerks sight that keeps him in awe; the Rogue was only hedged in with the fear of his neighbours, and the Penal Sty∣tutes at home; now he's broke loose he runs neighing like a Stoned∣horse upon the Common; I hope she'll find him a young Traveller, and dress him fit for our mirth, that we may have a revenge.
If she be a practised sinner, he is fitted; perhaps, she'll sell him to the Spirits that take up Planters for the Indies, or flea and beat him; and then turn him out to seek his fortune; what hue∣more is he of that he runs thus wildly alone?
What humour is he of, he runs thus wildly alone? an English elder Brother's humour, bred in a Nursery with a Bib and Muckander, and a Maid to tend him till he was in his Teens; one that knew no joy beyond a Birds-nest, Angling, or a Play-day at twenty; one that is whipped in a Free-school, and would cry and scramble for Nuts till he was out of his Wardship, and lay with his Grandam till he was married; A pox upon him, he has all our money about him; and if she rob him she plunders the party.
Never fear him, he has a sufficient ill nature to defend him; beside the blessing of pride and self-love; which will save our moneys from any danger his bounty may threaten; Marry if she should profess love to him, and can persuade him handsomely to believe it, there is some danger; else, if she get above his Ducat, geld him.
That's no good ground you go upon, twill not save him there; these women are none of those tender-hearted Lovers you find in Comedies, that sigh at first sight; and run mad for strangers in the second acts if he go into her house she has all she desires; and will either pluck his Plums by flattery, or else so shake and cudgel the Tree, he'll be glad to let them fall; then that Rogue you saw entertain him, and talk with such gravity in the Church, is her Pimp, and a Bravo; a slave condemned to the Galleys for
more murders then he has Beads upon his Rosary.
For beating him, I'll venture that; and it is odds but he'll beat some of them if they speak twice without respect or beyond his knowledge; the Rogue is stout enough, and twill be as hard to beat as please him; but let him pass and tell me, Ferdinando, how do you like these visions? I am for Saretta, it is a brave plump Girl, there's substance in her; her heart has room to dance and play in her breast; the Rogues soul lies soft and white; and in these Dog-days to lye in her arms is sleeping in Fresco; your lean women in the Summer burn like kindled Char-coal, I must find some means to purchase a sin, or so with her. Come, let us go see them.
THis is the Picture of the Angellica Paduana, that was Mistress to the dead General; her friendship is not to be purchased under a thousand Crowns a month, for which her Lover is Master four days and nights each week and she his Servant.
SEE, they are come; prithee observe, with what malice and envy yon women look upon us.
They are vexed to find the Trade so refined by a stranger; alas, they have no ambitions here, but to secure an Oleo to dinner, and a Coach to the Prado; a pound of Bacon, and a Royal of eight transports them; would our conclusion were tried that we might return to Venice; if ever you be tempted to leave that Pa∣radise again, may some mangy Don ride us through Madrid; twill be another condition now with us, you have youth and fortune to spare, you may look about and choose your man to make a friend at leisure; we can eat now without being forced to sell our liber∣ties but upon our own conditions.
I would not stay a meal in this Town; but for the vani∣tie and pleasure, to see and be seen; while the General lived, his
jealousy made me lye hid in the world, neither seen nor enjoyed; chaster then their Nunneries had my mind been as innocent as his Bed. Profit and to be sought was all my pleasure then, with which profit I will seek my pleasure now; the doubtful world scarce believed I was handsome: thus I shall remove that doubt, and leave a name and memory behind me; the novelty and hue∣more, besides the price, will beget discourse; I know there's few will give the money, though he is not born shall enter under; for though I want no money, I'll have the gusto to see them gaze, sigh and wish for what they have not the hearts to purchase, nor merit to deserve, gratis; and when our nine days wonder's over, we will be∣gone; and in our own Sphere enjoy all our souls can imagine of peace and pleasure; get the Theorbo, I see some coming.
Now Comrade, what are the conditions we must sub∣mit to before we can spend an hour in conversation with your La∣die? I am her Country-man.
Sir, be pleased to read that Paper, twill inform you.
A thousand crowns! Cape Bella per Dio, Ma Cara. 
What said they?
He's of Millain, Madam, and would fain have seen you; but they say a thousand crowns is dear, though you are fair.
Is he of Millain? would I had known it, the price should have been two thousand Crowns, to him, for his Generals sake.
Ha, the Furb has a mind to give horns to his Generals Ghost; see here comes more men, but I fear no Merchants.
What's this? a thousand Crowns! sure it is a mistake.
Not at all, Sir, a thousand Crowns is the least price.
Doth she give or take so much by the month?
One as soon as the other, there is two O's mistaken sure, a thousand Crowns, pray is she not mad? thou hast black-lead, prithee write it down, there are so few good Whores in Madrid, that an Italian holds at a thousand Crowns a month; the next Mer∣chandize we bring shall be every man a tame Whore; a thousand crowns? why it is a portion for the Infant, and a good one too, if we keep Catalonia, and Massaniello Naples. There's nothing to be paid for seeing your sight, is there? 
What said they?
They were of opinion the Painter had put in an o or two too much, and asked me whether you gave or took a thou∣sand Crowns a month? they were merry, and said, it was a pore∣tion for the Infant, and more then the Catholic King gave with his Sister now in France.
They look, indeed, as if they wanted a service and wages, but not such a Mistress.
A Mistress! a Livery would be more useful, or a Lane∣dress; what Linen they wear! Boots and no Cloaks in Madrid; Monsieur! monster, you should have asked them what Trade they were of.
You may see by their Men they are of the Genie petits the poor people expected so long; and we shall find them by the stink the rusty Bacon leaves in the Town; their Linen's hired by the month, you'll not find two shirts in a Family; and for smocks they have no such word in their language; they prize a woman! their Cur∣tezans dare not show their faces; their Prince will beat his Whore; they are seldom paid, but always robbed when they come amongst them; how they would demolish our Trophy, if it stood upon the new Bridge, in spite of old Halls Ghost in Brass, though he were a friend to the Petti-coat!
No, faith, never think they should bear respect to their dead King, since they do not do it to their living; the three Chri∣stian Kings are so used by their vassals; Frondeur, Round-head, and a Massaniellian; which is the worst devil of the three?
There's no Rogue like your Round-head, a dissembling, insolent, bloody, blasphemous traitor; whose originals were no∣ver got between sheets, nor lay under one, but the Sextons, in cha∣rity; Rogues that had of right only a grave a piece, in those three Kingdoms, which they so long reigned over.—See more Sons of wonder, Gazers, though no buyers.
No matter, I have my humour in their wonder; when we are gone, this will live upon their Stage; and be a Theme for a thousand discourses; all which are Trophies to that vanity which pleases women.
But a thousand crowns! would I had passed here before I went to Rome; I could have had her as cheap in my Bed as a Coach in the street; would she would take bills upon my friends, I'd give her two thousand.
Only ready money passes here; there is no credit, Sir, in this Trade.
Let's go lye privately two or three months at Salamanea till my bills come, and then return.
Or till the King pays me, and then I'll furnish.
Well, and how?
Why these are kind-hearted, civil men, but out of Cash; but if you will take Bills of Exchange to Cracovia, or assignments upon the moving Scotch Factory in Poland, the Prince is your man; or if you will deal upon Account to be paid when Braban∣la gets his money of the King, he is all te mall your servant.
Wishes will not drive our Mill, though I confess I am
not displeased with him that would buy if he could.—See some one to steal because he cannot purchase, how they are hid in their cloaks! she'll catch all; see how he stalks to the Bird; fear not, Sir, she'll sit still till you shoot; what! they are dumb.
Yes, but I know them; it is Don Pedro and his old Com∣rades.
Don Pedro! his Father died last Spring and left him a Million; it is the same that was wont to vex us with inquiries.
Is this he? I have known him beset the street as if an In∣quisidor had been hunting a Jew; if I guess right, he's likely to purchase one month of idle time.
He is rich, and I believe frank enough; but they say he is of an insolent and froward nature, and so jealous he will neither lead nor drive, a proud valuer of himself; let's be gone before he return; some men are got with shadows, and some birds with chaff; others that are wiser will have the corn in the sheaf; and Don Pedro is observed to be a better Lover in a window, then in a bed, and will give as much to be rid of a Mistress, as to purchase her; therefore I am resolved nothing but his golden-key shall let him in.
They're gone, and we will even turn our Lady to the wall, and to dinner; I am of opinion this bait will catch no fish; I'd be loath my wages should be deducted out of the first fruits of this project.
What is it to us, whether it thrive, or no, so we are paid? the sooner she finds her fool we are cashiered; and though it be but a dull trade to stand watching of shadows; yet it is better then bread and match, a frozen naked Sentinel in Flanders.
Nay, I am not so wanton as not to taste the sweet of feeding well, for nothing; it is a Crown of Plate a day, easily gained, to be a Knight of her Post; but I fear that remedy will cure her fit sooner then good counsel; two crowns a day hardly earned will quickly appear a dear price for folly, and quench the heat that bred this opinion of her own face. By this hand, she should have got more in a Booth with the Elephant, for two pence a piece.
Pray let us in, and keep up the humour, rail at and de∣spice the Spanish avarice that knows not how to employ their In∣dies to the right use; and be sure to admire her beauty; vain wo∣men are ships that sail only with windy flattery.
It is the same by all descriptions; is she handsome?
Esteemed one of the most Garbato in the Town, virtuous, young, and a high flyer is her character; but I have no practice with her, I am now going that way, and I'll inform my self particularly; Gentlemen, your humble servant; Don Thoma∣so, I hope, when I can be serviceable unto you or your friends you will command me.
Lucetta do you call her?
Yes, Lucetta, and her house is near the Jesuits.
No words, pray, that we know any thing of his haunt; he is a young man, but time will reclaim him.
Prithee, who is this that knows all the world? By this light, he has described Edwardo as if they had lain in a Belly; he has a shrewed memory; I'll take heed how I promise him any thing; but I fear his credit is not so good as his observation; for though he be a blade, his scabbard's old; how he eat at dinner! if his heart be as good as his stomach he is a brave fellow; prithee, what is he?
It is a fellow of a most temperate soul; one that makes his own humours his slaves, and himself a slave to all other men's; I have known him long and in divers Countries, a kind admirer still of the place and people he was in; as if it had been his own Country or Family; and it is thought he can live in all Countries but that he was born in; one of his maxims is, No man has wit that cannot be what he will, upon all occasions, in all companies, and in all conditions; Harrigo knows him better then I.
By this character you are no stranger to him; this is he that travelled with a young Lord, a Country-man of ours, till he spent and sold even his name, for he was feign to change it; it was not currant where they past; and at last were forced to hide themselves in Pilgrims weeds, and beg devoutly home.
What could he say after such an action? methinks he should fly the conversation of men.
I met him in that condition; and he told me, it was for devo∣tion, a penance they had vowed for a great deliverance in Germany.
What? they fell from the Butt at Heydelberg, or stumbled into another of Bachrac.
No, but miraculously delivered from a party of Swedes that robbed them; but had you heard him gravely applaud the hue∣more of such who voluntarily put themselves into those private habits; so by a Philosophical hiding a mans self to peep and spy upon the world through a cranny, as it were, the only best way to see and judge the true natures of men, who commonly are more free and unbent before the despised poverty of such whose eyes and opinion, as cheap and low things, they esteem not.
But when his Baits take, or the merry bill comes, then it is true the plain Clothes show the sober solid man; yet abroad, the habit and the men distinguish the Persons; and for his part he hath found it an Advantage still, to look like some body, and good Clothes pays us in respects, and observation, what they cost in the reckoning; so, long hair is comely, till it falls; Then short Civiller, and less subject to disorder with a Beard sometimes in the Greek-Mode, rough and unhewn, sometimes Spanish-Biggateroes starched to his Ears, and upon a sudden, those formidable Whiskers reduced to a pair of Eye-brows, and those plucked with Pincers, till they stare like Pallizadoes, or a row of Pins; These things he will suffer, and be rather thought out of his Wits, then out of the Fa∣shion; but see who comes to break off our discourse.
Thomaso, Ferdinando, Harrigo?. Your hands all, and as you are kind friends get me a dark room, and clean straw, before this flood of Joy and pleasure oppress my Brain; Ferdinando, hark you, will you buy any Land at Croydon? I'll sell you all, by this light, house and woods uncounted, and at an under rate too; for so much saved here is so much got there, and here I'll build my Ta∣barnacle; Thomaso, thou art a kind Friend, thou hast Wit and Judgement, and know how to choose; I have been an Ass, and Cozened all my days, but my Eyes are opened, and I repent, and ask thee pardon for abusing thee, and the place; Ferdinando, such a Mistress, so handsome, so kind, and full of all those Beauties the curious eye and kind heart seeks, and all for Love; She sighed, and smiled, and kissed, then sighed again, and wrings my hand, sure it is a dream; yet her Arms me-thinks hang here still; Prithee try if thou can taste her kisses; The Odour and the dew I taste them still upon my lips; I never felt such a melting Snowy Girl; All her kindness, with such a Grace, such a Majesty, such Crowds of plea∣sures in her Arms, I could scarce crawl from betwixt them; And from her door to her Bed but two steps in Love; What wretches were we to come so late abroad; Now Thomaso's descriptions taste; Now I savour his discourse, and by this One dish can judge of those Feasts of pleasure which We use to listen to as To∣mance; Ferdinando, If thou wilt be happy sell all, and let us two plant here.
Not all; Keep the Birch-wood to jerk this Joy, it is too hot to hold, Ned; yet I rejoice you have so good Luck, a Mistress that you dare tell of her kindness, it seems, your Spanish Loves enjoin no ungrateful Secrecies; No troublesome Honour, to throw Thorns in a Lovers way; She fits thy humour, who had as lieve be publicly poxed, as privately hapy; do you know her Name?
Her Name? no not I. What matter is it for her Name, a kind young and handsome Woman; what a pox shall a man do with more names then these? I shall not marry her.
What did you give her?
What did I give her? What do you think she is to be bought? No, Sir, Edwardo is not every body; give her? Why, are we in stock to buy such a Woman? No, not to purchase a kiss; give
her? by this light she gave me this Chain for the foolish Dia∣monte you saw me wear, and then such Wine; it was a Present sent her by that Grandee you saw me speak to in the Church; hoe's a civil, well bred man too, I warrant him; I am engaged to sup there to night.
We'll go with you.
Not a soul; No Gentlemen, you are of the Wits; I'll foal∣low mine own fortune, and when I have suffered Loves violence for a Night, Ten or Twenty, then I care not if you do see her; But not a kiss till I have surfeited.
After all this Joy I would be certain your Purse were safe; You know it is all our Stock; Come, pray impart; it is no time to venture all our Fortunes, in one Bottom, especially when you are resolved to sail without a compass.
Here, Take part, or all, if you will; useless Trifles now to me that can command such a Girl, and her full Fortune; Don Har∣rigo, pray favour me with your Servant, to buy my Supper, and to choose the wine.
How the Infidel is turned Idolater! and he that would be∣lieve no Woman faithful now believes and dotes upon a Common whore, she works like a crafty one; and if she be right Spaniard she'll discover some of the old Serpent in her.
Never fear it, Ferdinando; It is but the malice of men, that disperse those scandals, to brand the Nation; what time of day is it? I have not dined.
Marry, you must feed; Venus will have Bacchus and Ceres too; Else you'll be but cold Company.
I begin to believe the Rogue has met a Fortune, how∣ever, he has tasted of her and her Bottle; would I had such an one to cousin me too; of all the Love I could spare to Night.
Hark you, Ferdinando, be patient, and answer me; have you observed such a scarcity of men in the streets as to believe a handsome young Woman need run Rampant for want of a man? or do you see any such temptation in Edwardo, that he should make a wench choose him out of Fifteen Kingdoms, to offer up her youth and beauty for nothing? Observe me, she'll abuse him.
ANna, what musing! give me the Theorbo.
I was thinking what sullen Star reigned at your Birth, that has preserved your youth from being in Love, that green sick∣nos of the heart that vexes all our Sex, early or late.
A kind and a thrifty star, to which I owe my chief hap∣pines; yet there are Natural Reasons too; For, to speak ingenu∣ously, how should I become a Lover that have not so much lea∣sure as to wish or long for any man; All I see are offered before I
asked; I have refused many, and enjoyed more, but never yet desired one since I parted with my first Friend.
Nay, I'm clearly of Opinion, love thrives more in a Mo∣nastery then in a Court; A Nunnery with a high wall and double grate, there Loves grows mighty and Imperious; What would those Prisoners give for the Crumbs of Lovers, that sigh and fall from your Bed; the Table where Love banquets either refused or surfeited.
Did thou observe, the other day, how the poor Girls crowded to the Grates when we came in?
Yes, and it was easy to read their Curses in their looks, that darted poison at us; Their eyes were poniards in their wishes, for envy of that life which we loathe as much as they Covet to taste.
It is sad to see youth and beauty so betrayed, condemned and forced by Covetous Parents to wither in those shades; Roses in their prime of Beauty, of Force to have led Nations in Tri∣umph; Their Sighs and Tears have Rage and Pity in them; how they beat themselves against the grate, like old sullen Birds put lately in Cages!
It is a misery I have ben acquainted with; and I wonder no State hath been so Curious as to condemn some young Male∣factor to be thrown naked into a Nunnery; you talk of your Royal Chases, and Jocodotories; I had rather see a Kennel of Nuns worry a Friar of twenty, then all the Boars launched in the Forest.
Bless the man so condemned; as good thrown in the Lyons Den; how that Novitia's teeth would water, whose turn it was to read a Chapter while the Abbess tastes his forbidden Fruit!
What have we here? New men? No, it is the same Dumb Crew; would they were condemned to the Experiment for walking thus muffled in the Dog-days; if he continues he will be baked in his own Oven; That Scarlet in August looks Red-hot, and it is enough to set ones eyes on fire this Month; he is poisoned, I see by his swelling so; so, do, do, gaze; yes, yes, it is she; compare them to∣gether.
It is an Excellent Picture, whose hand can it be?
Van Dikes, and it is well done.
He was a great Master, and a Civil Penoil.
Why, do you think he has flattered her?
By Saint Jago, he cannot; Observe her without preju∣dice; Is there one Grace, one beauty more then she set before his Eyes? And softness, such as pencils cannot reach; That smile, there's a grace and sweetness in it Titian could never have caught.
Why do you hide your head then, when you know there's thousand sweetnesses are to be sold, Three for a Crown?
Were I Don Pedro, I would Resolve that Question ever my Month were out; it is true, kindness is the best sauce, I know, to Beauty, and will increase, nay beget an appetite; But sure, He that loves a Woman, if her face prove not his sauce his stomak's ill, and your scruple should never trouble me; To have shut out Don Pedro, and now let in his Money.
No more, they observe us; she has her Theorbo in her hand, I hope she'll sing.
See, Our Merchants are returned, and new ones are arrived; what are these?
Strangers by their Colours, and their Clothes; some Officers from the Army.
See, we are upon the place; Now observe with what Gravity and Decorum Whoring is settled here; By virtue of the In∣quisition, in this most Catholic Country.
That pillar, what is it? a whipping Post? it is the first gild∣ed one I have seen.
They are very neat, to paint and gild their Gallows; See, there's a picture upon it, it is some body hanged in Effigies.
That wonder is it I told you of; it is the picture of the famous Italian, the Angellica; See, shoe's now at her Window.
I see her, it is a lovely Woman; hark, I hear a Theorbo, is she Musical?
Judge by what you hear; These are the two Si∣sters in the other Window, and that's the Polack Prince with the Saretta.
Peace, she'll Sing; What a Garb she has? A Thousand Crowns? By this Day, a thousand Kingdoms were not dear; a pox of this poverty, it is always heavy upon these Occasions, where no virtues can make a mans way. Bread and water I can digest in a fur∣row upon a Rendezvous, and sleep in it, without thoughts of Envy, till an Alarm wake me; And then start up from among those Clouds, when the Trumpet sounds, as if it were Doomsday; Custom and Honour, Hall, makes that sufferance nothing; Nor has ambition or Fortune any Beauties, that tempt me; But as they can purchase Beauty, which we see set at a Rate, like Flesh in the Shambles, and spoiled too, like that, by ill Cooks.
Hark, she Sings.
COme hither, you that Love, and hear me sing of joys still growing;
Green, Fresh, and Lusty, as the pride of Spring, and ever blowing.
Come hither Youths that blush, and dare not know what is desire;
And Old men, worse then you, that cannot blow one spark of fire.
And with the power of my enchanting Song;
Boys shall be able men, and old men young.
Come hither you that hope, and you that cry, leave off complaining.
Youth, Strength and Beauty, that shall never die, are here remaining.
Come hither Fools, and blush, you stay so long, from being blessed.
And mad men, worse then you, that suffer wrong, yet seek no rest.
And in an hour, with my enchanting Song,
You shall be ever Pleased, and ever Young.
How now? what would you have, Sirrah?
What Insolence is this? Death, I'll not suffer it.
Stay a little and observe; you see they are strangers, and perhaps it is Ignorance.
What doth the Ruffian mean?
Why do you take down the Picture? restore it, or we shall force it.
How now Rascal? Sirrah, put up your sword, and quick∣lie, do you hear? or by this light I'll draw mine.
Why this violence, Sir! what right have you to this Picture, more then another?
Possession; and I'll keep it; you, perhaps, have money enough to purchase the Substance; We poor folks must be contented with these shadows, unless she were to be fought for, and then neither you nor the proudest in Madrid should out-bid me. Lady, do you grudge  the honour of this paper? If not, I'll keep it, in spite of all these frown∣ers, and show it, in honour of your Beauty, through all the world.
I am confident, Sir, you will; and I am so far from being displeased, that I shall take it for an Honour you will keep it.
Your Servant, Lady, and here I'll wear it; a Buckler against all that dare be angry, what ere they be. 
S' death, shall we suffer this? you are very brave in your words, we'll try what your sword dares do.
Beat us at this sport, and we'll wear swords no more; Why, a Pigeon will fight for his Hen.
Don John, Don Pedro, Don Carlo, what do you mean? Sir, to you that seem to have some kindness for me, hold, I conjure you by her you love most, by her that loves you most, I conjure you, hold; They are all deaf, run down, Anna, make those Vile∣loins leave siding and part them.
We are lost, undone, you and I, all, all lost and con∣fiscated to the State; It is some plot upon you; that Ruffian is set on purpose to destroy you; it is some damned Soldier hired to this; Those Soldiers, those damned Soldiers; it was never a good world since that race of Men and buff grew in fashion; In peace the Rogues use to sneak from cellar to cellar, and conversed with none but Alguaziles. 
Haste, I say, follow, raise the street, ere they Murder one another; It was Don Pedro's Insolence that cause this; what pretence had he to question him?
Pray let us retreat, before some worse consequence follow; You know, these are a Nation that will not be affronted.
You bleed, are you much hurt?
Not I, it is theirs if there be any blood.
If your Dons fight no better then this, they will never recover Catalonia; why must he be concerned in taking down the paper?
By this light, we'll have the picture too; We have won it in Battle field, fairly won it; The Knights and Giants are fled that should have defended it: Come, Ferdinand, lift me; I'll take it down.
Hold, Sir; and ere you do me an injuy, give me leave to speak to your Friend; Sir, as you are a Soldier and a Gentleman, I expect protection from you; It is their profession to defend, not injure Women; and I am so far from deserving ill of you, that I know you not; Yet if you please to come up, I am confident we shall give you full satisfaction for all the displeasure you can with Justice imagine me guilty of.
You are not mad to put your self into her power? Do you know how many trap-doors there are in her house, or how many leiger Bravos lie there?
Prithee leave fooling, and let us go to our own lodging; A pox of these gilt whores: By this light, I'll find as good flesh in Flannel, for a yard of ferret ribbon, as she sells for a thousand Crowns; and a man must fight for it too; she'll cut thy throat.
Is it possible you two should know me so little as to be serious in this point? Not go where a woman calls, a young fair woman, a woman that I love too, because there may be danger; Death, is there any danger like loving her without money in her purse, whom nothing but a thousand Crowns can purchase?
If that be so why do you lose your labour, and afflict your self with seeing of her, unless you had the sum to pay?
Why, though she may not sell, it may be she may have a fancy to give a Curtsy; Who knows? I am sure of two kisses, at coming and going.
You know that's not the stile of this place; she'll lie with you as soon as kiss you.
It is a gallant fellow, and the rest poor spirited things; Fear not, Sir, there is no danger threatens you; See all the weapons we wear, and if these Eyes do not wound you, you are safe from wo∣men's dangers.
Do not mistake this dispute, it is but the kindness of Friends; and if mine own Eyes brought not more danger by ga∣zing on yours then any Enemy threatens, it is not your doors could have kept me out; And to remove your doubt, would you durst meet me as naked in your Bed as I durst enter. Farewell Hal.—
We'll expect you in the next street.
WHy did you pull down the Picture?
Rather, why did you set it up, If not for that purpose? sure you know the excellence it exposed to our Eyes; which I would now describe, but that the conversation with your Glass will do it better, which I perceive you have con∣sulted, by the price you seem to value them at; In short, I saw and loved you, fair one, as who do's not; I wished for you too, as who would not? But when I read your paper, I found the price of this Jewel too great, not for my value but my Fortune; had that been equal to my Love, you should have found at what rate I prized the Beauty and the Friendship of the famous and fair Angellica, that Star of Italy; who had she been as fixed as bright, a Prince might have worn such a Jewel in his Breast, and receive greatness and lustre from her; These thoughts my wounded Eyes, and ravished Ears, suggested to me seeing that Form, and hearing those charms thy hand and voice dispersed amongst the surprised, and sighing multitude; When guilty of my own condition I despaired any success with my Alms-mony, to think of purchasing your per∣son;  And therefore I resolved at all hazard to possess this shadow to feast my Eyes with, and to kiss and imagine kindness for it.—You smile now, and look upon my Clothes, and despise me be∣cause I am poor.
No, Sir.
Yes, yes, I see it and can bear it; Yet, in these old Clothes I am a Gentleman and a Soldier; and though my habit be ill, my heart and my sword are good, and I think my Repu∣tation, as any Soldier needs; for though I have lost my Fortune, yet I have preserved mine Honour still.
You wrong me, Sir; And when you know my Heart and the thoughts she labours with, you will confess it.
Nay, I have told you I can endure it, if you despise me, so you do not tell me of it; But what's all this to you, who are fair, young and lovely, and indeed Mistress of all the Virtues depraved man seeks? Good Heaven! What faults have I seen Wealth and Beauty hide! Even Princes flatter faces, and wink at the sins and crimes they commit; and while Riches break the Nets, Beauty numbs the Fishers hands: Riches weighs down the scale, while Poverty lies open to the Law and censure, liable to the scorn and punishment; for though all are taught to know the pe∣nalty of the Law, it is the poor man is made the example.
What poison is this my Ears suck in? His words shake my Soul.—
How silent the stands and hears his railing? Good Corpo∣rall, will you trot and leave your preaching? Bless us from a Capuchin in buff; have you no text to take but my Mistress when you are to rail? Good Sentry, of old St. Frank's Order, this is no broken bread, nor sour porridge, this House affords no Love for Charity; Pray pack, and search the stalls when it is dark, or whistle the poor Bulker.
How now, who gave you this liberty of railing? Get you gone, or lie down behind you door quickly, or I will kick thy carrion carcass out at window.
No, no, let her vent her spleen, for the same question is in your heart too, only you can be so discreet as to hide it; What would you have? Who are you? One that scorns to play your parts; and though I dare spend my blood, I scorn to sell it for so base salary; No, not to enjoy you, though I avow a Love and admiration for thee, and would run any hazard to purchase thee; See here the last sum I can command upon the earth, the last meal I know where to eat now in my Body, when this money is gone; Yet I am such a servant to Love and Beauty, this last, last hope, I'll freely give to enjoy thee; here, pray take it, I conjure you take it. Do not scorn me, fair one, now I have said this; For know,  if you do, I can hate at as great a rate as I can love; and for my Revenge, not only give this last penny, but hazard the last drop of my blood too: Why are you coy to me? I know you are to be had, and would be mine had I money to purchase you; it is printed, and by your own Order published; Which Cordial, I'll still repeat to my heart, that knowledge has a virtue, and in time will heal these wounds; Never frown, fair one; I would not for the earth thy Fame were as fair as thy face.
Why so severe, Sir?
Not that I despise you, but to secure my self; All those flames I feel now are but so many Lusts, I know them by their sudden bold intrusion; The impatience and the sauciness of the flame betrays it, still devouring till it be devoured; had it been Loves pure dart, I should have pined at your feet in silence, ere found a daring to tell you so. Lust his bastard-brother, and born of the same Mother, can brook a denial of that which Love dares not ask, and only grows angry for a time; But the next kind Girl quenches his flame.
After all this severe truth, what are we guilty of that you have not confessed? What crime staines us that you would not now act? You men are strangely partial to your selves, you would not despise us else; Is the fault single in us? If not, why should we lose our Honours in the Act, when you think it an Honour to be the Actors? Who made the Law against Love? Or where will you find it obliges women only? If the Law be general, must not the crime be so too?
Yes, in Love; for Love it is equal, but not in you, because you will be paid; you sell your blood which is your guilt: It is Mercenarines in you that makes the sin, Nature else would plead for you too; When I hang out my picture, and at a rate expose my self to all comers, then I will not wonder if you despise me.
And I could urge, when you'll take a House and furnish it, deliver up your Youth and Liberty a slave to our Sex, and wait like a spider in your web, for all flies that pass; When Angellica knocks at your door, and leads you to your bed, I will not wonder if you ask a price before I enjoy you; Nor ought you to wonder when we desire some satisfaction for the slavery we suffer.
I am not here to defend such baseness in men, but to condemn it in women.
You have reason, Sir; and I am pleased to find such Hon∣our in your heart; But your truths are a knowledge I have learned too late: And to afflict my self with the consideration of that which cannot be remedied is second folly; Only (once a whore and ever) is the world adage; yet there may be degrees of ill; and I am vain enough to believe, though I am not a good woman, I am not an ill Mistress.
Faith it is a very ill woman, (if she be handsome) that will not make a good whore.
Gospetto, I can suffer no longer; stab me, kill me, do, tread upon your Nurse, wound these Breasts that fed thee; All for a Vile∣lain that hath railed an hour; Hell upon him, Beggar; why do you talk to him? Sirrah, you know the price, either pay or begone,  there's the door, and here's the window; Would I were as young as I have been, I would make thee leap it for all thy bragging.
Here, prithee good fore-woman of the shop serve me, and I'll be gone.
Keep your gilded Royal, and troop, good Rutter; here's no selling by small ware.
Yes, on my conscience, thou hast sold many a Marvadies worth of thy commodity ere now.
When you speak of a price, Sir, you know what it is; you have the Bill.
It is truth, Lady, and I desire no favour; let me see; the month is a thousand crowns, how much comes that to, for a Pi∣stole; divided by four nights in a week. I, by four nights in a week.—Hark you, Grannam; take your chalk and cast it be∣hind the door; see what it comes to, that I may have my penny∣worth out of your Lady, and I'll be gone.
I tell thee, scurvy, saucy fellow, we sell not this stuff by the yard; the whole piece, or nothing, Sirrah; I could beat him, A pox take him, he has vexed me into a Fever.
That's hard; must a Customer buy whole ships lading? your Shop, or nothing! faith, Lady, I can be none of the Merchant, as well as I love you, unless I could conjure; yet now I think on it I have partners, I'll see if they will join, we will take off your Commodity amongst us.—(It is a likely Girl, if we can purchase her we cannot be losers; we will take what we use, and sell the rest of our ware,) I am thinking, Lady, how to compass this Gear, though I am out of Cash; will you truck, or venture a courtesy? Death, not a kiss, or so, for a pattern? By this light, I'll have a mouthful of kisses.
If I thought they would please you you; should could I be certain you had a kindness for me more then as I am mere wo∣man, I would not deny you a kiss.
Have I eyes, have I soul, or sense? Death, I bleed yet for your shadow; and offer you freely my last bit of bread; if af∣la this you doubt, command me something, and try whether I can love or no; or dare frankly serve what I love.
No more, thou art a gallant fellow; put up your mo∣ney, Sir; for though I wish thy purse as great as thy heart, and thy credit as good as thy humour, or nature, yet know I would not sell thee a kindness but for kindness sake; By this and this I swear. 
What will this come to? I was never struck first by a woman before.
Can you forgive a fault, and love for love? can you forget I was to be sold, and value this gift? can you tell your heart I am yours, and not remember I might have been any by∣dies? say, can you do this? have you kindness and good nature enough left to hide such a stain? if not, yet have so much mercy, at least, to say so; and though you cannot love, yet prithee flat∣la me.
Nay faith, out-do me with kindness, and hang me; if I be not as well natured as any woman of you all, the world is cou∣zen'd; inquire where I have gone; if my women rail upon me for that fault let the sex frown.
Kindness is all I ask, and, for that command me; yet know what I offer thee has been often sought, often denied, sell∣doom
enjoyed; but, By heaven, never pleased; often a Mistress, but never a Lover till now; if thou be kind, forget and forgive my faults that are past, which are crimes of the Nation, not mine; sold by a Mother, oppressed with misery when I knew no better then to obey her; though I confess he that had the flower of my youth laid great obligations upon us, such as good nature and gre∣titude will always make me remember with love and kindness; but it was not like the Passion that now disturbs my breast.
If this be real, I am mortal; she weeps, sure my Pistols are not worth this trick; besides, I offered it with all this stir, I would fain believe her kindness real; but I have been so often bit with sighing, weeping, flattering sinners, I have no faith left for the sex; yet my Reason tells me I may venture here; her house is fair, her clothes good, here's furniture, and there are jewels, her very Baud a Matron-like woman, gravely clothed, and all of a piece; sure I may trust her; if the worst come to the worst, it is but a few Pistols lost; rob me they cannot, and beat me they shall not. Well. it is resolved, I am a proper fellow, and she loves me.—Come, no more tears, fair one; All passion but love is unseasonable, and out of tune now; and since you are a Lover you shall find I can be grateful, kind and serious too; and when you are collected, tell you it is not only good nature, but wit in women, thus to surprise a Lovers heart, and give, though not before it is asked, yet before he hopes, such a favour; the seasonablenss of a courtesy is the beau∣tie of the action; and Loves fruits above all expect we should ga∣there them in season, if they hang long they rot or wither; and if neglected, Loves flowers fade and fall; what beauty had that Rose yesterday, which to morrow is only fit for the Still? such, and so seasonable was the bounty of this kindness; our Rose and fruit has now all the fragrance and season in it; had I won it at long running, wooing still, and tasted kisses here and there, what's Angellica now would have been a dull and common joy; for such tastings dull the edge and dead the stomach of a Lover, who after such weary steps lies down by his Mistress tired, or without an appetite.
Do not distrust our joys then, nor my love; let me not find that curse to have my first vows doubted; if they be, here will fall in showers all those tears others have wept to me; all their treasured waters at once I'll pour out at thy feet; oh! that such a stream could make me as pure a Virgin as I am now a perfect Lo∣ver; then I would beg to be thy wife; but that must not be; for love bids me not ask that which honour forbids thee to grant; yet you may be my friend.
No more, the gods are merciful; and sins of youth and nature, such as ours, have their friends amongst them; come, dry those eyes whose fire those tears cannot quench; and though their beams cannot stab through those waters, yet they bruise a Lovers heart; and though Love ha• a Balsam for every wound, yet no∣thing heals love so kindly as love again; his wounds then leave no scars nor feel no pain; it is scarce a sin what they can do who love and are beloved again.
Let's retire, and not only learn but practise this new Do∣ctrine, whose Rules are easy, and Laws so sweet, twill give the blind Lover his eyes, and the Law his feet, but they will meet.
Nay, then a Whores fortune and my curse befall thee; have we spun and stiched, dressed and watched for this? is all the honey we sucked from so many flowers in their youth carried to that hive, for this Droan to waste? What curse made me consent to her vanity! a thousand Crowns, a fine plot to leave a fame be∣hind us! what a stink will this story make in Venice? a curse on this Caterpillar; by that time she hath clothed and fed him, we may resolve to go naked our selves; there's but one remedy left, Best rob her my self, while she hath something to steal; I may keep her when she is old; well, I begin to think this is no good trade we drive, twill thrive neither Whore nor Baud; I have been as painful in either calling as any she in Venice; my youth had as much beauty and as powerful friends; and my age as much thrift, Anna Garbota, says one Anna Spiritata, says another, Anna Bellama∣na, says a third, Assassin, Echephorbe, Calladora, these were my names; then Anna who had higher fame! yet see all these trophies shrunk into one poor Baud and these ruins: who admires but to mora∣lize upon them? and now to add to the afflictions of my age, in my age this curse is fallen upon me; it would make one swear to be poor and honest to see such luck as follows me; Love was al∣ways fatal to our trade; but I did not fear this curious mischief, to dote upon a Beggar, a Souldier-beggar, a trade as ill as our own, as poor too, and as impossible to be made rich; one that thinks it a dishonour to get or save; we shall never eat again neither, for he'll have all in drink; nay, it is an English Soldier too, and one of the Kings party, three titles to perpetual poverty; a race of men who have left praying, or hoping for daily bread; and only rely upon nightly drink.
BE he what he will, shall a drunken Tramontaney abuse us in Madrid? Are you a Spaniard, and suffer this Af∣front? By Saint Jago I'll strike him in the Church, but I'll be re∣veng'd.
It is the same that saved my Sister, when Pampalona was sacked; The Action was kind and Gallant; such as ought to plead against any Injury that chance begets; and indeed it was our faults to hide our selves from him.
The Devils in 'em, when they get abroad; The Dogs are so muzzled and tied up at home, with Constables, and romwel, they fight for sport abroad.
I have seen one of those painted staves disarm a Scarlet
Cloak, and command him into the stocks without resistance; and here they are so sullen they will not give the wall to Saint Jago, un∣less he be painted upon it.
There is somewhat of the Cock and Mastiff-dog in them all, sullen proud snarlers, any thing, one another, rather then not be worrying.
Methinks that race of Cavaliers should be extinct or quiet at least; they have been killed or banished, sunk, hanged and starved this thirteen years, and yet they swarm still; I pitied them at first.
Pity'em, hang'em, they are as proud of their persecute∣on as the Jews; and brag as vainly of their wants as a Castillian would of his blood; no servants, no money, no clothes, no meat, and always afoot, neither daunts nor dejects them; they beg as confidently their surly way, and they think as meritoriously as Ca∣puchins; By this light, I believe twill be an order in time, they are admitted into the Mendicants already; and those that loved the man least called their great Charles both Saint and Martyr, and the Rogues hope yet to make a black-red-day for him in their Call∣lender; their Princes too look as high, and charge as far still up∣on one lean Mare, as if they had a hundred led-horse behind them; and their Duke too fights now in France and Flanders as his Brother did in Scotland; at the old Rupert rate, ten to one still; And by this hand they look so above the rest of men, for all their calamities, that when they past last through Flanders no man durst be heard to pity them, for fear some one of his dull honest ones should mi∣stake that pity and strike him.
I, but that humour's changed now, France has so cut their Combs; the Louvre and the Pale-royal have been sad enchanted Castles to them, they have kept a Lazarello's Court there; dark∣nos, loanness, and the nest of poverty; but two loaves a day, and without fish, to work the Miracle; yet the Gallery was a Christi∣an Coney-warren filled with Cavaliers of all Trades; and unless they fed upon their children, it is not visible what they eat.
They are now removed to the Palace Royal, where they eat so seldom, and dung so small, you may as soon step in a Custard as a T—in the Court; they that do S—save it for their own Pig; there is not a blade of Grass left in the Garden, nor a drop of Oil in the Madona's Lamp; sacrilege and their Salads make it burn dim, they are happy that swim, they dive in the pond and steal the Fish. The younger stomachs browse upon the Cops as high as they can reach, they have starved the poor Antelope in eating up his Commons; their Grandees only dine, and that but when for∣tune smiles: the Grasshoppers are grown Pismires now, and are abroad as early as the day, and industrious as the Ant, for food. Brown-bread and old Adams's Ale is currant now; yet if little Eve walk in the Garden, the lean starved Rogues neigh after her as if they were in Paradise; there's their Resident too, his Arms are up still; but it is long since he had the Supporters; it is thought he eat the Unicorn last Passover, his Butcher and he are still in process
for the horn; the Lion's lean too, but he will never be tame; you may see the Royal Beast still in the Fair; and I have heard an Irish Capuchin swear (for he is a blade too, though in a gray scabbard) that if the Cavaliers could be brought to pray as well as fast, he believed the King would yet have more Saints in his Army then St. Ignatius has Lamps burn dim.
There's a Round-head in Town, a pleasant fellow, I heard him describe their Court the other day: the Rogue makes good sport with it; if a man had ill nature enough to laugh; Carlo heard him too.
Yes, he swears the Waiters act Tantalus better then Ovid described him; for there are those that follow the Cup and Plate, still, constant, lean and loyal, that have the smoke of the Of∣fice though the roast be run away, such as have privilege still to see, and only to see, what others eat.
Condemned twice a day to suffer an apparition of meat; it is sad always to see and never to eat, food in vision only; nothing to dinner; and sup all night in a dream, will make your Cavalier but a lean wight.
A Court with three Chapels, all Head, and no Bowels, neither Cellar nor Kitchen but what the Cobbler or a Taylor stitch in.
Yet the soul feeds high, spiritual food abounds still; he says; not a meal of prayers less then in the old Kings days.
Besides their Princes break-fast and collation made in private devotion; admirable souls-food for all the faithful that will come; Pestle and Gospel with Common-prayer by the Tune; but for belly-timber, not one crum.
By this character, if poverty or virtue can plead, sure the English Court will find a reward; it is great loyalty can make all fast, some pray; and though few have linen, all wear gray; sure they walk at least in the narrow way.
Why, the very stables have their vigils too, they say, and the poor Jades keep them without Oats or Hay; and let the Ma∣ster of the horse take care what Grooms he trusts to keep them; for if they dye within the verge, he swears, By this light, they'll eat 'em.
Yet their Footmen swarm still; how came they to stay?
For want of strength to run away; and, for the Queens side, there's neither fornication left nor pride; nothing but Madam Bluto remains of all the Kitchen, none above stairs but Susan, Civil, and her Capuchin.
Hot-spur's grown old too, his Gout requires ease; and from head Ostler of the Court is become Chamberlain with staff and keys.
Yes, for the young Prince is from the Indies come; and though his brave Sea-horse foundered in his journey home, yet the poor Jades are now become his cares; he's no more Admiral, but Palatine Polyxander, great Master of the Mares.
Then the young Neptune will to Sea no more.
It is thought so, for the neglected Trident sticks in the Dunghill, at the Stable door.
By this light, it is Pity such parts, and such a Spirit should be buried there; who, when he was in Action, bred both fear and wonder; His Enemies call him still the Devil, and Robin a Cumber.
Sir, he that struck me is now above in the Synniora's house; and Anna tells me, he begs and Rails, but has not a Royal of Plate to bless himself.
Lets stay, and see him speak, when he comes out.
And give him a Royal apiece in alms, and laugh at him, twill be some Revenge.
You mistake the man, he has a mind above those little things; but I can sting him; here Carlo, fetch me a Thousand Crowns, you know where to find it; with that we'll destroy his hopes; and to see us possess her, and himself shut out, will vex him worse then Blows.
THey are gone, and there is some mischief in their de∣sign I see by their whispering.
I saw one of the Bravos return from her house, and spake with him in the Red, I am confident they know he is within; and who knows but they are gone to surprise him by some back way?
It is a wilful Folly, to throw himself upon dangers need∣leslie, only for humour; He knows I have business too, a design of mine own, that waits me.—I'll knock.
See who knocks.
What would you have?
Prithee tell Don Thomaso it is late, and we stay for him.
Would you had him out at Window, so we were rid of him; A curse on the Door where he enters in, for Anna.
And how? come be Ingenuous now; do's fortune smile? shall we break her Windows, or Sacrifice in her Temple?
Do you not see it here; Is it possible, such joys as mine can be hid? Do's not the little god appear upon my Brow to di∣stinguish me from the Common Crowed of Lovers; No Cupids hovering in the Air, kissing their hands, nor scraping their short Legs; Formantias bone Mane, something to drink for the service they have done me? We'll call him no more the blind Deity; Do you see that Eye that peeps there? Death, it is his Quiver, Hall; And has more Darts then his old one in it, but they are all to friend. Prithee tell me, where had thou the Sack we drank at Dinner;
The Eloquent, Bold, Fortunate Sack we drank to day? say, that I may go kiss the spigot, and kneel to the Butt; It is Sacred Liquor, I'll dip my Beads in it, and then touch all things that I would have kind or happy with them.
The wine was good, and there is more of it; If you'll walk we'll take a Bottle, and hear the Story at leisure you so la∣bore with; There is good French wine too, to whet your Sto∣mack with.
French Wine? not I, it is the Omen of some ill luck when I drink it; French wine? when would that Corrosive had such success? No, I abjure it; Satyrs, and ill Nature, Costiveness, and narrow soul, shrunk heartedness, and ill luck followed me as long as I conversed with that hungry juice; Cheerful Oily Sack, you see, has in an hour of happy Minutes crowned all my wishes; I have not one desire left; Prithee let's be all wanton, and think upon something to want, Hark? Here's those Friends will remove all difficulties—Hark, how they dance out of tune for Joy to be fallen into my hands; That while we have the pleasure of spend∣ing, these little Rogues may have the Gusto to be spent? it is He and She Gold while it is here, and begets young pleasures; The fruit shows their beauty, while the covetous savor, with severe Eyes, keeps them Imprisoned in their Chests; they have no opportunity to meet, but lie barren; The separated Sexes for want of use wither, without putting forth either Leaf or Fruit; Or will you Collation, or Sup with me at our house? I am serious, ell's mine own, and you shall be well-come.
What the two Sisters are forgot, I see. The young Lady too, and the plot upon the hundred thousand Crowns, and all drowned in this joy, wife and all?
But thou art not married, I hope, for all thy fooling.
All the honey of Marriage, but none of the sting, Ned; I have a Woman without that boundless Folly, of better or worse; there's a kind of Non-sence in that Vow Fools only swallow; I can now bid my Friends well-come without Jealousy; Our vows are built upon kindness only, they stand &amp; fall together; We neither load, nor enslave the mind with Matrimony; No laws, nor ties, but what good Nature makes, binds us; we are sure to meet with∣out false well-comes, or dissembling smiles, to hide the Salary of a sin, or blind the Fornication of a Platonic Friendship; Our knots hold no longer then we love; No sooner wish a liberty but we take it.
I wish you Joy, Sir.
And I have it, Ferd. full joy; hark, how the Chorus sounds; poverty has a slavery tied to it; It makes Wit and Honour sneak; My soul grew lean and rusty for want of Credit; It withered the Root of Man in me; But this kind seasonable Shower sends out Buds again; Thou shalt see mirth renew in me; look here, Ned, your Saint, has she such a Shrine as that Pallas? Do's she give such Oracles as these? hark, how sweet they sound, and in a Language all Nations understand; there's no Riddles in ready Money.
I'll tell you to morrow; This night I am to try how for∣tunes wheel will rise upon my Anchor; if I be lucky I envy not any he in Madrid; though it is granted, The Angellica cannot be ex∣cell'd in Garb or Beauty.
You must consider hoe's but a young Wencher, but new come to Loves feasts, hoe's it's first Course still.
And a hungry Lover too, such as never tasted any thing but Loves porridge, and his Barley pudding in Wedlocks Ordinary; But when we have surfeited of Spanish, French and Italian beau∣ties as often as you have done, We shall search out such plumbs as the Angellica; and our nice stomachs will require such curious plates and sauce to tempt it as those that love us will prepare; yet what we Love will serve turn.
You name Foreign Beauty, as if England had none could please you; Show me where Cupped has such a Shambles, or such a Market as London affords?
I, but you know the proverb, Hall; For flesh and blood; but the Devil sends Cooks.
Gentlemen, your mirth would be more seasonable, when you have thought upon your safeties, which, I am confident, is not here.
Our safety? What danger is there, in Nature, for men to apprehend in our Condition? Let's mock and despise all dan∣ger, now we have conquered those of Love and Want; By this light, Famine grew formidable; The lean Rogue was seen to enter within our Court; and though he skulks in private now, It is feared he will grow bold and walk abroad.
Since you went up, They passed again; and now I am certain Don Pedro is one of them; And your acquaintance with his Nature must tell you, He will not brook an Injury; Which you have repeated to the quick; His sword and his Mistress he has lost; and how do you believe a Don will brook two such losses?
Don Pedro, The Serulina's brother! a mischief pursue him, (for putting her into my thoughts) are you sure it was he? By this light, hoe's too blame; Not I, his disguise has injured me.
I'm of opinion, twill be fit for you to give him a visit; we'll go with you; The truth of this Accident is enough to ex∣cuse us, and satisfy him; A word in season will overcome him more then blows hereafter: besides, As full of joy as you appear to be with this new fortune; I know you cannot be so little a Friend to your self, to slight and neglect such a Fortune, and such a friend∣ship, as the fair Serulina brings.
Prithee, dear Harry, let's not be wise yet; this is for se∣rios hours, and grave thoughts, and but puts water in our Wine to day; yet I'm of your opinion to find Don Pedro; for he is a per∣son for whom I always had a value and kindness.
Well, Sir, take your own way; As if you could visit him and his Sister not know you are arrived; which news I'll ven∣ture to give her, and find some way to serve you with her without your Commission; I know the Rogue is so proud that though he
loves nothing else but her; yet he would starve ever he would say so, for fear she should refuse him.
WHat's that?
A Feather, the Bird has many.
It is a Diamon'd, and a good Water; Is there no ready money too?
Fie! Money? I carried it with such State, he believes has got the Indies; I began, and gave first my Copper gilt Bracelet; had you seen how carelessly I parted with it, and how unwillingly I received this Diamond, till forced upon me;
Go on, Excellently good; Do you think, he would give me any thing if I should pretend to love him? I'd so fit him with a speech, if I thought he would.
Your part must be beaten out of him, Sanco; if he will not stand till we pick his Pockets.
No, hang them, they are Oaken Rogues, your English; knotty, sullen, crabbed, wooden Fellows, and will fight upon as little reason as they love; you must either flatter them, or Cozen them out of what you get, else their dry udders will give no milk.
Of this some other time; and, dear Sanco, haste, and call my Philippo, to whom thou know my heart is all in serious, what I would seem here; and I were happy, if my truth with Philippo found but such success as this Fiction; Prithee tell him, there is a Supper and a Ring attends him, and a better Fortune, if he can sail the straights, and find it; The Mine in his Pocket is then our own; Dear Sanco, be still kind, and use thy Art to bring him.
Be you ready to receive the stranger, and let me alone to persuade him; This place of mine has good Fees belonging to it; Else it were not to be endured, it is so pointed at, and this is one of them—There must be some Allougho had too, for I shall be dry  in the search.
When I consider the base means we submit to ere we can gain our Ends, The sordid ways, besides the sin and shame we pass, to arrive at fortune, It makes me wonder how any woman can abandon her self so as to play our parts; A Common whore, How I tremble at it? One that must yield to all Embraces, sub∣mit to all that Lust can invent, nay farther, not only obey their base desires, but blow the fire too, and tempt, as well as suffer; Bowing before all Deformities, and all diseases, not daring to re∣fuse either number, time, or place, when their lust Commands, and all for base Salary; though we see Our selves despised, some∣time before enjoyed, but always after; No one setting a price or value upon that youth and beauty we expose; But because it is
common, therefore cheap in their Eyes; Thus when I look back upon the Paths I have trod, I could curse my Fortune, That, in my Autumn has given me a slave to Philippo.
DId you see my brother since!
Yes, Madam; Carlo and he were talking; he inquired for Don Alphonso; they have some Quarrel; Both are hurt, though slightly; I left your Brother at the Door.
Don Alphonso? hoe's upon his old design, I see; which I shall easily satisfy, if his inquiry reach to me.
I was inquiring for Don Alphonso; I wonder I saw him not since I arrived; when was he here last?
I know not, Sir. Calis, when was he here? I considered it so little my self, I have forgot when it was.
And why do you hold so slight an Esteem of him whom your Friends value? a Person that, besides his Quality and For∣tune, has a passion for you.
So I have heard you say; but it is more then ever he told me, or had a desire should be known, as near as I could guess.
I am apt rather to believe his visits had more of Love, then your Modesty would see then, or confess now.
If he had a passion, as my Brother believes, yet I am cer∣tain, it was but a Passenger in his heart, no Native, nor Dweller there, some sudden kindness to himself, some complacency and Incli∣nation Incognito, that never appeared, still without the Garb of a gallant Love, such as is fit for a Maid to take notice of; else I should have seen it, he still appeared to me of a Nature so Indifferent as if he cared not to Conquer, which made me always think him not worth the being overcome; and so I lost him ever I found him and if some one, more concerned then either of us, had not missed him before me, he had vanished like his Shadow; This, Sir, is all the Account I can give you of one who was never thought of when he was present.
Men of his Birth and Quality, when they find themselves slelghted, you must not wonder if they seek a revenge; and though your Sex be exampled from his anger, yet your friends, that intro∣ducat them, may be Subject to it.
I do not at all apprehend it, not that I want Care, or kind∣nos for my Brother; But because I know Don Alphonso has neither sense nor good Nature in him, to let his Love afflict him; his ad∣dresses may make some Women angry; but his Anger will never be fit for any thing but your Pity.
I believe there is some other cause makes him thus displea∣sing to you, which time may discover; and then I shall be better able to judge of this Character.
Sir, I am your Sister, and one that has as much value and kindness for you as any Brother can pretend to; and it is grounded upon so much reason, that were you not my Brother I should still Honour you; For I believe Don Pedro's humour and nature's such, as may justly pretend to an esteem from any virtuous woman: But I would not see you presume upon the ill customs of our Country so far as to make a slave of your Sister, who, if you will be just to her, will give you greater power then you can ask without blushing.
Encouraged by your kindness I shall try my Interest in a small request; I ask not to be preferred before the world; I only beg to be ranked in your esteem with Don Thomaso; Why do you frown and blush? Is there any guilt belongs to the Name of that Wanderer?
You are my Brother, Sir, that ask this question; But it would have been altogether as noble in you, not to have given Faith to those whispers that made you thus curious.
His private return to this Town will authorize my fears; and my cares and love of you will exact this question from you, when you shall know I met him to day in Town. Why this con∣fusion?
You mistake me, Sir; I am not at all confounded with the News, nor ashamed of any esteem I have for him; My value sprung at first from that praise your self and my Father gave him. Then Honour, Justice, and Gratitude, made me his Debtor, being forgot and abandoned by all, and exposed to such dangers as the licenced Lust of common Soldiers threaten; When Rage and Con∣quest flew through the City, ruining all that was virtuous, Then Thomaso, this Wanderer, came and saved me; for which action my Soul has a high value for him; Nor will I blush to say it to you, though I never said so much to him, who has ever paid me an hum∣ble and a civil respect since that action, which no time nor absence shall deface: It was gallant to all men, and particular to me, who, when a Father and a Brother could forget me, left a prey to the first comer voluntarily, and for my sake threw himself into all dangers to redeem me; That Wanderer did this, that Wanderer that saved my Life and Honour; and Serulina has so much virtue as to prefer him and his Friendship before any frowns or Fortune whatsoever.
This is high, and enough to satisfy my question.—Johanne, a word.
Sir, you are too sudden and serious, and your question heats her.
Madam, Madam.—She is full of thoughts, but I must awake her; Madam.
Ho!
Do you hear the News? Don Thomaso is for certain in the Town; your Brother and he fought this morning for the P•du∣ana's picture; they say, he's in Love with her.
It may be so, but till I hear him say it I'll not believe it, nor then neither; for it is the last thing I would believe of a Lo∣ver to say he Loves; few ever did it well that said it.
That's but one part of the story; Diego says they are resolved to be revenged upon him, and that they have hired Bra∣voes to watch him this night; twill be worth your thoughts to prevent the danger, if your Mind be not changed; I am so much his Servant as to offer my self in any danger, in memory of those services that are passed.
Calis was ever faithful, and shall always find me kind; and if I live she shall not say I am ungrateful; It is now St. Cecilia's Eve, his own Feast, get our veils, and let us go in disguise to the Caletravo's; There's the great Music to morrow, and we shall certainly meet him at the Vespers; He was always a devote to the fair Cecilia, and Dona Francisco; Music was ever his delight, but their voices especially; If I meet him there I shall tell him of his danger; and if he be false, of some which do not threaten yet; But till I am certain he is false, it shall not lie in the power of Ma∣lice to blast his hopes; I know his humour is wild; and for his Love of Women, it is upon his own score; he that can be kind and constant to his women so against the hair, as he is, in spite of Law, conscience, or his own profit, buying at all rates their kindness, when he do's not so much as hope they should really love him; What a friend would this man be, when all these, and Love to boot, shall seek him, and if found oblige him? He must either change his Nature, or Love me too; Come, Calis, I am resolved in two lines to write him what we hear, and something of what they would have me fear, which I cannot do; For he that had virtue enough to prefer her before Fortune, quitting his Country for his Honour, shall never want my Fortune nor my Friendship, when it can serve such a Virtue.
I See them, they are fat, fresh, and young, as well foul as fish in season; All excellent in their kind; and since my Philippo will be at the eating, most welcome; But how shall we do to be rid of him in time? Dear Sanco, be ingenuous.
He•rk, I hear Philippo's whistle, within we'll resolve.
Now, the News; what sudden storm is this that blows so kindly? The business, for I am in haste.
See here one good part of the business, good meat, and better wine; Smell, pure fragrant Eskeyvous, St. Martin, and old Catholic Sack, with Pane Denied too; when we consider, (why that scurvy look, Sir,) I speak sense when I said Pane Denied, and such as I believe you have scarce blessed your belly with these ten days: Good scurvy Don, be not so starched and hard to please? By St. Iago, I shall lose all respect for you if you despise my Patron.
No more, Dear Sanco.
No more; By this day you spoil him with cockring of him, and I'll not suffer't a day longer; Never smell, Sir Botho, I shall grow extravagant, I shall, and drink this Wine, (do you hear?) and make you eat the Boracho; you'll find the pitch and hair as hard of digestion, and lie upon your stomach as long as the Jest; you will, Don. Let me alone, a Rascal that has but  half a shirt under his laced Doublet; one that your kindness has only made considerable; I hate to see him swell and look over us, a Rogue, whom all the world treads upon; and if you'll but look on, I'll make him stand as tame as a vaulting Horse, till I gnaw off those whiskers he plays with and frights children.
Sirrah, Baud, lousy Baud, scurvy louse, bite me once again and I'll crack thee. 
Rogue, let me flea him, and show you when his velvet case is off a breast-plate only of lining; and under those Cordovant boots bare legs; Slave, do not I know thy shoulders are laced with Galley-lashes, and that thou bear the mark of the flock on thy back, two F's. Swear to come thrice a week without sending for, or, by St. Iago, I'll cut thy throat.
Why Sanco? As you love me, let him rise; you know the passion I have for him; and if you hurt him, you wound me; A Curse take me if I Revenge not all injuries you do him at the rate of Life and Fortune.
Death, let him be kind to you, and I'll be as much his slave as ever; else, by this steel, he shall only have time to confess before I absolve him with one stab.
What shall I do to assure her or you I love more, then to obey your call; or, when my affairs permit me, come un∣sent for?
Your affairs? what are they? stealing Garlic and herbs at night; The committing Sacrilege on the lamps for oil for a salad? And choose this rather then eat a supper for a Prince with us, unless you have money too: You must be purchased, with a pox, with our money, earned through a thousand difficulties to give your Tarantula a dirty cold whore in a cellar; our Dogs lie better; whose starved poverty, and raw stomach, boils out in a
salt itch; It is two peoples work to claw her, you are fain to scratch a spell too, till the hang-man take the office out of both your hands; and this is the Jewel for whom you must despise my Patron: This you know too, and yet you dote upon him; my life upon it, he has given her some charm, some philter; which ei∣there confess, or by this hilt thou dy'st without mercy; do not build upon her foolish pity, let me alone, speak or I strike.
Hold, Sanco; hold and I'll confess.
Be quick, I say.—Stand off, by this day you will anger me else.
What, will he confess?
Something of which I have been long jealous; and you should have known my doubts before, but that there was no trust∣ing your fond humour with a secret; Come, be speedy.
Having heard much of a Mountebanks powder when I was in Naples, I purchased some; it is the same which is now sold in the Piazza, and by the same man; I had no faith at first, but gave it you upon adventure; but finding the effect, monthly renewed the dose as the paper prescribes; And had married you, but for a crafty whore, who jealous that my success with you grew from some such cause, called to mind that I had formerly mentioned such a powder; she found the box, and gave it unto me unknown; by whose force I am become a slave to that wretch, as you are subject to me.
O Rogue, Dog! shall I not cut thy throat now?
Not for the world; it is enough I have hopes of my reason∣very, and the certain pleasure of his kindness while the frenzy lasts.
Have you any of this powder left, Sir?
Yes, three or four doses in a box tied to my beads; you  will find it in my Reliquery.
So, now will I give the Coundess she Bear a dose in the name of Philippo, and the Rogue another n the name of the Bear; and when it works, give him opportunity to ravish Calipsa: Then accuse him to the Inquisition, and have him burnt for Sodomy.
Hold; Madam, have you no pity upon me?
Fear not, he shall not hurt you if I have power; I love him yet, and it grieves my Soul to think that I shall hate him, which is the last effect of this powder. Rise pray, and let your kind∣nos make amends for the injuries you have done me.
A pox of all ill luck; have I been a Bawd these 20 years, and might, for ought I know, have been Amoroso to the Infant, and Heir to 16 Kingdoms? I have the dose now, and if I can get an op∣portunity, she is mine; Then do I come forth King Sanco, there is no Heirs Males to pretend but the Comediantes; Nor is it the first Prince Spain has seen of the Sanco's; why should I dispute? if de∣tected, have not I the loving Infant still to plead? Or, if the worst  succeed, it is but dying after I have enjoyed her; And is it not better to be mourned for by a Queen, then to live Sanco? It is decreed, King Sanco if I prevail, or a gallant Villain if I fail.—Come, Don Philippo, I am friends with you as I am Sanco.
You are, Sir; it is well you can be friends considering—
Why, there's the difference betwixt an injury done by a Prince, and a subject; Princes when they do an injury they never forgive him it is done to, but hate the man, because they believe he but dissembles, and has not forgot the injury; now I that am your vassal freely forgive you all the displeasures I have done you; come, kiss my Patron, and smile out this Moon, and let's follow our de∣sign;—Which, I hope, will put me in equipage for my great work,  the Age is destined for such a mischief.
Come, no more tears; I am satisfied, still in doubt! these deeds of Love are never well sealed; come, print that kiss again, and then let me know what the design was I was sent for; for I be∣lieve neither of, you know what's happened since.
It is truth, though my fears have long doubt'd what is discovered; yet I had no thoughts of inquiring that secret now; but it is past, and you shall know our design; see who knocks.
It is Don Mattheo's man with his Basket; I forgot it was his day; prithee, Sanco, tell him I am sick, or abroad, or busy, or any thing to be rid of him, or desire him to dine with me to morrow.
Look out, and then you will be kind to the Cesto, what ere you are to the man.
The Capons and Veale look well, and shall be welcome; and how bright that Bacon shines, larded with lean.
Such Bacon is a beautiful savoury sight in a Kitchen; and those Pigeons have Olive-branches in their mouths; they look as if they had flown out of his Holiness Arms to come to you Pamphi∣lians; and will you refuse to receive them with peace?
By no means, Lady; those Annemellys too win my soul; I am resolved to let in his Supper, it is belly-timber, Child; consi∣der that, able to build two good meals of when we will; I love a Larder when it is full of such good company; a clean washed Kit∣chin it is as ill as a dry Cellar; then there's Dona Borachia and her hand-maids, their pregnant wombs swell like the Grapes that filled 'em; and can you be so cruel to refuse their great bellies to lye in the Cellar, take heed of being inhospitable to Bacchus. Don Phi∣lippo and I will refer our selves to one of them, that our quarrel may be perfectly reconciled.
See Matheo's be not troublesome, I'll yield to all the rest.
Let me alone to manage this affair, while you inform Philippo of our design.
A Pox of this sack, it is windy and fuming, would I were lodged; the Rogue told me he would stay for me at the corner; but which is the corner of a full Moon, that question will pose a great deal of sack to resolve; I have passed twenty corners since; I would the Rogue were nailed to one with a Planet, that I might see him blaze before me; it were easy to ask the way if a man knew whither; here's a door open; If I can hit it, I'll go in and sleep under this great mans arms, perhaps they'll appear to me in a dream; I'm sure I have sack enough about me to breed a vision.
WHere are they?
Within still, but upon going. Don John is vi∣olently bent upon his revenge. I heard him say; a sword and a Mi∣stress were not to be lost, nor the injuries put off with a raillery; but your brother seems more concerned for your kindness then his own quarrel to him; there is no stirring for me till they are gone.
Only observe those Bravo's well that we may be able to describe them to Don Thomaso; and see my Letter in some safe place till you can deliver it him; you shall, find me in the Arbour, when they are gone; dear Calis, be diligent, you know what's at stake.
I shall not fail of my part.
It is not what they have said or threatened frights me; for I know Don Thomaso has courage and friends to defend him against them all; and I hope honour enough to deliver him from her charms too; but what am I the better for his being uncon∣corned in her, if he do's not love me. In Town thus long and nei∣there see, send nor inquire after me! something like jealousy would fain make me angry; it is many years since I saw him, but that's excused being engaged by honour to serve his Prince in his troubles; but being in Madrid, my fears tell me if he were a Lo∣ver, that ingenuous Deity would have found some way to have seen a Mistress.—Ha!
Madam, I am glad this chance has gained some serious knowledge of your mind; yet it was no saucy intrusion nor curi∣os nature of mine that made me give you this interruption, but obedience to your Brothers desires, who has commanded me again
to tell you his fears, that he may, at least, have the satisfaction to know upon what ground you build your faith that Thomaso is a Lover.
Don John has ever been honoured by my Father and his Family, and I shall be proud to find I have not lost that value he had once for his Daughter; and to confirm him in my esteem of him, I shall satisfy him it is no blind wilful passion, but an affection grounded upon reason which I profess (if love can have any rea∣son in his sacrifice) besides those thousands which to day I gave my Brother; who if he found a froward answer must chide himself; for Love, Johanne, is a child; and if waked too rudely will be out of humour.
Madam, you will honour me in this trust; and I shall not rudely cross your heart in her designs, but join to serve you in arguing calmly your reasons with your Brother, who only fears you may be cozened of your heart; for Don Thomaso yet pro∣mises no great stock of love to purchase such a Jewel; what kind of address he has formerly made I know not; but since his arri∣val, methinks, there has been but little of the Lover seen; then his humour and his actions are too wild and extravagant for a seri∣os heart to consider.
What his humour has been to day, or yesterday, I know not; I shall rather judge by those years I knew him, then by these few hours of which you accuse him; all his addresses to me were still full of humility, and had honour enough for any Maid to avow; nothing of the earthy, heavy, envious Lover, that eats his own heart, if I but praise another man; none of the watery eyed, whining sigher, that thinks to gain from a women's pity that fa∣four which he could not deserve or win from her Reason; none of your fiery, choleric Lover neither, whose bloody rage speaks in his passion war and destruction; one that will frown and look pale upon a Mistress, as if he would win that heart by force and storm, which he has no title to by love or virtue; no, Don John, none of these, nor your aerie Humorist, your Dresser, Singer, Fencer, Horse-man, Dancer, Poet; all the all that all women, in all men, admire, I can prize, but it shall not slave me; had Thomaso loved the common way of men, I would have paid him with ordinary fa∣vours; and for his Mistresses, that great crime so often urged by my Brother and your self, I despise it, and inquire neither who, nor how many he has; I scorn to fear he can be such a fool as to give them his heart; and for his body, it was always the least of my thoughts, and only known as it went and came upon Loves Er∣rands betwixt us; and she that is concerned in her servants bestow∣ing his body till he is hers, (were I the man) I should believe such an anger were but darkly telling me she had a mind to it her self; come Johanne, let Thomaso keep his heart and mind fit for my value; let them be chaste, and for his body I shall never consider what it doth.
This is a new Doctrine; can you love a man and not be jealous of him? I thought jealousy had been one of the greatest
signs of love, though it be a crime in a Lover.
Jealousy is, no doubt, a sign of Love; but it is not of the man I am jealous; I would be as soon jealous of my Cook or Keeper, as of my Lovers person; for they have flesh of mine in keeping too; yet I allow jealousy both proper and honourable in your sex; and were it not troublesome I would wish it in my servant; for it is fit he should be jealous, not only of my heart and person, but every word, look and motion is worth his fear and care; for a Virgin once blown upon by the world, or touched in reputation, is for ever stained; and yet this stranger, this jealous Lover, the eldest son of Love, is by foolish women traduced, and his birth-right de∣ny'd him.
Faith, Madam, as they Marry now, it is no matter what either doth, where their friends buy and sell according to the Mar∣ket; here's a man and such a jointure; give me a woman and such a portion; so they truck their Children a common coin in Matri∣money; yet I am of opinion most men have this merit of jealousy, and do not know it.
And most women want wit, or justice, to reward, or see it.
I rather believe they want justice, then wit; and dread it as the Cage into which few Birds enter willingly; they do not dislike such love, but fear the consequence of such a Lover; they will not be impaled, such a passion cuts off their liberty, and his diligence is looked upon as a spy; most woman love servants as they do fruits, in, and of every Season some. It is not the Grape, the Melon, the Peach, will always please; no, nor the old Apple it self; and though few women can deserve one gallant friendship, yet none are contented with a hundred: All would have all, nor do they care so much to be loved, as to have it said so; they dress, Feast and Court for the vogue of the Town; and you will find in the Herd a hundred brace of fools, and not one pair of Lovers; though I will hope you may find Thomaso one; upon your score, Madam, I shall serve him; I beg your pardon, Madam; your Bro∣there  expects me before this.
This, I know, goes to my Brothers ear; for Johanne doth not brook the fortune Don Thomaso hath made in my friendship; and it is easy to discern (what he durst never discover) a design, himself to have been admitted a pretender, and that made him pleased with my neglect of Alphonso; but those are foolish women that will let such mean people, and their weeds grow to look them in the face, when they may frown them down, and with a look tread them into their earthy breasts.
This house is haunted, haunted, By cock; every Room furnished, and every door open, and not a servant to be seen; sure they look for the Devil, the Devil Incognito; I have reeled and stumbled through all the house, without a Question. What's here? a Garden? it tempts me to take a nap in Fresco, I shall sleep with∣out  a Cradle, I have sack enough to rock me.—Who is it? this Greco is a Witch, and has transformed me into a Dog; I turn round
thrice, ere I can lye down: How now, what have we here, a wo∣man! By this hand, a Wench; is she drunk too? it is a gay Girl, what fine Petti-coats and gilded feet she has! I'll catch her sit∣ting, 
—Sweet soul, let me kiss thy feet.
How now, what mean you, Sir? do you know where you are?
We are here, are we not? prithee kiss me.
What insolence is this?
Only good luck, parlous good luck, Child; it is a finer Wench then mine; By this light, she smells as sweet as any Posy; prithee Sirrah, let's not lose the occasion; I am a very honest fellow though I am in pickel now; thou may safely trust me; By this light I will not tell, for I do not know thee.
He is drunk; let me go; sure you do not believe your self what you say; I never saw such a beast before.
Therefore be kind the rather; to lye with me is scarce a sin now; there's neither malice nor design in it; solicitation and perseverance makes it a sin; this will be only a venial scope, mere chance on both sides; should I kill you now in my drink, you know there are Cities of refuge for such men; and if I should stab you in heat of blood, it would be but chance medley, on my side; and a little fornication in your own defence, for you; indeed should I court you any longer, and vow and swear till you believed and granted, that were to make it wilful whoredom, a crying sin; therefore thou art bound in conscience to lye with me without any more words.
Unhand me, wicked impudent beast.
Why wicked? a jury that had wit or youth, and saw that face in this place, would swear you struck first, and fools only see that face and doubt the provocation; come Child, prithee be kind, I'll warrant the sin as soon forgiven with me as any man alive; for if I do not make thee as fit for repentance as another, Hang me; you shall not need confess this fault, I'll give you a pe∣nonce with it, it was given me lately; A pox on her courtesy, I'll kiss thee.
Help, ho! who's there? help.
I, do, call witnesses to see how you use me.
Help, help, murder.
Help, for what? I warrant thee we need none, I'll do thy business well enough alone; how finely she dissembles? a crafty Rogue, she knows how to grind a man to an edge.
Calis, Johanne, Carlo, help, Rape, Murder.
Rape! you lye, Baggage; how now, as if you were not as willing as I; what do you do here alone else? in a Garden at this hour, and your door set open, good Spider, but to catch a Pas∣senger? do you frown? By cock, I shall grow angry too; come, and kiss me, and leave your fooling.—Hold you, there's a piece of eight for you.
Away, impudent beast.
You will not, you are sure, you will not have it.—
I give no more, and yet I'll have as good a face as yours; Nay, you  shall not go neither.
Where are all these Officious Rascals? If I had been whispering they would have been here long since, to betray a Mi∣stress; but now, when my Honour's at Stake, My cries for help can∣not reach their Ears.
Do you hear, if you cry help again, By Cock I'll leave you, and go sleep; how now, Manners, where have you been bred, refuse a Gentleman's money, and kindness, when you are alone; Pox on you, let go my hair.
Villain, do not touch me, I'll tear thee to the Street.
Let go, or I'll cry Murder, and Rape, if you pull thu•.
Sure I heard her call for help; Ha! what's here; How now, Sir, what do you mean?
What do I mean? I mean to be served first, because I came first?
Let the Lady go, or I shall loose your Fingers with my Dagger.
Let me alone, and get thee gone, or I will beat thee with this sword, most unmercifully beat thee, for being so unman∣nearly to interrupt us.
Drunken beast!
They are both gone; a Pox on the Rogue, he has got the Wench.
Where came the Rogue in? do you know him, Sir?
Yes, it is one of the English Crew; I shall find a time to be revenged upon that Covey.
The Rogue had clawed us if he had been sober, who left the Gates open?
That's a Question out of season; Let us go, and shut it.

MOst Illustrious Dons, and egregiously beautiful and virtuous Madona's, with the rest of my Gentle friends and Auditors; Behold your humble and most officious Servant Lopus, arrived from the most ancient and stately City of Saragosa, on purpose to make a Present of the wonderful effects of his Phy∣sisal and Chemical Arts to your fair acceptance, in this most glo∣rios and Courtly Town of Madrid; I protest to you, Gentlemen, I and my wife, with all my Servants, are not able to make of this Precious Oil you see in this Glass, half so fast, as it is fetched a∣way from my Lodging, by Gentlemen and others of this famous Town; and sent for by many of the greatest Dukes and Condos of this much celebrated Nation; Some of which have detained me to their private and particular use awhile, since my arrival, by their splendidous Liberalities; And worthily, for what avails it your rich man to have his Cellars stuffed with the purest grape; and his Tables furnished with the rarest variety of dainty Acates, when his Physicians prescribe him (on pain of death) to drink nothing but water-gruel, or over-stewed herbs, in a thin heartless Broth? O health, the blessing of the Rich, the Riches of the poor! who can buy thee at so dear a rate, since they cannot enjoy any happiness in this world without thee? Be not then so sparing of your purses, Honourable Gentlemen, as to abridge the natural course of your lives; For when a humid Flux, or Catarrh, by the mutability of the Air, falls from your head into an Arm or Shoulder, or any o∣there part; take you a Ducat or Castilion of Gold, and apply it to the Place affected, see what good it will do; No no, It is this bless∣sed Unguento, this rare Extraction, that only hath the power to disperse all malignant humours, from whatsoever ill affected Cau∣ses they shall proceed. It has power to fortify the most indigest and crude stomach in the world, though it be of one that (through extreme weakness) vomits blood; Applying only a warm Nap∣kin to the place, after the Unction and Fricassee; for the Vertigo in the head, putting but a drop into your Nostrils, likewise behind your Ears, a most Sovereign and approved remedy. The Mal Ca∣duco, Cramps, Convulsions, Paralysies, Epilepsies, Tremor Cords, retired and shrunk Nerves, evil vapours of the Spleen, stoppings of the Liver, the Stone, the Strangury, Hermia ventosa, Iliaca pas∣sio, stops a Dysenteria, immediately eases the Tortion of the small guts, and cures Melancholia Hypochondriaca, being taken and ap∣plied according to my printed Receipt; For this is the Physician, this the Medicine; this Counsels, this Cures; this gives the Direct∣on, this works the effect; And in Sum, both together may be termed an Abstract of the Theorick and Practick in the Aescula∣peon
Art; The price is but four Royals, that is the price, and less I know, in courtesy you cannot offer me; take it, or leave it; How∣soever, both I and it are at your service; I ask you not near the va∣lue of the thing; For then I should ask you a thousand Ducats; so several Grandees and Grandessa's have given me. But I despise money, only to show my affection to you, Honourable Gentlemen, and this most inclyte Town; I have neglected the Messages of di∣verse Princes and Nobles, and directed my Journey hither, only to present you with the fruits of my experience, and travels.
I have here likewise a most inestimable water, or Quintessence of Spirits drawn from all sorts of Medicinable Vegetables, which is equally to be valued with my Oil; of Both which if I had but time to discourse to you the miraculous effects, with the Countless Catalogue of those I have cured of the aforesaid, and many more diseases, the Patents and Privileges of the most Catholic and Christian Kings; as also of all the Princes and Commonwealths of Christendom; or but the depositions that have appeared, on my part, before the most learned Colleges of Physicians, where I was Authorized, upon notice taken of the admirable virtues of my Me∣dicaments and my own excellence in matter of rare and unknown secrets, to disperse them publicly for the common good. And though divers have professed to have as good and experimented Receipts as my self, and have assayed to make both of this Oil and water; Bestowed great cost in Furnaces, Stills, Alembics, conti∣nual fires, and preparation of Ingredients (as indeed there goes to each of them six hundred several Simples, at least,) yet they ever lost their labour and cost, both, for want of that large Talent of knowledge, requisite to such a work. For my self, I have always hunted after the most recondite secrets, and to get them. I have spared no rest, or labour, but taken indefatigable pains therein; Insomuch as, Gentlemen, I will undertake (by virtue of Chemical Art) out of the Honourable Hat that cove••s your head to extract the four Elements, that is to say, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, and return you the Felt without burn or Stain; For, whilst others have been at the Balloo I have been at my Book, and am now passed the craggy parts of Study, and come to the flowery plains of Honour and Reputation.
Here is likewise a Powder concealed in this Paper, of which, if I should speak to the worth, five thousand volumes were but as one Page, that Page as a Line, that Line as a word; so short is this Pilgrimage of Man (which some call Life) to the expressing of it. Or if I would reflect upon the Price, why the whole world were but as an Empire, that Empire as a Province, that Province as a Bank, that Bank as a private purse, to the purchase of it. I will only tell you; It is the very Powder that made Venus a Goddess, (given her by Apollo) that kept her perpetually young, cleared her wrinkles, firmed her gums, filled her skin, coloured her hair; from her derived to Helen, and at the Sack of Troy unfortunately lost, till now in this our Age it was as happily recovered by a Stu∣dious Antiquary, out of some ruins of Asia; who sent a Moiety
of it to the Court of France, but much sophisticated: The rest, at this present, remains with me, extracted to a Quintessence; so that, wherever it but touches, in youth, it perpetually preserves; in Age restores the Complexion, Seats your Teeth (did they dance like Virginal Jacks) as firm as a wall, makes them white as Ivory, that were as black as Jet; and with the addition of a most wonderful Bath, of my own preparation, It will tinct a gray hair pure Auburn, and make it grow so; make you cast your old harsh skin for one as fresh and smooth as Laeda's, and so supple and quicken your Joints and Nerves, as but seldom using it, you shall ever enjoy your juvenile Activities, Gustos, and total Abili∣ties, to the Admiration of all that formerly knew you; Many other rare effects there are of this Powder and Bath, too tedious to reckon in this place; but whosoever has a mind to try them, if they please to repair to me at my lodging, shall be more par∣ticularly informed. Only this I shall add at this present; This Powder has likewise a wonderful variety of Amorous effects be∣longing to it, which are not here to be enumerated; And for my rare Oil, thuogh I impart it to the Rich for money, I often cure the Poor for God-sake.
He is a famous Fellow, and has offered to restore to their perfect shapes the two Rich Monsters.
What Monsters?
The two Sisters that came from Mexico: Jews it is thought, of vast Fortunes, no wunder a Guardian of the same Tribe, though the Rogue eats Bacon; their Fathers and Families were both drowned coming from the Indies; they are worth a Million of Crowns.
And why are they not married?
Marry a Monster? who would have them? One of them is so little, and so deformed, it is thought she is not Capable of Mar∣riage; The other is so great an over-grown Giant, no Body dares venture upon her, shoe's out of Fathom.
Let's go and see them; twill be good sport to pass an hour; what do you pay for going in?
Pay? why, they are worth a Million, and cannot be seen, but by particular favour of their Guardian, who is my Friend.
No words, Captain; you and I'll talk more of this anon; I'll venture a paper of powder upon one of them; it is but a royal lost.
How shall I do to speak with his Puppet? I have a que∣stion or two I would fain be Resolved of.
I believe I can do it without a Witch; Serulina, and Angelica, upon my life; whither the old love, or the new, will be most lasting?
Prithee do not name those two together; Thou know that name has divinity in it; and when my soul is serious it still adores
her; one is my religion, the other my sport and diversion; and though you have not guessed far from truth, yet this is neither time, company nor place to discourse of her; we must now follow our design to the Sisters, where we are expected; I see Ferd. swears in his mind, for being thus long delayed.
Faith, you let me cool so long upon it, my desire is over; and if she do's not use me mighty kindly, and put my toy in tune, my Fiddle will make no Music: Pox on it, they have played me all this day like a puppy whoremaster; Now put me on, then take me off; you have pulled me back and forwards so often I am out of humour; You know I am a Country Gentleman, not practised to play at game whores; you should have got me a gay Muzzel'd Harlot, to have tows'd at first, at my pleasure; and if once ent'red, I had been in for all night.
See, here comes one muzzel'd by gaffer time, that has neither teeth nor eyes, a blind whore; thou may have the whipping of this.
She has been a strapping queen in her time; Two couple of Almayns at a course, I have seen staved, and tailed off, on her.
Prithee who is it?
It is Helena, a Famous old Courtesan.
She may be that of Troy, There's Antiquity enough, both in her Face and Dress; though she be fitter now for Priapus his rape, then Paris's.
By your leave, Noble Gentlemen, room for a patient.
Gentlemen, Ladies, courteous Gentlemen, room, pray, for the patient to approach the Stage.
Who is there? a chair for the Lady—What seek you, Ma∣dam? your Fortune from the old Oracle in the Box? Is it the powder,  or Elixir, a Restorative Bath; would you be your self, at Fifteen again or try our transformation? would you your Sex, or fortune change; all rests in your power; Here is the Secret, name your hour.
Celia, my Child, I know thy voice, whose Name has long been my Envy; Yet now thy Fame has brought me hi∣there; see the sad remains of what was Helena. Fame doth fill the Worlds Care with thy Husbands skill; They say, he can change Forms and Sexes, and (which is more,) youth restore; He can both wound and Cure a heart; O my Child, it is the remedy I seek; Let him try his Art, I have here brought the dart; I love, I love, my Child, and fain would be beloved again; A proud, and yet (they say) a lovely Man; My Age is burnt with desire; Cold limbs feel that fire, Blind as Love, and yet in Love; I sigh, Pri∣thee use thy Art, to cure the smart, or freeze my heart, Why should Lust and desire stay? By what right, since youth and Beauty attained their flight? Why should not the Bloods fire
die, with those that sparkled in mine Eye? Age shakes me now, more then fear did then; Helena was ever cruel, Helena, for all Loves fire, was still the Jewel; It was my pleasure still the youth to please, and the raging Lover ease. O let thy Bath replenish those dark lamps with new Virgin Oil; Do but fix these Teeth, and trembling Hands, and restore what at fifteen I wore; Give me my Gold or Auburn hair, let time this silver wear.
Pray retire with my servants, who shall prepare the li∣quor and the fire, and in few hours give you your hearts desire; You shall have Beauty to your Art, such as shall catch each Lovers Heart; Such amorous lustre in your Eyes, and your gray Hairs so bright shall rise; Your Cheeks shall such fresh Roses bear, your skin so white a slickness wear, as shall a general wonder move and pierce the hardest Hearts with Love. But you must give us your Age.
I have forgot, unless by past accidents you can collect; in Charles the Fiftht's days I was a Lover.
And when a Maid?
Ha, ha, ha, you make me laugh, a Maid? Alas, a very little, little while; God knows, if ever; Since I knew what it was to be one, I am certain I was none.
Gentlemen, it is late, and my Patients attend their Fate; Come, bring in this Lady, on whom I will show such Art, shall make you all that see admire my part.
Help, help, bear her in.—The chippings of these old women are my fees, as Master Pantler to the Devil my Master; Ah Mistress! when shall I have the paring of your crust? This shell  which your Soul is in I must have the natural use of; You know the case of the Coney is the Cooks fee.
O Scarramucha, if thou were but faithful, what would not I do for thee?
Faithful? Venture but a kiss in my keeping, and com∣mand what you will.
A kiss, thou shalt have a thousand; All thy Heart can wish, my bed, my purse, my friendship for ever; do but one thing for me, and be secret.
Propose, propose, Dear Mistress; how I long to earn a favour from you! This powder works through the box sure; has it virtue by sneezing? Why do you delay the secret? You see they are gone.
Why should I fear? Is any condition worse then to love that wretch? It is resolved, I'll venture all kinds of danger, but I'll be rid of this; You shell swear to be secret.
I swear, I swear, I swear.—Dispatch, Dear Mistress, for I do so long to deserve your kindness. 
Be faithful and take it; Know then, you shall swear to join with me, and as soon as the Bath for Dwarfs is ready, help to throw my Husband in; And this Evening, when Helena's Bath for Restoration has all the perfect rights in it, you shall dip me thrice,
and thrice repeat my Name, and then command me out, Celia at fifteen; Do this, and command me ever; thou shalt find me a faith∣full friend, and still as kind as fair.
It is a bargain, give me only a Courtesy in earnest, a cast of this old Cilia's office, and I'll sit you; and to show my Dear Mistress, how faithful a Lover her Scarramucha is; Never shall woman enjoy me after, if you will promise to be as kind to me as I am faithful to my Mistress; You shall even dip me too.
Why? What would Scarramucha be? Is he not young and healthy?
I am even weary of being Scarramucha; I'll be dipped, it is resolved; I'll be dipped, and my Mistress shall call me Helena, Helen of fifteen, and you shall see what a dainty Lady I'll come out; I'm weary of being a Man, and subject to be beaten. And if a Man have a mind to a Wench, the making Love is so tedious, that it is an affliction; then paying is to my Heart unsupportable: No, I will be a Woman, and be courted, have a house of my own, and Servants about me; Live at ease, have both the sport and the money; and it is so fine to be without a beard, and speak small, and sing a treble, with a fine little hand and foot, and squeak if the wind but blow upon me; I am sure never to be cudgeled again, still cockered and flattered; And Men will take it so kindly too, if I'll but let them put their hands under my coats; I am resolved I will be a Woman, unless I could be both; A fine Lady with a dagger and a scabbard too; however, Mistress, it is no bargain unless you will observe Covenants; Either Scarramucha must come out Helen, or Celia dwells in her old clothes still.
In serious faith, I vow; Be just to me, and I'll diligently observe my part.
It is agreed, within we'll take our leaves of Scarramucha and Celia; But what shall we do with the good old Gentle∣woman?
Hang her, she is not worth our thoughts.
Yes faith, when we have done; In Charity let's throw her in, and call her out by any young things name, there is neither pains nor cost in the Charity; Yet, now I think on it, what say you by throwing of her in, and calling her out by the name of Scarramucha? Her Soul will make good sport disguised in Scarramucha's body, how shall I laugh to see her rise in a bread and breeches? Twill be good sport to see her wonder at her self, when she finds the Ap∣purtenances belonging to a Man about her; I'm resolved I'll do it for mirths sake.
Any thing, so you will be secret, I consent to.
Hark, he whistles; a kiss Dear Mistress, for old Friendships sake at parting, and Fortune guide us.—Now could I cry and  sigh, to part with this old Friend of mine. Do not sob, nor cry, poor Scarrmucha; I'll provide for thee; and yet it is most ill na∣tur'dly done, to leave an old Friend in misery; How pitifully he looks upon me! The poor Rogue apprehends the misery he is going to suffer, when he shall have the Mind and Heart of a crafty
Whore possess him; What a fit of the Devil must he suffer that acts her desires from fifteeen to a hundred year? What must poor Soar∣ramucha suffer? What will not she expose thee to? It is not the Sex nor Breeches will save thee, I fore-see it. How, shall I be dishonoured? My Country and Family despised for that black sin; who would have thought it, says one; I should never have believed it, says another; No, no, I must not, will not use thee so ill; I'll even give her my Masters case for her old Soul to witch in, and put my Master into mine; I am so divided, I know not what to do: It is fine being a handsome young Courtesan, but it is unkind to expose an old Friend to be ill used in his Age, after the faithful service of his youth; No, I me resolved I'll be Helena, Helena shall be Lopus, and Lopus, Searramucha; Nay, nay, no grumbling, Friend; rest Lopus, and be thankful; You shall now no more play Zany Scarramucha, but Operator, the secret, the bank, and profit, all your own; No more conduct a Whore for Lopus, no more eat poison, or be stabbed for Lopus; thou shalt have a Whore, a Zany, and a Name thy self; Nay, do not anger me now by being sollen, when I have taken care and thought for you; if you be, I'll leave Scarramucha in the broth with old Helena, where you shall boyle  to a Cullis. Scarramucha, as we have lived Friends, so let us part; And upon your Life, not a word of what has passed betwixt us, good Scarramucha.
STay here, Sir; Till I go before and knock, to see if the coast be clear.
I am horribly sore after my apparition in the Garden;  The anguish of their blows refreshes my Memory; all the rest is a dream still; A pox on the unruly Sack; I would he were come back, I long to be in bed; Give me a Girl that loves me, I hate a gilded post that must be purchased; It is a fine Girl, and pity she is cast away upon such a jealous Husband; it is a consolation to think upon her; The Rogues kisses taste still, the savour and the smack are in my Heart yet; and if the piece prove as good as the pattern, a night with her is worth all the days I ere spent at Tot∣name or Istington; How woollenly those Sisters look and feel to this Silken Girl! This dainty sinner wears no Coif nor Ear-wyers, to make her Luggs smell as sour as Runnet or a Dairy; Now do I call to mind how wretchedly I spent my Estate in the Country, to keep a Kitchen and a Hall stinking; I would I could prevail with her to go into Surry; we have Whore enough there, But we want some good example to employ the stock; This would be a dainty Plantation sinner; she has the finest odd Name to; our Parson would not have christened a Child ofit, because it is neither in the old nor new Law; The Rogue stays long, it is late, and they have my supper within; If they should eat it now without me,
the jest would be better then the feast; a disgracia would give my Comrades such a Theme to laugh upon; a man had better have fined twice for Sheriff, then endure their insolent wits in such a case. I hear one whistle.
Where are you?
Here, is all clear?
Yes, yes; follow me.

ANd how do you like this disguise? is it natural? let me alone to fit his palate; I'll give him good sauce to night; for which he shall be our sauce this month, or else I'll lose my aim.
Hark, hark, one knocks; away to the Kitchen, and observe your Q.
Lady, I must beg your pardon for coming thus late; there was an accident happened staid me beyond my expectation.
Sir, you are not only master of your own, but my time too; nor shall any person, so welcome and deserving as your self, need make excuses here, where all are proud to be commanded by you; Love, Sir, has that property, twill hide faults, and glorify every virtue, which is in Love a virtue too he will not be divided from; nor is it fit for me to say how much your absence afflicts, but what joy your presence brings her eyes that loves and adores her friend; nor shall you find any of those saucy passions here that imposes upon the mind and person of those they love; those trow∣blossom humours make friendship heavy, and the delight short,  when it must with such slavery be bought.
I'll kill her Husband, and Marry her; I'm resolved; it is a pretty house this, and finely furnished; she loves me so she'll never think of asking a Jointure, nor I a portion; such a wife is Portion enough.
You are sad, Sir; I hope what I have said doth not displease you; if it should it would be an affliction greater then you believe.—His eyes are blew too, do you love me? I know you will say so,  though you do not; and I confess I am such a fool, I had rather you should flatter me with such a lye, then hear any truth that says you love another better.
Gentle soul, why dost thou blush and hide thy head? can thou fear I can be false or cruel to such a heart? what stony breast can hear and see this, and not become a slave to such inno∣cence and sweetness? I never had but one heart, a plain one, and an honest, and that's thine; I would thou were not married; I would try who would first propose a kindness that the other would refuse.
O, that I were as free, and my fortune as great, as when perjured Philippo betrayed me here! I would find a friend, or lose my self.
Come, no fears; for though those showers are seasonable in the spring of Loves choicest flowers; yet to good natures such kindness bears a sting; you should smile on Love, tears but wet his wings; Come, retire, it is late, and love would roost; this bed gives the Boy both rest and food; what joys my wanton heart pro∣mises it self I want soul enough to comprehend; sure her em∣braces will far excel all the pleasures I have tasted; for I never loved, nor was beloved till now; this is Loves holy-day; the rest were working-days, in which I but ploughed the sex; our dull cold kisses were common seed, thoughtless sown, and full of weed, not of force to kindle a heart; here every look or touch inflames or burns my blood; it is pleasure thus to be stung; for though it swells the heart, it is with delight, not smart.

LEt me go; had I thought Don Harrigo had more kindness for me, then to hear an insolent fellow despise one that has ever had an esteem for him.
You complain, who are indeed too blame; do you believe men will spend their money in these houses, and not have the free∣doom of their humour?
Let him be as free and wanton as he pleases, so he keep it to himself; why should his mirth choose us to despise? bragging, here the beauties and favours of other women; we know you came all now from the Angellica's; is this friendship? to make us the subject of your scorn and mirth, as if we could not deserve or distinguish a civility; if Don Harrigo had any esteem for us, he would not have exposed this place to his insolent raillery; sure you have not observed, Sir, any such obsceneness find encouragement or liberty here.
It is true, we are merry; but since it dislikes you we will be gone; I never knew you expected Homilies, moral Philosophy, or Lectures in Divinity to be read hear; you should set up a cross and a pot of holy-water at your door; it is the first Bush or Bawdy∣house I ere saw exacted more then the reckoning.
I thought Don Harrigo had come upon another account; I took him for a Lover, but I am deceived.
Not a whit; a Lover and a perfect Lover, one that loves but one, and that's my self.
Then it is not possible to oblige you!
Nothing easier.
How comes it then you are thus free, after all your pro∣fessions, and my civility?
Because I have wisely resolved against the slavery which I see all you women condemn your Lovers to; when I have a na∣ture can lick my self whole, sigh and blow out a passion, or weep to quench the flame, be sullen and kick till I have thrown a Mi∣stress as other Quacking Lovers can; when I have their oils to cure the burn, then I'll venture to play with his flame.
But, for old acquaintance sake, you may teach a friend how to know these Emp'rick Lovers that have such remedies against a Mistress; prithee, tell her their marks, that she may shut her door against them.
They are easily known by Don Harrigo's company.
And better by the Saretta's folly, who puts out her Birds eyes; not contented they should be her prisoners, but they must be blind too; which cruel curiosity I shall not approve, though the Bird sings better; sure you women have great imperfections, which you are afraid a Lover with his Reason might perceive; therefore upon the first springing of an inclination it is your business to depose that.
Pray, tell me how to know him; is there a new mark besides sanguine, fat and merry? will they be so cured, as to leave no scars behind them, not a twittering?
Scars! yes, and visible ones, which they are proud of too; those that are best healed, either by scorn or counsel, choice of wine, or change of women (as fair and kind as they) yet the Cicatrice will stay.
But doth Love leave scars, say you?—Nay, you shall stay and hear Doctor Harrigo read upon Love; who knows but you may profit in your own cure, of a slight wound you say he has given you? the scars, good Don Harrigo, the scars.
Alas, Sir; they are as many and as different as the wounds the Boy gives, besides his Mothers; but hers are visible, the young mans are more innocent; see here, Knots of old Ribbon, Braids of Hair, Rings with Poesies, Seals and broken Gold.
What, you are sad; did you think to find men constant?
Not sad, nor much pleased; yet I am glad to find Don Harrigo is so near his cure as to know his disease; I see he'll try to cure fire with fire, the remedy has been often proved; Angellica must now be applied to his breast to take out the sire Saretta's eyes kindled; yet I doubt not but we shall have the pastime, to di∣vert our selves with him in his days of repentance; when he has given his thousand Crowns, twill make us all merry; poor Mon∣tebank! she asks a thousand Crowns, and descends to a Ryal; and yet no Chapman; at last she gave her ware to the standers by, which Thomaso took for love; and she'll want none at this rate; Don Harrigo will be one too.
And that's all your sexes pride, every one would be Cupids shepherdess, and govern the whole Flock of Lovers; I have seen
some have a handsome troop, and the poor beasts knew not which was best used; all bleat and run when she calls; this has the Bell and Garland to day, that the Ribbon and Bough to morrow; they will sing and pipe before their Flock, when each one sighs, and thinks she sings to him, when she but keeps them together; and if she fold them in her arms by turns, it is for the Lamb, and the Fleece; Saretta knows the commodity of a Flock of Lovers is etter then the pleasure of a tame Ram.
Being of this humour, and this opinion of women, I wonder you'll spend so much of your time amongst them; but fly, and avoid the danger and save your fleece and flesh.
See who comes here to break off your discourse; come, pray no frowning, you know his humour; and say what he will now, I heard him speak kindly of you this morning, and prefer your beauty before your Sister Paulina's; what? I see Don Tho∣maso can be reconciled to a lean woman, though he admires the fat.
I love what loves me, which supplies beauty; it is for young men, Cornelio, to flatter and pay.
It is the way never to come late to Loves Feast; if any dish be standing you can make a meal upon it; necessity and kind∣nos will furnish all that beauty wants.
I never saw any man yet cut my piece; some are for se∣cret, others charity, a third for conversation, and cares neither then for face nor fortune; a rusty, mouldy Maid, filled with Platonic sentences, is the same things to him a Girl of fifteen is to us; he despises the body, yet I love to see that Prince in good clothes when the soul inhabits a Palace built in perfect Symmetry; I know no jest, no eloquence, nor Apophthegms, have more savour or plea∣sure then a voice, nor more salt then a kiss from a Girl of fifteen, smooth as Rushes, white as Lilies, plump as Grapes after showers; give me this, and let your Wit take his Sybill and her Oracles in∣stead of teeth in her mouth; and while he spends his days in such Monuments of women, let me clasp this smiling Girl, whose Ruby folds above her chin, laughs and discovers those pearly flocks with∣in; and for wit in women, so they say kind things, we know it is no matter whether they be true or no.
Can you be contented with flattery, Sir? sure your heart is easily satisfied; that's a root from which you can expect no con∣stant friendship.
Constant friendship, Child? Marry God forbid such a curse as constancy should follow me; I'll leave that for your Anchorit-lovers, whom Matrimony has vowed to some old women's Cellar of threescore; there the sin of constancy and rash∣nos of the vow, for better for worse, finds a just judgement in the conversation of Aches, Palseys and Catarrhs, which Wed-lock and Hymen hangs upon fools; who would have it thought con∣stance, to dote on Age and wrinkles, and pass their ignorance
for a virtue; but the Vine and the Sun teach better things; beauty cannot be divided from variety, no face is too new, or wine too old, nor a friend too true.
Faith, Secrecy is even the Brother of that Folly, a foolish humour that women have made a virtue, because it is convenient sometimes.
Secrecy a virtue; a damned ungrateful vice, only known where small beer is currant, despised where Apollo or the Vine bless the Country; and though Joves Wife was a shrew, yet we find none of his Mistresses hid in Roots or Plants, but fixed stars in hey∣ven, for all to gaze and wonder at, though few have wit to admire, or power to imitate; and though I am not Jove, to place my An∣gellica, or my Pauline there; yet my kind heart shall proclaim how fit for such places such starry beauties are; and when my Bro∣there comes from Salamanca he shall write our Chronicle.
Pray, when will he be here? I have heard much of him, and I long to see him; is he like you? has he your wild hue∣more?
No, he's a serious black fellow, he smells like Serge and old Books; but yet he loves a Wench too, for curiosity, or so; for he only lies with them for experiment, to be able to approve or decry the pleasure the more feelingly in a Satire. When he comes I'll wait upon him to your froward Sister, because their hue∣morse will agree; for she is for a serious threshing Lover.
Come, I say, embrace, or I'll break all correspondence with you; what, fall out with your Brother!
Sister, these frowns must blow over; I will not see them thrown upon my friends; you know I love him; and if you ex∣pect I should converse civilly with your interest, you must comply with mine.
I have no mortal quarrel to your servant; only I would not have him rail upon me because I have not wit enough to fall in love with him; it is true, his hand and head are white; but I am past the nursery, no Child to be taken with such Cream and Cu∣stard; yet if you have such kindness foot the Dairy, much good may it do you; give me my old friend, Don Harrigo; I love this colour, sullen Sack; I love the Kitchen and the Cellar in a man; this is gravy and mans flesh; and this Ok will have leaves upon his head when your Rose-tree and all is withered.
Nay, now I'll kiss you; and if you anger me with this humour toss me in a Blanket; By this light, I had rather be hand∣somely abused then dully flattered; prithee Ferd. call for a bottle and a glass; come, we will have the Song we made last.
Come, every man his Glass.
Women, Women, Wine and Health,
Ye gods, we ask no other wealth;
The rest of Nature and of Art,
For this kiss I'll quit my part.
These blessings, though they flow on earth,
Jove enjoys not but by stealth.
Why else, my Girl, did Juno frown?
And poor Simile to ashes burn!
The god turned Bull, and Maid a Cow!
So we know why, no matter how.
See, my Love that flaming star,
It was once Ariadnes Auburn Hair,
Which her god in Bracelets wore,
Not less esteemed cause Theseus whore.
Then in her god, to her god let us drink,
Of the Vine, in the Vine let us think;
And sacrifice this glass of Sack
To those sparkling grey eyes, and the flaming black.

WHo's there?
It is I, prithee open the door; is your Mi∣stress at home?
Yes, Sir; but she's busy, a man of quality sups with her; Sanco was to find you, to desire you would come to morrow; your basket and your bottles are safe.
Prithee, Kick, come to the back door that I may speak with thee.
Walk off a little till they are quiet; as soon as I can come without being missed I'll wait upon you.
False Devil, how durst she do this? and that dull stranger too enter without my leave?
Alas, Sir; it is their trade; Boat-mans-luck, you know, pass as his fraught comes; this is some job of work she has gotten by chance; and you that are her friend must not be against the good of the house.
I shall know all when her Maid comes; the Queen dotes, that makes me steal a bit now and then from her Mistress to give her.

WEll, and how think you? was this a purchase to be Lost for a little Coyness? where shall we make a voyage, if we refuse to touch at these fortunate Isles, because they are strangers?
No, I'm of your side now; But when you love for sha∣dows, and dote upon gay Clothes, some young thing for dressing himself; when a Feather, Gittern, or Sarabrand, begets Admiration, or when poor Poetry prevails upon your passion, to give your youth and fortune for a Sonnet, when nothing, but the Dedica∣tion belongs to you, such Fondness makes me rage; I speak with∣out Interest now; For since you know and have forgiven the fault I made, I shall hereafter faithfully serve you in memory of past kindness.
Except your own; and you know I was never guilty of such a Folly; No other wound nor scar afflicts my mind; and when once the Moon has prescribed a remedy for that Poison, I shall quickly recover the old Character, of being insensible again; what are you thinking on?
The party within, his silver, sword, gay Clothes, and Rings, besides that at his Bandstring, bundles of Seals, Watches, abused Gold, bowed into Bracelets? All shows the Rogue is at his Ease, a merry soul, and a wanton Fortune I warrant you; such su∣perfluous Expenses shows he wants no money; His Breeches too, those shells, I believe, have good Kernels in their pockets.
Those toys are such Feathers that grow upon Fools, for wise men to pluck, All the difficulty I find, is, his being a stranger; and the noise of such an Action will hinder our Trade with them hereafter.
Rather, that will be the security of the business. This is not only a stranger to us, but to the Country too; This knows no∣thing, neither your Name, nor street, so far from knowing your House, that he do's not know his own; And when it is done, do but change your Quarter, and hoe's at a dead loss for ever; If not, within ten days hoe's gone; and I perceive he will be flayed ever he goes; as good you do it as another; he shall have no harm, a merry Night for his Money; we'll have the profit, and he the Experience of the Jest.
He will kill me when he misses his Clothes and money.
Leave the care of your safety to me; he shall undress him∣self in my Chamber, your Toy let and night Gown are laid out already; let Sanco and me alone to fit him, for a Cook, and a valet de Chambre.
Well, I am not of your opinion; yet, so long as you do him no harm, I submit.

I Am resolved to see the depth of this design; If the stranger stays I'll take my Revenge at Leisure; if he goes, she shall see I am sensible of this Affront, to admit a Visit upon my day, without my consent! Farewell, Stephano, lets meet to morrow at the old Rendezvous.
Softly, pray, Expect me here; when the strangers gone, I'll call you.
Not a word to her, that I am here, I shall put her to ano∣there confession fit again.
Undress you in my Chamber; lest they find the Goose has been here by his Feathers.
Mum wench, make haste, lest the pot boil over before you come; I have no patience betwixt the sheets.

SOftly, I pray, and make no Ceremonies, but follow me, I must carry it my self; For I dare not trust my Maid with your lying here this night; shoe's too kind to him that was sent away.
Hang her spy, Turn her to grass; I'll get you a dumb Girl.
Within you will find Sanco ready to serve you.
Make haste my Dear, you know the pain longing Lovers suffer, when their Joys are drawn within the afflictions of a few Mi∣nuts; All steps move slow, time has lead upon his wings; The youthful Sun runs lazily, and we throw our selves to meet the Embraces of Friends whom with greedy longing we expected.
You speak my pain, whose love and desires still precede your wish; (Though I blush to say so) and grudges this lost time, though spent in hearing the Music of thy voice, that tells my heart you love me.
This kiss only, and then take thy Flight on Loves wings to return again; Love, that knows no grief nor pain like those that sigh in vain.
It is foolishly done to abuse him, for he is of a humour one need not pick his pocket, he will do it himself; it is an ill natured Crime, twice a sin, to rob such that give so much; The ill natured Devil would have had me done it, without giving him a Nights lodging for his money.

HOw Propa this little Rogue is, in every thing! Night gown, slippers, Cap, and Toilet? As brave as if she were to marry some Prince to night; sure it is my wedding Night, at least I'll imagine it so; And that which is the Excellence of this Blessed Country, A man may every Night have a several Bride, for a Pistol Jointure; Prithee call the Lady.
As soon as you are in Bed, Sir, I shall.
That fellow too, I took him for a Cavalier at least, and it is a Pimp; He might be a Justice in our Country, by the garb and gravity I met him in.

SEe, here is the Nest, I have taken the old one sitting; you shall have the watch; the case is Gold, and Cordial. This purse and hundred Pistols, and in the waste and knees of his Breeches a Magazine of heretical Gold, old Besses Coin all, our arch Enemy; the act is now justifiable; the Inquisitor might have done it; he should have lost it at Vittoria; If he complain, I'll make his Process; and had it not been a hard heart could have let these Birds sing in another Women's Cage!
But what shall I do in the morning?
Sanco is to wake you in hast, and cry your husband's come; you must start out of the Bed, as if to save your self; then I swagger with my own shadow in the next room, till Sanco urges the danger to him, how impossible it is to scope with life, if surprised; that there is no de∣nying or defending the act; for he had found his Clothes and was now staying for men to destroy him; having thus frightened him, seduce him, in his drawers, to follow him to some place of safety; Then con∣vey him out at the Back-door, and lose him in the street, and come round to the foregate, where I'll expect him; he being then unarmed &amp; naked, with darkness &amp; fear about him, his anger will open no doors.
This is a most inhumane jest; and I must not consent to such a Barbarity.
Only a Jest, a Summer Jest, I vow; if he be met let him pretend he has been in Fresco. Now Sanco, the news. 
Why, hoe's in Bed, and expects you with much impatience. impatience.
Give us the Key of one of your Chests, to lock up these tran∣sitory blessings, and then we will wish you good shipping, and a fair wind, till day break; But then we shall raise a storm shall wake you; O Sanco, little doth hee or you think what price he must pay for this Night; His Breeches have a Mine of Gold in 'em.
My share comes pat for my design, to make me brave in Clothes; Being once in order to Court I go; all there are fine, but the Infant will be only mine, or the powder shall fail his force.

THe Stranger is gone, there is some disgust amongst them; For she is gone fullen to bed; she would not let me light him because I grumbled at her for disappointing you.
But whore's Philippo?
He stays; She's become such a slave to that wretch, that she smiles or frowns upon us just as he commands her; And I know she has disappointed both the Stranger and you, only to pursue her extravagant passion with that Beast.
Thou art a kind Girl, and I shall not forget it; pri∣thee come quickly back again.
In a minute; but pray be quiet and silent lest she discover us; You must find the way to my Chamber in the dark; for I dare have no light in it, lest she should be angry at my siting up; I'll peep, and as soon as Philippo goes to bed I'll return.
Make haste, I'll not to bed till you come.
Her sullenness has gotten me an opportunity; when the Mistress will not, the Maid is handsome.
Now have I a curious Humour to rout the whole Fa∣mily, disappoint Philippo, and cozen both the Maid and Mistress; It is but stealing in the dark to Lucetta's bed, and surprising her in her froward Humour, where she lies expecting that crooked Rogue; But then Kick will be mad, and if she be, there are other days and nights to cure her; If not, it is but a Chamber-maids  wrath; and those fires of straw quickly burn out; It is resolved now, if I can find the door; so, sostly, puss, softly.
SHe is very long in coming; Some nicety now, some gentileness, to make her more welcome; Some per∣fumed smock now, or finer night clothes then ordinary; These Women are right City Cooks, and stay to garnish the dish while the meat be cold; I could find in my heart to steal out of the bed and see what she is doing. Hark, the door opens.
If she be awake, I'll tell her boldly who it is; if not, I'll surprise her.
Whist, who's there?
It is. I.
Come, my Dear.
So kind, she has had some inkling of my designs.—Where are you?
Here, my Heart.— 
You can counterfeit, I see.—
Some trick, I find it; these Whores have laid betwixt them to af∣ront me.
How now, what are you? what would you have?
What would I have? I believe both our businesses here may be guessed without a witch; But I shall be revenged. 
Nay, you stir not, Sir; I can hold a bearded Venus as fast as you; This is some Thief; what ho, Sanco, bring some lights here.
Light Kick, light Syniora; Thieves, bring lights.
Thief or no Thief, I'll have one bang at him for my kiss.
What noise is that in my Chamber?
It was the Strangers voice.
And Medias, or l'me mistaken.
Dog, Rogue, wilt thou worry me?
Ho! Traitor; In my Bed take the advantages of a naked man?
It is their voices, I am undone; That Whore Kick has let Medias in, who finding the Stranger in the Bed, I fear, has murdered him; Run, as you love our lives save the Stranger, we are all lost else, confiscate to the Law, and shamed for ever; This is a just curse upon your covetous mischief.
That Whore shall dearly pay for it.
Take your Sword and second me, it is no time to waste in talking; If Medias be there, you're sure he's not alone; take your sword, that we may be able to force him to reason; Pray stay you here, that nothing be laid to your charge whatever happens; lest his Rage having power should act some bestial Re∣avenge upon you.
Leave talking of mischiefs that may be, and hasten to prevent this certain ruin that threatens us.
Be what thou wilt, I'll make thee repent this visit.
What a Devil art thou that use me thus? I neither know thee, nor looked for such a Bed-fellow.
What am I? A Gentleman and a Stranger that is to be abused, robed, and jeered; But if I do not make you repent your share of the Villainy, I am a Dog.
Help, Murder, Murder; his fist lights like a hammer on my Face; a black mischief befall that damned Kick.
Kill that Rascal; Death, are you become Master of this  house? Cannot the Syniora dispose of her time and person with∣out your leave? I'll learn you to come when you're sent for.
Save your self from him by the back door, and follow me; I'll convey you to a friends house, and immediately bring your clothes; and as soon as I can inform my self of this mis∣chief you shall know it; but, by my Iife, it is a mystery yet to all.
I'll not stir a foot: Give me thy sword, I'll warrant I'll defend the House against them all, till you fetch a sword and second me.
No, Sir, I will serve you with it, but not quit mine; whore's your own?
Would I had but a knife to cut yonder Rogues throat with.
You know not the Law of this place; we are undone if any such thing should happen in the house; For the Syniora's sake, Sir, follow me.
I will not stir a step till I am revenged on you all.
Retire, however, and preserve your self till you may be revenged; You shall find both the Syniora and my self will join with you.
I'll follow you; but be certain the day shall not surer rise, then I'll find my Revenge.

WHy so; Now you have had your will, and I am de∣stroy'd; what mischief made this encounter?
I know not, but I can guess; Whore's Kick? That Queen has a finger in the business.
Well, what remains to remedy this?
The same remedy will cure it yet, if Sanco observes his first Instructions, and lose him in the street; the Stranger knows nothing, neither him, nor us, nor the house.
But if he should come to know who we are, what then?
When that accident happens we must think of a re∣medy for that too; In the mean time send for Kick, that we may inform our selves what is past.
The news, Sanco; whore's the stranger?
Where I left him, at the turning behind the Jesuits; but he is in such a fury, I'm confident he'll hazard a hundred lives rather then sit down with this affront.
It was well he got not a sword, you would all have paid for your trick.
And I counsel you to let me carry him his clothes and his money, this morning; and tell him ingenuously the whole truth; then you may make friends again; for I know he loves you, there is nothing lost neither by it; for I dare say he would give all you can steal where he is kindly used.
What hast thou there?
Medias his clothes, I found them in Kecka's Chamber, who has confessed all; you shall have the story within; Medias and she should have been merry to night, but with no ill intention truly; but when he heard the stranger was gone, and you alone (which you told Kick yourself, and gave cruel Medias occasi∣on to be false to love and Kick from whose bed he stole to sir∣prize you in yours) there he met his punishment in the martial Maid, who with a Beard and Buffets quickly laid the Knights lust in the dust; the jest will afford laughter on all sides, if well carri∣ed; Medias can blame no body but himself, nor the stranger ac∣cuse any thing but change; and if Medias that was beaten can forget, sure the other may forgive the beating; if you'll be ruled, I'll heal all to morrow; if not, somewhat worse will follow.
Where is that damned Kick? dear Sanco, as thou love me turn her naked out; she shall not sleep in this house, false beast.
Yes, that she may run and find the stranger, and tell him all that is past; rather shut her up, and chain her; lest she break loose and discover us before we reconcile the business.
Sanco has Reason; shut her up, and put out the light; lest that discover us in the street when the rogue makes a noise; come retire, and leave the care of him to me.
No, I am of Sanco's opinion, to send him his clothes and money again, and invite him and Medias both to dinner, and make a perfect peace; the jest will be good too when they shall both see it was accident; so we shall avoid both the scandal of such an action, and the danger of their revenge.
I am not of your mind, I apprehend no such danger; if he be angry it will be forgot ere he can express himself to be understood; if not, I can digest my part with this Cordial; Nor can I repent an action that carries ready money with it; and when will his friendship be worth a thousand Ryals of Plate apiece to each of us? if he frowns, we have as good Arguments against his anger as he has for it; a sword and an arm; I know no other; yet if you approve it we will out of Town, for a day or two, and be gone before day to avoid suspicion: you and Sanco shall walk to the
Bridge, and I'll meet you with a Coach; then we may pretend we were out of Town when this happened; we will take Medias with us and stop all mouths; come, pray be ruled; here's six hundred Argue∣mints in Gold of our side; we will see the Escurial in our walk, and be merry a month upon the jest; and is not that better then spoil a good business with a little sneaking repentance?
Before that month I hope to see you deposed from that Tyrannic power over my heart, which makes you command thus absolute; I obey, but if my fears prove true you will dearly pay for it.
I, I; let me suffer, be you ruled; and leave the rest to me.
I am not sorry to hear they have abandoned the thought of restitution; my share, I'm sure, will be least in the danger, though it be equal in the spoil; for I can run away and prepare my self for my great design with this ready money, and the power∣full powder: I will enter Sanco, that must go forth a Prince.
I May whistle and whistle, but the Dog will not come; it is dark and late, few people stirring in the street; the villain is gone, and has left and lost me on purpose; what course to steer I know not, either to find mine own lodging or theirs; her name too is jumbled out of my head; hell and mischief go with it; now had I as live go to the Gallows as return home; the rogues will so rejoice and triumph over me when they hear of this mischief; their jests will sting worse then a Dog-whip; what a day and a night has this been? twice drunk, twice cozened, and twice bea∣ten; mischiefs by couples; I shall give a fine account of my tra∣veals; a few of these unnatural days will make the journey seem te∣dious; what an ass was I to believe such a woman, so clothed, so nobly lodged, and richly furnished, could be maintained or had for nothing! Puppy, blind wilful Puppy; dull, vain Ass, to believe she could fall in love with me at first sight; no, I am an Ass, it is vi∣sible; she read the fool in my face, the Essex Calf; for what grace in∣deed, beauty or virtue, can I plead, then this face which I can suffer because I am acquainted with it; dull Ass, to be flattered into a mischief when I was sober too! I could pull my self by my long ears, which, methinks, I see by star-light they are so visible, there is nothing to redeem such a folly, but a home, full revenge without mercy, upon the whole nest of them. What lights come there? I must hide my self some where, else the people in the street will pass their time with me.—More strokes of fortune yet! A  pox of the Whore; will she expose me to their mirth too? where shall I hide me? I'll get upon this stall, and lye as if I slept.
See here's some Lover sleeping in Fresco, after his Serra∣had; what was the business, Carlo, at Lucetta's, this night?
Lucetta, Lucetta, that's the damned name.
Some quarrel amongst her Amoroso's; one leaped the window in his drawers.
That's some comfort yet; I went out at the Door.
That Philippo will undo her; He is still playing the Bravo amongst her Lovers; I wonder what she sees In that Beast to love him for?
Shoe's a beast her self, false and proud; Nothing but Picaroons, and falsehood amongst them; There's that Sanco, a Bloody infamous Villain; and while she admits him, No man of Honour, that loves his Throat, will sleep under her roof.
Lucetta, Philippo; Those are they against a world; That Sanco too is the Squire that lost me. But if my revenge find not him and them too let them laugh at the dull English man; ha! The light again; I'll step off, ever I am discovered, and take Sanctuary in some great mans Portico.

NOt know him?
No, faith; nor understand him scarce; I'm sure, he is a stranger, one that supped there.
What said Lucetta? was she of the Plot?
No, nor none of them knew of my being in the house; nor was he less amazed then I; it was in the dark; For I went in Knavery, without a light, to surprise her, who, I thought, had been alone in her bed; We kissed, and hugged each other, till our Beards discovered; but afterwards, you may see by my face how he set up mine.
Where are your Clothes?
I was even glad to leave them behind me, and escape so; Hoe's naked too. I saw him stalk before me, like a Ghost in the shade; you must needs have met him.
We did so, He was got upon a stall; Do you not remem∣ber, I told you there lay a Lover in Fresco; It is one of Thomaso's crew upon my life, let's walk; if we find him, we'll laugh him into a Fever.
Gentlemen, you may laugh, but believe it, I cannot; would I were in my own Bed, I would not quit it for any shoe's in Madrid. Now do I smell a Ballad to morrow in the Prado, of the two Bearded Lovers, kissing like the Devil and the Collier in a Ladies Bed; If I be not revenged I shall pine in my mind.
You cannot be revenged on her; it is clear, shoe's Innocent; indeed Sanco and Philippo should be well stroked with Cudgels;
and larded with poniards, to refresh the Rogues memories, and teach them their duties towards Gentlemen.
The Dog made me leap out at a Window; Else I am con∣fident he had killed me; he gave me these Three hurts ever I could pass.
What a Rogue it was to strike a naked man! come let's try if we can find your Enemy. Give us but the satisfaction of that mirth, and we'll all join in your Revenge.
There is time and ways enough for a Revenge, for those Rascals have more Enemies then thou hast friends. The Galleys and the Gallows are their Common disease, and all unnatural deaths their natural Ends.

YOu rise late, methinks!
At Feasts men sit long, and the Rogue made me a kind one; she bound me in her bed, where we so kissed and talked over the stories of passed love. She swore it was not day till the procession was passed.
It is a kind and a buxom Girl; but I am for her Sister who has promised me we shall be merry at night; but what will your Angellica say when she shall hear you lay here?
Say, as much as I do when I hear Don Pedro lay there; why, dost thou think I'll be tied to one Wench, Ferdinando? No, I am for a herd of Whores, or one honest woman; while I am an out-lying Deer, have at any mans Corn; impale me and take me.
What do you resolve this morning?
Why, I must find Harrigo, I have some business with him.
And I am for that visit I told you of.
And pray, Captain, solicit your Taylor not to fail of my clothes to morrow; you know Saint Cicely is my Saint, and we must keep her feast to morrow; and then, Ferdinando, you shall see
I'll change my Garb, and step, when I come forth Don Thomaso.
And Don Cornelio leap into Monsieur Con, with long Hose, and a short Coat, and after they have been seen here, sometime away; and become an honour to the Regiment in Portugal.
What, it is a bargain then I see, Coat and all?
All, for the new Buff-coat and old kindness sake, upon the condition he wears it at Saint Cicilia's feast; and therefore haste your stitcher that I may get my self sheathed in Don; Come, Harrigo expects us at home.
How now, the news? we were coming to you.
Have you heard nothing this morning?
No, what is it?
Nothing of news?
Nothing, what is it? some roguery I see by his eyes.
Such mirth, if you can laugh at the affliction of a friend.
Who? Edwardo, upon my life, beaten, robbed and thrown out at a Window!
Not altogether so ill; but beaten he is and robbed, turned out of doors naked, at mid-night; he has lost six hundred crowns in gold, besides a Watch, Rings and Seals; the Guard brought him to our house, to see who knew him; it was such a sight to see him come in torn and bloody; and yet no man durst pity him, or laugh at him; he storms yet, and will not endure a Question; he struck the Porter for asking him who abused him.
I am sick till I see him; let's away, and study as we go home to abuse him; the Rogue has been so wantonly bred in per∣petual plenty, you shall see how shittenly he'll look without money in his Purse, and how sneakingly he'll borrow, and how scurvily he'll ask a courtesy.
He was never out of his depth before; you shall see him plunge and struggle like a young swimmer to get of the puddle; it was well I took the rest of our money from him last night.
He shall bite upon the Bridle, twill him make hear reason the sooner hereafter; my Bills are as good as his now; he shall want nothing, but I'm resolved I will not offer him a Real; I'll have the pleasure of acting his part a while; not one of these black Dogs shall stir out of the Kennel before he whistle; you know, Ferdinando, I prophesied this last night.
Prithee, let's find him ere he has time to get to bed; for the sight will be half the jest, and I long to see him just as the Wench has dressed him for a Comedy; where is he now?
Gone home in a chair.
EDwardo, how now! bloody, not wounded I hope.
for the blood, I'm sure it is none of mine; and I
I have the satisfaction of beating my Bed-fellow beyond a Jest, what ere he meant by his visit; And I had burst my Gall when I found my self cozened, had it not been for the vent my Rage took by discharging my Heart upon him, who must needs be as full of wonder to find his Ears beaten with English and blows; for the Devil a word of Spanish could I get out.
Can you not remember their Names yet?
No, that's my trouble now.
You'll be quickly out of that pain; when Cornelio comes he can inform you.
Cornelio, where is he? Let me but once know where they are, and I am content to suffer your severest Jests till I am revenged.
He'll not be long absent, he's only gone to the Taylors for Thomaso's Spanish Habit; there's a truck betwixt them two for Thomaso's laced suit; that's it makes the Captain so diligent.
But was the Drab so eloquent, such a fine flattering De∣vile; unmerciful Whore, to bring a Lover within an inch of her mirth, and then to beat and rob him not only of his money, but his Gusto too! A young longing Lover, that would only have tasted of her Milk; what a jadish Cowes trick was that to kick down the pail?
Pish, a Mistress is nothing to him; he'll have a pair of new ones the first Mass: Ned has nets and catches the Covey; were it you or I that fly at single Women, whose Cupped makes not above one flight in an Age, and to find her false to Love, it were sad; But for Ned, he only walks the Street, shows the man, and the Town is his own; The German piper was never more followed then he, when he will apply himself.
This, and more, I expected. Alas, Fred, where wilt thou find a wit that is not mortal? All that are Active must be subject to these calamities; Yet I had rather venture where these storms threaten, then wear out my days dully in some Widows dock at home; When I miss my voyage I'm as happy as either of you; one of us Gamesters may win a Fortune: But Fred, that dares not hazard, but only spends himself in stakes, is only some Plant, some Tree; and I had as live be a stone or Tree, as know the height of my Fortune: See who comes here; Don Thomaso, by  this light, raised by virtue of a Taylor, without a Circle, Sieve, or Shears; Now would not I play that part naked as I am; I had rather be Tege in my Drawers still, then such a hide-bound Don.
Do you hear? Is there any privilege due to this habit for Strangers that will wear it? Can you be admitted into an Hospital above three nights with these clothes? Else, if you cannot have two penny loaves for a penny, to wear it, By my troth, I would not be committed to such a Prison as that Doublet and Collar, those shoes too, with the toes longer then the soles; I would wear the stocks as soon, and I think sit as easy in them.
Is it far more justifiable, Fred, to ones Friends to be thus at ease against a mans will? This Liberty of Waste-coat and Drawers in the dog-dayes; Is it not better then to purchase thy
Penance calmly to be crowded, and stuffed by a Taylor into a Doublet and Hose, and look like a bag of Baize full of fools flesh? It was beaten into this Fresco, it is true; But when you find me leaping windows voluntarily, you may laugh at me.
For your part, Ned, I'll allow you not only to dislike the Fashion, but the Nation too. They're twigs of those Rods that jerked you so lately; and the Jest stings still so much, that I dare say, thou wilt not endure the sight, nor sound, of Don this month. Alas, it is ordinary; We see Children that have been frighted with a Cat in the cradle hate the poor Beast for ever; And it is to be hoped, you may come to hate a whore too in time; by that a Fardingale has used you as ill as a man in a great bellied Doublet has done: But for thee, Fred, thy dislike is as Panic as his fear who died the next day at the sight of a past danger; So thou tremble at what's to come, and apprehend being cozened and beaten to night: You know where you are to go; take heed, it comes with a fear, especially with a Countrey-gentlemans fear; Your Essex man in Madrid, their prophetic Fantasies make their Dreams Visions still.
How came you both to suffer me in the habit? I am an English-man too: How came you to comply with my Breeches?
Had we seen your Metamorphosis, as we do his, we should have started at that too; What Friend can see Circe's cup given to another? It is an Affliction Ulysses cannot bear, to hear his Friend grunt out of a Gotillio.
Fetch the black box with the Periwigs, and let us not lose our time, although the Gentlemen do their censure. 
Prithee make haste, for it is late; and the Church will be so full we shall get no place at the Music.
Pray, will you persuade Edwardo to go.
Whither, to Church? Take him in a Church again till he be carried thither by Torch-light, and I am deceived.
Do you hear, Captain? laugh your laugh and away; for it has been a Jest too much handled; What will you give for my Clothes instead of Thomaso's, and be bound to fetch 'em.
Why that's not so impossible as you believe; what will you take for my losses last night? Be at a word now.
Why, I'll take a good Revenge and a sudden one, if you will but tell me who has abused me.
I know the woman and the man you followed out of the Church yesterday; and if you'll walk, I'll show you their Door.
Yes, and the very window you were thrown out at; he can, Ned; Con can do this without conjuring; See Don Thoma∣so play such a trick, and then I'll subscribe to Monsieur Edward.
Captain, prithee let thee and I talk seriously: Dost thou know their Names? They are damned hard ones; I
have heard some like them in a Comedy.
Her Man is called Sanco, and her Name Lucetta; is it not so?
Yes, by these Bones; Luc. Luc. Luc.
How now, what dost thou look for?
My black-lead; but now I think on it tic now in my Breeches; Prithee lend me thine. Luc. Luc. Sanco, Sanco; the street, good Captain, the street again. 
By the Jesuits.
One Question more, and I have done; Cannot your Taylor cut a pair of Christian Breeches as well as a Catholic Doublet? I'd fain venture one suit more in this unchristian Country. Thus would they use the Defender of the Faith were he here.
Yes, yes, he'll fit you in both kinds.
Farewell, Noble Gentlemen; you may hear News from Demotes. 
Give me the box, I'll put the Periwigs in order; Is not the suit well made?
Your bargain was better that got his other.
What a Devil have we here? These Periwigs belong to the Tyring-house; they are all as black as the Devil is in a Comedy.
Harr. and Ferdin. How! Black?
How came this mistake?
That dull Rogue, Pogio's man; a pox upon his welch memory.
Is it possible he could mistake thus? Why then there is three Crowns cast away; I always told you, you might cut him as often as you would of the simples, you could never cure him; Who is that he speaks of?
Even your Brothers wise man, a Munmoth Witch; William ap Marlin ap Roger, a tame Country-man of yours, that lives as innocently as Ale and fool can keep them; If there were no more Charity then Profit in it, a man would keep a Cough of the Lungs, rather then be troubled with such a fool.
There's a couple of them, a Richard and a William; They have been at the Apes Academy these six months to breed them fine Gentlemen; and yet there's a Cobblers dog in a Doublet, that lives in a cellar in the louvre, has out-revel'd them both, and passes for a finer Gentleman.
These are those Periwigs my Boy bespoke for your Brother, who will be as far to seek with my white ones as I shall be with his black.
The mistake is plain, but what's the remedy?
It is easy to wonder; But I would fain see all this College of wits now, to prescribe a cure; Show all your craft now, to make a black Periwig white.
In this extremity the business may be easier reconciled, and you come forth a complete Don; it is but dying your Beard
and Eye-brows black, and a little mouth glew-to your whiskers, and the business is done.
It is but a but, But whore's this means for this But, other then walk the streets like a Magpie; else I am not so in love with white hair but I can sleep in a black beard.
By this hand do; and we'll say it is your brother come from Salamanca, till you get a white one.
Keep but your own Counsel, and no man can betray you; let not Don Edwardo know it till you have saluted him in Spanish; you may be resolved by him whether your disguise be perfect, or no.
If you resolve, I'll fetch you the Water; Our old Secre∣tarry has of it; it is that he uses daily to his Beard, and you see it keeps him as Black as a Raven.
Never doubt my resolution; Prithee fetch the water; silly Rogue, to put up the Box without looking into it; My first visit shall be, to try whether the Angellica will know me; But we must be all Secret, and serious, till the Jest be over.
I See them follow us.
We have such a Revenge upon Edwardo; he knew no∣thing, neither the persons, nor the place, till I told him; But then he flew like lightning to his Revenge.
Why, who was it? I am her Friend for ever for it.
I guessed right; it was Lucetta, and her two Bravo's.
Lucetta? would she be guilty of such an Action? she had a better Reputation in the world; I wonder she is so foolish as to ex∣pose her self to the power of a stranger that can fly the country when he has done her an affront? Besides, shoe's in danger of the Justice, and the Law.
The Law? She has small friends y'faith, if he get Justice against her; I would it had been his Friend Thomaso, so I had an∣swer'd the throwing of him out at Window, and he has good luck if he Escape, for he will deserve it richly; where are they now?
I left them upon a design to visit the Calatravo's, it is Saint Cecilia's Eve; Thomaso is full of Money.
I am glad to hear it, a rich Lover makes his Mistress smile; Captain, Farewell, we'll to the Church.
AS you Love mirth, Gentlemen, be secret, till some body discover him; say only, it is his Brother Don Ja∣como,
newly arrived from Salamanca, that we may be all found in one Tale.
Content at the Church; we shall meet acquaintance.
We'll only pass, and so to the Angellica's, and try if she can know me, see who comes here.
I know not, pray be serious all, and carry it gravely; See, now they open; so, now we shall know them.
It is the two Sisters.
You have reason, let them pass, see what they will do.
There's Don Harrigo, and the other Englishman, your new Amoroso.
It is so; but who's the third? it is a handsome Man and a stranger, but none of their Nation, his Men is too grave.
Some Merchant, I believe, to whom they are recom∣mended.
That Eye has a Fellow; Why hid, Ladies? would you play the spy upon your Friends? What is it you are Curious to dis∣cover?
That stranger, what is he?
A Servant of yours, if you please; a brother of Don Tho∣maso's that arrived last night from Salamanca.
A brother of his? The Hen had several Cocks, sure; This looks as if he were worth a Women's kindness; it is a proper man, would he were less a kin to that wild humour.
This is a man of another Temper; but we hope to abuse him out of it; Thomaso swears hoe's a Maid still.
A maid! so is his brother, it is a proper black fellow; and I dare say 'has as much pride as Thomaso has good nature; This looks as if he would be Courted before a woman had the honour of his Conversation; whore's my Friend? see, he Eyes us.
Your Friend has more wit then to appear when his bro∣there is in place, for fear of being despised; It was the first modest action I ever saw in him; This letting him walk alone; has this as ready a tongue as t'other?
Come, I'll bring you acquainted. Don Jago, Here are Ladies, Friends of mine, desire the Honour of your acquain∣tance.
It is an honour, Sir, to me, and such as a stranger ought to be proud of: especially such private persons as we Students, that are not only barren of Desert, but frustrate of Occasion how to merit the most diminutive favours of so fair a Lady.
Sir, I have had the happiness to know your brother by my sisters Friendship with him; and though we Quarrel sometimes, that shall not hinder your well-come to me, when your leisure will bestow a Visit upon your Servant.
Truly, Madam, he has much more to do in the world then I pretend to, that has any business beyond receiving the ho∣nor of such conversation; And therefore you are to Expect a sudden trouble, by the importunity of your slave being conscious, to my self my Company may be troublesome; Else I should be
more Ambitious to have the honour to be esteemed your Creature; For yours are the first Eyes that ever yet had power to pierce my heart; and without vanity let me say, your beauty is the first that ever threw chains upon your Jago.
It is a fool, a formal Ass, he talks like a Mountebank, di∣minutive honour, Glorious, Happiness, ambitious of Friendship, Chains, and Flames, and Slaves; Sweet Lady, sure you cannot be so weak as to believe he has wit and means this for one of our Trade, at first sight too? Pox on him, hoe's either an Ass, or thinks us so; this is but a la Parakito.
Thou art so versed in Raillery and Railing, from thy Lo∣verse tongue, Thou can not savour any handsome serious reply; thou wilt come to talk bawdy, drink and swear too, in time, If Huff Cap and Ale were but a little more Domestic here.
No more of this, now; we'll come and see you at home, and satisfy all your Doubts.
Your Servant, Sir.
Here's mirth, beyond expectation.
I would drive this Jest to the bedside, ever she knew it.
To the bedside, Hall? I, behind the bed, and upon the bed, in the Bed, or against the wall: if I do not nail this Jest to her Belly, let a Beadle scratch me with a Dog-whip.
Fie, two Sisters?
I, Ten, if the Litter be kind and handsome, good Coun∣trey Conscience; What Advantage do I get by turning Catholic, if a Saint cannot forgive such a sin? You think a man gets his own Children in this hot Country, as they do in Essex; Thou art an Ass, There's not such a thing as two Sisters by Fathers and Mothers side, on this side the Hills.
I'll leave you to pursue your Fortune, for I am resolved to have no hand in it more then the Jest; shoe's too much my Friend to betray her.
I'll go and see how he will look, when she discovers him; for it is not possible, when we are near, and Converse, but she must find him.
Well, I'm resolved to hunt the mischief till she finds her Error; there's Revenge, as well as Love in the pleasure.
NOw I find Don Pedro Loves me, when he will give this Idol of the World for my Friendship; And you shall find me, Sir, as kind as you are bountiful, and your Arms out-vie her that sighs most for Love.
It is many Months since I offered you my Service, without limit; and that which I took ill, was, you doubted my complying with such a poor Sum, which now has o∣penned
your door, where Don Pedro was shut out.
That's a Quarrel all your Sex has against us, though most un∣reasonable; Thomaso urged it yesterday; and he upbraided me with selling of our selves. It is truth, and the same Answer serves you both, when either of you set a price upon your selves; If I have a mind to you I'll pay it, and purchase you; Ours were a fine trade, if we kept shop, and gave our Wares for Love; would it turn to ac∣count, think you, to dress and hire this House, and venture our Bodies, and Souls, to receive all that would enter? Try the Trade some one of you.
I urged not that, as a displeasure, that took any Root, only an unkindness, which is blown over; though I wonder to hear you are a Lover, the Insensible being as vulgar, as the fair Angellica.
It is but the wonder of a Day; A heart I have, Sir, like other Women too, though no man had wit to find the way to win it; He is dearer to me then all the Earth besides; and if you love me you will not hate him, you cannot embrace me single; My breast is full of Thomaso; it is his, and Loves Nest.
Can I give you a greater Argument of my Love then this patience, while you prefer my Enemy and my Rival before me, and avow it to my face?
Can you be an Enemy to my Friend, and Love me? No, Sir, he that loves me loves and hates as I do; My Friend will pro∣tect me, and revenge my wrongs; It is not the purchase of my bed that tells me you love; that's your pleasure; Mine is to see you smile when I smile, and embrace what I embrace; and I know there has passed nothing between you and Thomaso but what may with honour enough be forgotten; as if you were the first that love and anger had blinded; what is there so ordinary as to find those Passi∣once throw friends upon the swords of Friends?
I confess as much; and when the heat was over my Rea∣son did not condemn him; it was accidental, and his back was to∣ward me, and we were both angry ever we knew with whom; He has been since at my house; but I was not at home.
See, Anna, who knocks.
It is a stranger, I know him not; he inquires for Don Thomaso.
Call him in. Would you speak with Don Thomaso, Sir? 
Yes, Lady, from a Brother of his.
A Brother of his?—It is he, I know him—Well, and what business have you to dispatch from that Brother of his that might not have been done in Gray as well as Black? Good Don, let's know the reason of this Disguise; have you any guilt, that you mourn for?
None; but since I am discovered give me leave, first, to salute this Gentleman, and then you shall know the Cause. Sir, I know Don Pedro has too much Honour to doubt it in his Servant, who if he were a Stranger would not make this Apology; But
having had the honour to be known to you formerly, I venture upon the score of a Gentleman and a Soldier that once was com∣manded by you; to whom it is known, I left neither the service, nor the Country with blushes; which will be enough, I hope, to pre∣vail with you to forget the accident of yesterday, in which I am only guilty of having so late called to mind a person whom I'll so much honour as I shall ever do Don Pedro.
Sir, you have prevented me by your disguise; else I had been earlier in the confession of my fault; but your disguise, to day, must plead for me, as mine begot our mistake yesterday; and Don Thomaso may be secure nothing but mistakes can beget an unkindness from me, who have the same ready heart to serve him.
Embrace then—so; now I am happy; and this is kind∣er, and far more welcome to me then all the price you can give—  That is yours, you bought it; this is mine, I have paid for it; I am yours, and this is my Mistress; and now our hearts are free from fear or anger; for wonder sake, unriddle, why this disguise? some roguery, upon my life.
No, in earnest; a mere chance: you know, yesterday I resolved to put my self into the habit of the place, and this morn∣ing when I was dressed and called for my Periwigs, there was none but black ones in the Box; my man mistook when we parted at Paris, and put up my Comrades Box for mine; and to make the chance a jest, Harrigo died my Eye-brows and Beard, as you see; and our chief Plot was to try if you could find it out.
And doth Don Harrigo, or my friend, think, it is colours or habit can hide a Lover from a Lovers eye? No, Thomaso, nei∣there the Hawk, nor Hound have any sense quicker or more sagaci∣os, then a Lover; there's too much of the heart pierces with every look to be deceived by shadows.
Yet I have passed this jest upon one whose wit and ma∣lice is as great and curious as your Love; her hate too as full of poison as your kindness can be of honey; yet she has been de∣ceiv'd; and she that despised me when I was white dotes upon this shadow; and takes me for my Brother, whom I hourly expect from Salamanca; yesterday I was a fool, a better kind of Bravo on∣lie, neither wit nor person to deserve from any serious woman; but, to day, all the graces and excellencies of our sex scarce ex∣press her character; she invited me to dinner, but I sent my excuse; else I could, this day, have had that offered gratis that would not be purchased before.
And why did you refuse her? Fie, a cruel Knight deny a Lady that sighs for you! especially when such a jest may be followed.
Do you ask why I refused her? is not the Angellica rea∣son enough? thinks my Love, I would quit my place here to sleep in any second bosom? no, I'll buy no jests at that rate as well as I love a piece of knavery.
Who is it that is fallen into this snare?
The Saretta, a humoursome Merchant as any Trades, one that has wit and beauty enough to answer all his bills.
I know her, it is a friend of yours; she'll grow lean when she hears your Picture is down; she hoped no man would purchase your friendship at the rate proposed.
I know she hates me for praising her Sister, who has much the better nature and the sweeter voice; I like Paulina's humour, it is gay and ingenuous, you may read a real heart in her eyes; there is woman in her aspect, her very looks are soft and kind, yet a Girl of a sprightly Men, and graceful in every motion; it is pleasure to converse with such a humour; I could love her before a hundred of her Sister; and I am resolved, this business shall not dye thus if I have power.
I, I; hereafter we will think on it when twill be a cheaper jest, that's a work will be done in an afternoon as well as in a night.
I swear you dine not here to day, as well as I love you; I'll starve the Boy, or watch him tame, or delay love till he grow desperate, rather then lose the sport of this jest. Let me alone to have it sung in the Cachery; the two Foresters abused the two wits of Madrid with a Periwig; it is resolved, no reply; but away to your business, and I'll teach you how to strike two Birds with one stone; follow your design with Saretta, and oblige Don Pedro, in giving him your day here, and I'll give Saretta mine; be but kind when you are here, I ask no more; till night, we will expect the success.
Well, it is resolved; and the willinglier, because one of the Tribe has abused my Comrade; and if I succeed, her story shall accompany Edwardo in the Prado.
Edwardo's story! what is it, any new accident?
Have you not heard how he was beaten and robbed, and turned out at mid-night by he knows not whom?
It was last night near the Jesuits; I passed by when it was done; Don Medias was beaten too and thrown out at a Window; he's out of his Wits to now who did it; it was in the Lucetta's House.
I know not Don Medias his part; but, Edwardo, no thief taken and whipped had more shame, or worse usage; but if she passes clearly with it I am deceived in my man; she might have had his heart for a kiss.
Fie, it was base and ugly, but not strange amongst these Mulotto's; and lest you believe all our Tribe such, see here's my Argument to buy your faith of me, when I say I love,—If you love  me you will not refuse it, and with it buy thy pleasure; follow thy Capricha with any woman in Madrid.
I shall not blush to receive any favour your kindness gives; it is the vain and the miserable that make benefits heavy, and slaves the generous mind more then want; benefits when they are done with Bon mine; it is a pleasure to become a debtor to such a nature when they shower upon us. Fair and kind, farewell; and
if Love can pay my debts, I am certain I'll owe no score amongst women; and since you will have it so, let this Spanish wit look to her self; if I do not lay the jest upon her belly, let her lay a cud∣gel upon my back. Sir, I am your servant, and hope to find some time more seasonable to tell you so. Farewell, be kind to the kind; and it is but just to love where you a Lover find.
You are sad, I hate a melancholy Lover; one that must be kissed still out of his trance, else he'll neither pipe nor dance.
No, I was only admiring what I see and hear; and wonder, why I could not master my nature as well as you; this Thomaso loves as much as I, with his sword he purchased you; and for your conversation neglects both the fortune and beauty of one that is not to be despised; and for your passion, I have the same Arguments to conclude it that I would use to prove mine own; for I see you pay the same rate for friendship; yet you two can both tame your hearts so, that they calmly consent to let each other give and take the fruits of Love; as if his Tree on the Com∣mon grew, enclosed by no vows.
So he doth not marry and impale the Tree, let him give the friut to any she; Me he will not marry, nor shall not if he would; because I love him he shall not for my sake be guilty of any action he may blush for; nor will I stand the curse of a chaste bed, whose robbed sheets, when holy vows have tied him, wound as sure and fatal as lightning.
Why thus severe to your self? I warrant he may marry you, and with honour and profit enough forget passed faults.
No, Sir; though honour be that I think not of, because the custom of the world has placed it beyond our power; yet I can prize it in others, and despise that man that wants it. Kind∣nos and faith to my Lover, good nature and charity are the height of our ambition; and it is one comfort, that heaven is easier satisfied then men; who think this fault of ours a gallantry in them, a sin so light they sing and dance under it all their days; a sin so tamed by custom that few or none hide it, as if honour had no pretence below a mans Girdle; so his heart be right all is gallant; chaste men ridiculous, neither believed, esteemed or trusted by either sex, scarce held of honour if once branded with that stain; Nay, the contrary, both sexes admires him who has the potent'st arms, and gives the frequent'st and mortal'st wounds in Venus wars; while women are so slaved with custom, that virtue, parts, nor fortune can heal the wound in us, though Nature, Love and Kindness give it; for which, but that I know we shall have other judges of that well natured sin, and never a man of you all be of the jury, I would eat bran ere any he that breathes in breeches should come between my sheets.
This quarrel would soon be reconciled, could you prevail with your own sex to a reconciliation; it is the women, not the men despise; they cry, Fie, and frown, else we could digest it; for I observe your severest women that cry whore most, are the like∣least Timber to cut a Cuckold in.
Nay, on my conscience, the dissemblers of our sex are more then the public Whores, both for weight and number; but that will not excuse your partial Idolatry of yours selves.
Our guilt is not so general, we like and enjoy some one; you like nor refuse none that will buy; which truth I would not urge but for Arguments sake.
You must then confess, it is not virtue but nature makes you less guilty then women; for could you act as often as we can suffer, few of you would refrain for the sin sake; this I believe, be∣cause you all boast not only how many women you have known, but how often too; and lest the sin should want its weight to be currant amongst you you will give him grains of oaths, and belie the number. What partial folly then is that governs the minds of men; and what fools are women to submit to their Lunacy? I prize my self as high for having enjoyed a gallant man, as you would do for having won his sword, or a gallant women's heart; despised because enjoyed by others! tell me, to morrow, if you find any paths or steps upon my body where former Lovers trod, or any print of passed kisses cleaving to their lips; if you can miss those Graces, those Roses they gathered, and find not as fresh and full handfuls for you to reap, as if he or they had not found their harvest.
Yet it is the opinion, such credit gives love more repute∣tion then women; and those bills the oftner drawn, and the oft∣ner paid, make a woman a better Merchant then a Lover.
NOt find him?
No, Madam; yet I came twice just as he went out; I have hunted him both by the eye and question through the Town, and cannot meet him.
Were you at the Angellica's? I hear my Brother has sent a thousand crowns; I hope he will be so busy with his new purchase he'll have no leisure to think upon an old quarrel; else this delay may be fatal.
I was there, and saw Don Pedro at the Window, and a Bro∣there of Don Thomaso's come out while I was there; I knew him not till he was past.
His Brother? which, he that was at Salamanca?
The same, he came last night to Town; I saw him since with Don Harrigo; it is a proper black man; and has as much of the Don as the other has of the Monsieur; I left him here hard by, un∣der the Portico.
It is strange he should be thus long in Town and neither come nor send; an injury from him would work more upon me
then all the Arguments his Enemies can urge.—See who  knocks.
It is Don Harrigo.
What can his business be? Some Message from Thomaso; I'll seem as unconcerned as he has been negligent.
This is the House, and there is the Lady.
What a dog it is to follow such carrion upon every dung-hill, and leave such Manna here?
Farewell; and tell him since he resolves to be serious, I'll serve him faithfully, and I hope successfully.
Don Harrigo, you are welcome as any man can be that from a familiar friend have made your self a stranger; Since Don Thomaso went I have only seen you as the seasons change; How came you to exceed in your favours? It is not yet the fall of the leaf; And I remember you did me this Honour the last Spring.
Faith, Madam, it is not for want of Respect or Affection that I pay my visits so seldom here; It is a time that makes all our Nati∣on sneak and hide themselves; There is a National guilt that beats our Hearts, we are out of countenance as we walk the streets; The Ages crime hangs upon us; it is not enough that I know my self honest, unless I could make that knowledge general; All can say, there goes an English-man, though but few know what part he plaid.
This is a noble sense to you, but I meant not to beget your trouble; it was only a kind quarrel for your long absence, which has not paid all that trust your friend reposed in you.
And I am now to beg your pardon, not only for my self, but a servant of yours; who dares not appear till he has made his way by this excuse.
My servant, and you mediate for him? What will your Friend say when he hears it? But pray who can this servant be that sends before?
It is Don Alphonso, Madam.
You are merry; but when I send you Gloves from his Wedding, they will not smell so sweet as those you expected from Don Thomaso; But I would gladly know where Don Alphou∣so gave you this Commission.
I had it, Madam, from Don John; who told me your Brother and he had a private meeting this morning at the Capu∣chins; where they resolved your Wedding should be sudden, and by your consent, having declared you had no such intentions for my Friend.
I will know the depth of this; It is some new design to disgust Thomaso.—Why truly, Don Harrigo, my Brother, and my Friends, have given many Reasons fit to be considered ere I make my self a slave to a stranger; One, that besides his ruined
Fortune, can (in the time of his pretension, after five years ab∣sense) fall in Love with every face he sees, and fight for a whore against my Brother; One that has had three Quarrels, three Bal∣lads, and twenty Mistresses in the Prado, ere he could find leisure to pay one visit to me; If I were that foolish Lover he believes, I see how fit for pity and scorn his Heart would leave me.
Madam, I am ashamed to hear this; Nor can any ingenuous Nature deny what you have urged; and I shall be loath to destroy your Faith of those Truths I come to deliver, by going about to justify him, though he be my Friend; Only I will confi∣dently say, when you shall know how accidentally he came en∣gaged in all that has happened to beget the discourse of the Town, you will say, It has been a day of Chances; at which you will laugh your share, and not condemn his part; Especially your Ladyship being so well acquainted with his humour, which cannot be out at a Jest; But I am confident his serious thoughts and highest value, are confined to the happiness you have promised him in your Friendship; Though the Condition that Fortune has now thrown him in, since his Princes troubles, makes him not so confident to ap∣pear before you, till I had ventured to say something in his de∣fence; Which, if you please to retire, I shall deliver; and I hope, with more success then his fears expect.
I should be sorry to find my self so far concerned in your Friend, as to be very angry with any Arrives of his; No, Sir, you will find it is all Thomaso can do to find me, when he shall seek Serulina; And I hope you are too noble a Gentleman, either to wish or believe I shall seek him.
He scarce hopes to find such a Virtue in your Sex: Yet allow him as ill as your fears, or his Enemies would present; I will prove you are as far out of the way of being happy with Alphonso, as with my Friend with all his faults; Nor is Alphonso chaster or confidenter then he, only duller and more niggard, one that fears his flesh more, and loves his money better then Tho∣maso; which are the hedges that keeps him in; it is neither Love nor Honour that binds him; only his Craft can dissemble better to gain his own ends, the fair Serulina and her Dowry; Besides, the Beauty of her person, and Honour of her Family, are Blessings any man would dissemble to purchase.
Yet he can pretend a Portion, for he can make a Jointure as honourable as my Dowry; And though he be not so fine a Gentleman as your friend, yet he may be as good a Husband; he can keep a Wife too, he has a fortune will make her live splen∣didly like her self; and discretion bids us consider those real goods, and not dote upon flowers; and give me a Husband that can feed and cloth me as well as hug me. What Jewels will Don Thoma∣so present his Wife with? those of his eyes and heart; and hang his Arms in stead of Pearl about her neck? or in her ears fine Verses in stead of Pendants? suppose this yet; it is a stout man whose sword can defend his Wife from cold; and although Don Thoma∣so's wit be better then Alphonso's, yet his bond is worth twenty Colonels.
Faith, Madam, since you are in a good humour, I'll argue  his Case with you.
These Arguments you urged, Sir, are hazards which the virtuous mind must arm and resolve against.
I doubt not, Madam, but you have virtue enough to di∣gest the worst of these their homely pleasures, which reach only to the body; but it is sin to consent to slave the mind; for how will she rejoice or exercise her nobler faculties when that comes in question; all that have ingenuity must subscribe; wherein can the soul busy her self in the Country; but in studying of Simples, and preparing Medicines for nasty Surgery? and perhaps, kill more by error and mistake, then your charity can expiate; then to suffer the affliction of such grounded ignorance, such resolute folly, such natural dullness as most Country-families are haunted with.
Yet it is sweet being in the Country with all this; and when I marry it shall be to become a Wife, not a Slave, Don Harrigo.
That's resolved as I could wish; and for the Country, it is no question but it is as sweet as Lavender or Rose-mary can make it; but I think the Orange and Jasmine in a bottle, and the Trees all the year in your house at Madrid, as sweet as those in the hedges.
I, but to walk and gather these flowers, is there no plea∣sure in that?
When? by Moon-shine? I am sure you dare not meet Signior Sol abroad, unless you'll come home, like Rose-cakes from a Still, baked and sweating; which though your dew be sweet (as common civility will make us allow that) yet it is troublesome and a new sight to meet Ladies abroad, when the dogs cry as they pass the streets, when to walk in your Court but two turns is evi∣dence for chastity, and out-does the old Law Ordeal: It is enough for your Alphonso and his Indian breeding to endure such stabs as the Sun strikes in the Dog-days; it is true, they say he will beat the hoof in his woollen-hose, till his feet sweat and stink more then a hunted Bores, and are fain to be steeped at night as long as the Beef, ere they be fresh again; this commonly out of freedom is done in my Wives Chamber; and if he be kind, and dares trust you, perhaps he desires you to cut his Corns and dress his Issue, signs of favour I can assure you; and such as you must not hope, unless your woman be out of the way; and that honour being passed, the Giant stretches himself, yawns and sighs a belch or two, stales in your pot, farts as loud as a Musket for a jest; and then throws himself under the Rug, and expects you in his foul sheets, and aspit∣ting cloth, where hangs as much of his Lungs as remains in his body; and ere you can get into the bed he calls you with a snore or two; and are not these fine things in a Ladies bed? who would not rejoice to meet his woollen-waste-coat and knit-night-cap without a lining? a shirt so nasty a cleanly Ghost would scarce appear in at the latter day; for his linen is a kin to him ere he
puts it off; thus prepared for delight you Ladies meet your Coun∣try-husbands; the Alphonso, high shoes; and there lye and suffer them to abuse you as often as they please to use you, which you'll too late repent; and there you may lye and sight whole nights away, he'll snore and snore till it be day under the same covers, and in the same bed his forefathers lived and died in, and some so lately you may smell the very earthiness of the Corps still; and it is a better savour then his arms or breath, a stink composed of vile Tobacco and dead Wine, stuffed nose, rotten lungs, and hollow teeth, half whose number has been drawn with dry Cheese, and tuff lean beef; yet this man you must kiss; nay, you must kiss none but this, and muzzle through his beard to find his lips; and this you can submit to for threescore year for a jointure; which you must purchase too; for he sells you that and this Paradise, his bed, for the price of your portion only; and in strict sense you give him so much to lye with him as long as he lives; for unless he dies you have nothing but a place in his Family, and so has his dog, who shall have a pension as well as you; for in these bargains of Wed∣lock the Wife is to the portion only the handful over measure; a Chattle that he takes to stock his Family, as other Cattle to stock his ground; nay, perhaps he's a blade too, and then you may spin at home, while he is abroad with Phillis in the field; by which you find, the Alphonso's are as subject to the ills you dread, as the Thomaso's; only, as I said before their differences is, the Al∣phonso's are more nasty lusts, and cheaper Whores, and the sin more dirty there then in the City.
Sir, By this I gather a kind of necessity of being misery∣ble; either way affords precipices enough to make a Maid tremble ere she makes a choice.
Therefore from frail men choose the least or best ill; take such a Gentleman as my friend, that you know has wit and honour, and a passion for you; one that you see has lived and maintained himself in spite of cross fate; and though he has lost his fortune, it is with honour enough; never burdening any with his wants, with∣out cheating or tricks, one stained with no base action, his name and honour still clear and fair both with his Prince and Comrades; and when your kindness has added a fortune to his expire∣ence, his grateful heart will be eternally obliged to you, and so bu∣sie to serve you and justify your choice to the world, so industry∣os to deserve new favours as well as pay the old, that twill be a joy to your soul to see. What cares Don Alphonso for you or your opinion? sick or well, live or dye, he's prepared; the funeral cloak is brushed and laid up for the good day; and if you dye, it is upon your own account, for he is sure of your Portion; and your Join∣ture serves again, never the worse for wearing; and will bait the hook for some other fool to bite at.
And none but fools are taken with such baits, nor none but mad folks suffer such chains; I am yet free, and will be, from all such slavery.
In serious earnest, Madam, it is nobler far to buy a friend
whom you affect, though at price of your fortune, then to be chaf∣fer'd or sold to slavery by friends, who only think upon joining wealth to wealth; with my friend you command as much as you must obey there; Don Thomaso has seen the world, and gathered from every Nation what is excellent, and can comply with times and natures, for he has been bred in Courts and Armies, those schools of the mind, where men learn to tame their wills and pas∣once; for Princes are to be studied and obeyed, not disputed with; with him you'll know no cause of dispute; with the other you must expect perpetual civil war, a sullen, rude, louring, wilful, scow∣ling clown, from whom if you escape blows, it is well; an unhew'd rudeness, whose very kindness bruises; that when he but strokes or flatters his dogs, they cry, This will seek and bring all that is pleasure home, either in humour or conversation, to divert you; the one will devour this youth and beauty that flows with such grace in every form and feature in that lovely body and diviner face, like common food, for his dull appetite, without a thought or value of the feast you set before him; while Don Thomaso with awe and respect and faithful kindness from a ravished soul enjoys you. Alphonso, Don Indian! By this light, he thinks he's trading at Gamba still, and would sell you, himself, that Bell and Bauble for your youth and fortune; it is his last venture, and you'll make a voyage if he catch you.
I am not desperate; nor find no such disease in a single life, as to drink this poison to become such a wife; when I find my self desperately sick, and nothing else can please, I'll send for a Priest and change the disease.
Faith, Madam, and Marriage is one disease which women are necessitated to pass; for an old Maid is an evil without a re∣medy; an ill husband may be cured by a divorce, but there's no flying the other curse; a kind husband is the best cordial you can provide against infection of Marriage; and if you should be sick or sad (which heaven defend) Thomaso would so divide your griefs with a kind sense of what you suffer, so pity your pain, so feel all your griefs, that you will find sadness vanish, and sickness it self decay, while health, perfect health, by kindness charmed, returns; and you'll find so much more pleasure to walk with such a friend in one of his descriptions of a Garden▪ then in twenty of Dameta's Orchards; and read in his relations the Histories of persons, times and places; And such such minds, Madam, and such men, are fit for such Brides as the Gentle Serulina; and they only make happy Hymens; the rest but join the sex and beast together; and such sordid coupling is base and mean, and the herds afford as good Nuptials; this advantage Colonels (Madam) that have wit and breeding may pretend above those who have nothing good but their Bond and Jointure. Your servant, Lady; my hour is out, and so much shall serve for this time.
Pray, Madam; where was father Harrigo's text? I hope he will not find it in our family; after this counsel, it will be fool the first and the second; and if he do's, pray consider the Doctrine and use, how he cited his Saint without a Calendar, urging his Tho∣maso still to prove his text, and has so confuted Father Alphonso for Schism.
If I had been disposed to have listened to that clod in the Country, what a character he had given him to have shook a re∣solution? but the truth is there was no fear of that punishment; and this shower of reason hath but given growth to a former aversion.
Marry Alphonso? such a wedlock would have more sins to answer, with him, then adultery with another man; I had as live follow to the Hostel de dieu, to waste your youth in vows there, a handmaid to Lasers and Cripples, as spend it in such a Marriage.
There is no danger, Calis, of such a folly; and I cannot but wonder why my Brother is so bent upon it, as to attempt the forcing of my consent; sure he knows whose Daughter I am; and I have so much of the Father in me, as but for modesty sake I should be very sensible of his unkindness, though I love him with all the tenderness a Brother can expect from a Sister; but I'm resolved not to make my self miserable to please him; and for my honour I shall always be as much concerned in that as he, and will dye ere throw the least stain upon our Family.
And this he knows, though Don John still solicits him to a sudden resolution; Diego says, he presses him to see you married, or put into a Monastery, to avoid Don Thomaso's pretension, whose fortune he could never brook.
A Monastery! I am like to make a good Nun; this passion is an excellent ingredient for a Grate; no, Calis, I have a Saint of mine own to pray to; and we will try whether our wo∣men's wit can be more ingenious, then his jealous, or my Brothers angry fit; get me your old Coat and Veil to put over me; I have a a design, if it take, will put all their kennel of spies to cold hunting.
I am glad to see you intend your safety; for I do believe women may do most of their own business upon earth themselves, if they would but leave the ••inning, and try; wit and handsome, in good clothe, will do our ••nos as well as the Madonna.
DId she not suspect at all?
Mahomet as soon as me in her bed, I am confi∣dent; the Queen was so kind, and the sinest armful of sweet white sin I have clasped in Madrid; I could wish I were black indeed, for
her sake, I would have given her handsomely out of the Angellica's present, and, By this light, she refused it.
Why do you put on these clothes then?
To meet Pauline, who will be here in a minute; but I must be gone first, and leave word I am upon the Piazza.
A pox upon her, I thought to have been so fine in these clothes to morrow.
It is but a little patience till the jest be over, and then they are yours; this was a chance I could not foresee, nor neglect when kind fortune presents;—But all this while, Harrigo, you give me no account of our serious business; what success had your  visit to the party?
Come, dress you and walk, and you shall know all; I have been with her and found her in a good humour, and I believe I left her not in an ill one; but upon my word it was time, if not of the latest, for all your fooling; it is not enough to value her in your heart, but to let her see it in your actions too, unless you mean to quit the thought of it; women are not to divine a Lovers mind; it is well they will answer when Love questions their heart.
I am of your mind; and this day I'll find some occasion to see her; I forgot to tell you, Don Pedro and I are friends; I met him this morning at Angellica's; and she made us embrace.
Trust not that friendship; for I am confident he brooks neither of your interests, either with his Sister, or his Mistress; and where he has an advantage you'll find it, I know Don John presses him hourly to a revenge; you know the man and his nature, a most implacable enemy, I speak upon sure grounds; and therefore dispatch your business with Serulina; such a jest, and two hundred thousand crowns, will make one laugh and merry an age; those you amuse your self with are only for the Prado, or to laugh an hour within a Comedy; where you'll see them better done too, and ex∣ceeded by the Mountebank; I am your friend, else I should not take the privilege to say this.
Dear Harrigo, it is kindly said, and I am thine for it; and we will find some hour, to day, that may be seasonable and safe to vi∣sit her; for I confess to my friend, my journey hither was to see what success that amour could find; 〈◊〉 whose kindness I am more concerned then any man but your 〈◊〉 shall know; nor can this mist of raillery and mirth blind a friends eyes, to whom I shall say, it is no more my nature then my interest, though I choose rather to put it on then give any women's pride the Gusto, to think, because I am poor it was in her power to despise me; but to my friend I shall still be free and serious; come, we must be gone, to avoid Paulina's visit; I am too much out of cash to accept her Bills of Love to be paid upon sight; her Sister has had all my ready money.
When the trick is known all the load will be laid on me for keeping your counsel; and pray tell me, am I such a dull fool as you believed for continuing kindness for this Girl? By my life, I would not change her friendship with any she in Madrid,
if her spirit were not so furiously raging sometimes.
I love a froward Girl, a storm for variety; and it is Co∣medy to kiss them when they scratch, and see how quickly a calm will follow their tears and anger.
COme, make haste, you see the company begins to gather; is my Master returned yet?
No, Sir; he is gone to prepare a pair of Bathes in some private place, and has left my Mistress with the old Lady within, she asks for you.
It is well, I'll attend her; salute the Gentlemen now that you may take leave of them and Scarramucha with a good grace. Now I love you; excuse him, Gentlemen, pray now; for his mind doth so run upon a Lady, that he forgets his respect to me, his old Master.
There's few or no company come, let's walk a turn to∣wards the Church.—
See, there he is, and his friend with him.
It is he, be sure to speak with him ere he goes off the place, and take some opportunity to give him that Letter.
There is one of our Tribe, Hall; and a man were in stock, what commodities he might take up of this kind, and at good rates too!—How now? another? By this light, I must get a switch to keep them off; now, your business, fair one? 
I have some, Sir, and it is serious; which I would impart to you if you please but to follow me to yon Church.
You had best retire betimes ere they pull thee in pieces; you see what it is to have the reputation of a sufficient man among these Merchants; twill be long enough ere they come to offer their war to me thus.
Sweet Saint, or sinner; I am now, and have lately been so busy I have no leisure to make a new friendship; it is all I can do to keep credit with my old friends; if I had but a little little corner of a heart to spare thou should have it for kindness sake; but ask this noble Gentlemen, a friend of mine, if there be not, at this minute, staying in my Chamber one of Venus Creditors dunning
my sheets, for a promise, and I am now going to pay a debt I owe upon my honour; else I were your man, Courteous and kind; Another time command me.
Sir, my business is worth your serious thoughts; I have a letter for you.
Nay, if it be from a writing Lady, she'll never find me at leisure to read her two leaved books; Those humble Ladies that write first, their wits are best when their Faces are at worst; it is fair, if the fair will answer us; and I dread to find a Lady that de∣dicates her self, thus, by Epistles to a man; if it be haste give it to one of my Friends, I'll try if I can persuade one of them to know your business.
Let's see your face Mistress; come, show a sample of the goods you sell; would you have us buy a Goose in the Feathers? a woman in a dream is worth a hundred of those visions; till this shell, this vail be off, who knows what Kernel your Nut holds?
Where shall I meet you, Harrigo, an hour hence?
Con and I must go about our business, for an hour; then I am for you; where you'll appoint.
I'll call you at home—
What house is that he entered? follow, and give him the letter, or wait his coming out; I'll home, and Expect you; dear Calis, make haste; tell him it was I that saluted him; and if he won∣der why I was in this habit, satisfy him I am to make a private devotion to Saint Cecilia's Altar this Night.
I'll obey you; but hoe's so full of his wilde humours still it is ten to one but he makes sport with me again, before I can de∣liver it.
Prithee make haste, lest he pass before you speak with him; you know how much it concerns me; if it take, We shall be too hard for my Curious ill-natured Brother, and his furious friend.
Who was that? how she eyed us? See, she looks back still.
If he follows me I am undone for Ever.
Shoe's right, I warrant her, and some one that knows you.
It is the Angellica by her Tallea; She told me to day she would go abroad this afternoon; that Coat and Scarf betrays her, for those shoes and feet are not of a piece; some knavery in design, who ever she be, I warrant her.
Let's follow her, and be certain who it is; See where she Sails; We may fetch her up yet ever she doubles yon Cape; she looks back as if she were willing to be chased, and boarded too, I warrant her Prize; If you will not chase with the Admiral, let your servant Carlo chase with his Frigate of Cupids; I'll make her
spread all her Canvas, but I'll speak with her; It is no matter for Commission; Pirate is as good Title to these Carvels, as lawful men of War.
See, she stops, and looks back still; follow aloof, Carlo; I'll see who it is.
What a task it were to make this Don Chaste, or Con∣stant? now is he as mad upon planting this new Island, as the An∣gellica's continent; another thousand Crowns I foresee in Plant∣tion; he is taken with the prospect already; a good Eye, and a white hand, a straight Instep, and a clean pastern, a pair of good feet, the Rogue will follow them to a precipice; Now must I follow, and when he has set the Partridges, draw the Curtains about them; for I warrant her lie whilst a man may draw a sheet over her; and it were not ill sport, in pairing time, to hawk these manned whores, but that they are subject to be green-tayl'd too.
What ho, down with our Banks, Excuse our Pa∣tron to the Gentlemen; he is detained by urgent occasion.
I am lost, sure he knows me, he follows so fast; it is impose∣sible to get home before him, other place I know none, nor where to retire, but to a Church, and there the liberty of being free with women will make him certainly discover me; Is there no door open, no house I could shelter my self in, till he be passed? see, he comes, something I must resolve.
There she goes again; it is the Angellica, I see by her step; I'll follow her, for that look; she has some Roguery in Chase.
If I were not busy now, there were a Fortune, she looks back; I, sweet soul, I would follow thee with all my heart, but that I have business; is it not pity such Love-Beggars should want an Alms? if I were as able as Charitable, Not a poor whore in Madrid should want a kindness; See, Don Pedro is leering after her; Now Sir, you are stalking, I see the Game before you; by this light, he will draw a whore dry foot.
It is a pretty wench, by the list; if the Cloth be as good, I am her Man too; It is some of our Friends in disguise; she gave me the sign thrice; prithee let me go, ever she be out of sight.
Never fear her; She'll stop at every Streets point; but to our business; it is certain Harrigo has been with your sister, this more∣ning, from Don Thomaso.
Prithee meet me at the Caletravoes, and we'll talk at large of it; but I must needs see who this is.
Would any man think he had paid a thousands Crowns this Morning for a Women's Friendship that he dotes upon, that
should see him stepping from his first visit; thus hot in pursuit of a Fresh design, that shows a true-bred, Stanch, stout lover, Cupids Kennel love to change.
He pursues me still; If he speaks to me, in this disguise, I am lost, nothing less then certain death to be expected from his Fury; I know his jealousy has contracted a hatred against me; it is neither my Innocence, nor Justice can protect me; There is no disputing his rage when it is armed with power, and privilege to destroy; which the base Custom of this Nation assumes; and un∣der, pretence of Honour Act all barbarous power, even to mur∣der upon Women; And so they can but tell a specious tale of ho∣nor, they are excused, &amp; we condemned; See, fortune, kinder then I expected, offers a relief, here is a door Open; I'll enter, and shut it after me; why should I dispute it? what danger can I apprehend worse then his fury? this will at least shelter me from his pursuit; he will not be so impudent to ask for one he knows not, however my necessity has no choice; Love be thou propitious; and let once op∣pressed virtue find thee and Fortune kind; else, who will won∣der if we stray, or lose the way, when both our guides are blind.
To this place I followed her; she is entered some of these houses, or turned short that damned Lane; a Pox of Johanne, his prating has lost her; perhaps shees gone up the Lane to yonder Church, I'll see; if I retrive her, shoe's mine.
SO, now I am a little at peace; it is some consolation to my mind, the hopes of a Revenge; would my Clothes were come home, that I might quit my Fresco; yet this time I may waste to my advantage, by contemplating and Philosophying upon my own misfortunes; a young handsome Whore to use me thus! a young Dissembler must be an old Witch; if I had got my Night for my money it would never have grieved me; how like a Boat∣swain I am clothed, and I have a heart now as hard as any the Galley breeds; I grow malicious too, and am mad, to see Thoma∣so's fortune; The Rogue is so successful; All Trumps turn of his Suit still; That black Periwig (a mischance as we thought, and laughed at) has got as good Fish as any Hook he threw into the
Sea, this Voyage; Well, all I beg of Fortune is, but to send some one of the Sex into my power; Any thing in Petticoats, that may be at my mercy: By this light, a Cat at Tower-wharf, or a Cavalier at Westminster, a Whore in Bridewell, or a Bear at Stake in Whit∣sontide, shall find more mercy than I'll show her: How many ways have I killed that Sanco and Lucetta over, in my mind, since last night? I'll send for a Bottle of Consolation; what cordial comfort, I and counsel too, have I found in Sack! I shall be mad, if I stay at home, and think upon my injuries, without it; here's a damned Book too tells me how to avoid such accidents now when it is too late; by which I find, it is not amiss sometimes to read as well as hawk or hunt; and yet it is some comfort to find some others have been ill used before me; and now I have no∣thing to do I'll pass my time with other men's injuries, and learn all the causes I can to hate this damned Nation, and the false sex.
It is a handsome house, and no body in it; yes, there is one, what is he doing? Armed in his Drawers, some Master of De∣fence, or else a Tumbler; what ere he be I must speak to him—Sir, if your study be not very importunate, pray let me divert you. 
Ha! a woman, and alone! Fortune thou art kind.—What miserable thing art thou?
Your charity, Sir, guesses right: a most unfortunate per∣son; a Virgin, Sir, in distress, that's forced to seek protection, though a stranger, from your roof; and if you favour not, shoe's lost for ever.
What strange Curse can threaten thee worse than to be thrown thus into the dangers of this place? Dost thou know, wretched thing, where thou art? Does not thy heart bode the ill, that's hanging over thy head? Dost not observe me, and the po∣stur thou find me in?
Your words and posture, both, beget my wonder: But alas, Sir, I had no choice of safety; either I must find it in this house, or fall into the hand of •• mortal Enemy, from whose rage and power I was to expect nothing less than a present death. But why you should threaten my misery with new fears, my inno∣cence is yet ignorant of the cause, my heart being guilty of no one injury done you by this visit.
From death you are pretty safe, my anger is not mortal; but for the rest, if any of your sex ever found a more implacable Enemy, let the Hangman shave my throat.
Sir, as you are a Gentleman, I conjure you, consider, ere your passion transports you.—Why are you so barbarous to abuse a Maid, fled to you for protection?
Yes, yes, talk: I would fain see one of your sex talk me
into a faith again; Innocent, quoth you! so was I; come, no re∣sisting; By this light I'll bang your bones, if either you make a noise, or struggle: What a pox are you grown so impudent as to follow me into my house? Is the fool so visible in my forehead that you dare attach me here? Enrage the Boar, and pursue him to his den? Am I such a Du-pe, as to be robbed and coozen'd thrice in a day? Come, come, off with this Hood. 
You are a barbarous person; and I doubt not but Hey∣ven will protect me from you.
As barbarous as I can be; I'll assure you, I'll kiss, and see thee; not that I care a rotten Orange for it; Nay, I will lie with thee too, and yet you are never the safer from my anger; nay, I'll show one Whore how another has used me; I'll even treat you upsie-dock, for I can kiss, and rob, and kiss, and beat a Whore too, as well as she did me, and strip you too at noon-day, as I was at mid-night, and turn you into the street for Flies to sting and boys to hoot; Come along, or by this light I shall flatter you with such claps as will make your ears ring.
Hold Sir, why do you pull me? Though you be angry, yet hear me speak; you know I am not guilty of the injuries you have received, and twill be most inhumane to revenge your self upon me; this is such a treachery, to set your doors open of pur∣pose to betray the wretched that fly for sanctuary to you; why this violence? your eyes and Reason may tell you, I am not ac∣quainted with such barbarous usage: As you have honour, or any thing of gentle in you, consider, ere you let your rage proceed to further injury: Do not mistake me for one of those vile women; For by all those holy things, I vow, there is nothing innocenter than my self; and this visit only a chance, and a sad one too; No∣cessity, dire necessity, to save a life and honour, which were both at stake, made me enter your doors.
Persuade me it is night, Tell me I dream, or my beard is gray; any thing shall find faith as soon as the tears, prayers, or flat∣tery of a Spanish woman; a race of young dissemblers, false and bloody, in their youth, to weep my Purse out of my Pocket, and flatter me into a beating! young Devils, to abuse a stranger for being kind only; And I be not revenged upon all your sex, let me pass for a tame fool—Come, or by this Hilt I shall bang you with this Scabbard, good Devil. 
How now, what Scene's this?
Fred, thou art come in the nick. A prize y faith.
What, she's in love too? One of a great Family, that's fain to steal a visit; some one whose passion has transported her be∣yond the bounds of modesty and custom? Is it not so, fair one? or some mighty concupiscence which Petticoats cannot tame.
No, she's one that's pursued by some near a kin, a Hus∣band or a Brother, and was fain to take sanctuary here at Fools Haven; and this poor innocent simple young virgin had been mur∣der'd, but that by miracle she found the way to pick the Lock of our Door, where she will find such a Sanctuary. Death, to me for
protection? As if fine words and tales could delude the Fool again! No, young one, curse thy self, for the world shall not save thee, nor any thing in Spanish Petticoats find mercy here, not a cloven Saint, no, not the Madonna, unless she were disguised.
Now Lady fair, is this the story?
Yes Sir, and a most sad and serious truth.
She sighs; Take heed, Ned; this is in love with thy skin, she will flay thee; if thou trust her, there are of her Tribe about the Town such excellent Thieves they'll geld a man ere he feels them: I have heard of one that robbed a mans mouth, while he slept, of a row of teeth; another stole Jack Smith's Eye out of his Head at noon-day, and he never missed it till he felt the cold; Nay, she made him buy it again; This is true, Dame, as nice as you make it.
Sir, some such ill women, void of honour and shame, there may be; but why you should be so hasty to condemn me for one of them is most uncharitable, till you have cause for your fears; have I asked ought of you, or injured the place more than by putting my unfortunate foot in your house; nor that, but to have saved a life that was pursued.
Come, come, be real and confess, for this Trick will not pass upon us: why here? why in this house? inhabited by strangers only, that neither knew nor practised with any of you till yester∣day, and see how we are used! Behold that wrack, a tall ship well rigged, and a good fraught when he put out of Port, and see how a she-Pyrat of this Isle of Rogues has used him, but for sailing one Tide in your Straights; all to be beaten and plundered, and set a shore for Dutchman; but if he will be ruled by me, you shall curse the story: By this hand we'll both lie with her, one will be enough to beat her.
That I promised her before you came; Little one it is re∣solved you must pay this score: Honour, Revenge, and Pleasure, all three condemn you to the Couch within.
Else we shall be alone the sport of the Prado; and the blind Fiddler, who would else have roasted none but the English∣men's names upon his Lanteer, now the spit shall turn with a new tune; I would Thomaso were here to see us towse this Quarry, in revenge of our affront—Come Sweating, cry, I, I, poor virgin in  distress; rude fellows to pull thee thus, and please thee against thy will. Cog, cog.
Do you know Don Thomaso the English Colonel?
Know him? yes: I would he were here, he would have a leg or a wing of thee, Chicken; but it is as well, we'll leave him some of the Carcass till he come home, he's not so nice-sto∣mack'd, but he may make a Collation upon a cold Whore and a Salad.
For his sake, I conjure you, if you be Friends, use me civilly; and I am confident he'll take it kindlier than if you should pursue this barbarous humour,; what is passed I can forget, because I have heard something of your story; and if you be that
Englishman that was abused, I confess I do not wonder to find you thus enraged; it would make a better nature than you pro∣fess think of their revenge; and when he comes, if you repent your delay of Justice upon me, I am still in your power to be used as barbarously as he or you shall decree.
She speaks sense, but it is out of time, and I am deaf to all but revenge; I care not to be just or gallant; I'll be revenged on all the sex, Angels in face and voice, but Devils in their hearts; I thought I had made a friendship with a Saint, so young, so innocent; when the dissembling Whore would have coozen'd a Jesuit, false and bloody as the common Stews.
Be you my Judges, my innocence dares appeal to your rage, for the worst that that and malice can say; when you have listened to all that anger can prompt you to, suppose me the worst of women, sent upon the blackest Errands, you must confess my journey was either to prostitute my self for moan you lust; one of these base causes is the worst your heart can think me guilty of; Now to clear my self from those crimes, and to as∣sure you I am fallen by chance into this misery, take this Dia∣monte, it is of no common price, I freely give it as a Pledge of my Innocence, and a price to purchase only your delay of revenge till Thomaso comes; and if he doth not allow of my protection, let me suffer all your displeasure threatens; you see I am so confident of my innocence, I refer my self to be judged by your Friend.
It is a Diamond. Hum, Fred, This mollified a little; it is strange how much more sense this Diamond speaks than her tears or prayers.
This Ring makes her sense plain, which was hard before; and do you hear, Ned, it would vex us to be hanged for ravishing an honest woman, when we think we only towse a Drab; and but a scurvy Why-not, to oversee a Gallows so.
A pox upon her, I cannot believe she is real; what if this Ring be false? They are all dissemblers; the other talked as par∣lously as this, and gave me a chain too; as false metal as her self, Gypsy
However, there is nothing lost but time in this ven∣ture.
Well, I'll once break a resolution, and delay my revenge, for an hour; come, I'll see you safe in my Chamber till your Friend comes; but I'll make bold to keep you Company, lest you play an∣other Cats Trick, and leap the window.
And if I scope this storm I'll no more to Sea, blind Love in thy Idol Name, To hazard Honour; Life and Fame.
DOn Pedro, What occasion stops you here, Sir? will you do us the favour to see our house? it is the poor habit∣tion of strangers; We boast nothing Extraordinary; and for Furni∣ture, so the Kitchen and the Cellar be well, if the Bottles be good, the Bed cannot be ill.
It is more then you know, Don Thomaso, what furniture you have in your house; for if I mistake not there is a moveable more then you imagine, and now I am confident she is entered here; We followed a pretty woman, and (as near as I can guess) to your door, before I lost sight of her; she gave the sign at every Turning.
Upon my life it is the same I saw in the Piazza; If you please to go in, we'll inform our selves better.
QUick Fred. look out, I heard some body open the Street∣door.
It is Thomaso, and strangers with him, some of the same Crew we had the Quarrel with; Don Pedro what do you call his Name? he is one of them.
Don Pedro? As you have Honour, By all that is dearest unto you, let him not see me; I conjure you, be not Calmly barb∣rous; though your Rage has wronged me yet now you are collect∣ed, be not so inhumane as to Expose me to misery, for your sport only.
By this light, she is really Concerned, I see now, by her Paleness; poor Girl, Come be not afflicted; by my life, he shall neither see thee nor Injure thee here; come be confident: poor Rogue how she shakes!
Sir, I'll take your word, and if I live I'll deserve this Fa∣four from you; And now I consider your Friend better, it calls to mind a former injury, so freshly acted that I cannot but wonder what Star makes me thus subject to him? and though I take no delight in Revenge, yet I would not have him urge me too far.
What was it she said?
I neither know nor care.
Ned, see here are friends of yours come to give you a visit; They heard you kept your Chamber.
Sir, I am both sorry and ashamed for your injury; But
since you know who did it I shall gladly have the Honour to join in your Revenge.
Why faith, it is Lovers luck: but I should not have seen you so confidently as I do, in this Garb, But that I am upon better terms with the Sex then I hoped this morning; for here is one of the foolishest, or else unlucky'st wenches fallen into my mercy, that ever was hid under the Curse of a Petty-coat; By this light she found me and set upon me alone, and braved me here in my Chamber; an Impudent tear-sheet; and if I had not been armed she would have ravished me; she knows you both, and pretends some interest in Don Thomaso; but, for your part, she will not see you; her cover is none of the best, but she is fine and clean underneath.
It is the same.
I have taken out Letters of Mart for reprisal against her; and vowed to make a voyage upon her, ever she go out again; yet she eats nothing but Bread and Water till she pay it, nor shall she lie alone neither.
He had boarded her ever I came up; so she ransomed her self with this Diamond; but she is only Reprieved till you come, she says you'll be her Bail.
Hang her poor whore, some common Carrion; she would never haunt your house else; it is some hungry Kite you see, she flies at all; your ring is likely to be a good one, when she had rather give it then lie with you.
Ned, take my counsel; hide your Ring and deny this sto∣rye as you love your Credit; Two such affronts in one day! for the Nations sake hide them before the Boys come to know it; robed and beaten by one Whore, and another rather pay then have you do her work; where is she, Fred?
In Neds Chamber, will you go and see her? I have engaged my self you must not; But you may peep, or so.
Give me the key.
If I but see a Glimpse of her Face, I can tell whether she be a Wench of any Garb or no.
Follow me, Sir; and when I go in I'll plant my self so, that when she discovers her face to me you may see her.
A pox on her for a crafty Queen; she has turned her back to the door; there is no knowing her.
It is no great loss if you lose the sight; she has been here this hour, yet I was not so curious to lift up her veil; Come, Don Harrigo, We have a Bottle or two in Fresco, let's waste the time with that; and when Thomaso comes we shall hear all the story; if she prove prize, Harrigo shall receive his Majesties tenths and fifteens.
No, Sir, I am not for that Game; I hate such hawking at the Bush with those Bob-tails; Give me a long-wing'd Hawk, a high flying whore, it is sport to see her stoop.
NO more excuses, Sir; I am satisfied, it was all full of chance; no intention of any injury to me, this habit and the license of the place was only guilty; and it is all forgot, though my part had like to have been sad; and those clouds and fears that darkened my mind this morning, this joy, to find you the same we parted, has quite dispersed; nor will I fear the frowns or storms that any man can threaten, since you are satisfied; whose protection and opinion is all I would seek or find amongst men; yet, in kindness and civility to my Brother, I would not have him see me here; it is not handsome so to declare against a Brother; and though his anger be an usurped power, it will be more modesty to suffer such a tyranny then to war against it.
I am yet so confounded and surprised with my joys, so amazed to meet you here, I can scarce settle my heart into a faith of what I see. The Sea works still, though the storm be past; and my heart trembles to think what a danger you have escaped, knowing the nature and the rage that now possesses both my friends; to which is added the accident of your Brothers being within, my soul feels the horror still; what strange misfortune directed your feet, in that hour of mischief, into this danger; yet if self interest could govern me, I have cause to rejoice; this storm having wrought through a thousand impossibilities, and procured a blessing for which I, in vain, have laboured many years, and now possess with fears and doubts; for I was never so vain as to believe I deserved this honour from you, nor never had a thought so insolent as durst assure me I should be happy; yet, it is truth, I always adored you above your sex, and still gazed upon the virtuous Serulina, as that divine person from whom I was to believe and expect all that kindness honour and justice could prompt her heart to; and see how those vows and that faith, have not only paid but exceeded all my hopes, and, heaven knows, sir∣prized my very wishes; for which goodness, at your feet thus I throw your servant, bound by gratitude with eternal vows of faith, to adore the virtuous and fair Serulina; but we must be  short, and silent, Madam; lest the dangers from within by some new mischief interrupt our joys: for I'm of your opinion, your Brother should not know you are here; nor dare I any longer de∣lay the incensed mind of Edwardo, whose late injury has made him a beast, and ready to act all inhumane things upon your sex; which danger I must prevent.
I confess, when Edwardo was alone, I had some appre∣hension, because I had formerly known him by that accident that befell in my garden, where he showed a most untamed nature, whom neither danger, reason, nor tears could soften; but when Ferdinan∣do came in I then took courage; for you seldom read of two men
so wicked by chance, as to act or consent to such crimes as Murder, or Rape, where the looker on grows as guilty as the actor.
I beseech you, Madam, let me interrupt your discourse; lest while we talk of passed dangers, those that are upon the way and drawing near surprise us; your Brother is without, and expects me; pray be pleased to hide your self in your veil, and shut the door till I return, who will with all possible diligence disperse the company within and wait upon you.
WEll, Gentlemen, I'll take my leave of you; I see Don Thomaso is pleased with his visit; and twill be but an ill complement to speak in his draught; upon the Piazza this even∣ing, I'll meet you and hear his adventure.
Nay, faith, never part till he comes; we will have only one bottle more, and then I'll call him; Pox on her, it is some crafty Whore, and hopes to flatter and mollify him; for he's such a good natured fool she'll persuade him to any thing.
Let them both use their best Oratory, try if they can pre∣vent her walking in Fresco this evening, with a most large Paper on her back full of causes why.
We will expect your prize in Spasso, I'll seek out one of your Ballads against you come; you'll have leisure to write the second part your self; I'll warrant you twill sell.
Would there were no worse in the business; but I believe I shall scarce get a thousand crowns by my Ballad; though I'm sure I paid little less for the subject.
What a pox can he be doing all this while with that poor Devil?
Come, let's beat up's Quarters; what if she have cut his throat, and leaped out at the window? I imagine all mischiefs from all women; yet this is a fine straight tree, I long to be gathering some of her fruit, I could clasp her Bool, and clime her with a good will yet for all my anger.—See, here he comes. Well, Sir, how  goes matters? what, you are charmed, I see; wounded as a man may say, or stroked into a calm; not one wrathful billow appears.
He looks so serious as if we were to beseech him to let us take our turns; come, the story; be quick, for we must have our hour too.
Where are the rest of the company?
Harrigo left us as soon as you. Don Pedro staid the share of two bottles; we laughed a spell with old Ned, and parted; he'll meet us on the Piazza; I believe it is a good fellow enough, if his mind were quiet; but I perceive by his discourse he is jealous you have too much interest with Angellica, which he can scarce digest.
He drank her health, and pledged for you; he took it
kindly, your leaving him there to day; but this is from my busi∣nos; what a pox have you done with our small sinner all this while? her time of execution draws near; if you did but see the Paper within which Fardinando has writ, and I mean to nail upon her shoulders with some Lath-nails when I turn her out, it would make you laugh to read the causes; prithee say, has she clean li∣nen? dost thou think she is sound? if I should go now to re∣avenge one mischief, and get another, I should curse my self.
Stay here, and I'll satisfy your Question.
What do's he mean to be thus serious? By this light, I'll have my revenge in spite of his heart; let him frown to the Devil.
Do you know this Lady?—nor you, Edwardo? 
I have seen that face, but where I cannot call to mind.
Nor I; yet there are dark lines in my memory that lead me to her face; it is not Lucetta I am certain.
I shall remove this wonder with another; have you no∣ver heard me mention the name of Serulina. Horrid beasts! are you not both struck with the judgement of this vision?—Do's not your black breasts accuse you of all the villainy most barbarous  men can be guilty of? what misery can this oppressed innocence inflict, that your own souls will not say you ought to suffer? what mercy can you hope from this provoked virtue, whose bar∣barons breasts, even forgetting her sex, could proceed to threaten blows, which she could have suffered too with less affliction then those wounds your rage and lust imposed? Fred. you saw her this morning in Don Harrigo's company; could you so soon for∣get her and your self? I should be loath to find you guilty of any malice; it is as much as your ignorance can do to plead that we are friends; for him, he was a beast in his wine, before, as much as in his rage, now; and both his injuries crimes to the law, not to our friendship; else I should have found some other way to have ex∣pressed my sense of them.
Sir, we are your friends, and reason may do much; but you must not think to threaten us into a repentance; you know us both too well; yet I confess this is a cause you may beat us in safe enough, though my part of the injury may find excuse from her Veil, and the place I found her in; for, to be ingenuous who would have looked for a person of honour in those clothes and your Chamber? nor was her veil off; but when her fears and tears were on, which was such a disguise I am ashamed to plead.
Madam, I am not yet so ill as to defend my faults; and though I cannot be innocent I can repent my crimes; and I have now as much shame and sorrow as there was wine or anger in my injury; and when I can serve you, you shall see that sorrow express it self as highly your servant, as those crimes declared me beast and
mad-man. And if the fair Serulina will still be like the great character Don Thomaso gave us of her, here we stand an object fit for such a goodness; whose crimes are fit for such a mercy to exercise it self upon; and for my part▪ I'll never rise from your feet till you forgive me, and command me something to expiate my faults.
Pray, Sir, rise; for I am not now to be reconciled; your friend knows my anger fell with my fears; nor can any man wrong me by chance; and I am certain Don Thomaso could not make so ill a choice of friends, or converse with men so wicked as would injure me when they knew me; and my faith is as confident in my innocence as you can be in your carriage: and you see That inno∣cency has been, this day, successful, and overcome all the dangers blind fortune threatened in this accident.
Now am I such an Ass I cannot speak a word for my self: By this light, Madam, I was never heartily ashamed before; the guilt of this action makes me dumb; I shall never look upwards again till I have redeemed this fault.
If you will have me believe this sorrow real, I conjure you be still kind to your friend; and to confirm you that I am re∣concil'd, he shall tell you what we have resolved on, in which you must both bear your parts; and when it is past, if you will give me a visit at my house, I'll use you better then you have done me for intruding into yours, though I will not promise to kiss you so often.
Nay faith, Lady, have mercy; we only pretend to that.
Why, and I hope a kiss will hurt neither of you.
Faith, they know not, for I believe they never kissed an honest woman before; and for Fred, he is so little concerned in the sex, if he had been in Paradise we had staid there.
Because I do not talk so much as you do.
No, but because thou dost nothing but talk; and I dare say, if thou were as free from the sin of the Vine, as thou art from the Apple, thou might safely return and claim the old Gardeners place yet.
Prithee, let this subject pass; and give her this Ring again. By this light, I dare not come so near as to do it my self.
No, no; give it her your self; you could towse her even now, and use her like a poor Whore; tear her veil, kiss and threa∣ten to beat her without any awe or reverence to the majesty or di∣vinity in that face or form; alas, it is the same woman still, there is not a Poniard more in those eyes then when you saw them weep, without remorse.
Though she be the same Excellence still, yet I am not the same Beast I was; Prithee take it, and leave fooling; it is not friendly to urge a folly thus, nor pursue a friend too far.
Nay, never hang a tail, but follow like your selves; See, Madam, the later part of Rogues Restitution: This Ring, do you know it?
Yes, but I have no pretence to it now; Nor can I claim it, unless I could pay back the price I received for it; It is sold, Sir, and at a rate I repent not.
Nay, Madam, now I am of their side; and hope you will not believe them so little Gentlemen, as to keep any such mark of their crime to upbraid them; This Ring will brand them worse then the Law in such a case; And I'll say that for Ned, (and a pox take him) I know the Rogue will as soon wear the T and the F in his hand, as this Ring on his finger; And I am so much his Friend, as to desire you will receive it.
In earnest, I dare not, twill be an ill Omen to me; Should I take back in safety what I gave with joy in Fears and Dangers, it were to repent my vows when I have reaped the blessing; I am too superstitious to touch it, when I eall to mind it was the price of my deliverance when both our Honours were at stake.
Do you hear this? Well, Madam, what shall be done with it? Gentlemen, you hear what the Lady says, which of you claims it? I'll only write his name in Hebrew and restore it.
Madam, if you have any Charity left, pray take it for him; we must fly the Country else, to avoid his bloody Jests.
Nay, faith; If neither of you will have it, what think you, Madam, of giving me leave to offer it to St. Cecilia's shrine to morrow, in remembrance of this deliverance upon her Eve, from two English Gentlemen, which shall be hanged up in wax in her Chapel, with an Ex voto; A Spanish Miracle wrought by the Saint upon an Essex Calf with two legs, possessed with a Collier of Croydon.
This is the Mercy we expect from such a Nature; Yet if I were better acquainted with this Lady, I would ask her how she comes to forgive you so easily, that are indeed the cause of the mischief? And in a Lover your crime is greater then ours; and the neglect you have shown her a higher offence then what we kneel for; our Insolence was a chance, and proceeded from Ignorance and passion; for had we known her, we would have sacrificed our lives for her, rather then have acted or suffered the least of those Crimes. But you that have the Honour not only to be known, but esteemed by her, to be thus long in Town, and never pay your own duty, nor inform us how we might pay ours, it makes it our faults your guilt; You showed us all the Whores in Town, and were mad till you had seen them your self; But, for this noble Lady, I never heard her mentioned in Madrid; Had you paid that respect your Heart knows due to her, we might have had, by such a visit, the Honour of being known to this Lady; which would have given her Protection, and secured our Innocence. Do you blush? It is time; and if you had any grace, this Truth would be a Ring in your Nose, as well as the other in ours. Good severe, small Friend, am I with you?
All blessings upon thee, for stinging him on that side; By this light, my guilt has picked all the Guts out of my brains,
Show you this Lady? Prithee look upon her again, do you think your selves fit conversation for her? No, Gentlemen, though I afford you my Company, yet this is of another form; I showed you all my Whores, they were fit conversation and ac∣quaintance for you; Meat according to your palate, Souls and Minds of the same size; This Virtuous Lady, what would you do with her? She'll neither drink, nor swear; I dare say, Ned is the first that ever belch'd before her, though she might have heard many men sigh; They are no such Dutch sour ones, as your Beer breaks.
It is well, Sir; you have the staff in your hand, and you use it.
Nay, now you are too severe, and I must take their parts; But it is no matter, Gentlemen, what he says now; His first Character shall stand with me; and for what is past, I assure you, it flies and dyes with the hour it was acted in.
Your goodness, Madam, makes us blush, and ought to shame him too; But he is so hardened, nothing can disorder him.
No more mutiny, lest I produce the Ring; This Dia∣monte, Madam, will work upon them like Medusa's Ass; And the Rogues are easily turned to stone; For their Hearts are Marble already, though your goodness hath forgiven it.
NOt come home yet? Where can she be? I dare not see her neither, till I have delivered this Letter; All things run cross to day, I would they were honestly lost in the great bed at home; We shall never have quiet hour till the Priest have knit a knot upon them, and thrown them into a pair of sheets. There he is; I'll hold him with my teeth ere he scopes me.
Why I, Pout; I would not sup now, were I Fred. Nor speak these two days; I would cry too, and not be styled with plumms; What a pox would you have done to come off? Been grave and serious? There is nothing you could have said would have made her so soon calm as seeing me storm; And when you have read Women better, you'll find it easier to make them forgive ten faults committed against 'em, then forget one fault which they commit.—How now Child, at whose suit? what have we here, a cloven Alguazile? 
Leave fooling, and read that, you know the hand; A mischief take me but I'll burn it else; I have hunted Moon-shine in the water for you all this day, till my feet are so in Love, they are scarce sweet or sound.
Dear Calis, what news?
You are a kind man, you a Lover! A Woman has a fine
time that affects any Soldier of you all, with your Iron Minds, and tough Buff Hearts; You have all got the Boys wings, feathered Lovers all; The Devil clip them for Calis.
Come, no more Anger; Dear Calis, your Letter is answered; at home you will find your Lady, to whom you must make haste, she has business for you.
Have you seen her then?
Yes, and by a chance, which she'll tell you; Here, Calis, wear this Ring, you know whose it was; Your Lady will not be displeased to see it thus disposed; there is a Story belongs to it, which you shall know hereafter; Farewell, Dear Calis; be faith∣full still, and reap the Harvest of all those Afflictions thou hast sowed.
This was my Ladies Ring, I'll home and take my share of the Jubilee; Farewell to you and your friend; methinks, you might have kissed me after five years; you had wont to do it when you should not, and tell me it was the English fashion; but I find we both grow old; Nay, now you shall not; there's neither Grace nor savour in a kiss when a woman begs it.
It was Calis, and she gave him a Letter but from whom; I can guess, though I do not know; What woman was that he parted with at our door? It was the same shoes and scarf we dogged from the Piazza; I'll find Don Pedro, there is something in this worth his fears and cares, if I guess aright. 
Come, let us haste to Harrigo's, and resolve with him what is best to be done in our business: This Letter should have been given in the Morning; it is Don Pedro's Resolution suddenly to put her into a Monastery, till she consents to marry Don Al∣phonso.
You are both fairly warned; and if you have not wit to prevent threatened mischiefs, you will fall unpitied; Come, pray lose no time, but make use of her kindness, before he doth of his Power, to both your prejudices.
It is resolved already, and with Harrigo you shall know all; We must only get things ready for her design, it is she must Act; We must only be diligent to attend her summons.
NO more, Dear Carlo, it is but too true; Don Pedro's discourse confirms it, and I am miserable; It was he that saved her in the sack of Pampelune, and it is my punishment to love one that cannot be obliged; Yet I can bear his scorn, any thing but marry; though I know he will never be mine, yet I can∣not suffer the thought he should be another.
If you expect Don Pedro, I'll stay; else, I must be gone and seek him; for this is not a business to be delayed or slighted; It is most certain, she has a Passion for him; and the intel∣ligence they hold, if not prevented, will produce some sudden mischief.
Pray stay, I know he will not be long absent, unless this news meet and divert him; As you love me be urgent in it; I'll tell him how much his Honour is concerned, and how he is bound, in care and kindness to his Sister, to provide against this danger as the greatest curse can threaten her life; You see his Nature is inconstant, wild and rash, as common Bravos.
I shall be faithful and diligent in my part; but who can prejudice him when you contribute such sums against your own Interest? But for these chances he had sneaked long since; Leave him to his Fortune, and Poverty will quickly deject him below the saucy thought of such a Woman.
I cannot repent any kindness I have done him; My fear is rather, that Fortune will not have it in my power to oblige him.—See here comes the man you ask for.
Carlo, how now? the news.
That which you have not a little apprehended: within you shall know all.
THomaso in a Periwig? it is not possible; Hatred and Aversion have Eyes as curions as Love; and the An∣tipathy betwixt us must have discovered him.
I am amazed too, it cannot be so slight a disguise should hide him from the Love of one, and hatred of the other; it is but some discourse to vex us.
It is a Truth great as his Villainy, as public, and as base, as injurious and as wicked a Villain, to hunt the Bed of two Sisters; and if you suffer it, may you be used as I am, and de∣spiced by all Men of Honour.
If it be a Truth, I'll find some way to be revenged as he has been curious in his Injury.
If it be a Truth? Are you Saretta, so true he is a Vile∣lain; There is no Brother arrived from Salamanca, Don John knows him, (he's a little black fellow) who told me the whole design; only two Perriwiggs, and two suits of clothes; which when he comes next, you may easily discover: And if you find not that damned Thomaso under that black Periwig cut my throat, as the dog has done my face, just as I had packed up his friends things to send
them back; for his injury, By heaven was a chance, in which I was as innocent as he; here comes one can resolve you all.
To cure your doubts, veil your selves and walk to the Piazza, and hear whose names, and what stories fill the crowds with laughter; while they glory in their mischief in vindication of the affront was done to one of their Comrades; nay, they threaten new revenge; the Angellica is of their counsel, and I hear the de∣sign was laid at her house.
I will not brag, nor threaten; but if I have any friends, or credit in Madrid, I'll make it a black day with some of them.
And a black mischief light on me, if I join not in any re∣avenge at the rate of life and fortune; and if ever Philippo will de∣serve from me, let him now show himself a friend; be bold and kind in our revenge, and command me ever.
Kill him, and name the price; here's my earnest, be quick and secret.
Here, take this key, and make thy own price; for it was he that set Edwardo on, and hired the Bravo's to my ruin.
And the same men shall cut his throat if you will forgive them.
Let them but revenge me upon him, and I'll not only forgive, but reward them too.
Well, I'll undertake this business so you will be secret, and dissemble your hatred for a day or two; perhaps to morrow being a feast may present the occasion; your best way is not to seem to know you are injured, or known; seem to slight 'it, and laugh too.
Death, I could tear my very flesh to think that Rascal has touched my; me blood rises to think how kind I was to the thing I hate; I scarce remember I ere enjoyed a man with more Gusto; sure Harrigo was in the plot, and that hungry Captain too; I'll be revenged upon the whole tribe.
Pray retire, I'll abroad to inform my self of them all; and, perhaps, this night find those that shall dispatch 'em.
I never hated any man before; and see the Devil should give me a passion for him only to plague me; how I hate these eyes that betrayed me! these arms that embraced him; these lips that praised and kissed the dog! methinks, all mankind like my self should despise this body stained with that wretch; sure my flesh is turned carrion since he touched it.
These are pure women's passions that neither know what nor why they love, or hate; the accident vexes me too, but not to that height as to engage my self in the murder of a friend; for the two Sisters, that part of the story she knows I can unriddle; though for my interest, I'll let it pass, in the opinion of the world; nor shall her mischief prevail if I can prevent it; it is the folly of an∣ger to threaten still, which but alarms an enemy, and gives time to arm; their anger makes their hearts cold and cruel; and love makes mine kind and warm, and resolved to save him from the storm.
NOt seen since I went out?
The Mountebank and the Captain have been with 'em all day.
Let them alone, they have some new design to redeem themselves; we shall have the story time enough, I'll warrant you; but when you see Edwardo tell him he has played the fool to cut Lucetta's face; for, believe it, she'll be revenged; I know the hue∣more of these people; and I could have wished you had not made your self so merry, to day, with the Saretta's character; there were those by, who though they laughed at what you said, yet I know they love not your humour, and will be the first that whet you on to such an error, and afterwards both do you a mischief and de∣spice you for it; and, believe it, she is a wench that wants neither friends nor malice, and as like to do you a mischief as any she in Madrid.
I laugh at her and them; their opinion and their anger too; alas, we are none of them that fear, we are of the number that fright others; I know the trick of a Poniard as well as they, a dead wall, a dark night and a false light, I know the advantages too of striking first; and wear a sword that will bite as deep up∣on such occasion as any he's in Castle; and if they will play at tricks, let them expect them. But I wonder more what it is these fine Gentlemen, our Comrades, have in chase, just now when our business requires their presence, which you know admits no delay; we are both undone if we disappoint her to morrow; the Angelli∣ca is jealous too, I find it; and how I shall bear my self with her to night, there is another trouble; one business more will make me take my Bow and Arrows, and then lye down to sleep, with the Proverb. Do you hear, Rogero, when they come, tell them I am gone with Harrigo to his Chamber.
NO words, there is the money; it must be a secret for a day or two: what must we do when they wake?
Rub their Temples with that oil, and give them some of the Vial to drink, and they will come to themselves again.
I hope the loving fit will be over: By this hand, I would not for all her Estate mine should embrace me two hours more: I cracked like Wickar in her Arms when she laughed and grew gay: did you never see a Cow pretend to be merry? even with such ungraceful motions she expressed her self.
When will the Baths be ready? I long for the good hour,
if that succeed as well as the powder, we are made for Ever; and we'll set up thy Statue in Essex.
Never doubt it, Sir; my life for yours it takes of∣fact.
Let's lose no time then, but In, and vow a Pottle or two to good Luck; and the Joy of the Jest is, all will be done ever Thomaso knows of it.
Their Guardian is a Jew; how the Rogue swelled at the Ce∣remonies! yet he was as glad to be discharged of them, as we were to have them.
You will not wonder at that when you consider what a sum he reaps by the bargain; But there was no remedy, you must not have hoped his consent but upon such advantages; The best is, you are sure to have no noise, nor suit; All parties are con∣tented.
Hold Captain, there is your share; come, no Nicety; All men must live; and when profit runs round the Mill grinds merrily.
Well Gentlemen, since you think I deserve this favour, I am not in a Condition to refuse it; But I must desire you will get Thomaso to let our Bargain stand for the Clothes; to morrow is Holy-day, and he wears them still.
To day only, for Evidence in our Plot; you shall have them at Night, now the Jest is over.
Then I shall be fitted for this Companion; Clothes and money too! Well, I will pursue my business, to get you the Baths ready; I'll provide a good Dinner, choice wine, and the best Mu∣sick in the Town.
Prithee be-speak Ten Wheel-barrows of Tripes, for Jug the Giant; I cannot but laugh at our Fortunes; How ma∣ny will envy us, and how many abuse us for these wives! a Pox on the Captain he winked upon you; else I had got the longest Straw; would thou had had the Giant; thine is the finest small Devil I ever saw.
See how hard it is to please you; Come, what boot yet between 'em? Yet I know as well as you the Advantage of my small sinner, and what charges yours will bring, both in Food and Clothing; besides some new Engine, with twelve yoke of Oxen, to draw her into the Country, or take the Air after Dinner. Do you mark? after Dinner; which Meal would victual a Kings Ship; Think of this, and propose.
The Rogue is confident; else I know he would not treat this bargain, his is one of the convenient'st Wives; Of such a fine Diamond cut; her Back and Breast are crooked, in Table and Faucet.
Where will you lodge her? there is no going above stairs; nothing but a ground-room will bear her; Some old English Hall, for a Bed-chamber; And now I think on it, pur∣chase Pals, old, Idle, and unuseful Pals; Separate the Isles, and there is a Partment for her; and there she may walk up∣right,
the Gates too are big enough for her to come in at; Then there are some of the Marble Tombs left still, which will serve in∣stead of Benches, to sit upon; There are stone Cisterns too, at the Porch, will serve her to piss in; Do you remember, when she went out of the way to Stale? I thought the Spouts had run when she opened her Sluice.
I forgot to bid the Captain bring a Ladder; that the Tay∣lore might take her measure.
The Taylor! fie, fool, it is no Taylors work; let those that use to furnish Churches do it; they are used to such heights; By this hand, twill turn a Women's Taylors head, to look down from her shoulder; Besides, the others, when they have but paced her about, will guess how many pieces of Tapestry will serve to furnish her; Think not upon Velvet, or Satin, those paper wares, she'll take up more then furnishes Saint Jago's Chapel; They can furnish her with Frutages, and Festunes, for head dress; Neck-lace and Chains, Bobs and Bracelets, they have always in readiness, as much as will fur∣nish a Church; Thou must get a Grate in the Bed, she'll over∣lay thee else; what a time her husband has, if he be bound to act that part! he may as soon feed Whales with Worms.
If the Baths fail, all my refuge is, I can run away from her; Her portion is big enough to pay the Post.
Since you will not resolve upon this change, let's find Thomaso; But not a word of what's past; we'll only ring these Bells in his Ears; We can Dance to our own Music now. 
UPon my life, it was she, my Author saw her, and the confusion she was in for fear you should know it; twill be a fine dishonour, when the Town shall take notice of such a visit; Sir, she is your sister, and all her Actions will reflect upon you; But which is most Impudent, Carlo saw him bring her to your door, and was present when Calis gave him a Letter in the walks; Be not abused, Sir, Two hundred thousand Crowns, and a sister of her me∣rit, are not toys to be lost; they'll expect a better Jointure then a Scarf and a Buff-coat, and will be much better Ornaments in your Family, then a Colonel and his Commission; Take my Counsel; see her in a Nunnery, and I'll make him either fly the Country, or make him a Nest in the Church-yard.
It is clear, and I am satisfied; But we must be wary in what we do; They have both too much wit and resolution to be surprised; We must dissemble our Intention, lest this Passion be∣tray us; and, for ought we know, the work may be done to our hands: For I am told, the Lucetta and the two Sisters are highly incensed, and have some design to be revenged upon him; I left the Angelica too full of jealousy and rage: There we may
Inform Our selves; and if We can blow that Coal with her, we'll resolve what's to be done: Women, when Rage and Jealousy possess them, are as good Counsel as Mischief can inquire of; and what she Resolves we'll Execute; who is your Author?
The Lucetta, and she had it from Cornelio, who is himself unsatisfied with Thomaso.
NOt a word, Ned, till to morrow, of what is past; we'll consummate to night, and then defy the foul Fiend.
I am chained, See where they come.—See the lost sheep;  We thought you had been sunk or stolen: Fred has spent three Groats in Criers to day.
It is well, I'm glad to see you are not flayed again; Be∣ware of the She-shambles, Ned: There are now snares set, I can assure you, and the whole Piazza curse you for debauching the Mountebank, who was absent all day, and Excused him∣self that he was employed by two strangers: Great wonders are expected to morrow from his skill; it is thought he will make you two wise.
Well, Sir, Fool on; We may live to show the world some Essex men have some Wit, though the Calf lie at the Door.
No more, let time speak for us; Prithee what is it a Clock? This noise in my Pocket drowns mine ear so I cannot hear him strike.
A cheerful sound, if no hue and cry pursue it.
What? there is some secret, I perceive, which we must not partake.
As thou love me, do not ask them; They will never tell, if they but imagine We desire it; to get a secret out of these men, you must neither listen nor consider what they say: But slight their discourse, and them, till they hunt and hold thee to tell all they know.
Yes, yes, Trust to that; To morrow if you be∣have your selves well, it is Resolved you shall share the Bless∣sing.
Did not I tell you so? now is he as sick, till he has told it, as one that holds a Glitter too long, twill out, Fred. Room, Hall. let the secret come.
Not a word, only this sound to afflict you.
Yet, in midst of your mirth twill be fit for you to know, you have raised a Wasps Nest that may sting you; the Lucetta has vowed a Revenge.
Her Revenge? By this day I'll have her throat Cut now;
I can spare as much as will do it by the Law, whether it be right or wrong.
Well, the Business we were sent for? pray dispatch; For we have affairs of Our own that attend us.
Well, content; and let the Secret lie till Nature works; you must be in disguise to morrow, and ready to serve the Lady you wot of; you must get you fighting swords too, lest you be beaten; she expects you should pay her the debt; I have pro∣missed her you will be as bold in her cause as you were in her injury.
If you be serious, we will not deceive your Expectation; but why disguised? you do not mean drunk?
Be well armed, and it is no matter for disguises; I'll have the Ambassadors Coach and Footmen ready to receive us, and then we'll defy their Anger.
This is the business; and within Harrigo will inform you both of the time and place; pray be early to morrow.
I Have no Patience till she be in a Monastery; my heart can find no peace; Fool that I was not to try my For∣tune before; Why should I believe my self the only Woman not fit for a man of Honour to marry, when thousands have married Women of as ill life and Fame as mine, and yet find Swords and Friends to defend them? His Poverty too would have pleaded for me, which his pride now will oppose, his heart being swel'd with the hopes of this Fortune; and twill be in vain to attempt him till she be removed from a possibility of his hopes; He will not see me neither, though thrice invited; That base ingratitude in the Sex makes me hate him, to find, he that three days since fought for my door, and would have sold himself to the Galleys but to purchase my Bed, will not now be bought or courted to a visit.
Don Harrigo and he are at the door.
How now? turned shadow? fly when I pursue, and foal∣low when I fly? Anna, do's your Lady use to walk in her sleep? There is no danger in questioning this Noctambule; I have heard of them would walk upon Ridges of houses, guided by the Fiend, without danger, unless you awake them; Therefore we must speak softly; Stay, gentle shadow of my Love, and see how I will prove thy fears vain, and anger light, and thus catch thee in thy flight, by falling on thee in the Night; is it not so? Oh! there's a smile
still; I thought we had been arrived at the Court of sorrow, where Jealousy and despair, with snaky-hair, will not let us kiss away our Care.
It is well, Sir; your joys are full, and fortune smiles, pur∣sued by choice of Beauties, oppressed with those blessings which others sacrifice for in vain; All the Cupids that break loose, and fly from the Cages in others breasts, perch, and build in yours; which is become their Nests; while we poor famished Lovers are glad to feed upon such broken bread as your heart will yield; such wretches as your despised Angellica. Yet know, fond man, Love poi∣son'd with a Just Anger; for perjured vows make the mortall'st hatred man can fall under; Nor doth thy heart know what dan∣gers the fury of a Woman, robed of her hopes, and couzend of her Joys, threatens even against her Love.
Her blood was as black as any Ink, for she did nought but think and think; If I were apt to fear what I love, how this would fright a man? There are those would scarce recover their humour again to night; and there are some that such a short speech, next their hearts, would make as Chaste as Camphor; Prithee what Melancholy Planet hath raised this dusty storm? Harrigo and I came to be merry, and laugh at other Lovers, whose nests are on fire; and for ought I see, we shall have enough to do to quench our own; This is such a Hymn you may sing it to a Drum; I did not think you could have spoke such a Raw-head and bloody-bones-speech; What, is your anger so high, a man cannot have credit for a kiss, or two?
A kiss; who denies you a kiss?
Now prithee, Sot, tell me, what difference can you find betwixt these and those of yesterday? What fond idle thoughts jealousy would put into our heads! Why this fury on a sudden? What, Don Pedro is jealous you will use me too well, and would have you believe I love the Saretta.
No, Sir, the Saretta cannot be my Fear; I know you scorn to marry her.
Scorn? why scorn? shoe's a handsome woman.
I deny not her beauty; yet I am vain enough to believe neither Beauty nor Fortune shall have power to buy you from me; No, Sir, not the Serulina's; Do you start? If her honour did not weigh the Scale more then they, Angellica could be proud, and confident as she; it is honour, that Bubble, so prized by men, which all Covet, though none catch the shadow.
Come, you are melancholy; and when your passion is over, you will find this is but some plot of a jealous Rival. Serulina? That's an old story, revived only to Alarm your heart, and lessen your kindness.
Yes, by those that invented the bringing her to his house in disguise too day; I do not know it was she Don Pedro followed from the Piazza; nor how Edwardo tows'd her; and how she re∣fus'd to see her brother; Yes, Sir, I do know it; and he knows it too, and I believe will prevent your design.
WHich was he?
That which went first, in the gray clothes with silver lace.
It is enough, leave the rest to us.
Their mischief is bent against his life, which is too precious, in my esteem, to sell for a black revenge; and though she abuses the world with the opinion of our being Sisters, I that know the secret and my interest in that opinion will not so far wed her folly as to countenance a Lie with the price of his blood whom I love; That Villain Cornelio, to eat his bread and betray him!—Here it was he entered, I'll knock and speak with him.
Who knocks?
A Friend, that must needs speak one word with Don Tho∣maso, it is business that concerns him.
Be gone in an evil hour; What do you haunt him in other women's houses? This is fine Impudence; Be gone, or I shall empty an Oleo or two that was eaten three days since upon your reverend Baudships head. My Mistress must not only pray and pay for his company, but she must have Knights to defend her from Ladies Lovers Errands. Where is your Squire with his shield to defend this Chamber-pot, or his Wisp to cleanse you when I have done? See, here it comes; by S. Jago, if you stay but a pissing-while I'll throw it.
I must find some way to tell him, he is lost else; there is is no disputing now; this Bawd will do me some affront if I stay—  Don Harrigo you are met in a happy hour.
Ho! Pauline, what, spying! jealous, upon my life; Why you see what frail things men are, especially young healthy men; Not a true Lover, Child, in a hundred, that is to say, a constant Lover, but true to love Ninety nine. What, you hunt now? Why faith he's within, all to be-hugg'd and kissed as if thou had him in thine own arms.
You are merry Sir, and I am pleased to see it; but when you shall know it is no curious jealousy, but serious business, that brings me hither, such as concerns the life of your Friend, I doubt not but you'll assist in his preservation; but you must conceal me, because my Sister is engaged; if you will walk you shall know the Design.
Since you are serious, let us retire; this comes of fooling; this Climate is too hot to suffer these severe Jests, which will pass in our thick Air.
I Know not what she was; some impudent thing that plays the spy upon him, and would fain have spoke with him; but I sent her away without a reply.
I would I had seen her, for my jealous Heart starts at every shadow now; I am afraid it was some one from Serulina, some Letter, or some Message. See who knocks.
It is Rogero with a bundle.
Bid him pass into the next Room, and if she returns call me, and be sure to let her in; I am afraid she has some notice of Don Pedro's design, my Heart will have perpetual Alarms till she be in a Nunnery; I fear nothing but his Marriage; I would he were as fit for my Hate, as he is for my Love; Or would I were as fit for his value, as I am for his desire; Then I might hope to impale his wandering Mind as he has mine: My Heart was once as unlimit∣ted, my Breast as untamed, and as much common as his; Yet his Eyes have enclosed it, which makes me blaspheme Love that has destined me a slave to him that will not be my Lord.—See, he  comes, I must retire, he'll be angry to see me sad still; And I con∣fess he has Reason; for it is most unpleasing to meet storms where we seek our Pleasure.
Prithee give thy Master that note, and dispose of the Clothes as we resolved; You must be certain to deliver them to night, though it be late.
I shall, Sir.
Villain, to betray us! Now I am certain, it was he discovered Serulina's being at my House; The difficulty will be to follow our business to morrow, and yet avoid their Malice, unless this design take; The slave took my money, to hire the men to cut Lucetta's face, and for so much more, told who set him on; But if I cry not quit to morrow, and stick a feather for his Goose, let him laugh at the change as well as at the Robbery.
He's a Bed, and I must call my Child, he'll be froward else. What have we here? A Letter, it is a women's hand, and directed to Don Thomaso; It is none of my Mistresses, it is some of his other fools that complains. Some one whose Beauty he has reaped; the Rogue pays not a sigh of Rent for all his Love; I could afford to
poison the Stallion; would he were lapped in both our sheets, so he were laid in his Grave; What a life have I had since I saw him! There has been a perpetual storm in our Minds; Reason, Love, and Interest, so disordered, so shuffled together; twill waste a year of happy hours to place our thoughts aright again.
Where is he, in bed?
Yes, but here's a Letter cannot sleep; I found it alone walking about the Chamber; the paper is guilty, and full of a foul Conscience sure; Pray will you shrive her.
A Letter, give it me.—It is from her, that cursed name of Serulina is subscribed, and confirms all my fears; That name 
 has ripened all my miseries.
What ails you? For loves sake be quiet; Wretch that I was to give her the Letter.
It is resolved; Get me a pen and ink and put on your veil, while I write two lines to Don Pedro to enclose this Letter; There's Malice for Malice; and I shall be Revenged at last, though my fears could not obtain his Love.
It is late; but you must be sure to find Edwardo and Ferdinando, and give them this paper ere they sleep; and conjure them as they love their lives to observe my directions early to morrow. Treacherous Villain, who could have feared such a mischief from one that breathes by our Charity? And  had not this foolish girl exceeded in kindness as much as he has done in Villainy, he had inevitably fallen; But since we are advised, we shall find some way to prevent their Malice; I only dread it may hinder our design, and disappoint the fair Serulina; I must find some way to give her notice.
MY Heart dreads some mischief; Their stay thus late makes me apprehend they will this night attempt us; Where are the keys of the Garden?
Here, Madam.
Is my Cabinet and Jewels put up, and such money as you found in the great box?
All is done as you ordered.
Then let us sit quiet and hide the light; if they intend any force, thus disguised and thus provided we may by the back door make our escape through the Garden to the Ambassadors house; I have consulted both Nature and Reason, and from neither
find that right of Empire Brothers claim over Sisters; and since he resolves to arm himself with those advantages strength and cu∣stome gives him over our Sex, it is both Justice and Wisdom to provide for our safety; My desires have neither shame nor dis∣honour belonging to them; Justice and Gratitude both guide my Heart to serve him, that saved both Life and Honour.
I have a Dagger, and by my Life, the proudest He that dares lay hand upon you, a black mischief find me if I leave it not in his Breast; They have all such a care and kindness for your Pore∣tion; But were I you, I would build an Hospital with it ere they should have it.
See who knocks.— 
It is too dark.
Listen then.
Who knocks there?
A Friend, Master Porter; one that hath earnest business with Don Pedro; and a Letter for him that concerns him to see it to night.
He is not at home; but if you leave it he shall be sure of it when he comes in.
Are non e of his Gentlemen up?
All the House, except my self, are a bed.
Pray do you take it, and give it when he comes.
It is Anna, the Angellica's Nurse. Some mischief upon my Life.
Signora Anna, Caro Vecho, come in and pass an hour; I have Esquiuris and a Biscuit; Come, we'll squeeze a Botto till he comes: Ha! you old Conjurer, how long is it since the Devil danced last in thy bawdy circle? Come into the Lodge, and let me brush the Cobwebs from thy corner.
You have Bell Tiempo, Master Porter; but I am now in haste, my Mistress stays for me, and it is late; What a dumb House is here? Is this the Eve to such a Feast as a young Ladies Wedding? No spits going, no Cooks chopping, no pots seething, nor ovens heating? What, twill be a stolen Wedding.—Farewell, Master Porter.
What a pox ails her to talk thus? I hope they will not offer to marry my young Lady without telling me of it.
It is clear; we are betrayed, I find by her discourse, and they are now upon some design to prevent us.
Let's be gone before they come; it is better to prevent such a mischief, and easier then to resist it.
I would fain see that Letter first; There may be some light in our business, something may guide our Resolutions; Dear Calis, no trick to catch it?
I'll warrant you the Letter, Madam.
These flesh flies how they haunt the shambles! pox take her, she would not see him two days since; and now aMid-wife will not be so
haunted as he.—So, stick thou there, that I may find thee when he  comes in; some great concern, no question.
So, he's earthed in his lodge; now for my design, if I can find the window, it is done; See, here it is; now for a piece of the Chamber-maids virtue, tread lightly; the hundred Arts that we must learn, speak softly, see quickly, hear half sounds, read looks, keep her secrets, and betray all others; smile when she smiles; frown, hate, and love, as she doth; lie with her, for her, either under, or upon her; and (unless a Nuns) on my Con∣science ours is the wickedst kind of Innocent Life women can practise.
She stays long.
The Rogue stood entertaining himself with his own sha∣dow till now: But here it is. 
Give it me.—What a chance is this? We had been all undone if this accident had not happened. By this you'll find mine were no idle fears; it is well we are in a readiness, for we have no time to spare; Early in the Morning we must pursue our design.
What a false Queen is this, to take advantage and abuse his Trust! Malicious and jealous Devil! what mischief must this have bred had it come to Don Pedro's hands?
Yet I find by this, they are not in a readiness to exe∣cute any plot against us; And they shall find, though I stoop to the God that bears the bow, yet I will not hold the plough; My Heart and Mind shall become his Priest; no stooping Hind.
COme now, this is but singing a long Psalm, better re∣solve and leap into her Bed; When you are there, I must leave you; Don Thomaso has sent me the Clothes, and I'll be as fine as any of you to morrow.
Now do I tremble to go to head, lest she should roll me betwixt her fingers, or crack me like vermin against her bed∣post: But since it must be, come Captain, let's part like Friends; and if we do live to meet again, this danger will be mirth; Pray Captain get witness ready against the Morning, for I'll not lie with her another night without a grate betwixt us: This night will make my plea good in Law, else nothing but Honour should en∣gage me to charge her breach again.
And mine is such a small kitt, I fear I shall make no mu∣sick upon her; The little fool sits so quiet, and perches upon my Breast like a bird; I only chirrip to her when I call her, and she peeps me an answer like a Chicken.
HOw merry he was when he heard the design was not made to abuse him! only a trap to catoh the English∣man.
Yes, but I observed him; and he is angry still for all his mirth, and not displeased when he heard her face was cut.
His fall from the window was a worse bruise to his body then Edwardo's to his purse, and will be longer in recovering; to morrow we shall hear what her friends will do to revenge her; I am told the two Sisters and she are upon a design; Cornelio has confessed Thomaso set them on.
I would it were done, it might be some advantage to my business.
Sir, there's a Letter for you in the Window.
From whom?
That I know not, Sir; it was a woman brought it, some Caterpillar.
Send it in; is my Sister a bed?
A bed! it is almost day, Sir.
Was any body here to speak with her to night?
Not any body.
If there be any body inquires for her, give me notice; we must be early up, ho, to morrow; and, pray, send to invite Don Alphonso to dine with us, and resolve upon our business.
You must be sudden, you know she has a high spirit, and wants neither wit nor resolution to deliver her self from your pow∣er, if once she imagine your intention.
It is resolved, and I have already moved it to the Abbess, in case she should refuse; but I hope better, for she knows Thoma∣so lies this night with Angellica; which humour will take off the edge of a women's kindness, what ere they pretend, when she sees a man in the height of his wooing haunt the beds and conversations of common Whores; what can a discreet woman hope from him when he is surfeited upon her youth and beauty, that can now when a fancy and imagination labours in his longing mind, throw himself into the arms of every prostitute? but of this to morrow, it is late. Farewell.
YOu are early; is your Lady stirring?
Yes, Sir; she is early up, for she went not to bed; her Brothers stay, having notice of his intention, made us expect
to see the success, still resolved by the Garden gate to make our escape hither; nor will you wonder, Sir, at our trouble when you consider that Letter.
It is enough, I'll take care for all; and desire your Lady to be confident in her resolution, and she shall find all safety here, and in us a readiness such as our enemies dare not dispute.—Give this key to your Lady, and observe the door; when the Porter sees this, she may 
 pass without unveiling her self; I have given him his instructions.—The Devils sure are in the breasts of these women; what will their malice do, if they express their love thus dangerously? had this Letter come to Don Pedro's hand she had certainly died for it: and Thomaso is a beast not to burn Papers of such conse∣quince: this is Wine, and those Women are accursed that have a friendship where it is loved: for though it has a thousand friendships made, all women know how many secrets it hath be∣tray'd.
It is well, thank your Master; tell him I will not fail to observe his directions, and find him at his Cham∣ber.—I found her changed in my arms, she had not craft enough  to hide her anger; what a Dog was I not to burn the Letter? but see the difference betwixt a virtuous passion and a lustful flame; Serulina, busy to prevent my mischief, her noble mind forgot all my crimes to her; while the others, malicious and bloody, designed nothing less then the ruin of us all. But Love and Fortune, kinder then either my merit or hopes could pro∣mise, has blown over the storm; and now I know their malice, if I prevent it not, I ought to fall unpitied; it vexes me she should be guilty of so mean an action, because I thought her of a gal∣lant temper, but she's a common Whore; and this life of mine, that which some men may pass some months in for humour, but no trade for men of honour; Wisdom and Conscience bids us seek a Nest ere Age and Diseases find us; and where we spend our youth with Faith and Love, there man ought to expect patience for the impertinence of Age: it is sad to be out of doors in the Winter of our Age. A gray Wanderer is but a bad Tragedy to himself, though an old Beggar may be a Comedy to others: These thoughts, and the noble nature of this virtuous Maid, have made me resolve to abjure this humour; and having bid farewell to all the follies of my youth vow my whole thoughts to the friendship of the fair Serulina; a maid, whose Dower and Beauty may satisfy an avaricious heart and a wandering eye; yet those
are blessings may be found in other women; but her mind is a single virtue, and to me constant kind, her love a chaste full stream, which no out-lets of friendship, or likings, has exhausted or lessened. The stream always bent on one object; and my heart shall faith∣fully meet her, and the Wanderer shall in this friendship prove he has in all his past flames but practised how to love. Yet Paulina's kindness is as remarkable as the malice and treachery of the rest; poor Pauline, for whom I have still regret; whose kind heart has endured the test, and is of all ill women that I have known the best.
MArried!
Yes, married.
Two days since, to the Monsters; and so privately, it is yet a secret to Don Thomaso; only Cornelio and the Mountebank were of the plot, by virtue of whose Powder they were won; their Guardian too consented, and has his share in the Portions; and the Brides are now at Thomaso's house, where they have prepared a public dinner.
Hell upon their luck, they are as rich as Peru; and those Vagabonds will only remit their money home, and leave them.
It is but justice; the Jews their Parents cozened the poor of a Nation to give it to these Monsters; and it is but equal the Jew their Guardian should revenge their trust.
Come, we have no time left to lose in talking; our de∣sign expects us; and if all hit right we may light other Torches then Hymens yet ere night.
Their feast will advance our business, and make them less curious to observe or suspect our motions; Sanco the Rogue has failed us, I met him this morning as gay and fine as the Sun, and flowers in June, going in all haste to Court; and promises himself some fortune by my Powder: but he shall find I have malice too, such as shall to the Guard betray the impostor, and make him in the Galley find my Quondam Father Boat-swain, fit for such a Rogue a Foister.
At the corner of the Piazza we will expect you, where from the Carmelites we may stand and see which way he takes; and when it is done it is but stepping in and we are safe, or pass through the Venetian Ambassadors which is but three doors off.
Take no care for us; be but secret and silent, and leave us to our fortune.
THe news; where are they? will they come?
Yes, Sir; they will follow immediately; but I found them and the house in such a confusion, it is a Jubilee at home; there is a whole Kitchen full of Cooks at work all over the yard, and such loads of Meat and Wine.
What cause, prithee, for all this joy, or rather madness? this is Freds fooling, a piece of country wit, always out of season; you shall find him play M. Justice Over-do to day in spite of coun∣sell, I perceive the Plot; now do they intend to surprise us with a Wedding dinner, which may, perhaps, give such an alarm to her Brothers jealousy as will beget some more mischief, or hasten the old; A pox upon them and their Grand Jury jests; they are as un∣seasonable here as long Graces at their feast.
Your worship is mistaken, Sir, in the cause; they are both married, and have been these two days.
Married!
Yes, Sir, to the two monsters the Captain used to speak of; I saw them both, one sits in the yard, for the house will not hold her; she's as big as the Saint Christopher in Nostre Dame, and the other looks like the Christo upon his shoulders.
Did thou see them?
I saw them, Sir, and the Mountebank with'em, whose Powder got them; they'll be here immediately, and resolve you themselves.
This is what I have always prophesied; marry two Mon∣sters! what chicken-hearted Rogues are these to be cowed with one misfortune!
What work this story will make in Town! By this light, there will be no living in Madrid for and English-man; the very name will entitle us to Green Hats; see where they come.
Save thee, sweet soul, and thy friend; what, how goes business? is this the day thou vow'st to Hymen? twill be a nati∣onal Wedding I see.
But is it for certain you two have done this horrible thing?
Yes, By this light, we have done it, By this fire, By this sound, By these clothes, it is done and done, a bargain y'faith, wed∣ded and bedded, which we believe no small action; and it was I that encountered with the Giant.
This is the common trick of Rogues; when they have done an ill act to stand in it; and these are grown as impudent as carted Bawds.
As Friends we ask your mercy in this case; and if you be good men you will have mercy upon our beasts too.
But'tis a Monster, an ugly Monster.
Not so, she has Beauties, divers and sundry Beau∣ties, which I can really enjoy, and shall last Ages; a House and Family, fed and furnished, me thinks a pleasing Beauty: her Hand has another grace, for the Beauty of her mark one∣lie finds credit, and her Bills are honoured through the World; Come Thomaso, he that has Money has all; Money speaks sense, It is Beauty, it is Honour; and he that has it not shall find the rest but idle nothings: What care I to keep any Mans Opinion, or any Women's friendship: when the old will not I'll buy new; Money will make a Liar speak true; you see the virtue of a Wager, the new Philosophical Argument lately found out to decide all hard Questions.
These Trappings are the Beauties of our Brides, they give no Ribbons nor Braids of Hair; when I would wear her Favours she can fell a thousand Acres of Wood, Excremental Beauties which their Estate can better spare, and twill grow sooner again than a Lock of Hair; from those Lil∣lies with the white Faces which you believed had so tied up our hearts; No, Child, we have learned to choose better; for besides these Beauties of the House and Field, you shall see standing at the Door four Foot-men and a Velvet Coach, with six Flanders Graces more, which wait ready to hurry us to those Pleasures that expect us; for these Keys open all Doors.
And what becomes of all our Vows in Croydon? the bowed Two-pence and the Garter which was given with tears because the Present spoiled the Pair; that Garter so be∣kissed and worn till it was a lousy Relic? All is forgot I see; the Cream and Sugar is digested too, and all the memo∣rye of Sack-Possets, though eaten with the same Spoon, that dainty way of expressing a Country passion, so to eat each others Slaver, quite abolished, all; neither that nor the Charms of Valentine, plucked Daisies, nor Yarrow, St. Inn's Vision, nor her Fast, nor Ground-Willow under her Lovers Head, charms now: All these Magic Rites, believed as oft as tried, and con∣firmed by a •ea with nine, when in stepped Ned and Fred, whose Names had been the Night before nine times chosen out of the Ashes; and what crowns all, the sacred Tomes of Ptolomy, who with In and In sent us to Holy the first and second for that For∣tune which she and you then believed next (if not before) the Holy Writ; but all these steps of Love a Monster has trod out with her Herculean foot.
Yes, that monster is my Wife, and at worst but my Trade; and good severe Sir, will you not allow a man an honest Calling to get a Living by? You'll sail a storm at Sea in a stink∣ing
ship and be lousy, starved and roasted under several Climes for the gain of so much per cent. or flatter a faithless Tradesman, or a less faithful Court, and wait upon Preferment till a Dropsy swell your Legs; Why, this Monster is my Place at Court, my Ship at Sea, my Vocation; and when Honour calls me here I charge, and Custom will reconcile all; and the danger grows so common I shall not fear it; and for a little patience here I purchase all my pleasure.
You or he will let the Dog that loves you kiss you, and cherish every beast that's kind to you; Is our case worse, what, for their money live with these tame beasts? and is it not better to suffer for a time the Worlds nine days Wonder, than an Ages scorn, for being a perpetual Cuckold, as thousands are, who vow to that faithless thing called Beauty? Our houses may be haunted with Wonderers; but we are sure to find no Lovers there; for my small Bird is so lean she's neither good in the Field nor Bed, which makes me securenone of Cupid's Falkoners will fly at her; And for Ned's, I would fain see him that dares attempt her Honour either by force or flattery.
And when young Ascupat shall be born wilt thou make him a Christian Giant, or no? Sir Bevis of Croydon, by this hand Ned, if it were mine it should never be christened; a baptised Giant sounds sneakingly; the last holy one you see shrunk from Christophoro to S. Kit. Prithee let thine be an Ethnic Knight and run wilde in the Wilde of Kent, a Pagan of the Pagans in Surry, and breed some new Romances; only breed him a Ca∣valier, that he may fight with the Palmerines, Olivers, and the Rolands of the Age, for the Legislative Lady, and I promise thee a Patent to show him thy self; a favour, but that you are a Friend to the Master of the Revels, you should not easily obe∣tain, the showing your own Monster; and twill be worth your care, betimes, lest some Committee be appointed to do it; Thou art undone if thou dost not prevent it, they will so imbezel thy Monster.
Sir, Calis is at door.
Tell her we are all ready, and will follow her immediately—Come, we are expected; Calis has given the sign.
And what is it we are to do, besides being laughed at? if that be all we'll return; for there are two Pots boiling, in whose Porrage we are concerned two hundred thou∣sand deep.
We must be all in a readiness to attend the Design where∣in Serulina is concerned; if it thrive we shall have a home too; but that's not all, for Harrigo tells me that Cornelio has betrayed us to Lucetta; and she knows it was we that set the Bravo's to cut her face; that and the Serulina's being at my house, Harrigo's message
to her, All, all is betrayed; and we have only this morning to pre∣vent their mischief; which now we are warned of if we fall into we deserve no pity.
Come, let's away; be you sure to strike first, let that be the sign; and if we do not make some of them stand off we'll fall by them; What a pox, abuse me, and think I dare not be angry?
The Ambassador's Coach and Servants attend us, but we must not let them appear in the Piazza, for giving jealousy; the only thing I conjure you as friends is, not to let your passion transport you if any accident happen, so as to pursue your re∣avenge rather than our Design; but keep together, and that woman you see me take by the hand, do what lies in friends to protect her from those that shall attempt us.
The Porter will be ready at the Gate to receive all those that retire thither.
It is enough, we are instructed.
It is late, I wonder Don Pedro comes not; Thomaso I fear suspected my being displeased, he was so serious and so silent when we parted; Are you sure my Letter was delivered to Don Pedro last night?
Either last night, or early this morning.
Then I hope, he is now about the Design; Come get our old veils, and hide elose, if you see Don Pedro as we pass, speak to him that he meet me at the Carmelites; my heart will find no peace till she be disposed of.
THere they are; Come Ladies, this Disguise is so thin we see through it.
Pray Sir, let us go; we wonder you are not in disguise too, it is a strange confidence; considering your injuries, that you dare be seen; it is so poor and so mean an impudence as makes us scorn to
converse with such white Spaniards: you Castilians! and suffer your swords, Sister, and Mistress, to be taken from you by a flock of Dutch-men, a Band of Gipsies, a Troop of vagabond wandering strangers, an old cashiered Corporal and his Squadron.
Switzers with two coloured Coats, Knaves of divers co∣lours, black and white Knaves, such Proteans a Lady knows not when to love or hate them; dissembling Knaves that make women kiss them when they should beat them; froward Rogues that scratch Ladies faces; Fie upon them, go, go, naughty men; come give me a stroke, I'll beat them.
It is well Sir, and an easy thing to wound a naked woman; but though I bear his mark, if we strike not as deep in our re∣avenge let them despise us, as we do you for being such tame Dons, such muzzled Knights that dare only be furious when women dis∣please you, and yet let these wandering strangers put Bits in your mouths, command and ride you, spur your sides till your hearts are galled, and yet you neither kick nor stumble before them; See if we prove such Jadey slaves as to suffer this—
Pray let's follow them; twill be good sport to see them tear his hair and scratch his eyes.
I have no great expectation nor apprehension from their anger; I know their humour too well; but believe it, the Angeli∣caes is a resolved hatred, and likely to make a mischief; for he has used her so coursely that she rages without all bounds.
I am glad to see him pay my scores there, for she uses me as ill as he uses her, but I shall spoil his great design, and put him in worse company, and fill his mind with lower thoughts.
Were that once past, and she in the Monastery, you would quickly see his fire of straw burnt out.
FOllow close, I saw him cross the Piazza, we'll step into this Church, at the corner you'll be sure to meet him.
Walk not so fast, people observe it.
There they go; and those Soldiers are they Bravo's; mark them and be ready, left they attempt us.
Attempt us! why they are fewer than we; Prithee let's beat them first; I'll pick his message out of his mouth with my Dagger; What a pox, it shall never be said, Three Rogues made four of us walk muffled in Madrid.
Prithee be quiet, the Game plays it self, only keep an eye upon them.
See the Angellica and Anna; let us step into the Church till they are past.
I saw Don Pedro follow us; stay at the Corner and deliver your message.
Did you see him, Calis?
Yes, Madam, they are before; and We shall overtake them at the Church.
Be diligent, dear Calis, for all is at stake, my whole peace laid down; It is our first, and last venture, if Fortune frown.
Walk softly, Madam, it is he, I'll turn, and speak to him.
Who are these that stand at the Church door?
By my life Don Pedro is one of them; step off, and stand close, for I see Don Thomaso coming.
So, now I have my Ends too, and perhaps those wits will be caught, and their scores paid by some as malicious as them∣selves. Con is a fool, yes, yes; But the fool has money and Clothes too.
Lost, undone, for ever ruined.
So may all Treacherous Villains be rewarded.
There lie, insolent, and false; now boast the Affronts you have done us.
Come away, Ladies, there is no staying here.
Bloody Villains, ha! what's here; by my life, it is she; I know the Ribbon, there is the sign; Harrigo, Edwardo, Ferdinando, hold, as you love me, here's our business.
Don Harrigo?
Calis? it is she, struck with the mistake of the Clothes.
Do you follow, let me alone to carry her off.
SHot?
I, Shot dead they say, and see where he lies.
Bloody Devils; see where they stand at the Church-door, and brave the Act.
So, that work is well over; Now let's see what is become of that unlucky fool; who have we here? Don Pedro and his Com∣pany, have they a hand in it? Sir, this is an Action both unworthy your birth, &amp; Profession, to set a Murderer to revenge your quarrel.
Death, why do you talk with him, have they not Swords by their sides? beat them till they draw.
Let's fight for our Lives, it is better then be shot like birds sitting; is this your Spanish Gallantry? draw your sword, Sir.
Hold, what needs this fury?
Be not rash in your passion; Our innocence makes us pass by your trouble, which we know ought to be concerned in a friends Murder, though we scorn the guilt of so base an action; and though there were some reasons to make me unsatisfied with your friend, yet I scorn such a Revenge; and there stand those that will not deny the Act; it is true, I heard they had some design upon him; But, by my life and honour, I could not imagine it had been bloody, only some mirth to return his Jest; else it had been easy to have pre∣vented this mischief, which I should have gladly done; for by my life, I not only loved, but valued him.
This Lazy Villain stays so long with the Surgeon too. Sir, We beg your pardon; For finding you upon the Place, and ha∣avenge notice of your displeasure, it looked as if you would have avowed the action; and I am glad with all my soul to find Don Pe∣dro Innocent.
Sir, I love my Sister, and shall with all honour endeavour the making of her happy; but if there be no way to compass it with∣out a Murder, it is a rate at which I shall neither purchase hers nor mine own happiness; Nor did I ever urge any thing injurious against Thomaso, for I always esteem d him a Gentleman, and a Soldier; One, to whom (I confess) she owes her life and honour; an Oblige∣tion I would gladly have paid at a cheaper price then a Sister.
See, he stirs, Help Fred.
So, now they will find their Error, and my malicious Friends repent their Folly.
Ha! Cornelio!
Yes, Gentlemen, it is Cornelio.
Ha, the Captain!
What Devil put this Ass in the Lyons skin? We are all un∣done, and forfeit to his scorn, and the Justice too; lost and destroyed by a mistake, and shall perish without Revenge; who went for the Surgeon?
I am glad it is no worse; though this be a sad accident, yet the safety of the other will allay the grief, and this mischief but just, for I am confident he was guilty of the design, and has through all the day played the spy among us.
Saretta, how came this wretched fool in these Clothes?
I'll inform you; Do you see this Lady? how do's her good∣nos upbray'd thy malice, that coldest, for the Revenge of a Jest, design the murder of her Friend? Especially knowing how false the pretence of Sister is; which though she was content to hide, for In∣terest, yet it was folly to believe she would with a lie, and a Murder, satisfy thy malice; fear not, Pauline; Thy good nature shall find friends, when justice and shame has made Saretta hide her head. And in short, Know, we heard your Bravos had no other mark to di∣stinguish Thomaso by; then those Clothes which made us fit them to a person, who, you see, is taken in his own Plot.
And, for you, Lady bright, that thought to have had me cold meat in your Kitchen; By this light, I will have that Nose, and flay thee here at the Church door; do not think it is your scratched face shall excuse you.—And but that I fear the  whores blood is so envenomed it would spoil a good sword, the earth should not save thee now.
Hold, prithee, it is the Hangmans Office; he bleeds them twice a year with a whip.
It is well nature has armed you against us; But if I had thought our Revenge would have been thus slow, I would not have been within the danger of your threats now.
Sir, this is no time to give you the particulars; else I am confident I could remove all your displeasureagainst this poor girl.
What do you amuse your self at in this mistake? haste, and save your sister; Your modest Maiden sister; I saw her fall in a swooned at the shot, while Thomaso and another put her into the Ambassadors Coach; She, you, and I, are all lost, if not im∣mediately prevented.
My Sister? This Rape shall be dearly paid for; Can∣not a Virgin pay her devotions to the Church without violence? Sure there is Law and Power enough to revenge this.
Yes faith, the Gentlewoman is gone; and that damned Soldier has all to be married her by this time; What a fool it is, to neglect the Angellica for Serulina? There's not above two hun∣dred thousand Crowns to boot; Nay, nay, be no angry sweet heart, nor do not frown, we'll find thee another man.
Fools cannot Anger me, especially Stripped, beaten, cozened fools; I despise their Anger and their praise; and it was all my Quar∣rel with Thomaso, for keeping such mouths company, such Monster-Mongers; and he was in the right in his answer; Alas, what can one expect from Hobynoles, that are cut out of Fools Timber? Prithee
enquire out Fairs and Feasts, and join betimes with some motion men, and go halfs in your Monsters; If your Comrade had not been another kind of man you might have drawn like a Team, in your Trots, ever any Jade of you all had found a Stable in my house; who now, I fear, is gone for ever.
No matter, would thy heart were burst with Envy, or with Grief; and may thy Love turn to as great a mischief to thy self, as it has been a Curse to us.
No, no, shoe's wise, a shrewed crafty One, a witch of Loom∣birdie; she Cozened? not she; her thousand Crowns is but put to use; Thomaso, you know, is turned Banker; Faith I would you had some more Bags to spare, here is a poor Cozened fool would so love you for them, so sigh out all your Praises; I can flatter too, and you know what a pleasure it is to be cozened in good Language.
It was your vanity and Madness set him up; His starved soul was tame and lean before, till your folly cherished the Frozen Viper, who now has bit us all; What do we stay here for? to Invite and Tempt the Justice? Let's away and preserve Our selves; Who knows but we may yet gain a Revenge; it was Paulina's falsehood betrayed us all.
I can resolve of nothing, my mind is so divided.
PRay be at Peace with your self, and all other storms will cease; Harrigo has sent word there is no danger of Death, the shot having struck no mortal part. I confess, This mis∣chief had like to have spoiled all, had not my Trick been better then theirs; For the Bravo had no other mark to know me by; with which I paid two debts, his Treachery, and my Promise; But I must acknowledge my life and safety to poor Pauline.
Where are your Friends? are they in safety?
From all but their Monsters.
Pray be serious, are they married?
It is most certain; why do you Tremble now? when by a Miracle all is safe, and your self, the chief part of our Care, in a Place where no Injury can touch you?
I am not troubled now; But you cannot expect to find the mind quiet as soon as the Reason; The Alarm my fears took cannot be so soon composed; you must allow some time to place a∣gain what the storm disordered; It is but a Minute since I found my self miserable; and this change of happy Fortune had like to have finished with Joy the dangers which despair begun; Nor shall I find a perfect peace till my Brother and you are friends; and here I make it my first suit to you, that you will for my sake bear with his Passion; And as he by an Extravagant Anger may express the value of a Sister he conceives lost; so you will show your Esteem of me, by bearing patiently his Injury.
I were most unworthy of your Commands, if they did not bind me above all Interest or Passion; But this is a Command so agreeable to my own wish, that I am obliged to it by mine Inclination as well as Obedience, which shall always speak me a faithful and an humble Servant.
Were this storm over, how happy should we be!
It is over; only the fear remains which thus raises these billows in your Heart.
UNdone, undone; Fool that I was, covetous, unthankful Fool, undone, for ever undone.
Slave, Cheat, Villain, Thief; thou shalt die no other death but boiling in thine own broth to a damned jelly, spoon-meat for the Devil thy Master, slave.
Fred!
Ned! 
O Cursed Rogue, two hundred thousand Crowns in pore∣rage! Let's fley the Rogue ere we boil him, he'll be the tenderer for the old Devils tooth; A Crooked Rogue with a wry Soul too; he'll lie in the dish like a starved Hen with two breast-bones; a car∣rion slave, how he looks!
This was your doings, Ned; I am bound to curse thee; he has spoiled the finest little tidy Jewel of a wife, just a wife and no more; Fool, that I was, I must be trying conclusions, and make a Monster of a miracle.
And I, that had all things in plenty; Fool, dull Fool, fortune and wife enough for a Parish, to lose all in a Cullice! I have sought and skumm'd the pot, and cannot find a bit of her; I am afraid the Devil and the Cook were agreed to rob the pot of the whole flesh; what a mess of Eve and pudding will the Lecher have to his Supper!
Alas Gentlemen, I am not too blame; your wine and kindness made me forget some Rules; I shall never love Mace, nor top again; I told you then my brain was weak, nor am I faulty; I did my part, and prepared your Baths fit for my experiment; A nobler work had never been done, nor prouder Subject of my Art will never be shown, had not that cursed Wine made us forget to limit the operation and proportion in the charm, to such or such a form; you should have named some body for similitude or shape; you should have seen what miracle our skill would have performed; But I too late, remember your dispute, (which was handsomest) held you so long in resolving, drinking to this, and admiring that Beauty, till you forgot to resolve on one whose name but called on in the Charm had stood the form or mould to have cast your wives in. And now when Wine and delay, (your own Crimes) have un∣done us all, unjustly you punish the chance on me, though your nwo Heart knows the Charm was of high force, and wrought but too effectually.
And is there no remedy then? must mine continue in this horrid form?
Nor no retrieving my wife, is she absolutely lost in fumo? Is it possible to fix the broth again and recover her? No Art to save so much as is useful of her? Only so much, good Sir, as will make a wife but to stand good in Law; I desire no more, pray will you use your Interest with his Highness the Devil, to spare me so much of my wife; there will be enough to make him merry besides.
Alas, it is neither in Art nor Nature to relieve you; For I confess, the parings, or chips, as we call them, which the Charm has hand from the Giant, are the Devils fees by contract; for which he is bound in exchange to furnish so much of his own store as wanted to build your Dwarf; And your Worship knows, how impossible twill be to get a pound of sweet women's flesh out of his hungry kitchen.
Why then, mine is more then three parts Devil.
Not so, Sir! the stock is only Devil, the graft was your own little wife inoculated.
Now, hast thou found my wife?
Yes, Sir; We have found her at last, but we were fain to strain the broth from her first, and then we found her lying in the Herbs; It is a fine little Gentlewoman, and she sleeps still.
And mine, Rogerò, prithee how does she bear her burden?
Yours, Sir, is lusty, and walks about the house, starts, and wonders at her self; seems angry with her own shadow, then frowns, and listens as if she were frighted; she will not believe she is her self; yet she knows me, and wonders why I call her by her name; she asks for you, then pinches and pricks her self till she squeaks again, ere she would believe that load at her back and bell∣lie belonged to her; in earnest, Sir, it is a sad sin to wrong them thus.
Gentlemen, is the Report true? have you murdered your wives? The Town is full of such a mischief.
Fie, no Sir; murdered them? my wife's gone out just be∣fore you; we only tried the foolish experiment of the Baths, which the famous man professes that sold us the admirable powder.
What Baths?
Those of excellent virtue, which make a Dwarf a Giant, or Gyantize a Dwarf; rendering any person bathed there∣in, great or little, as you desire; And we, to express our Affections to our dear wives, willing to spare no cost, forsooth, when their good was concerned, employed this Artist to prepare two privately; which, by a mistake, or rather omission of some Ceremonies, the unlimited remedies have wrought a little beyond our desires, and have boiled away so much of my wife, as I fear the remainder will be of no use; But she is very well in health, and the heartiest little thing, as much Soul as ever; what was a Marble Rock before is contracted into a Diamond; if you'll please to go in; you shall see her, she lies so fine and quiet in her cradle; but she'll grow every day now the Spring comes on.
And mine had a mischance to be cast into an evil mould, and is come out like a wry bullet; But we'll mend all these mis∣fortunes, by being the best Husbands; and you must speak a good word for us to reconcile the business, and we will yet be more grateful to you for past kindness; Come, Ned, let's wait on our noble Kinsman to dinner, and drink down this sorrow.
Gentlemen, this is no drinking nor jesting matter; I must desire you'll restore the money and Jewels you have re∣reived; Besides an Account, before the Justice of both my wards; where your unlawful using of witchcraft to win them, and now to murder them, shall be presented to the Inquisition; who, I hope, will not see a couple of lewd Heretics to murder their Wives, and rob the true Heirs of the Estate; I'll find the Justice for you, and he shall sing your Epithalamium.
Witchcraft and Murder? Fine points for a Member of the English Church to answer in a Spanish Inquisition! Now do I smell the faggots and the fire, or a rope, for fooling.
Not only lose our fortunes, but come to make a Holly-day for idle folks! For my part, I am so angry at my luck I care not if I be hanged; it is all the remedy that's left us; Pox on it, it is but an ill quarter of an hour; and when it is past, let Fortune kiss me where I sat a Saturday; I'll even go hang my self, and be revenged of a Croydon fool.
I and Thomaso how he'll Triumph upon this second chance! His Tongue will sting worse then the Boatswains pissle, if our sentence do find so much grace as the Galley.
But first we'll spoil your Quacking, Sirrah, you dog; Help Fred, by this flesh, you go into your own porrage; and let me alone to call upon your proportion, as high as my wife, and four times as big, with a stomach equal; I'll secure you from the Galleys, 
 Sirrah.
Oh noble Gentlemen, have mercy upon me, let my Art plead; You know who dies with me, the age is wounded, Nations will perish with my secrets; No mercy! no pity! Spare me and I'll redeem all yet.
So, there's one Rogue fitted.
There are three in already, who are they?
No matter who, I have taken an order for their size; We'll have such a nest of Giants to revenge my quarrel against the Country; I hope they'll plant again the race of true Moors and Saracens in this damned Nation; four such Giants will destroy them with two of the three Curses, Sword, and Famine; I am sure Ca∣stile cannot feed them, nor fight with them without Auxiliaries; I am resolved I'll fly this unlucky clime.
There are some Gentlemen without desire to speak with you
Prithee call them in.
More mischief yet! what fart blew them hither?
Gentlemen, I come to inquire for a Sister; I am told
she knows the way to this House, and so shall I if not restored.
Have you lost a Sister, is it a great or little Sister?
She was no Monster, Sir.
It was strange, considering who claims her.
This Injury will not pass thus; we shall find a way to take a serious and a strict account from some of you.
Sir, there are none here but what are in the pot; We have no leisure to think of you nor your losses; We have business and losses of our own; Our Wives and two hundred thousand Crowns boiled to nothing, cozened and cheated by a damned Mountebank; but the slave is in pickle for it.
Yes, Sir; it is we that are cozened the second and third time, fools in grain, and stand fair to burnt or hanged too; Judge then whether we are in stealing case; A pox on Bathing, I shall never love broth nor spoon-meat again; Would any man have thought liquor would have been our Enemy?
Come, Sir; let's lose no time, you see she is not here, and haste to the Ambassadors; you may stay short, while I can inform my self.
Where is the Guardian?
Gone, Sir, long since.
Gone? Hark, Fred; There is no dallying nor fooling in this case; therefore let us haste, and pack up the money, and save our selves in the Ambassadors House, before the Justice seize us; we shall never be Innocent if they know we have that guilt about us; and let Rogero shut up all the doors, and follow us when he has done.
MY Heart's at ease since I saw the mistake; and it was but Justice to let that seditious fool fall into that mis∣chief he designed for others; It was he that embroiled us all; the necessitous fool, to get a fleece from every man flock, plaid the woolf one day, and the Shep-herd another.
I was amazed at nothing more then to hear them brag that you would join in the Murder of one you loved.
And I wonder at your Sisters Hatred.
Sister? That's a story I shall clear some other time.
You have reason, and we ought to consider our safety; for though we are both innocent from the blood of that fool, yet we know how busy the Justice will be to squeeze as many into the guilt as he can, either as Accessories, or Actors in the crime; Therefore I'll take my leave of you, and retire to the Venetian Ambassador's; where my people will, by this, expect me with what they can save of value in my House.
I believe I shall be safe under the English Arms, from whence (since we have made this Friendship) you shall con∣stantly hear from me.
Pray let me; and be so just to let him know how inno∣cent I have been in this design; and all my crimes were but so many loves of him.
ARe you serious?
I, by this unlucky day, undone for ever; not only lost the Birds but our selves too; unless with these feathers we can make us wings to fly to our safety, if you will not protect us from the Justice and their Guardian.
That Guardian is a Jew, a Rogue, I know him, and he'll undo you all; a Bath say you, lost in a Bath!
You know what the Mountebank professed the other day; see, here are his Papers, this is his Powder, and a sovereign one; I'd not give this Dose for the best Diamond in Europe: now the secrets gone, do not taste it, unless you mean to run mad for love of me; and I have vexations enough without the addition of such a mischief. Travel, Quoth you? a month of such days as I have past will give a man experience enough to be a Witch, if he be so unlucky as to scope hanging.
And what wilt thou do with that Powder?
I'll travel till I find some small Princess that pleases me, and give it her; with a dose of this I can choose my woman through the world; and it were not for that satisfaction this loss would kill me.
Nay, By this hand, I'll betray him; he has a Plot upon the Angellica with it; she's handsome and rich; and I heard him swear, even now, he thought he should never thrive till he had married one of your seasoned Grass-widows.
By my troth, I had as live take her as a Caged Nymph, a mewed Maid from a Grate in a Nunnery that acts what she can, and wishes the rest; whose Maiden-head is a prisoner at the best: all this and more I am armed against; and foresaw your mirth and scorn when I got her, and the joy now when you should hear I had lost her: but I am resolved, if my Powder do not thrive, to put half my stock in a venture, and away for the Indies, and live where these stories were never heard of.
The Indies!
Yes, the Indies; where we are promised six black wives a piece, smooth and comely beauties, naked truths, Eves, in the state of innocence, Girls that will neigh and fight for my bed.
Bless the man! three couple of Moors in thy bed! they'll hunt thee to death.
Hunt their hunt, we are resolved, Sir; six plump, smooth, pregnant Girls a piece is the bargain, with flat-noses all, for conve∣niency of kissing, with brave swelled lips, Cupids Cushions; so soft and sweet, the Rogues dew is sweet in the Dog-days; their very
sweat Aromatic and Balsam all; upon these we resolve to plant a Croydon Justice, and an Essex Captain of the tame bands; and I warrant thee the seed will thrive.
Your Fourbisher, your Magellan, your Drake and Roly; all consent your Moors woman has no fellow in nature; she's your black Garden-mould, the same rich earth Adam dug in, so full of nature and strength the Sun dwells in her; and will send forth such Clusters of Boys and Girls, such straw, and such an ear, so full, so clean, the Cradles will not hold the Barnes: our bar∣ren cold red and white clay knows no such harvest; all the streams the Sun sucks from the parched earth you will find in the woman there, as full and luscious as the Greek Vine; and it is true pleasure to pluck a Girl there, so full of juice she'll fill the Press; and there women show their true virtue and their use.
Methinks Edwardo is an apt Scholar; and now you are leaving the world, given over by Matrimony to a wedded Bed, even make your will, and entail your Bachelors opinion on him; I would see this Testament signed, for I perceive he's resolved to suc∣ceed you in the Wanderer; and twill not be an ill journey, Sir, though I'm afraid it will be a long one if you travel till you lose the Justice of Peace: consider upon the business till I return; I must be gone for fear my stay may bring some misfortune to poor Pauline, who will suffer if I provide not for her safety; and her kindness deserves all our care.
Dear Harrigo, find her, and use all possible means to bring her here.
Leave that to me; but you must not fail to give her a pre∣sent for old kindness sake, since you resolve to see her no more.
I shall not need, there is one within will do it for me, who resolved it as soon as I told her it was she that saved my life: and she now is as kind to Pauline as I have been, and loves her for loving me; she longs to see her, and hopes to persuade her into a Monastery.
I'll be gone; but pray be you two private here till I in∣form my self how your business stands with the Justice; and twill not be amiss to accuse the Guardian of conspiracy, and try if you can fright him from the pursuit; I'll ask counsel in the business.
Well, Sir; how goes your business? better I hope then ours.
I am married too, and settled, I believe, for a hundred years, or so; if I fall not into a kettle.
Well, Sir; let the Kettle boil; and know her Brother is in pursuit of you; he came to our house to inquire, Pox upon the sad hour, it is full of unbidden guests I fear by this time; we durst not stay to eat our dinner; and if you give us not some food and remedy for care, a bottle or two apiece to chide sorrow, we are lost; all the foes of man arm against us.
I warrant you for meat; those days of affliction are over sure; a Wife and no meat! it were sin as well as folly to beg single,
and double too; no, Ned; I always told you when ever I married I would be happy and honest.—See who comes here; Sweet heart,  prithee, let me present my widowed friends to you.
They are most welcome, and so are all that bear that title.
What a delicate taste an honest women's lips have above a small sinners? I shall never relish a Whores again, I fear; I won∣der what Country my good fortune is fled to; I have neither Pow∣der, Wife nor Whore, to build upon; was ever Gentleman-travel∣ler so out of Cash and Conversation as I am? would I were at Pa∣ris, or the Hague, again; did I leave those places of pleasure and quiet civil life to come to this where mischiefs only swarm; whose very air is lousy, and that curse would destroy the Country but for another curse that wars with it, that of the dust which flies so hot it would fire powder as it passes; every sand is so many sparks in the air: yet here we walk in this furnace without a miracle.
Nay, then I despair of thee; can one affliction make thee compare Holland to Spain? Oh the Fish-pots and Butter of that Egypt without a River; whose Mist of ignorance hangs upon them still, and though the English Olivers rod be over them, yet their hearts are hardened against poor Cavaliers; I thought this heat would have sweat out all the kindness thou suck'dst in with Rotor∣dam Beer: but I'm afraid twill stay as long as the gravel in the Kidneys; the fruits of Hop's, Turnips, and Pickl'd-herrings which paves the back.
For all this Satire, the Flesh and Fish is such as your Ma∣drid has not shown us the like in her lean Shambles and starved Markets, where the Priests are fain to conjure for Fish, by throwing Tubfuls of Tripes into the water; and then by virtue of a Bull by Ignatius's name, command that they be fish; and they have faith enough to eat it afterword, and swear there is bones in it too, tran∣substantiated Tripes: a true Papist Catholic would distinguish what fish he eats with bread of yesterday; for there is nothing but the Wafer baked in the City, and it is well they have this trick of fishing by miracle; for that which comes naturally to the Mar∣ket, those in the Zodiac are as fresh and sweet, and lay less in the Sun then the Salmon we eat last; it walked like a vision before us for twenty days upon a Mule; and yet past for fresh, even at the Catholic Kings own board. You used to eat such at Woods in the Hague?
Who will deny Holland has Fish, or who can say they have Flesh? By this light, their Flesh is Fish, and their Fowl fly-Turf; their Birds but feathered Fish; and their Fish finn'd Mud: all you see, smell or taste, is Fish; it is indeed so many Provinces of Fish-street.
Yet I have seen you sigh and dye for one of these dishes of Milk; Mademoiselle, what do you call her, Ned?
Skel-fish.
Pish, Mademoiselle.
Van Knowles, Van Cates.
Prithee leave fooling; Lord, Ned, you know her; it is the Ufrow Van—
Stoff, or Cabillio?
The Heer Van—
Forman, Skipper, Crves and Buord?
Nay, then you are resolved.
By this hand, I have named all the great Names and Fa∣miles in the Country, except the Royal Orange; which they have so squeezed with a clinch, they shall be sure to have my curse.
Yet last year they were so fair, so white, so smooth, so proper; I have seen you frown and sigh at the sight; the grand Mistress shall know what a Knight she has of you.
One Swallow makes no Summer; though it is confessed the flesh is white, and such as if I would eat a Girl it should be a Dutch-girle, a North Holland child, it is pure Vitello, Mungany, or Capon de Lecho, as white and sweet as either; and when it is weaned, the Pigs, her Foster Brothers, that sucked with her, are as good as she; In earnest, Madam, a Rotterdams Pig, taken from my Ho∣stesses own breast; dost remember, Ned, when we stole the Sows∣baby out of the Cradle where the kind Nurse had hid it? it was cruel Ned that killed it: the Neighbours ran together at the cry; and as if we had killed her first born, it put all the house in mourning, till Sack and Sugar allayed the grief.
I remember it was at the Saint John's head, and it proved the purest Babe of grace; it would have tempted a Jew as it lay in the dish; old Satan of the Disser, and a Scot his Host, in spite of  Moses fell to the Roast.
It was where we met Ambassador Will, and Resident Tom, with M. Sheriffs Secretary, John the Poet with the Nose; all Gondiberts dire Foes; from Poland laden with the spoils of what do you lack, Sir; and all the Scotch Peddlers Packs on their backs, Sir.
I am pleased to find you all in so good humour; and would bear my part were my Brother and you friends in your heart.
The Ambassador sent a civil Message to him; and had an Answer both kind and serious, and is now gone himself to speak with him; and I believe all will end in Comedy, since Co•nelio's mischief is not mortal; this story of the Baths will make fit mirth for a Wedding.—Harrigo, haste thou found her?
Yes, she's without, but ashamed, and afraid both; to see your Lady; shall I fetch her in?
Yes, pray Don Harrigo, I long to see her.
No, I'll do it my self; for there is nothing of shame be∣longs to the kindness of yesterday; the obligations of to day bear their own date; and faults hereafter are crimes to you; what's past is upon mine own score.
Come, no more tears; I would not have you stain my wedding day with your griefs; it is ominous to weep on Hymens Al∣tar; pray be not sad.
There is a guilt and shame, as well as sadness in these tears; and I must hope for nothing but certain misery from your joys; your virtue may smile, you have all the causes joy can bring you; in birth happy, in love and fortune blessed, and in innocence, which crowns the rest. Yet heaven witness, I envy not your youth her peace; for though I cannot be innocent my self, I am not so wicked but I can adore both her and virtue in the breasts of others; nor do I lament a grief that has surprised me; it is long since my heart discovered his; and they are fond women, who stained with our crimes can hope to weep gallant men into such madness as to leave the blessings the fair and virtuous Serulina brings, to blush their lives with us.
Pray cease this grief, and know my heart has no severe thoughts; I can see your good and oversee your error, which I know has many arguments to plead; and if heartily repented leaves your heart as innocent as if it had never been acted.
Custom, impious custom, is guilty of all my sins, by be∣ing the original of all my crimes; whose depraved liberty not only tolerates, but encourages those follies whose guilt I blush before such a virtue as the fair and innocent Serulina; who has not only honour, but mercy too. Other women may be chaste, but they are so rigid and so cruel to our faults; and their counsels so full of whips and stings, it rather incenses and hardens then reclaims a heart; nor doth their ill nature care to make a convert amongst us, so they may have the vanity to make a Satyr upon us; but here I find the Balsam of true innocence; which is not so proud, or vain in her own blessed condition, as solicitous to preserve and redeem others: and here I see the true stock of honour, which in your ge∣nerous breast has diviner forms and fruits then we can know or imagine in our sick state; yet I dare boast never to have broke the Laws she prescribed to our sex, faithful, kind, constant and obedi∣ent to cur Lovers, concerned only in their good, never betraying or abandoning their trust.
I swear there are charms in her tongue, her very griefs are bewitching; what would her mirth and kindness do? how graceful, how delightful, when her sadness is thus lovely, thus catch∣ing; infectious grief has made me sad in spite of this days joy.
Though this fault be folly in strict sense; yet you see we have sometimes some reason to love these Girls; and I am confi∣dent I'll never want that excuse; you shall always find a handsome witty cause of my sin at least.
Have you no thoughts of retiring, now? methinks, in this handsome sorrow you should have a sense of your condition, such
as might prompt you to the abandoning this world; and listen to all those Angels that summon the heart: hark how they call; see where virtue stands, and beckons thee to come! prithee, dear Pauline, go, and spend some of that youth and beauty with her, try but the dif∣ference; what a peace and calm thy mind will feel, there is no thorns nor dangers; thy quiet mind fortune and death it self de∣spicing: Oh, that thou could be so early wise; what Jewel would I not give to see thee become my penitent! and once in the Magda∣lenes, what joy it would be to me to converse with such beauty, and such goodness, in the glory of a repentance! your friend too shall visit you; dear Pauline, consider what I say, and look back up∣on those dangers both of rocks and seas thou daily venturest in this little bark, how ill guided, and worse manned, thy youth must be to struggle with those storms and tempests which the world threatens thy beauty having no compass nor star to steer by.
The Magdalenes, Madam; though I bow to your good∣nos, yet I perceive your Ladyship knows not the place: I was bred sometime amongst 'em, and from my knowledge of their customs take leave to say it; when I retire from the world it shall not be in∣to a Nunnery, for I am resolved to be honest when ever I profess it; a Nunnery will only add a dissimulation and facriledge to my fault; and it is less sin and shame to yield to the flatteries of young men then the lust and force of old women; I speak a known truth of their too common crimes; young strange women there shall suffer more pollution and rapes then in sacked Cities.
The Magdalenes, my heart! why, if I would breed a Thais or another Lais, or put Ovid again to School to learn a new art of love, I would send him to study at the grate of the Convertines, where Aretine should be made an ass, and blush the publishing his dull postures, compared to the ingenious lust that's practised in their cells.
My own house is far from chaste, but it is a Church, com∣par'd to theirs; whose crimes have such blackness in them persons of your honour can neither imagine, nor believe.
How can the world expect better from such multiplied de∣vils in a nest assembled by want, or condemned by the Law for some horrid crime? the most innocent enter in passion, or drove by the despair of some discontent; and though divers causes bring them, all are forced; no one whom reason, honour, or conscience guides, which makes them when they have recovered the anger, fear and despair that threw them in, their minds turn to the old vomit; for their hearts are slaves still to the same lusts, and burn with the same desires, whose fires are increased with the thoughts of past faults, which they are so far from repenting, as with double sin they act them o'er again, while the spirit of lust plays two parts alone, the lover and the loved, till what was fornication in their house becomes Sodomy in their Cell; two or three piled sins Nuns wear, it is not honour, nor con∣science binds; double grates can only keep them from breaking of their vows; and were not the hangman of more terror then the Con∣fesser, you should see what swarms their hives would send forth.
I would you would leave this subject, and think of din∣ner, and take your convert with you.
I would she were my convert, I would not only dine with her, but fast for her, in hopes of such a blessing.
Truly, Madam; I'm resolved, at least to change the place, if not my life, to avoid all occasions of being a further trouble to you and your fortune; for since we are both struck with one Dart, the Angellica and my self are designed for Italy, to seek a remedy by absence; she only begs you will forgive her sending your Letter to Don Pedro, it being the only crime you can accuse her of; and by this journey avoid the trouble of seeing what can only be our af∣flictions.
There is nothing of anger, but much of kindness due to both: and since you resolve upon that journey, I am confident you will find them both a kind and civil Nation; and here is a Lover begs you will wear this Ring in memory of her and your kindness yesterday. The Angellica shall have her thousand crowns again, it was the first money I ever got by the sex; and I cannot but wonder at their narrow minds, as well as their fortunes that can be so poor∣lie spirited as to design farther then the kindness of a woman. I have bought many in my time, but never yet either asked or got more of a woman then her flesh. What you'll do, Madam, I know not.
Where I give my faith and friendship I shall never refuse my fortune; and I wonder as much at them who can give their persons and deny their goods, as you do at those who prostitute themselves for money.
Madam, I shall wear this favour to my grave; for I per∣ceive it is a debt I owe your goodness; and if your husband doth not change his nature you will not repent your kindness: for Don Tho∣maso had always a heart greater then his fortune; and his presents still held proportion with his love, rather then with his money.
I will not afflict you farther, but wish you a happy jour∣ney; and will still hope better resolutions then you promise; for it is impossible good nature should be wilfully and resolvedly wick∣ed: it is true, Nature has her weakness, and vanity or want may sometimes counsel us against our hearts; and therefore, when ever you can resolve, here am I that will remove those difficulties; and as long as I have any fortune you shall not have that excuse, to be∣come as fit for my love as the kind Pauline is for my my pity: Come, you must dine with us.
I should gladly receive the honour, Madam, if I durst avow my being here.
Come, no fears; thy innocence shall be as public as thy kindness; and as long as I have friends, or fortune, they shall both protect thee.
DId you see my Sister?
No, Sir; she desired to be excused till the Em∣bassadour had spoken with you.
What answer had you from him?
He confessed they were married, and was highly satisfied with the civility of your Message; and bid me assure you all the satisfaction you could expect in honour; and that he would im∣mediately wait upon you himself; his Coach was ready when I came out; and I saw him pass the Piazza now; it would not be amiss you were in readiness to receive him.
Call Johanne, and get the people in readiness.
There is no struggling in this case, Sir; she being of years to choose; it was a mischief might have been prevented; but it is not to be redeemed.
YOu must excuse us, we cannot stay, but we will be with you in a minute; we expect the Ambassadors return; Don Pedro is coming with him to make a peace between him and Thomaso; when that business is over, we will find you; in the mean time, dear Pauline, I'll leave you Mistress of my Chamber; and Gentlemen, look you be civil to this Lady.
Faith, Pauline, I am thinking it is but a folly for us to part, being of one mind; for this is no place for the Edwardos neither; the air doth not agree with me; especially now they have got the trick of beating and cozening me, I shall never be safe; and home I'm resolved not to go, for I have seen the new Cate∣chism; and though I can lay hold of sin by as lively a resolution as any, yet wickedness is so ill dressed, so stolen, and so oppressed; sin doth not savour in that cold air as in this hot climate; the Cooks and Sauce are better here, though the sin and flesh be the same; and now they have spoiled Wed-lock too; for unless a Wench can steal a man, and run away with him, she must lye alone.
Faith, Child, having heard your resolutions we are re∣solved (if you and the Angellica like our humours) to bear you company into Italy; look you Pauline, we have not lost all; though the Birds be flown, there are some thousands of Pistols yet, and Jewels, to a sum large enough (I warrant you) to maintain a Soul∣diers life, which in honour must not be long, for fear of the Pro∣verb: A gray Soldier.
Is it a match? shall we remove the Scene to Italy, and swear Comrades? Fred and I have a mind to wander with such Planets: young and kind Constellations cannot choose but have good influence upon mirth: dare you venture your self in our Spears! I'll undertake to prevail with the Angellica.
If she consent, I'll agree, else I cannot; for I am already obliged to her and her company.
If it be a bargain, Ned shall give us a Supper at parting; I long to see Italy, and taste the description the Rogue uses to make of it, such Wine, such Women, such Music; and then his heart fires a volley of sighs to their memory; and then a Carnival,
such as would make a man curse his lot that fell on this side the Hills, as if it were out of the bounds of Gods blessings: at thy sup∣per, Ned, he shall repeat our lesson; put him but in the humour, and twill be both counsel and comfort.
My supper! no Fred, no more fuppers; I prithee do not so much as mention meat in Madrid, there is a curse follows it; I'll not eat again upon mine own score while I am in it; it would make a man swear a fast, to think upon the ill luck has followed my feasts; and makes me resolve to commit that kind of fault no more; if ever I fill a women's belly at that end again, let them play Lucet∣ta's part; I find feasts and banquets are follies of a high rate, Fred: and when a man has laid out his money that way, what re∣turn doth it yield? Fah, it stinks to name it; and woe be to that bottle of Sack I lay my hands on first; he shall pay for all these griefs.
And my sorrows are as ready to do you reason as any their∣sty sinner in Madrid; Come child, be merry, and learn of us to de∣spice sorrow; we will make thy journey short, and so laugh over these old stories.
I shall not be the saddest in the company, Sir, since I find others have their crosses too: Fellows in misery make the burden light; it is the single loan grief in jolly troops that to all is heavy still, and wounds both the seer and the seen.
It is past, Sir, and forgot; the name of Brother hath wiped all other titles from my heart but that of friend, which shall be faithfully preserved for you; I know you have honour, and that will make you use her like your self; and still remember how she has preferred your friendship before either her Family or her Fortune; pray let me see her, Sir.
Prithee, Harrigo, wait upon her in, and desire the comp∣ny to follow, it is late; and we'll to dinner; this had been a merry day if my friends had not lost their Brides; is there no possibility to get them delivered to the protection of their Husbands? it is the State, not they are guilty to permit such witchcraft to be practised in the City.
That will rest in the breast of the inquisitor, who must be dealt with for a sum of money; who, else, I fear will make their portions as great a crime as the Bathes have been.—Sister, I wish  you all clear and perfect joy, such as your kindest thoughts have promised; and, dear Serulina, I conjure you not to mistake my past severity; it was neither want of value or kindness for either, but a desire to have seen you married into a Family which you know might have given us both advantage: but since it is your for∣tune to fix upon this Gentleman, with all my soul I wish there may be no change in your fortune, but live and dye happy in one ano∣theirs
Friendship; And I hope she will not be the less welcome to you when a Brother and a servant thus presents her, the Reward of your first Generous Action: The Portion I shall see with all diligence paid; and it is now the season and Q for mirth, that I may have some share in your Joys, twill, I hope, be nei∣there unseasonable nor unreasonable to expect you should relinquish to me Angellica, who, upon my credit, had no hand nor interest in the Murder designed this day.
I am confident she had not; and though her kindness may want discretion, yet she wants not good Nature; and I shall not only relinquish, but use all my power with her to admit Don Pedro, and only him; for by Serulina's Faith I vow to be as faithful to her Friendship now, as ever I was to my humour before.
Your desires will come too late; for I know the Angel∣lice's Resolutions are fixed upon a return to Venice; and I am resolved to bear her company.
Yes faith, and we are all of a Troop if we can escape the Justice; Nothing but Witchcraft and Murder stays us; would Rogero were returned, that we might know our doom.
Is this serious? Or does the Angellica say this to Alarm my Heart with her departure?
Yes faith, Sir; We are all for Italy if the Hang-man do not lie in the way; and merrily we will spend the chippings of the Monsters; here's as much left of Sir Mammons hopes as would cure the Itch in a hot Country.
And what shall I do alone in an empty house? How say you, Carlo, shall you and I make up the Covey? Shall we be well∣come, Pauline?
I am certain, Sir, you will be most welcome to all the Company; and a year or two well spent abroad will bury all the wild stories we leave behind; which is the chief cause makes me resolve upon the Journey.
Sister, you were yesterday all my care, and now Don Thomaso has blown that fear over; Faith take the house into your Protection too; for Carlo and I am resolved to spend a year or two in Italy upon this occasion; The General once offered me a command in Millain; if I like the people and the place, I'll take it; if not, it is a Journey of Pleasure; the season is good, and the Company better.
Sir, I am now allied to you; and there are many rea∣sons, besides the kindness to your person, would make me wish your stay; yet all interest laid aside, it is not only my opinion, but my desire you should take this Resolution; and if you be not as highly satisfied with the journey, the people, and the place, as any you have yet seen, I'll forfeit the charge.
I am resolved; and now, Serulina, all cause of Jealousy being past betwixt us, be freely and clearly kind to your Bro∣there, who here vows to my dear Sister all that her Heart can ex∣pect from one that loves and values her; and to give you one
Argument to believe it, look you choose me a wife against I come home.
How now, Rogero, what news?
All is well, Sir; The Justices came immediately as you went out, and have seized all the goods they found. But those Prodigies in the Baths has made them fly the House; Four such Giants, Sir Amadis, nor the Palmerins ever encountered; The German guards are now in Arms to seize them, Scarramucha is come out a Lady, as big again as Don Edwardo's; And there is a Lady come forth Scarramucha, a Giant amongst Giants; She doth so wonder at her Beard and Breeches, for she has Helena's old Whores Soul in a mans Body; it was sport to see the wonder, and what a start she gave at the Ammunition of her own Breeches. The Mountebank keeps his own Features, but in a horrid form; and threatens black destruction to you all: His wife too is one of the loveliest forms and perfect symmetry that such a Monster can present to the judging eye; Celia in Youth and Beauty, such as when her charming Hand and Voice led Rome in Chains; Yet she is still frighted with the power of that Charm that first enslaved her, and would hide or fly the Anger and the Love of him who now with frowns and severe looks threatens all; They quickly made the Inquisitors leave the House; which gave me occasion to tell them you were Tra∣vellers, guilty only in the trying a public experiment; Men that had not a sold to lose, poor cashiered Cavaliers; whom their Guardian had cozened of their Portions, and I'd un∣dertake, for a piece of money, should quit your Interest to them; upon which they seized the Guardian, and expect Don Harrigo to treat your Interest; You are sure he's in the Galleys for his Life, and his Estate confiscate to the Church; Your wives will be Prisoners during Life; for to lie with them is held Copu∣lotion with the Devil.
The sum in hand, did not the Guardian tell of that, nor require Restitution?
Not a word; he durst not mention that for fear of confessing my accusation; which has named him as a party that conspired with the Witch.
Ha! not only free, but hopes of more money; Pri∣thee let Harrigo treat the Consolation; I will not have above a hundred thousand Crowns; it is more then a Soldier of our party ought to possess, unless he will eat alone; for where a Devil shall we find two more to make up our mess?
While we feed upon this Ayre, I have a Mind to a real dinner; for I am a thirsty and a hungry sinner.
Love hath his Famine too and Thirst, that drinks the Blood, while the sighing Heart becomes his Food. But we a
more propitious Deity have found; which with smiling Fates, and full Joys, our Loves has crowned; And now, Madam, all Fears and Tyranny of the Boy must be remembered only as the salt and seasoning of this Joy; Whilst cheerful Hymens Nup∣teal Treasures invites to new and surprising pleasures; Such, as I in all my curious search could never find; Embraces that are as chaste as kind: And I conjure you all, where ere you go, proclaim what I shall still adore; The Virtue of this Star, bright Serulina, whose Friendship thus has fixed the Wanderer.

MOre bright and better made then all the Gods,
Superior to the rest of Dëities by odds,
My ForeSPEAKER with immortal beams is crowned,
Victorious beauties I raise from the ground,
I after Glory always run,
Not after Daphne whom I shun.
That fierce destructive Python I did quell,
That ugly horrid Serpent hatched in Hell,
Rebellion, which had poisoned far and near
Fair France I chased from off this Hemisphere:
I rather had this Monster slay,
Then with my Daphne sport and play.
Yet it must be at last, early or late
I must a Female court, it is my Fate,
And though I am all God, yet there's a she,
Whom with love glances I must deify.
And what Nymph, Goddess, Queen, or Muse
To be my Daphne would refuse.
My stem is more then of a mortal race;
For to great Henries Granchild all give place:
My Innocent and young aspect,
Inspires both pity and respect;
And he who loudly would complain
of Princes falls and Peoples reign,
Of angry stars, and destiny,
Let him but cast his eyes on me.
I turn this charming look
Sometimes to Doomsday book;
These eyes, where in his throne
Love sits, make many moan;
My Rosy cheeks, my quickening fire,
Mad the beholders with desire:
And though I am but a young thing,
Blown as it were but in this spring;
My office is the History to tell
Of what a thousand years ago befell.
The Mouth of Fame doth tell,
In Mine the graces dwell:
So red, so small, Loves Queen
Had not, nor ere was seen;
A hundred beauties more
I have in bank and store;
Yet none esteems them less:
I nature rather bless
For those inward parts I have,
Which will last me to my Grave.
Though I with musique use to cheer the mind,
Yet in my Pipes no foulness you shall find.
There is no heart so free
But it will yield to me;
I have the true supremacy
Of beauty both in front and eye:
My glances able are for to recover
The sickest amorist, the palest lover:
My Comedies, if that you listen well,
Are able to redeem a soul from hell.
The stars in their career
Are not so bright and clear
As is my mind, which 'bove the Elements
Doth soar to view those high syderian Tents.
This port, this countenance, and eyes
Show I did drop down from the skies.
I study their Aspects and Influence,
Their Motions, &amp; what good descends from thence.
If for a mortal I am taken,
You may perchance be there mistaken,
I dart a ray will pierce the heart,
And make the center of it smart:
I carry such a Majesty,
Which represents Divinity:
The graces all in me do dwell,
Contending which shall bear the bell:
I doe preside in Masks and Dances,
Wounding the looker with my glances.
Beauty a treasure of high rate
Is my companion and my mate;
Of virtues I have such a store,
That could enrich a thousand more:
I raise my spirits to enhance,
(When I am in poetique trance)
By high heroic verse the acts
Of noble Champions and their facts:
The Sock I scorn, the Buskin me
Doth raise to immortality.
Although my countenance be grave,
Yet pleasure and delights I have▪
I look on Death and Destiny,
Yet are my strains Divinity:
The passages of virtue I rehearse,
Though in an Elegiac Tragic verse.
A hundred objects I do see,
Although at my Nativity
They say I hooded was, my song
Will carry one to heaven along,
The various postures I do show
Will make the Gods themselves to bow;
I am the glory of our hills,
Where joy both heart and spirit fills.
Let my heart go loose more then to one,
If I do love but three, I leisure have
To sell love by retale;
I cry; I sigh, and ready am to hang,
Yet then I vanish in the height of passion.
The beauty which me charms is like the spring,
wee ought to love each other, she is fierce, and so am I.
A young forceresse may well become a Magician of
twenty years.
Who can make scruple of my art and skill,
My reasons in due time have Energy enough;
If I look fair in any part,
I'st not a trick of Magique Art?
I have enhanced my gallantries so high,
That Neptunes Court is glorified thereby.
They equal the exploits of Paladins,
Whose fame the Earth with Echoes dims,
What a poor thing it is to be
A demigod by land or Sea?
Yet I am one, I'd have it known,
It is no stain but a renown,
In the fair field of love for to be so
Where joy &amp; sadness, flowers and weeds do grow:
And for the water-Nymphs none can express
Better then I whether they are fish or flesh.
With a Nymph both fair and cruel;
The Fates have called me to a Duel
My torments endless are, my breast
with the Sea surges have like rest.
1. In my fine hooks ther's danger, then beware
I am a fairer Fisherman by far,
Then love himself my hook and line
Can catch a creature though Divine.
2. Husbands their cares do double, lest one day
I fish within their ponds and catch the prey,
So subtle is my wit, that none can see
Where I do fish those things which flow from me.
3. I will lance out when Age improves my flanks,
In the mean time I keep upon the banks
For corrall on Vermilion lips I fish,
And who will hinder me to have my wish?
It is not for me to fish for Corrall here,
I to another Coast my course must steer,
A fatal ground
Which Seas surround.
There I must fish upon an angry Main,
More then two Crowns and Scepters to regain.
I have the same bait, hook and line
I had when I could scarce tell nine,
A few there are
Though ne'er so fair,
If I am set
Can escape my flaxen net.
Upon the side of a still peaceful pond
I use to fish, and dare not go beyond;
The time will come that I may also seek
The Rivers Banks, and happily a Sea-creek.
As straight and slender as a rush
I use to cast my line, and push
It on, but I do only catch
Small things, I cannot yet attach
Great wel-grown fishes, one might make
Good cheer with those I cannot take.
Of this sweet Trade of Fishing I intend
To be one day a Master, and so mend
My fortunes, now, the greatest skill
Of a true Fisherman is to be still,
And patient for a while, to make no hast
So he may compass well his ends at last.
Thetis, Jupiter, Juno, a dumb Quire of the Furies of jealousy▪ Jupiter
being encompassed with pomp and Majesty, de∣scends
from the Air in midst of a great cloud, and pro∣pounds
to Thetis all the tender &amp; passionate things which
might oblige her to be his spouse; but she refuses this
honour out of high respects she owed to Juno, who had been
so careful of her Education; whereupon Jupiter was up∣on
point of carrying her away; but as he was wrapping her
within the cloud wherein he descended, Iuno comes in a
whirlwind not so violent as her rage; And after a loud
fit of scolding, having brought the furies along with her,
the earth opened and disgorges a huge horrid Monster;
At sight hereof Iupiter letting go his prey, and putting off
his design till a more convenient time, returns to Hey∣ven.
In the mean time the Furies extremely well pleased to
have so opportunely done such a piece of service to Iuno,
dance all before her, whereupon the goddess Iuno having
thanked Thetis for her virtuous resistance, takes the furies
up with her in the same whirlwind which brought her
down to persecute Iupiter in his repose, and in his glory.
Spain, fly from this young fury, fly away,
She comes to daunt thee, and with torch in hand
Through every corner she doth force her way,
To find thee out, against her thou can not stand.
She persecutes the bad, and makes them read
Their guilt within their looks, nay, the same time
They mischief work, and do commit the crime,
She glides into the Conscience fear and dread.
Believe me not, to trust in me forbear,
A fained sweetness on my front I wear,
Of me there may be some mistakes,
for I do hide my claws and snakes.
My face is lovely, sweet and debonair,
Such as an honest Fury ought to bear.
My heart some poison may contain,
Yet serpents lodge not in my brain.
PEleus being conducted by savage men and women,
meets with Prometheus upon a Rock with his Eagle
which gnaws upon his heart, and having made a light
comparison of their torments, Prometheus assures him that
the Oracle of Delphos had foretold that Thetis should bear a
son greater then his Father; and that Iupiter also without
doubt should be constrained to renounce his pretension,
and that Mercury having been sent in his behalf to Iupiter,
to acquaint him with the saying of the Oracle, the busi∣ness
should end to his contentment: Peleus hereupon re∣turns
to Thessaly extremely comforted, and the savages
upon hopes that Prometheus should be freed from his tor∣meant,
and that Peleus should obtain his hearts desire, could
not more lively express their joy then by a dance.
Wee value beauteous cheeks, and how
They must be used we also know,
Nor such rude savages are we,
But civilised we soon may be.
Jupiter, Mercury, a dumb Quire of Wood-Nymphs.
Jupiter meets with Mercury in this fair Palace which
he had cause to be prepared in the secret place about
Caucasus, to celebrate his Nuptials there without the
knowledge of Iuno, and devising the means how to con∣duct
thither the new spouse; Mercury gave him notice
what the Oracle had said; Iupiter being therewith sir∣prized,
and fearing that the same distaster might befall
him there, which had happened twixt him and Saturn,
makes love to yield to ambition, and retires to Heaven af∣la
he had commanded Mercury to make it known that he
would think on it no more, nor do an act so injurious to
his Authority; the Dryads being Land-Nymphs, fell to
be jealous of the good fortune of Thetis a Sea-goddesse, be∣ing
there as spies to give account to Juno of all the purpo∣ses
of Jupiter, and they express by a dance the joy they
conceived that Jupiter had altered his resolutions.
The King, the Dukes of Joyous, and of Roquelaure, the
Marquis of Genlis, Monsieur Bontemps, the Lords of Lorges,
Desairs, le Vaiser, Verpre, Beauchamp, Molier, D'Olivet.
A Nymph as great as generous,
In Oaks as green as precious
I lead a happy train:
My youthful branches taper so,
As if to heaven they would grow,
And stars salute would fain:
They spread and shoot so bravely out, that they
The glory of their root will not betray.
By their rind you well may know
With what strength and Sap these grow,
and whence it springs.
They may be fit Caesars to make,
Or Alexanders for to shake,
with thousand earthly Kings.
About this proud and Royal Tree
Others do grow, but modestly
They creep more humble then the grass,
So that one day 'twil come to pass,
This Tree of Heaven may be made
Unto the European world a shade.
While the seasons, rude and cold,
I wonder none with me makes bold
My wood hath this rare quality, it shall
Burn, warm, and make no noise at all.
Some hold me for a merry wench,
And that I care not much for Continence,
I am the greatest babbler I confess,
And imitate Vergonda by my tress.
There is no Forest but doth feel
The strokes of my victorious steel,
As soon as I doe haunt a cops of wood,
To bring the Axe among them were as good.
I have my vanities, besides my Age
By right of Impudence sometimes doth rage,
And if a Tree cleffed may chance,
They presently impute the cause to me.
But to conclude, sweet Nymphs, my pleasures shall
Never hurt yours, therefore doubt not at all;
To my beloved trunk isle so adhere,
That for to injure others none shall fear.
Within the bottom of a Grove
A Satire thereabouts did rove,
Who held my honour at a bay,
But hard it was for to display
Whether a real Satire, or one clad
Like Satyrs, or indeed a true Dryad.
The Cavaliers of the Principal City of Thessalia being
afflicted for the cruelty of Thetis against Peleus their Mo∣narch,
do bring in a combat at Barriers to the honour of
Mars: in the mean time they offered sacrifices on the o∣there
side to the same God, with supplications, that he
would employ his credit with Venus for the return of
Peleus, and for mollifying the heart of Thetis; At this same
time the Statue of Mars having spoken and foretold all
good auguries, the Knights quit their arms and dance.
Attend me Laurels, this combat's made
To gain the glory of those irons which hold
Me captive, therefore I must be more bold
Then any, and employ my trusty blade.
What force can lance or sword
Against me then afford?
Be not my friends at all astonished
To see a man only for back and head,
He happy is who is a beast
Backward, and not above the breast.
I find no incommodity
That I am such a prodigy,
Half a man sometimes may need
Half a horse for better speed.
When I have moralised by sense,
(Within my cell) neat and distinct
Unto the stable, I withdraw me thence,
From Reason taking pleasure in instinct.
If that my pride appear, I reason have,
For I instruct all gallant men and brave,
Lucre makes me not mercenary,
But I do teach all frank and free,
If among my scholars one be pleased to pay,
I can afford the rest a good long day.
This young Academist doth learn so well
His part, that all the rest he doth excel;
His present (and his future) Grandeur show
All mortal his high virtues are below.
This Master piece to perfect, it seems that
Fortune with Nature did cooperate.
The Bodies exercise is his delight
Against his own in many an eager fight;
He beaten hath the iron, and made them fly
A fair presage of future victory
He greater things prepares; And Spain shall find
How dextrose he will prove in every kind.
He cannot broke any should him exceed,
Whether he runs, or leaps, or mounts the Steed,
In dancing neatly none surpass him shall,
The world admires him, only the Ladies are
Wary, nor dare they what they think declare.
Peleus doth all he can to gain the good grace of Thetis,
but she continues still in the same rigour, and as Proteus
daughter, takes advantage of the privilege of her birth
to deceive Peleus by various shapes, yet he faints not in the
pursuit, but begins to add boldness to affection: at last
Thetis transforms her self to a Rock, which Peleus em∣braceth,
and protests to perish rather then forsake her;
at this last proof of Constancy and love, Thetis yields, and
accepts him for her husband; hereupon all Peleus Court
falls into an excess of gladness, which makes the Cour∣tiers
to fall a dancing.
The Duke of Candale, the Marquis of Villequier, and of
Genlis the Count.
This youthful Courtier hath so high a look,
As if for some great King himself he took,
He's forward, bold, and cannot be alone,
Nothing doth please him more then to come on:
He sure will something do:
The charge we see he hath is honourable,
And for his age very considerable,
Some lofty spirits would be glad with less,
But he doth far more glorious things profess,
sure he will something do.
He ordinary titles doth excel,
He would do better, though he now doth well,
Had he no process with a nearly,
Which yet doth set an edge on Majesty,
Sure he will something do
The Court would not so splendid be and brave,
Were I not there, nor half that lustre have:
We are the 'ffects of one another,
We laugh, and play and sport together,
The Courtier may do Fortune a good turn
As well as she to him—
Fortune and Love are two odd things,
The one is blind, to'ther hath Wings,
It is a tedious task and doubtful gain
The true good-will of either to obtain;
For me, I like the lover, who doth go
By way of storming, and ends quickly so.
I will not knock too long at one hearts door,
Lest in the mean time I lose hundreds more.
In the Court a number te•ds
To divers projects, divers ends,
All opposed to one another,
The sisters oft do cross the brother,
Touching my self, I hope to expedite
My business by my charming face and wit.
I trace the earth all over by account,
As far as Pindus or Parnassus Mount;
I Corinth view, where every one
Cannot arrive, it is I alone
Who can by Land-skips, Maps, and Instruments,
Measure all Regions, and their vast extents.
In me a comely spritfull grace,
Makes Vnisons throughout my face:
A charming harmony
Moves betwixt lips and eye:
Sometimes I melt, bring sadnesses and smarts,
Which shows I am not welcome to all hearts.
My youth, my hue, my eyes do prove,
The strongest Reason in the School of Love
Is Beauty, twill convince the most austere,
And make a Fool of a Philosopher:
I pray let this serve for an argument,
I merit on Parnassus Hill a Tent.
My mind is not so mussled among the clouds,
But I can know the causes which by crowds
Puzzle us here below; the stars when I
Was born, did smile at my Nativity,
The Heavens did power their graces in such store,
That ever since it makes me them adore.
Though young and innocent, I have some fits
Of the Green sickness, yet I well may sit
Among these sisters, to my A. B. C.
Ther's not an Art but it is an oblige:
The ground-work I do lay, cut out, and trace,
Therefore on Phocis Hill let me have place.
I useful am at Court, Hearts will not yield
I snatch away, and so do win the field,
I conquer with my tongue which I do file,
When I a charming beauty would beguile.
My youthful charms make many hearts
With groans, and sighs, and sobs to smart
Beyond computing, yet could I
To number them my self apply,
But that thereof I make a small account,
They to so many Ciphers do amount.
Having immortal beauty in my face,
Where roses bloom, and Lilies still have place,
What reason is there I should jealous be?
Poor Mortals be not so deceived in me;
I jealousy do scorn with foul disdain,
I'll neither give nor take it, it is a grain
Of cursed, seed that naturally doth bear
A dry black leaf, which will the heart strings tear.
I am as serious, as Cupped is a sot,
I turn his flames to virtue every jot,
Madam de Puy knows well no Blonden is
So frequent with chaste maids though full of wish.
In the behalf of Love whose pleasing bait,
Have done me such good offices and bad,
I must begin my Labours, and go clad
On Venus shrine, and Altars for to wait;
I find my veins and passions all as hot
My heart as vigorous as it was at first,
Ther's nothing in me that's decayed a jot,
For glory also I ne'er more did thirst:
Only my feet are not so quick, as when
I deceive did my host, and may again.
Peace, sure thou'lt come at last so much desired,
Who hast to heaven thy self so long retired
And we must be
Thankful to War for thee.
Behold she comes, and she to me is sent
To make me have a timely sentiment
Of Europes doleful case, lo, she doth bring
Laurels &amp; palms, fit presents for a King.
Ye charming Femals, from your eyes
It is, that wars and tumults rise
You dart the thunderbolts of strife,
You have your trumpets, drum and fife,
Venus we know is Mars his wife.
By toiling much both night and day
In Mars his field, &amp; Venus dales,
I glory have obtained, they say,
Having still propitious gales;
I have got Laurels, but the bloom
Is passed, the fruit is not yet come.
Ladies, from this tender spray
There may some danger come one day,
Ye with caresses flatter him, he you,
Ye kiss, &amp; hug him, but you'll find it true,
It is a Lions cub which yon do stroke,
Who with his paw in time may make you smoke;
He sports with you, he smiles and mocks,
Plays with your jewels, fancies, locks,
But take ye heed, for he at length
Will gather more increase of strength;
Yet, I foresee he will wean quite
Himself from all such soft delight;
And marching in the steps of his great sires
Make Glory the sole Queen of his desires.
All those Loves I do behold
Brighter then the burnished gold,
Are nothing if compared with me,
Whether Fire, or Light they be,
I do discover in effect
I am all love, when I reflect
upon my self—
I peep to hear what lovers say,
When they whisper sport or play;
And sometimes lay
Traps in their way.
If hee be as discreet as is his mother,
He will neglect the love of any other,
But if the father he be like unto,
He mistresses will have &amp; Beauties woo.
Our talents are diversified,
Each one hath his perfections aside;
For me,
Till I have wings, it is meet
I fence my self with feet.

WHy do you thus your self torment?
Chiron, How shall I find content?
Pursue your hopes, and onward go▪
Is it possible I should do so?
When on my heart a beauty lies
That is descended from the Skies;
A beauty that's all moving and immense,
That hath o'er me such an omnipotence?
Moreover, I two Rivals have,
No less then Gods, who me outbrave
For Neptune with his Trident, and great Jove
Are my competitors for Thetis love.
Peleus, Why do you thus your self torment?
Chiron, Where is it I should find content?
Then follow your fair hopes, and onward go.
How is it possible I should do so?
Listen to me, gray hairs do but in vain
Attempt young beauties, they will them disdain
Though they be Gods: Neptune is rich in years
As well as Treasure, Thetis will him jeer.
For Jove, besides his age, his rapes and wiles,
How he so many Ladies did beguile
Will make her shun him: but if you desire
To compass your designs, and quench your fire,
Behold those Magies that with charmed flight
Will guide you safely to Prometheus sight,
Who being bold and wise, is th'only man
Who in this Enterprise you pleasure can:
He is no friend to Jove, who him torments
With such eternal pangs, therefore he will,
To help you, exercise his utmost skill.
Wherefore take my advice, and hence away
To India, through the air cut out your way.
Delay is always dangerous to Lovers,
He ne'er obtained his ends who hums and hovers.
This Aerie journey I will undertake,
But though herein Fortune my friend I make
Yet are my hopes but small, I have a hint,
That Thetis's cruel, and her heart is flint.
When modest beauties to excuses fall,
You must not presently it rigour call.
The heart oft-times desires what lips deny,
For a huge distance doth betwixt them lye.
Could it unto my Love-sick thoughts appear
That what you say hereto is true and clear,
Those pangs I suffer in my breast
Would turn to case, delight and rest.
But fall what will my fate portends.
I still will glory in my ends,
Which an unmeasurable joy distils,
And my so high-swoln heart with comfort fills.
Let a true Lover never lose
His hope or courage when he woos:
The more his suff'rance is, the more
Sweetness is kept for him in store.
In Cupids gentle kingdom nothing is
Impossible, but one may gain his wish.
Go on then happily, for who doth know
But that your constancy may tell you so?
On, on, then to my Magies I will go.
The Quire of Tritons and Mermaids.
At such a splendid glorious show,
What heart but would turn fire and tow?
A Pomp so rare, a sight so fair,
Is able to perfume the air:
Nor Morn nor Sun did ever view
So bright and ravishing a hue.
At such a splendid glorious show,
What heart but would turn fire and tow?
There is no fence I find,
Love will invade my mind.
In these moist fields my Rivers run in vain,
To quench my fire, or tepifie my pain;
Though I in midst of waters lye,
Yet do I melt, dissolve and fry;
But Thetis, you at last will find it true,
To be more fool unto your self, then you
Are cruel unto me. Will you refuse
The richest of the Gods, Him who doth use
To give those gems that beauties do adorn,
Thence, where the Queen of Love her self was born?
Aurora commonly doth rise
Cheerful and smiling to our eyes
But suddenly we oftentimes do see,
She false a weeping upon flower and tree.
If you desire the cause I should unfold,
It is because her Consort is so old.
Thetis, Be not deceived, though I be gray,
My waters still are green, and so they may
Be wholesomer then Springs, which by and by
Upon the least drought grow shallower and dry.
Youth is unstable, heady, rash; but age
Is constant, cautious, provident, and sage.
I do confess, that you discourse, and reason
Like a quaint Amorist, although the season
Of Love in you be past. It was for Love
The Heavens made Youth, for which the Gods above
Have journeyed down to earth; no other age
Is fit a Female beauty to engage.
Perfidious thing, I plainly now do find,
Thou art unto another more inclined.
Come winds and tempests, and with my lament
Your blasts unite; Come, come incontinent,
Let hispid blust'ring Bores from the North,
Bring all the Haracanes and Whirlwinds forth,
Blow off, and banish from my Kingdom quite
This impious Girl so full of hate and spite.
Revenge the quarrel of your King,
And with your vengeance Justice bring:
Shall she in my Dominions dwell,
Who hath inflamed my heart with fire from hell?
Ungrateful, rash, and foolish Nymph, can thou
Slight thus the greatest of the gods below▪
The grief will be thine own
When thou art wiser grown.
Neglected Amorists may learn from hence,
Against blind Cupids arrows a true fence▪
Disdain of beauty a revenge may be,
Though not of love th'expected remedy:
Now that the fury of the wind
Hath left so sweet a calm behind:
Now that the storm is gone,
I pray let me alone
To vent unto my self my moan.
Oh me, I find that ambushes are laid.
To take me and entrap poor silly maid:
What will become of thee my heart?
You are like to suffer many a smart.
Oh me, Oh me,
Poor heart what will become of thee?
Thy chastity Love studies to surprise.
He's sly and cunning, though not always wise;
He Armour hath of every sort
For to assault a female Fort:
He prays, complains, and pines,
He menaces and whines
Now, if another God should join
With him, who can me then essoin?
Oh me, Oh me,
Poor heart what will become of thee?
What can blessed heaven me avail,
If still of my desire I fail?
Celestial joys, if they to sorrow turn,
Far worse then all Tartarean tortures burn▪
O Thetis, thou alone
Hast made me quit my Throne,
Thou give him law,
Who Gods doth awe•
It is my destiny and luck,
By thee for to be deadly struck;
And that which is the greatest wonder,
Thy beauti's stronger then my thunder.
But come, O come, my Fair, increase my bliss,
And let's cohabit both in Pardise.
O no,
Not so.
Come and be partner of my Throne
Which Hymen offers thee alone;
That Empire Love hath thee designed,
Come, come my Fair, be not unkind.
O no,
Not so▪
The heavens forbid I should be said,
(Poor innocent and silly maid)▪
For to be such a Rebel as to wrong
Her bed who trained me all along
From my first cradle: I had rather die
A thousand deaths, and scorch in Tartary.
If you will use such slight Apologies,
To him who can command both lair and Skies;
To clear your error, and my pain assuage,
I must use force, my Dear, but far from rage.
Cloud, gently take her up.
Oh me.
What ails my soul?
Aim, who helps me?
What mortal Creature's hee
Can thee reprise from me?
Disloyal Jove, is it my hapless fate
Thou should so oft thy Faith thus violate?
But since in Heaven no Justice can be found,
Or Piety among the Stars, the ground
Shall op, and styx shall belch forth furies fell:
Come then appear, ye ghastly dames of Hell;
And help to vindicate
The justness of my fate.
Farewell my Thetis, so enchanting bright,
But know I do not thee abandon quite.
Great Goddess, I no pardon crave of thee,
But pity; though unfortunate I be,
Yet I am guiltless, and from foulness free.
Such hazards to escape is no offence,
Much less misfortune or incontinence.
Sweet gratitude doth always rest
In a' well born gentle breast:
The Gods desire no more
For those blessings in such store,
Which on us Mortals every hour
They in silver showers do pour.
Unfortunate Prometheus, how thine
Eternal torments are like mine!
Ah, who is he▪
Thus speaks to me?
Tic Peleus King of Thessaly,
Who may thy mate for torture be.
I from the body of the Sun
Stole fire ever scarce the world begun.
And I some fiery glances took
From Thetis all enchanting look.
Jove chastneth my temerity
By this voracious bird you see.
Prometheus, it is Jove the very same
Torments likewise with jealousy my flame.
But yours one day
May find allay.
But when, and how?
Ah, ah, my torments grow.
O cruel pangs some truce and respit give,
Prometheus may with counsel me relieve.
I have received advice from Mercury,
The Thunderer will Thetis fly,
And his Ambition place (as you shall prove)
Before her Beauty, or his flames of love;
To credit this you may be bold,
For by the Oracle it is foretold.
If it be true what issues from that vioce,
My soul shall carols sing, my heart rejoice
There never was so coy and cruel she,
But only sought by one, may conquered be.
Go, go, return where thou did leave thy heart,
Thou shalt find ease for thy corroding smart.
In the vast sea of Love who ever doth sail
Must lose no wind, and then he may prevail.
For this sweet counsel thou hast given me,
May heaven, O Prometheus, set thee free.
The Thunderer may be
Less cruel unto me.
O dear, and solacing, sweet blissful Hope,
How comforting art Thou to those who cope
With rigid beauties? thou dost periods put
To black despair; the Gods did justly shut
Thee out of Hell; Thy breath though ne'er so small
Would ease the damned souls in Pluto's Hall.
And you my faithful guides unto this place,
Enjoy the comforts also I embrace;
Be all partakers of my hopes, and share
Some of my joys, which past expressions are.
Well,
What did the Oracle at Delphos say
Touching my love to Thetis, tell me, pray.
Apollo from the Tripod did pronounce,
The Son of Thetis (all will see)
Shall greater then his Father be.
How can that be? unless the fates renew
In me my Sire's example, and maked true.
That which Prometheus told me also is
No less infallible and true then this.
Then I do find that it doth me behove
To leave commanding Heaven, or not to love.
Which do you most desire,
To serve or domineer?
I hold Love's golden fetter,
Then any Empire better,
The one doth thousand sweets instil,
The other the brain with cumbers fill.
Permit me, mighty Jove, to tell you it is
Folly of a Mortal still to wish,
Under the vail of good, to meet the bad,
Which goes in Virtues habit often clad.
But you which o'er the Spears do sway,
And such coruscant beams display;
Can you be so transported, as endure
That a blind lying Boy should you allure,
Who will vapour every where,
That he did fetter Jupiter.
Thetis, suppose, an idle wench should prove:
Have you not Goddesses enough above?
If you Olympus loose, where will you find
Throughout the world a Kingdom of that kind?
In your Discourse you go so strongly on
That makes me half of your opinion.
Nor can you any true content obtain
Whilst you are compassed with a double pain.
Juno pursues you with her Furies here,
And Thetis may perhaps fly from you there;
The one is doubtful, the other is jealous still,
Both may confederate to cross your will.
It is true, that Juno me pursues,
And raises furies by whole crews.
She every where doth stir and wheel about,
She doth disturb all Heaven to find you out.
Then Mercury, go and proclaim
From Pole to Pole that I disclaim
Thetis, and will no more my Honour maim.
Go speedily.
Jove, I will fly.
Fair Wood Nymphs let this day be Festival
That I my wonted freedom did recall,
Which impious fate and beauty did conspire
To captivate with false and fatuous fire.
Fair Wood Nymphs let this day by all
Be kept hereafter Festival.
Great God of War, the prop, defence and stay
Of Empires, intercede that Peleus may
(By favour of that Goddess whom alone
Thou dost adore, and art to serve so prone)
Return to sway again fair Thessaly:
Behold that amorous Warrior with mild eye.
And you brave Champions propitious make
Our vows and Altars; let the welkin quake
With the high clashings of your Barriers.
Peleus at his return will pay you your Arrears.
But stay a little, stay,
Our Oracle will something say.
At last the King of Thessaly
Shall home return with mirth and glee.
O news more rare
Then Indian Pearl, and sweeter far
Then that Hyblean juice the Attic Bee
Stov'd in her cell for Joves Nativity;
And will King Peleus come again?
Then Thessaly shall swarm with men.
O news more rare
Then Indian pearl, and richer far.
FOR him who parts from his delight
Time makes too quick and rapid flight,
But who is travelling to see his Love,
Each moment unto him an age doth prove.
Hope still with doubts, fruition with fear
Is commonly attended every where.
I with my companions here
Did think to find you full of cheer.
Now that you are a Champion o'er the Gods,
Of whom for Faith and Love you have such odds;
Why do you thus afflict your self with pain?
Faint heart did ne'er a Ladies favour gain.
Sometimes my spirits are alert and high,
Then they begin to languish presently;
Because I fear that Thetis heart
May Marble prove; hence comes my smart.
You are deceived; when Thetis knowledge had
You left fair Greece, and undertook so bad
And hazardous a journey to find ease,
The fury of your passion to appease;
She with a pitying paleness then was struck,
And sighing said, The Stars send him good luck.
Go, lay close siege, and let her see
You are resolved for Battery.
The Female who believes she's truly loved,
Need not by too long Prayers to be moved.
Your counsel's good: now with alacrity
I will both Love and Fortune try;
And of the business you shall quickly see
I'll make a shaft or bolt. But where is she?
I'll go in quest of her.
In the mean time let my Disciples dance,
We will be fortunate in spite of chance:
Love, if you will enter like a friend,
Lay down your Arms, let peace attend
Your purposes, and so you may
Be welcome, and so win the day.
If boisterously you me assault,
Come not near me, but make a halt:
Be sure not to torment my heart,
Or with your passions make it smart.
O Thetis, you desire to shun
That which your self to me have done.
Ohime.
My Dear,
What do you fear?
Ohime, when you were far from hence
Love did do much for you; but now
You are so near, I fear with violence
He will assault me with his bow.
I pray retire.
Will you with such a heart of flint and steel
Convert those pleasing passions which I feel
To pangs? Shall he still languish
With tears, with doubtfulness and anguish,
Who loves your eyes
More then the Stars or Skies?
These words an amorous pleasure do instil
Into my breast, my thoughts with fancies swill;
Fool that I am, I who have made a vow
To any Love enchantments ne'er to bow;
I who two Gods for marriage did refuse,
Shall I yield now
And love-sick grow?
I pray retire.
From those fair eyes I will not part,
Who have infused into my heart
Grief, and content, with constancy;
All Trophies of your chastity,
And of my Faith: where ere you go
I will adore your shadow too and fro.
Against such a charming violence
If I can find no guard or fence,
I'll have recourse for quenching of this fire
Unto the Arts of Proteus my great Sire.
Peleus will then desist, unless he fall
In love with Lions, Monsters, Rocks and all.
Dear, Whats that you whisper?
May your laments
Find their contents.
Oh pleasing accents!
But Peleus now I will you disabuse,
They are feigned fancies which you thus amuse
When you made me the object of your mind
You took me for a Nymph, but you shall find
I am a ravenous Lion, a hard Rock,
A Monster that wears clouds in lieu of smock.
My sweetest friend,
What do you now intend?
I'll wrap my self within that cloud:
Do not do so, for I shall cry aloud.
O heaven bless me, what do I see!
Can such a beauteous Creature turn to be
A beast of such immane ferocity?
You cannot fright me, or make an escape,
My Thetis I'll pursue in any shape.
What do I see? This shape becomes you well,
And shows that you are cruel, fierce and fell.
But all this cunning will not serve your turn,
The more you horrid are, the more I burn.
A Sacrifice of sighs and groans
I'll offer though you change to stones.
Dear, take your shape again,
And ease me of this pungent pain.
O God,
The more I monstrous make my self in show,
The more my spirits melt, and gentle grow.
I am almost in Love.
Almost! That word my panting breast doth pierce,
And shows you still are cruel, fell and fierce,
In lieu of solacing my love-swoln mind,
It leaves a double agony behind,
Ohime, what Lions, Monsters thus oppose
My virtuous Love, and make themselves my foes?
I know not where to turn, my spirits are
in such a strange confusion, yet I dare
Not say I love as yet; my hot desire
I will suppress and quench this raging fire.
The tongue shall give my heart the lie;
I'll make no haste,
Though I must yield at last,
There is no remedy.
Dear Thetis, cast on him a pitying eye,
Whose breast for thee with content coals doth fry.
Distracted soul, it is too too true,
I must bid now Virginity adieu.
But sure my lips and faltering tongue doth err,
Oh did my heart do so; I must prefer
The heart before the tongue, because the last▪
Less noble is; in the Heart Dame Nature placed
The pure arterial and illustrious blood;
I fear that I am too well understood.
By Peleus.
Ohime, by soft degrees I find
That cunning little God, though blind,
Doth make his way into my breast,
Maugre my self, I must make him my guest.
Yet I must try once more this Boy to mock,
And turn my self into a senseless Rock:
Have I again lost Thetis? is she gone?
Must I to stones and rocks make now my moan?
O precious crystal Rock, thou now dost hold
A gem more rich then Diamond or Gold;
I fear that at the foot of this hard Rock
My Hope will shipwreck by a fatal shock.
But for strong water made of Mercury,
I'll try with tears this Rock to mollify.
My heat is such, twill me to ashes turn,
Then will I make this precious Rock my Urn.
Love, Lo, I yield, I can no more resist
Thy all subduing power, or persist
In my first purposes, thy dart
Hath split in two my tender heart.
Who have no hearts at all are only fit
To cope with thee, and fence away thy hit.
Lo Peleus I am thine.
Hold heart, do not too wide thy self dilate,
Lest by excess of joy I draw my fate
Too soon upon me, and so dye
Ere I make use of Victory.
And you my faithful followers rejoice,
And cleave the air with your triumphing voice:
You have been sharers of my misery,
Now you shall share of my prosperity.
Now our Desires
Do flame with equal fires.
And there doth nothing want but constancy,
For to complete both our Felicity.
Thetis, Thou art my chiefest good.
And you my heart and precious blood.
Behold the Gods are come to be our Guests,
And learn of us what it is to be blessed.
Peleus, We now are both from tortures free;
You Hymen helped, and Hercules helped me.
And to oblige us further, they are here
To mingle joy with us, and make good cheer.
To them who languish
In pain and anguish,
Love gives at last
A sweet repast.
Just heaven ne'er fails, and Powers above
To recompense a virtuous constant Love;
Grief, cares, and pain
Turn all at last to gain.
By this we find adversity to be
The surest road to true Felicity.

INstruct me some kind Power,
To which I may most Lawfully prove false;
My friend, or Mistress.
But what talk I of Law? as if that faith
Could ere be broke with Justice!
Rather, which
Can my heart suffer to be torn away,
And snatched from its own sinews?
Which of them can my soul part with upon easiest terms?
For thus stands my ambiguous fate, that one
Side of my heart must needs be ripped from t'other,
For so these two had filled it; one side each:
My share was almost nothing; only that
Which knit the other two, I called my own.
Friendship, thou art a name, and nothing real,
A mere and empty word, and
Here I quit thee,
Isle not be fettered in fantastic chains,
To court Ideas, nothings, and adore
A strange Platonic Cupped. Give me Love,
That has some Life and vigour in it: Love
That shall delight our bloods as well as Fancies.—
But stay: Is this Lysander? No, some Fiend,
Some false malicious spirit crept within me,
To poison all my Faith. Methinks
I am too earthy; and
I feel my clogged thoughts grovelling
To baseness. O my Theocles!
Pardon me friend; when I forget that name,
May I be-miserable; nay I need not wish it, for
It is implied in that, and I may well
Now save my curse.
Sir, here's a Messenger
With commendations from Artemone.
That Name again confounds me,
Startles all my Loyal thoughts,
And shakes my yielding Virtue
To a weak coldness. Can I part with thee
My Artemone? No; thee Theocles?
O my distracted heart! methinks I feel
The Nerves by several Engines, rack't two ways,
And almost torn to——
—Pray Sir,
What answer shall I return?
I had forgot thy business: say I come,—
Yet sure there might be found a middle path,
Wherein I might observe an equal pace,
Of faith to both. Isle think on it———
O Wench, ne'er trust 'em, they are th'unconstans't
Things in all the world,
They still exclaim on us; tell us
We are more wavering then our feathers,
And that we change more often then the Moon,
With such like sickly Fancies. But if
It were so, in them the cause is;
Had but men a care, still to observe,
And please us as at first, we
Still should be the same; our fancies never change;
But the object alters, and then we
Out of our Constancy, are forced to choose
Another, which may please as that did first.
But Madam,
I do hope you find no reason to apply
Ought of this to your Lysander.
No? what think you then
Of his long absence?
What some two days? I promise you
I know some Lovers, and those of the best file too,
That do presume more on their Mistress favours:
As there's your stalking Signior, he that comes
Hither a wooing still in state, that tells
Long stories of his Pedigrees, and Honours,
In stead of Amorous Passions.
Who, Philonax?
Yes, he that scorns to woo the common way,
But keeps his distance still, and courts by the Rule:
So much a day: observes a kind of diet
In all his wooing: Sooth were it to me, I'd make
His stately hams to cringe before I had him,
And afterword let me alone.
I prithee tell, how has Lysander bribed thee
That thou should thus exclaim on Philonax?
True Madam,
I'ue been bribed; but by his virtues,
His fair Respects to you▪ and noble Carriage.
Ha, ha, ha.—
Indeed I do confess, it is not usual
Amongst us Chamber-Creatures to be bribed
With such uncoyned metal.
I believe thee;
But prithee tell me true, does he not use
To charm thy Tongue by some more powerful motive,
And chain it to himself in golden Links?
Come, come, I know he still does use thee kindly,
Cause Thou belong'st to me.
Madam, I hope
You are not Jealous of me, yet Isle tell you
All that I know, though not as to Create
A good Opinion in you, but confirm
That which you do conceive already of Him.
He's truly Generous, but far from Bribing:
For sure, I think, he cannot be so unjust
To his own Merits, as distrust 'em so
To think they want a mercenary Advocate.
Nay, but, I prithee, haste to his Opinion Concerning me.
He thinks, as all do else,
You are Perfections Store-house, and does love
One only in the world as well as you.
O Hyperia!
And can Thou call him faithful which dos pledge
His faith to more then one? That, That is it
Which I have▪ still suspected, and it cuts
My very heart strings.
But Madam here he comes,
I hope will Cure 'em strait.
MAdam you might have spared your messenger,
My own distressed thoughts did prompt me to you,
As to my Tutelar Goddess.
So perhaps
You use to Court your other Mistress too.
How Lady? what strange Language do I hear!
Yo'ue struck a damp into my soul, which but
So soon exhald by those quick beauteous rays,
Had stifled all my Spirits. Let that tongue
Be blasted, that hath so infected yours.
The witness is not far from hence, My woman,
Who can confirm from your own mouth so much.
My own mouth be accursed then▪ speak Thou monster,
Confess the truth, for that is it must clear me.
That is, I know the Party, whom you love
As dear as this my mistress, and can prove it,
Out of your own confession.
O the Malice
Of faith-betraying Chambermaids! Nay sure
I cannot dare to outlive that cursed minute
Which gives my faith suspected to my Mistress;—
Lady, unlock my Breast, and you shall find
A heart as undefild, as is your beauty,
Or if you will not, I can do it my self.
Hold Sir▪ tic Theocles, her Brother.
See I pray the grounds
Of your strong Jealousy. Thy Pardon Virgin:
Yet thou did ill in holding us so long
In such a strange suspense.
Beshrew Thee wench
For putting me to such a fright: yet still,—
Pray heaven it be none other: I suspect
The sword unsheathed made her conceal the Truth.
But Madam I shall shake your faith I fear,
In craving but one favour at your hands.
What ere it be I'll think the occasion happy
That may the more oblige you to me, speak it.
With much reluctance and fear to offend you,
I'm forced to ask it, and desire you would
Encompass round your heart with a strong faith
That I can never really forsake you.
It is that I may go court Another Mistress.
Is this my Brother? Come you need not hide it,
What should you fear my anger, or Offence?
The thing you ask doth free you from all Love,
And consequently fear of me: why should you
Care how I take it, having thus forsaken me?
O you are much mistaken Madam; Love,
Excessive love of you, doth force me to it;
Your Bother (in whose bliss I know lies yours)
Is deep in love with fair Ethusa, who
Stoutly rejects all Entertainment of
His true affection, till her Sister shall
(To whose disposal she hath given her self)
Freely consent, and wish her to it: now
She, more then I desire, affecting me;
Denies all help to Theocles, unless
He also use the self same power on me,
And by that power with me conform me to her;
Could you but now dispense with me a while,
(Without your leave I dare not) I could soon
Effect what he desires, and then return
With as much joy to you, as he that having
Forsaken for a while his native Country,
Friends, and his safety too; being come home
Kisses the Soil he left, and counts himself
For all his many dangers and more fears
Happy at least in this, that now he knows
To set a higher rate on the kind favour
Which Heaven at first bestowed.
Nay Sir you may
Without all forced pretences do your pleasure,
I am not, I thank Heaven, so fond to sue,
Or broke for Servants.
Think not, fairest Mistress,
That I can ever truly Love but you,
I can in any shape adore your Virtues,
And still reserving in my Constant heart
Your fair Idea, ▪Court another Beauty
With Amorous devotion; but such
As still must rest and point it self in you.
Sir, that Devotion which adores the Image
May chance persuade It self, that through that Image
It worships the true Deity: but yet
Must Excuse others that do still suspect it
As very like Idolatry, if not It.
Madam that strength of Light, that does encircle
The Powers above, Admits no mortal gaze:
Yet by Reflection perhaps we may
Gather a glance, or so: As through a glass
We can outface the Sun, and by those weak
Nerves of our Sense collect those Scattered beams,
As they do guild some Wall or Turret, which
By an immediate view beheld, would dart
Flames in our Eyes to punish our Presumption.
So that sometime a Reverence may as well
Keep us from that we love, as Love invite us.
But Sir, take heed least your Idolatrous love,
Pass not so truly through the fictitious object,
As still remain there: sure the jealous gods
Accept immediate worship, rather then
What's done through the Image, and comes not to them
But by a Proxy: howso'ere the cause
Which you pretend, with your large promises,
May keep me still the same unto your love,
So that your frequent visits strengthen me
In my much shaken faith.
Madam, I leave
My heart with you in pawn, that you may know,
What speech so'ere I use to any other,
That still remains your own.————
Hyperia,
I did not think the had loved me, or the truth
So faintly, as for any threatening, to
Conceal ought, prejudicial unto either.
Come, come, I know, for all the cunning carriage,
Ther's more in it then so; your first expressions
Could not well suit with any friend, but Mistress,
Till fear applied i'm: but it may be now,
That being over, thou'lt reveal the truth.
I do conjure thee here, by all my favours,
(Which I shall much repent, if thou confess not)
Tell me sincerely, what at first you meant.
Madam, if all the carriage of my life
Have gained you this faith of me,
That I can speak any truth at all: believe me now;
If I or know, or think, but that Lysander
Among all women living, loves you only,
May I ne'er find your mercy, no nor heavens.
I cannot yet be confident, I much want
Some forcive Argument to re-establish
My doubtful thoughts.
And here comes one, I'm sure
Will bring you none, your uncle Madam; this
Is he quite poisons all; Lysanders enemy:
Yet hath no reason for it, but that he is
His fathers son.
I met Lysander here,
Now coming from you; Niece, I wonder much
You will give entertainment to a man
You know descended from the ancient enemy
To all our family.
Pardon me uncle,
If that I be not yet of that opinion;
To think that hate must be successive, or
Malice hereditary.
Yet believe me,
Though't runs not in a blood, I see no reason
Why the son ought not take the fathers part.
Come Niece, be wise; ther's the Noble Count
That loves you well I'm sure: In him you may
Bring honour to your self, and you well know
He has your Fathers free consent.
But Sir,
I hope I have a suffrage in this Business,
My voice too would be asked.
See, here they come
For the same purpose too, I think.
Daughter,
Though in this matter here of weight I would not
Force you to any thing; yet I could wish
Your liking would concur with mine. I here
Present unto you him, who, in my esteem,
Deserves your love best, and I hope will find it.
For all that Sir, I think it very fit,
That children should be ruled.
Nay I esteem it
No Marriage; but a well named Rape, where friends
Force Love upon their Children; where the Virgin
Is not so truly given, as betrayed.
I would not have Betrothed people (for
I can by no means call i'm Lovers) do
Such Penance in their marriage sheets, and make
The Rites no Wedlock, but a Sacrifice.
Where like an Innocent Lamb, the passive Virgins
Heart is Torn from her Entrails, not Enticed:
Being condemned, not wedded to her Husband:
Wherefore I will not practise what I may,
But hope nerth'lesse to find my will performed.
Sir, the continual carriage of my Life
Hath been one Act of Duty and Obedience;
And that in this I may not stain the rest,
But steer my Thoughts by yours; I do desire
Some time of respite.
Take it, but have a care,
Your hoodwinked vent'rous Passion oversway not
Your Reason: Think whom here I have commended.
I shall, Sir.
Now to you, thus having made
Your way, I wish success.
And Sir, I think
After your Merits have displayed themselves,
It may be our Presumption, not our Prayer.—
My thanks to both. Madam I make no question
But that you easily believe these friends,
And partly from your own experience know
How well I have deserved you; otherwise
I should relate my self, how much you are
Obliged for this observance which I show you,
By condescending thus to court a Lady
That sued not first to me.
Sir, though I think
Most might be proud of such a favour from you,
And prize it high.——
Nay faith, I must confess
My threshold groans under the daily Clients,
And little Legs that come from Ladies to me:
And I receive so many Tickets from 'em,
That I am fain to hang i'm upon wires,
As ▪Apothecaries do their Physic Bills,
And serve i'm out as the bragging Captain did
His Challenges, so many to a day,
Each in his turn: I've disappointed three now.
—Yet, as I was about to tell you Sir,
I am not of that fancy as to sue
To any man, that does not first appear
A Client unto me.
It seems so Lady:
And yet I am not of that general Tenet
That does admit no female wooers, surely
Your sex is not denied that Liberty of soul
To like what ere you apprehend as good.
Who does forbid the enamoured wedge of Iron
To steal unto the Loadstone, and to knit
It self unto it in an amorous kiss,
Not but by violence to be disjoined? who ever
Censured the uxorious Ivy, that it Courts
The stout tall Oak, and twines it self about
Like to some passionate Lover? as if willing
To shroud the exposed bulk from threatening dangers,
And tell the hostile wind, or envious hand,
That heaves an Axe against it, you must pass
Through me to injure this, hoping to see
Fury at last appeased by the soft object;
Yet howsoever, till death, does not forsake him,
But falls in an Embrace, as if desiring
To be entombed together, and made one Pile.
Sure were those dregs of Pride drained from his soul—
He would appear of most refined thoughts.
But Sir, what Nature may excuse in them,
Reason corrects in us.
Nay but the rather,
Knowing your souls endued with such a treasure
That can direct and guide your Passions, should you
Pursue the Object when by it approved.
True Sir, if Reason did commend it to us,
Likely we should consent.
Believe it in this
Your Reason and your Will are much the same,
You can desire nothing but what that does
(First having weighed and pondered well each scruple,
That may object it self) commend as good;
For whatsoere bounds our affection,
Must first appear unto our Judgment lovely,
It standing Sentinel, questioning all
That pass unto the Closet of the will.
Nay I shall easily grant that we can love,
And love with reason too, but still am Heretic
To your Position, that we ought to court
The object so beloved.
See Madam now,
Your thoughts are not denied to be as willing
And ready too, as ours, but the expression
You think unfit, and so will needs set up
A kind of Just Hypocrisy, nay Virtuous,
Whilst that which you stile modesty, is only
A more allowable and fair dissembling.
For so it is in effect: you must appear
Unwilling when desiring nothing more:
You must seem backward, and be much entreated,
Nay sometimes scarce entreated unto that
Which should you miss of, you would curse your virtues,
And count your Modesty injurious: But
Madam, what only I discourse to you,
I practise among other Ladies: here
You see I break my use, and therefore will not
Ask what adventure I shall undertake
To gain your love; I think you will conceive
That the first act of wooing was a merit:
And that I moved my suit, deserved it.
Nay,
It is not enough to manifest a Love
In bare appearances; Each man perhaps
When ere his Blood runs high, can court a Mistress
With eager zeal and fervour; but it is he
Alone, whose Soul prompts him to purer Love,
Deserves reciprocal Affection.
As for my soul you may know that hereafter;
And for my Blood, you know, I've told you often
It is of the noblest strain, derived from such
Who were the glory of the Roman State:
And all I'm sure that ever heard me speak,
Know by Report it is not stained in me.
I have maintained still the Credit of
Our Family, and as I can remember
Never descended yet so low as now,
Which I trust you'll consider.
Sir I know
You would esteem it but a Lightness in me
To give away my heart almost at the first
Demand, and having had so small experience.
I have some thoughts that disaffect me now,
And hinder all Deliberation
Of Love: hereafter you may hear more from me.
Madam I wait upon you.——
Pray Heaven that all these storms thus coming on,
Like wave and waves one on another back,
Shake not her promised faith unto Lysander,
And ruin't quite: The Gods I think take part
Thus to disjoint their loves. Her Jealousy
First backed with those appearing Reasons may
Be strengthened by these Motives, ne'er decay.
HA, ha, ha, I have ee'n burst my self yonder with laughing▪ and am now forced to retire for fear of my ribs; The most prodigious Contention about a Mistress that ever I beheld: A Ballad-singer and a vexed Constable I should take i'm for; but that I know the one to be a boisterously valiant Captain, and t'other a Gentleman abused into a Poet by his Mistress: who, having for a long time courted her with verses only and Sonnets, is now enjoined by Her to speak nothing but Rime. The Cap∣tain being his Rival hath now provoked the Quarrel, he hath drawn his Falchion, and wheeling about, lies at his Guard
most fiercely, whiles my Riming Gentleman makes at him with a pair of Heroic Verses, which he again puts by with a warlike Oath or two: Such strange Passadoes there are between i'm, such Hermaphroditical Play; short sword and long verse, as I ne'er saw the like. But here they come.
I say I'll fight what ever comes on it.
Why then have at you Sir; nay I'll assure ye,
There is no Poet but he hath his Fury.
Nay good Captain be pacified; indeed it is not manly to challenge or beat another whom you know resolved not to fight again: why you see he refuses your weapon: Alas he com∣bates in another way; if you will make Amorous Sonnets with him, I know he will enter the Lists.
No! my Sword shall be my Pen, and I will print a blue∣die Tragic Poem upon his flesh—————By this good steel I will.
By these good Verses thou shalt have thy fill.
Nay, though with sword I fight not, yet will I
Hang thee in strong lines; make thee living die.
Strong lines? strong halters: I'll beat this riming spirit out of you, and make you howl in pitiful prose. If ever I hear you pelting verses at my Mistress window any more, I'll beat that inspired Pate: I will Sirrah, so that the discharged Cham∣ber-pot shall be a work of Charity, the urine being med'ci∣nal.
I do defy thee and thy threats, thou fellow,
That look so like a foaming angry Billow;
Crowned with my twig of Laurel I fear not
Thunder of rotten Eggs or Chamber-pot.
Get you a Sword Changeling, and a good one too, or I'll crown your Cockscomb with a holly twig as big as my arm, Isle make your brains so fluent, they shall be ready to fly out upon all occasions.
My Body shall with Poetry be charmed,
Thus to be naked is to be best armed.
Isle ee'ne try what Armour of proof you have.
Hold, hold, shall I now tell you what you two are?
Yes, Mars, and Apollo.
A ridiculous pair of Cockscombs you are to quarrel, and violate all bonds of friendship: thus for a white face, a coy, disdainful woman, who for ought you know when you have done your best, will only laugh at your folly: I would not have you expect to be so Generously miserable as to deserve Pity.
Come, come, you only speak this out of your own Averseness to all Love: she hath most affectionately engaged her self by several promises to one of us two; but finding us both, so equally deserving, cannot as yet finally determine the party.
Nay that's for certain none can husband bee▪ To fair Ethusa, unless I or Hee.
Here's nothing to be done with my Sword, and I scorn to kill him as he is, unarmed. Prithee Miserotos we should be much bound to the discovery of thy Justice, if thou could chalk us out a fair way of Decision.
Faith I can imagine none, you are so disproportiona∣bly qualified; unless putting it to the hazard of Lots. For you standing on terms of Chivalry, He of Poetry; you for the point of your Sword, he of his pen, can never meet in fair Duel.
Why then Isle stand to Lots.
And shall I too? No; for I much do fear
To venture such fair hopes as now appear.
Nay then let her decide it; I know her judgement must prefer me, therefore I'll stand to no other Lottery but her li∣king.
It is then agreed.———
Did ever men run thus out of their wits with love? nay and for one that gives i'm no Encouragement at all, the most contemptful abusive woman that ere was sued to. She appoints i'm their days of visits, and then sits in state like some great Princess about to decide grave matters concerning the Common∣wealth:
They usually walk without in the Hall, and converse with the Serving-men, till summoned by her Gentlewoman, who being the Clark of the Court, presents their Petitions, their Amorous Papers of Verses, and takes their several Enditements against the next appearing.
Well, give me Liberty of soul, who's will take Beauty.
SAve you fairest Ladies: I wish health
And your own wishes upon both.
But sure
He does not know how much h'has given away
In that one word. If I had my own wish,
He should bestow himself.
If that be all,
We thank you Sir.
But Lady I have business
Beyond a bare salute, and it is of Theocles,
His Service to you Lady.
Well! proceed;
Hoe's one, if faith can bear the stamp of Merit,
Deserves your love; he spends the day in tears,
And by his Sighs, with which he counts his hours,
He makes void Minutes. Thus he pines away,
And in a Sullen grief hath lost himself
Only for love of you.
How well that tongue
Hath learnt to woo! He need not fear repulse,
If he could spend a Suite in his own Name,
Smoothed with such language to my tender ears.
Alas I pity the poor Gentleman;
Bid him rise early, use good Company,
And know no other moisture but of wine,
Twill cure his Melancholy.
If you return
But this slight Answer, know you then will draw
A new disease upon him, and your Cure
Will only thus grow to a deeper wound,
Whilst he shall die with Physic.
Still he moves
Like one that knew the Conquering Art to plead
For any but himself,
Indeed you urge
His suit so full, as if he had bequeathed
His soul into your bosom; But I pray you
Discourse it coolely; should I give my self
To every one that this way would deserve me
I should be married to a Troop of Men,
And grow a Lawful Strumpet; For my Face
Is not of that poor Clay, as to be courted
With one Flame only, there are more desires
Chained to my eyes then his.
There may be so,
And that Face doth deserve it▪
Pray heaven himself
Do not increase the Number.
But in all
That heap of Suitors, there are few can boast
A Flame so vigorous, as Theocles's;
All do not testify their rude Affections
With that best Complement of Gaudie Presents,
Nor woo in the costly language of rich gifts:
This is the stile of Theocles firm love
Printed in Gold.
I grant indeed he sent▪
Full choice of Presents, and the finest toys
As I could wish: But I returned my thanks,
And paid him still in a Civility:
If he expect more, I recall that too:
Else, call it what he will, he sends but wares,
And cheats my Cabinet with Merchandise,
Which I forsooth must think filled with his love,
And in Reward, bestow my self: alas
I have no price set on me, nor am sold
At the cheap rate of Jewels: Isle not pass
My self away by bargain.
Lady he scorns
To chaffer for affection: He desires
That you should recompense his Faith with yours,
And not his Gifts: when ever he sends a Jewel
Carved out into a heart, it is his own heart
Wounded and cut by your Disdain; each present
Carries a part of him that sent it too.
His Love is weaved through all his Gifts: Did he
Know that base Art how to send any thing
And leave himself out, you might easily then
Slight the poor single offer. Nor is he armed
Only with Gifts, he dare even challenge dangers
And provoke death, if he might thus avoid
The fate which he more fears of your Displeasure.
He dares fight for you and maintain your Beauty,
Whilst he shall lose his own, and paint your face
Fresh with his blood.
I, here's a way indeed,
A fine device thus to defend my beauty
That he might ruin it. That Ladies name
Whose worth must be decided by the Sword,
Suffers though in a Conquest; it is a stain
To honour, whilst it wants another force
Then its own Innocence to guard it.
Lady,
You're too severe thus to despise all ways
That render Suitors lovely: if you doubt
His Constancy, invent your self a Trial;
Impose some harder task, whose cruel weight
Might shake a faith which was as firm as Rock,
Though more relenting. If gifts fraught with love
Cannot prevail, nor the Judgment of a Duel,
Then find out something heavier then war,
Enjoin his absence, and impose some years
Of tedious Pilgrimage, which only thu•
Shall grow a Sport and Recreation,
Because your Command.
Sister you're too heavy,
Come, be more cheerful.
This is a Contempt
Worse then the rest, will she not give an Answer?—
O the proud Insolence of a coy Lady!
But if that be the way, I can follow,
And shape my self to any thing to produce
A Comfort for my friend: Panareta
Let me entreat your help.
O do not wrong
The power you have in me to entreat any thing,
Be it a command, and it is already done.
Lys. What sweetness dwells in all her Answers? now
I could forget my friend, and almost urge
A suit might bless my self; But I must throughout:
My request is, that you would win your Sister
To glance some favours upon Theocles.
She is all stone yet, but that she will not
Be won upon by tears; No softness can
Supple her harder Bosom.
A good Character.
Ah Lysander! I did hope you would
Have urged a glad Suit of Another strain
When I did yield so far: I did believe
(How Credulous Love is) it was me you aimed at.
Did I forsake one shelve to split my hopes
Upon a New? I must still try Ethusa,
Since you are cruel too.
How should I plead?
Tell me what words will soonest win her love,
For sure you know the way to conquer hearts.
How gravely they consult together! only,
After more Policy to be denied still.——
Tell her how great his Love is: let her know
She sits within his heart next to the Gods.
Sure that cannot win her, for even thus I love
You with a faith as great, as he does her.
You sit within my heart next to the Gods,
Pardon the Blasphemy, and are even placed
Above i'm too, and yet I am neglected.
I am glad I am released, since I can now
Gather more Breath, strong for a new repulse.
If you love me, then show it in this grant.
SEe he is come himself: let him now move
His own desires; for sure it is an Advantage
To any one, but me, to woo in Person.
Friend and Lady, pardon my hasty rudeness,
Which scarce permits this short salute:
I see a Beauty that can draw my Soul
Out through my Eyes, by whose exhaling virtue
I am dead every where, but in those parts
Which survive only that they may view her.
Now I must even become a Prodigy
To please his fancy; his strange Expressions
Seem not so much to court as fright a Lady.
And I applaud the strength of my conceit,
That I'm not startled yet: pray Sir tell me
What Show do ye please to make Me? Am I turned
Into some Blazing Comet? Sure my hairs
Do all lie right, and they are still themselves,
They do not hiss nor spit out fire.
Lady,
You have the Beauty and the Majesty
Of any Star, you shine as bright as they,
But not so monstrous▪ and yet pray heaven that you
Do not portend a Death too. But since
You will not conceive the meaning of a Distance,
I will grow nearer to you, and address
My suit in th'approach of a plain language,
My business then is humbly to implore
The Influence of your love.
Then you have performed
Your Business, you've implored it: Fare you well Sir.
Nay Lady bee'nt thus cruel to undo
A man whose only fault is too much Love:
His wish is not to beg, but to obtain.
And yet the whole reward of my Desire
Is but to beg, though I could wish to obtain▪
I must confess he still hath shown himself
A careful wary Suitor. I've received
Presents enough to tire my hand in the taking,
To which I only can return my thanks.
But he must pardon me if I withhold
My Love: H'hath bin a frequent Visitant,
And oft hath sent his Page to know how well
I took my Rest; nay, even how I dream't:
H'hath been as Scrupulous as a Physician,
And knows my sleeps as perfect as my woman:
And yet for all this Care I can bestow
Only the Charity of thanks, and wish
That he would new place his love upon some Subject
That knew more how to yield.
See, Sh'hath given
An answer sucked out of my breast; I grant
You've shown Affection great as are your merits,
For which I can but thank you, and entreat
That you would place your love upon some other,
Soft as your own Desires.
Your Answer, Lady,
Hath only killed with Pity, all the relief
Which I can draw from so misplaced a kindness,
Is but to die.
Then I perhaps may shed
One tear upon your Funeral, and wish
That you had been more wise.
I was transported
With your unwelcome Answer, that I knew not
How to reply, had not the Charity
Of your friend helped, and taught me to confess
That all your pity only bids me die.
Recall your harsher sentence; Let me live
Only in the Comfort of one Smile.
Do not thus
Betray a man to sadness, who can joy
Only in the Services he does—for you.
You plead well, if your self did not betray
A maid to sadness and the wild Company
Of her own tears, for want of the relief
Which you might pour out in one Smile.
Alas,
I should but counterfeit.
It would appear
Some comfort yet if you would fain a Mirth.
Remit some of your hardness, and infuse
A soul into him quicker then his own.
I cannot blame the weight of his desires,
But wonder Sir at yours: I cannot see
With what hope you might urge his Suit, whilst thus
A Lady droops and pines for love of you,
One that deserves a Nobler Mate, if thus
She had not first betrayed her own desires:
Expect no other usage to your Theocles
(For Isle not call him mine) then what you cast
Upon Panareta.
If it be only this
That keeps your love in, and drives back your smiles,
My friend may yet discern some show of hope,
And I'm content that you should pattern out
Your entertainment unto Theocles
From mine to your Panareta; (for as yet
I cannot of the sudden call her mine.)
I am content too, what thinks this sadder pair?
I bow to any thing you please to name.
And I to what Lysander doth agree.
Be it then concluded; you are firm Lysander?
You'll not fly off?
I vow my faith t'observe it.
I see this comfort yet, that if I die,
'Tmust be a friend that kills me.
And I am glad
My life's enclosed within a Sisters Breath.
Enough, it is all agreed, hereafter we
Shall either know your Faith or Perjury,—
Nay Sister we expect some other Courtship, I've appointed
My two other servants this day of Visit.
Is it a day of hearing then?
Yes; in troth this serious Courtship of Theocles had almost wrought a distemper upon me (for such I count all sad∣nos) I hold him somewhat too worthy to be listed with that ridi∣culous Company, else I had thought upon some humour for him too: But Isle lay no other punishment upon him besides a con∣stant absence, till he hear my pleasure.
O Sister, as thou regard'st my Comfort, prithee let no∣thing pass from thee that may be at all distasteful to him.
Well Sister, for your sake Isle study a Carriage.
O Madam, yonder's your Brace of humours, as you call i'm, in the midst of the street quarrelling, but hither I imagine their course is bent.
When they come bring i'm in hither. Sister pray take your place, and learn by me how to entertain Suitors. It is not
fit that these Men should call us Mistresses, and so confidently proffer their Services for nothing. I would not have i'm so hypocritical.
SLave, Rascal, I'll beat thy Brains out with the hilt of my Sword.
Sir I suppose it is my Mistress pleasure,
That I should first appear, you stay her Leisure.
How now? what Saucy companions raise this tumult so nigh me? what you two? I did not think you had stood in so little awe.
Most fairest Lady, indeed and forsooth
He rudely hath almost beat out my tooth.
And Lady I suppose he did deserve it, in offering to compare himself with me; nay, and what's more, he did prefer his Poetry before my valour.
You're both rude Fellows, get you to the door again, let me see whether you can come in more civilly. Go I say.
Why this is well, now let me hear what you can say for your selves.
Fairest of Ladies, hither I am come,
Out of my store of wit to show you some:
And if you please on this my Present Smile,
My self the happiest of Men I'll stile.
What have we here, a Paper of Verses? Read i'm.
Madam, th'Ʋnwritten Paper I had brought
Fair as t'was in the native hew,
Because it was a thing unfit I thought,
To give ought Blotted unlike you.
My weeping Pen with grief began to swell,
Sad that It should nothing send;
Whose Tears by chance to these few verses fell,
Doubtful lest they might offend.
Thus every thing fair Lady I enjoy,
Doth court your Presence, mourns to find you coy.
And now, faith what Poet has hired you to put off his verses? you bring nothing of your own besides the Tune, you'd make an incomparable fellow, if you had but a Raw arm, and a Partner, the structure of whose Body were built upon a wooden leg, to bellow it out by turns in a most pitiful unsanctified Note. Come, I know it is some Penny-Rimer or other hath sold you a stock to set up with, to save the delays of Printing: Take you out of this common way, and I know you have no more Rime in you then a dying Swan, though less melody.
No, Madam? if for verses you thirst ever,
My Pen shall run, I say, as doth a River.
Pox of all his Canting; This foolish thing called verse is a language as bad as Barbarism to me: I can as soon turn honest as Rimer.—Divinest Lady; I fear me you'll grow sick of this bad Poet; give me but leave to silence him, I'll talk him dead. Speak nothing but Swords and bullets: Or dart a fire from my Basilisks Eyes shall singe and stifle all his Poetry: I will do this or any thing, be it beyond the reach of Man or Thought, to do you service.
Has your Sauciness done yet? or do you want breath to conjure any further? Sure you forgot your Circle, else we should have seen some darksome Fiend raised by your Charms, or heard a rattling Tempest louder then the tongue that made it: know Sir, a Silence would better become those Swelling lips, till you had known my pleasure. What if I like his Poetry and pre∣fer it 'bove all the Thunders of your puffed up valour? It is no new thing to woo in Rime.
Lady, since it is your will, I'll be as silent as the Grave, which strait should Swallow up that Bombast Poet, but that you please to ransom him: My lips shall be sealed up as close as Cockles, and never divide Themselves till you uncharm i'm.
Now as sure as the Death he talked of, he speaks all by the line, his Tongue runs like some mad chained dog, thus far, and is then checked for want of room and breath. It were better you had obeyed without the tediousness of a reply, and not have bin thus stubborn out of Duty. Well pro∣ceed Lamprias.
I bless the Tongue that gives me leave, and shall
Thank you hereafter that hoe's not my Rival.
And yet it were not amiss to thank in present, if your Rime would bear it. But pray Sir, whence grows this perem∣ptory noise of yours? who hath informed you that Pisistratus is not the first in my Thoughts?
Lady your self hath taught me this, for why
You'd not bid him be silent, unless I
Should be the Man, and since you deign this favour,
I shall still be your Creature, still and ever.
It is true indeed, I bade him be silent, and see, he dares not so much as whisper; but it was only that I might have leisure to deny you. Do you not see how he is obedient? he dares not venture so near a disloyalty as but to breathe it's mouth; he sucks in all the Air at his Nostrils only, and instead of speaking does but merely shrug, and faintly nod his head, as if he feared this were a Disobedience too: faith try him, and see how stubbornly he will hold his peace.
Pisistratus! why Pisistratus, what hath thy tongue
Forgot his Thunder? Is thy speech all gone?
You see he dares not trespass, and I would you durst not too.—But did I command you to breathe nothing but what was clad in verse, and yet forsooth you dare utter your mind in Prose.
Lady it was verse I said, I say it was verse,
And if you please I will the same rehearse.
A very fine, smooth verse indeed, where the Music ends in Tongue and Gone: it was well chimed you think: but no matter, I shall find time to punish these Enormities hereafter; mean while I'll tempt your Obedience a little further, and command your Silence, yet it is one favour I have done you, that you practise by Pisistratus, and hold your peace by Rule.
My Thanks and I could wish———
Stop there, and know, when I command a Silence, you must not promise but perform it: for once I'll pardon you your Rime, and give you leave to break off in the middle. Now Pisi∣stratus I untie your tongue, and expect what you have to say.
First let me humbly thank you, that I am still a Soldier, and may talk.
You say right indeed, for most of you are skilled at no other weapon.
But if you'll give me leave to express my Thoughts, I'm none of those weak counterfeit Warriors; no shadow but a Soldier; my Part is not to say, but do: I disclaim these Trifles of Service, this talking way of Courtship: Give me a danger such as would strike astonishment in the bold Alcides: Plant me instead of Ordnance against the Walls of a besieged City, or let me enter on a Grove of Pikes, which I will mow down like a crop in harvest.
Bless us! what a volley of words is here; you do not Speak methinks, but Discharge, and make every sentence, a peal.
Madam, I bring no puling Elegies, no Poetry I, Bellona is my Muse, and this bright Sword the only offering I can pre∣sent: but such as when you please shall sacrifice whole Hence∣tombs of your Enemies; (if yet among Mortals there be any so profane as to injure so Divine a Beauty.)
You promise Liberally; but I fear when it should come to the Test, your Sword will not be so nimble as the Tongue that brags on it; it shall be fastened so close in the Scabbard that you cannot draw it out, or some such pretty toy to delude a danger: Then instead of fighting you shall swear valiantly against the Cutler, and give no Death but in your Curses.
Lady, your comment wrongs my worth, by your fair honour, and by those many Victories, which yet sit warm and fresh upon my cumbred Sword, were he a man, and such whom often Conquests had made great as my self, and to what height my virtues have arrived, to be thought immortal; if such a man should speak these words, I would strait confute the wild open∣neon of the loose world▪ and leave this wonder dead before their Eyes.
Faith it would do well to have some proof of so untamed a valour. But yet Sir, methinks you are much mistaken in the wooing way. Sister, what will you say if I take down this Lyon∣like Champion? this Spirit rampant? I'll undertake with two words so to humble him, that of a boisterous Roarer, he shall become as supple a Courtier as you would desire.
I should as much admire the miracle, as the power that effected it.
Mark then. Sir, as I told you, methinks you are mista∣ken in the way of wooing: I would have a tame Suitor, you make too much noise in a Ladies Chamber; pray let me have your Courtship in a softer Dialect.
Madam, the power of your love is so prevalent, that it can turn me to any shape; I can submit my mounting soul to a most gentle Carriage and sweet behaviour only for your sake Lady.
As how Sir? I long for an experiment.
Why thus: Divinest Lady, my humble service being premis'd—
What? Do you repeat your Letters? Sure this was the last you writ to your Country Mistress. Does it not follow—Hoping you are as deep in love as I am at the writing hereof—and so forth?
Lady I do esteem't the greatest part of my Duty, still at the first appearance to present my service to you.
What and give the same thing twenty times over? I thought you had presented that sufficiently already, but now I begin to suspect it as at another command, and none of your own, you are so free on it.
I hope you do not take me for a Serving-man, or Gen∣tleman Usher, Lady?
And yet that laced Cloak being so near allied to a Live∣rye, may breed a foul suspicion.
Fair Madam you're mistaken.
What Sawcebox? tell me I lye. I'll make you more Obedient.
Would it would please you Lady to descend so low, as
make me understand your will, you should always find me as quick in the Execution, as apprehension.
Bless me! my servant all this while, and now to seek in what pleases me? I'll hear no more at this time, I care not what's your business.
Nay Sister, now you are too cruel.
My doome's irrevocable; be gone I say; I expect no reply.
Your Creature.
Come back again; my humor's altered; and now I think on it, I'll put a further trial upon your Loyalty; you be∣gin to complement pretty well, I'll try the power of love, and see whether it can file you into a more smooth garb; and to that purpose I command you (upon pain of my displeasure) to appear never before me but as your Rival Lamprias is wont, in Rime. I know you are not such an Enemy to the Muses, but that upon such an occasion they may smile upon you. And then for you Lamprias, because I would not have you unemployed, you shall assume his fighting humour; I love a man complete in all ways. Give him your Sword Pisistratus, he should have your Buff Coat, but that your Doublet I fear is Canvas on the back: I know you'll fight courageously; and for Pisistratus, I make no question, but in a short space we shall have him as good a Poet as most at Court, and make verses on one leg as well as the best of i'm. Come Sister, let's leave i'm to think on it, when you are provided let me see you again. (Exe. Pan. Eth. Eud.)
Make verses on one leg? I warrant they'll halt to the purpose. Shall I turn Poet and be feasted by the Players? well! I thank my stars I am not so far to seek yet, but that I can drink, and take Tobacco, with some other initiating qualities, in which we Poets and Soldiers are near allied.
In good faith I have not one quality of a Soldier, but running away; I think we were best change habits, I could rime as well in thy Suit, and thou fight as manfully in mine, could not?
I but doest think shoe's no better sighted, then not to discern us by our faces?
I had forgot that; but what then shall we do?
Nay that I know not, let's ee'n to our friend Miserotos, and take his Advice; A Looker on may see better ways in the game then a Party.
I Do not doubt his Love, but I could wish
His Presence might confirm it: when I see
A fire well fed shoot up his wanton flame,
And dart it self into the face of heaven;
I grant that fire without a fresh supply
May for a while be still a fire; but yet
How doth its lustre languish, and it self
Grow dark, if it too long want the Embrace
Of its loved Pile? how strait it buried lies
In its own ruins? Bless me my kinder Stars
From the bad Omen! Now methinks he wrongs
The tenderness of my Affection,
And plays the Tyrant with my easier Love,
He may perchance abuse the Liberty
He ravished from me; and when he hath won
Panareta, urge my own Consent against me.
If his Love still be firm, O how he seems
Too like the God that struck him; whilst he can
With-hold his Sight, too cruel! and himself.
It much afflicts me that my message was
Prevented by my Father, and my Uncle.
I'll sift the business out—————
—How now my Girl?
Methinks there sits a Truth still in thy looks:
A Treachery upon that forehead placed,
May easily wrong a faith it self hath lost.
Madam, what unknown fault of mine hath thus
Perplexed your Entertainment? heretofore
You were not wont to cast these frowns upon me,
As if you meant to bury all my joys
Within your wrinkled forehead.
Whence hath guilt
Borrowed this glorious shelter? how can vice
Become thus specious, hid within the shroud
Of an unfaulty look, and innocent tongue?
Thy pretty pleadings make me almost love
The Ruin thou throw'st on me.
Madam, I dare
Pronounce my self still free; no guilt can stain
My Innocence; unless it be a fault
There to be guiltless where your Sacred Tongue
Imputes a Blot: how my grieved Eyes could weep
To wash that scandal off from my clear Face,
Which only your Suspicion makes a Crime.
A vice thus painted out is the best Face
That virtue can put on: O that Lysander
Could thus dissemble too! I then were blessed
As much in his concealed Apostasy,
As in his better Faith.
How I rejoice
To suffer with that Name: Then I perceive
It is some uncertain Rumour hath displaced
Your wonted cheerfulness.
Were but the fame
Uncertain, I would then call back my Smiles,
And still shine in a free and generous Mirth.
But oh! the grave instructions of Age,
And the more lively Precepts of a bribe,
Whose Innocence will not these baits o'rethrow?
Now Madam, since I have discovered thus
The poison of your sickness, give me leave
To cure the Malady with a present Ease.
You sent me to Lysander, as I went
Your Father and Diarchus met me, They,
I must confess, urged me with vehemence,
And a severity printed in frowns
Deeper then age had carved upon their brows:
They threatened to Reward my falsehood too.
(For even that whiles it would take away
My Faith from you were but a Punishment)
I should have told Lysander, that your flame
Cooled by his absence now did only aim
To seat it self within the prouder Circuit
Of Philonax rich bosom: I did then
Promise Obedience, which I performed
Only in not betraying your commands,
This is the only guilt my virtue feels
In disobeying Artemone's Father.
Suspicion yield a little: how I fain
Would force my self to a belief that thou
Speak only Truth? but yet recall thy self,
Do not heap guilt on guilt in a Denial
Of what hath passed; alas! thy tender years
Are too unripe for to delude the strong
And mature policy of subtle Age,
It is but a slender fault to be overcome
By an experience such as theirs.
Madam,
Could you persuade me that it were a virtue,
I would yet scorn to own it (Pardon Madam)
I am not rude, I ought in such a Cause
To be as bold as Innocence.
Yet still methinks there heaves a Jealousy,
And will not out of the sudden, I feel it beat
About my heart, O that I could believe
Thee faithful, and might yet suspect Lysander:
There's something whispers me thou art not false,
And yet I must still doubt of him.
This Madam is
But to distrust me in a fairer word,
You Gods that kept me Innocent, by the same Power
Make it appear so, else it is but vain
To worship whilst you're as blind as Love,
Virtue is worth your miracle; Create
Some new way which may blot this scandal out:
I can bring only Tears to plead my Faith,
And would I could weep Rivers to maintain
My secrecy to you, in the same way
As I would expiate some horrid Crime.
Enough, The hast won my Faith, and kept thy own:
Then pardon my best Girl the vain Surmise
The frailty of my love possessed me with.
Let Father threaten, and that next dear Name
Of Uncle plot against my happiness,
Let them contrive my Ruin, and infect
Their Care with Malice too, so I enjoy
Faithful Lysander, and Hyperia.—
Yet oh this Absence!——
O The strange subleties of a women's love.
We must embrace our Punishment, and swear
We are rewarded when they torture us:
What Comfort dwells in that frail Sex, whose best
Of kindness proves a sting? have I for this
Consumed my heart in Passions? and through sighs
Breathed out my Soul to find a better dwelling
Within Ethusa's breast, and yet does she
Dislike my Presence, and pretend love too?
Alas I must not visit her; Though't be death
Not to enjoy that Face, I dare not see it.
Let those unpitied Lovers turn their plaints
Into glad Jubiles, whose constant suite
Meets a perpetual frown: I envy that
Which they esteem the worst of misery:
Would I might be denied still; They, at least
Enjoy this Comfort, to behold the hand
That strikes, whiles it is my Fate to dye in the dark.
The Tempest is then lessened whiles the Sun
Mingles his rays with the unruly showers,
But in the horror of a gloomy night
The Shipwreck multiplies, and the sad strokes
Fall double still. If I behold her face,
(That Face which hitherto hath made me live)
I then must cease to be; for that's the doom
Of her displeasure; howsoever my Plot
Backed with success may soon dispel these clouds.—
—What? Musing Sister? your looks seems to wear
A manly seriousness; all your Gestures
Should be as soft as an embrace.
I confess
I did not dress my look, nor put it on,
As we do use our Gorgets, by the glass;
But if it brags no lustre sprung from joy
Of your Arrival, it belies my heart.
But whore's Lysander pray y'? for sure you'll want
Part of your welcome, whilst that Name's forgot.
Urge that way Theocles, it is the best Physic
To a melancholy virgin to hear talk
Of one that loves her, nay some say there is
A sickness which that Name can only cure,
Which the poor Doctor fain would undertake.
Stop thy lascivious tongue, and do not dare
To think the rest.—But brother, you tell me not
How fares Lysander.
How I see friendship thoroughly in that Name?
Men talk of Pylades, and I know not what
Strange Enterprises of rash Theseus;
But this Lysander, how he out-goes all story?
Give me a man made up of the Extractions
And quintessence of all whom ever yet
Fame with her loudest Trumpet hath proclaimed
For Men of Loyal Breasts, and this same Man,
This Man thus filled with Friendship, shall yet learn
A way to love from our Lysander.
Sure
You'll strait commend him into some new God:
But I dare still wish after all this noise,
That he were yet complete in a firm love.
That were to loose a wish; I never yet
Could tell of any that had made a choice
To fix his love within the tender compass
Of a fair Virgins bosom, to which he thought
The heavens themselves were poor, and would contemn
The gaudy competition of the stars,
And yet one whom a friends request
Might tempt from all these joys, who for that Name
Durst leap from his Elizium: just such
A Miracle is our Lysander.
And is the faith you bragged of come to this?
How all his Praises vanish! you do ill
To raise my hopes to such an height, and then
The only Argument of his Constancy
Is, that he's false to Me: It is no such miracle
Of Love since you thus prize it, to betray
A Credulous Maid.
Heavens and Gods defend it!
He plies my Suit, but no way leaves off you:
That love, which some say is begot by sight,
And born within the eye, yet does not perish
At every distance, nor yet die entombed
In a dark mournful wink, it is stronger weaved,
And grows more knotty then to be easily broke
At each small Absence. When you see two Irons
Receive an equal virtue from the Loadstone,
How they both stir at once, and though divided
By many envious miles, yet how they move
And dance one way still! Thus your Lysander's love
As near as your own heart, replies to yours,
And still is constant here, though still abroad:
Indeed he's grown unto that strength of love
Guarded with an unjealous Faith, he dares
In such a Cause be absent from your face,
And only meet you in a Constant heart.
I always told her thus, whilst she replied
I was too young to know a Lovers heart.
Heavens know, and the Gods witness, I'd allow
So long an absence as might even bring
My love in question, if ought thence should rise
To further your Desires: But pardon Brother,
If I esteem th'adventure of one visit
Less fatal then to cross your hopes: He might
Advance your flame, and not neglect his own.
Sister, he dares not dream of a neglect.
Still for my faithfulness.
He should much wrong
The love I bear his virtues to contemn it:
But though he fling no other Scorn upon me,
It is one that he is absent.
How I grieve,
That Love should be thus blind.
What? troubled Brother?
Only I thought how ill Ethusa's Face
Did suit with a disdain▪
There's something more
In the quick change, you were not wont so soon
To let Lysander vanish from your Thoughts,
When hoe's fixed there he, fills so great a space,
That Nothing else can enter, no not Ethusa;
Your looks inform that you unwilling hide
A truth which you are loath to utter: say,
What strange mishap dares vex your knowledge? is
Lysander safe?
Alas Sister know,
It is one that's nearer then Lysander suffers.
What still Ethusa?
Nay one nearer yet:
Know then it is your misfortune throws these clouds
Upon my darkened Face.—And I could still
Suppress the Cause. Faith Sister let it pass.
Nay then I will conjure you to reveal
Your Thoughts at full.
I can hold out no longer.
First then (with pardon that your self hath screwed
And wrung out the Relation which my promptness
Should freely offer) know that Lysander loves
Panareta; nay so as I could wish
His love as great to you: At first indeed
He did but fain Affection, and put on
Courtship, as if he thought you present still,
But won by her sweet ordered Carriage
And fair converse, he like the giddy Fly,
Long sporting with the pleasant light, at length
Embraced the cruel flame: He needs not strive
To vent an artificial Sigh or Tear,
He does not labour now t'expresse a groan
Or doubtful accent, which may more betray
Skill then affection; Cupped uncompelled
Sits in his Face, as proud to conquer him,
Whose Counterfeit seemed to upbraid his Power.
This sad discovery, to my troubled thoughts
Carries an equal irksomeness t'unfold,
As to suppress; for thus I lose a Friend,
Who else should wrong a Sister.
Brother,
Is not the sum of all, Lysander's falsehood?
Methought I heard a Thing like this: That sense
Had but that discreet faculty to err!
O this villain Falsehood! That I might
Enjoy my own wish, and not murder his!
How I repent my Sin ere it be done!
But I must through it, and yet bring it out
This new strange way by still denying it.
No Sister hoe's not false.
What was it then
Your speech delivered to my trembling Ear?
It was that Lysander was grown false: I cannot
With my best Art conceal't: Indeed hoe's false.
What will become of me now? They'll believe
My treachery hath wrought all this, and then
Where is that Faith I bragged of?
Prithee Brother
Withdraw a while; heaven knows I love thee better
Then to enjoy thy company in tears.
I'll obey, and watch the progress of his Suite:
What though Lysander yet is my true friend,
(If that can be whilst hoe's my Sisters foe)
That Title shall not draw a wrong on you,
Hold then and I already clasp Ethusa.
Fair Madam—
Prithee I am not fair,
I was so when Lysander loved me; That
Was all my Beauty.
I am glad yet she will not
Hear me; she has not leisure then to chide.
And can Lysander thus forget his vows?
And cease to love? or place his unjust flame
In a new Bosom? He can; and may perhaps
Feel a Revenge high as his Injury.
It is vain to shed a Tear: if he be false
He not deserves one Jewel from my eyes.
(For thus he once would flatter even my tears)
Grant me but this ye Gods, that he may feel
A cold repulse, and once more woo my love,
I would then trample on his base Devotions,
And joy in my revenge, which only thus
Would seem too Small that it comes after his;
And to his further Rage, I'd even woo
A flame hid in his Enemies breast.
PLy her strongly Brother, give her not time
Merely to breathe: if her unguided answer
Would fain be clothed in a Denial, if
A discontent break from her forehead, then
Lay out your Power, stifle her speech in the birth,
And choke all passage up with the rehearsal
Of that loud Name of Father.
I am perfect
In your Instructions. Daughter you still appear
Wrapped up in Clouds, and whilst other Ladies
Study their boxes, and still practise helps
For to preserve their Beauty, you alone
Desire the ruin of your own Face: Fie!
Grow cheerful, I shall else perhaps conceive
That I am your Disease.
Father, your presence
Is always welcome as of my Tutelar God,
And it must needs be some strange unheard of message
That makes your sight grow tedious.
Brother now.
Now for my counsel.
Nay then I have it:
Now Artemone by a Fathers plea,
By the unbounded limits of Sire—
And by the privilege an Uncle bears
In a reflection from that Sacred Name—
Here are love Philtrums now; hey for Philonax.
Do not thus wrong the virtue you have given me:
What need these charms? when even your fainter breath,
Though uttered in a more familiar sound,
Would prove a Spell unconquered.
We do not bring
Any severer Magic by whose art
Thou might be supplied to thy overthrow.
Love is our sole Enchantment, and a Care
For your continual welfare.
Alas such News
Would challenge its own welcome, though not involved
In this mysterious Dialect: I've not heard
Of any one so much his own bad friend
As to be wooed to a Good-fortune; know then
Father and Uncle, Stiles of Providence,
What ever the message be your Cares have brought,
I will receive it with a Joy as great,
As much unlimited as I grant your Power,
And in acknowledgment shall still remain
Due to your free disposal.
Some hopes yet,
I see shoe's well prepared.
I, here's the sound
Of sweet Obedience! why should tender years
Fling off their Fortunes through an Appetite
And fit of liking: That Affection
Will prove most durable, where knowing Age
And a considerate choice confirm the match.
Well, I'll be silent yet, my lesser power
May but perchance hinder the good Event.
Then I perceive that love will be the scope
Of this Authentic language; your discourse
Well seasoned with a grave discretion,
And the Authority of a Parents will
Have thus far won upon me: I confess
Though in the hastiness of my Desires
As far as my Affection is my own,
(Yet still reserving a due share for you)
I have in heart betrothed it to Lysander,
Yet not so chained, but that your just displeasure
Might break the knot, or (what I'd rather wish)
Your mild advice untie it.
A brave cunning Lady!
Her Father now must thank her, and be obliged
Because he will grant her wish.
Let but my Niece
Hold on this course, and by my better hopes
I will reward her as she were my Daughter:
And by the Dowry I will cast upon her,
It shall be thought she was Diarchus issue.
Sir, though I did not hope for a Reward
Besides the naked Act of my clear duty,
I should not start from my obedience:
My thoughts are so Immaculate, that I
Could never mean to buy my Innocence,
And make a Trade of virtue.
Then my Girl,
I hope thou art prepared to entertain
Philonax's love, he, the Senator?
I feel my Coldness melting! Sir, your breath
Hath raised a heat in my Affections,
Which until then were frozen. I confess,
And now dare speak it; I love Philonax,
And were he present, could receive his Courtship
With more then formal kindness.
Hyperia,
Go and entreat him hither.
Tell him we expect
His quick approach: I would not have him slip
This very punctual minute; Sure this Love
Hath his set times; would he were here already.
How aguish her desires are! Now it is her fit
To like and to be well; now she grows hot
And zealous in her Love, which erst was cooled
And fanned by a chill Scorn: There is an hour
Lucky to Suitors, and it is fallen out now.
Let all young men hereafter woo by th'Clock,
Try how the pulse beats, and promote their Suite,
As we give Physic by the Almanac;
Search how the weather goes; such a day's fair,
For Lovers, fair as their own Mistress Face;
Such a day's clouded o'er with frowns, and brings
Foul weather, shed for her distorted looks.—
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
Is he not come yet? how I begin to fear
This good time will be over-straight? not yet?—
It is a wealthy Suitor.—Here he comes.—
—NOble Philonax, your quick arrival
Honours your Servants, and I hope shall meet
Their thanks in an Enjoyment of their wishes
Thanks Melesippus, if I should add Father,
It were but a while to antedate that Name,
I know she cannot stand out long against me.
Worthy Diarchus your Servant.
I embrace
Your love, and wish that we were nearer yet
By an Alliance.
You wrong your judgment, Sir,
To wish it, shoe's mine already.
Or else no child of mine,
We have only chaff'd the virgin wax,
To make her fit for your Impression.
I hope his Confidence will prevail,
We'll leave you to your stars, and courtship now.
Be plaint Girl.
Fair Lady, I am not like those that aim
Instead of a fair wife to steal a Portion,
But bring a Dowry with me; nor do I woo
With a set form of weary Complements,
But with a strong Enchanting Title: tell me,
Art thou the Senators Bride?
Sir, the Confidence
Which your Deserts put on, would misbecome
My native modesty: it were Arrogance
To accept proffers so beyond my state,
And I should thereby seem to grant some worth
••each cause your liking.
Strange, that we should be
Denied because we are too great; a Title
That other Ladies are ambitious of,
Whose queasy Conscience stands not on such points
To refuse honour. I have heard of some
Have bin with child merely with a deep thought
Of a great Title; I must needs confess
It was my Fate to be born high and noble,
Of proud Command; but yet I can vouchsafe
And deignt' accept your love.
Worthy Sir,
Do not thus stoop below your self, alas!
When I shall sit circled within your Arms,
How shall I cast a blemish on your honour,
And appear only like some falser stone
Placed in a ring of gold, which grows a Jewel
But from the seat which holds it.
How I love
One that so well can read my swelling worth
At the first sight. Know then Artemone,
My Judgment chooses Thee; for so it will
Be styled what ever I do: our great Revenues
Would prove half fruitless if that we could err:
It is a main prerogative of honour
To be discreet whether we will or no;
We are infallible whilst we have thus much gold;
To be called Prudent and Judicious,
We challenge now as we would do our Rents:
You are fair, and worthy, when you are my Bride.
But I could wish I'd somewhat of my own,
That my timorous consent might not wrong your merits.
Ne'er talk of the disproportion; I'd not wed
One whose estate already were as great,
But I would marry that we might be equal:
And even as far as love can make us so
We are already.
Sir, if you understand a virgins Face
Painted with red whilst a true Lover's by,
You have my meaning.
I've a divining guess,
And do conceive so well, that I could wish
You would pronounce my thoughts, and bless your self
With that rich word of being called my Bride.
Then I assume the honour of your Bride.
And thus we seal the Contract. I knew always
It was but the weakness of thy modesty
That kept thee off: though some to try my Faith,
Would often buzz in my incredulous Ears,
That it was the love of one Lysander.
He
Once begged indeed that he might be my servant.
Thy Servant? faith handsomely urged, he sure
Observes the learned Roman Apophthegms,
And thinks it the best way to gain a Kingdom
By his obedience: Thus he will be your slave,
That he may rule and fetter you; thus he woos
With language picked up from the Senate house:
The vanity of these Affected Lovers
Which hide their Suit in that submissive strain,
Were well rewarded not to be understood.
With pardon Sir, it is but the common garb
And fashion of most Suitors.—
I, the common garb,
Give me a man that scorns that beaten way,
And owes his Passage to himself; It is base,
And argues a low spirit, to be taught
By Custom, and to let the vulgar grow
To our example: It is to betray a Virgin,
And urge the merit of a Treachery
To win Affection: I do not love
This riddling Dialect, and how ever grown
Above the pitch of any thing that's vulgar,
Am plain in my Demands: Tell me, art 'mine,
I add not Mistress, be that the fein'd voice
Of them who stretch their wits but to delude:
And cheat thy love.
Sir, I am so far yours
As you shall please to stile me, and embrace
The Name of any Thing your will puts on me▪
It is the discretion of thy modesty
Thus to rely on me; but prithee tell me,
Is there no rival-Name left in thy bosom?
Does no part of Lysander still rest there?
Is He quite vanished? for I would be loath
To mingle Faith, and to divide Affection;
Thou should be mine entire.
I would not wrong
A Suitor of that bounteous worth which dwells
Within your prudent breast, with an half Marriage
I should be then but partly blessed, since all
My happiness is only thus confirmed
In being wholly yours. But I can bring
A stronger proof then my bare Testimony,
Thus to clear all suspicion of a love
Tied to some other; here I humbly offer,
And (though against the privilege of my Sex)
Beg your acceptance that we may be joined
As firm together as each of us are
Chained to our selv's; Let the Marriage knot
Combine our hands in witness of the league
Made by our twinn'd Souls.
Thus thou hast removed
All scruple from my Thoughts, It is not the voice
Of Hymen, nor his Priest can more confirm
My faith in Thee: But for that other knot
Which links our hands together, that a while
Must be deferred, to be attended on
By the magnificence of Ceremony.
It were a scandal to the height in which
My Dignity is sphered to have a wedding
With no more Celebration then the Priests:
I must not wound my Fame, nor let my state
Thus long held up now droop, and grow obscure,
They must be both kept whole, and my repute
Must flourish still unblemished.
My desires
Shall wait on yours, amd I'll no more pursue
The haste of Marriage, since it is your command
That we expect it still.
How I applaud
The obedience of thy love! A while farewell:
But stay; we must yet ever I leave thee, thus
Salute, else we have parted all this while:
I am not yet skilled in the Complements
Which love requires: no matter, I shall learn i'm.
Once more farewell: I'll hasten the dispatch
Of all fit Entertainments.
Sir, farewell:
So; to my wish; Now whom Lysander hates
Shall reap the comfort of my Bridal bed:
I am not taken with this Philonax
For all his stiles of honour: but no matter,
It is resolved, I'll love him; and perhaps
Wean him from those false pleasures, which his Pride
Hath fastened on him; I see his vanity,
He courts, as if against all Cupids rules,
He would command upon the Marriage day,
And yet I sooth him in it, lest my Coyness
Should drive him back, and my revenge be lost:
Hereafter I'll reform him, and so gain
A praise to vengeance, which though it is a vice,
(If all hit right) yet shall produce a virtue.
SIster, you know how oft you have professed
My word should be the Square of all your Actions.
I not deny the promise, and my deeds
Shall speak as much.
How I should hug thy kindness,
If this soft temper were but settled on Thee:
And Thou as yet knew not the rigorous Scorn
To hate a worthy Lover.
Such a one
Next to your self I'd cherish, but you then
Must give me leave with mine own eyes to see
And judge him worthy.
Ah Sister! do you thus
Observe what you professed? Is my word now
The square of all your actions?
Pardon Sister,
This is a matter of a higher Nature,
Then to be taken up on trust: In things
Of an indifferent strain I shall submit:
But on that base which props my Fate, I must
Call my own judgment unto Counsel there.
Where is that solemn Reverence then you'll pay
To my experienced Discretion?
Is this the honour you bestow upon
A Judgment, to entrust it with mere Trifles?
Then you would have me to love Theocles?
It is the Ambition of my best wishes: Hoe's
A man so well accomplished, that I should
Grow Envious, if he were once bestowed
On any but a Sister.
Hoe's a man
Sufficient, whose Suit I'd hear with pity,
If you'll grant mine.
Speak, and thou hast thy wish.
Then cease to love Lysander; one of that state
That he will be wooed forsooth; you must bespeak
And flatter his Affection; shortly I fear
He will have you visit him and kiss his hand.
Ah cruel Sister! dost thou thus reward
My best of wishes for thy unhappy self,
To rob me of mine own? Th'hast given a wound,
Only Lysander can inflict a greater:
When that Name's tortured then I feel a rack,
My fortunes are so woven into his,
(Like Phydia's Image in the Deity)
(And hoe's my God too) that what ere mishap
Strives to deface him, the same ruins me.
Not love him? prithee bid me not be Panareta,
Bid me confine the air within my hand,
And grasp a Thought: This were an easier task.
The only fair of Ladies!
My Master Theocles with his humblest service
Directs this Letter to kiss your white hands.
You mean my Sister sure.
It is endorsed
With your name to Panareta.
The Lad speaks well, had his Neat Complement
But left some beauty too for me: Did Theocles
Teach you these manners?
Madam within that Face
I see your Picture drawn so well, I may
Without a wrong to your divinest Feature,
Stile that the only beauty.
Return our thanks, tell him h'hath shown a Skilful Friendship.
Madam, I'll bless his Ears with your acceptance.
I must perus't again; such good News gathers Strength, and grows in the Repetition.
See how she melts! with what delight she reads?
And dwells upon each syllable; as if
She had received a packet in one letter.
Sure it must needs be love! if Theocles
(Fool that I am, that I cannot call him mine)
But if my Theocles should bow his Flame,
And force it 'stoop unto Panareta's Love▪
To what a pass then hath my Coyness brought me?
I fear it is no vain guess; perhaps he thus
Shoots his disdain at me; and he may now
Love with Revenge more then Affection.
Now Sister; how do you like his Courtship?
Is it not full, as if there dropped a heart
From his swollen pen?
I like his Courtship?
Heavens! shoe's too honest to deny it,
H'hath learnt contempt from me.
How Sister, caught?
I am, and foolishly have caught my self;
I had not lost him, had I not bin too sure
That he was mine.
Sister, you've made me glad
In this discovery, News almost as good
As that the Letter brought me.
And can you then
Prize any thing as high as Theocles?
His love should be more then expression.
Still you increase my joys.
Nay let it not
Be sport that I am ruined, because thence
You gain a fortune.
Since it is gone thus far,
I hope it is past recall: Then you love Theocles!
As I do health or virtue: but do not mock
At my misfortune; sure he loved me once.
And does so still: if you desire a proof,
Read his own Letter.
Thus he that executes
Holds out the Axe which cuts away our life,
And we are first killed through the Eyes. I'll read,
But prithee Sister, if I chance to sigh
Or wet the paper with a Tear, as if
I'd drown the sad contents, prithee at least
Bestow a pity on me, and confess
My loss deserves this sadness. Now I die.
But is it then no worse? I feel a Joy
Running through all my veins, and I conceive
That I may live still.
Nay but read on,
There's somewhat else left that requires your notice.
Oh is the wound behind still! I had thought
There could no Poison follow such fair words:
But be it what it will, I'll taste it.
I'd thought I was in heaven before: but now
I'm past the reach of Envy.
O what a relish
Flow from these words? I am thine Theocles,
Thine own without a mediators help:
But prithee Sister do not thou betray
The weakness of my passion; let me still
Hold out, and though you know my eageraesse,
Let me come slowly on; I would yield
Too soon, though I have yielded all already:
I cannot deny his suit, yet I'd be loath
To fly into his arms; I would retain
Some modesty in the height of passion.
As I would not desire you should woo,
So I would wish you would not be too stiff,
One stubbornness may lose us both.
I'll not wrong
The hopes of either, since to Tyrannise
Longer o'er him, were to torment my self.
MY dear Lysander,
You are opportunely welcome; for no time
Is thought unfit when to enjoy thy presence.
It is season at thy very Entrance.
What? is he grown a Mummer?
One of your Making Lady.
'Troth then you have forgot your vizard Sir,
My Maid shall fetch a mask.
No Lady, I can be content for once
To look upon you through one pair of eyes.
Come, do not thus revenge your self.
What? is Lysander come yet?
Yes, and with him the neglect you taught him.
Troth Sir,
I'd forgot the Mask, and was thinking to have
Sent for your self.
Prithee good Lady send: faith not worth a servant.
I have one Sir ready at call. Eudora.
Madam.
Go call Lysander hither.
I go Madam. Lysander! Does not your Ladyship mean Theocles?
I tell thee Girl Lysander.
Madam hoe's there before you.
O I cry thee mercy, are you the man? well, leave us.
I was once, and there are some here could wish I were so still.
There is indeed Lysander.
Still slighted? what a strange rage tears my divided breast?
See Sister, what a Monster your disdain hath
Made me; I'm not worth the speaking to:
Prithee calm him, and yield a little, I know
It is thy neglect to his friend Theocles,
That robs him thus of his Civility.
I will endeavour.
Pray Sir, from whence rise these strange
Postures?
You may inform your self.
My Ignorance will not Admit of a conjecture.
Know then,
It is your cruelty to that best of men,
The faithful Theocles.
This is stranger yet;
Suppose that true, yet how can this excuse
The fullennesse of your Temper?
Thus;
You know my vows are past so to regard
Panareta, as you do Theocles,
To whom your disrespect does bind my Faith
To show her this disguised behaviour:
It is you, her Sister, wrongs her.
I know not, but methinks I feel
Some yielding passions; if there be a name
Next under Love, That, he hath won already,
I bear some good will towards Theocles.
If you expect no more from me, that task
Is soon performed: I bear some good will too
Towards Panareta.
Alas, that's a bounty
You have still granted me without a Suit;
I aim at somewhat higher.
Pardon Lady,
My vow that keeps me off.
Prithee Ethusa
Grow nearer in thy love to Theocles.
It is one advantage yet, since it is my Fate
To woo, to beg help through a Sisters love.
Lysander then I challenge all your vow;
That you affect constant Panareta, since
I now begin to honour Theocles.
Then vanish hence all roughness; fairest Lady,
I now profess my self what I was forced to hide,
My self your humblest Creature.
Blessed change:
It is Music all thou speak: this late disorder
Heightens my joy: thus we owe thanks to the cloud
That robs us of our Sun, that after he
May show a face more washed and clean.
But yet▪
I must needs grant there are some trifling vows
Made to another love, fair Artemone,
Which I would fain forget.
But dare you then
If she send back those vows, and remit all
Your kinder promises; if she renounce
And slight your former love, dare you then place
Those vows on me.
By all the faith of oaths
Then I will love none but Panareta.
Fixed in this confidence, I will no more
Be troubled with this torment Jealously.
Nor shall you find just cause: you freely now
Dare trust my absence; There's a Passion burns
Struggling within my breast, which checks my love,
And tells me, I delay the news too long,
For want of which my Theocles doth languish.
Confirm him strongly in my affection,
Leave him no scruple unresolved; tell him
I languish too, and shall expect his Visit.
Worthy Madam thanks for these brave employments▪
I owe these joys all unto Thee; nor yet
Shall I appear ungrateful, since I have used
No other means for my own happiness,
But what may prove the readiest way to thine:
Thus thou enjoy'st Thy Theocles; thus thy love
Is like a virtuous Deed, it's own reward—
—NOw Noble Philonax.
It wrongs my Faith
To Artemone but to see that Face.
Dare you not trust our Ears with what you whisper?
You were not wont to be alone with us.
I dare, though what I speak be my own poison.
If he talk venom, will not his discourse
Blister our Ears? Faith mine begin to tingle already.
Know then Panareta, since I left that Face
(In which resides my only happiness)
I thought I could forget it, and at length
I thought I might not love it: your disdain
Raised up these treasons, against the Majesty
Of your unequalled beauty; then I strove
To love fair Artemone, as the white
Which Cupids shaft might easier penetrate:
I wooed but with an ill success: for she
Straight granted, and bethought her presently
Upon the Marriage; she talked nothing but
Wedding solemnities, and with such eagerness
I thought her self would make the Bridal song:
It is agreed with all; Grave Melesippus
And sage Diarchus too have feal'd the Match
With their too free consents; my business here
Was to take back those vows, which yet your Scorn
Would ne'er vouchsafe t'admit: but being uncharmed
From Artemone, and again fettered
Within the glorious prison of your Face,
I must now beg that you deny my suite,
You've struck a ray with those fair wounding Eyes
That chains my heart unto i'm.
O the tricks
That love deceives with, how it never goes
Abroad with his own Face.
But tell me, are you sure
That Artemone hath bestowed her self
Freely on you? Do not mock my Fancy,
Which may be credulous against my self.
As sure as I shall hazard all my fortunes
In your just hate, whom my still ardent flame
Pursues with a strong Faith.
Then carry hence
This beam of comfort, if you dare affirm
Shoe's false to her Lysander, that I thus
May be revenged of his unjust disdain,
Whilst he shall lose all his best hopes in her,
You shall much please me, and soon meet my thanks.
Come Sister.
Then happy Philonax who thus doth woo
One Bride, that he may have the choice of two.
NAy, but I prithee good Miserotos, hast thou thought on the means whereby we might effect our Desires?
I, that is it we desire to know.
O you can speak plain language now.
Yes, faith, the power of love hath reformed me, yet at first I was very unwieldy to be wrought into passable prose. But to the Plot you promised.
Then thus: You know your Mistress hath enjoined you to change humours; you Pisistratus to make Sonnets altogether,
and speak nothing but rime: you Lamprias to fight and swagger as he was wont.
Yes, this we know too well, but which way we may execute it, are altogether ignorant.
I'll tell you: you Lamprias shall pen some verses which Pisistratus shall deliver as his own.
I, but what then? he cannot lend me any of his valour, how shall he requite me?
Be patient a while and mark; you shall make him be∣sides some other verses by way of common place, to furnish him with an answer in rime upon most occasions. Now in lieu of this Curtsy, he shall let you in the presence of his Mistress give him any opprobrious terms whatsoever, and with patience re∣ceive 3. or 4. blows and kicks from you: which must needs give a sufficient Testimony of your mutual change, and her power that effected it.
Thanks kind Miserotos; this plot is admirable: I'll pen some thundering speech for my self, which if I have the grace to pronounce with a brave courage, I am made for ever: But I much fear, I shall hardly find in my heart to beat this Pisistra∣tus, I have found him always so boisterous; and then I have no skill at my weapon.
O it is but practising a little, you may beat your man or so.
What if I practised first upon one of my Landladies Maids?
That's base and cowardly.
Or one of her little boys?
Well, do as you will; but see that you look and speak very courageously.
But what shall I do if he chance to ask me some questions, to which I have no answer in verse?
Why I'll tell you the trick on it; It is but thinking of two words that are rime first; and I'll warrant you with a very little pain, you may screw some other words to make up the verse: it is no great matter though one be sometimes shorter then another; a cripple verse that halts upon crutches, sometimes does very well, and moves compassion.
Why look you, let's hear you rime, here's two words, Armado, and Lansprisado.
For your sake Madam, I fear not an Armado, For I would kill i'm all with my Lansprisado.
Very well: here's two other; Musket and Helmet.
O Sir, that's no rime; you must by all means take a great care that your verses fall in the like sound, or else you spoil all.
What if I read some of our late versifiers for exercise? for I think there are none better to bring a man to a smooth familiar stile of riming, then some of our Modern Poems that treat of Executions, and Monsters born in other Countries.
What Ballads?
So I think they call i'm.
Out upon i'm: treat of executions say you? it is one to read i'm; and for Monsters, they can feign none so prodigious as themselves: I'll be judged by your Friend Lamprias else.
Indeed I always esteemed them scarce fit for a Gentle∣mans survey; and yet since Watermen, and such people have dabled in Poetry, I see no reason why they may not be gathered into a Volume, and called Works: Howsoever I believe it will not be amiss for a young Sucking Poet as you are to take all ad∣vantage of imitation.
I, as if I had a mind to wish her happy, thus would I rime.
God save your beauty Lady fair,
And send it long to reign;
And eke your loyal Servants all
In health and wealth maintain.
Yes, yes, such may serve very well, being it is a way you never were skilled in: But I'll furnish you as well as I can with verses and rimes to give an Answer to most questions, or else stand by and prompt you. You'll keep counsel, and never be discontented if it fall to my lot to enjoy her, as I promise in the same case for you.
Ne'er doubt me; but be you sure you do not kick too hard, for I shall be my self again presently if you do. Come let's be gone, and prepare our selves.
I will by no means miss this sport, it will be excellent mirth to hear the Captain thunder out his amorous soft strains, and my t'other friend whine out some bombast speech in a la∣mentable amorous tone: I'll be sure to follow i'm.
I Do repent thy wrongs virtuous Panareta;
And will release the Injuries, and now strive
To love in earnest; I'll repeat her sighs
With a true groan, I'll mock her misery
No more with grief printed but forehead deep,
I know her love is as her virtues are,
Entire and constant: But what rebellion
Weighs down my soul? And can I spend a passion
In any besides Artemones Name?
She is all Faith and beauty, there my heart
Chained with the strength of vows hath fixed it self.
Where I am equally beloved of two,
It is not ingratitude but my destiny
To forsake one: I should love Artemone,
But must Panareta. O whore's my Friend,
The News I carry will cheer him, though't wound
The Man that tells it: I have won Ethusa
Unto his bosom, but I've lost my self.
What Friend, alone?
No; for I'm never dispossessed of Thee,
And thy fair Sister.
It is one of those good faults
We cannot quarrel at: but I could wish
That you were freer with Panareta.
And I, that I were quite released her sight!
I've bin too free already, and so far
Have yielded though against my self,
That she hath gained Ethusa to your love:
And I am now sadly employed from her
To tell you she is yours. Pardon Friend,
If I can spin a grief out from the web
Of your delights, suck poison from your Joy:
It is not well done to put me on these snares
And thorns of Friendship, There are smoother ways
To show an unmolested curtsy,
And we might love at ease.
Though I am glad
At these good tidings; yet I cannot choose
But grieve you envy them: I hope you will not
Accuse my friendship as it were a burden.
Then let my tongue be blasted. But how ever
It is in thy power to give a greater ease.
As I've known men strong and healthful, yet
Admit of Physic, though I dare not say
I'm sick, yet certainly I should appear
More vigorous if thou would cease to love
Ethusa.
If a friends breath can poison,
There is a hot infection now taints thine.
Be not yet too rash: you've called me friend,
And would you then grow strong out of my Ruins?
Heavens forbid!
Then see the Labyrinth in which I tread,
I woo Panareta in this disguise,
Only to win her Sister to your love:
Whilst thus I sue, that great Man Philonax
Bends his Devotion towards my Goddess,
And is my dangerous Rival in your Sister,
Now if you'd free me from this Vizard love,
Then were my Artemone free from him,
Who then would seize on fair Panareta,
From whom it is only my pretence hath barred him.
And would you have me then not love Ethusa?
It was but a vain request, while my best Faith
Was answered with the violence of scorn:
But now being strengthened with a mutual Love
What fury can remove it?
How I'm made up
Only of wavering! I must not see
A Friend thus plunged whilst I within my Power
Can grasp the Remedy. Know then, friend Theocles,
Though through my own misfortune I'll maintain
Thy happiness in its due height, methinks
If Love to her must breed neglect to thee▪
I now could cancel Artemones vows.
O ye wonder of what was ever styled friendship!
It were my Heaven if that thy Love to her
Did not make faint, and cool Ethusa's heat,
What now is warm'th might burn into a flame,
If thou coldest truly love Panareta.
I can, and shall not henceforth act thy love,
Nor woo as Proxy longer. I'll not be
Only a bare naked Interpreter,
Nor spend my Suit in a third person more,
I will profess my own vows, and implore
A med'cine which may cure a malady
Festering within this breast: I see her love
Settled, and though affronted with neglect,
Unshaken still; I meet no obstacles,
No threatening Father, nor too covetous Uncle,
The Reins are in her own hands; she enjoys
A full command over her self, but that
Sh'hath given the power to me.
Being thus confirmed,
I'll rip my breast before thee, and uncase
A secret which till now I durst not utter.
A Secret! Heavens, how have I lost my Faith,
That ought between us two should be concealed?
I thought till now thy breast was made of glass,
And lay as open to my curious view,
As that Face doth.
Call back thy former temper,
When you've heard more, you may perhaps confess
I ought to hide it.
Prithee then quickly speak,
That I may be thy Friend again: for sure
That name is lost whiles there remains a Secret.
Then since thou love Panareta, know my Sister
Believes as much, and first hath cast thee off,
It was my Plot (pardon good Lysander,
Only that one word which ere yet stained my Friendship)
I worked her into this suspicion,
Told her she was forsaken, and Panareta
Become her Rival; then she left thee too.
Thus neither guilty, you have both cast off
Each other first; my end in this contrivance
Was to new plant thy Love, and make it firm
Where it was but counterfeit, that I might thus
Sooner Enjoy Ethusa.
Have you now
Vented your secret, is it quite out?
It is,
But I could wish that it were closed up still
Within the private Cabin of my breast,
Your frown hath made me thus unloyal.
Sure
It was not well done then to be treacherous,
When I my best faith and my falsehood too
Bestowed upon thy safety—But I'm grown
Too calm: If I should now consider Thee
In thy first love, that thou were once a friend,
This were to season Madness with Discretion;
And I should rave with Judgment: Balance all
Thy better deeds with this one Injury,
They cannot weigh down my Revenge: then draw,
That I may cut thee and thy false love off
From any Title to my wounded heart.
Sheath up your Sword and anger; let not thus
Your passion rule, that you may after say
You've lost a friend.
Base villain draw.
If you're so rash not to consider me,
At least remember your own spotless honour,
The Nobleness with which you heretofore
Were wont to fight, would scorn to take advantage,
Know then your challenge aims at one that is
Already wounded; your severer tongue
Worse then the fiercest rage your Sword can bring,
Hath almost slain me.
Fie, do not thus increase
The wrong you have done me; let me not be forced
To kill the yielding; for my own fems sake
At least do one good deed, and to redeem
The scandal which thus brands my Innocence,
Die with thy sword in hand.
Ify'are resolved
Upon my death, inflict it; be it ne'er said,
(What ever the disgrace my tongue hath done)
I took up arms against my friend.
Isle tear
That Name from thy false throat; to be thy friend
Is to be treacherous, a Sin which yet
Could never reach Lysander; which my sword
(A name to me almost as dear as faith)
Shall thus maintain.
Then since I needs must draw,
It is with thy hand I do it.
Take my thanks
Yet for this latest Courtesy.
O my son Theocles!
O my Brother, my
Dear Brother.
What sadness do we see? where is the Author?
Here, it is base Lysander.
You Artemone take care of Theocles; see the best Surgeons be quickly sent for.
Be not thus tender, it is but a scratch h'hath given me.
O false Lysander! can thou pretend love
Born to our family, and yet thus wrong
The best part of it?
Brother, you're too mild,
It is not discourse, but law must right us.
Let us strait tear a Satisfaction
Out of his Inmost bowels.
Noble Sir,
We must not heal one quarrel with a new one,
Here's too much blood already.
I have not thus
Stood silent, that I might with leisure frame
Some Innocent Apology; I've heard
And seen your griefs, which I my self have born:
The Amazement which is stuck in all your brows,
Is fixed within my heart too, this same hand
Wonders as much at what is done as you,
And I can scarce believe it was I that did it:
Let Melesippus and Diarchus know
I pity their misfortune as my own.
But pray Sir let's know what reason was it
That raised this Tumult.
You were wont to join
In close Embraces of another kind.
What should thus change your greeting?
Some few rash words too bad to be rehearsed.
It is now past hiding, you must show the cause To us, or to the rack.
I cannot utter it.
Lead on then, we must put you in the charge
Of a strong guard if the wound be dangerous.
I Would you had still kept the cause unknown
Of this your fatal Combat, sure I am,
'Thas bred a Mutiny within my soul,
Scattered Seditious wars through all my thoughts.
O Brother! you have made me break a faith
Firm as the Rock of Diamonds, and as precious▪
I must confess continual waves of Fear
And Jealousy much dished it, and endeavoured
At least to overwhelm that which they could not
Shake from its firmer station; yet it stood
Unmoved, though not discovered. O Lysander!
What will thy Innocence conceive, when Thou
Shalt find my heart thus altered, and my Faith,
(My Faith once given to Thee) plight to another,
To Philonax thy Enemy, and owe all this
Unto thy Friend, my Brother? yet I know
His softer Disposition cannot choose
But pardon, and still love you, call you still
His hearty, constant, loving—Traitorous Friend,
And thus embrace you.
Hold Madam, what's your meaning?
Hyperia, thou did but ill to hinder
The wholesome wound, I have much blood still left me
Might well be spared, much bad corrupted blood
Which hath infected, more then filled my veins,
That blood which prompted my unwilling thoughts
To value my desires above my Faith;
Would it were all exhausted, save so much
As might preserve a Blush for my past Folly.
Come beloved Enemy, unripe my bosom,
You need not wound my heart, for that already
Bleeds a Repentance in a shower of Tears,
Which like so many purpled Magistrates
Pass Sentence on my Guilty thoughts.
Oh Sir,
You've quite overcome my rage by this unfeigned,
This powerful Repentance, your hearty tears
Have quite extinguished all my Flames of Anger:
I now begin again to be your Sister,
Yet I could wish your thoughts had bin unspoken,
I would this had not happened.
Think not my Speech,
When first I did accuse your true Lysander,
Uttered the least Intention of my Thoughts:
My words did then as much belie my knowledge
As his unmoved Loyalty. Alas,
My own love tempted me to betray his,
That again blows my zealous rage. I would
He had bin false indeed, (pardon Lysander)
Would he had broke his promise: but that he
Should then preserve so true, so strict a faith,
When credulous I upon a bare report,
Nay not so much but one Mans single word
Should cancel all my vows: And yet it was
My Brothers word, the friendly, virtuous Theocles.
For heavens sake take your poniard, and prevent
All outrage that my passion may suggest.
Nay do your pleasure, here I stand that would
Most willingly now fall a Sacrifice
To your offended goodness. Surely when
This cottage of my soul shall fall to earth
Crumbling to dust, your Fury will like that
Be blown away; when you shall find me ashes,
And think me made so by your Flames of Anger,
You will forgive me, nay will you not? pray speak.
Sorrow thou come too thick upon me, and
My oppressed Soul sinks under the vast burden.—
—O Brother hide me from that Deity
That is so much offended; I dare now
Not look on any thing that is not false
And like my self. And yet for ought I know,
There's unexpected mercy. I have heard
That Noble power does as oft appear
In lenity as just Revenge. O Sir,
If your breast harbour pity for that wretch
That could find none for you, here you may use it:
And this in all my misery shall be
The seasoning comfort that I shall supply
The object where you may employ a virtue.
Fairest, those knees were never meant to bow But to the Gods that made i'm.
Sir, let this Excuse
My former stiffness: I have broke my vows,
And given away my Faith, as if you first
By a recanting falsehood had provoked it;
But heaven knows you are true, and I as black
As sin can make me: yet methinks mistake
Might somewhat mollify the Censure of
My giddy passion. No, it was enough
That I could think ought true that might impair
Your virtuous Constancy.
I pray correct
Your erring thoughts, for I was false indeed,
And hither came for pardon.
O the vastness
Of faithful love! undo me not I pray
By that Immensity of Favours, which
Twill be impossible ever to deserve.
That love should force a Man t'accuse himself!
And lest I might well think I had done basely
Thus to pretend a falsehood. Come, I shall
Sooner suspect the sprightly fire should
Forget its natural wings, leave to mount upward,
And creep upon the sordid earth, then once
Your pure and elevated Thoughts could flag,
Or that your Faith could know so low an ebb
As to think foully. O Sir, I am another,
And cannot now bestow my self upon you,
Nor dis-ingage my self from all that load
Of kindness you have heaped upon me, but thus—
Hold Lady, hear me out, and you will find
I'm not the man for whom you ought to die.
Know to my shame I speak it, I was false,
Nay truly false. My faith was counterfeit,
But not the breach of it: and that you may
Know so much to your self, hither I come
First t'implore a pardon, then desire
That you would render back my vows unto me,
Forget that ever you loved me, or I you.
And if the least Desert of mine remain
In your fair breast, that still might prompt Affection,
Tear it away; for I have blasted all
My former merits by this Act of baseness.
How I embrace that falsehood! O it joys me
(As now my fortune stands) more then all Faith,
All love could ever. And I would fain know
The happy reason that first moved you to it.
Madam, when first I had the licence from you
To court Panareta, I was all your own,
Yet somewhat doubtful through the Jealous fears,
Chiefly through that old hate your friends bore to me,
To which being added that fair Carriage, which
Panareta always studied, quite overcome
My dallying thoughts, and turned them at length
To a true dotage. O she would often sit
And breathe a cloud of sighs, tell me how much
I should abuse a credulous virgin, if
I did but personate that love I made.
How if I did enjoy another Mistress,
Her Ghost (for sure she could not well out-live it)
Would fright my soul from this my body to her:
O she would cast such powerful glances on me,
Such charming Spirits danced in the bright rays
Of every view; They did draw up my soul,
And chained it fast to hers. Thus the fond Lark
Playing about the glittering snare does tempt
The Nets, and dares its prison, till at length
He finds his Liberty betrayed, and all
That pomp of brightness, but a glorious bait.
Methinks in all the story you've forget
The principal main business, my Obligement,
The Cause of all these Troubles; yet I hope
You did it not in that neglected way
As to forget it strait: why tell you not
How you may thank your Friend for these Disasters?
How faithless Theocles wrought all this woe?
And to Reward you, studied to betray you.
O Friend! the rough behaviour I last used
Hath wiped off all your score; you now stand bound
To me for nothing: nay you shall oblige me
If you will sign my pardon, for which merit
I hope I shall ever some few minutes pass,
Make and pronounce you happy in your love.
Your goodness still o'recomes us, and your Favours
Flow in so high a strain they seem to scorn
All competition of Desert or Thanks.
COme Lovers to the Temple, you were best
Make all the Speed you can when once agreed:
There are so many tricks in love, I should
Never believe I had my wench until
The Ceremonies were all quite performed.
And therefore we think fit my Lord, if you
Can in your Judgment count it so, to pass
All Ceremonious pomp.
I'm yours,
And only do demand my Love here would
Make but a Repetition of the vows
Which formerly have past between us two.
It is but to satisfy this Lady here,
Who otherwise requires my love.
Nay sure
They are all registered in heaven ere this,
And only want that approbation which
The Church must soon allow.
And therefore Madam,
I here disclaim all right and title to you,
Panareta, come, you see I have performed
Your strict Injunction; I have wooed her so,
That you can witness now she disclaims
All other interest.
Now bless me heaven!
Shall I for ever be deluded?
Oh!
It cuts my very heartstrings thus t'abuse
So fair a goodness: were I well quit here,
I could recant and claim her love again.
Sir, are you mad?
What mean you Lady?
Sir, I shall study to deserve this favour,
But cannot now bestow my self upon you,
And therefore Madam here I deliver
What lawfully ought to be yours.
What strange
Mysterious clouds are these? Fair Mistress let us
Not wander on in darkness still, I pray
What means this mad confusion?
Philonax,
I must confess you first did woo my love.
And court my thoughts, but still they were reserved
Unto this noble Gentleman; yet still
Finding him backward, in respect he had
Before expressed some love to Artemone,
I know no other means to dis-ingage him,
But this by sending you to court his Mistress,
Which you were willing then to undertake,
To please me in a Revenge I feigned,
And finding to my wish such vows between you
Not fit to be revoked, I much congratulate
Your happy suite. And now Lysander, being
You have here had experience how free
You are from all this Lady can claim from you,
I thus perform my promise unto Theocles,
And therefore challenge yours.
You cannot Madam
More fully crown my wishes, and I hope
Content dwells smooth on every brow.
Sir I hope you'll pardon
All roughness that I heretofore have used,
It was but personated; now I freely
Do speak my self and my own thoughts, when I
Do say you are the man I only Love,
I am
So quite distracted with my happiness,
I know not well to whom I owe it, and
Therefore defer my thanks.
Nay Sir,
I hope you do not still repent you,
Why look you so disturbed in your thoughts?
I am studying what great merit I might do
To win your pardon Lady.
Sir you have it.
I now
Begin to be awake my Artemone,
I find I have but dreamed all this while,
Now I can see your merit, and discern
Your real virtues much out-ballance all
My vented Glories, and I here shake off
That personated pride I first took on me.
Merely to keep my self from such a blessing,
Which now I do account above the World,
Your Love; which I will study to deserve
By all the Courteous humble Carriage
That crowns a Genial bed.
O Sir, you have
Redeemed my desperate thoughts by this discovery,
I ever loved you much, but yet I could not
Persuade my self to think your pride a virtue,
Which being thus shook off I do esteem you
Of more then humane worth.
Here are some Gentlemen without desire admittance to Madam Ethusa.
Bid the Trifles begone, I am now too serious.
O by no means, pray Lady let i'm enter.
If they bring mirth they'll do well to season our past fears.
If they perform my Injunction, we shall have very good sport: one of i'm is Pisistratus the quarrelling fighter by my command turned Poet, and t'other my riming Gentleman Lam∣prias thrust into his humour: pray interpose not, but let me have▪ my will.
what have we here a prize? How now my Poet,
What's the News with you?
Madam see here the power of your love,
Out of my proper sphere it makes me move.
I who meanwhile like Warrior thundered wildly,
Am melted to a Poet, and now speak mildly.
Most mildly delivered, sure you have spoke a speech in a Pageant: but whore's your Sonnet? have you brought me no papers of verses?
In sign I versify by your command,
This to your feet I offer; these to your hand.
Let your boy sing i'm.—
Two-topt Parnassus I defy,
But that your swelling breasts supply,
If every Poet there mightily,
O who could choose but versify!
A quill that's snatched from Cupid's wing in spite
Of inbred Nature will compel to write.
Then for a Helicon I know
A purer far your lips do show,
What in your Cheeks before was snow,
Melted to Nectar there doth flow.
I can out-vy Phoebus, whiles I enjoy
A Daphne far more fair then his was coy.
—Very well, let me see i'm.
Two-topt Parnassus I defy,
But that your swelling breasts supply.
That I may know these are your own making, tell me what is Parnassus. Mis. She'll put him out of his way and spoil his riming.
Fair Lady to give you an answer plain,
As I have heard some say, it was the Poets mountain.
Now he is forced to rime of himself, mark how he hacks the Kings language.
Well, and what can you say of Helicon?
By Bellona Madam, the truth to tell ye,
The Muses spring heretofore was called Heli—Con by the Poets.
Well Sir.  I can out-vy Phoebus, whiles I enjoy
A Daphne far more fair then his was coy.
I pray Sir what Relation had Daphne to Phoebus?
She was—she was—what, what?
She was his Mistress not turned—not turned—
Yes Sir, she was turned, but to what?
Now I have it) She was Phoebus Mistress not turned to rue or Sorrel,
But metamorphosed into a Laurel.
I see this sudden riming doth somewhat perplex you; but I find by your written verses which you have studied, That upon mature deliberation you write very well, and are like to make a hopeful Poet. Well, so much for you: Now my brave Knight let's hear you rant it.
I think I came off with credit: but she put me shrewdly to it at last, I had no rimes provided for such answers.
Through many craggy cliffs of Mountains high and mighty, have I by the robustuous nerves of these brawny arms sought out Bellonian Encounters, to testify th'affection I have conceived to the fairest of Fairs, Ethusa; In whose defence I here stand up a Champion, and defy all Bradamants, all Knights of the burning pestle; by the dreadful thunder of my tearing throat I will astonish and confound them; by the Aetnean flashes which my baiting enraged blood shall evaporate, I will wrap them in flakes of lightning, or by the Boreasian Tempest of my most stre∣nuous breath shake in pieces their limbs, and sweep their scattered relics into the Sea-like Dust.
Most prodigiously valiant. Sir, your voice methinks is much changed since last I saw you; you then spake in a mild amorous key, but now you do so thunder-thump it, heavens! how it pierced my Ears? but yet all this does not confirm me that you are valiant, I should desire some better testimony of your valour then this speech only.
Shall I then cut this Traitorous Giants head off, and laying it at my feet (with a Non Curo for my Motto) look like the man that does contemn the world, and plays at Foot-ball
with the Globes of Earth. Worm I will trample on Thee.
Hold, or I swear ere thou shalt have the higher hand▪ I'll rime thee to death as they do rats in Ireland.—Not so hard you Rascal.
Most killing verses I promise you. Hold, this is pretty well▪ but I do not believe, but if I gave him Commission, he would return your blows with some advantage. (I doubt there's some conspiracy betwixt i'm. I'll sift i'm strait) I think I must choose Piststratus, for I like him as well for a Poet, and better then you for a Soldier.
She'll choose him now, and then have I played the fool all this while to very great purpose. I must prevent it. Lady, and if you please to breath a vigour into my nerves by your com∣mand, I'll beat this Coward, till he shall utterly disclaim all title to your favours.
(privately) That's more then I promised Sirrah: take heed you vaunt not too much.
Nay that's unequal, you being armed, and he having no offensive weapon but his tongue: He shall have another Sword, and then the Conqueror shall not fear a Rival. What say you, will you agree to that?
Madam, I must confess although I kick him here or so, there have such bonds of Friendship knit us together heretofore, that now they tie my hands from drawing his blood. I would not fight with my Friend.
How say you Sir? are your hands tied too by the bonds of Friendship? would not you accept the motion?
Madam my love to you so firmly tied is,
That for your sake I would not fear to fight with Alcides.
See you that Sir, he will venture if you dare.
Why Pisistratus, Friend Pisistratus, pri thee refuse it; I tell thee I will by no means fight with my Friend.
Nay Sir, you see you've cast your self: he hath made me here very good verses, and then he is very valiant: I must choose him for—
Hold Lady, pray you forbear; suspend your choice a
while, and I believe I shall prevent it when I have told you all. Know then, he is no Poet, I made those verses, this brain is the mint that coined em.
Which I will trample under my feet you Rascal, can you not keep conditions? Nay seeing you have discovered. Lady, see here his fortitude, it is only passive, he dares not advance a Sword against a mouse. I in charity, that he might hereafter appear in some credit, lent him my back for a while to use it as he pleased, but if you did observe, he struck me very heedfully, he durst not let his arms flee with a free swinge thus, nor went his feet without discretion, as if they kicked in earnest.
Hold Sir, you'll kill the Gentleman; pray Lady end the strife.
Then thus my Friends; neither of you can challenge any reward from me, neither having performed my Injunctions: how∣ever I will not be so severe as to detain the guerdon I always intended, and you have taken such pains for: you shall be laughed at.
Come, come, I told you at first what you might expect, ne'er stand to reply for fear of being worse abused.
Lady, these Trifles being gone, let us proceed to the Consummation of your joys. I am glad yet you used Theocles better.
Nay Sir, I can easily distinguish betwixt realities and out∣sides.
Madam I thank your good opinion, and will study to continue it. Come forward to the Temple.
That is our general voice, pray Sir, lead on.
Why this is well, I thought it would come about at last.
Now Joy unto you all: Lysander, Friends, and that
I may comply with your now smiling Fate,
At these your weddings, I divorce my hate.

