O Stay and hear me speak my noble Friends, my Subjects
and my Soldiers hear your King; in nine set Battles
•against the conquering Danes hath Ethelred with various
fortunes fought, to rescue you and England from the
spoils of War and Tyranny: Recall your spirits, this
City Winchester is all our strength,
And if you cease to fight, the Foe comes on,
With bloody rage, and sad confusion.
The breach is made, the Danes rush ore the Walls, and like
the pent up Ocean 'bove his banks, falls from his height with roaring vio∣lence,
and drowns us all in blood.
despair not quite,
We yet may beat 'em back, arm, arm to fight.
The Danes are in the streets, slaughter begins, and execution
is their Soldiers words. O will you lay your throats beneath their
swords, or doth your danger make you desperate? your houses will be
preys to fire and theft.
Your Wives and Daughters slaves to Danish lust.
Your Children in their Mothers arms struck dead.
The names of English torn from memory;
Oh let your valors in one chance be buil'd,
Or quite extirpe a Nation from the World.
See, on my knees, I pray you, for your selves; O it is for
Englands safety not my own, makes me a Subject to my Subjects thus,
pity your King, your Country, and your selves that now are falling,
let your valors rise, and in this last resist your enemies.
Now by my Princely birth (my royal Brother) His sight a∣mazes
more than all the Danes; rise, rise, and speak no more; put them
away, the stones will sooner yield you aid than they.
Rip up our Breasts, and see our loyal hearts to fight and die
for you in this just cause, But death hath seized us, all our bloods are
wasted, and through our many wounds our souls exhausted.
And since we can no more, O let your swords take swift
revenge, and save the Danes a labour, In killing us you ease our present
woes.
Fly royal Princes, save your lives by flight, the day looks
clouded, there's no hope of safety; The traitorous Osbert Duke of
Mertia makes Head against you, and with all his Troops, enters the
City gates, guards in the Danes, triumphs in slaughter thorough every
street. The aged Father of St. Swithins Abbey, that with his holy Cross
between his hands, mounted the Walls to cause the Soldiers on to
fight for Freedom and Religion, Seeing this Treason, hath retired him∣self,
and on the holy Altar heaves his hands, awaiting death; the chaste
religious Maids, with Cartesmunda their fair Governess,
Flock to the Temple as their last defence,
Hoping that place may shield their innocence.
Come, Princely Alured, my noble Brother, lets seek to stop
their pressing through the City, if we must die—.
It is but our Fate
Which even till death close by thy side Isle wait.
Seek for your safety, Sir, the King is dead.
See noble Edmond what the Danes have done, a King, by
Heaven created for a Crown, now only made fit for a golden Urn, be∣trait
to death and slaughter pitiless.
Curse on the Traitors heart that wrought this Treason, rebel∣leos
Osbert that betray thy Country.
Leave his reward to Heaven that will avenge it, and brave
Duke Edmond, sith the times are such, lets take disguise with speed
and seek for safety; If Heaven be pleased, brave Lord, we yet may live,
if not, what Heaven has given, isle freely give. Hie thee to Thet ford, raise
thy friends in Norfolk, If I escape with life, Isle post to Scotland,
Donald the King is of a noble spirit, and will not slack I know to send
his aide against this common Foe to both our Kingdoms.
There shalt thou meet me, tho our journeys far,
We'll once again renew this dreadful war.
Spoke like the hope of England! Royal Prince! shake hands
in this red City, and then part, for in thy quarrel I will live and
dye.
First bear hence this cold clay of Majesty, our hapless Brother, and
revenge his death.
That, and what else may but express thy Worth and Title
to the Crown, isle still pursue, or may black infamy my baseness
tell.
My soul shall quit thy love. Brave Prince farewell.
The Cities won, my Lord, the King is slain, and great Ca∣nutus
with his Royal Troops may rake possession of this conquered
Town.
Thy love brave Osbert duke of Mertia, revolting from the
English to our part, has overturned the City Winchester, drowned in the
blood of Kingly Etheldred and all his Host. Hie thee Duke Erkin∣wald,
conduct our beauteous Sister to our Tent: You shall go back
Elgina strongly guarded, till with our swords we clear all passages that
may oppose our peaceful entrance.
Stand on you Hill, and hear the English cries;
While Trumpets sound the Da•each Victories.
I shall, great Prince.
The Gods protect my noble Brothers safety, and crown thy
brows with wreathes of victory.
Duke Harold take our Guards, and march before, ransack
the Temple, and each private house,
Who bears the name of English strike him dead;
This day the Kingdom's wholly conquered.
Long may it so remain to great Canutus; an hundred thirty
years the English Kings have paid just Tribute to the conquering
Danes, which now re-conquered, with assured hopes to hold pos∣session
of the State and Crown, see here the slaughtered Body of a
King
〈◊〉 and disloyal Etheldred,
Thus 〈…〉 his foot upon thy head,
That was a 〈◊〉 late with precious 〈◊〉,
Rejoicing 〈◊〉 by me thy pride is 〈◊〉.
For bear brave English Lord, remember this, he was a King,
let not thy Subject foot tread on thy Sovereigns head; Take off his
Crown, and when the slaughter's past present it to us, and we will then
reward thy faithful service; enter the Town, spare neither Sex no•
Age,
Whip out this English Race, with iron rods;
The vanquished are but men, the Victors, gods,
Come holy Virgins, hie you to the Altar.
The raging Foe pursues, defend us Heaven, Take Virgin tears,
the balm of martyred Saints, as tribute due to thy Tribunal Throne;
with thy right hand keep us from rage and murder; let not our dan∣ger
fright us, but our sins: Misfortunes touch our Bodies, not our
Souls;
Keep Faith before us, from Hell none escapes,
Our deaths may be thy will, but not our Rapes.
Fair Cartesmunda, bright illustrious Maid, O be thou con∣stant
in this day of trial.
Virtue is Vice unless it do persevere,
That is true Holiness that lasts for ever.
Upon my knees to you and Heaven I swear, when I do yield
my Virgin vow to lust, in the soft I wines of an insatiate bed, may I give
up the treasure of my youth
To such a man, whose lust and poisoned breath
May soon reward my sin, and be my death.
Such Vows being kept are true religious. Hark, hark, the bloody
Foe has forced the Temple.
Turn boldly and be constant, here's the trial.
To Nature we'll be false, to Heaven be loyal.
On, on, kill all, spare none; this by Canusus dyes; ha!
Who holds my conquering hand? what power unknown,
By Magic thus transforms me to a stone,
Senseless of all the faculties of life?
My blood runs back, I have no power to strike.
Call in our Guards, and bid them all give ore,
Sheath up your swords with me, and kill no more;
Her Angel-beauty cries, she must not dye,
Nor live but mine: O I am taken strangely:
Methinks I lift my sword against my self,
When I oppose her: All perfection!
O see, the pearled dew drops from her eye;
Arise in peace; fair soul, will you be mine?
If you be death not else.
Here is his power, for if my wrath thou move,
This blow shall rid my heart of torturing love;
Pale deaths effect shall take away the cause, and I be 〈◊〉 as Air: Thou
Sorceress, that stay my hand with Witchcraft, and with Charms:
I will unwind thy cunning Ex•rcismes. Rare beauteous Virgin, Will
you love Canutus?
When to these bodies dead, thou give new l••e, I then will
love thee.
Isle give thee death, As those in blood have fallen; and thou
shalt dye. I cud,—We will withdraw; Then kill her.
And I am ready. Tie•ant, do thy worst. O heaven!
Hold Traitor, hold, you have killed thy Sovereign▪ Does she
not bleed? O Love how strong's thy fear? All England shall not buy
this Jewel from me: Did thou strike her?
I had not drawn my sword, you came so sudden.
Nor never may thou draw it against her life, so she bee
pleased to love.
To ha•e thee I will love, but never love thee.
Grant me thy Love, my Royalties are thine, and thou shalt
strike the Sun blind with thy lustre, in Ornaments more rich then is the
Treasure •id in the unknown bottom of the Sea; And for thy pleasures—
Peace, sleek Flattery. Thou seek to violate my Virgin
Vow with thy enchanting tongue, which 〈◊〉 I break,
The heavens shall fright the earth; Saints prove unjust,
Death lose this power, ere I embrace ma•s lust.
She turns me wild with rage and passion; Isle rip thy bofome
up to see that wonder, a constant women's heart: Sure thine is f•no, yet
thus Isle pierce it were it Adamant: Oh!
My Royal Lord.
Great Prince recall your spirits.
I'm struck with lightning from the torrid Zone,
Stand all betwixt me and that flaming Sun;
Yet do not: Let her heat in death be spent.
Go Erkinwald, convey her to my Tent.
Let her be guarded with more watchful eyes,
Then heaven has stars, for fear she be surprised;
If here she stay, I shall consume and dye,
It is time must give my passions remedy.
Art thou not gone? Kill him that gazes on her,
For all that see her, sure must dote like me,
And Treason will be wrought against us for her.
Be sudden. To our Tents, Prithee away,
The hell on earth is love that brings delay.
The Duke of Mertia with the English Crown attends the
pleasure of my Lord the King.
Present him to us; O obdurate Maid,
The English Crown is value less to thee,
This thy Idea crowns my victory.
Low, as obedience, thus the vanquished English yields subject
duty to the King of Danes, and with this conquered Crown our lives
and honours.
You please us well Duke Osbert; come invest us, thy
warlike hand shall crown Canutus head, For by thy aid, this Realm is
conquered.
Long live Canutus mighty King of Danes, of Denmark,
Norway, and of England King.
Thanks Duke of Mertia, We must now remember that by
thy late revolt we wan this City, slew Etheldred the Lord of many
thousands.
Now for reward which should have come before,
Thou never shalt crown King or subject more.
Off with his head.
My Lord.
A guard I say, stop up the Traitors mouth: Let us have
fear, not love; Mans nature will be bold where it is liked; A Kingdom
got by blood must so be kept: I will not hear him speak; Away with
him; Bring me his wisdoms head into my Tent, there weel converse.
Heavens wrath is justly sent.
Here was it that I saw that blazing Star whose bright aspect
promised a general peace to this affrighted Kingdom: Torches Slaves,
the night comes on us, we are all in darkness, prepare my bed, weel rest
us after toil, and sleep, thou mother of forgetfulness, drown all my
thoughts that ere I saw this Virgin, make her a stranger to my memory,
that I may joy in this, not dye for love. Hofman, her looks are heaven;
her eyes are Cupids darts; Go bring her to me: Art not gone yet
slave? It is an Embassy too good for Harms, the Herald of the
gods: Thou shalt meet Lightning, yet on thou must, go ask that weep∣ing
Nun, dost hear me? Art not gone? Were Helen now alive, this
Maid alone would stain her beauty and new Troy should burn, Paris
would dye again to live to see her: O bring me her, Dull slave with
reverence; Let not the Sun be more out-worshipp'd by the tanned Bar∣barian: Tell her, A bleeding Lover sent thee to her, and name me
if thou chance to see her smile: Tha'st not forgot my name.
No my good Lord.
Let me not spurn thee, Go, Fetch me some Wine, weel
war a while with Love. Fair Phaedra, who in Corinth once was
found, compared to her, as different they wo'd show, as sable Ebony to
Alpine Snow; when first I saw her at the holy Altar, Surely the gods
more careful of her life, then of a mass of souls brought me upon her,
and fixed my soul to hers: Let's have some Music.
But thou prevent us with a better sound. The Accent of her
Name strikes Music dumb, for she is Air of all perfection.—Her
Name?
Her three times sacred Name, most Royal King, is Cartes∣munda,
a Religious Nun.
It needs no Epithet t'express the Name,
For Cartesmunda is the worlds bright frame.
I charge thee Villain, strait conduct her to me. Her sacred Name is
Cartesmunda called; O fairest soul! I fear't a harder Task to conquer
thee, than all the spacious Bounds of Barberry; Had the gods none to
take my glory from me, but a weak woman? O strange destined Fate!
Ten Worlds in Arms against Canutus State.
See the day breaks; Look where Aurora comes, and see the Mornings
dew falls from her eyes, begetting better Flowers than those of May
from the glad ravished Earth: O tell me Fair, Speak English Maid;
How came thou to my sight? What make thou here? Came thou
to murder me?
What all my friends have found but wretched I,
I seek for, death to end my misery.
But can not find him, for thou art immortal; Death wud
dye for thee, if he even saw thee, and for thy sake make blunt his Ebon
dart; Pray weep no more, He prays that might command; We will
not force the Jewel thou so prize, till, thou bequeath it freely to my
youth. We are of the Eagles kind, and scorn to stoop to an ignoble
Thought: Sweet will you hear me; It was King Canutus fetched that
sigh you heard: Still turn aside! Well, if you loathe me, leave me;
there lies your way: Yet be advised, Fond Maid; No sooner shalt
thou pass from forth my sight, but the base Soldiers will lay hold
on thee, and what I value 'bove Religion, will not be thus much there,
They'll ravish thee, and therefore prithee stay, with tears I pray thee.
Thou frosty April, woo't not love for love? Do it then for Honour,
Pleasure, Majesty: Ungentle still? Then get thee from my sight: Go
to the Woods, and learn of wilder Beasts a little pity: You preserve
chastity with a foul sin, Ingratitude: Goodnight; Yet stay, We are
strangers, We may kiss at parting; Thou hast infused Promethean
Fires into me: I have two lives, Yet none of them mine own. Fair
Cartesmunda, If thou wilt be gone, bid me Goodnight, though in
some Language that I understand not:
Goodnight, My Lord.
When shall I have thy Love?
When men shall cease to think there is a God, or any thing
more strange: Alas, great Prince!
My Chastity stands at the Bar above,
My Life I owe to you, but not my Love.
So young, and full of grey haired Purity: In vain I shoot
against a wall of brass, that sends mine own shafts back upon my self.
I must choose fitter time to conquer thee. Lights, and a double guard
to attend my Love.
(Fairest) Good rest; be duteous in her keeping,
He wake with thought of thee, and then with weeping.
The King is Love-sick Harold; Join thy powers, and round
begir• this City Winchester; Beset the ways, let not the English scope,
That stood the siege and sack of Winchester.
I think there's few escaped, the King is slain
And England now submits to the conquering Dane.
Prince Alured, the Brother to the King, and Edmond Duke
of Thetford both are escaped and may raise powers afresh: Therefore
be careful.
Doubt not my Lord. See here comes the Princes.
Madam, I bring you dear commends from your great Brother,
England is won, and the white flag of peace is reared upon the ruins of
this City, King Etheldred slain, and great Canutus invested with his
Crown and Dignity. What conquest can be more?
That you subdue your thoughts; and sir, give ore, till I have
conference with the King.
And then you'll love?
Till then isle love no other.
Drag him along, he's English and must dye. Come for∣ward
sir.
Ye cannot fright me, it is my wish to die,
And I that seek it scoff your Tyranny,
O for fair Englands good and my lost powers,
Mine be the suffering, and the glory yours.
What prisoner have our Danish Soldiers got?
One of the straggling English, my good Lord,
And now are leading him to have him tortured.
Let him come near us, Say, what art thou?
Some God, I think, disguised in humane shape, come down to
court us with bewitching looks,
There's something tells me, if my thoughts speak truth,
To thee I owe the pleasure of my youth.
Was that thy fortune, 'thad been better far
Th'adst fallen amongst thy friends in this dread war
Then live to further shame. Away and hang him.
Stay good my Lord.
Madam forbear, the King hath sworn the deaths of all that
bared his entrance to this City; they scorned his proffered peace,
and now must perish. This may suffice, Hoe's English, and must dye.
If all the English perish, then must I, for I (now know) in
England here was b•ed, although descended of the Danish blood, King
〈◊〉 my Father, thirty years governed the one half of this fa∣mous
Kingdom, where I, that time was born an English Princess;
Therefore I pray, my Lord, set this man free
Let me bestow his life and liberty;
Isle beg it of the King.
Madam, tic yours, go Soldiers drink this gold, and let our
word to you discharge your Prisoner.
It shall my Lord, wo'd we were rid of all the English thus.
Pray Sir, resolve me, what has your fortunes been?
The most of woes dear Princess, I have lived to see my Coun∣try
ruined, my friends murdered,
My self condemned to die, and but for you
I had been dead, that life I hive's your due.
Comfort your self, henceforth you shall be mine,
Attend this, noble Lord, it is for your good;
Where mildness conquers, we must shed no blood.
You are all compact of Love and Mercy (Lady) attend me
sir, and for this Princess sake, we will prefer thee; come beauteous Ma∣dam
you now must leave the Tents to entertain the glorious triumphs of
the great Canutus, whom you must comfort, for the Love-sick King
sits sadly doting on a beauteous Nun.
Is it possible (my Lord) the King our brother,
In midst of Conquest sho'd be Cupids prisoner?
Such is loves power, it flies with swiftest wings,
And midst his armed Guards he wounds Kings.
Venus defend me, if he be thus powerful we shall be all Soul∣diers,
and these stern Wars must be transformed into Loves encounters.
Well, my good Lord, we'll see this English wonder my Brother so ad∣mires,
call for our Guard and Train.
They are ready (madam)
Go you before then (sir) and Isle not stay,
Look to your Prisoner, lest he •un away.
O fear not Lady—Come sir,
Wo'd he wo'd run, so he wo'd take me with him, by Jove I love
him, but it is bashfulness, that thus makes women hide their passions,
even till we burst and die; we must not plead love,
Yea, tho't be offered we must still refuse it.
With foe•d denial when we wish to choose it.
I see no sense for this; well amorous youth,
For thy sake Isle teach women what to do,
And spite of custom to begin to woo.
Be gone, be gone, my Juggy, my Puggy, be gone my Love,
my Dear, my Money is gone, and ware I have none, but one poor Lamb-skin
here: Why so, and who buys this Lamb-skin now, A most
fine, dainty, nappy Lamb-skin, if a Lady would line her Petticoat,
A sweeter Lamb-skin cannot kiss her Catastrophe: Let me see, how of∣ten
do I transform my self in four and twenty hours? First, Here in
Northumberland, mine own native Country, amongst poor people I
change these myllan fustian Needles into eggs, then my eggs into mo∣ney,
and then am I a Merchant, not of Eels-skins, but Lamb-skins; and
thus poor Thornton of Northumberland, picks out a living in spite
of Beggary: Yet this is not the living that I aim at neither; for I may
tell to all men that I have a terrible mind to be a horrible rich man; nay, I
am half assured on it too, for where ere I go, there's something still which∣pers
in mine ears, I shall be greater, and here at Newcastle too, into
which I am now entering. All which to confirm, a Witch or a Juggler, has
guided my fate in writing, and now Isle read it once again, that all the
World may know my fortunes, and wonder at them. Mark then, for thus
it goes.
Go to Newcastle, take thy fate,
Yet ere thou enter, count thy State,
If service in that place thou get
Thy wealth will rise to infinite,
And Thorntons name in England stand,
The richest Subject in the Land.
O fortune, how hast thou favoured a poor Merchant stranger? I have all
this wealth in conceit already, and all this have I got of cunning man,
for two poor Millan Needles, and one of 'em lacks an eye too. No
matter. Hope keeps the heart whole, and I shall be rich, that's certain;
but how I know not▪ nor care not, so I come in any likeness; my For∣tune
says, I must get a service here in Newcastle, but ere I enter I must
count the wealth I have now, and that's soon reckoned, one poor half
penny and a Lambs-skin, is all the wealth I have in faith and yet for all
this my state must stand the richest Subject in the Land; it is certain, my
mind gives me it, and I am assured on it, yet I must put my self in re∣membrance
of my poverty, lest I should forget my self when I am grown
so rich, I will write a note on it ere I enter the Town▪ and hang it here
upon some tree, to keep it in mind, as long as the River of Tine runs
under it. Let me see, instead of paper this Tile-stone shall serve, and
here's and Ink-horn I stole from my Hostess, a scurvy Queen, if I had not
given her money for my Ale, she would have chalked me presently,
this shall serve the turn. Isle sit down and write, sweet Hellicon inspire me
with thy Castalian luck.
Come, come dispatch, the wind is North North West, and
blows fair on us; Where is George my Factor?
Here Sir,
At the next ebb, good George, I and the ship fall down to
Tinmouth; are your books made even, the goods made fit, and all
things fitting for the voyage.
Ell's done sir, the Commodities prized and summed; their
value at my back return from Sea, I hope to treble to you.
Heaven deal in that, or gain, or loss we must be still contented,
and therefore are we called Adventurers, because we know it is haz∣zard.
•Tic indeed sir, and I do wonder at this gain of hazard you'll
set so great a state, seeing the time joins with the Sea in danger; the
Danish Fleet watches to pill the English Venturers. Then be advised.
Yet to avoid all dangers Husband, I'd have you do as here
my Brother doth, ve•ture your state in your own Country, tho the gains
be smaller, the safety's not so doubtful.
I, I, Wife, thy Brother Randolfe here is known a famous Mer∣chant
for Newcastle Coals, and England holds the circuit of his traf∣fick,
but we that are Adventures abroad, must fame our Country
through all Christendom, nay far beyond our Christian Territories, to
Egypt, Barberry, and the Tawny Moors, Where not indeed? if Sea and
wind gives way unto our dancing Vessels; nay, nay, Brother, your mer∣chandize
compared with us, I tell you, is but a poor fresh-water ven∣ture.
Well brother, well, pursue your Foreign gain, I rest content
at home, at the years end we'll cast the difference twixt your far-fetch'd
treasure, and our Newcastle home-bred Minerals, you shall perceive
strange transformation, black coals turned to white silver, that's my com∣fort
sir.
And take it to you sir, with much good I wish it. But stay,
slay, who is that?
One that is very brain busy it seems.
Peace, peace, observe him prithee,
Here did Thornton enter in
With hope, a half penny, and a Lambs-skin,
It shall go in faith. Isle never strive to mend it; foot this Poetry, and a
mans brains were not well laid in his head, wooed make him mad, I
think if there be any Hellicon in England it is here at Newcastle, I
am inspired with it, every Coal-pit has a relish on it, for who goes down
but he comes out as black as Ink.
Is not this fellow mad?
Good faith I doubt it.
Well this writing will I set up here at the Towns end,
that when I have got all these riches together, and sit amongst my
comely Brethren, I then may stalk the pace of wit, and worship,
here to read this Manuscript, then will I view my Ware-houses, disperse
my coin, comfort the poor, I and perhaps build Churches.
Either he speaks to himself, or hoe's possessed with some
strange talking spirit, that Dialogues within him.
Then will I have some Fifty Beades-men in my life time,
for that's the first way to be prayed for here, and mourned for when I am
gone, and on their Gowns their Cullisance shall be six millan Needles,
and a silver Lambs-skin.
Ha, ha, the more he speaks, methinks it is more distracted.
Lets question him.
Is hee not, think you Husband, one of those Players of
Interludes that dwells at Newcastle, and conning of his Part, for
surely these are other men's matters hee talks of? Doe you hear
honest man, and Friend, let me instruct you to bee wise and so∣ber.
I come not hither for thee to teach,
I have no pulpit for to Preach,
I wooed th'adst kissed me under the Breech,
As thou art a Lady gay.
Marry come up with a vengeance.
La you wife, you see what it is to trouble a man in his
Meditations, prithee let him alone, hoe's not mad I warrant thee.
With hope, a half-penny, and a Lambs-skin, I protest
I never pleased my self better. Let me see, what day's this; O
Monday! I shall love Mondays vein to poe•ize as long as I live, for
this trick.
Good speed, Good fellow.
Ha, Whose that? O I thank you Gentlemen; If I have
good speed, Isle do good deeds the sooner: Your sufferance a little I be∣seech
you; Then will I build some famous Monument.
Thou build'st in the Air I think: Prithee, what Country∣man
art?
Faith Sir, a poor Northumberland man▪ and yet I tell ye
Gentlemen, not altogether the poor Fellow, which you behold me;
Fortune may change, If you seek what I shall be, It is infinite, and
cannot be summed together: But if you wo'd know my present store; It is
all summed on this Tyle-stone: I shall be very rich, that's certain; and
this Town of Newcastle must be the raising of my fortune, if there I
get service, then are Wealth and Treasure my servants.
And such a servant cannot want a Master. But Prithee tell
me, Whence hast thou these hopes?
Pray Sir, read that, then tell me your opinion.
Prithee let's see it. Go to Newcastle take thy Fate,
Yet ere thou enter, coun• thy State:
If service in that place thou get,
Thy wealth will rise to infinite;
And Thorntons name in England stand
The richest subject in the Land.—Excellent in faith. And dost thou
believe all this?
As sure as you live Sir, and all the world cannot drive me from
this opinion, but that I shall be a very rich man.
I like thy confidence: How dost desire to have Employment?
Wilt thou go to Sea.
Sea or Land, Fire or Air; Let Newcastle be my home, and
some honest man my Master. This Halfpenny, and this Millan
Needle, shall I multiply to a Million of Halfpence, and this innocent
Lambs-skin to a Magnificent Lordship.
Stay there, I prithee, it is wealth enough for a subject, come,
Isle give thee handsel, that's Entertainment, my name is Goodgift a Mer∣chant
of Newcastle, where thou desire to serve, give me thy hand, If
I do live to see thee this rich man, I shall be proud to say, I was thy
Master.
I am your servant Sir, and will be faithful.
Obey me then at first, as Isle employ thee: Thou shalt to Sea,
I see thou wilt be thrifty: Come hither George, take him a Shipboard
with thee, change his Apparel strait, and make him handsome; I begin
so well to relish his Plainness that I am half persuaded of his hopes. How
say thou wife?
Nay, Nay, He bad me kiss his Breech, B•rlady, but that's
no matter Husband, seeing I see his Fortunes are so hopeful, he shall have
my liking: Come hither Thornton, since thy Master sends thee out to
Sea, there's something for thee to begin thy stock with, and if thou
double it, Isle ne'er grudge in faith, So thou't remember me, when you are
a rich man.
Ha, Ha,—she's confident already.
So shall I ne'er be, till I see it Sir.
Well, Well, Do as I bid thee George, under thy self, let him
have charge of all.
How will he put off these Commodities he has Sir?
Tush, Tush, Isle have an out-cry Fellow George, for so I
take it Sir, your name is now.
Why what's thy Lambs-skin good for?
Marry Muff Sir.
Thou say true indeed Thornton, and Isle purchase it of thee,
for that purpose, Isle give thee a Great for it to line my Muff
withal.
And you shall have it Mistress, It has been lain dead on my
hands a great while, and now it shall be dead on yours, only this, Sweet
Master, I must intent you, that ere I enter the Town, I may hang up this
writing here; I doubt not Sir, but at my coming home, I shall be able
to have it cut in stone.
Agreed, Agreed, an honest Motion. How now, Who's this
comes here?
It is Grim the Collier, Ist't not brother?
O yes sister, the main Over-seer of all my Coals, I war∣rant
you, his heads more troubled too, then Thorntons was to count his
hop'd-for wealth, and mark how wisely he proceeds about it.
Let me see now, first five hundred Chaldron of Coals at ten
Groats a Chaldron, that is, in Coals, and money; ten Groats, and ten
Groats, is twice ten Groats; Then take twice ten out of two times ten,
and there remains four times ten: fivescore Chaldron at ten Groats a
Coal, comes to five shillings, then take me thirty Coals out of thirty
Chaldron, and put them together, and there's the whole Voyage, so
thirty Chaldron of Coals, comes to five Chaldron of Angels.
O rare! He multiplies bravely.
I told you what a reck'ning he wo'd make on it.
Then to cast how many Fourpence halfpennies there are in a
Chaldron of Angels: Let me see, take half a Chaldron out of a whole
Chaldron, and there remains—No, No, this is not the way; I must
begin lower: A Chaldron of Angels, if you take nothing out, there re∣mains
something: This is the honest way for a servant when he casts up
his Masters Reckonings, to take nothing out, and then the whole Stock
remains untouched still.
I marry Sir, I like that well; Why, How now Grim, What
art thou doing?
I cry you mercy Master, I am even doing my good will to
make your Accounts right Sir: There's five hundred Chaldron of
Coals leaving the River, and shipped away: They'll be Sea-sick to morrow.
How many for London (Grim?)
Three hundred Chaldron, Sir.
And whither go the rest?
It was purposed they sho'd ha gone to Winchester, but its
thought since the Danes came thither, they have little need of Sea-coal,
every place is so hot; they say a Taylor burnt his Goose, and yet no fire
came near him.
That's strange▪ Well Grim, bid them alter their course for
Winchester, bid them put in at Lyn, and Yarmouth, and let London
be the farthest of their journey until these Wars afford us better
safety.
Alas Master, if you stow up your ships, you may ee'n hang
up your Colliers, for they'll starve and dye if they come above ground
once; you have sevescore pits, and seven hundred lusty Colliers daily
digging in them, and if they come above ground once—What Thorn∣ton
my old Acquaintance! How ist't, How ist't man?
Never better in faith.
Dost thou know him?
Better then the Taylor that made his Doublet: Know
Thornton, the famous Needle-maker of Northumberland? There's
not a Beggar that carries a Patch about her, but knows him; All
our Colliers buy Needles of him for the same purpose: Many a night
has he lain in the Sellerage amongst • Thornton, How many Eggs
have you roasted at our fire in the Coal-pits?
Thou possessed me now in faith Grim, I have been infinitely
beholding to thee, and when I am a rich man, here's my hand, Isle re∣quite
it.
I had rather thou would set a certain day to do it. Dost thou
think to be rich by Peddlers Eggs, and Lambs-skins?
But I have other Employments now Grim.
He is my servant Sir, and is already by my best liking voy∣aging
to Sea.
Does he go a foot Sir?
Sir, Sir, He's a Venturer too, and when you see his safe re∣turn
again with wealth from Sea, you'll make legs to him.
How legs to him? I scorn him and his Lambs-skins. No
Sir, Thorxton must remember I am Controler of the Cole-pits, and that
many a night I have committed him to the Hole, and there he lay forty
Fathom deep beneath me, where I coed have buried him alive, if I had
thought on it: Make legs to him?
Come, Come Sir, We'll have you friends at parting; Go
George, follow my directions, and let Thornton have that Employment
I prescribed to you; Come Sir, you shall first erect your Character ac∣cording
to your mind at the Towns end, to keep a Record of your En∣trance
in.
With hope, a Halfpenny, and a Lambs-skin, that's all
Sir.
Ha, Ha, a brave rich man I promise you.
Is thy name Altered?
Yes, My good Lord.
Thou art my prisoner still, and we have power o'er all, thy
Life and Fortunes.
I still confess it, Sir.
It is well, Can thou guess then, why my love extends it self
so lineally towards thee? Thou know that even from death I have
advanced thee close to my self, and trust thee with my secrets, and one
above the rest, requires thy aid, thy subtle and quick brain can better
forge matter of fair discourse than mine can be, The bright Elgina thou
must court for me. In Peace and War she has been still my aim, for her
the tedious night I do beguile, with serious thoughts of her divinity, and
watching till the midnight Chimes be past, have waked again before the
Village Cock had called the Ploughmen to his early labour.
Go plead my love, yet ere thou go, here swear
(Yet I with love will win thee, not with fear)
Never to injure me in this disguise, Nor with Icarian wing to soar too
high.
I were a villain to betray your trust, being so meritless of your
great favours, and therefore vow by all that man may swear by, Isle
be as true to you in this employment, as truth is to the just.
Thou hast said enough, I leave it to thy tree•st—Go, return
and make me happy, there's gold, spend freely.
Fortune I see thou now art blind, and foolish, and without aim di∣rect'st
thy giddy shafts, these gifts thou give to me, which I despise,
what physic h•lps a man just as he dies? Tic Englands peace that I
would live to Court, but she is fled, and I a captive Prince, slave to my
mortal foes, till time release me, that once I may regreet my English
friends, which long ere this, I know have wished my presence, to join
our forces for our Countries freedom.
But here she comes whom I must plead for love; my faith is past, and
were she beauties Queen, and half the world her dowre, I wo'd not wrong
The trust I have received, Isle court her for him,
And plead my Masters love, though she abhor him.
Who's there, Altered?
Your pardon beauteous Princess, I must woo you.
But isle prevent you sir, for isle woo you.
For noble Erkinwald my warlike Master. All love from
him.
Is nothing like to thee,
That conquer'st love, and Cupids Deity.
You do amaze me Lady.
Be not afraid,
But tell me boldly, could you love a Maid
That for thy sake wo'd be a president, and teach all women a new way to
win the often wished desires of stubborn me•? In me you shall observe pa∣tience
and duty, tender care, and fear; by thy bright eyes, Isle teach the
constant Turtle truer love, and make the Nuns at Vista's Altar sue•,
The Virgin state is not so strict to move
As the obsequious life▪ you lead in love.
And cannot you yet say, you mean to love me.
Beshrew me Madam but you tempt me shrewdly, pray give
me leave to think upon it—. Ha! my vow's not broke yet; for I woo
not her, that was my oath sure, and I think there's no man that can
withstand the wooing of a woman. Fond fool, how quickly youth and
blood transform?
Come, What's your answer?
Dearest Lady, There is but one thing in the world that hates me,
and you have brought it with you.
O me! what sho'd it be?
Forgive my rashness, it is a thing within you, not you, that
charms me from you.
Be it my heart, isle pull it out, so thou wilt love me.
O gracious Princess, it is your Royal blood, so near allied i•∣to
the great Canutus
Keeps me at distance, were our states made even
My love sho'd be as strong as zeal to H•aven.
Therefore Imperial Maid—
No more, if that be all, we will dispense with greatness, use
me like one that loves you, Isle Invent a plot that shall in short secure
us both; I crave but this, that thou be true of faith: For by my life I
love thee.
And (gracious Princess) since now I see your passions are un∣feigned,
I vow not only to requite your love, but with affected and sin∣cere
intents to crown your wishes, though it work my ruin.
Our faiths and hearts are one then, Cupids wings,
Can crown mean births, with joy, make slaves of Kings
Knew Erkinwald my heart, he would change with thee,
And be thy slave to have command ore me.
At it so close? Isle hear their conference, win her, and gain thy
Freedom, Love and Honour. Ha! That kiss (bold slave) past thy
Commission; Death and the Devil, she kisses him too. O fond Er∣kinwald
be blind and do not see them; thy office was to speak, but not,
for thy self.
Natures Divinity is in thy looks, and he an Atheist sees thee,
and not loves. Should Erkinwald now see it, I wo'd love thee, tho for
each kiss I had a several torture, ten deaths for thy enjoying were my
Bliss.
So high I pr•ze thee, by this Virgins kiss.
Yet you make shift to reach him with your lips; Degenerate
Princess, I suspect thy birth: Yet well may thou be Sister to thy Bro∣there,
For Great Canutus blood runs low as t•in, and Love-sick doa•∣eth
on an English Nun.
Then you resolve to •lie?
Heaven knows I do.
Here's one will stop your Journey. Thunder part ye, slave.
Ha, O me unfortunate!
Tush, fear not Madam. See here I stand my Lord.
A perjured Villain.
That tongue lies that speaks it—Hey• me, I courted for
thee with my best of speech, and showed my faith as firm as Adamant,
till fate that rules all love, ore-rul'd her so, that she became a Suitor for
my love,
And on my worthless self her smiles hath thrown;
My tongue was yours, but my consent mine ow•.
Isle have that heart she loves—hold eyes from weeping.
But I shall hate that heart if in thy keeping.
Sheath up thy sword, and hear me Elkinwald, what shall I give thee
to renounce my love?
As much as thou would give to attain Elizium sho'd not avert
my love from these fair eyes, Ioves thunder, or eternal miseries shall
never so transform me.
Yet I cannot love thee.
But isle remove the cause of that. Villain, thou hast seen our
slaves dye, when their Lords have laughed, Come, run on my wea∣pone,
this is Princely favour,
For greater tortures do attend on thee,
But we'll be merciful in Tyranny.
See, on the Earth, thy Sovereigns Sister kneels, to beg thy
pity.
There's nothing but thy love can purchase it.
Yet have mercy, the fault in love was thine, thou did betray
me when thou let me see him; and Villain thou, if thou but touch
his life, the Great Canutus shall revenge my wrongs,
For after him Elgina will not live;
Bethink thee then, O yet some pity give!
Do not debase your self, for my poor life,
I dare his worst, my love is constant still,
More resolute to die, than thou to kill.
Tic worthy praise, then see, behold thy death.
With open eyes, as I wo'd view her state,
And like a man thus I pursue my fate.
Hold, hold. O I am slain, farewell dear friend, the loss of thee
is Tyranny in d•ath
And death a dream, so thou but close mine eyes.
Chaste love is born in Heaven, and never dies.
Amazement to my soul, O my Elgina! O I am most occurs•!
it was this hand struck thee.
For which Isle be revenged; thus Heaven is just.
Base Villain thou hast slain me.
It is thy fate, Farewell.
Oh pure, unspotted Maid, unhappy Princess,
This hand shall keep thy will and close thine eyes,
Let thy soul joy, for here thy Murderer lies
Dead at my foot, and I with thee could die,
Were my poor Country free from misery.
War calls me to the field. O my Elgina. Autume is on thy ch•oks, the
Rose is withered, and thou look like the Alabaster statue,
Upon thy lips I print this parting kiss,
And flying from thee, leave all earthly bliss.
Osrick, we hear the Duke of Thatford raises men in Norfolk.
All England sure, I think will mutiny, if 〈◊〉 the King nag∣lect
his hopeful Conquest, by doting on a women's lustful Beauty.
Never was man in love bewitched like him, he will not suffer
speech or any counsel that may dis-swade from her; he bars his fight
from any but the Nun, and his loo•e Panders. Ha! what sight is this?
Duke Erkinwald and the Princess murdered, this sight wo•d sad even
Tyranny it self, draw tears from Tigers, and make wonder dumb.
Oh Great Canutus what pore•ants are these•
This heavy curse lights on thy lust and ease.
Thy sister, and thy best of friends are slain,
And safety now is frighted from thy Throne.
Convey this spectacle of grief aside, and let a guard pursue the m••∣derer.
Isle hie me to the King, and there relate
Their deaths, his lust, both guided by strong fate.
She is an Angel in the shape of woman, chaster than Dian, col∣der
than Freezland snow, and yet she burns me; if I miss her now, my
death must be the period of my love; Go, let those Jewels, Cates, per∣fumes
and Music, be all produced together in one sense.
Unite all raptures, let's have nothing s•ant,
That she may taste at once, what all Queens want.
Strike heavenly Music, with a tuneful measure,
And with thy raptures swell her blood and pleasure.
The star appears, welcome dear soul, to make our joys more full, fit
to this Banquet, Great Queen of my heart, and fully joy thy senses in
each part.
My senses are entranced, or do I dream;
O let me back return to hide my shame.
O stay divinest soul, hear me but speak.
O I have lost my sense with these Enchantments; I am I
know not how, for all my powers are useless, but mine eyes to
weep.
Make not the earth proud to receive thy tears, lest being sub∣jest
unto me her King, I force her to restore again those pearls, more
rich than all the Jewels of our Crown, so high I prize thy tears, yet thee
'bove all.
I am your Servant, Prisoner, Vassal, worse.
Thine eyes upon my freedom laid that curse.
If thou be mine, I do command thy love;
Where Kings of Subjects beg, let pity move.
How can so great a King, be weakness slave?
In doting of those joys I near shall have.
Men that lust women once, no more endure 'em,
In health they loathe the physic that did cure 'em.
When I neglect thy love, or touch thy life, may all my Battles
prove unfortunate, and I lose all the conquering Danes have got, and end
my days with shame and inward grief.
Your words be registered, with hands divine,
O keep your vow (great Prince) for I break mine.
I blush to say, I yield, I'm wholly yours, a spotless Virgin now is in
your power, and as you mildly courted, so this kiss confirms me to
you.
And my soul to thee.
Never did man meet more felicity.
Run Vassals run, prepare all sweet delight
For Cartesmunda sleeps with me to night.
England shall sleep in peace, for all my force
On Cartesmunda's love shall now be spent,
Thy Arms shall be my Arms, thy Bed my Tent.
Defend me Heaven, how is this King transformed? my news
is not so sad, as is this sight.
Whose there? Harold? what news?
The English Princes (mighty Sovereign) seeing your Highness
thus forsake the field, threaten fresh war, and England will be lost.
But Cartesmunda won, In thee we have all good that Eng∣land
holds,
All Conquest in these Arms Canutus folds.
Hast more to say?
Yes, but with grief (my Lord) The fair Elgina, your beau∣teous
•ester, and that only one that made her Sex admired, is slain, great
King.
Give me this Bracel•t, I have begged it long.
And noble Erkinwald lies murd'red too.
Why now you are my pretty one, Come, kiss thy Canutus.
Had you (my Lord) as I, beheld that sight, the Tyranny of
death had sure amazed you.
What does he talk on?
Do you not mark, my Lord; he says, Your Sister's dead.
Let her be buried then: Remove out of mine eye, thou
fright'st my love. Some Music there: Come Cartesmunda kiss me:
Go bid our Soldiers hang their Arms up; Fold up our Ensigns, and
unbrace our Drums, England is conquered, all our Wars are done, and
all in this, that Cartesmunda's won.—
O strange Enchantment, the sad news I brought, Though now
regardless, meanwhile would have made his eyes start from their orbs to
hear of it: O fair Elgina! happy now you are dead, and dost not live to
see thy brothers folly. This is not now Canutus, nor his Palace, but
rather seems a Roman Theatre, and this young N•to acting Come∣dies,
with some light Strumpet in bold scenes of Lust; This change
with wonder I behold, and see
That love is powerfulo're inferior things,
When thus to baseness it transforms great Kings.
Come Bullies, fetch more Coals, and aboard with 'em lusti∣lie,
show your selves Newcastle-men, not proud, but honest and humble,
and such as do not scorn to carry Coals.
I warrant you Mr. Grim, We•'l send'em going, Newcastle Coals
are Here•icks, and must be burnt at London.
You say well, We'll put'em to water first, and then let'em put
fire in their Tails afterword.
Well said Grim, I see thou art not idle.
No Master, I am Bailey of your Cole-pits, and your Worcester∣ships
Benefactor: I will do what lies in a true serva•t; Seven hundred 〈◊〉
Indians, or Newcastle Colliers, your Worship keeps daily to dive for
Treasure five hundred fathom deep for you, and as they bring it up, Isle
send it out to your profit, Sir.
It is well done Grim, thy gains will one day be a Gentle∣man.
A Gentleman? Nay I hope one day to purchase a Lordship,
and all my Colliers under me shall be Ladies, for Isle maintain'em with
black Masks on their faces already; but do you hear Master? I hear
there is some disadvantage towards us, and it behoves us to look to it,
they say there are a new sort of Colliers crept up near London, at a place
called Croydon, that have found out a way by scorching of wood to
make Charcoals, and '•is to be feared this may hinder our Traffic
Master.
How? To make Coals of wood, art sure it is so?
Most certain Sir, but never fear it Master, Newcastle Coals
shall conquer Croydon, we can give a Chaldron of Sea-coals for a sack
of Char-coals.
Thou say well Grim; but I hear my brothers ship's
returned with large Advantage, I mean to see him, mean time insist upon
•hy care, good Grim.
O sweet Master, Let me go with you, I'd fain see how
Thornton our Needle-merchant has sped, I doubt me, his Lambs-skin
is turned to three Sheeps-skins the wrong side outward.
Come, Let's go; but see they come to us.
Now brother Randolph how is'• with you Sir?
Glad by the happy tidings of your News Sir; Fame has out∣stripped
the wind that brought your ships, and tells us of a rich and pros∣porous
Voyage: Isle talk with your Factor, Sir, and know your Pur∣•has.
Do, Do, Mean time Isle talk with Thornton here my honest
Merchant of Millan Needles; How hast thou sped in thy Voyage, how
did thou brook the Sea?
I think he was glad to pump over-board; How say you
Thornton?
Tush, Tush, Thou art a Fresh-water Fellow (Grim.)
A Fresh-water Fellow? O disgrace to a Collier! If ever I
kill a Whale hand to hand, it shall be thee.
Nay, good Grim.
Mr. Goodgift, I pray pardon me: Shall Grim the Collier
that has been thus long Controler of the Cole-pits, chief Sergeant of the
Selleridge, nay the very Demigorgan of the Dungeon, be called a Fresh-water
Fellow?
Quietness, I say, We'll have no quarrelling.
I beseech you Sir▪ Let's both be let down into a Cole pit five
Fathom deep, and he that kills the other, shall be sty•led with a Damp,
and so you shall never be troubled to hang, nor bury us.
Go to, I say, Isle have ye friends again: Come, shake
hands.
Never, unless I may call him, Porpoise, now at single hand,
Sir.
I, I, Thou shalt.
Thou? go thy ways, thou art a Porpoise, and now I am
friends with thee.
So, So, It is well, and now as I was saying, Thornton, What
Voyage hast thou made to benefit thy hopes, your Halfpenny, and your
Lambs-skin? My Factor tells me here thou hast been careful and di∣ligent,
but to the wealth and greatness you expect, I yet hear no∣thing.
I marry Husband that's the news I look for; Sir, Come tell us
Thornton, How have you bestowed the money that I gave you?
Faith Mistress, as the rest, my full stock to Sea, you, and my
good friends gave, was five shillings, and putting in at Preston for
fresh water, I turned it there into six Tun of Iron, one of which Tuns
I have already sold unto an Anchor-Smith here in Newcastle for four
pound; the rest, if I put off so well, will multiply my stock most richly,
Mistress.
It is well, but far from hope of wealth and Lordships
Thornton.
Yet that re-multiplied again, good brother, may help his
Halfpenny and his Lambs-skin somewhat.
Well, well Thornton, you are welcome home however; So art
thou George; Go see the ship unl•ded, we'll go before, and view the
Ware-houses.
I shall Sir.
Come brother, will you go?
Yes, Sir; You'll quarrel no more, if we leave you together
now?
No Sir, I mean to borrow some money of him now.
That's not his way to thrive; Look to him Thornton.
I warrant you Master, we'll agree well enough; Ah Sir, Mr.
Thornton, you have got six Tun of Iron already, you must take heed
now that you fall not into some crafty Ironmongers hand to deceive you
of your whole stock; Look too't, they are hard dealers that deal in Iron,
if you be gulled, remember what Martin said to his man, Whose the
Fool now?
Tush Grim, Look there man, my whole stock lies not in
Iron; a little stock I borrowed of my fellow George at Sea, and with it, I
have purchased these Pearls.
Pearls? Prithee tell me true: Are they Pearls in faith?
Pearls? I, and precious ones too, I hope.
Ha, ha, good Oyster Pearl, worth twelvepence a pound, I
think.
No matter man, I cannot lose by them howsoever; they cost
me little; I have sent for a Goldsmith a purpose to know the certainty.
That's well, and in the mean time, here comes your first
Chapman: How now good man Iron-fist, Why do you puff and
blow so?
O Mr. Thornton, I'm ee'n out of breath with seeking you,
unless you stand my friend, I shall be undone for ever.
Why, what's the matter man?
Your Iron, Sir, your Iron, that I bought of you, is not the
metal I took it for, twill do me no good Sir, there will not a nayl be
hammered out of it, when I heat it, it melts, and when it is cold again, it
bends like-lead, and if it lye on my hand, I am undone for ever; I be∣seech
you, Sir, take it again, though I lose ten shillings in the price I paid
for it.
Nay, I must not rise by hurt of any man; Isle take it again,
and thou shalt lose no penny. I prithee let me see it, Is this a part on it.
I, for here's the end of one of the Bars, the poorest piece of
Iron I ever hammered on.
Well, leave this with me, and bear the rest home to my Ma∣sters
Ware-house, thou shalt sustain no loss, thou shalt have thy money.
I thank you Sir, Isle bear it back again, and my wife that yet
curses you most terribly, shall pray for you most horribly.
This is strange, my great Venture turned to nothing now?
Faith Mr. Thonton, and your pearls prove no better than your
Iron, you were best turn Merchant of Lambs-skins again.
Well I know the worst on it Grim, see here comes the Gold∣smith
that I sent for; if my Pearls prove as bad as my Iron, I am quite
beggared in faith,
Now Mr. Thornton what's your business with me?
Your advice in these few pearls sir, and I would know the va∣lue
of them.
They are fair and round, are they your own sir?
Isle answer the sail of them.
And have you any more of 'em sir?
Some thirty more, and far more orient than these are too.
Isle give you twenty pound for these two at a venture sir.
You shall have Pearl my dog at that price sir.
What say you Mr. Thornton?
Twenty pound say y'? there's some hope then towards my
half-penny, I see. Come sir, Isle make a rash bargain, you are my first
Ch•pman, and shall have first refusal, both in the price of these and all
the rest; and since you give me this good comfort, sir, pray let me trow∣ble
you a little further, you have good skill in Metals sir, pray look on
this; what metal should this be?
Let me see it sir, Isle tell you presently.
A beastly piece of Iron it is, it came new from the Forge,
old Iron-fist the Smith has been hammering, but he can do no good
on'•.
What think you sir?
Ha! fore Heaven, it touches fair, have you any store of this
metal sir?
Yes sir, six Tun I assure you, I brought it for good Iron, but
my small skill has deceived me.
You were well deceived sir, for if the rest▪
Of your six Tun with th•s in trial stand
You 're now the richest Subject in the Land,
Ha! Gold? Delude me not I beseech you sir, let me believe
you plainly. You've touched this piece, and this Isle give you to make
good your word.
Upon my life I will, it is perfect gold, and for this Wedge
I will refine it all to its pure lustre, and your infinite profit.
I make that bargain with you, this piece is yours, and since
you give these hopes, I pray conceal it, and meet me at the Ware∣house,
there Isle show you the full six Tun I spake of, and confer.
I will a•tend you sir, and tell you thus,
Your For•unease all are rich and wondrous.
I have a thankful heart to heaven for it, that's my comfort: Why
how now fellow Grim, how stand thou man?
Six Tun of Gold? O that I durst but embrace you Mr.
Thornton!
Tush man, I prithee do; Isle ne'er foget my self nor thee,
I am honest Thornton, and thou honest Grim.
Poor Grim the Collier sir, but Isle never be your worships equal,
you shall be triumphant Mr. Thornton, and I poor Grim, your honest
friend, and quondam fellow.
Come, come, no more of this, help me to cast my venture
honest Grim: Six tun of gold?
Most right sir.
Three pound an ounce, is threescore pounds a pound.
And that's horrible usury for your worship.
Nay, nay, no worship good Grim, this is Heavens blessing
thrown on a poor mans head.
Wo'd I were thrown into a Coal-pit with such a blessing on
my back.
Nay prithee let's reckon further, three pound an ounce, and
threescore a pound, is full sixteen thousand pound a Tun, and doubling
that to six times six, comes near to forty hundred thousand pounds, almost
four millions.
O Lord sir! is not that better than twenty millan Needles that
your Lordship had wont to sell amongst the Colliers, and when you came
to Newcastle, as your writing says, Here did Thornton enter in, with
hope, a half-penny, and a Lambs-skin.
True, true, good Grim, and I shall ne'er forget it.
O that my mother had lapped me in a Lambs-skin the first
hour of my begetting, for now I see there is no luck to a Lambs-skin, six
Tun of gold at one purchase, and besides all this your Highness does for∣get
the •earls too.
Nay, nay, no Titles Grim, it is all heavens blessing still.
Tic true sir, and I think your Majesty's the richest man—
Away, away, though•t speak Treason anon Grim. The wealth
I have I see is in•inite, and be thou secret and conceal a while, and Isle re∣ward
thee with large recompense.
I am your Vassal sir, and will be obedient to your Excellence
in all things. But see the foolish Smith is returned to see you.
Prithee be silent. How now honest Smith, hast thou sent
home the iron?
O yes sir, I thank Heaven I have rid my hands of it, you
have made me a man Mr. Thornton, my house is quiet, my wife silent,
I have carried home your leaden iron, return me my silver back again, and
my wife and I shall pray for you when you are dead and rotten.
Well sir, withal my heart. I received four pound; Look you
sir, there it is, all your full sum to a penny.
Sweet Mr. Thornton, shall I not give you four pots for all this
kindness? pray sir, it is fit I should lose something.
No, no, I'm satisfied.
Do you hear ancient Iron•first, the old Smith of Newcastle,
I can tell you one thing, if the Almanac or Erra-pater be true, you'll
hang your self ere to morrow morning.
How, hang my self!
Nay, prithee Grim, thou wilt discover all anon.
No I warrant you sir, I do it but to work a little profit. Do
you hear Smith, what shall I give you for the ashes and rubbish that
came off of that old Iron that you refused now?
How? the ashes? marry I mean to sweep 'em out of my shop
when I come home in faith, for fear they infect the rest. What wilt thou
do with 'em?
That's all one, Let me have all the ashes and the pieces you broke
off that Bar you brought to Mr. Thornton, and Isle give thee five shillings.
Five shillings? Isle not be said to gull you Mr. Grim, but an
you'll give me a great ready money, they are yours.
A bargain: There's your great.
The ashes, and all the pieces of iron are yours sir.
Bear witness Mr. Thornton, come, Isle go fetch 'em presently,
y'•d best make haste, your dismal day's to morrow, you know what
I told you, and unless you rid your self of 'em quickly, you will hang
your self, that's certain.
Ha! Have my hopes ore-tane me? think on it Thornton,
and thank Heaven foe•'•t; here at Newcastle first
In low estate, did Thornton enter in,
With hope, a half-penny, and a Lambs-skin,
And now my large Accounts, of wealth scarce told,
I keep possession of six Tun of gold.
The blessings strange, and I must now resolve
To tie my vows to my auspicious fate,
Lest the world curse, and Heaven call me ingra•e;
To make of this my gold a household God,
Were mere Idolatry, no'• shall fly abroad:
Newcastle, to thy good, large sums of love
My promise owes, which isle pay, and prove,
To grace thy fame, Isle beautify thy ground,
And build a wall that shall embrace thee round.
That Music is too loud, tread softly sirs; How sweetly in his
sleep Can••us looks? Isle not envy thee Iuno, keep thy Jove, here lies
the soul of Cartesmunda's love. Now by this kiss Canutus I do love thee,
thou need not dream it, fie, fie, sluggard fie, beshrew the God of
dreams, what, did he fright thee? Or art thou fighting of some battle
now, wherein thou see me taken prisoner, and startst with fear of that?
There's nothing else that could affright thee, though it came like thunder,
for thou were made for Arms, and for these Arms; and yet thy sword
Canutus did not win me. I saw these eyes, when I refused to love thee,
begin to lose their splendour, and in tears drown their neglected brightness.
I have seen this face half dead when I have frowned upon it, and with my
smiles life has returned again; go, go, you wanton, by this kiss Isle beat you.
How now Sweet-heart?
Art thou awake my Love? then I am well.
Well Cartesmunda, sleep, and I will watch as careful as the ten∣der
Pelican stands by her tender young; give me a kiss potent as Bac∣choose
to raise appetite, and le•'s go sleep together, if I get a Boy upon
thy youth, he shall be King, and half the world shall be his Dower.
Whose that knocks so rudely for his death? hath not the slave described
the noise?
It is Duke Harold, sir, entreats access.
He does not choose his time well. Let him in.
The King is angry sir.
Angry, say thou? holy Saints defend us, 'has foes enough to
vent his spleen upon, and not to shroud himself thus from his friends.
Most mighty Prince.
Rise Harold, •e coed chide you; But go on.
Pardon (my speech my Lord) it is my duty, and I must needs
make bold to tell your Highness, y're no Soldier but a Love-sick Prince,
And while you dally out your days in love, the English all are raising
head against you, the Ga•reasons that kept Northumberland are
chased as far as York, two thousand Danes, died in that bloody slaughter.
And now again those warlike Princes all their Forces join, and seek
you forth.
Fetch me some wine, we'll drink to all their deaths that
dare disturb us; Cartesmunda, thou shalt sweetly pledge me, come
faster slave.
Thus in this wine we'll wash away all care,
My pleasures and my conquest all are here.
Come pledge me sweet.
The Duke of Thetfords Forces raised in Norfolk, have quite
expuls'd the Danes, the English Nobles bound to your State by con∣quest
and by oath, forsake Allegiance, and with sound of Drums pro∣claim
Prince Alured the English King.
Ho, ha, ha.
Why laughs my Love?
To see thee pledge me such a hearty draught.
You see my Lord hoe's careless, and neither minds us nor his
persons safety.
Most Royal sir, what order for your forces?
Let's have some music strait; Come Cartesmunda wee•l
dance out half this day, and that being done, we will retire our selves and
sleep again. Why, when ye slaves? do your souls sleep within you? here's
good music.
So was the warlike Drum and Trumpet once, great Har∣diknute
the glory of the Danes. Thy Son plays now the King.
Hail mighty King.
Thunder to thee; Foot can we not be private?
Alas my Liege my news is of importance.
So is my pleasure slave, avoid our presence, thou and the rest
that come to fill our ears with tumults and with bloody Massacres, fright∣ing
m• heavenly Love, for whose sweet sake let men fall thicker than the
checkered leaves, the stern winds rend and ravish from the tree•, when yale∣low
Autum turns them into gold.
Be gone, come Cartesmunda let's retire,
We will not stir were all the world on fire.
Is this the end of all our former conquests? to be reconquered
now with wine and women?
I, this is she that bears so high a stroke, we dare not shake
our heads for fear we loose 'em; if she but dreams a dream that not
del•ghts her, next morning there are some are sure to bleed for it, whose
lot so ere it be.
Wo'd it were mine, my Lords, so she coed dream, and it would
come to pass, the Devil might fetch her.
This twelve month sir, he has not touched his Armour, nor been
in the field to cheer his Soldiers.
We now must make as great a suit to see him, as if we begged
for Tips of dignity.
No more, I see your griefs and all our ruins, if we keep si∣le•t
thus. Isle speak to him, and venture life for such a general good, if
my plots fail, my tongue shall boldly speak
To touch his baseness, though I lose my head,
Isle die, or win him from this strumpets bed.
Fear not to second me.
Not I, were death assured, Isle first begin,
A Soldiers best fight is to beat down sin.
Double my Guards about her, I will prove
There's no happiness on earth but love.
Most mighty Prince.
Audacious Traitor, wherefore come thou to us, did we not
charge thee to avoid the presence.
Your Father (Royal Sir) knew me a Soldier, and I have
fought for you, yet if you please, so I may speak, make me your hum∣ble
Martyr.
Slave what would thou say?
That which my life shall prove
You've lost your conquest in a women's love.
Could you untie the vail Cupped has bound about your eyes and forehead,
you wo'd find she were not all so fair as you esteem her, Nature was never
so impartial to give to one to rob a million, arm but your self and lead
your Soldiers forth to win another City, you shall find her beauty far
out-strip'd, sacred Liege, if like a young man you take counsel ill,
Destroy me quickly, it shall be my fame
I died to win you from a Strumpets shame.
Thou'st spoke enough to damn thee, Impudent Traitor, go
dye unpit•ied; Though thou hast my hate▪ thou shalt not have the honour
of my sword o take away thy l•fe, you of our Guard; See a base death
performed upon this Slave.
Farewell my Liege you once must have a grave.
My Resolution's firm, and I will speak, though hell shu'd
gape to swallow me alive; What's he chat's gon to death my So∣foreign?
A Traitor (Harold) to my best content.
O pardon sir, your rage has lost a man of more true worth
then all this Nation; He was not of that strain of Counsellors, that like
a tust of Rushes in a Brook, bends every way the current turns it self,
yielding to every puff of Appetite that comes from Majesty, but with
true zeal he faithfully declared the grief of all: Pardon me (great
Canutus) I must speak, and let thy subject on his knee entreat, the
Kingly Lion yet to rouse his strength,
And chase those English that do only wound,
Because out Rescuer will not be found.
Fond man, how dare thou check our Appetite: Hast thou
forgot, our frown can strike thee dead.
I know it, and willingly lay down my head;
For it is more honour by thy wrath to dye,
Then living to behold thy misery,
Which sure is coming on.
Let it make haste. We'll beat it back with our triumphant
Host.
You cannot, till you beat that wanton hence; She has b•witched
your senses (mighty Lord)
Her Tresses, like to Adamantine Chains,
Have let all heat but lust out of you veins;
When she is gone, your valour you'll assume,
But while she stays, she doth your state consume.
No more: Go bid the Captains meet me in the Hall; Tell'em
to morrow early we'll come down;
And in strange kind to all your eyes we'll show
We can command our self as well as you.
Isle do your will, and hope for good event.
There is no hell on earth but discontent.
I feel my blood grows i will, a sudden qualm in a deep Laethe seems to
drown my joys.
But here comes she, by whom those thoughts are gon,
Earths happiness, as whose creation
Nature spent all her stock: Welcome my love to make our joys full,
Go adorn thy self in all the richest Jams my Coffers yields; Wear all the
Jewels purchased with my crown, and out-shine Dian in a Robe of
stars.
For what, my Lord?
To please mine eyes, and make all men admire thy Radencie.
Thy Beauty shall out-brave the glorious Sun,
Somewhat Canu't must do to be talked on.
Fie Sister, weep no more, it is time to lay by grief, and with
the death of your late husband, now bury your sorrows.
Shu'd I forget so soon so good a husband?
His goodness was your good, your late dead husband has left
you rich, and full Executrix to be over-seen by Mr. Thornton, whose
care I cannot pass without some note; For though his wealth be raised
to Infinites, he not forgets a servants love.
Alas good brother, I have wooed him from it.
How Sister have you wooed him?
I, from civility, Methinks it is unmannerly in me, to see a man
so much in state the better, to be so like a servant to me; I tell you I have
wooed him from it.
I think it were better far he wooed you Sister.
Wooed me? For what?
For Love Sister.
O •ie, good Brother: The very word would wrong my
husbands grave.
Tush, a Women's Sorrow, has been in black to day, in green
to morrow.
I, but I am none of those: No, no, Isle never marry.
Come, you are foolish, think upon him, Sister, Hoe's rich
man, I tell you. Hoe's now the wealthest subject England hath.
O but my Husband!
Which of 'em? he that's gone, or this to come? Think of
Mr. Thornton.
Alas, I am not his equal:
Tush you were once his Better, hoe's humble still.
Well, Isle speak no more on it.
Well, think on it then.
Hey, ho, Hoe's a very honest man truly, and had my husband
dyed but two months ago, I might have thought on it.
How fare you Sister?
As a green widow sir; Pray if you see Mr. Thornton, say I'd
speak with him.
Are you there in faith Sister; See, hoe's here already.
Spare for no cost, and ply the Workmen hard, Isle pay'em
all, they shall not want for money; have you tan the compass of the
Wall?
We have, to a foot sir.
How many Towers of strength may be erected, dividing
each distance by a hundred pace•.
It is cast already, and the compass falls,
A hundred fourscore Towers to grace the Walls.
How high de'you raise the Walls?
As you directed sir, full a hundred foot.
Right, and twelve in bread•h.
Just so sir, twill be a pleasant walk to view the Town:
So I wo'd have it; And therefore from the highest erect a
Battlement above the Platform four foot high a'both sides, both to
secure, and make the place more pleasant; See it raised so.
I shall sir.
O my dear Husband!
Why, how now Mistress?
O Mr. Thornton, I never see you, but I think of a good hus∣band.
I marry Sister, that's a pretty cast.
Your pardon I beseech you gentle Mistress; Your Factor and
my self have summed your state, and find it cl•early, all your debts dis∣charged,
in complete value fifteen thousand pound.
Ha, ha, Sister, a good Dowry to get a new husband, trust
me.
No, no, Isle ne'er marry again; Isle even follow Mr. Thorn∣tons
rule, you see he lives a Bachelor.
Sir, Methinks' it were good you took a wife, and so leave your
own to your own posterity.
In all, Isle take my Mistress counsel: Pray resolve me, Had
I, a mind to marry, which in your judgement were the sitter, a Maid, or
Widow?
Truly, I think a Widow sir, you may imagine, I may speak
somewhat inmine own Flattery; but alas, it is a state I shall not change!
It is for your good, I speak in love, no hate,
A Widow sir, will best secure your state.
You counsel well Mistress, and Isle think on it.
The sooner the better too, I can assure you; you'll find much
comfort in it, you may elect some young green thing out of a Maiden
choice, that may be fury and froward, she may please your eye a little,
and other parts about you, but vex your heart, and be a gulf to swallow
your estate; If you'll deal wisely (as I hope you will) take me a Widow,
that knows how and what to do, that has been seasoned in a husbands
usage, and one that will obey as you shall honour:
He that will quietly lay down his head,
Let him contract a Widow to his bed.
And still I say, take me a Widow, sir.
Why, you say honestly Sister; Do you understand her sir;
she bids you take her a Widow.
You are merry Brother.
Nay you said so Mistress, speak't again then, for by my Faith,
were it not for two things Mistress, I'd come a wooing to you.
Two things? Why three things shall not hinder it; What
are they?
My first fear is, the marriage of so much wealth as ours
compounded, would choke all content, and with the superflux change
all to cares.
You take good course for that already, sir, your charitable
works so well begun, will help to disperse the o're-plus freely.
You have removed that well, the other is, that the remem∣bronco
of my poor estate, which is so publicly proclaimed to all men,
might make my wealthy Mistress here disdain me.
Nay, that's your glory, sir, and cannot be accounted as your
shame.
Why La sir, she has helped that her self now.
In faith, say then Mistress (I am a bad Wooer, it is my be∣ginning)
shall it be a match?
I cannot so forget my late lost husband.
Why, this repairs your losses, Sister, you lost a good one,
and find his equal with a wealthy purchase.
Put me in hope that I may once enjoy you.
I will not marry, sir, these seven years, trust me.
How? this seven years Sister▪ fie upon it, we may be all
dead and rotten six years before it; come, come, speak in compass
sister.
Truly Brother under half a year I won't here on it.
I marry sir, that was well bated. Speak again Sister, and let it be
a fortnight.
A fortnight? no, no, not this month, believe me.
Away, away, a months too long, hark you sister, we'll clap it
up privately to night, and the Town shall not know on it till a month
hence.
To night? O fie upon'•! an you love me Brother let it not
be till to morrow morning, I beseech you, for the speech of people.
Afraid of wind? tush let it vanish Sister, I say he shall marry
thee to night.
Let it be so, and here's an earnest Mistress.
Alas I kiss coldly in a morning Gown sir,
Tush it shall off; we'll marry, then to bed,
Wooing is idle, better to be sped.
Use your own will sir.
Why, so, it is as it sho'd be now; embrace him sister,
And live in love and wealth, 'bove all admired,
Here's seven years quickly in an hour expired.
Thus far triumphantly with good success, my Princely friends we
have together marched, and from the North parts quite dispersed the
Danes, alone the City York holds firm again, whose buildings we will
level with the earth, unless they suddenly yield up the City; give
your advice most Princely Alured, on your fair quarrel all our Fates
depend.
Your Highness has been fruitful in your love, bringing the best
that Scotland can afford, in honourable Arms to right our wrong, let's
forward then, and dare 'em to the Gates our horses hoofs shall fur∣row
up their Land, and sow the fields with blood instead of corn.
Spoke like the Brother of dead Etheldred, summon 'em to
the Walls. Drums beat a parley.
The meaning of this Parley.
Danes ye see all hope of Conquest has forsaken you quite,
Two thousand of your stoutest Soldiers are fallen already by our conque∣ring
swords, if ye will yield affirm it, if not death shall in his meagre few∣rye
through your Host, revel and catch your Jubilee. Then tell us, do you
resolve to fight it out or fly.
Or stay and have your throats cut in the fight?
Or leap the walls, and break your necks before us?
Resolve so quickly, and save us a labour.
Yes, with immediate speed, set opo the gates
And like a torrent on their heads we'll fall,
The Field and Air shall be their burial.
If there we fall, our fame out-lasts times date
On to the field, blessed with propitious fate.
All earthly honours are thine own, fair Prince, and Heaven fights in
thy cause, the Cities taken.
The Danes are all expuls'd and fled for safety.
The Danes are fled from danger, not from shame
That still pursues 'em wheresoever they fly
And on their Tombs shall live eternally.
Let's seek the Love-sick King Canutus forth,
And in one Battle try his valors worth.
That's our intent most noble Malcome, but we must war se∣curely,
all their strength will now be band•ed to oppose our coming, and
therefore whilst you here refresh your Army, Duke Edmond and my
self will try our friends, and in these North parts gather up new Forces to
aid us against all Danish stratagems.
We like it well, assist us gracious Fate,
To seat a true Prince in his Royal State.
You've stolen a wealthy marriage Mr. Thornton unwar•• to all
the Town, but we are glad we are so well deceived.
Faith Gentlemen, it was not to abridge the Nuptial Feast, for
that shall have his full Solemnity, but from some private causes of my
Mistress.
Whose power retains all former duty from me,
And as a Servant still she shall command me.
Not so sir, I resign that title now, my self and state are only
by your power to be disposed and swayed.
I, well said sister: This match was richly made, with liking and
with joy to all the Country. And Brother Thornton (so Isle call you now)
I came prepared to give you fit surrender of the last Bargain which you
purchased of me.
Your Coal-pits and your Servants Brother Randolf.
Yes sir, and look you, this is the Orator must speak for all,
in his mouth they have put the Law and willingness they have to
serve.
Who honest Grim?
Yes sir, and I am the Prologue to the Play,
And for them all I have to say.
Seven hundred men in sable wise,
From forth the Coal-pits shall arise,
Not melting men made out of wax,
But such as use Spade and Pick-ax.
Who when you bid 'em use their skils
Shall make a Dale of Mauburn hills,
Then raise a Mount as high as Poles
And turn it strait to burning coals.
This speech I think was penned on purpose.
I speak deep things, some sir, of 50 fathom deep, I do it
de profoundis, and no disparagement to the Author, that which I have
spoken was in as
Good rhyme as entering in,
With hope, a half-penny, and a Lambs-skin.
Ha, ha, thou hit'st me there in faith.
I give you a taste sir, how you shall find me here, and as for
my seven hundred followers they are honest Tartarians, and whosoever
deals with 'em shall find them grim fellows I assure you.
Grim thou were always honest, and on my word thy love shall
have reward.
Sir, all your works, both finished and in•ended, are pious,
holy, and religious.
And in the goodness if you still persevere
You build your self a house in Heaven for ever.
Heaven have the praise of all, and look ye Gentlemen. Reach
me the Table George, I have here repay•'st the copy of my first arrival
here, which yet hangs up insculp'd on a tileshard; but now it is rectified
in golden Letters, with the same phrase still, only thus altered,
Here at this West-gate first, came Thornton in
With hope, a half penny, and a Lambs-skin.
I remember that still sir.
How now Grim, are you so saucy Sirrah?
It is well done Grim, I'd have• remembered ever, go place it
ore the gate that all may view it, and witness these great blessings heaven
has sent. The reason why I urge this Register,
To have my memory thus kept in store,
Is not my wealth, but to record me poor.
Go see it done.
For ever may it stand to your renown.
And all succeeding fame,
While this Town stands still honour Thorntons name.
Amidst these poor endeavours of my love, my careful Master
must not be forgot, wh•se Heir I am become, and for his sake, I will re∣edify
Alhallows Church, where in the peaceful bed of death he sleeps,
and build a Tomb for him cut out in Touchstone, which in our Persian
Voyage was returned, from whence my golden Mineral arrived.
In the likeness of old iron sir.
I, thou say true Grim.
I have wondered a thousand times old Iron-fist the Smith did
not hang himself for refusing the first Tun of it, a whoreson Cox∣comb.
They say you got somewhat by it Grim.
Alas Mistress, a few chips or so, some ten pounds worth for
a great, I think I bought on him,
How now, what mean these shouts?
I think there's some Match at Foot-bal towards, the Colliers
against the whole Country cut, and long tail.
What's the News good George?
Prince Alured and Edmond Duke of Thetford are newly
lighted, and desire to speak with the Town Magistrates.
We shall with joy receive him as our Prince, and wish he had
as free possession of this whole Kingdom, as this Town shall give him.
See where he comes; All duty to your Highness.
Rise Gentlemen, we have your hearts, forbear your knees,
your true Allegaince hath proclaimed it self that never yielded yet to for∣reign
Sceptre, you have fortified your walls against all invasions
And in that circuit gloriously she stands
With kind embraces to enfold your friends.
Our Town, our selves, our lives are all your homigers, as the
most lawful and indubitate Heir,
To our late Sovereign Lord, and to your Throne.
We fall as Subjects, you we know our own.
My best of thanks is due to my best friends. Which is the
man amongst ye Gentlemen that bears the name of Thornton?
Your Subject and your Servant, Royal sir.
Let me embrace you sir, and tell you this, your goodness speaks
you nobly: England is famed in this fair Town, much honoured by
your virtues. Our Countries conquest by these Danish wars
Have not such blazon from our shame exhaled,
As these your good deeds now have countervailed.
I can do nothing but my duty sir.
It is worthy praise in all, and trust me Gentlemen, we have
good hope to see a happy day, and once again make England singular,
Free in her self and Princes. I came now with my best Horsemanship from
the Scotch Army, whose Royal King in Neighbor amity, is armed in my
just cause, has past the Tweed with prosperous forage through Nor∣thumberland,
all Holds and Castles taken by the Danes restore them∣selves
to his subjection in our behalf. The City York is won, from whence
I came.
And whilst we forage thus, their King Canutus, doting on
the beauties of Cartesmunda Nun of Winchester,
Of his estate so careless now is grown,
Hee I put no arms but Cartesmunda's on.
Go forward noble Princes, your work's good, and to incou∣rage
it, ten thousand pounds Isle lend your grace to levy Soldiers, which
if you never pay, Isle never ask, and for my own employment to your
aid, Isle lend (if you will honour me so far) all the full strength New∣castle
can afford, I have seven hundred men that call me Master.
Besides Grim the chief Controler sir.
Very true sir, and these Isle four times double,
And three months shall their charge be mine alone,
To back your Right and seat you in your Throne.
Your bounty and your love exceeds all means of p•esident and
recompense.
Tic but my duty still, which Isle not slack, go Grim and muster
my seven hundred Colliers, to them isle add two thousand more of our
Newcastle strength, and thou shalt be an Officer to conduct 'em.
For a Corporal or so, let me alone with my Squadron, I dare
undertake with my seven hundred Colliers in six days, under ground, to
march to London, they shall dig their way themselves too.
And know it is two hundred miles.
That's nothing, Isle march forty miles a day with 'em at pleasure,
there is no Pioneer to be compared to a Collier in his Coal-pit, if you'll
have a dozen Cities as we go, undermined and blown up, give but every
man a bushel of Apples to his Breakfast, and you shall hear the wind
roar and shake the ground like an Earthquake.
Well sir, wee'• try their valors; go George, get Armour ready,
and Grim, get thou a Drum and Marshal 'em.
If you wo'd rake hell and Phlegitan, Acaron and Barrathrum,
all those Low Countries cannot yield you such a company. Tara, ra, ra, ra,
ra, O brave Master, now for a company of conquering Colliers. Come
George.
Now would it please my Liege so far to grace his humble
Subjects and their new built Town to take a homely Banquet, we sho'd
think it were royal Neighbourhood to heat our buildings.
We cannot be unkind, though to your hurt, we will dispense
with our great hast so long, and then from Banquets unto Battles fly;
Which Heaven (we hope) will guide successfully.
Go let our Drums and Trumpets spite of fear, thunder aloud in the
Air, and tell Canutus, his Captains do attend to speak with him he pro∣missed
to come down.
Yes down to the earth.
And in the shameful ruins he prepares with lust, and murder, bu∣rye
up his name, he's known by nothing but a large defame, the City
York for want of aid is lost, and still the foe pursues, if thus we stand to
sooth him in this sin, our conquest dies.
And we in blood must end our victories, 'sfoot sound and call him.
Give your attendance Lords, the King is coming.
It is time he sho'd, he has been absent long▪
And done his honour, fame, and Country wrong,
How did he take your reprehension Harold?
It startled him at first, but when with mildness he did appoint
this general meeting to us, to what good purpose it inclines I know
not.
I hope the best. see here he comes, my Lord.
Where are our Vassals, attend your charge, and our delight,
with all your best of care and diligence, or by those s•ars whose influence
made me great; you dye in Torments all, let not the Sun extort from
her bright Rays, to give him lustre (or if enamoured as we know he is)
unless the Alps have frozen up his Flames.
Let him not on her smooth front dart his heat,
No, not for all his glory or arched seat.
All health and honour to the great Canutus.
Rise in our favour, vail thy face my love, we must not have thee
seen too much by slaves.
Content, attend the King and his fair love.
Long may she be the Mistress of his youth:
And give him heaven on earth.
And hell to boot: S'death shall we flatter thus?
So, now you crouch and fawn like daunted Curs that dare not
look the Lion in the face; Come Cartesmunda mount Canutus
Throne.
Let me unveil thy face, and tell me now, which of you all that
thus have taxed my lightness, cu'd (if possessed of such a Jem as this) less
value it then I: What think thou Osrick?
I have not seen the like.
Nor ever shall, what Nature had in store was given to her,
And can one crowned with such a heavenly weight,
Live and forgo this Center of delight.
Let not these vain Affections (Royal Lord) sway you from
reason thus.
Ha! What is he?
Do you not know me sir? the time has been, when in thy Bat∣tells
Huldrick has been seen knee deep in blood, cutting his way by
force, careless of life to free thy Royal person, and does your Mighti∣nos
not know me now? Then hear the news I bring to comfort you:
The Danes once styled by Names of Conquerors, are now subdued and
slain, The King of Scots banded together with the English forces, have late
at York of•ethrown our Garrisons, and now to London march vi∣ctoriously,
defacing all, thy conquered Cities burn;
And in their falls, the flames do rise so high,
They seem to light the Tapers of the sky.
And since Fems Trump which of• hath summoned thee, is not so potent
asto draw thee forth, thy honour bids me dare thee to the Field, if thy
high spirit be not extinct by Lust: Let's arm our selves for
shame.
Traitor, thou hast deserved death ere thou die; and this thy
proud presume shall break thy neck, for chasing our high blood; O
love thou art unjust, I feel assaults far sharper in my breast, then all the
English Forces, against this wall; now love and honour, with their oppo∣site
powers
Afflicts my soul, and with their virtuous strife,
Plead for my Love, my Honour, Fame, and Life;
With this mans words, my passions strongly move,
He for my honour speaks. Honour, but Love
I am thy Martyr now, and must go on,
For what is Honour but Addition,
Got in our pride of youth; yet stay Canutus, think of thy wonted
Fame, go on and conquer. Give me my horse, and I will quickly quell
um.
What will Canutus do?
O Cartesmunda, with that heavenly voice, already I am
changed, stern War remains; Kiss me, and kiss me dead, my best of
Loves.
Hoe's changed again.
This Strumpets eye, does sure bewitch him with her Sorcery;
Isle not endure this shame.
Where is my Lord?
Where thou shalt not be long: What would thou Villain?
Arm mighty Prince, we have descried at hand, the Horse and
Ensigns of the English Army, trooped with their Leaders like the gods
of War, who in bright steel, the fields do stoutly bear.
And there seek that which thou vile Dog shalt have; Come
thou to fright my Love?
Do not expose a mighty Nation, thus naked, to the Tyranny of
Lust, Canutus.
Traitor.
As thou art great, be just, Let not • Strumpets love, work all
our Ruins; the Enemie's at hand, and from thy side; Isle force this painted
Whore.
Help me Canutus.
What, can you cry?
Were it thou Ioves Minion, slave, thou thus had died
Isle meet it thus,
And dying so my end is glorious.
Oh I am slain!
I have my happy wish then, Welcome death,
I dyed (Canutus) to preserve thy breath.
Sink down to hell; What has my rashness done?
O Cartesmunda, stay thy fainting breath,
Thou still shalt live with me in spite of death:
My Fate is come, great King, my vestal Vow, that broken, with
my wish is fallen upon me.
For your fair love I failed my faith with heaven,
And from your hand my death is justly given.
Such was my former wish, farewell Canutus.
And with my fall may thy great Fame arise,
Poor Cartesmunda, thus untimely dyes.
May all the world dye with thee; now I see
The heavens envy an earthly Deity.
Brave Huldrick that durst dye for Countries good,
And for our freedom spent thy life and blood.
Ha, sit you weeping there; or has Amazement turned you
into stone,
That like men gasping all Medusia's stand,
To see my Love thus fall by mine own hand:
Our Self will instantly be in the Field, and scourge the English pride and
Inhabitants. Sound up our D•um, and call our Troops together, and
arm with speed, Isle to the Field, and fight; Farewell dear Love, whom
I of life bereft, for which unwilling Act, O pardon me;
Canutus arms, a while shall be thy Tomb,
Then gold enclose thee till the day of Doom.
How harsh these Drums sound now, that once like Music, did
more delight mine ear than Orpheus Lute▪
Sweet Cartesmunda's death my senses kill,
Like one long sick, I relish all things ill.
Courage my Lord, see where the English stand braving your
Mightiness: Let's set upon 'em, and never leave till to their mother
Earth they pay their lives as Tribute. Now, what says Canutus?
That ye all are Rebels.
Eng. Rebels?
Stay let him speak it out.
An hundred thirteen years, the English Kings have paid to
Denmark, and our Ancestry an annual Tribute of ten thousand pounds,
which you unjustly and rebelliously detain from me, a lawful successor.
It is true Canutus, that the Denmark Kings, so long our
native Island hath usurped, and whilst they kept within their Danish
bounds, and left us to enjoy our own in peace, we justly paid our homage
F•alty. But since your Father Hardiknut• arose, and you succeeding
him, neither content with that our Tribute, but would further seek our
utter Extirpation, which five and twenty years you have attempted,
planting here your selves in Norfolk, Suffolk, and in Cambridgeshire,
erecting Garrison• through all our Kingdom against the Laws of former
Articles, we now resolve to spend our Royal blood, and either counter∣vail
our former loss, or hazard all we hold, by doubtful battle.
That is your answer then?
Resolvedly for all.
Now by the high, and Royal blood of Kings.
Swear by the beauteous Nun of Winchester; you oft have kissed
that book.
And that one word, has raised more vigour in my active blood,
then ere her beauty flamed my Appetite to crop the sweets of Love.
It shall be cooled with better spells than erst her wanton Magic
could ever invent to lay thy burning Ardor.
Danes. Parley no more Canutus.
O Cartesmunda from thy gentle Arms,
I fly to conquer in Wars rough Alarms.
Why dost not strike? dost thou not like thy Aim? or dost
not know me? I am the Danish King, that which all Soldiers seek in
bloody War, may here be got on me, eternal honour and easily too, for
by the powers that made me, my senses are benumbed.
I dare not, nor will take no such Advantage, though I on thee
could vent my roughest spleen; pass safe, my Lord, I will not fight with you
for your fair Sisters sake, whose love was to me so high and potent, that it
did attract her Virgin-thoughts to dart Loves joys into me, and for the
zeal due to her Memory, keep what I coed take from you, Life and
Honour.
I prithee take it, Isle yield it willingly, and, for I see thou art
religious in thy love, let me embrace thy breast, and of my Love, bright
Cartesmunda Nun of Winchester, Isle tell so sad a Tale.
I cannot stay to hear it, hark great Sir,
Wars Mu sick summos me, for Elgina's sake,
I slip the Advantage that Fate bids me take.
O for a Midwife, I am big with grief,
And fain would be delivered, tho with death.
See where he stands, secure him Soldiers, Never did man so
feebly use his sword in such sad times of Terror, O my Lord, can you
in all this danger be thus calm?
Though you neglect your self, yet prize your honour, or if not that, yet
for your subjects sake, be pleased to re-assume your wonted valour.
Can he be valiant that's without a heart? or can a senseless
Trunk have sense of Loss?
Such have you made me, therefore share the gain,
And to these English leave your Lives and Fame.
There is no way but Flight.
Thank your selves for it; had Cartesmunda lived, and graced
mine Attempts, but with a smile; these English, would as soon take
part with those that from Olympus strove to pluck down Jove, as look
upon Canutus •and Retreat, the blood of Cartesmunda stirs the gods
for this Revenge; and if this may appease her angry soul, we get by lo∣sing
it; Do what ye will, for I will never more taste joy on earth; her
death makes all things poor.
What shall we do?
What else, but fight and dye,
And in our deaths hide all our Infamy.
Thus from the usurped Temples of Canutus, we take the Eng∣lish
Crown and plant it here, to whom in right it legally belongs. Princes
and Soldiers, now with me proclaim Victorious Alured, Englands
Sovereign.
Long live great Alured our lawful King.
First to all-helping heaven due thanks we give,
Then next to you, by whom our glories live.
It was I that took him prisoner, my Lord, the Colliers are
the Conquerors.
We will reward your Valours.
Propose a ransom Royal Alured, to sad Canutus and his
Country-men.
Give me no Ransom sir, O let me dye, in Cartesmunda's death
I brake my vow, and for her sake I have neglected all, and willingly have
sought mine own sad ruin; Isle have no Ransom, Cartesmunda's dead,
let me be buried with her, that's all the mercy I now will beg of thee
from all thy Conquests.
No great Canutus, for I pity thee, I call to mind thy Royal
Sisters love, beauteous Elgina, worthier then thy Nun, whose loving heart
was once unbosomed here, and for her •ache, Isle like a brother use thee, this
one condition frees thee ransomless, that you abate the Fealty we paid
you, you shall return unto your State in Denmark, and henceforth
even as brothers wee will live, exchanging Embassies of Love and
Honour. And now to you my worthy Country-men it shall be texted to
your lasting fame, that your Newcastle strength set England free in this
days fair and happy Victory, for which, and for thy sake (most worthy
Thornton) we'll give a lasting honour to the Town, now beautified by thee
with Walls and Towers to which we'll add all noble privilege belonging
to a Town Incorporate; and for your former Government of Poretereans,
we here establish it a Majo•alty, and Thornton as the first we here
create Mayor of Newcastle, and give thee the power to elect a brotherhood
of Aldermen, with choice of Sheriffs to assist thy Government, your
Charter shall be drawn wi•h fullest strength,
Even with the fairest Cities of our Land,
This Sword confirms it from King Alureds hand;
Bear it before ye still.
Your Highness gives us honour 'bove our Merits.
We have not yet done all, but what we want, we'll study to
requite to thee and them.
Then since your grace is got into the giving Vain, I beseech
you sir, Let Corporal Grim be bold to put a Colliers request into one of
your ears.
What's that Grim?
Only this sweet King, I that for thy service sake was Corporal
to be Warden of your Coal-Carriers, to provide Coals, Surreverence,
for your Highness own tooth, Isle promise you weight and measure, if
none of your Officers do purloin, and warm their Noses at your fires
in their own Chimneys.
A reasonable Request: Thou art our Coal-carrier.
Nay, Isle carry no Coals neither, I can tell you, and yet I have
another Chaldron of courtesies to 〈◊〉 from your kindness, that in re∣membrance
of Newcastle Colliers that have fought so bravely, we may
from henceforth have the upper shoulder, and the wall of Croydon Col∣liers,
and that if ever they be found with a Goose in their sacks, they may
be made to stand a whole Market day in the Bakers Pulpit, because they
showed themselves Cowards to their Country, and durst not fight
against the Danes, as we have done.
All this is granted sir.
Then stand thy ground, old Coal of Newcastle, and a fig for
Croydon.
How now, still sad Canutus? We now must war with love, to
raise this siege, which we will do with Banquets, and with Revels. Great
King of Scotland, we are yet a debtor to your kind love, which thus we
'gin to pay, all those our Northern borders bounding on Cumberland, from
Tine to Tweed, we add unto your Crown, so it was fore-promised, and
it is now performed; Most fit it is that we be ever lovers; The Sea that
binds us in one Continent,
Doth teach us to embrace two hearts in one,
To strengthen both against all invasion.
Look up Canutus, now ell's clear ab•ve,
Let Cartesmunda dye in our•new love;
And let swift fame thy former glories ring,
And hide the sollies of a Love-sick King.

AND dost thou swim in Pleasures, Tyrant, still?
Or hast thou got a Patent to do i•?
When will the date expire? hast thou not yet
Contracted guilt enough, that the ponderous weight
Of all thy Tyrannies, Ra•ins, Murders fell,
May, like a Millstone, sink thee quick to Hell?
Are these too light? leave thy Adulteries,
Thy Rapes, thy Incests, heaps of Perjuries,
And Ghomorean sports, no sting behind?
Or are the Gods grown all, like Fortune, blind?
Or has dull JOVE no Thunder left? Doth not
(1.) The murder of our Sire (so soon forgot)
(2.) And Me, deserve a Bolt? Sleep thou? with what
Philtries is thy strange Pillow stuffed? do not
Ten thousand Fur•es with their flaring hair,
And knotted whips of wire, at thee still stare,
And threaten stripes? Is our great Fathers Ghost
Weary with haunting thee? or used to it, dost
Account it now familiar, and not quake?
If so, behold, I come, from the dark Lake,
To be thy evil Genius, and distill
Into thy darker bosom deeds shall fill
The measure of thy sins up, and pull down,
With violent hand, heavens vengeance on thy Crow•.
The foul Fiend aid thy counsels; and unto
Thee dictate what he would, but cannot do. 
Upon thy self, and thine own Princely line,
Revenge our Fathers wronged Ghost and mine.
Inherit all my fury, and obey
What jealousy shall prompt; mine did I say?
Alas! (vain voice!) how weak is that for thee!
The spirits of all unnatural Fathers be
Doubled upon thee. (3.) Act what the Mogul
(4.) And Turk shall start to hear, what (5.) the Tartar shall
Pity, what (6.) BAHAMAN could not wish should be,
And (7.) the Arabian will lament to see.
Falter not in thy course now, but pursue
New mischiefs, till no mischief can be new.
" No cruel actions, unless thoroughly done
" Are done secure. Let not thy gallant Son
Engross the subjects loves: all his brave parts
And deeds, are Privy seals to take up hearts.
How will he stick (armed with the strength of the Land)
To snatch the Sceptre from thy hated hand,
As thou did from thy Father? "Such dire deeds
" Are still revenged with their like; no seeds
" So fruitful are, as wrongs. Who doth not thirst
For Sovereign sway? or who, that may be first,
Is pleased with being second? then do thou
Begin with him, and wait not the first blow.
But with a Sons, and Grandchilds blood, appease
Fathers, and brothers Ghosts. What though thine ease
Be bought with razing out the family,
And strangling the hopes of all Posterity?
What need thou care (so here thy race be even)
If when thou fall, the Poles and studds of Heaven
Be shivered, the stars quenched, thy house, great names,
And all the world too with thee sink in flames?
" Free villainies a hated reign assure:
" And swords still drawn: dire deeds, dire deeds secure.
The vow is made, nor shall thy flattering Fate
O MIRZA contradict it; though thy Troops
Stood like a wall about thee, nay, though JOVE
Press all the Gods to guard thee, and should arm
Them every one with Thunder, I would through:
I'll tear the groundsells of thy Towers up;
And make their nodding spires kiss the Centre,
But I will reach thy heart, thy heart proud Victor.
The power that I have climbed to ere my time
Cannot be safe, if any reach too near it.
I feel my Crowns totter upon my head,
Me thinks, and see him ready stand to latch them.
Was I a Prince, born to the Persian greatness?
(8.) Set equal with the Gods? and as adored
As is (9.) the Sun our Brother? and shall I
Be bearded by a Son, a beam of me?
And like a Cipher add but to his value?
I will, hereafter, call thee viper, ever.
If thou can lose thy filial Duty, I
Can lose my Bowels, and on thy ruins build
A Pyramid to my revenge and safety.
I that would wrest an Empire from a Father,
And Brother, will not lose it to a Son.
" Still may he fear that dares not to be cruel.
WHo's that?
It is I.
My FLORADELLA.
Yes.
Enter my sweet: welcome as earliest light
To the infant world; and with thee ever bring
A thousand Comforts to my thoughtful breast.
But why doth sadness invade Beauties Kingdom?
And these fair eyes eclipse their glorious  splendour,
With veils of melancholy? is it possible,
So firmly enthroned in thy ABBAS Love,
That all the Gods should make thee know a grief?
Alas! my Lord, the peoples common theme
Still grates mine ears; no other voice is heard
But MIRZA's praises: the Gods hear no vows,
No prayers, but for MIRZA's safety: who's
So dull a soul that cannot, since he first
Led out your armies count his victories,
(As if all were Historiographers)
And for each blow he dealt return a statue?
I'll kick their sandy fabrics into dust,
And rear a lasting one of their own heads,
(10) Higher then that in Spawhawn is to which
Their Idols own shall be the Cupola.
They all read Lectures on his actions
Till out of breath, they pause, and then admire.
Till his encomiums hit the stars, and stick
His Idolised name amongst them swearing
The lustre of that one puts out the rest.
You, my dear Lord, they say, lie wallowing here
In pleasures, and will one day take a surfeit.
A good effeminate Prince, whose only act
Of worth, is, that you gat so brave a son;
Whom as the rising they adore: for you,
They think, have passed your Meridian,
And now are ne'er your setting.
Setting! yet
I've heat enough to scorch them all to cinders.
And see they not the Sun ne'er look so bloody
As when he sets.
Ah! but my noble Lord,
How can I look upon this pompous Palace,
Furnished with spoils of nations; the long train
Of early clients, that wear my Thresholds out:
Nay, on your honoured self, my excellent Lord,
But as the Prisoner, late condemned to death,
Doth on the pleasant meads, the curled groves,
And silver brooks he passes by, as led
To execution? These he alas, must leave. 
And well I know how dead Kings Paramours
Are dealt by, by their cruel successors.
Why dead? why successor? but why these tears?
Which I'll dry up with kisses, and revenge
With as much blood of thy fea'rd enemies.
Be a good huswife of these pearls, (my dear)
Too precious ere to spend, 'lesse when I die,
Thou'lt shed a few of them t'enbalm me with.
Who's that? It is the voice of Beltazar.
Or Mahomet Allybeg, or both.
Sit still.
COme, come, my Lords, I've long expected you.
We met in the way a stop, a giddy stream
Of people, with broad eyes, and right-up ears,
Pouring themselves from all parts to (11) the Buzzer.
The novelty made us too mix among them,
What then made all this concourse, ••t to hear
A Panegyric, sung by hired Eunuchs,
In adulation of the valiant Mirza?
The mountain brought forth a ridiculous Mouse.
Heaven grant it proves ridiculous.
Heaven it self
Can't make it otherwise.
There were all the deeds
Of (12) your great ancestors, from Mortise Ally
Recounted, not as copies to be followed,
But made as soils, to set off his the better;
And brought but by comparison, to show
How his green valour conquers all example.
So, said the flattering pamphlet, Peleus name
Stoops to ACHILLES, and so SATURN joys
To be ore-topt by JOVE.
O most felt flattery!
And there exposed they his armed figure,
In a triumphal Chariot, drawn by (13) CIRRUS
And great (14) DARIUS, yoked, with this inscrip∣tion:
As the new Moon the light of the old devours;
So do thy actions all thine Ancestors.
No more, no more: seemed any man of name
To countenance this fairy Pageantry?
No less then great Duke ELCHEE, at whose cost
It was performed; he's hasting down to's charge,
In the army, this was his farewell to's friends.
There's music in that voice, would many more
Of his rank durst oppose us. "There is gain
" In mighty rebels. Flies and moths may buzz
About our beard, and are not worth the notice,
Or if we crush them they but foul our fingers.
"It is noble prey deserves a Princes stroke:
And by my Fathers soul, they shall not want it.
Spoke like• thy self!
Heroic, god-like ABBAS.
Let not my Sovereign doubt my proved faith,
(That (15) would op MAHOMET's Shrine at your command)
If humbly I play the Princes friend,
And urge but their objections, as thus,
What ever glorious actions are achieved
By him or his, redound to the Kings glory,
As all the soldiers to the generals.
What common soldier ever gained a Triumph?
And yet, what Generals single valour conquered?
How then are you made less if he grows great
Since all his greatness is not his but yours?
Do not the flourishing of the branches add
To the Trees beauty?—
But luxuriant boughs
Not pruned suck too much moisture from the Tree.
What cares the Sea how great the Rivers swell,
Since all their pride flow into her?
But what
The Sea doth get in one place, in some other
It loses; and the more he wins upon
The affections of the people, the more I lose.
" Minions too great argue a King too weak.
" Great Favourites should be set near Kings as foils
" To set them off, not to vie lustre with them.
" A Partner once admitted to a Throne,
" Soon justles out the other: the snakes new skin
" Once come, she casts the old one. (16.) No where are
" Two Kings in safety but in Tener•ff,
" And there the one is dead, but one alive.
But it is not known the Prince intends a danger.
It is not proved.
It is then too late, when proved,
To be prevented.
Cockatrices eggs
Must not be brooded over till they're hatched.
" Kings fears are proof enough they that will give
" Them cause to fear, give cause enough, to strike.
" A Treason is a kind of Hectic fever,
" In the beginning it is most easily cured,
" But hardly known: But in the course of time,
" Not having been in the beginning known,
" To know it becomes easy, hard to cure.
But he is modest—
So are Whores at first,
Coyness is the best Lure.
Blaming his friends
For doubling of his merit, and chides himself
For suffering of his acts so to be gilded,
Lest they might any way eclipse your splendour.
Hoe's Politic: "Seen nets are easily 'voided,
" And dangers threatened once, are half prevented.
" The cursed dog bites before he barks, and Thunder
" Strikes ere it speaks. Treason still shuns the Sun.
Tha• female Virtue, Modesty, can't harbour
In such a masculine spirit, even that
He makes a bait to catch the vulgar with,
It gets him a respect: He's not to learn
" That honour, like a shadow, and love too
" Shuns the pursuer, follows him that flies it.
Why if he means no Rape upon the State,
Doth he so fortify himself in's Party,
Binding all men of action unto him
With all the obligements of a Politician?
"He that will make a Faction means to use it.
He studies every particular Gen•us,
And takes every one in his own height.
The ambitious he makes his with honours, Titles,
And high commands; saying, "worth loses lustre,
" Like Gems in Quarries, if it be not set
" To public view, like Diamonds well mounted.
The covetous he ties with chains of Gold
To his own purposes, extolling "bounty
" As the most conspicuous virtue of a Prince,
" And gainfullest; saying, Virtue else will freeze,
" If it be not kept active with Reward,
" Valours best Nurse. Those that are discontented
"(And such are sure ones) he gains by favour,
And silken promises. The multitude
He strokes with Popularity, and they
Like true dogs fawn, and crouch as much to him.
Though upon service he's austere enough,
Exacting each mans duty; out of Action
He courts the common soldiers by their names,
Lies with them on the Guard, fares as they fare,
And calls them all his fellows, sees them served,
In time of want, ere he himself will take
The least refreshment.—
What souls will not these
Strong arts allure, if he meant war with JOVE,
To storm even Heaven, and maked a Colony!
What, Heaven a Province!
Noble Forts he builds,
And Citadels, as if he meant to compass
The Kingdom with a trench, and into these
He putt's his Confidants. Huge hoards of wheat,
Munition Provision stuff his Garrisons,
When no Foe threats the Confines. If these charms
Of Affability these knots of strength,
And preparations signify but care,
And Arts of wisdom, which need 'wake no thought
Of Jealousy, and require no prevention;
Let's cast no Ramparts against the swelling Sea,
But tamely think the peaceful NEPTUNE means
Us no invasion but will sit content
In the old Boundaries of his watery Empire.
Cherish the speckled snake, and let him twine
About your leg, alas! poor loving worm!
It only comes to kiss your foot, and means
To dart no poisonous sting into your flesh.
Has he no filial love? no noble nature?
Can't be that to him, to whom every Virtue
Seems in this dearth of Piety, to run
For Patronage, Paternal duty should
Be, or a stranger, or a slighted Exile?
He is ambitious, and "Ambition knows
" No Kindred, it was a maxim practised
"By JOVE himself upon his Father SATURN.
No, no, my Lords, that something must be done
Is not the question but what? and how?
Weaken him in his friends, call them from places
Of trust, and put in others or make them yours.
No they are preingaged, and will not come
But to great baits: So to reclaim them would
Cost much, to ruin them add more to us.
'For all Rebellions, thoroughly suppressed,
" Make Kings more Kings, and Subjects still more Sub∣jest.
Then call him from his strength, lure him to Court.
And drown him here in pleasures and delights,
Twill soften and enervate his great mind.
" There's little fear of Carpet Kinghts, rough beards
" And hairy men have still the working heads.
And such is he.
That were to cross his Genius,
And force his Nature backward, he is made
For hardened steel, and not a masquing suit.
No Music please him but the bellowing Drum,
No exercise but tossing of a Pike.
So stout a nature never will recoil.
Confine him to some Island, with a set
Of beardless Eunuchs, and soft Punks about him,
Prohibiting all martial company.
Pictures and Beauties are alike to him;
His soul's so full of's NYMPHADORA'S love,
As throw him into 'an Ocean of Beauties,
The vessel's full, and can take no more in.
A brave truth from an Enemy!
Confine him,
That were to spur a fiery headstrong steed
And have no reins to hold him: or to 'wake
A sleeping Lion. "Persons of his rank
" If once disgraced, must not be left a tongue
"To tell it with, or hand to act Revenge,
" No, nor a heart to think it. He that strikes
" At mighty Enemies must do it thoroughly.
Say my beloved MAHOMET, "must not Kings
" That fear great subjects growth, and gathering strength;
" Or wink at all, and conquer them with kindness,
" Or, if they will take notice, leave no need
" Of second blows, but at the first cut off
" At once the fear they have, and cause of future?
" Who finds a Serpent couched, and at one blow
" Parts not his heart shall never fetch another.
The Oracles are revived, and speak in Abbas.
But how much more then pity is it, that
So high a valour, Affability
(Virtues of brightest lustre with the Persian)
And all the endowments of a Princely mind,
Should, like good seed in ground too fat, grow rank,
And make him fit to feel the sickle! which
Gladly I would dissuade, were not the tree
More worthy then a wanton branch, or the head
Then any corrupted limb, though ne'er so handsome.
Ah my good Lords, the bowels of a Father
Have yearned in me, and no small strift I had
To gain a Conquest of my fond affection,
And bend my will to part with him, as with
A gangrened member to secure the whole.
But I have won the field of foolish pity,
And swam (17) by the eight refulgent Orbs, his death.
The young wolfs death can never come too soon;
For he that spares the wolves, destroys the sheep.
But think, my honoured Lord, will not the soul
Of every subject bleed in his each wound?
The pledge of their succeeding happiness!
The crown of their best hopes, hope of their Crown▪
And who will spare to damn for Tyranny
(Pardon the speech, I act the Princes friend)
A deed, so without Justice, proof, or conscience?
Not all the steel forged into swords and spears,
Nor all the Iron formed to battering Rams,
Have ruined so many Kings, as that round word.
" Conscience and Sovereign sway are things at odds,
"It is mischiefs freedom holds up Tyranny,
" Which who so blushes t'own is no right King.
No more debate; Sentence is justly passed,
The execution rests, which, what if acted
Upon him in the army?
If the cruelty
Chance to disclose it self, on the apprehension
Of the murderer, t'may raise some dangerous tumult.
" All cruel actions must be safely done,
" And all their safety lies in privacy.
Let's train him up to court, and do it here.
That thought needs not a second.
Cause you then
Our secretary t'indite letters to him
Here to attend us with all possible speed,
Where he shall be acquainted with the weight
Of the affair that urges his quick coming.
Provide a messenger of your own knowledge.
I know my P•o••nce.
You Lord BELTAZAR,
Who are not so well known his enemy
Though firm enough in our esteem, hast down
Unto the Army, where, till he, you know
Be on his journey hither, keep your mask on:
Then break to the Lieutenant General
Your power, and errand, which is to be set
With him in joint commission ore that Army,
And be the noble partner of our care.
My faith shall labour to deserve the trust.
And thou my FLORADELLA shalt have work too.
Be frequent in your visits to the Princess,
Extol the virtues of her gallant Lord,
And set the wheels a going. "Praise gets confidence,
That openness of speech, and women be
" Best spies of women's actions. Sift her then,
" What is intended, who, and where employed.
Speak with such confidence, as if you meant
To force her think you know what never was.
" Tic no less service to detect close treason,
" Then to vanquish open and avouched Rebellion.
What arts will not my love unto my Lord
Infuse into me, and what subtle care?
You've all your parts, act them but like your selves,
Isle in, any study more of the art of King-craft.
Madam I kiss your hands. Yours Lord MA∣HOMET.
THis was well carried, there's another step
To our great purpose whilst the Tyrant stood
Firmly propped up by his heroic son
And his brave Troops, not all the Gods could shake him:
Now that he ruins him he but lies down
For me, and therefore thee, my FLORADELLA,
Upon his neck to rise to sovereignty.
But what if the success should thwart the platform,
And something intervene to save the Prince?
Would not the ruin turn upon our selves?
Such deeds are never safe till they be acted.
Descend not from thy self so low as fear,
The blow meant him is guided by a hand
Sure and steady: but if he misses aim,
This very hand through wounds shall force his soul,
So doth the love of thee arm me, Isle wrest
The Sceptre from JOVES hand but thou shalt have one.
Why do you court your own Sir?
Therefore dearest
Because mine own and worthy a Gods courtship,
I never meant thee less, nor have I wooed thee
To leave a Monarchs crowned love to grace
A subjects bed, but to adorn these Temples
With golden wreaths, more bright then ARE•AD∣NE's,
And make thy name the subject of all Poetry.
Then shalt thou trample on the under globe,
And choose what part of heaven thou meanst to grace.
So great is the reward of MAHOMET's love.
How grows your strength? what men of name, and fortunes
Espouse your interest?
It is not yet my time
To tempt too many: when the heir is gone,
And all men in a maze, then is our hour.
No Fish shall escape us, when the water's troubled.
In the mean time get thee a party to thee
Of the male-spirited Dames, that may engage
Their sons and husbands, they are useful evils,
" Bosom solicitors are most prevalent.
Isle find, or make such: first I'm for the Prin∣cesse.
POor credulous Cockatrice! think thou I'll rear
My self a Throne, and set a strumpet with me?
No, he that can crush Princes will not pick
Thee out, among the rubbish of their ruins.
Yet must ambition use such poor low things.
Thou art a good close spy, a bosom traitor,
And a fair bait for some smooth liquorish (18) Sultan,
Whom Isle perhaps buy with thy prostitution.
But a companion of my Sovereignty
Must boast a brighter virtue, higher descent,
One that in making nature toiled, and sweat:
Such as the excellent Princess NYMPHADORA,
Whom when industrious nature once had formed,
She broke her mould, for never since could she
Produce her like; she'll fit our proudest height;
But her I'll not assay till I'm possessed
Of my new royalty: then —a Princes Throne
Is a brave jointure, and the name of Queen,
To a young Widow lusty in her blood,
Will be a charm, hardly to be withstood.
What curses are entaild on wicked pelf!
We, when we want it, scratch and plot to get it,
And when we have it, fear to lose it still.
I dreaded wildly those two craving soldiers
That met me at my Merchants door they were
But meanly thatched me thinks and seemed to have
Sharp stomachs too. They watched and waited on me
As Dogs do upon children for their victuals.
There lie ye—till my Tailors long long bill
Brings an indictment strongly proved a∣against  you.
Thus are we but the Jailers of our wealth,
Which although most men make their God, is but
The Poets slave, and mine— And but for use—
We'll rescue your rich prisoner presently. 
Come in— (Pox on ye, its your tattered Rogueships.)
Your humble servant Sir.
Your servant Sir.
Gentlemen, you'll excuse me, I know you not.
You shall Sir know us better— Please you lend us
The key of that same trunk—Stir and  you die.
Nay Gentlemen.
Nay, not a word you'd best.
Take the keys out of his pocket cōrade-so
Now we will eat boy and be warm again 
Hang warmth and eating too,
We'll drink, drink deep.
drink by the hour, and this same watch shall help us.
To escape the Constables.
But I dare hold
A rope of that—the Devil!—robed!— and thus too
Robed in a Complement! —Theves!—  Thieves! ho Theeeves!
Pox of your care, could you not stop him?
Now
(Prithee leave chiding to another time)
We've no way but to follow him, and cry
Out Thieves as loud as he: so we in the hubbub 
May hap t'escape. 2 The. It is best. Both. Theevs! Thieves! ho! Thieves!
IS this the story's to be acted?
Yes Sir.
I love to see these Actions, they will put
Spirit into me. Is the Princess ready?
She will be presently. You stand on thorns now.
Shall I see it too?
Yes, yes, my pretty Lady,
If you'll sit patient there, and weep no more,
Indeed I will not: but I could not hold
L•st day, they were so cruel; could you IFFIDA?
To see hard-hearted PROGNE stab her Son!
And all the while the boy cling to her breast,
And for each wound she gave return a kiss!
Go, you're fainthearted.
Nay Sir, she's good natured.
This too is some sad story: tell me IFFIDA,
Why do's this woman look so angry here?
What ails that old man so to weep? I can't
Endure to see a man weep it shows cowardly.
That fierce Lady MEDEA resolved to fly
With her new servant JASON from her Father;
To hinder his pursuit▪ she tore in pieces
Her brother ABSYRTUS, and bestrewd in the way
His limbs which that old man, their father finding,
He stopped his vain pursuit o•'s cruel Daughter,
To gather up by peace meal his torn son,
And seems to bath each piece with tears, as if
He thought them Cement strong enough to set
The tattered joints and flesh again together.
Was she a sister? O I could not do
So by you SOFFIE for all the world —
I care not now for seeing it presented,
I hate all cruelty so perfectly:
Yet could I bear a part with that old man,
And weep as fast as he; so infectious
Is a just sorrow, chiefly in old persons.
WHat ails my FATYMA to drown her bloc∣somes
Of beauty thus in tears? Child art not well?
Yes Madam, but this piece is limnd so lively,
As it doth strain tears from me to embalm
Poor torn ABSYRTUS with.
Pretty compassion!
I like this tenderness in thee: but we think
This a feigned story. O may real griefs
Ne'er touch thy breast, poor thing! — wilt see it acted?
It will, I fear, make me too melancholy.
Do as thou wilt, my Heart.
This piece shall be
My m•lancholly study, and sad Tutor.
When I have either cause or will to weep,
Isle take up this, and sit, and think, I see
The tender boy stretched out his hands unto me
For help, and sigh, because I cannot rescue'him.
Then think again, the old man calls out to me
To help him gather up his sons limbs; and weep
Because I cannot.
Pretty innocence!
Pray Madam, let me wait upon your Highness
To the Tragedy.
Thou shalt sweet-heart.
What now?
If it please your grace, the Lady FLORA∣DELLA
Is lighted at the gate, and means a visit.
She's welcome.
Pish, pish, now her idle chat
Will keep us beyond time.
Soft my young Gallant.
HAil my good Lady.
Mighty Princess, hail.
Please you to sit.
How does my little Lady?
I thank you Madam.
And you my Lord?
Madam,
At your service.
Troth, an early courtier.
How happy are you, Madam, in these copies
Of your fair self, and your renowned Lord?
By which you've filled times sharp teeth, and secured
Your names, your forms, and natures, from the wast
Of death, and eating age; nor is it fit
So eminent a beauty, and clear virtue
Should for less then eternity grace the world.
Why, Madam, give you me the trouble to
Speak your words over? for these heights of courtship
Are but like sounds made in a hollow room,
In expectation of the Eccho's answer.
No Madam, by your beauty and that is
The greatest Power that I can swear by, I
Oft lose my self in pleasing Contemplation
Of you as Natures, and as Fortunes darling.
By whose best gifts yet can you never be
So highly graced, as you do grace their gifts,
And them too by your bare receiving them.
What had the Gods in all their Treasury
O• greater worth or lustre then the Prince,
Your excellent Lord? A Prince that strikes dumb
Envy and slander! and gives Fortune eyes!
And who could they find worthy to bestow
This great result of all their sweat upon
But you? who yet deserve him every inch.
In him indeed I am completely happy.
But he is so far above all deserving,
As I can plead no merit; yet the Gods
Themselves have sometimes deigned a mortal love.
In which of all the Gods fortunate Princess,
Could you have been so happy as in him?
With better grace thou Phoebus dost not hold
Thy gorgeous rein, nor from thy glistering Throne
Scatter more beauty or more Majesty!
A Majesty indeed too great to know
Any Superior. And now that the King
Is bowed down with the burden of old age,
The heavy weight of the unwieldy Empire
Grow but a trouble to his aged shoulders.
His Crowns are to his head a load, no more
An ornament It's fitter his white Age
Should now indulge his genius, and release
His thoughts from all the ruffle of the world,
And give him time to contemplate the place
He tends to every day. So should the Prince
Make his few days brigh•er and easier to him,
By taking on himself (now fit for labour)
That load of care we call the Sovereignty.
Pray Madam give such thoughts no longer breath,
Thoughts that the loyal Prince and I detest.
It is the base viper gets a life by forcing
A violent passage through his Parents bowels;
(19) My Country Phoenix when he duly mounts
His Fathers spicie Throne, brings on his wings
His honoured ashes, and his funeral odours,
To show, he climbed not, till his death, his seat:
Your Highness rather should assist his rising,
By gaining more to's party, which is done
With but a gracious look or smile from you.
'So prevalent an Orator is beauty.
No, by his life, and all the love I bear him,
I'd rather follow him fairly to his Tomb,
Perfumed with that unblemished stock of honour
He now stands in, then that so foully broke,
See him untimely thrust into the Throne.
And justify my self a loyaler wife,
In loving more his honour then his life.
(Unconquerable Virtue if the Gods 
Give me a Plague twill be for the injury
I do this noble pattern of all goodness)
Well Madam, you may feed upon that air,
But there are those wish the design on foot.
And promise to themselves a fair success.
So great's the love they have for the brave Prince,
An exp•ctation of a braver King.
'For it is Authority declares the man.
I'll thrive their trai'trous plots.
My Lord, speak to her.
But in his face I read my SOFFIE think's
This conference might be spared, as well as I,
For he was wooing me to carry him
To see MEDEA played, at Madam OMAY'S,
And I am loath to disappoint his hopes.
I'll be no cause of that.—I'll wait you thither.
You'll honour me.
(I'll go before you one day.)
I Need not tell thee, my SELEUCUS, what
Hast, secrecy, and care must wait you• journey.
Attend Duke EL•HEE first, but privately,
And with my letters give him high salutes,
To work in him a confidence of me.
When you have obtained Audience of the Prince,
Note with what gust he takes his call to court,
And ere he be upon the way, be sure
I have a Post, t'inform me of the minute
I may expect him here; that his arrival
Anticipates not my provision for it.
My Lo•d, no part of your instructions shall
Be unobserved, and what my care can more,
Rely upon.
Be happy.—This will prove
His faith, and diligence, and those shall be
The rules by which i'll further trust or slight him.
All tools are not for greatest works, they must
Be tried, and 'bide the trial must be made
Staves in the ladder we ascend a Throne by.
HAil my Lord BELTAZAR, what, you are going
To take possession of your new command?
I wish your journey and that too prosperous.
You know you have a friend in Court, and I
Assure my self of one now in the Army.
That your assurance will never fail you.
The King expected your Attendance.
I
Am with his grace already;—Adieu my Lord.
HOw quick's this Jack of state! if this my journey,
And the whole project be not a web of his,
I miss my mark.—The Prince is grown too great
And must be feared, and presently removed,
Not because he is too great for ABBAS, but
For ALLY-BEG: But this I must not see,
Because I cannot help. Should I suggest it
Unto the Prince, it were but to fall with him.
I'll rather save my self, and try if I
Can keep an even Path, twixt the two hills.
"It is be•la give way to, then resist ills,
" And raging Lions, of too horrid might
" To be withstood by force of Law, or right.
" The Prince must fall: his ruins will be great
Enough many less Princes to create;
Why may not I be one of those? so from
A River stopped, many small runs do stream.
Virtue, I love thee, but with thee to stand
Were now to fall; 'Yet what the King commands
" That word makes Virtue, or at least Law; for he
" Can do no wrong, since against himself't must be,
" And to the willing nothing's injury.
How ere, it is wisdom to obey: "They who
" Will rise at Court, must not dispute, but do.
O Misery of greatest states!
Obnoxious to inconstant Fates!
'Great and good Persons well may be
" From guilt, but not from envy free.
" They that stand high in Public trust
" Expect the forked arrows must
" Of such below, as deem their parts
" Less in employment then deserts.
These vapours yet may hap ore fly
So long as the helm is guided by
Temperate Spirits, and severe
Judges, that both know, and dare.
And whilst that Kings will, in things high,
Their action to good counsel tie.
And not by single advise be led,
Of the passionate unsalted head.
" But since that flattery and ease
" Crept into Princes Palaces,
"It is dangerous to be good, or great,
" For such the Court's a slippery seat.
" Nor is it safe for Subjects since
" Too too much to oblige their Prince,
" With mighty service, that exceed
" The Power of his noblest meed;
" For whom he cannot well reward,
" He'll find occasion to discar'd:
To which many a Parasite
His easy nature will excite,
Things sold to riot, that still swell
With envy against such as do well,
Because their glory blazing higher
Then theirs, ecclipses their false fire:
So must he for their private ends
Divest himself of his best friends
Nor so their humour's fed, care they
If he and his become a prey
To's greatest foe•, against whom their care
Deaf•nd him neither can nor dare.
" These are those ear-wiggs to a King
'Then hostile foes more ruin bring.
As Ivy seems the blooming spray
To adorn but sucks his heart away:
So do they rob their Prince of's heart,
In making him his duty invert.
And the best Government Monarchy,
Degenerate into Tyranny;
Persuading him, his single will
His Realms are made but to fulfil.
They make a wolf thus of whom Heaven
To the flock hath for a shepherd given.
The Sun, they might as truly, say
Is vested with his flaming Ray,
To scorch and not assist the Earth
With gentle warmth, to natural birth.
" The Flatterer merits worse of you
" O Kings, then whose pale Poisons brue.
" They kill but single Princes, he
" Assassinates even Monarchy.
Leave then with beasts your sportive war,
Or hunt no beast but the Flatterer.
DOe, Fortune•e, doe, frown on, that the world may see
My constant Virtue can overcome even thee.
And when thou pour out with full sea thy spite,
Swim with more strength against the angry tide.
Conspire with the Foe that not to you
The honour may, but to my self, be due.
But if thou be the Mistress of the world,
From whose mad wheel all our events are hurled,
Thank thee for being coy: It will improve
The pleasure of the Conquest, and my love.
" Slight favours are not for a Princes ware,
" The foulest ground the fairest crop doth bear.
In a dull calm, a child may play with the helm,
'But he's a Pilot can outride a storm.
Raise raise them, then, let loose the winds to rage,
And let this tumour with that warfare wage.
Block up the way that to Fems Palace lies,
To give my spirit nobler exercise.
Why am I more observed and courted too
Then other men unless I more can do
And suffer more? "It is not enough to be
" But born a Prince our greatest Royalty
" Lies in our Acts if we have greatest parts
In reverence, let's have so in deserts.
And though the bravest soldier at this day
(The whole worlds terror) under me in pay,
Did never hear me saying yet, go thee
Where slaughter highest raged, but follow me,
Yet could he stronglier against the Torrent swim
Of War then I, I'd yield my Palm to him.
But Counsel must direct each martial feat;
" Uncounsel'd force is crushed with its own weight.
I Study nothing here, so much as how to merit your h•gh favour, and do some∣thing may fix me strong in your desired friendship.—
WHy this to me, that never yet could gain
More then a quarter face,—thus—or perhaps
An over shoulder look from this great MAHOMET?
This sole ingrosser of the royal aspect?
To me this! a disgraced cast Courtier!
Sure this is more then complement, yet not scorn?
It looks like serious. He has his ends if he
But speaks, or bows, or nods to any man.
His very looks and smiles are all design.
Had I best meet his curtsy half way?
Or shun it as a snare? Sure he thinks not
Me cheap enough to be his instrument
In a low matter? and in great his craft
Has not enough of confidence in me.
I'll not embark too far, yet still egg on
His confidence to make my breast his closet.
Then either close in what may serve my self,
Or save my Head by vnraveling his Plots.
He hath somewhat in the sorge and hopes my late
Disgrace and discontent will make me blow
The cole with him, though he'd but use my foot
But as the Cats to reach the nut out of
The fire for his tooth. He's not to learn
" That male-contents are tinder for a faction.
He may remember too, that "with great Persons
" New benefits blot not out old injuries.
He hopes I'll catch the spark, if not for love
To him, for hate to the Tyrant, who yet perhaps
Bids him cast out his lures to tempt my stomach.
Yet will I see the bait, and play with it,
And since I see it, fear not to be hit.—
Who waits there?—
My Lord?
Desire the Gentleman
To enter, —Favours done to followers
Oblige their Lords; as he that did relieve
MINERVA'S weary Priests engaged the Goddess.
COme sir this mass of love your honoured Lord
Is pleased to send me, flows with such a tide
Of joy upon me, as I shall either die
This night, or else live forty years the longer.
My Lord, his honour's covetous to find
Fit objects for his love, he's used to say,
But now he needs not seek abroad, your Grace
Deserves it all, and he is no less just
To pay desert her due, then wise to find it.
You're too obliging, we know his judgement well
Wh•ch yet in nothing's more conspicuous,
Then in such prudent choice of followers.
My Lord, when will the Prince—
The Prince anon
Will be at the Council of war; there or expect
My entrance, or else by some attendant,
Give me but notice of your being there,
And I'll present you to his Grace, according
To your good Lords desire. The time draws on.
In the interim, here's some will entertain you.
SELEUCUS! hail.
Well met dear Colonel.
Welcome my better half, welcome to the Camp.
How looks the Court?
Is it uses, like a Lottery,
Where one may draw and draw till he exchanges
His whole stock but for blanks: and if by chance
A Prize do come, it is more by luck then skill:
And then the noise, the Drum, and general cry
Follow the fortunate, when a thousand others
That ventured more, may sit and curse their stars.
A good Satiric Metaphor; in them both
Blind fortune rules.
But how are Ladies? reasonable?
Even as they ever were, and ever will be.
Shadows, shadows of us: pursue them and
You may pursue, and tire in the chase,
Seem but to fly, they'll follow, and be handled.
It was ever so, keep them but sharp and they'll
Obey the lure.
Watch them and they'll be tame.
But with fr•sh oaths songs, kisses, Duels, (food
Strong and approved) gorge them, and they'll turn tail.
A pretty truth: but who bears greatest price.
Why, faith, the plainest, the fairest ever are
Most kind and least proud —
So, And what new loves?
How thrives the new sect of Platonic? ha?
Troth the best Pimp that ever entered Court.
You need not fear the grouth of such a weed,
Nor hope we better fruit, since that (1.) the Persians
Begun to follow the Lacaedemonians.
Then i'll up and turn Courtier, SELEUCUS
Wilt buy my Regiment?
Prithee BENEFIAN
Wilt now turn fly, and spend the day in buzzing
In Ladies beams till thou hast singed thy wings?
Fie, fie, the Prince he•e shows thee'nobler game,
Wilt thou, like an ill-handled kite upon
Her wings after a noble quarry, go
Away with paltry check? or leave a Partridge
To dop after a lark, or Robinred-brest?
There is a Siren in that tongue.— well, i'll
Consider a while of't. But you SELEUCUS
Mean to stay with us, ha? and see some sport?
Yes, yes you will not leave the stag at Bay.
Well, i've a Mistress I would fain present
With a piece of a torn Banner.
Well said my
Bully HECTOR,-but hold—The Lords of the Coun∣sell
ANd now my Lords, what business calls loudest
To be the first discussed in our Counsel?
Exchange of Prisoners; many we hold of ther's
At needless charge, as many they of ours
Deserving men and stout, whom we much want.
Our Regiments and companies are thin,
Scarce one in ten of them amounts to half
The constitution: So the Guards are weaker
Then else they should: and thus hard duty comes
Oftner to the same men, till the poor soldiers
Grumble, and faint beneath the load, and scarce
Are held from mutiny; But which is worse,
A mass of Treasure daily is consumed
On idle officers, Parchment Colonels
And titular Captains, that ne'er saw four files
Under their Ensigns, or perhaps no more
Then their own grooms, or private servants, save
Some that they borrowed upon days of muster,
Or else pretended to lie sick in Quarters.
Dead pays are not to be eschewed: tic grown
An abuse too strong for reformation.
The rest, the Prince has thoughts how to redress,
And means it suddenly, by cashiering and
Reforming idle officers, and filling all
His Regiments; which method he intends
To be exact to four times in the year.
All gentlemen that come as volunteers
Expect commands, which yet they measure by
The greatness of their states, not martial skill.
A Troop, a Company, or a Regiment
Each novice claims as due; less cannot answer
A full fortune: when, for a Princes self,
They that know any thing, know tic no disgrace
To trail a Pike under a known Commander.
But tic disgrace enough, and something more,
I'd almost said tic treason, t'undertake
More then a mans ability can perform,
Since the King suffers in it more then he;
The King, more in his work, then he in's credit.
These in their times; but first, if you concur,
Some thoughts of the reducing of you City
Were seasonable: the siege is long and tedious,
And sickness and disease invade our camp,
As if the foe had made them of their party.
And that, my Lord METHICULI, makes good
Your proposition; that place won, we gain
Those prisoners, whose exchange will cost us dear.
My Lord, I echo you. What a disgrace
Would stick upon our names indelible
As cowardice, if our great Princes standard,
That never yet was fixed in vain before
A hostile Fort, but uses to display
Its self still on the Enemies proudest Turret,
Should now be left alone, or which is worse,
Forced to remove?
Though all the Gods were parties,
Our Princes stars are of a clearer light,
Then so to be eclipsed by the (2) Turkish Moon.
She's pale, and wains already, and his Arm
Shall pluck her from her sphere, or quench her in it.
Or daube her horns with (3) Ottoman blood, till she
Sets red, or shrinks into her Cloud, and wastes.
How can it be but so, when such a Sun
As this appears, drowning her sickly light!
MY Lords, this City stands stiff in our way,
But none I hope, have any other thoughts
Then tempting of our stars, till the proud Turrets
Bow to our feet, and sink in vengeful flames;
For why should she ere boast a brighter fate,
Then her as potent sisters, that now kiss
Our yoke, and humbly truckle under us?
And so shall she, and glory in the bondage;
For to be slave to you, is next to win.
This my Lord ALKAHEM wisely advised,
Should be our first address unto your Highness.
He spoke my thoughts, or rather I in him.
This I the rather was induced to do,
Because, since the two Mines we sprung last day,
And five former assaults, proved unsuccessful
And all your Messages met a Rejection:
I humbly now conceive, no storm or scale
So fit to be attempted, as some stratagem
To be advised of.
Give us but a hint.
An't please your Royal Highness, the last sally
It was my fortune to make two young men Prisoners,
Whom by their civil fashion and demeanour,
I judged and found to be men of the Book,
Rather engaged by novelty to see
Something of war, then any way expert
In these rough meetings: these I had into
My Tent, where being well warmed with (4.) Shires wine,
They fell into a freedom of discourse,
And, among other things, assured me,
They in the City had received a Promise
From OSMANHELI, their old Governor,
Of succours within four days, for which service
He was prepared, and stayed but for some Galleys,
And Frigates to convoy him, and enable him
To pass through our Fleet, which Navy he had
A good assurance would attend him shortly.
And these are th'onely hopes hold up their hearts,
And keep their Gates shut against your Royal Highness.
Neither is this discovery the effect
But of their drink, for, sober, they confirm it.
The same, a Page of mine, lately their Prisoner,
Who mat's escape in the same sally, told me,
He learnt in the Town.
It is the general voice
Among the meaner Prisoners, who hug their
Condition, and joy they are with us,
That they may eat again, famine within
Rages so strongly.
Hopes of this supply,
They say, do only keep the Town from uproar.
The starved Soldiers fly upon their Leaders,
And cry with a half hollow voice, Bread! Bread!
For heavens sake Bread: when shall we eat again?
They answer, do but smell upon your Matches
Four days longer, then by th'life of (5) MORAT,
If no help comes, we will make our best conditions.
It seems it is a conceit strongly believed,
That they shall have relief.
Believed, my Lord,
They every hour trace the sands, the walls
They climb, and Turrets, peep through Prospectives,
And if they but descry a Sea-gull, it is
A Sail, and if a flock, O that's the Navy,
Till lost again they chide their credulous faith,
And curse the two cross winds, till their own sighs
But make them stronger to defeat their joys.
I had the guard last night, and intercepted
A messenger in disguise from the said OSMAN,
With Letters sown in's (6) Tulipant, spoke the same.
These be the Letters—, and the Postscript fixes
The time two days, or three at farthest.
Good,
And you conceive now, we may send a Party
Fresh flourishing in the Enemies Colours, who
By this pretence, may gain perhaps admittance,
And so surprise the Town?
It is probable.
It is certain.
Nay it is more, it is done already.
Well, since you've such a confi∣dence, we will try it.
You, my good Lord, METHICVLI, shall command
In this design, to whom we will join your Regiment,
HYDASPVS, and yours, ALKAHEM, and yours MATZOT.
Our care shall not be wanting.
Have the Brigads
Ready t'imbarque by the first light o'th'morning:
In the mean time, we will send unto our Admiral,
That riding in the gulf, blocks up the Town,
To bring ships down unto the Haven this night,
For to transport you in, those must you wing
With Turkish Flags and Streamers, and acquaint him
With the adventure, that you pass the Fleet
In the next night, yet not without some skirmish,
To work the greater confidence ith'City,
That you are foes to us, and their recruits.
Yet least discovery frustrates the project,
Keep your selves whole, that you may so make good
Your quick retreat. You, my Lord ELCHEE,
At the same time shall storm on the Land side,
To give the greater terror and diversion
To the Towns strength: so fortune aid the attempt.
My self, and you, EMANGOLY, will be ready
Either to enter with the Horse, or succour
Our friends, if they be forced to a retreat.
If this succeeds '•is but our keeping up
The Turkish Colours on the Towers awhile,
And we shall so train in the succours sent
For th'Towns relief, who ignorant of its taking,
Once landed, can't scope us.
Grasp not too much.
The Action promises well.
My Lord, SELEVCVS
Attends without.
Sir, you'll oblige me, if
You'll please to bring him in, and i'll present him.
MOZENDRA, let it be your care to make
Our Admiral know our project, and desire
Of Ships from him.
Sir, I am gone about it.
ALl hail.
May it please your Grace, this Gentleman
Is come from Court, with Letters for your Highness,
From your dread Father.
He is welcome,—Sir,
How fares our Royal Father?
By me he sends
Your Highness twenty thousand blessings: and
Is kept in health, if but by the relation
Of your renown, which gives him hourly music,
So grateful to his Majesty is your fame.
We will study to requite his love with duty.
My Lord HYDASPVS, and you ALKAHEM
And you MATZOT, will all be sure to bring
Down to the Haven, before the Moon arises,
Your Regiments, where you shall find me ready
To lead you aboard, the Ships I need not doubt,
They being my MOZENDRA'S care.
Do'nt doubt me.
Nor me.
Nor me. 
Sure I red not right!
His message likes him not.
O for an Augur!
Good heaven! what an Oglio of thoughts
His Highness has in's face!
He reads disturbance
In very line.
What bold blind fate dares thwart him!
It is so— Well, Soldiers may'nt dispute their orders.—
My Lord, I've here commands come from my Father,
Forthwith to wait upon him, and I dare
Think nothing but obedience.— But O in
What a Dilemma between duty and honour
Stand I? Honour calls to me from the house
Of Fame, built all of sounding Brass: and what
Wilt thou, says she, that hast given up thy name
To me, go wanton in the Courts soft pleasures?
When yet the field is covered with thy Army,
And new attempts resolved?
Hear, hear her sir.
Then filial duty calls loud from the Temple,
To obey is your chief honour, the contrary
Would fix more staines upon your Name, then all
The Ottoman blood, could you set it a Tilt,
Could ever wash away. O strait! who says not,
To go is Cowardice, to stay, Rebellion?
Excuse me sir, were it not blasphemy
Against our great (7) MITHRA, to say the Sun wants light,
When he doth but keep state in gloomy days?
No, no your Highness have possessed the world
Enough with your known valour, now no spot
Will stick to you; besides who knows your business?
Your Highness going may be necessary,
And so your journey give more honour to you,
Then kicking op this Towns Gates with your foot.
Of the other side, some handsome excuse may
Give satisfaction to the King, till this
Design be over, and not incur displeasure.
It may so, yet, why should our Lord the Prince
Run that hazard? his stay may do him hurt,
In losing the opportunity of some Action,
Sure of concernment, else the King would not
Have sent, knowing the weight of his work here:
Or worse, it may provoke his Fathers anger,
At least suspicion: His going cannot harm him,
This Plot is so contrived as we may act it:
Nor need the common Soldier know he's gone;
Put one into his Armour to disguise it.
When he is there, if the affair be urgent,
It is well he went: if not, he may return
To us before the Action.
I'm confirmed,
Obedience possesses me all over.
Isle up, and down again, quick as your thought:
If I be forced to stay, go on and prosper:
But duty bears me not faster to him,
Then Love and honour shall again to you:
And so adieu my Lords.
Heaven keep your Highness.
Go safe.
And safe return.
And well as safe.
HAil my Lord Duke of Shires.
My Lord BELTAZAR!
What wind wast drave hither trow?
No good one,
You may be confident.
Save you my Lords.
O my apprehensive soul! I'd give 
An eye my Lord the Prince were here again.
It is thus, in short, my Lords, His Majesty
Dreading some sickness growing strong upon him—
He was in health even now. 
Stay sir, observe.
Thought good to send down for his Son the Prince
The staff of his old age, to be about him:
And has done me the honour to command me
Hither, to stand in joint Commission over
Th'Army, with you, My Lord EMANGOLY,
My honoured Colleague.
Your standing is my fall. 
My Lords, methinks I see, and grieve to see,
Something like Discontent in all your faces.
I'm justly proud sir, to be joined with
So eminent a Virtue; but this, in this
Conjuncture of time, I think, was ill advised.
Now, when the Army is near worried out
In a long war, to tear their darling from them,
Will relish ill.
I'll up, and turn Platonic.
And I Stoic.
Isle to my Farm, and there 
Sow Mustard-seed: the Prince gone, farewell Arms.
This is a trick, the Prince ne'er dreamt of it.
A bait, to lure him up and lodge him—O.
My Lord, his Highness ere we lost him, laid
The Plat-form of a Plot to gain this City
By a surprise; till that be done, will it please you
To keep close your Commission, lest th'novelty
Disturbs the Action.
Sir, I'll be advised
In this, and all things, by your better judgement.
We all do know our duties, let's attend them.
Go then, my Lords, I'll follow:— or I think,
We had as good let this adventure fall,
It was but to please the Prince.
Sir, as you please:
I've some dispatches, those over, I am yours.
THe Prince called up, to stay! and one sent down
To take his place? and that a Courtier too!
Plot of some Turk to ruin Persia
By striking her good Genius! Impudent head!
Worthy a thousand thunderbolts, that durst
Once mention it! why stay we in the Army?
There's not a Captains place now to be given
But some Court-Madam must dispose it, to
Perhaps some little legged Gentleman-Usher.
Or decayed Stallion.
Though we toiled and sweat
To purchase honour for the Prince, we will not
That BELTAZAR shall share with us.
Shall I
Be coupled now, after so many Triumphs,
With a Court Spaniel? I'll let the Turk in first.
Say my good Lords what, can you shrug and fawn,
And complement? your General is a Courtier.
Now you must fight in method, exercise
Your men as in a Dance.—
Pox, let all fall.
Best call MOZENDRA back, and lets do nothing.
But mutiny.
Or at be•t, raise the Siege.
The shame will not be ours, but the dull Kings,
That knows •ot how to prize a worthy Son.
With all our hearts.
Let'•hold together then,
And we are safe.
You are an Oracle.
The King shall know that nothing shall be done,
Less we be pleased, and have again, his Son.
SELEUCUS, is thy Post upon his wings
T'inform thy master of the Princes coming?
My Lord, I have dispatched him.
Prithee stay him
For my Packet.
My Lord, i'll after him.
Do so,— and then the King shall know he must not
Pull down his Son and let these great ones stand,
That are but his dependents, pieces of him.
They're grown too great to obey any but
Their Prince, and will not brook my rising ore them.
And yet, to speak my conscience, they're but honest,
And do, but what I should; yet now that is not
The way to thrive, and so may well be loved
And wished, but not practised, without loss.
" As he that fells an Elm, must also fell
" The Ivy Vine, and under shrubs that dwell
" Beneath his shade, and cling in loving sort
" About his bole some but for their support,
" Some to suck sap from him: So who'd remove
" A Prince, or great man, strong in the Peoples love,
" Must strike his followers too. A mighty man
" Doth never fall alone, no more then can
" The beams and columns of a Palace and
" The Rafters and the spars unmoved stand.
WHat dire effects evil Counsel works
Even to unhinging greatest states!
It doth allure with specious baits,
But underneath foul Poison lurks.
The Prince, to please a factious few
Must rob himself even of his best
Of friends, and discontent the rest,
Which he may ever after rue.
This happens when the Princes ear
Is open (dro•n'd in soft delight)
Unto the bosom Favourite,
Or undermining Flatterer.
How hard and difficult a thing,
Almost above the power of man,
Or even what the immortals can,
Is it, to be a prudent King!
Almost with honour due to JOVE,
Such it is no Piacle to adore,
For sure, hourly less, or more,
He hath intelligence from above.
O what a narrow path doth lie
For him! what a straight neck of land?
Twixt this dire Rock, and that Quicksand,
Here base contempt there flattery!
To escape flattery men must know
He loves the naked truth to hear;
B•t if these freedoms given are
To all, they to contempt will grow.
So dost thou loose thy reverence
Great TITAN, guitar of the Day,
Because thou dost with equal Ray
Thy light alike to all dispense.
The wise Prince then some few selects,
And but to them gives liberty
To tell him all things as they be,
From the rest he nought hears or expects.
Of such a prudent choice must be,
(Men wise and daring, that above
His Fortune do his Person love,)
Lest they fall into flattery.
Not chose for favour, but for parts,
Not so poor as they him must make
Their prey, nor should he any take
For the•r high Fortunes, but deserts.
Nor must he yet let them engross
His love; keep them his Counsellors
Not Favourites, lest the gaining theirs
Of all hearts else becomes the loss.
Should SOL from one place ne'er remove
And starve the rest, scorch would that part
With curses, and his partial Cart
Might more esteem get, but less love.
" Few Favourites were there ever seen
" But either wrought their Kings decay,
" And proved Usurpers, or else they
" Have by the People ruined been.
" O Kings, be sparing to make those
" Whom well you love, your Favourites;
" For them you give to vu•gar spights,
" Or else, for them, your selves, depose.
IS there not something more for me to do,
Then to gain Persia's Crowns, and Asia's too?
Must I end there? and after ages say
Here was the limits of great MAHOMETS sway?
Forbid it my bold Genius. Such a Head
Was never meant less then the whole worlds dread,
To coin new projects, and dilate my fame
Beyond (1) cold Caucasus, where the Roman name
Could never come, all knees must bow unto't
(2) From Ganges head to towering Atlas foot.
Cunning or force all ways shall open make,
Or that all locks shall pick, or this shall break.
Some would start now, and say, we can't dispense
With justice to do this, and Conscience.
Die all such thoughts in me. "Who great things dare
" Think all ways just that profitable are.
As long lives he that throws JOVES Temples down
As he that prostrates at his shrine his Crown.
" All Acts, in this world, good, that prosperous, are:
What, in the next I neither know, nor care.
This world then that I know i'll either have
My subject, or else mine and its own Grave.
If I fall, she shall: the loud crack will be
A Dirge fit for so great an Obsequy.
WHere is my MAHOMET?
He's here dread ABBAS.
Hast set the Guards, and put a bit upon
The Mutinous Town? such acts as we intend
Are not safe in themselves, but only made so
By the same power that doth them.
I, my Liege
Have doubled all your Guards; and yet the more
To oblige them, I have paid them all arrears.
You did well to make that the first act of
Your Treasurership—Sit down my Confidence.
And now what say your letters from the Army?
Even as we wished, the Prince is on the way,
But played loath to depart from his dear strength,
At first it was debated.
Heavens! how far
Was this state Gangrene crept, that they durst make
Debates of my so positive commands!
The wily Foxes yet advised his coming,
To gain your good conceit of his obedience.
BELTAZAR'S Power known once, all flew off
The hinges; every face, grew dull and misty;
All late resolves of Action recoiled,
As if their bloods were cooled, and frighted back,
Either through fear, their Treason is smelt out,
And so they shall not stay long after him,
Or else for pure Love to him they mourned;
But it was not love, men of the blade and Action,
Used to quaff blood for Healths, are too too rough
For that soft tender Virtue to inhabit.
It was conscious guilt that flew into their faces,
Armed with her furies whips and Harpy nails.
Was it not time then to disarm the Serpent
Of's sting? who now may hiss, but never bite.
BELTAZAR writes EMANGOLY and ELCHEE
Seem most displeased, and slight his joining with them.
They know themselves, and know withal that hee
Or I, or any, whom your grace dares trust,
Have not the Art of war. They know you need them,
Therefore take boldness thus to nose and beard you.
I'll ruin all mankind first. No, this war
Is but to enlarge our Territories; honour,
Not need or Right is all the cause: I'll send
Commissioners down, and clap up peace with the Turk,
And so disband this factious Army. Then
(3) Let the haughty Duke of Sh•ras have a care
Lest I absolve my self of my rash oath,
Never to lop him shorter by the head.
By the hands at least I will, that is the Power.
" The misery of rach oaths! yet in the cause
" Of Treason, no man hath a privilege.
I'll thrust him from (4) his Government of Shires,
(5) I'll turn his feast of Lilies into Cypress.
And remove ELCHEE from Hyrcania too.
To out EMANGOLY you've pretence enough.
Ha hath been long continued in his trust;
Places so high ar'nt only for one Subject
Your Majesty have many to reward,
And honour is the cheapest way you have.
But ELCHEE has had no time in's Honour,
And been provoked already; besides he
May still be useful, and hoe's yet too great
For such disgrace. "It is never safe to anger
" Too many great ones at one time, Sir, ELCHEE
Made yours once, will serve to balance the other.
Yet for a while, banish him from your presence,
Twill make him conscious of his fault, and put him
Upon some thoughts how to regain your favour.
Then, to be reconciled is to win him.
" It is better to gain one friend, then crush then foes.
But let EMANGOLY be clean cast off,
As useless quite, and not to be reclaimed.
Wise MAHOMET, thou shalt rule me, bee it thy care
To draw up Articles, find Commissioners
To fetch us peace, empowered with full instructions.
Who mean you in EMANGOLY'S room, ore Sh•was?
Who but thy self, companion of my Reign?
Who else is fit to be second in glory,
Or help to bear so many ponderous Crowns?
I now shall take sound sleeeps and no more start,
Or break my troubled slumbers, with conceit
Of sword, or Treason. The Hesperian fruit
Was not so safe under the Dragons guard,
Nor the golden Fleece kept by the brasse-hoof'd Bull
Half so secure, as I and the Empire shall be
In thy care, Angel Guardian of Persia.
Not all the Gods could so oblige me. Heavens!
What anxious care, what service, what endeavours,
Can ere requite such favours! But, Sir, I
Am conscious of mine own defects, for such
A Province, that requires the ablest man;
A man, A God Phoebus himself to rule it;
A rule as glorious as his flaming Throne.
Thou art modest ALY-BEG. He is most fit
Who we dare trust, and that is thee my MHOMET
WHo have you brought into our presence (Dogs)
And are the sons of filth and poverty
Fit objects for our eye?
Mercy, O mercy!
An't please your Majesty, these two were soldi∣ers.
Ran from their colours hither, and turned Thieves,
They robed in the Court it self, my chamber.
Mercy.
It were to disgrace our mercy to bestow her
Upon such vagabond•, who besides your Theft,
And cowardly sulking from the Camp, shall die,
If but for so disgracing, so profaning
Our Court, with such base rags, and bands of vermin
Compounds of Oil and stench! spawn of a Toad!
Are these weeds for a Court? Or is our Marble
To be polluted with your dust and sweat?
Rascals! spued out of Gaols and Charnel houses!
Rotten already! that bear graves about you!
Go, Officers, away with them to death.
It is plain they are Thieves, they've robed some of their fellows
Long since hung up in chains, of those foul rags,
That danced ith'air many a frosty night.
Yet, that they may die neatlier then they lived,
Give them new Coats, then dragged out of the Town
Impale them high on stakes, thrust through their bodies.
This may thank you could keep the door no better.
T'may thank us both, for robbing without killing.
"They're wise that make sure work.
Tic true.
Away.
(Tic a good Prologue this to his sons Tragedy.)
Attend without there, FARRABAN, I've somewhat
To move the King, you may be useful in,
Be within call.
I will, my honoured Lord.
Draws not the time on, you expect the Prince in?
Yes. How will you that he be entertained?
How entertained? why, how, but with a bow∣string?
Is it not decreed? Entice the trusty Son
From his Eccliptick line, he shall obey
Your beck, and wander from his sphere, ere I
From my resolves.
Admired Constancy!
Set you some spy of faith against his arrival,
There let him stay him to attend my coming;
Then give us notice, and thou and I will plant
Our selves in secret to behold the justice;
To act which, get seven Executioners
Deaf, dumb, and dextrose to rush in upon him;
So all Rebellions shall be strangled in him:
Th'Hydra of Treason at one pluck shall lose
Her numerous heads▪ and we our fears, and be
For ever cured of all jealousy.
Isle appoint FARRABAN to be his last
Master of Ceremonies. FARRABAN,
WHich is the way to rise at Court, think thou?
To obey and please.
Right, and thou art ambitious.
What do I here else?
Whither tends thy aim?
Give me the utmost height of thy aspiring.
Troth there you pose me; for "Our thoughts still rise
" As our estates and power; the avarice
" Of honour is no less insatiable
" Then that of gold. — But for the present, I
Know mine own wish, and so shall you my Lord.
When I walk by the Citadel, so strong,
So stately, that claims reverence from mine eye,
I think if I had but the government
0f that, I should be happy enough to pity
(7) The grand Signior, and envy him no more.
The government of the Castle! is that all?
Thou art too modest.
Good my Lord, do'nt scoff me.
I am in earnest, —thou shalt have it FAR∣RABAN,
The King has but one piece of Service for thee,
Do that, and thou art Governor.
If I
Can do it, tic done.
Come, Isle instruct thee how.
COme, why staid you so long abroad this morning?
You'll never leave your Gossiping till you
Be double rib'd, as GLAVCA was, and then
You may go seek a Father for it: 'bove all things
Beware of a great belly; there is loss
Of time, and loss of sport in it, besides trouble.
O Madam, I can make sirrup of Seven,
My self; and twenty tricks I have besides.
Here is the book EARINA promised you.
What, ARETINE, so famous for his po∣stirs!
Let's see it.—Were you at arena's house,
Or sent she this?
I was there Madam, and
Had the luck too, to see her fine new servant.
What for a creature is it?
A pretty silk-worm.
How happy am I therein 'bove the rest,
That dote on sleeked limbs, and finest blood,
Looking but for couch comforts, not aspiring
The godlike ornament of a crown! let them
Melt in their youngsters arms, Isle sacrifice
To hair and bristles, cling to MAHOMET,
Or hug a coffin to arrive at honour —
Me thinks this Purruck leans to th'left hand somewhat,
No Madam, it is well set, and rarely scented.
I would we'd more of the prepared Pomatum,
And powder I bought last.
What talk's most rife
Abroad, wench?
That my Lord MAHOMET is sworn
Lord Treasurer, he's now the only Sun
Next to the King, of greatest light.
He shall
Eclipse him one day. —What do you now?
This fucus
Is laid too thick, Isle mend it with my scarlet.
Have you got Puppy Dogs, and an after burden?
Yes.
Well—distill them then with care—my Lord▪
WHy; this is as it should be, now my beauty
Displays her lustre, throwing sweets and graces
About the place, her self being as the spring,
A box wherein all sweets compacted lie.
This spring, Sir, owes it self but to your beams.
I wish you joy, Sir, of your treasurership,
A step, that's but a step to a greater height.
I've something more to tell thee, that is fit
For thy ear only.
CLOE, prethe leave us.
Now can't I for my soul but listen, I
Have such an itch of novelty)
Come my dear,
Art ready to ascend thy throne? hast practised 
To Queen it with a Majesty? see thou not
All creatures bow in homage to thy foot?
And Princes throng into thy set of servants?
This is fine Pageantry, would it were real.
O how I should be courted!)
Jest not, jest not,
How proceed you?
Smoothly, the dreaded Prince
Is on's last journey; an hour brings him hither,
An other sends him El•zium.
The army kicks at BALTAZAR's command,
And pines for th'Prince; the two Dukes fume and fret
Like Lions caught in toils or Bulls in nets,
Where struggling but entangles them the more.
Since the King can't trust these men thus enraged,
Nor knows he where to serve himself of others;
He means a league with the Turk, so falls this army,
And leaves him no force to oppose my rise.
He showed me his thoughts of outing ELCHEE
From his vice-royship of Hircania,
And stout EMANGOLY from his of Shires.
I having hopes of ELCHEE, knew to out him
Were to disable him to do me service;
So wrought him to continue (8) the golden Duke,
But not without a spice of his displeasure,
Forbidding him the Court, and this will rub
His former wounds, and make him fitter for me
To work upon; for "Nothing like disgrace
" And discontent drive men into rebellion.
EMANGOLY I know too wise and haughty
For my use so did close with his suspicion,
To lay him by; there I've disarmed a foe,
(9) And the most Potent too in the whole Empire.
To hinder his gath'ring or abetting Factions,
We will to this Town confine him, to have him in
Our eye, and keep his friends from herding with him.
Fair fall that Counsel, I shall see my Sweet∣heart
Again then,—O dear VASCO!—Well, I'll venture
Catching the other cold, with sitting up
To let thee in at the back door a nights.
Lord, I'm so marriage-minded of the sudden!)
I'm mufing who shall be preferred to Shires,
If any of that faction should step up,
It were but the worse: be that your care to hinder.
Who clears a field of thorns, but means to reap
The crop? nor had I counselled his remove,
But that the King proffered his place to me:
Whereby th'best half of my design is acted.
" For he that gives the means unto another,
" To become powerful, undoes himself.
That word gives me new spirits. O my joy!
Let me embrace thee, sweet; all our contrivements
That sounded hard before, are easy now.
Nor will we rest in our first project: we
Will stretch our conquest farther, till no names
But only ours, be heard from Pole to Pole.
This hand was never made for to grasp less
Then the whole world, one Sceptre cannot fill it:
Thou shalt reward thy women all with Kingdoms—
Hei, ho, my heart! then I shall be a Queen.)
And give whole Isles in dowry with thy My∣dens:
The meanest drudge that toils in thy service,
Shall sweep his Oven with (10) MORAT'S Horse-tayle standard:
My Ganymeds and Lackeys I'll prefer
To Provinces, and give a City to
My Grooms for every time they hold my stirrup.
I'll ride upon tame Unicorns, and thou
Shalt have thy Chariot drawn by yoked Lions:
My slaves shall play at foot-ball with the crowns
Of their own conquered Kings, whose blooming daugh∣ters
Shall sue to wait, some amongst thy maids, and some
To be entertained in my (11) Seraglio.
Why should not I have a Seraglio too,
For men and boys? I prithee let me build one.
That would be fine i'faith, I love variety.)
No, no, my sweet, thou must keep all for me.
Fie, this ingrossememt is but mere conceit:
Do's the sweet spring less cool, less fair appear,
When many thirsts are quenched in her, then when
But one has drank? find you not the same sweets,
When more besides your self have smelt your Rose?
Well, I'll not press the Dove's example to thee,
Or genial Vine, but give thee the free reins,
Let thy self loose to pleasures.
We will make poor
Ingenuous luxury in all her Arts.
Mean while, we will re-erect our marble City,
(12.) Persepol's, far fairer then her founder
SOSARINUS, or rather JAMSHET meant her;
Or then she was indeed when (12) the mad Greek
Swimming in riot, at fair THAIS Counsel,
Did wrapped her pride about with wasteful flames.
There our bright Palace I'll repair, and give
(12) The forty Towers new Resurrection,
From their forgotten rubbish (12) Th'hundred Pillars
Of white and shining marble, shall again
Erect their polished heads, not to support
APOLLO, as of old, but thy fair statue,
And mine, adored of the prostrate world.
We will lie on Beds of Gold and Ivory,
(13) Richer then that Bythinian PYTHIUS gave,
Our great DARIUS: Golden Vines shall shade us,
Studded with Pearls, whose artificial clusters
Shall be the freshest Rubies. Thus we will tyre
Nature and Art, and our selves too, with pleasures.
I've a pretence shall gain even MIRZA'S friends.
It is that I only aim at, the Protection
Of young SOFFIE, whom they cannot think safe
In's Grandsires hands, seeing his hate to's Father:
Do you pretend no other to the Ladies.
At first, to name my self were gross, and open.
Great soul of wit! that cannot choose but take them,
Some of the great Ladies I've with visits courted,
With presents some, all with unusual favours:
So that they seem to stand expecting something
I'd have them doe, which when the Prince is gone,
They being thus prepared, they shall have.
It were good you won the (14) Muft•e to your pur∣pose;
And some of the (15) Abdalls, that at public me∣tings,
And market Lectures, may expound the Text
Of the (16) Alchora•, according to your Comment.
Good cheer is bait enough for these poor spirits,
Fill them with that, and the bagpipes will sound
What Tune you'll turn them to, when they are full:
Bid them inveigh against the Tyranny
They now groan under: promise silken Yokes,
And easy burdens in your Government.
Pretend a Reformation of the Law,
To take down all illegal Courts and Taxes:
(17 To make all Lands and goods Hereditary,
So that the Persian being rich in Marble,
Need never more to build with unburnt clay.
Promise a Toleration of all
Religions, to ease tender Consciences,
Or Jew or Christian, but yet persecute
The Christian still; it is a spreading Sect,
And where it gets a foot draws in the body:
What though your word's not kept? your ends obe∣tain'd,
You're too great to be taxed with breach of promise.
It is true, great wit, these mercenary Priests
Are the best fire-brands, such I've ready kindled,
They are at work in every Conventicle,
Their empty heads are Drums, and their hoarse voices
Are Trumpets to the war: then, when no longer
The people will believe, I shall be able
To force them to it: Power and Policy,
" Are the two Poles a Kingdom turns upon.
More Policy not MERCURY can boast;
O that your power were equal! as to that:
What think you of the Horse-guard I propounded?
I do intend it, when I've money for it.
I've twenty thousand (18) Tomaynes towards it.
(This want of money now was well proton∣ded.)
As many thanks, my sweet, I will return thee,
For every piece a Crown, (a noose I should  say.)
Base man! well, I'll prevent thy treachery.
By this the King expects me, but my dear,
First let me leave my soul upon thy lips.
Out Crocodile! he'll lick off all her paint too.)
Adieu my Queen, my Goddess, more, my Love.
My Prince, my MAHOMET, my best of wishes,
And their accomplishmens attend thee ever.
ANd must the brave Prince die? who would love virtue!
That sure has no reward, and is but name!
Could virtuous valour, and all daring goodness,
A noble scorn of Fortune, and her frowns,
Whole Hecatombes of Vows and Prayers, sent
Climbing to Heaven on pious breath, enough
To scale it, and force blessings from the Gods:
Could Countries love, or Persias Genius wrest
From ruthless ATROPOS the impartial shears,
Then had thou lived, great MIRZA, and outlived
The smooth-tongu'd Greek. O let not this be known
In (19) Balsora, nor published in (20) Bizantium,
Lest the Arabian triumphs, and the daughters
Of ACHMET, sing the fall of the Persian glory.
But why wail I his fall that is my rising?
" Kings great intents are to be served, not searched:
But would he'd used some other instrument:
Yet th'Cittadell is worth the pains I take for it.
He comes,— I'm hardly bad enough for this service.
NOw FARRABAN.
Long live your Highness, you
Are well returned. Sir, I am sent from th'King,
To let you know, that since it was private business
Urged him to call you up, he thinks it best
You'd not appear in Court, or make your coming
Public, now when your Army so much needs you:
And since a sudden grief late fallen upon him,
Makes him unfit for business; he desires
You'd repose here, till himself comes to visit,
And give you your dispatch, which he assures
Your grace shall be as soon as he can get
Leave of's Disease to venture into th'air.
Thou give me joy and sorrow FARABAN;
Sorrow, to hear his Majesty wants health;
And joy, in hope of quick dispatch, because
My Army's need of me, and my desire
To be with them are alike great and urgent.
My humble duty to his Majesty
I'll here attend him, and employ the time
In prayers for his health.
Heavens keep your highness,
For Earth sha'nt long I'm sure. 
Your Highness said,
You'd have your Scimitar, new set on edge,
Whilst here you stay, if it please you, 't may be done.
That's well remembered, the stout trusty blade,
That at one blow has cut an (21) Asinego
Asunder like a thread, is drunk and glutted
With Ottoman blood; it cuts not now, but bruises.
Take it, and gived an edge, but be'nt long absent,
Mean while a nap shall settle my tossed  brain,
HE sleeps.—One blow will make you sleep e∣ternall.
He is the fitter for your purpose, farther
From opposition.
But it is cowardly,
To strike a man sleeping.
We that stick no•
For virtues self must not regard her shadow,
Fame and repute; no heed what honour says,
State says it, and state is the power we serve.
A handsome man! it is pity!
Do you soften?
Relent a little; alas, against a shower
Of so great blood, what Marble but relents!
You have your choice yet, whether you or he
Shall pass the Stygian sound first. Do, do, strain
Curtsy with him; say, my flower of youth
Has shed the leaves, thine flourishes in glory:
Live thine own time out MIRZA, and mine too.
No, he must fall; yet falls he not my crime,
But Tyrant Necessities, that knows
No law, not those of justice, nor of nature.
Now you're your self again.
Skirt all along
The trenches with the Horse.
Hark! hark! he dreams
Nothing but war; talks sleeping or awake,
Nothing but blood and wounds.
Remember but
That I am MIRZA, you Persians.
Is this
Nothing?
An overflow of dangerous valour.
AH!
See your self and crowns rescued from danger. 
Deaths journey-men ready to seize your fear.
Sad necessary evil!
Shut but your eye
And when you op't again. you'll see no Rival.
Where, wher's the opposite∣on  made?
He wakes.
There's danger in his fury, and quick death
In every look.
Bless me! what do I see!
I am betrayed!
I warrant you.
Treason! Treason!
I, I, call till your lungs crack.
Hell, and furies!
What Devil made me send away my sword,
To fall a tame dull sacrifice to treason?
Persia's good Genius.
Yet the lower shades
Shall never see my Ghost  come unattended.
" Fury ne'er wanted weapons. 
O that I
Could save him, and be safe my self!
You cannot.
Go you dull dog, tell RA¦DEMAND I come—
And you— bid CHARON wait me  with his boat.—
How will it yrk my Ghost to fall without
My full revenge?—could every blow I deal
Light on my cruel Father —the cursed cause
Of my base murder— I should die contented—
As in th'embraces of my dearest friends.
You see Sir, what you were to trust to from him.
would I had ne'er deserved it.
And you too,
Go you, —and tell my Grandsire, and my  Uncle
I come—to keep them company, —we will sit
On A herons banks,—under a fatal yew, —
Counting the murders— of my Tyrant Father.—
Ah too unnatural Father! —Our pale Ghosts
By turns shall vex thee.—Is this private business!
Curses and horror dog thee to thy Hell.—
ABBAS!— O ABBAS— forget not—that I die— 
I die— the complement of thy Tyranny.
I can no longer hold, I feel his torment.
Inconstant!
MAHOMET, help me rescue him,
And call him back from the infernal shades.
Faith Sir, I'm deep in the gout I cannot struggle.
MIRZA, O MIRZA, speak, thy father calls.
My murderer.
O he lives he lives, help! help!
I am very lame —Pox o'these  bunglers, would
He had killed them all.
He faints again! the soul
Is coy, and will not stay, help! help! who waits there?
SIR.
O help me redeem my hasty error,
And be a Father again.
Alas Sir, we cannot
Bring him again of the sudden; he's but sounded,
His spirits must have time to Rally. But what
Will do with him? do you think this injury
Will ever be forgotten? will you restore him?
No, yet he lives, though in a dungeon. —Bind him
Lest he recovers.— Now to make him henceforth
Incapable of giving me more trouble,
Isle have a flaming steel be drawn before
His eyes, to take away his sight.
Do it then
Ere he recovers, you'll not rule him else.
Be it your care FARRABAN and SELEU∣CUS.
It shall.
Then guard him to the Cita∣dell.
Stay FARRABAN, you I've made  Governor.
Whore's his commission MAHOMET?
Here my Liege.
You see Sir I was mindful of my word.
Your trust shall never be deceived by me.
Ward the Prince up, but hinder not his friends
Th'accesse of visits; yet observe who comes;
So shall we know the faction by degrees.
He fast, fetch his wife to him, and young SOFFIE.
Let little FATYMA be brought to me,
Isle have her in my Court to play withal.
All your commands are done.— Now I grow strong. 
In villainy, and fit for any service.
At first I startled, and my blood recoiled.
" None are of the sudden highly good or bad;
" By time and practise are crafts-masters made.
MAHOMET, compile a Proclamation
Declaring my just fears and jealousies
Of his exorbitant rise, and growing faction.
This timely mercy will possess the wo•lt
That I am only careful, and not cruel.
And that it is not the person but the treason
I punish. "Tyranny may be gilt with reason.
INconstant dotard! can thou never sleep
And wake again, firm in the same resolve!
Well, thou but leave for me to do, what thou
Would have, but coldest not; nor shall this faint rub,
Thy cowardice cast in my way, impede
My strong-cast bowl, but the more surely lead
It to th'intended Jack, that is, thy head.
WHat mists are these that dwell about mine eyes
To cheat me into slumbers! as if rest
(The cure of troubled minds) meant to compose
The tumults of my brain, and sleep repair
My broken senses, softly by distilling
Her gentle balm upon my wounded thoughts!
When I no sooner do obey, and throw
My cares on her, but melancholy keeps
Sad orgies in my head, shuffling again
My senses with pale frights, and ghastly dreams,
Full fraught with horror and black Tragedy,
Turning to poison what soft sleep meant balsam!
Why weeps her grace, as if she'd  wash the world
To its old innocence? accost her Madam.
Alas! poor heart! my load of grief's too hey∣vie
To be removed by thee; —mine eyes no sooner
Close, but I start in frights, visions and Ghosts,
Pale wandering Ghosts still shake their funeral brands
Before me, and invite me to their shades.
Me thought I saw my Prince with ghastly looks,
Squalid and bloody, beckon me away.
And then the Sun with bloody countenance seemed
To set upon his head, and a thick cloud
Enveloped him in her dark misty womb.
Portents! portents of some dire fate to come.
Madam, alas how oft have you chid me
For crying at sad dreams? last night, me thought
I saw an eagle pick his chickens eyes out,
And could have wept for it, but I soon forgot it.
It is true, sweet-heart, our sleeping thoughts are oft
Idle and imperfect, but most commonly
They're either Histories of something past,
Or dark presages of what is to come.
For heavens sake, Madam, torture not your self
With dreams, but let some (22) Magus read them to you,
Or else consult with some wise woman about them.
No IFFIDA, "Wisdom and virtue be
" The only destinies set for man to follow.
" The heavenly powers are to be reverenced,
" Not searched into; their mercies rather be
" By humble Prayers to be sought, then their
" Hidden counsels by curiosity.
MAdam, the Court is full of armed men,
They've planted guards at every door, and make
Apace towards the presence.
Hark — Madam, let 
The Prince be hidden.
No, he has innocence
Enough to guard him.
O they come!
Let them.
YOur Grace will please to pardon us, whilst we do
Only our Offices, and the Kings commands,
In removing you, and my Lord your Son,
To th'Cittadell, where Madam, I assure you,
You shall find all the liberty and service
Is in my power to afford.
You, Madam, 
The King expects at Court, where all delights,
And studied pleasures, shall be spread before you.
O Heaven!
Why this oth'suddain? if there's ought
Amiss• in me, his gentlest check could have
Reformed it soon, without this strict confinement.
Madam, no cause of this is from your self,
As we conceive, but from the Prince, who is
Already there.
O my oraculous soul!
My dreams are read without a Magus, come,
Come, lead away, if he be there, the place
Is not a Prison, but a Court, a Palace,
A Paradise; this is my Prison, because
He is not here: I go not to restraint,
But to enlargement. Is my Lord there say you?
I'm sure unjustly, since nothing deserves
A punishment but evil, and all evil is
Repugnant to bright honour, and her dictates,
And no dishonourable thought had ever
The confidence to thrust into his mind.
Adieu, my FATYMA, thou must to Court,
But I to riper pleasures, if allowed
Thy Fathers presence in what ever place.
Alas, Madam, may not I wait on you the
No Madam.
I'll not be long from your Grace:
Farewell my Princely Brother.
Alas! I cannot
See thee torn from me thus.
What insolence
Is this! and whither will you hurry me?
My Lord, only to see your Royal Father.
Go, Child, the Gods of Persia are thy guard:
Wilt thou partake my fortunes IFFIDA?
Willingly, Madam, as i'd entertain
My Bridal.
Come then, glad Brides do not meet
Their longing Grooms, more eagerly then I
Embrace my Prison, if that be a Prison
Where MIRZA is: the joy of meeting him,
Devours all thoughts o'th'place which must appear
Both noble and convenient, he being there.
WE knew his Parts, but know with all, "No Virtue
" Can merit praise, once touched with blot of Treason:
Yet since it is not himself we chastise, but
His crime, the innocence of his children shall not
Share ith'reward of his offence, and therefore
We commit FATYMA to your Governance:
She is of the best blood, yet betters it
With all the Graces of an excellent spirit:
Mild as the infant Rose, and innocent
As when Heaven lent her us. Her mind, as well
As face, is yet a Paradise untainted
With blemishes, or the spreading weeds of vice.
My care sir, shall preserve those glories green,
To grow with her, and flourish as her beauty.
When aged some two years more, we me•no a marriage
'Tween her and an Arabian King: Her goodness•
Can brook no meaner fortune then a Throne.
SEe where she comes, waited by all the Grace!
With Innocence cast about her as a Dress:
Yet wears she sorrow in her face.
But mixed
With such a sweetness, as gives sorrow beauty.
Come my fair Grand-childe, welcome to our Court:
We mean to have thee here, as a choice Jewel
Set to th'advantage, to be seen and praised;
Madam OLYMPA is your Governess.
Then sir, my first suit to her is; that I
May see my Father, if not still wait on him.
Deny her nothing, but make quick 〈◊〉
A Prison is no shrine for such a good•es•e.
Come Madam, I'll attend you to hi• Highness.
Doe— and SELEUCUS, hast thee down to (23) Larr,
Be happy in thy Government let us know
What's fit more to be done there? and how they
Take this great change of state.
I will my Liege.
YOu soon will know what you have done, and what
You should have left undone, wh•n it is too late.
What Prince would have disarmed himself of so
Trusty a str•ngth! and to his watchful •o•,
Laid himself open thus but one in whom
Strict justice would have that impartial doom
Of Tyrants to be proved, "Him whom fate
" Means to destroy, she doth infatuate.
THe empty nothing of our worldly greatness!
O that your trusty Scimitar had stuck
Across my heart, when I deprived you of it▪
Armed but with that, the Sons of earth had felt
Their brothers fortune that made head against JOVE.
Remember it no more sweet youth, alas!
Hell and dire Treason called, called in the voice
Of love, the fiend ith'Cherubins disguise,
(Safest disguise, but cruelest!) I came led
By powerful Fate to my destruction,
And this by chance the wrathful Powers made join
To pluck me down. So, "To a falling man,
" Every thing gives a thrust to hast his ruin.
Who's that?
It is FARRABAN your Jailer sir.
The Devils setting Dog! guide me but to him,
My wrathful arms shall crush out his black soul.
Alas! Sir, your revenge is toothless, hear him
Twill less exasperate.
NYMPHADORA, sir,
Your Princess comes to see you.
Can that name
Come in thy mouth, and not convert thee? wretch!
O Heavens! and has the Kite got that Dove too
Into his fangs▪ the Gods have sure forgot
All justice, and hurl plagues about at random!
Goodness! what do I see! — O, that I still
Did not only dream! — O—
Ah! alas! sweet Madam!
She's sounded! help me DORIDO.
What Tyrant 
Planet did rage, not reign, at my cursed birth!
Too cruel heavens, to ply me thus with wounds?
Do harsh JOVE, do, shoot, shoot again, but know,
If thou spendst many Darts upon me more,
Thou'lt soon disarm thy self.— Is not my woe
Enough, without addition of hers
To sink me to the Centre! Lead▪ O lead me
To her, my comfort once, but now my sorrow,
That I may revive her with fervent kisses,
Or mix with hers my dying breath.
Take heed sir.
O NYMPHADORA speak, thy MIRZA calls,
Still MIRZA, and still thine. O speak, speak quickly,
Lest grief before thou speak, puts me past hearing.
My name was once beloved, and powerful with thee.
Who, O who calls me from the pleasant shades?
Thy MIRZA dearest, it is thy MIRZA calls thee.
O the vast power of that Charm! where is he?
Bless me— what see I?— Heavens, let me return
To that sweet Grove, there stood my MIRZA for me,
Glorious and bright, and isle to him again.
Alas, She's gone again— sweet SOFFIE
Speak to her.
Ah! and is he here too!
Madam, ah Madam, SOFFIE never asked
Ought yet of you in vain.
Heaven is proud
To have got so pure a soul, and vows to keep it.
Here comes poor FATIMA too.
Madam,—FATIMA.
O ye infernal Powers! your conquest is
Complete ore me, why kill you me no faster?
But crucify me thus with lingering tortures?
I'll do it my self— and never be beholding
To you for my last rest (24) BA•AZET'S Cage
Armed him with high resolves: my woe's as great,
As powerful.
O Gods!
Sir, sir, the Princess. 
Sweet FATIMA cling you to him, to hinder
His violence to himself.
O eyes! what see you.
O choice of bitter sights.
Warrant one enough,
To break so soft a heart as mine. O Father!
O Mother! whither shall I turn me first?
Which first bewail, or add my loss to yours?
O that I could redeem his life with mine!
Or I with my blood ransom hers it would be
A noble payment for the breath she lent me.
Oh—oh! —
Ah! what strong groans are those?
It is MIRZA dies, Madam, it is MIRZA dies,
Infected with your grief.
No M•RZA is
Immortal as his Virtue!— O what cheats
Are these! even now I left him in •lizium,
Yet now I find him here squalid and blo•die,
As in my dream—
Madam, put off your fright,
Assist now his recovery.
O my MIRZA!
Which wound shall I first kiss? here? this? or that?
In silent streams below now dost thou bath
Thy bleeding wounds— but, ah! why dost thou seek
To wash them any where but in my eyes?
See! see! they flow! These tears when once I dropped
Into thy hurts, when thou came hot from conquest,
Thou did call balm. Ah! they are still as warm,
As clear, and flow as free. See, see! I'd weep
All my whole moisture into cures could thou
But feel it, yet I'll weep because thou dost not.
Ah, ah! thou dost not!—Thou art now possessed
Of thy fresh Grove, and there to fame deliver'st
Thy N•MPHADORA'• Name; or on the rind
Of some fair Tree, perhaps thou now ingrav'st it,
Then hugg'st thou the fresh bark, and ask pardon
For wounding it with thy beloved Letters.
O'wake, 'wake dearest, and embrace the substance.
Where,-O-where am I?
O thank Heaven he lives.
You are in my Arms, thy N•MPHADO∣RE'S A•mes;
Where, O that thou had ever been, or now
At least may ever be.
No, no, I am not,
I'm in the Torrid Zone, right O right under
The vehement Line. — Water-O-water quickly.—
What Devil has in my sleep, thrown me to Africa?
O for a River, though it were Acheron,
Or S•yx its self to bath in.
Alas he burns,
He's high in a strong fever.
Madam that
Will find an easy cure, get him to rest;
That's the first step to health in a distemper.
Ah me! What COLCHIS, what Thessalian Hag
Thus tortures me, poor wretch, with Magic charms,
And boils my guts in such a scorching flame,
Melting my marrow as her wax dissolves!
Alas dear Prince! best try to rest my Lord.
To Lib•an Lions TITAN is more mild,
Then thus to rage. VULCAN feels! no such heat
It's glowing forge. Neither is Aetna's self
So scalding, when she vomits burning coals.
O, I will sigh my soul to air to cool thee.
O, who put HERCULES shirt on me? I feel
The poison work, and all my veins boil high
With Centau•'s blood.
That I could weep, till like
AEGIRIA I thawed into a fountain
To cool him!
Might I ACIS like melt to a stream.
Pretty obedience!— Fortunate PROME∣THOUS,
Though thy eternal entrails still should feed
A thousand Eagles! the kind Caucasus
Benums with cold; O that I might with thee
Under that hill, handle eternal frost,
Roll in perpetual snow, to quench my fires,
And slake my parched soul with continual Ice!
Dear Madam, get him in.
O that I could!
Or might I still thirst, TAN•ALUS with thee,
So I might always bath in thy cool River,
For O I burn, I burn, the dog-star rules me,
And feeds his raging fires on all my joints.
Wilt in to rest?
It is dog-daies every where,
And Offer•ck.—Here ye BELIDES, here power
On me, kind sisters, your perpetual •ialls.—
There is an impious nation that is said
To stuff with human flesh their greedy womb,
O they expect me, and are now devouring
My roasted Liver; all my members broil,
And ready be •HYESTES for thy Table.—
Page, try to lift him up, softly, O softly.
O I am stifled in hot glowing brass!
I low, shut up in dire PERILLUS Bull.—
Away Dragons, you scald me with  your breath.
Stay yet.
Nought see I'fore mine eyes but flames,
And towering Pyramids of eternal fire.
What food can serve such flames! alas! what mines
Of Bitumen and Sulphur have I in me,
That thus my loins consume without a pile.
Alas! this talking heightens his distemper.
It does,—come try to bear him quickly in.
Once well, he will forgive it.
I melt! I melt!
Ah! mine own self am mine own funeral fire.
BUngling Puppies! could not twitch hard enough
When once they'd got him down! What will you do now?
Step on, or back, or alter the whole ma•hen
Of the contrivement?
On, my fair,
" These little difficulties indear great actions
" To noble minds; they are weak souls fall or stumble
" At rubs cast in their way to •rye their s••ength.
The peace I know by this time is patched up,
And the bold factious Troops disbanded all.
The Town anon will swarm with idle Soldiers,
That will, like fish lie basking in the Sun,
And die, when all the water, their element,
Is let out from them. I'm for ELCHEE first.
I for OLYMPA, and EARINA.
Press hard
For liberal lones of money, plate, or Jewels,
Or any of their fine superfluities,
They'll help t'augment the heap. Possess them strongly
That I intend to rescue the brave Prince
And SOFFIE.
You've instructed me enough.
Keep hid the Serpent, Lure with the Dove:
" No Treason is like that goes mas'kd like love.
WHat is it Heavens, you suffer here?
As if that vices malice were unbounded,
All virtues Laws inverted are,
And the just be by the unjust confounded.
It is punishable to speak reason,
Now reason and loyalty are out of fashion,
And Tyranny and Treason
Have all the vogue in this besotted Nation.
He that our great Palladium was,
No less our strength and bulwark, then our glory,
A pray to rampant malice lies,
Whose fall almost, the doers selves makes sorry.
His innocent issue suffer too,
Not laid so close up as a prized treasure;
But to show what their rage can do,
And that reason rules not their acts, but pleasure.
His noble friends, that whilst they wore
In the field his purple, could deaths self have daunted,
Men, that a crime, then death, fear more,
Suffer for crimes wherewith they are unacquainted.
Some to strict bounds confined are,
Some to remote; all judged without due trial:
The cause, fond jealousy and fear,
Strange state, that fears such subjects as are loyal!
Whilst they that mean the rape of the state,
Swim in smooth oil, and wallow in all riot,
Intit'ling their black deeds to fate,
And put bad men in arms, to keep good quiet.
O whither doth the precipice
Of evil hurry men of base condition!
Made drunken with unjust success,
They all the world grasp in their vast ambition.
See thou not JOVE rebellions scope?
'Lesse thy quick vengeance stopps their sudden rising,
They'll, like their elder brothers, hope
To depose thee too, and dare heavens surprising.
Hear, O JOVE, hear their blasphemies,
How all their wickedness on thee they father.
Cheating the world with pious lies,
Saying, their rules from thy instinct they gather.
Dost thou not hear it boldly said,
JOVE bids us break all ancient laws a sunder?
(At the dire speech ASTRAE fled)
Or hearing it, why sleeps so long thy Thunder?
Was it not worth one bolt to save
Him, who the world thy truest copy deemed?
Whom all good men in reverence have,
Who thy laws highly, as we his, esteemed?
Whom wilt not tempt, when these, they see
The great prosperity of evil secures,
Away from down-trod right to flee?
When wrong, with the fair bait, success, allures?
So would it be, but that there are
A wiser few, that know on high there fitteth
Of the world, an upright Governor,
And every thing is best that he permitted.
" We know a punishment it be
" To evil to prosper, nor shall long endure.
" The wicket's false prosperity,
" Though justice slowly moves, she strikes sure.
COme BELTAZAR, how have you used your power?
May it please your Majesty, a mutual league
Offensive and defensive we could not
Obtain, but upon terms too low for us.
The •urk is yet too high, and stands upon
Rendition of those Towns you hold of his,
Which would disfurnish you of many men
Fit for your other wars; so'a Truce is all
We've made, but so long, 'tmay be called a peace,
It is for three years.
'These truces yet in war
" Are only like the well days in an Ague,
" Short intervals of health, that flatter us
" Into debauch, and make the next fit worse.
" Nor should we suffer a disorder follow
" To save a war, because that war's not saved,
" But only put off to our disadvantage.—
But how took our stout Captains their cashiering?
full heavily and muttered mutiny.
EMANGOLY here at the Town was met
With your arrest, and seizure of his places.
Which he seemed to put off with no more trouble
Then he would do his Arms after a march,
Or a hard charge, to take a nap of sleep.
Cunning dissembler! How took ELCHEE
His banishment from Court?
As a school-boy
That has plaid treuant, and hears his Master's angry.
There's hopes of him; but the other is quite lost.
WHat's that my FATYMA.
It is a petition
From a poor subject, wronged by a great Lord.
Too strong for him to struggle with at Law,
Nor has he wherewithal to pay for justice.
The case holds in himself, and his  brave Son.
Our justice, FATYMA, shall be given, not sold.
It was wisely done, who ere he be, to send it
•y thy hand, (sweet) of all the dearest to me.
Tic granted.
Heaven will pay the early mercy.
Take you the scroll, BELTAZAR, and see right done.
BUt child thou show thy self as unconcerned
At all the pleasures of the Court, and seem
A discontent.
Alas Sir, how can I
Relish these toys, when my poor Father pines
And raves, mewed up in Prison? Is the daughter
Fit for a Court, and Father, Mother, brother
But for a dungeon?— 
Come, these thoughts will over,
As time and more discretion wins upon thee.
•ts fit thou be as free from the reward
Of his foul treasons, as thou were from them.
He may be yet restored; how ere, his Name,
Though stained with this one blot, shall ever stand
Full and Majestic in great History,
For noble acts yet shall those Histories
And after times boast thee his chiefest Act,
That fame him most. — But which of all the pleasures
That court thee here, dost thou most favour child?
Music; it feeds my melancholy, and
Brings Paradise into my thoughts. OLYMPA
Tells me the soul is only harmony,
And Music built the world.
Come child, within
Thou shalt have some shall please thee.
'Tmust be sad then.
HE was indeed the very soul of war,
The thunderbolt: had TYPAEUS fought like him,
Great JOVE had been his Prisoner.
Heavens! whose ears
Have not his Trumpets tingled in! what fears
In Persia's foes, have his braced Drums awaked!
What enemies face has not his hand besmeared
With blood and glorious dust! what land, what fields
Has not his sword manured with hostile blood!
Whose triumphs have not his deafened! his, heard
To, and beyond (1) Byzantiums walls of fire!
But now, O lost, lost is our hope, our glory,
And fortune of our name, except—
Except!
My Lord, and can yet all the Gods, if they
Should sit in counsel, form a remedy?
Yes, yes, dear ELCHEE, there's a way yet open
To rescue Persia's glory, and our comfort.
O speak it, and be our good Genius.
And it is, my Lord, a way wherein the Love
I bear to you, would have you high and eminent.
Nature and virtue have done their parts in you,
And Art and education bettered both,
The dignities and honours that you hold
Are no more then your birth assigned you to,
Were your parts less. I'd have those scores of merit
You've put upon the age, paid double to you,
But how the course the King now takes, will do it,
Your new disgrace at Court assures you;
So that if justice, honour, or endearments,
Were silent all, the many disobligements
The King has given you, call you loud enough
To th'Princes Party.
I, my Lord, have studied
Not to divide my sovereign from himself,
His interest, and the Princes, I count one,
How ere his anger has now severed them.
And were I once assured in my reason,
That his dis-favour of the Prince were just,
I'd only mourn his fall, as much from Virtue,
As from his honours.
It is but the jealousy
Of's guilty mind, persuades this cruelty
To th'Prince, and to himself, he being his hope.
Good JOVE! what fears, what doubtful apprehensions
Do wicked Actions leave in cruel minds!
His Fathers Ghost, and Brothers haunt him daily,
And MIRZA he thinks, must needs requite the blows
He gave to them. Nor will this humour cease,
But grow upon him still with its fond Nurse,
Old testy age, that's subject in its self,
To fears and doubts, and sees all dangers double.
That's his disease, my Lord, but now the cure?
What, but a hard, and seeming violent one?
Why may'nt you martial men, rally your powers,
Free the brave Prince, secure his hopeful Son,
And then maintain't, and force his frenzy from him?
That looks too like Rebellion.
O success!
" Is a rare paint, that which succeeds is good,
" When the same Action, if it fails, is nought.
Indeed would the young SOFFIE were safe.
To wish it only is but womanish,
Attempt it, and he is. Think but my Lord,
The innocent Babe calls from his prison to us,
And are these hands that never could deserve them,
So soon for fetters? Believe it, DAMOCLES sword
Hung not by a less thread, then the Kings doth
Ore that sweet hope of Persia, one mad fit
Destroys the race and glory of the Empire.
He grows apace, and the old Tyrant knows,
" The children, whose Parents have been wronged,
" Inherit all their hatred, and are dangerous:
What factions then, what numbers of Pretenders
Will not with force assert their fancied Titles?
And shalt thou, fairest Mother Persia, be
Torn by the factious hands of thine own Children?
Forbid it Heaven.
MIRZA'S deserts plead too.
Yes, and that loud: shall I that spared no blood,
No toil, dear quondam Soldiers, to adorn
Your heads with Palm, your memories with fame,
Now pine, and find no courteous hand will knock
My unworthy shackles off? Is Honour, Love,
And Gratitude, all blinded with me too?
Who should begin?
(It works, it works) why you,
Or Lore any body; well begun,
The work's more then half ended. A small force,
And handsome Declaration, will find none
Such Enemies to themselves as to oppose:
Nor do the Princes high deserts, his Sons
Apparent danger, or our Honours call
Louder then our own safeties, they are too
At stake: He whose wild rage could reach a Father,
Brother, Son, and I may say, a Grand-child,
Will not spare us: but you, or I, or any,
May daily feed the monster of his fury.
It is but too probable: like a mad man he'll
Hurl stones at all alike.
And like a mad man
His present state appears, with sorrow, I
See him like one distracted, about to murder
His best friends, and himself; and doth not this
Condition call for help? O let us pity
The Father of our Country, and interpose
Between his fury and his violence
It is Duty, not Rebellion: We will restore him
To's wits again, and then he'll thank us all,
For hindring's making of himself away.
How would the young mad Greek have hugged that servant,
Had hindered him in's drunken frolic, from
Murdering his friend?
Our ABBAS jealousy,
Is no less wild then. ALEXANDER'S wine,
Both perfect madness, and the fit once over,
He'll see his error, and be sorry too.
Then how shall they appear lovely in story,
Firm in the Kings, the Princes Peoples loves,
That like good Angels, saved all that was dear
Mong us, to Gods, to Honour, and the Empire?
An Action no less glorious then is ATLAS,
His bearing up the sinking Globe from ruin.
My Lord, EMANGOLY, is well beloved,
And now enough incensed to make the head
Of the design, twill work his reconcilement
With the King too.
No, no, my Lord, why should you
Thrust from your self so fair a fortune? do it,
And let me serve you in it: your hand, my head,
Our Purses, and our friends together, do it.
Besides, EMANGOLY is too much disgraced,
And men will say his hatred to the King,
And not his love, or to the Prince, or Empire,
Put him in Arms.
They'll say the same of me.
Bear you the name, head both the act and Plot.
(I ne'er meant other (2) good 
Golden, but to ride you.)
I shall have honour enough in serving you.
Well Sir, Isle be no courtier with you then,
But do what JOVE shall envy, and wish his.
You'll hold the second place, Lieutenant General.
Yes.
Then what friends can you oblige to us?
Isle try them all, but MATZOT, young BENEFIAN,
And Stout MOZENDRA, I promise to my self.
Those are sure cards; what banks have you ith'City
Will push out freely to a contribution?
" These public works need many private purses.
Some we shall find.
The beauteous FLORADELLA
Has promised largely, her I have engaged:
We shall proceed the merrier for the Ladies.
We will give them back their gold to buy their silence.
The best way to assure our selves of that,
Is to engage them deep enough; we need them
To work their friends, and to augment our treasure.
" All wars are chargeable, but civil most,
" And we that mean the public good, must not
'Lie heavy on the people. I intend
A guard of horse, my Government of Shires
Will bear it out, thither I have sent SELEVCVS
To govern Larr, and raise three Regiments there,
Of horse one, two of foot. This Citadel
Is mine and that is all that readily
Could give me any trouble; another force
Isle pick up here, the Town and Country swarm
With cashiered soldiers, thirsting for employment.
My Lord, what if I levied in (3) Hircania?
It is fit, call all your friends about you here
To cast your strength up, but avoid all listing.
" Listing is dangerous in secret Plots,
" One paper lost, discovers all; take only
The great ones names, and what they promise, trust to.
We can have no resistance suddenly,
The first must be by foreigners called in,
Nor can the King trust to those mercenaries,
Nor will the Persian like their coming in.
Besides My Lord, our powers may be ready
To be with us, ere they can reach the fron•iers:
How ere they'll hinder the Kings levies there.
Thou art my Oracle of war.
But why
May we not seize the King, and cut the fear
Of all resistance off? the Princes friends
Are ours already, the rest we will find, or make so.
Of that at our next Council, mean time work
Your friends as I will mine; but above all
Provide what money, and what arms you can:
" Who has the gold shall never want the man.
Enough. Farewell my Lord, my good Lord General.
HOw shall I fall in love with mine own parts,
That have so conned all cunning mistique Arts!
On every side have I set wheels a going
Shall work my purpose with their own undoing.
Torches, shall spend themselves to give me light;
Stages, for me to climb by to my heigh•.
Then down go they then my hot credulous Lord,
And then my fine soft wench will I discard.
" The Lovers and the Courtiers Master-piece,
" And the states-mans, dissimulation is;
" High favour and sure friendship to pretend
" To him whose Throat he'll cut, to gain his end:
" This must he do, will rise, and then its best
" To swear most love, when he intends it least.
THis, and much more we will do, to let men see
That we can help as well as they, to save
A sinking State.
And happy are we Madam,
In putting obligation on the present
And future ages. For this act the Prince,
The Princess, SOFFIE; nay the King shall call us
Their Patroness••, that did timely bring
An arm to save them from their hasting ruins.
Children unborn, and Priests not yet begotten
Shall sing our names upon high festivals.
And many a happy Pen shall toil to keep
Our memories as fresh when time himself
Grows old and halts as now our beauties are.
But why sha'nt we improve the debt, the State
Owes us, by enjoying offices, and sitting
In council with the men!
Madam you're happy
In that conceit. Indeed we are framed by nature
With th'same parts of the mind for th'exercise
Of virtue as men be.
And if men boast
Such exellencies, it is reason to think
Those no less excellent of whom they are:
Since timorous Doves, did never yet hatch E•gles;
But men, and beasts, and all the whole creation,
Inherit th'minds and spirits of their Parents.
It is no hard task to pattern in our sex
All excellent things that ever men performed,
Not arts excepted nor that active valour
That lift so many Demi-gods to heaven.
(4) The valiant Amazons are proof enough.
Nor do others fairness take away their force.
True vertu's not obliged to live with beards
Alone, she may choose the smoother edifice.
But the rough part of virtue, skill in arms
I am content to let the men engross.
(4) I have no mind to lose a breast, to wear
A shield the better Yet state offices
And to be Counsellors would become us well.
Our Wits are sharpest, and we fittest made
For Embassies, as having smoothest tongues.
And should our Rhetoric fail, we will but employ
Our looks to plead, and conquer with our eyes.
Besides, the novelties and varieties
We meet ith'state will yield us strange delight.
We will have them both; the Buff and Fur shall be
A new and fashionable dress, and every
Lady appear a PALLAS, with an Aegis
Upon her breast.
This, Madam, and what else
Our Cabinet thoughts can dictate to us shall be
All in our powers.
Plurality of husbands
Would be thought on.
Yes, and Seragl•o's too
For downy, peachy chins: This, and all el•e
If we but ply the work. There's Madam OMAY
Is worth the winning, who has interest in her?
There has been long a league between us, strong
Enough I hope to make her hear reason from me.
She has her share too of ambition, that
Will work.
Ambition! Madam, what are we
Without it? it is necessary as beauty
To a great Lady.
What sounds high in others,
And is pride, is but needful state in us,
And the true knowledge of our selves.
She's rich,
And young and handsome, and you say ambitious;
Then She's well qualified
Handsome, in troth
At first she presents well, but then she loses
Her self presently.
She does indeed—what now.
Madam, my Lord. 
Well, Madam, your great friend
Expects you.
No.
Come, come, deny him, do.
Well, we all know our parts,, and will no• loiter.
The pains will pay it self. —Now whore's my Lord?
HEre, where he would be, Dearest, in thy arms,
The Centre my soul tends to.
Welcome, ah
Welcome hither, as conquest to the soldier.
How do the Ladies take thy proposition?
as their best wishes.
Good, good, ELCHEE too
Has swallowed the hook, and promised his Allies.
I feel the Crown warm on my head already.
My guard is raised, I want but the Kings license
For their attendance; for that plead thou strongly,
Possess him wi•h the need of't for my safety,
This last service having pulled envy on me.
It shall be granted, or I'll lower the dotard
To death, it shall, I'll kiss it out of him.
My better Angel! ah! how poor am I
That there are not more worlds then one, that I
Might cast their crowns into thy lap for this!
Your love my Lord shall set me higher, then if
I rode with HECATE in her ebon Chariot,
Or held the reins of JUNO's yoked Peacocks.
To hold that heart is above all dominion.
HOw stately a thing it is to be a Queen!
O that I now could but look into Heaven,
To see how our great sister IUNO shakes
Her Sceptre ore the world, and learn her carriage!
We now must speak in the plural number CLOE,
Dost thou not see new Majesty spring in us,
And all our looks speak Queen?
Madam, I would
Fortune had been as free to you as nature
Then had that honour long ago rewarded
That beauty which did ever merit it.
CLOE, bestow thy wishes on the needy.
Fortune has humbled her self to us, and
Asked pardon for so long keeping our right
From our possession, a fault she'll now amend,
And be our servant ever. Go, provide
State Ornaments, and regal Robes for us,
Jewels will cost whole Provinces to purchase,
And yet receive new lustre from our wearing.
Hast any sisters, friends or kinswomen?
Prefer them to us, thou shalt have the favour
To appoint our maids of honour, and a set
Of servants for us, against our Coronation. —
Dull and insensible! what, did thou meet
Thy Mothers Ghost this morning fasting, that
Thou starest so! do not our eyes proclaim it?
And all our steps say, they are towards a Throne?—
The poverty of thy soul!—
She's mad, and raves!)
Have we not taken care for all events
That can betide us? Have not we removed
All that stood stiff, and many in our way?
Goes not the levy's on? flow not friends to us?
Is not the Castle ours, and Shires too?
Is not all ours? Or shall be, when I've given
Th'old Dotard King his passport in a kiss
To the other worcester•d; thither a Dag, or draught,
Shall send the Prince, and a Plumb SOFFIE,
Who then is Emperor, wench, but MAHOME•
His head has laid it, and his hand shall act it,
His ready Army shall crush all gain-sayers.
Perhaps you too.)
What mutter you? me too!
O how her Plumes would fall now, should I tell her 
What I ore-heard!)
What is it you mumble, Gossip?
Madam, you'll pardon me, at your last meeting
But one, with my Lord MAHOMET, I was curious
To listen, and ore-heard some doubtful words,
As if he'd only serve his turn of you.
Pish, pish, He knew you listened, therefore spoke so,
If so he spoke, to try my confidence
Perhaps, or mock your curiosity.
No, well, he knows he never can requite
My love with a less dowry then the Empire;
I have deserved it of him, and i'll never
Be jealous of his love.
What toys doth fancy 
Suggest to us, in favour of our selves!
Well, I had best comply.)—Indeed perhaps
His great wit played with me; but could he see me?
Yes, my self saw you.
Then it was so: but yet
Me thought the manner spoke him serious.
But sure the Army do's not mean his rule,
But to restore the Prince.
Tush, Soldiers know not
Their own intents, it is as the General pleases,
Who has an Army up, and a strong Purse
May work them easily unto any thing:
It is done, it is done, my CLOE,— it is high time
For us to practice Queen-ship; thus do we
Indulge our hand, our trusty maid of honour.
May it please your Majesty, then  must I begin
To know my self, and set a higher price
Upon my beauty.
It is indeed a virtue,
To prize our selves enough—CLOE, as we pass,
Bear up our train—so -Not so near our Grace.
High ho! my Heart! I shall have a sweet place.
O The seven Bandogs are let loose again
Upon me! HERCULES! HERCULES! can not hear!
Prithee lend me thy club — the Lubber's sore
Wed's labours still, and sleeps, and hears me not.
Why let you him come out thus?
Alas Madam,
He broke through's all, and calls us all his Hangmen.
See! Lightning flashes from their eyes.
Hark, Madam.
Every one of them is a match for CYCLOPS,
Yet will I charge them all alone.—O —O.
O.
Help! help!
Page, hold him from violence.
Th'hast hit me right TIE∣PHAEUS, thou hast Centaur.
O heavens! if there be any powers that pity
The miseries of their Creature•s, look down on him;
The fight's enough to move a heavenly nature.
So MIMAS, hold PORPHYRIO, strike no more,
I am TYPHAEUS Prisoner.
Lay not hands
Upon him, keep him but from farther hurt.
CHARON! oh, CHARON!—
Nay my Lord.
Come CHARON,
Quick, sirrah, Sculler, row me to Elyz•um.
Alas! the frenzies high talk not much to him.
But now ha'nt I a halfe-penny for the waftage,
No matter though, I'll snatch the slaves Oar from him,
And if he grumbles, knock his brains out with it,
And CERBERVS his too, if the Cur snarls at me —
So— I am pas't without a Sop— now which
Of all my friends shall I first meet?
O Gods!
Give me more ease, or else more punishment,
For I with this can neither die nor live.
Who's that?— That's PROSERPINE be∣wailing of
Her Rape, the silly wench would fine be with
Her Mother again.
O make me either happy
Again, or wretched till you can no more!
It is so, tic she— she's warm, and  sof• as air.
Sweet PROSERPINE.
Madam, apply your self
A little to his passion.
Beauteous Queen
O'th'under world, do'nt men when they come hither,
Though blind above, have here their eyes restored?
Alas! I cannot flatter his wild frenzy.
Pray Madam seem to be what he conceits you.
What art thou, GANYMED? and if thou be,
Good yellow-tressed Boy, entreat thy Master,
When next he thunders, to bestow a bolt
On ABBAS head, twill not be cast away,
The man deserves it; —but that plague's too quick,
Desire him rather, send him (5) PHINEVS, Harpies,
He merits them as much as the Arcadian,
He've put out his Sons eyes too: hear small skinker?
Yes, and when next I wait, I'll do the errand.
He wants no Furies, he has all in's breast.
Ho art thou a Fury? good TISIPHONE
Get thee to Persia then, and take thy sister
ERINNYS with thee and torment the Tyrant.
Well sir, he shall not want for torments.
Hark yet,
Prithee new wire thy whip before thou goosed,
And tie more knots on it, take fresh Snakes too with thee;
He is my Father, I'd have him want nothing.
(6) May all the Scorpions of Cushan sting thee.
Ah! cruel Father!
First TISIPHONE,
Lead me to TANTALVS, I'd fine talk with him.
Why TANTALVS?
Because he killed his Son too,
I'd see if's punishment be great enough,
Then I'll Petition PLVTO, my hard Father,
May have the same.
O that the Comparison
Held whole in thee! He murdered his PELOPS,
To entertain the Gods but ABBAS thee
To feast the furies of his frantic mind:
To PELOPS too, the yellow Goddess gave,
A whiter shoulder for his own she tasted,
And with new better life requited him.
O that some Deity would thine eyes restore,
Or close up mine!
Ho! that's PROSERPINA,
She's in love with me, and condoles me too,
But I'll not wrong my NYMPHADORA, though
PROSERPINA, whore's (7) my Uncle, and (7) my Grandsire
Two Persian Princes, murdered by their Son,
And brother? I'd fine speak with them, and sit
Comparing fortunes with them.
O they are
Bathing themselves in bliss, in their sweet Grove.
And shall I be there too, CERES bright daugh∣la?
Let me sweet Empress.
Yes, if you will rest
Your head here in my lap, and there lie still.
But will not PLVTO then be jealous of me?
No.
Come then— (8) Now tell me more of Para∣dise.
There'midst the fragrant flowre-enammell'd fields,
Do golden Palaces their shining heads
Erect, with richest Arras each one floored,
Crystalline Rivers flow to moat them round,
For state, not strength, and with their wanton mur∣murs,
Lull every sense, and make soft sleep yet softer;
Their banks are fringed with Trees of Gold, that feast
With goodly forms the eye, with fruits the taste;
Fruits that pluck't ne'er so oft, straight spring again,
So the rich boughs still with like mettle shine
Under whose fragrant shades they spend their course
Of happy time with amorous Virgins, who
Regard alone their own particular loves,
Not such as tyred out in the world a life,
But there created for it, with best form,
(9) Cows eyes, and beauteous as the Hyacinth!
Still their Virginities return, and still
Their beauties flourish as their Paradise,
For ever young, yet ripe and fresh; full blown,
Yet always free from natural pollutions,
Still as in their third lustre, men ith'fixt.
Their Boys of divine feature minister
To them, and proffer hourly to their choices,
The most delicious Viands, Drinks, and Voices.
But when, but when, dear Queen of darkness, shall I
Inherit all this bliss?
When thou art fit for it.
And how shall I make my self fit?
By sleep.
Sleep will much purge thee from thy earthy humours.
Sweet PROSERPINE, there is in Persia,
The fairest Lady that ere blessed the Earth,
Sweet NYMPHADORA, thou must needs have heard
Of her, many worthy Hero's have
Dyed for her love; one frown (if such a face
Can frown) of hers, have given a hundred Princes
Their Passport hither: did ne'er hear them sit
And sigh her name? or see it carved in the rind
Of some fair Tree?
Yes. O that love should last
Longer then reason!
She PROSERPINA,
Will be with you ere long the noble heart
Has taken such a grief, for her wronged MIRZA,
It can't last long unbroke, but when she comes,
Let not thy PLUTO see her, lest he falls
In love with her and so turn thee away,
He will PROSERPINA, let him not see her.
Well then,—he sha'nt.
You talk of women too,
That we shall have in Paradise; when she comes
Let me have her, she was mine own above,
And I'll not change her for all natures store.
Admired constancy! sleep, and you shall.
Boy, GANYMED, give me a draught of Lethe
To make me sleep,—wilt not?—I'll try without it.
Alas! what noise is that?— 
Look IFFIDA.
Madam, here comes my Lord EMANGOLY,
And three or four with him.
He were welcome,
If's coming now could be without disturbance.
Ho! ho! who's that? do's. PLUTO come?
No, no,
Lie still.
We'd best retire.
No, join your help
With me to calm his fury.
O that my self
Had bit my unhappy tongue from th'panting to•
And spit it in the Tyrants face, which falling
Had (trembling) murmured curses at hs foot,
When I gave counsel to my Lord to obey
His cruel message.
O who ever yet
Saw the returning steps oth'credulous beasts,
That visited the counterfeit sick Lion?
And yet, O ABBAS, what fierce ravenous Lion
Did ever Lib•a's fiery womb produce,
Or what fell Tiger, thy Hyrcania,
Of so prodigious cruelty, as thou art?
Lions are tame as Lambs, and Tigers mild
As frisking kids, to that outrageous monster.
There is no perilous desert but his breast,
Where teeth and armed fangs do tear the strong
And treacherous toils t'insnare the innocent,
Are ever ready set.
O th'cruelty
Of hate, disguised like love!
And how, O Gods,
Is virtue dear to you, if thus the Serpent
Of Treason, be permitted to turn Dove,
To flatter it, by unsmelt means to ruin!
I knew on earth a voice like that, —sure it is
My good EMANGOLY's —and is he here too?
Here, my deer Lord; but O that I had been
Under the earth, when my unlucky judgment
Advised you hither.
O you've spoiled all my Lord.
Why are we still ith'upper world? I thought
I'd past the ford.—Cheats! cheats! and fantasies!
Quick then, EMANGOLY, go muster all
Our force, and see them paid, I'll march to morrow,
And never make a halt till I have kicked
Bizant•um's self to dust. (10) Let an Iron Cage
Be made to carry with us, for proud MORA•.
I'll try yet if his stomach be as stout
As BAJAZET'S; but line it all with furs,
To hinder him from the pleasure of a death.
Would he but cool with sleep his high distem∣per,
All these wild thoughts would vanish with his frenzy.
Repose Sir till the Army needs your conduct.
Yes, my dear Lord, restore thy self again
Unto my care, and make my lap thy pillow.
I will, my sweet, and ne'er would rise from hence,
Did not dear honour call as loud as thunder,
Such is my love to thee, yet could I not
Love thee so much, loved I not honour more.
IFFIDA call for music, and a song,
Gentle and soft, as Notes of dying Swans,
To woo him into slumbers.
That will charm him.
The Turks already made thy Prisoner, when
I next return my self to thy soft breast,
His head's a present for thee.
Hark! my Lord, 
How gentle rest courts thee in her best language.
HE's great that masters his own soul,
As he whose nod shakes either Pole.
Not he that Kings in chains can bring,
But that subdues himselfe's a King.
That's ever in himself at home,
And ne'er lets his Queen Reason roam,
On whom all passions waiting stand,
As hand-maids on their Ladies hand.
He ore himself triumphing first,
Dares chance and envy doe their worst;
And keeping still his own even height,
Fall Fortune heavy, fall she light,
He'll never make to th'standers by
Too low a moan, or haughty cry;
But wisely can her fawning slight,
And then as bravely scorn her spite.
Who can deny that such a one
Possesses all things, or wants none?
And which oth'two would you wish first
Still to have drink, or ne'er to thirst?
Excellent morality! O the vast extent
Of the Kingdom of a wiseman! Such a mind
Can sleep secure when th'brine kisses the Moon,
And thank the courteous storm for rocking him.
Come my good Lord METHICULI, you and I
Will sit, and tell sad stories; pray begin.
Ah me! what story can thou hear can vie
For sadness with our own? run ore the Roll
Of Tragedies, and write but NYMPHADORA
And MIRZA (for let's ne'er be parted more)
And that's the sum of all that grief can do.
But my Lord SOFFIE, I've a plot to free you.
Speak it, and be my Deity.
And once out,
I can secure you, where not all the force
The Tyrant, or the world can make shall reach you.
But how shall I get out?
Your sister, Sir,
Has won much on your grandsires best affections,
So that if he love ought that's good, it is hers:
And she comes often here to pay her duty
To her dear Father, (O too much wronged Father!)
Nay, pray, no circumstance, she comes, what then?
I'd have your grace change clothes with her, and so
You veiled, may easily pass the guards, and come
Where I'll receive you.
How shall she get out
Again?
Sir, twill be quickly known to the Tyrant,
Who loves her so, he'll not be long without her,
He'll send for her, and with a chiding pass it.
But wilt not turn his rage on my dear Mother.
He'll not think this plot only FAT•MA's
And mine, but hers.
I'd suffer for thy good
All th'Tyrant now can do, the wasp has stung
Me already, and disarmed himself: if rest
Restores the Princes senses, we will advise
With him about it—How sweet security
He now enjoys! O pleasant dreams! slide softly
Into him, that he takes no wounds from you.
Present his silent thoughts with purling streams
And hushing winds, such as perfume the morn.
Then mildly as thou seized him gentle Goddess,
Resign him perfect: so what was the gift
Of relenting heaven, we will ascribe to thee.
Ah! where• am I?
He wakes.
Pray heaven to health.
Here my deer Lord, In thy sad spouses lap,
Yet compassed with a ring of t•y best friends.
That Ring is sorrows Crown,—and can it be
That any will be friends to wretchedness?
High mounted in the Courts and Armies head,
The Sun had not more Atoms dancing in
His beams, then I had followers in mine.
But even from him eclipsed, all shadows vanish,
And shall mine then continue?
These are such
As virtue, not your fortune, made your friends,
And will though fortune fails, continue such,
Since your high virtue cannot ever leave you.
If we loved and obeyed you, when you stood
In power, both to do us good and honour,
Which then we never could requite unto you,
We ought to publish now our gratefulness,
When the world sees no hopes induce us to it.
There gratitude spoke in her Angels voice.
We have lost in you a Prince for to defend us,
A Father to care for us, a Companion
In all our joys, a Friend in all our wants;
And if we owe to your sad memory
The pious duty of our love and honour,
Shall we not pay them to your self yet living?
Not living, say, but buried alive.
Treasure ith'mind, is treasure still, though trod∣den.
Should we desert you now, it would basely prove
We never loved your highness, but your fortune.
Rather, we never loved his Grace, but High∣ness.
Like vermin that suck of the living blood,
But leave the body soon as life.
The'more Love
We owed you, the more should we show our hate
To the accursed Author of our loss.
Let's rouse revenge, and arm all her dire hands
With Thunder, to discharge upon the Tyrant.
Act, act, brave friends, and leave complaints to women;
Twill be more honourable for my Tomb
To be sprinkled with my murderers blood,
Then with the tears of you my constant friends.
Now have I time to shed some,  but in private.
" They truly mourn, that mourn without a witness.
O Let me not lie long in this sad durance
This justice to the world, This duty to
Our injured Prince, This honour to our selves,
And terror to our foes, do strongly plead for.
This will restore our glories lost, and put
A mussel upon Tyrannies black jaws.
How shall we effect it?
How? and have not you
The Power of the sword, the Soldiery
Alas! not we, my Lord, we're all cashiered.
Your highness was no sooner cheated from us,
And decoyed up to Court, to be undone,
But BELTAZAR comes down strong in commission,
To be my Colleague, that is, my superior.
We vexed at our injuries, and loss
Of you, threw up all diligence, and quited
Counsel or action, when the minion showed
Power to clap a peace up, which was quickly
Done, on conditions fit for slaves, not soldiers;
The Army all disbanded, I called up,
Met with Arrest and banishment from Court.
Thus is their wrong secured by our weakness.
Shall we then tamely suffer? my blind self
Will grope out Vengeance yet, and in deep makes
•ncize it on the Tyrants own dull head.
O foolishness of Tyranny! that the King
Should arm his foes, and thirst his own undoing!
He studies evil, and seems lost to all goodness,
But for his love to your sweet FATYMA.
And loves he her? can vice then affect virtue?
Sir, her he doth embrace with all the powers
Of a doting soul.
Has her still in his eye,
Nor ere seems pleased with ought but what she does.
He talks of marrying her to the King of Arabs.
Soft, I've a better match for her in store.
We met his Proclamation as we came
Stuffed with invectives against your Grace and us
Your Highness grew too great, wee too much loved you,
Therefore the King must fear, yea, and remove you.
(11) My treachery to the English it alledg's
That helped me to take Ormus, when it is known
Themselves first broke conditions, and enjoy
Still Privileges for their service there.
This is (12) the Costermonger ALLY-REG,
For his smooth tongue must the old King go mad
And dote upon his foes, when there is never
A Jewel in's Crown but is enamelled
Both with your Highnesses brave blood and mine.
I that so oft displayed his bloody colours
•the martial field, and bearded his proud foes,
• that have so enlarged his Territories,
And stretched his line beyond (13) the Caspian Sea,
•14) Drive•n the Mogul into his Candahor,
To stand and see me wast his other lands.
(15) Made Balsora the Arabians utmost bound,
And (16) bounded the Tartar with the Hyrcanian Ocean.
(17) I that checked CYCALA'S insulting Progress,
Torturing the George•ans, our Confederates
With eighty thousand men, I that first chased
His bulky Army to the A•minion bounds,
Then forced him fight, and gave my self the pleasure
To paddle in the blood of thirty thou•and •urkes:
I that did still pursue that flying General
Into I•eria, and slaughtered all
The Turkish Garrisons in Testis, Tauris,
Cazbeen and Babylo• (17) that year regaining
No less from ACHMAT to ungrateful ABBA•
Then our TAMAS lost to their SOLYMAN.
(17) I that since that, beat that stout CYCALA
Oft as he could recruit, till the Foe vowed
Never to follow more that luckless Chieftain,
Must now be the Martyr of the Insolence
Of slaves, and a besotted Tyrants wrath.
(18) I that gave Ormus sceptre to his hand,
(18) And brought her Captive King to live upon
His slender Pension of five Marks a day.
(19) I that subdued Larrs sandy Kingdom for him,
Mangre her wall of Rock, am now accused
By him for killing her King treacherously,
When he himself angry I gave him quarter
Commanded it: I now must tire out
My life in exile, or, as bad, disgrace.
And (20) I that won the Realm of Larry Jo•
Am taxed with a perfidious Victory,
When I had died, had I returned without it.
Why mur•ur subjects when his Son escapes no•
And how could I hope other, when his Natu••
Thirsts after blood as food! O when so many
Innocent subjects fell, they warned me.
What signified (21) his wrong to the poor Chr•stians,
(22) His murdering of his Ambassador
To the ••rk as he'd kill all can't work his ends.
(23) His Treachery to the Magician, set him
On work, then hang him up for conjuring.
(24) His murder of the sleeping Traveller,
Base•se his pampered horse but startled at him.
(25) His coupling of the soldiers lustful wife
To an Asinego.
(26) His cutting a Clerks hand off
But for not writing fair. (27) His wrath to the two
Pilfering Soldiers, more for their rags then theft.
But above all, (28) his ore-ambitious murder
Of his brave Father, and far braver Brother.
His Torture, Poisons, strangling with bow∣strings;
(29) Men eating Dogs, and Arts of Tyranny
Proclaim his nature, that it must be glut•ed
With blo•d, and why not ours, since it is best?
What better promises (30) his irreligion,
In taking needless Journeys still in Lent
To avoid fasting, under pretence of Travel?
Our misery is his inconstancy
Like the weather about the Equinoctial,
Now a quiet breath, and gentle gale, and then
A storm so fierce, a ship can feel no helm?
(31) Thus he'll forbid and tolerate the same thing
Oft in one year, not as his interest,
But as his variable humour sways him.
Go my EMANGOLY, take my bank at Or∣mus,
Rally with it a Troop of your old Soldiers,
And give me liberty: take my SOFFIE
Into your care, and make him safe in private.
Sir, here's a way propounded for my freedom,
To change clothes with my Sister FATYMA,
And go like her out hence.
Let it be done.
Be ready to receive him, and be to him
As much a Father as thou 'hast friend to me.
So Heaven be mine, as I his faithful friend.
It is no small benefit that this rough fortune
Discovers yet my friends, severs the doubtful
From the assured, for Prosperity
At her departure took away with her
Those that were her's, and left me still mine own.
O at how vast a rate would I have bought
This fair discovery before my fall!
And when I thought my self most fortunate!
If Heaven again will my lost state restore
And wealth, i'll use them better then before!
If not, my soul not at the loss ripens,
Having found friends, a greater wealth th•n Mines.
LAdy, but that no fault or disrespect
In me to your sweet Beauties merit it,
I should afflict my self to see your Countenance
Estranged thus to your best servant.
Sir,
I know no fault, nor is my countenance changed
But with my state, due gravity increased,
As how, dear Lady, since I left the Court
Is our state changed? I hope the cloud upon
My Lord shall not obscure me?
No, but you
Think then I am the same you left me?
Yes
Lady, I see no change, your lip, your eye
Has the same lustre, the same tincture on it.
If there be any change, it is for the better.
Better, I know that marry; yes my hopes,
Nay certainties, are higher then before.
And shall my thoughts then bear no correspondence?
Is it no more to be chief Maid of Honour
To the Empress of Persia, then woman to
My Lady FLORADELLA?
(Sure she's mad!)
Empress! we have none.
But we shall have soon.
Follow me in, and I'll unriddle to you.
Since we are one, the secret is safe still,
And were the fortune mine, it should be yours.
Love and amazement! what will this produce?
It is granted, pretty heart, they all shall have
Their just desires, and I truly wish
I could as safely give them liberty
As necessaries in their just restraint.
FARRABAN, see your royal Prisoners have
What they desire, fit for their condition.
Wait my fair granchild to them.
Sir, my thanks.
Come FARRABAN
Madam, your humble Servant.
O Strength of virtue! how dost thou shine forth
In this sweet Innocent! how dutiful,
How careful, how solicitous is she
For her Parents! and shall not nature then
As well descend, as ascend? am not I
As well his father, as she his daughter? but
Here's she will turn these thoughts another way.
INtrude not I upon your privacies?
No, my best love, for what is more impor∣tant
Then thy embrace? and what affair shall not
Vanish at thy approach, as mists at days?
But I see business in thy face; come speak it.
Though hither chiefly, love and duty brought me,
Which puts me strongly forward to your pleasure,
I have indeed somewhat to ask your Grace,
It is for your servant MAHOMET, his last ser∣vice—
Has rendered him most odious and envied.
The factious threaten in private, and in public
Beard him to's face.
There's lightning in his eyes
Shall blast all his maligners.
They are great,
Strong, and increased much by th'cast Officers,
Most now in Town, all of the Princes faction,
So that without a guard he can't with safety
Attend your person, or follow your affairs
Which ask his public presence: and you know
How much your service needs him.
He shall have part of our guards assigned him.
(Those can't we 
Trust) that your state permits not—see himself.
COme MAHOMET, what need had thou t'em∣ploy
Any tongue but thine own in thy just suit?
Thou moist do more with me, my MAHOMET, raise
For thy security, what guards thou please.
I willingly could have spared this needless state,
Could I securely attend your service:
But though armed with my innocence, I fear not
JOVES Thunder-bolts yet, "Wise prevention
"Is the first point of wisdom in a Peer.
Sir, here is a commission, please you hear
It read, and sign it?
Give me it, MAHOMET,
We will sign it without reading, we dare trust thee,
Farther then this.
Your Highness may.
We know it.
Dear, thou know when to  meet at Madam OMAY's.
The consultation's there, you had the watchword?
I know the time, and will not loiter, dearest.
Since it is for thee I work.
And I for thee.
A Masque attends me, thou shalt sweet par∣take it:
Thou MAHOMET hast something else to do.
YEs, I have that to do, shall undo you,
I err, it is done not Heaven can hinder it.
But should th'whole Machine of the design crack, which
Would more amaze the world then brutish thunder,
The pleasure I have given my self to see
To what a height I've wound this strumpets soul,
Would almost pay my pains: How sure she makes
Her self, of what I never mean her fortune!
Then when I rise fresh in my summer glory,
And throw her off, like a course robe I wore,
Only to shield me from my colder winter.
Who will not say, I cunnings Master am,
That can deceive, and that in their own game,
Greatest deceivers when they me shall know
Out-cheat a woman, and a strumpet too.
AM I awake! or do I live! what torrent
Of evils have over spread thee Persia?
Is justice crippled? and the furies all
Let loose to act their Gambols in the world?
Dire secret of the direst Treason! how
It swells within me till I be delivered
Of it at my Lords ear! He happily
May stop its course: then was my love well placed
To sift out this; and though I die this night,
I've lived to be most happy, and the ages
To come shall pay thanks to my memory.
BLinded! imprisoned! pining here for want
Of what each debauched Ruffian spends in riot!
And by command of my own Tyrant Father!
A proper Patrimony! If the Turk
Had used me thus, my fall had been with honour,
And heart held up with hope, whilst I had had
A Father to command Revenge•, and friends
To act it home: But when those friends are thus
Fettered, disgraced, and torn from my assistance,
And nature too turned backward in my Father,
What have I left me, but to curse my stars?
Stars! ignes fatu! glittering Meteors!
That made a show of greatness, and in snuff
Now loose their glimmering false light, and stink!
Unnatural Monster! have I left so oft
For thee, and for thy safety, the embrace
Of my fair Princely spouse? abandoned
My self to all the sufferings and hazards
Of bitter and long war, to have this Triumph?
O that I could relieve my soul with vengeance!
In my last sleep I saw the wandering Ghosts
Of my great Uncle, and wronged Grandfather
Squalid and pale, attended with an Army
Of murdered spirits, all my Fathers crimes,
Calling loud to me for revenge, revenge,
Both for the love I bear them, and my self.
In•h' head of these gnashing her teeth with ire
Came frowning NEMESIS, offering a whip
Of folded snakes to my impartial hand.
My solo's now like a boisterous working Sea
Swelling in billows for disdain of wrongs,
And tumbling to and fro from Bay to Bay,
Nothing can calm it but full wrought Revenge.
Stern Goddess! I adore, and give my self
To thy dispose. O point me but a way
To work thy ends and mine! My arm is short
And shackled thus with Irons, I can't reach
The Tyrants heart, how shall I serve thee then?
When strait she calls to me with bended brows,
Reach him in's Favourites:alas! ALLYBEG
Is strong in the Courts and Tyrants affections,
But he has Marble walls, and Iron bars
T'ween him, and me. But FATYMA comes to thee,
She sai•s: and she's the Idol of his soul,
Rob him of her. Shall I through my own sides
Wound him? and to deprive him of a Grandchild,
Tear from my self a daughter, no less dear
And dutiful to me, then she's to him?
But I am great with child of indignation
And cannot be delivered but by vengeance,
And no revenge but this is in my reach.
I shall but send her to the pleasant Groves,
Give her at once Heaven and the Tyrant Hell,
Hell in his thoughts, Hell in his Conscience,
And that same Hell of his is Heaven to me.
It is decreed: She dies to make him do so.
O sweet revenge! how I thirst now for blood,
And burn more then I lately did for drink,
In my wild fever hottest fit? —who waits there?
Called you my Lord?
Yes child, is FATYMA come.
Not yet Sir,
SOFFIE, art thou prepared
For freedom when she comes.
Sir, as you please.
yes, thou shalt go to Liberty, though I
Repent thy absence.—O, my great resolve!
If I must fall, I'll pull down Persia with me,
And have no lesser Monument then an Empire.
And when the art free, and in EMANGO∣LY'S care
Think of the restraint thy Parents here endure,
And seek with all discreet care to redress it.
I shall not rest till then.
Here's FATYMA.
COme child.
Fate is not yet all cruelty.
What's this I see child in thy face of mirth?
Madam, I have got Licence of the King
For all you can desire but Liberty.
And without that what can we here desire
Worth satisfying?—Come hither FATYMA,
Stand here between my knees.—(Sweet  innocent!
Ah! that I could but now forget all Father,
Or else be like mine own, and leave all goodness!)
Sweet child, art thou contented to stay here,
And let thy Brother'scape in thy attire?
Most willing Sir.
Thy Grandsire will not let
Thee lie here long in misery like us.
Would I might still stay here to wait on you,
I'd rather so.—My Lord METHICULI
Is at the Castle gate waiting for some body.
That is for me.
Come Brother let's change clothes.
Stay FATYMA, suppose thy Grandfather,
Why say I so? thy Fathers Murderer,
Should now grow angry with thee for this change,
How wilt thou bear his wrath? child, can thou die?
Yes Sir, if you will have me; to die and sleep
They say is one and after Death we wake
In a fresh Paradise where joys abound.
All joys are there, there once, for all the world
Thou would not be a minute here again.
But Sir, shall I not want your Presence there?
And my dear Mothers? and my Princely Brothers?
I love you better then all joys beside.
Pretty ignorance! thou goosed but before,
Wee soon will follow thee. In the mean time,
There shalt thou meet thy Uncle and great Grandsire,
They will make much of thee, and show thee all
The glories there, the green and fragrant fields,
Ripe fruits that ne'er decay. Soft melting songs
And Carols of the Golden-feather'd birds
Shall lull thee asleep: then shalt thou wake again
To see the Nymphs and Virgins dance about
The silver Rivers, they shall take thee in,
And make thee Mistress of their sprightly Revels.
Would I were there, if you would follow, but
I'll not be there without your company.
I'll follow thee sweet heart, when I have got
Revenge enough upon the doting Tyrant:
Mean while— (ONEMESIS• see! I obey thee!
Act thou my shaking hands, and be my Goddess.)
Go thou before me, and prepare my way.—
O Heavens!
O Gods! what fury's this!
My Lord, my Lord, it is
FATYMA you kill.
I therefore kill her because FATYMA.
She could not die more innocent, nor I
Get better vengeance on the Tyrants head
Lie thee there till another comes.—
O— O— 
Ah me! sweet babe! is all the world turned Monster?
Ah! my dear Sister!
SOFFIE, come hither,
No?—
Fly dear SOFFIE.
Fly, fly, my Lord
Come hither• or be wretched. 
O my Lord,
Why will you wrong your virtue thus to murder
These pieces of your self?
Because the Tyrant
Loves them and loved he me I'd kill my self too,
But since he doth not, I will live to spigh• him.
The'world too little to satiate my revenge.
Page! Guard op, op, O op the doors and save me,
RUn down, sir, run that way.—Ho•roar and Furies!
Take you all.—dogs! wher's SOFFIE?
Escaped
From your wild rage,
My curse shall overtake him.
We'd best bind him.
Hold gently, gently, sir.
Ah! the sweet soul is fled, fled,  never, never,
O never to return.
Ah. sweetest Mistress!
Then carry her to my Father as my Presen•,
'Twil make my peace with him, he'll love me now
For doing this Act, it is so like his own.
Twill make all good men—
Pray sir speak not to him.
Look down, look down great Uncles Ghost, and see
Where ABBAS Jewel lies! (32) the sight will give thee
A riper joy then thou did feel, when thy
Dread hand struck off CARAEMIT's proud head.
It is I that must revenge my self and you.
Come Page, attend me to my Dungeon,
There will I boast my parcel Vengeance,
And study more, and ruin the whole Creation
But I will make the Tyrant hang himself.
Good Heavens! how rage Bears men out of them∣selves.
Bring in the precious body IFFIDA,
I cannot yet bewail her fate nor mine,
Too great for words is my vast misery:
" Small Griefs make men lament, Great stupefy.
O My good good Lord! the saddest accident!
My Father has killed with his own hands my Sister,
The Castle is all in an uproar at it,
In which I escaped, else he had killed me too.
Thank Heaven you have so- come my Lord, this is
No place for talk, quick, let us hast away.
Fast as you please my honoured Lord, &amp; whither
WHat horrors seize me! that the world should thus
Be all abandoned to the furies envy!
Sure this is but to cheat us!
No my Lord,
Though CLOE told it with such confidence,
The horror was not able to persuade me,
Till first I ran to OMAY'S Garden House;
There the Conspirators are all to meet,
The house preparing and the entertainment.
Dire discoveries! VASCO, this you'll swear,
And with your blood maintain?
I will sir.
Come then,
Though banished, I'll venture to the King,
And break his hasty order for his good.
How happy art thou to discover this?
Thou shalt be Persia's Genius, she shall pay
Devotions to thee: and how blessed am I
To be an instrument to save my Country!
O Heaven! how bounteous art thou to mankind!
When we rush on to ruin, mad, and blind,
Thou cost's a bit upon our furious hast,
To curb us for our good, and from our wast
Preserve us against our wills! Whence is it, whence
That the world stands but from thy providence,
Truth-loving JOVE? Thou wilt not suffer wrong,
However great, to go unpunished long;
Or although long to us, and to sense past
All hope, yet full-paid vengeance comes at last.
" Thy certain Justice ever ready stands,
" And though she 'has leaden feet, she 'has Iron hands.
A Passion stronger then the rest
No more call love,
Since dire revenge in a wronged breast
More strong doth prove.
She breaks all bands for her desire,
Blood is her food,
She treads down all things in her ire,
Though just or good.
Ore love it self she triumphed hath,
Oft having forced
Fierce hands in the dear blood to bath
Which they loved most.
The fierce Odrysian Queen to take
Revenge upon
Her husband, for her sisters sake,
Butchered her son.
As to the wood a Tigress wild
A Fawn doth trail:
She dragged to a close room the child.
Where nought avail
His tears, his banishments, or both
To calm her blood,
Revenge stood by gnashing her teeth,
Expecting food.
O rage of women! though the boy
To her bosom clung,
She him (nor turned her face away)
Stabbed as he hung.
He kis't, she stabbed O dire reward
His kisses got!
The pavements blushed with blood besmeared
Though she did not.
This proves not she her sister prized
Before her Boy,
But that all are by rage despised
For cruel joy.
And that revenge might ore men too
Her Triumphs see,
We have a Father late did doe
As much as she.
A Father, by his held in thrall,
His daughter killed
Because her the Grandsire above all
Things precious held.
Since his revenge could reach no more
O rages sway!
The Jewel of this soul he tore
From him away:
Careless, so him, himself to strike,
Hope flattered so,
What that to PROGNE's, this the like
To his Sire would doe.
Go innocent Princess, Martyr go
Of Rage and Fate,
And in thy checkered Grove below,
Embrace thy Mate.
ITYS and FATYMA there shall cling
Into a pair,
Him sweetest birds shall ever sing,
And MUSES her.
Impute not thou the crime, O JOVE,
And breach of Laws
To the Actor, but to them that gave
The cruel cause.
GRief and Horror seize on all,
From the Suns rise to his fall.
But in in sighs no breath be spent,
No voice heard but to lament,
In each face the cause is read,
FATYMA and Beauty's dead.
SOL, disturb not sorrows night
She gone, none deserves thy light.
And ther's none now whose eye may
Bright as hers did, gild thy Ray.
Birds, that did your songs forbear,
Hers with more delight to hear,
And did still expecting stand
Notes from her voice, meat her hand,
You again may sing alone,
You'll be heard now she is gone.
To her name your voices set,
And ne'er sing a note but that.
Flower•, droop your leaves and wither,
You no more her hand shall gather.
Wither, wither, for there's none
Worth a Garland, she being gone.
Water Nymphs, that in a maze
Oft have stopped your sports to gaze
At her sitting on your banks,
Or else tripping ore their cranks,
In a Dance, with odorous feet,
And a grace as VENUS sweet,
Weep her loss: weep, more you'll ne'er
See your selves out-done by her.
Weep till you thaw: melting, mourn,
Till into your streams you turn.
Winds, let sighs henceforth consume ye,
Her breath shall no more perfume ye.
Be astonished thou O Earth,
Thou hast lost thy fairest birth.
See! see! all the charm obey!
Into night is shrunk the day.
The Sun mourns, or, to judge right
He wants her to give him light.
Birds have learnt her name, and now
Hark! they sing't on every bough.
Of the flowers some decay,
Others wither quite away,
Or if any beauty have
Still, they keep it for her grave.
Grief has turned the Primrose pale,
Lilies droop, and all bewail:
Down the Violet hangs her head,
All the Roses tears have shed;
Cups full have each Daffodil:
Down along the cheeks they trill
Of the rest, and trembling there
Hang, true Pearls for sorrows wear.
Fountains weep, winds sigh her fall:
Earth is stupefied withal.
Only Gods from grief refrain,
Since earths loss is Heavens gain.
For since she arrived at Heaven,
Now the Graces number's even.
No more let bold Philosophers deny
That Virtues are from Nature since here •ies
An heap of Beauties, with more graces born
Then Education or Art ere gave
The longest liver. Once a divine soul
•nform'd that curious Body, and so acted
•t to all good, that Heaven envied Earth
The enjoyment of it, therefore took it home
As bright as when she lent it the fair model,
And now it shines the brightest star she has.
But why, so soon, good Heaven, hast dispossessed
Earth of her glory? Is it because you mean
To call the Chaos back again, and she
The soul of the world must first be tan away?
Day must depart before soul night can come?
Or failed your Power? could you not make the summer
And Autumn of her Age as glorious
As her sweet Spring, and so destroyed it quite?
Or doubted you she would engross all hearts,
All loves? and make us think there was no Heaven,
No Paradise but her, and her sweet favour,
So, jealous of your Honour, took her hence?
No, but now that her viper Father had
Given up his name to mischief and Rebellion,
That all that's good of him might fall, she must:
And fall his crime: but O that crime alone
Had he no more, should sink his monstrous head
Below the deepest Hell, I punish him
Not now for crimes committed against me,
But against himself▪ these I could have forgiven,
And Nature almost now had won me to it,
But this dire murder of my joy and comfort,
Has chas't away all pity from my thoughts,
And armed my heart and hand with torments for him.
Who will not crush the worm that eats his Rose?
Go FARRABAN, lade the inhumane Monster
With pondrou• chains as heavy as his guilt:
Remove all comforts from him: pine his carcass,
Till his own flesh be his abhorred food,
He may as well devour that as this
Tell him we will study Torments for him, Torments
Witty and requisite, as he wishes us.
Deliver the message to him in words, fit
For a just anger▪ great as ours is
Twill be some comfort to this innocents soul
To see her murderers blood poured upon
Her divine ashes: Pardon, glorious Ghost,
(For now devotion's due to thy bright lustre)
That we mix with thy sacred dust a blood
So tainted: yet it is but thy sacrifice.—
You FARRABAN, see SOFFIE be regained
Again, you'd best: I wonder at your neglect
Of care to guard so great Prisoner.
My Liege, In the aproar when the guards were all
Employed to stop the Princes frantic rage,
He made escape.
Well, see he be sought out.
Lead on, and enrich Earth with Heavens envy.
GReat NEMESIS! now have I sacrificed
To thee the best of Creatures Persia had;
If the old Tyrant feels but the wound,
I have mine ends, and thou a feast of blood.
But sir, I fear the blow you gave through her
Will fall most heavy on your self: and make
Him more incensed.
So he but feels a grief,
I'll triumph in my pains, and scorn his worst.
WHo's that?
It is FARRABAN, in his looks
I see Revenge and Torments threatened.
Tut!
Sir, the King
Peac•, thou most impudent tongue,
Call him not King, but dotard Tyrant, Serpent,
Go on.
Commands me to deliver's wrath
To you in thunder: Pardon the messenger,
He threats you with Strapadoes, Famine, Tortures
Cunning and cruel, for your dire deed.
I thank his Tyrantship; return thou him
From me many curses: but how took he
His minions death?
As he would do the sight
Of his own Executioner, heavily.
His life-blood seemed to stream from his aged eyes,
Horror to seize his Limbs, and grief his soul.
He tore his silver hair, beat's reverend breast,
Threw himself prostrate on the loved body,
And cursed his stars: the killing news is like
To do as much for him, as for the old
PENSION the like act of PROGNE's did.
He slights his meat, seems wholly given over
To sorrow and revenge.
Io, Io, PAEAN!
Sing victory, sing victory, my soul,
I'm Conqueror: I've vanquished the stern Tyrant
In a great deed, 'bove the horror of his own.
Now I can make him grieve, I'll make him bleed,
Bleed next, dog Jailer, bleed his damned soul
To air, which will turn to Pestilence,
And poison, and infect the cursed world.
He has but yet a taste of what i'll do.
Sir, sir, we will keep you from all further outrage.
Be civil, villain, to your Royal Master.
He must excuse me, I'm but an Officer.
Of the Devils.—Traitor, do thy drudgery.
He has commanded me to load your limbs
With weighty gives, and famish your stout stomach.
The Devil has.
His gives are ornaments,
To me: and Famine, that I fear not slave,
I'll feed on my revenge. Come bring thy fetters,
I will adore them as a lover does
His Ladies favours.
Sir, Exasperate
Not Tyranny.
Sweet youth, be patient,
I'll teach thee courage. Hangman come, your chains,
I'll follow you by your sent, Beare-ward, to have them.
HOrror! that the brave Prince should ever do
So cruel a deed! but what can't sense of wrongs
And thirst of revenge force a great mind to!
Yet shall this stop our grand design no longer.
Now for the King. HIDASPUS, you say SOFFIE
Is at METHI•VLI's Farm, without the Town?—
What is it you study of?
My Lord?—yes, yes,
He is.—My Lord, I was even stricken dumb
With the discoveries you've made.
O great, and
Horrid they are: by this the hellish Counsel
Is upon meeting; sure their hour's near?
It is come my Lord.
Come then HYDASPUS you'll
Accompany me to the King.
You know, my Lord,
We are forbidden.
What th•n? for his good,
And to save Persia, what is our lives hazard?
They can't be better spent, i'll wait your Grace.
But not a word where SOFFIE is as yet.
FATYMA murdered! all my joys are fled!
Fled in a moment! Pageant of Earths greatness!
I that was erst adored, great in an Army,
Strong in a valiant Son, and happy in
The fair hopes of two brave Grandchildren,
Am now forlorn in all: my Army broken,
A base peace made for which all brave men loath me,
One of my Grandchildren, hope of my Crown,
Fled, but O whither? that's unknown to me.
The other dead, dead, and worse, murdered
By her own Father, ah unnatural Father!
But yet not more unnatural then my self,
Used I not him so? and should he not be
As dear to me as she to him? I did,
I did, O mischief of credulity!
And causeless jealousy! would all my fears
Had happened, so I were guiltless still.
It then had been his fault, not mine. O heart!
May it please you, sir, my Lords, EMANGO∣LIE
And HYDASPUS do strongly plead without
For Audience of your Majesty, shall they enter?
Have I not banished them my Presence? well,
They die for breach of the command, if they
Prove not their innocence: Let them enter, i'll
Have now an ear for both parts; I will never
Punish more on bare hearsay,—Guard, attend us.
HOw dare you thus intrude into my presence?
Must I forbid you, and my strict commands
Be slighted thus? you rush upon your ruin.
Sir, were we conscious to our selves of any
The least neglect unto your-just commands,
We'd fly your sight as doth the Owl the Suns,
And seek out corners for our Treasons safety,
But when we dare defy black Calumny,
We know not why we should not venture to you
To warn you of your safety, now at stake.
At stake! as how?
If there be any fault
In us, examine it in fitter time,
And spare it not, but study punishments
New and exemplary to plague us with,
At least, at present, mind to save your Crown,
Your Realms, your life, and all your Progeny.
What Pageant's this!
No Pagean•, Sir in short.
You are betrayed, and MAHOMET's the Traitor.
What envy dares traduce him? then my heart's
False to my head.
Sir, if I prove it not,
Dissect me into Atoms, torture me,
And fix eternal infamy on my name.
Produce your proofs.
Your Highness lately stood
A Bulwark to your friends, a terror to
Your Enemies, you had a Royal Army
Commanded by a noble Son, and though
I say it, a faithful General, and Officers
Trusty as truth it self, while these stood firm
In your esteem, as they deserved well,
(For what have your brave Son, and my poor self
Not done, that men could do, for your just honour?
You do not hold one Sceptre in your hand,
But such as we have put there, or else kept
From being torn away:) whilst these I say
Had power with you, not your proudest foes
Or Treason had a tongue or hand to hurt you;
But we must fall, that they may rise, upon
Yours, and our ruins, and your credulity
Has given them way: pardon the plainness, sir.
Go on, go on.
Sir, it was your misfortune
T'advance the impudent pleasant ALLYBEG
To such a dangerous height as made him giddy,
And mad with pride: he is the very person
That having got your ear, wrought all our ruins,
Intending yours: which thus he acts; first having
Obtained the Princes fall, disbanded the Army;
He has consulted with the mal•contents
T'advance himself: has raised a bank of money,
And now is levying of a Guard—
That Guard
On second thoughts I feared.
As well you might.
Well, who are of his party?
His pretence
Is specious (as all Traitors must be) so
He has allured some innocent Persons to him
(For such we yet are willing to believe them)
As ELCHEF, who yet owes you a Grudge,
And so's the fitter for his purpose; he
Engaged MATZOT, MOZENDRA, and BENEFIAN,
MATZOT is levying in Hyrcan•a,
But privately, as the rest here in Town.
These credit his pretence, which only is
To rescue the Prince, and be made Guardian
To SOFFIE, when he indeed intends
To murder you, the Prince, and SOFFIE—
What's this, you say?—
Nay, good sir, hear me out.
He means himself our King too and his Queen
FLORADELLA, (she at least believes so)
For she was useful for him to gain you
To this advancement, and the Princes fall,
And rich to help his bank, and has engaged
OLYMPA, EARINA, and Madam OMAY,
All these we know, besides who else as yet
We've not discovered. But his confidants
Are FARRABAN and the smooth tongued SE∣LEVCUS
He at this present gathers force in Shires
The other holds the Castle at his pleasure.
If this be so, themselves conveyed away
Young SOFFIE, I pray JOVE not to Heaven.
That, time will prove, we speak but what wee know.
How came you by the knowledge of thus much?
My Lord, my Servant VASCO has made love
Long time to CLOE, FLORADELLA'S woman,
And she has heard him not unwillingly:
It first came out by her, who boasted it
To him, as an addition to her fortune.
This makes me doubt the rest: sure ALLY∣BEG
Has more brain then to trust such high designs
To whores and waiting women; Sives, that let
All things run through them, be they ne'er so precious.
Sir, she's the closet of her Ladies secrets,
It is like she had this knowledge from her chiefly.
By some especial providence: O Gods!
How have we sinned! that you upbraid us thus
To indebt us for our safeties to such low
Vile things! as if the basest instrument
Were good enough to save so corrupt a state!
But Rome thrice owed her life to as vile trash,
Once to a common Harlot, twice to Geese.
Wise Heaven can make good work with any tool.
But this me thinks requires pregnant proof,
Ere it gains my belief, as now my horror.
First, we attest it sir, next, your own eyes
And ears may be your certain witnesses.
Fail you they cannot: clap a Guard on us,
Send but another Guard to OMAY'S House,
There may you apprehend most of the Traitors,
There at this instant hold they their black counsel.
No lie can bee avouched with thus much fore∣head.
EMANGOLY, thou hast deserved much of me,
And you HYDASPVS; first we cry you mercy,
For our too much rigour to you both,
We'll study an amends, if this be true,
If not, you both die without further process.
Sir, be it so.
Yes, so my Liege we'd have it.
Come then, our self will go to OMAY'S house,
It is worth our pains, you shall attend me thither.
Your Majesty still meets our wishes nearer.
Is BELTAZAR engaged?
No surely sir,
We believe him too honest, and a spirit
Too great to truckle to base ALLYBEG,
Though he had the mis-fortune to be used
In the Princes ruin, we might see regret,
And an unwillingness in him to th'action.
He did indeed, I think obey for fear;
Nor did he more then what our own commands
Did urge, so we've no ground for wrath to him;
Him then we will keep in favour still, and call
T'attend us to unkennell the base Fox.
First send for FARRABAN, and make him sure,
Then plant a Guard upon the Citadel.
It will be best sir.
Guard attend us here.
WOmen are still most forward in great actions,
I wonder yet none of the Lords are come.
All in Good time Madam— it is a close day,
Me thinks it'bodes not well, I like it not.
The day is as it should be, close and dark,
And fittest for our Plot that must be secret.
The Sun perhaps mourns for poor FATYMA.
O that sad accident takes up my mind,
I'm almost statue still.
It was sad and cruel.
Ladies, you see it is more then time we help
Poor Persia from ruining her self,
To which she hastes amain.—
Madam, my Lords.
SAve you Ladies.
Hail beauties all a•row.
Hail Persia's Genius.
Hail my honoured Lord.
Are we all here?
I see not FARRABAN.
FARRABAN wanting!
What makes him so slow!
Slow, you're all Snails to us, you must confess
The Ladies still most active: we will not lose
Our shares of glory.
FARRABAN not here!
I like it not.
My Lord, he's gained already.
So we are all I hope.
I'll engage for him,
What you here order him, he shall be ready
Upon first intimation to perform.
He may be busy searching SOFFIE up,
You heard the Kings threats if he were not found.
Would he were found.
Let not that trouble you.
(1) If we cannot recover him, give out
He is baptised, and so incapable;
It is no new way, in India, ASSAPH did it,
And well it took. —My Lord, you are not cheerful.
MAHOMET'S troubled.
It is for PARRABAN.
What! doe's my Lord Court her,  to be her Guardian?
Now had I rather talk of Love and Court-ship
To EARINA then these state-affaires.
How well she looks!
Fie, Flesh-fly, hold your peace. 
My Lord, I hope you flag not? will you sail
Bravely three quarters of your course, out-ride
Many a storm, break thousand raging waves,
And then sink in the Haven?
My soul is dull,
And dreads some treachery; never till now
Knew I what it was to fear.
Come, sacrifice
To confidence, she'll carry you through all;
I'll promise largely when we come to th'Loane,
More then you must expect to bring them on.
But sure we came not here to whisper, sirs.
No, I did think our business had been pub∣lique.
Rouse my dull soul— Public indeed it is,
And private too it must be, the Consult
Private, the benefit most public shall be—
Now he's himself again. Death! dead ith'nest!
And reach to all: old men shall owe that short
Portion of life by natures course they hold,
And reverend Matrons their white age, to us:
Those shall thank us, they see their manly Sons,
Spend in soft exercise their peaceful time,
And that themselves sit in their chimny-corners,
Telling the loved stories of their youth,
And feel not at their withered throats the swords
Of foes, to force them to detect their wealth;
And these, that they enjoy their blooming daughters
Unravished, and see their Grand-children
Come skipping on their aged knees, and not
Sprawling upon the Enemies hostile Spears.
The Nurse shall owe to us, that her dear child
Doth suck her milk still, and not she its blood,
So to sustain a while her famished soul.
The Gods shall be indebted unto us,
That still their Temples stand, and do not crack
In sacrilegious flames; the Genius
Of every City, that he is not forced
To leave his walk, or wander '•out the ruins:
The dead that fury ransack not their Urns,
And puff their ashes in the face of light:
Th'unborn, that we procured them time to ripen,
And that they fell not, blasted ere they blowed.
The benefit shall to the meanest Swain
Extend, that toils in the Parmenian fields,
And farthest parts the Persian name doth reach,
To us his morning, and his evening thanks,
Shall he ere pay, for that his wretched eyes
See not the battering hoofs of wastf•ll Troops
Trample his hopeful Corn, and springing grass,
For that the sheafs ar'nt from his reaping hand
Torn by the Foe, nor his full Barns blaze high
With dreadful flames, nor stalled Cattle low
Under the plundering Soldiers hungry blade;
For that the hated noise of bellowing Drums,
Fright him not from his Plough with fear of pressing.
He shepherdesses thanks might promise too,
For having time to sing still, and make  Chaplets.
Those thanks shall you reap.
Those I chiefly covet,
I soon can tell them how they may requite me.
This general good must unto all accrue,
By our encountering of that violent torrent
Of ruin, that flows strongly towards all,
And will ore-whelm us, if not stopped in time.
Is not our aged King (alas!) given up
To dotage, and unneedful jealousy?
Has he not cast down his chief prop, the Prince?
Disbanded his strong Armies? so the Empire
Lies open to her Foes, like as a Vineyard
To the wild beasts, its fence being trodden down.—
Princes were given to defend their subjects,
If he'll quit the Protection of us,
Yet must not we quit our own safeties.
True,
Doth not the royal stock decay apace?
One of the best and fairest branches of it,
Is torn away to death—
O that the Tyrants
Self had excused her!—
An act so horrid,
The Sun ne'er shined out since, but hid for shame
His face with clouds; the other forced to hide,
Perhaps in some foul shed, poor and forlorn,
His innocent head, from his hard Grand-father,
And injured Sire, and yet he is our hope.
Pines not the Prince, whose fight no foe could 'bide,
Without his fight, in a condition
Beneath the merit of the greatest foe?
Melts not the sweetest Princess in the world,
In her own tears? she, worth a brighter fortune
Then Earth can give her, yet abides the worst.—
So much the worse, as fallen from best.
You Ladies should resent this most of all.—
Who doth not, hath no sense.
No soul.
No honour.
Yet the old King's so fast in his dead sleep,
So lost in his strong Lethargy, he feels,
Nor sees, at least regards, nothing of this.
I'st then not time to 'wake him, and to stop
The gulf of ruin that thus ops and gapes
To swallow us all in its hollow entrails?—
I see it in your faces, you all think
It more then time; nor let the cure seem harsh:
No less then fire, cauterising, searing,
Can salve this sore; tic Arms I mean must do it;
We must cast Rampants against so strong a tide,
Nor think it at all unjust; "That War is just
" That's necessary, and those arms religious,
" When there's no hope left otherwise but in them.
The Prince restored, the King once shown his error,
SOFFIE returned to safety, how will all
Applaud the Actors! what is there you wish,
But will flow in unto you with advantage!
Your greatest thoughts will be accomplished,
As easily as desired. (2) Would you my Lord
ELCHEE, requite your self for th'injury
Late done to you? now, now's the time to do it.
I see, nor will let slip the fair occasion.
Would you, MOZENDRA, arrive at th'hopes
You, I know, have, of things worthy your merit,
And daring soul? this, this is the way.
I shall improve the opportunity.
Would you, BENEFIAN, render your self
Worthy, as the addition that honours,
And fair estate can make you, (and they're great
In women's eyes) to teach the bravest Lady
In the Persian Court to give and take a flame,
(For you, they say, are amorous) now's the time.
And I will strike, Sir, whilst the Iron's hot.
He 'has taken me in the right vein i'faith.
And is there any thing that you, sweet Ladies,
Can on your Pillows wish for? now command it.—
As ther's no Lady sure but has her longings.
Is there a seat in all the Empire
Fairer then other? or an air cooler?
Before your feet that place shall spread its self,
And court you to accept it. Is there ever
A Knight, or smooth chained youth your eye commends
Unto your heart? he is your ready servant.—
And we may had employ that privilege.
Are your thoughts higher? would you make your fortunes
Even with your beauties, equal unto Princes,
Fit for to meet with crowned Monarchs loves?
This is the way to achieve all these, and more:
To be, alive great Queens and dead, bright stars.
You shall be cal•'d the Saviours of your Country,
A name more dear then Monarch, the sole honour
Of the present age, the grand obligers of
The next, and MAHOMET, your humble servant.
Admired height of Policy, and Courtship?
Cast then, sweet Beauties to so great a work
But your lose Ornaments, and receive greater.
Borrow but of your fair ear a Pendent,
A Garkane• of your Neck, or of your breast
A Gem, and be returned more then a Crown.
And you brave Knights, shine forth in brandished steel,
Like to so many Gods of war, and be
Adored as he is Nor can I express
(Such is the dearth and poverty of words)
With how much dearness of affection
You'll be received of all loyal hearts.
With what resolution of fidelity!
With how great Piety! with what tears of joy!
Will any Gates dare to be shut against you?
Or any Envy to oppose your Progress?
Up then, and undertake this brave exploit
With that courage, and those fair hopes, wherewith
Such just great actions are to be attempted,
That under your colours, and protection
Of your Fortune Persia may be
Again ennobled, and made more then free.
My Lord, whilst uttering this, I wished your voice
Had been as loud as STEN•OR'S, or ram'd thunder,
That' to might been heard through (3) ABBAS thirty Kingdoms,
And strike upon the Centre with an Echo
Loud as the acclamation it deserves,
It would have done more good then forty Troops
To our great purpose, of which men and money
I take to be chief elements: for men,
My MATZED's Levies prosper as our wishes
Designed them in Hyrcania.
And in Larr
SELEVCUS grows as fast: once on their March,
They'll gather like a snow-ball.
Here I've gained
As many friends as when I can appoint them
A Rendezvous, will make a Regiment.
I have as many too, besides my Guard,
To help up which the bounteous FLORADELLA
Disbursed freely.
I have yet my Lord,
Fifty thousand Crowns towards the service.
And is your purse, sweet Mine, as fathomless as is your wit?—this is a brave example.
Sir, my good will.
(Shall I go less then she?
I will not, though it half undoes me)—Sir,
I have as much at your command.
I knew
She would not behind me)
Excellent Lady!
All I can say, is, you shall pay your self
For your great bounty, with your own desires.
(Shall we go below these? they'll scorn us then.)
Faith Madam, I can't spare such  sums, let you
And I go halfes, and maked betwixt us then. 
Content.) — My Lord, this Lady, and my self.
Between us will bring fifty thousand Crowns.
What we will more we have in our own breasts.
Pish, ther's a Jewel at your breast would do it)
They that least need are still the greatest hold-fasts)
'Till be the welcomer that comes unlooked for.
You're bounteous Ladies, and shall shine for this,
Below in story, above in the Firmament.
You, Ladies, have done well, but we will yet more,
Not to extol our selves, or slight your bounties,
You give but part, we all: you hazard gold,
We blood, and sweat, and life, and our gold too.
Brave Colonel! this toil shall buy you rest,
And furnish you with stories for your age:
Each skar you get esteem of as a favour
From wars great Goddess sent to win you hearts:
Men are not more enamoured of their beauties,
Then fairest Ladies are of men's known valours.
How hee takes every bird with its own lure!)
Where, where shall we begin? I would be at it.
Spoke like an Angel!
Here in Town I think.
Do you intend to seize on the Kings person?
What else?
Then it were easier done abroad,
If you could train him to some house of pleasure.
For that, let me alone; i'll undertake it.
He cannot, though they grew, pick up a Force
That can make head against us in time; but should he,
Which is unlike, sure he'd give us conditions.
If we get him, we will give him Articles
To sign, the effect you know, what else we then
Think fit, we can cast in.
Resist! my Lord,
Wrong not your Judgement once to think it can be
Are we not strong enough to force the Guards?
Yes sure.
Then let JOVE and HERCULES
Come take his part, they too, shall be our Prisoners.
Brave fiery Hero!
I've a Proclamation
Already drawn, luring as words can make it.
Now for the time?
What if we presently
Dispatch advice unto our friends abroad
To put themselves upon their march towards us,
And when we know the time they can be with us,
Give our friends here the watchword, and to horse?
All this, I hope, may be sometime to morrow.
It may, it may, we by to morrow night
May all be ready, and night's the best time too.
The Sun shall see us Conquerors when he rises.
Your Counsel's good.
But at the hour we rise
The Citadel here must advance your colours.
It shall.—Cheer up sad mother Persia
We will retrive again thy age of gold,
ASTRAY shall come down once more, and fix
In thee her fair Tribunal: those impostumes
Rather then children, that broke from thee,
Thy factious sons, I mean shall fall in ruin,
Whilst thy true births shall grace thy happy bosom,
And thou on them bestow a thousand blessings.
Then Treason—
Hark! what noise is that?
Look out.
O heaven! the King and FARRABAN!
My soul!
Is he a Traitor!
Well, I only came
To contemplate the Ladies beauties.
Fly!
Fly all!
Alas! the Guards spread all about.
HOrror! what a dire Conventicle's here!
Sir, now you'll credit us.
My faithful friend!
You are my good Genius: I must do thee Homage
Both for my life and Crown, I owe all to thee.
I'm happy sir, in being useful to you.
Let's yet fall bravely.
Stand we here a while
Looking of Treason out of Countenance.
Since we have seen the Basilic first, no danger
Can he bolt from his fiery eyes: see now
How bloud-shotten! how red with rage they be!
We've innocence enough to trust to yet.
We meant nothing but well to the whole Em∣per.
So skulks the owl before the Suns golden ray,
As these black souls do at the face of justice.
Death! that I saw thee, yet could not scope it.
I'm looking on what Rock of Diamond
This house stands, that the weight of so much treason
Hath not yet sunk it.
Ah! unhappy me!
Madam, if you get free, for sure  the King
Will not extend his wrath even to the Ladies.
Beg me to be your Servant.
I my self
Would serve in any quality to be free.
Sure Madam, there was treason among our selves.
You may swear it.
O I am thunder-struck!
A vengeance on the Traitor! this was you
Damned Cockatrice. 
Varlot it was thy self.
So, peal, do, do,
I yet fear FARRABAN.
Alas! my Lord, will not these chains resolve you?
Craft, craft all.
Faith, this is no fashion;
He has confessed enough to hang you all,
But not discovered.
Confessed!—
Why should I spend
My last breath in avouching lies and Treason?
A bowstring stop that breath—my Liege, we were
Designing—
Mischief.— ball not, impudent head!
Ungrateful Monster! cause I raised thee
From they foul dunghill, will no meaner seat
Then a Throne please thee? and mine own too? wretch!
Guard apprehend them, to close Prison with them—
Mercy sir, mercy sir.
Pardon, mighty Prince.
Lest they consult, or pack lies, sever them.
Favour at least sir, till our cause be heard.
(I'll second her.—Sir, please to hear us speak—
Yes, on the rack you shall.
Let him put me
In PHALARIS Bull, he shall hear nought but curses.
What will become of me! I'm lost on all sides.
No, fear not, the discovery shall save you.
(I aimed at a great name, and to  transmit
My fame down to Posterity, and my fall
Shall do it for me, since my rising fails.
As long the memory of him shall last
That burnt DIANA's Fame, as his that built it.
" Fame follows great deeds be they good or bad.
I'll slight his rage then, and speak boldly to him.)
Sir, who ere was your spy upon our Actions,
Make much of him he, did you timely service—
O unheard impudence!— slit his windpipe some.
The truth is, we intended to take arms,
Not to disthrone you, as you intimate,
But to restore the Prince, and make you see
Your error in your unjust anger to him.
Peace impudence, the rack shall squeeze out more.
Not more then truth, and that you have already.
So may we find your favour, as it is truth
He tells you, and no farther stretched our aim.
Others did then Guard, bind them, and away.
You may EMAN•OLY, and BELTAZAR
Take their Confessions: force from that  base serpent
Whom I detest to name, the truth by tortures.
Would I'd a sting, thou should not fail to fool it.
She's open enough, you need not press her much
Use CLOE gently, and persuade her, VASCO,
To detect all.
I'll do my best, my Liege.
Away with them. HYDASPUS, wait on us,
Double our Guards: we will to sacrifice
To gracious Heaven, and make public prayer,
That saved us from what we knew not to fear
THe Citadel beset with armed Guards,
Upon what interest as yet unknown!
And I still pining here! and still the Tyrant
Wallows in Luxury! (4) surfeits with delights
As far fetched as dear bought! Hell and Confusion!
DORIDO, faithful DORIDO, there is yet
A way for thee to help me.
For me, sir?
Speak't and enjoy it.
Give me a draught of Poison.
Forbid it Heaven.
I promised FATYMA
•'d follow her, and I will keep my word,
'Twil in some part excuse the wrong I did her,
The sweet soul claims it of me: I ne'er sleep
But still I see her beckoning me away.
However DORIDO, had I not better
Die bravely like a Roman, then pine here
A slave? I'll die too, though thou dost not help me,
And bequeath thee a Curse for thy unkindness.
In vain they are forced to live that vow to die,
This CATO Uticensis taught, this PORTION
His noble Daughter too: and shall the Prince
Of Persia go to school to Italian Lad•es
To learn Courage? think but of that sweet youth.
Lead me to rest.—
Shall I do this, and bear
All his friends curses? no, they'll rather bless me
For rescuing him from torment; and his foes
Will feel the pangs gnaw them of their own envy.
FIrst, my EMANGOLY, and you, my Lords METHICULI, HYDASPUS, ALKA∣HEM,
We here revoke our sentence against you
Of Banishment, and empower you to sit
With us in judgment, on these dire Delinquents.
We thank your Majesty, and glory more
In that we are capable of serving you,
Then in the honour which you grace us with.
They'll complement our lives away at last)
Then we are judged already;-wel, the other day
I studied speeches for the Ladies, now 
I want one to the People; but, —lets see—
The common place is to avoid ill company.
A curse on these state matters!)
Next we here
Degrade that Viper ALLY-BEG from all
Those places, or of public trust, or Honour,
To which too rashly we advanced him.
Those which he held of yours, EMANGOLY,
We do to you restore.
Your Grace shall find
Me faithful as at first.
The Treasurer-ship
We do confer on you, METHICULI.
My service, as i'm able, shall requite it.
May they requite you as I would have done.
Bold Traitor! cannot armed justice awe thee?
Now BELTAZAR, produce your proofs a∣against
These criminals.
They're guilty all of Treason:
CLOE accuses that impostum'd monster
MAHOMET, to have forged the whole conspiracy,
But not without the help of FLORADELLA—
A curse on that loose Gossip.
And you too.)
Give them no name but Traitors.
First they meant
To shift away the Prince, dissolve the Army,
That no force might oppose the Traitors rising.
You Majesty— (the horror of it chokes
My utterance) — your sacred Majesty—
So, try again.
This viperous woman should
Have poisoned.—
So, now it is out— would she had.
And FARRABAN, SOFFIE, then held the Castle,
At the devotion of this monstrous man,
Who aimed to set the Crown on his own head,
Having already gotten a strong Guard,
Towards which that strumpet did disburse a Mass
Of ready Treasure, making still her Purse
As common to him, as her wicked body.—
You might preserve the modesty of the Court.
To this end be their Levies afoot too;
In Larr SELEUCUS, MATZOT in Hyrcania,
Are raising Forces; so that this lewd woman,
And FARRABAN, and sly SELEUCUS, were
Chief accomplices, that knew his utmost aim;
The other we believe drawn in, as only
Crediting his pretence to free the Prince,
And MATZED'S Levies are on ELCHEE'S score.
Urge that my Lord.
Yes, yes, sir, urge that home.
Monster, what say you? knew the rest yo• meant
Your self their King?
They knew as much as I did.
It is false.
That thou were worthy but to bear
A Sword, that I might claim the combat against thee
I'd write it on thy heart, in stabs, thou lie.
A brave Rodomantado!
This vile man,
Given up to Treason late, and now despair,
Accuses these but to have company
In's fall.
True my good Lord.—Come, you and I
Were Comrades once.
This I indeed believe.
The more the merrier.
Hear my gracious Lord,
He intimates as much before your Grace.
What if I say I levied in Hyrca∣nia,
With an intent to help the King, and balance
MAHOMETS strength, having the greater hopes
For doing him service so unexpected?
Twill gain no faith: and then  it was Treason too,
To list without Commission: know your doom first,
If you fall, urge it: some will credit you,
Twill beget pity to your memory
In•h' vulgar, who are still fond of the wretch•d.)
These persons could not be so lost to sense,
Being noble, as t'advance so vile a thing
Over themselves.
We scorn him for our Groom.
His envy and his rage will peal us too
Anon, I think.
How strong is malice in thee,
Pernicious wretch! thou car'dst not how foul
Thy Treasons were on earth, nor weighst thou now
How great thy plagues for them shall be in hell.
Disburden yet thy soul of so much guilt,
And speak these innocent in what they are so.
Your selfe's not innocent, good Rhetorician.—
I thought so, slit his impudent throat some body.
You did, as much as I, exasperate
The King against his Son.
If this be true,
I here beseech your Grace command me stand
Among the Traitors:— Come come, Officers, bind
My hands, I am accused here of treason
You, more then feignedly, did act his friend,
And O that I had heard your pregnant reasons,
So urged to save him with an equal ear!
Heaven knows, I urged them strongly as I durst.
The Tyrant's selfe's not innocent.—
Bold head!
He's guilty of his Sons blood, and FATTY∣MA'S too.
I was butt's instrument.
O ecstasy!
Varlet, the guilt is thine, though the grief mine,
That I gave faith unto thy forgeries.
Proceed Lord BELTAZAR.
Sir, hoping these
May yet be worthy of your timely mercy;
What have I but t'inveigh against those other?
Look up, fair Mother Persia, and see
Thy self redeemed, put off the horrid fright,
Thy plotted ruin late amazed thee with.
Now shall not thy fair breast be stained with
Thy best Sons blood, but freed of thy worst.
Had this gone on, th'hadst been but thine own prey,
Th'hadst seen thy Prince that toiled so oft for thee,
Groaning his soul out into empty air,
The hopeful blossom nipped as soon as blown;
Thy aged King swelled up with deadly poison,
And burning as in Aetna till he'd burst:
And impious MAHOMET upon thy Throne,
Unworthy of thy Galleys; and this strumpet,
His fine loose Queen.—
That yet I never meant.
The more wretch thou, so oft to swear it to me.
The more fool thou though, ever to believe me.
Thy noblest Sons torn, some to cruel death,
And some to servile misery, worse then that;
This was the sight prepared for thine eyes.
And it had been a brave one.
Cursed monster!
No sense of guilt? no tears! can no remorse
Touch thy scared Conscience?
Yes, I see my guilt;
Guilty of folly I am, to trust a woman
To keep for me, what for her self she cannot,
A secret; tears I could profusedly shed,
Tears of just wrath, and for each one that drops,
Afford a curse too, that I sped no better.
I'd spend my soul in sighs, could they but scald thee:
To be so near a Crown, and reach it not!
O Hell and Furies!
In thy soul they're all.
Proceed to judgement sir.
Tyrant, remember,
•n me thou judge thy own Cause; I meant
No more to thee, then thou did to thy Father,
And brother too, and that for the same reason.
Prodigious boldness! sir, regard him not.
Monster, since thou hast toiled to be ungrateful,
And with thy Treasons to out-vie my favours,
To let thee die were too much pity to thee,
Nor is there a death equal to thy guilt;
Besides, we having so much honoured thee,
And sworn thou ne'er should feel death from our hand,
We will keep our Oath, but leave it to our Heir,
A strict command, that on my funeral day
Thou die (5) the ancient death of boats.
Then have I
Great MITHRIDATES for my pattern.
Mean while,
Officers, lead him to the public market,
There let the common Hangman bore his eyes out.
In a Dungeon shall he sustain his life,
With what he gets by begging only.
Nay,
I'll then sustain my soul with full mouthed curses,
To thee meant, and the rest of my undoers,
Especially that open Sex, whose souls are
So loose, they cannot keep them in their breasts,
But they will still swim on their lips.
VASCO,
To thee we do decree his whole Estate,
And our best thanks for thy discovery.
I humbly thank your Majesty.
Let Soldiers
Go pull down all his Palaces and Statues,
And make a Jokes there where his chief house stood.
Admired Justice!
Equal, equal, Justice!
Do, do, ball on.
You, strumpet, are the next.
But that I scorn to ask it, might I hear
Her sentence, and I'd triumph in mine own.
Envious villain.
Away with him, he shall not
Give so much pleasure to his envious soul.
Write on my dust, IN HIGH ATTEMPTS HE DIED.
All ills betide you.—
Lead that impious wretch
To th'publique Market, &amp; there (6) beat her brains out,
In the ancient way ordained for Poisoners:
As for the murder of her Queen STATIRA,
Base GIGIS died, then (7) burn her limbs with Cats dung.
Mercy! great sir.
Thou hast too much in dying,
But that we are not rigorous to thy Sex.—
Away with her.
O this is a sad fall.
All her Estate to CLOE we confer;
It is fit she have reward t'incourage others,
Though she not meant to do us good, she did it.
Indeed my Gracious Lord, I ever meant it,
I humbly thank your Majesty.
See now, CLOE,
I counselled you for th'best. Come, I'm still constant,
Our business here is over, we will to better.
Take FARRABAN with the rest, and stran∣glee him.
O mercy, mercy!
Quick, away with him.
The Citadel cost me fair; O dire ambition
The Citadel we give thee ALKAHEM.
I hope to do you better service in it.
We doubt it not.— Now ELCHEE.
(Now, now,
I feel the Bow-string at my throat.
Nay sure, 
He'll let us die like Soldiers.)
Though we credit
The good of your intention, yet your life,
Is by your hasty error forfeited,
But that we give you, and confine you only
To the Isle of Ormus, whence on good behaviour,
We may recall you.
Thanks dread Sovereign.
I hope my carriage will induce you to it.
My fear was never so great of your justice,
As grief for the rash error I ran into,
And so ensnared my friends.
Troth, I believe him.
Sure he'll send us thither too? MOZENDRA,
Are there any handsome Ladies there, can tell?
I care not, so there be a Book, I'll  never
Converse but with the dead hereafter I.
This true repentance speaks him noble.
Yes,
Your two friends shall attend you.
A noble mercy.
Long live the Gracious ABBAS!
More then live!
My Lord, my love to you re∣mains  still firm,
And eggs me on to prompt a way unto you,
How you may happily avoid exilement. 
The Kings rigour, I know, will not extend
To th'Ladies lives, yet in the fright they stand in,
They will do any thing may get them mercy:
Urge them to promise, if they have their lives
To give the King in gratitude, those sums
They engaged for to the Traitors; then be you
Their speaker to him, and he can't in honour
(Urged by my meditation) but receive
The favour as from you, and show you grace.
My Lord, my humble thanks, I will atttempt it.
But MATZOT, for exam∣ples  sake must die,
Being ith'very act of Treason, raising
Of Arms against us: You my Lord HYDASPUS,
Take a Brigade of our own Guards, and hast
Down to Hyrcania to apprehend him,
Strike off his head, to you the Government
Of that fair Province we assign, until
If he deserves it, we recall Duke ELCHEE.
I wish he may, mean while, I shall be careful.
EMANGOLY, send you some trusty person
To Shires, armed, to seize SELEUCUS there,
And strike off his head too.
My Liege, I will.
These Ladies still expect,— how shall we use them?
O my good Lord.
There's mercy in his looks.
Sir, they'are beneath your anger, they can't hurt you,
Nor stands it with the honour of great States,
To take strict notice of vain women's actions.
Well, mercy is no less a virtue royal,
Then justice, and it is fit we show some, since
Heaven has shown us so much: we pardon you
Ladies, hereafter pray avoid state-matters.
We will we will, my Lord.
Our humble thanks.
Long live King ABBAS! long, long-live the King!
You'll keep your words. 
Yes, yes, my Lord, we will.
May it please your Majesty, these noble Ladies,
(Not to say by my instinct) do resent
So heartily your royal favour to them,
As to their powers, to attempt gratitude,
Whereas their error late involved them in
A promise of considerable sums,
To'advance what they thought duty, but proves trea∣son,
As testimonies of their thankfulness
For pardoning them that fault, they humbly pray
Your sacred Majesty to accept those sums,
Towards the raising of your force again.
Tic among them all an hundred thousand Crowns.
A brave amends!
A noble gratitude!
Ladies, we thank your loves.
And we your mercy.
METHICULI'S Treasurer.
My Lord, we will
Attend you anon at the Exchequer.
Now
They do deserve their Pardon, and I'd almost
Said, ELCHEE merits his too, for procuring
These donatives, it proves his loyalty.
Hark! hark!
ELCHEE, for improving thus
Your interest with the Ladies to our service,
We do revoke your sentence of exilement.
My best thanks and endeavours, still shall serve you.
These two offended, sir, but on his score,
They're his dependents.
Them we pardon too.
Our humble thanks.
We will labour to deserve it.
My Lord, I am your Creature for  your hint.
I joy my love could prove behooffull to you)
A fair escape!
A Resurrection! i'll
Ne'er hazard more so high a member as
My neck; VENUS is my star.
This were a happy day, were SOFFIE found.
And the brave Prince restored.
That he shall be.
Then SOFFI's safe sir—
Thou were born to oblige me.
Where, my good Genius?
In METHICV•'s care
And mine; and now forth coming, at your service.
Go METHICULI, bring him to the Castle.
We'll meet thee there, whither we now will hast
To rescue our Son, and make our self deserve
This benefit the Gods were pleased to give us.
My Liege I will.
O who can be a Tyrant,
And plague the innocent on bare surmises,
When gracious Heaven pass by our real ills,
And oft to gain us, save us against our wills.
FIe DORIDO, and did I ever think
I should check thee for disobedience?
Now I importune thee, sha'nt I obtain
My last draught of thee!
I can hold no longer
Against his command—Sir, here's a bowl well spiced
Will send you to your Paradise in a moment.
Give me it DORIDO.
Ah, my hand trembles
In the delivery.
Thanks, good faithful youth.
Now that my Father could see me quaff this!
A health to the confusion of the Tyrant. 
Sir, leave some, and i'll pledge you.
As thou wilt.
Now call my wife to take her last farewell.—
I come sweet FATYMA, i'm coming to thee,
And doubt not but thou'lt thank me for releasing
Thee from this Prison, the world calls a life.
WHat would my Lord?
Be reconciled to thee.
I know the art angry with me for the loss
Of FATYMA.
Not angry sir, but grieved.
Come I have sent the child to a place fit for her,
A sacred place of rest, worthy her goodness,
This world was not, it was her Hell and mine;
And I am following her; I sent for thee
To take my last leave.
I conceive you not.
Thy eyes shall make it plain—I have drunk poi∣son.
O Heavens forbid!
O Gods! how came he by it?
I gave it him, he drank, and here I pledge him. 
O wretch!
Were it lawful, would i'd pledge him too.
I still was used to obey all his commands,
And this was one, nor could I abide to see
Him miserable, my duty did gainsay it.
And my own honour, faithful youth, and cou∣rage
Self-murder's a false colour of true courage,
" Rising from fear of torment, or of shame,
"To out-face ill Fortune, and malicious Fat•.
And this I hoped from you: then should the Heaven
First have dissolved, but you should have been righted.
" Heaven sets us Captains of our bodily Forts,
" Which without Treason, cannot be delivered
" Till redemanded.
Sure if Heaven had made us
Masters of any thing, it is of our lives?
Which if we may not without leave lay down,
We must not without warrant leave a joint.
If in these little Castles we be Heavens
Lieutenants, sure we may give up our charge,
When He•ven leaves us void of good means to keep it.
We must not doubt Heavens goodness, who is nothing
" But goodness, nor limit it, since the last
" Instant is scope enough for the heavenly Powers
" To revoke all things to ones own desire.
Why pluck thou then their work out of the hand
Of Justice, and become thy own revenger,
When she would surely have don't, and better?
I feel the poison working —O— be happy.
Hast IFFIDA, some antidote may help yet.
Nay, spare that pains, not natures self can help him.
It was strong enough.
To break my heart, I hope.
It works with me too: my eyes swim in death,
And dizziness toss over all my brains.
Fie, DORIDO, thou art the greatest Traitor
Of all, to poison thy dear Lord.
Peace fool,
He's faithful, and my good deliverer.
NO, that is yet my part, I'm thy deliverer.
Rise injured Son, arise and meet thy freedom.
Who's that?
The King.
The Tyrant: in good time
He comes to see me rescued from his rage.
His eyes blast me; I can't, with patience, see him.
But what means this yet? why are these friends with him?
All are proved false and mock our misery.
And is this then a spectacle of pleasure?
That I could form a curse great as his guilt!
Spare them, sweet daughter, if I yet am worthy
So near alliance to so bright a virtue—
O death, why come no faster?
Heavens! what means he?
He thinks he comes to torture him.
He looks ill.
No art of words can now more aggravate
My guilt then mine own Conscience: nor dost thou
Feel sharper pangs of Grief then I of horror.
I'm undeceived, I see my hasty error,
And had thou now a window into my breast,
Thou would confess the unfeigned integrity
Of my repentance, when thou see my soul
Weep (freely) tears of blood to bath her crime in.
Cro•odiles tears.
Indeed, my Lord you err.
Thou err'st, brave Son, for yet i'll call thee so,
And will henceforth appear a Father to thee,
I've been a Tyrant, nay a Monster long,
Which as I have bewailed, I will redress,
Repentance has made Rivers of mine eyes,
My eyes weep themselves blind for loss of thine.
My breast is hardened as brawn with strokes,
My head turned grey, with sorrow more then age.
Insense makes the offended Gods relent,
For that, i'll spend my very soul in sighs.
" To be penitent bears a pardon with it:
A pardon, I that yet ne'er begged of any,
Now beg of thee: A Father of a Son,
Let the relation at least obtain it.
So when the house is burnt the fire goes out.
O that this true remorse (for so I think it)
Had come before, when yet it had been useful!
Madam, it is ne'er to late to redress wrongs.
Yes, when the wrongd's not capable of redress.
The Prince (alas!) inflamed with despair,
Got his unhappy Page to give him poison.
O Heaven▪ and slightest thou our Penitence?
Poison so strong defies all remedies,
As it will soon make me all injuries.
O Act of Horror!
Dire event of wrongs.
Which when in time we'are careless to redress
We justly, when we would do it, are denied it.
I mourning to my grave must ever go then.
At least, before thou leave this upper world,
O speak thy self but reconciled to me.
I freely do it, and implore your pardon,
If I, exasperated with my wrongs,
Have vented any indecent words of you.
Of other crimes towards you my soul acquits me.
And mine own too: this piety adds load
Unto my grief, and melts my very soul.
SEe sir, their joy has drowned them all in tears.
This looks not yet like joy.
Ah! no, my Lord.
All joys have fled us.
The brave Prince, tired out
With suffering wrongs, took poison.
O just Gods!
Not just, they are grown Tyrants too, &amp; mock
Our best intentions—O—
What a blessed day
Had this been, had not this draught clouded it!
That baleful draught descends in a di•e storm,
And not ecclipses but our Sun-shine only,
But batters with fierce drops our springing hopes!
How might thou else have triumphed in the Justice
Done on the cursed causers of thy ruin!
Base ALLYBEG, and impious FLORADELLA,
And all the rest of their dire Accomplices
This day fell sacrifices to thy wrath.
SOFFIE is found too, and doth here attend thee.
Turn then your love to him, to him requite
My wrongs, and from him too expect my duty.
Now shall I die with much a lighter heart,
Since I have lived to hear those Traitors fall.
O this I ever hoped for from heavens Justice,
And grieve the more that thou despaired of it.
I come sweet FATYMA-Father, farewell—
Use SOFFIE like a Son.—
O that Heaven would
Let me excuse thee!
SOFFIE,—Farewell
Obey thy Grandfather—as thou would do me—
Forget my wrongs—and eschew Tyranny—
Ah! that I could forget sense, and turn stone!
Adieu sweet Spouse.—
O!
From thee I hardliest go!—
But thy grief will not suffer thee, I know,
To be long from me. —
O my wretched ears!
Do you hear this, and will you ever hear
Any thing after it! O woeful eyes!
Why at this wailful sight drop you not out!
Or, frighted, recoil deep into you holes!
O stubborn heart! can't all this shiver thee?
Am I turned Rock too!
Friends adieu— make ore
To my young Son, the love to me you bore—
O that I could not hear!
Or I could help!
Yet love my memory.—
O Grief!
O Anger!
That grief is all we can!
Thou DORIDO,
Art to attend me- to the shades below—
Yes my dear Lord.
O that he'd gone before.
I shall again live— and on some sad Stage
Be mourned.—"Great wrongs reach further then one Age.—
O—O. 
He's gone, he's gone, break heart and follow!
O Heavens!
Stay winged spirit, stay and take
Me with thee, at least (8) let me suck thy last breath.
Madam, forbear, you will infect your self.
O Gods! what have been my deserts, to be
Thus punished! or if such be my deserts,
Why am I yet not punished more, with death?
Yet that were to give end unto my woes:
To join me with him, were to make me happy:
That happiness I shortly will obtain
In spite of fate, if not from thy kind hand
O ATROPOS, from mine own grief at least:
Mean while— lie soft, O loved Corps, and thou
Adored soul, if love to earthly creatures
Remain in death, think of me in thy shade,
And oft Petition Fate to send me to thee.
Unhappy DORIDO! how hast thou wronged
All Ages!
And shalt still be cursed by all.
Is it not too late to say, forgive passed errors?
I h•st to follow him to his shade, I'll there
Wait on him too, and try to be more happy:
They that behold the Sun, must see his shadow,
And who remembers my brave Lord, must cast
A thought on me, and may they say thus of me;
I was his faithful servant, waited still
On him in life, and death, good state and ill,—
So used to obey his each command,
I did it, though it to his hurt did tend.—
If any fault—of mine—be known to time—
Service mistaken—was my only crime.—
O—O. 
He dyes.
Would it were our greatest loss!
Our loss (alas!) is above words to ease,
And we must more then mourn it: Do thou see
METHICULI, all rites of pomp and sorrow,
Performed to that brave body: This vile trunk
Of DORIDO'S, for giving his Lord poison,
We will have burnt upon his Tomb.
Sad office.
Ah sadder sight! that it were  my last!
SOFFIE,
Thou now art our, and the Empire's hope,
EMANGOLY, be thou his Governor,
And breed him such as you intend to serve.
My care shall labour to requite the honour.
And mine t'improve your honour by my profit.
Daughter, your losses we can ne'er requite;
Yet, as we can, let us attempt amends:
But that must come from you; look ore your wishes,
And be the Mistress of your own desires.
Alas! sir, what is there left for me to wish,
But a short term of wretched life? mean while,
Some humble Country seat shall be my Cell,
Free from the trouble of all tongues and eyes,
I being unworthy either waiting their
Kind deaths cold hand, to lead me to my Lord.
If that be your desire, you must enjoy it,
But we could wish we could deserve you still.
Wilt thou partake of my retirement, IFFIDA?
Madam, it would seem hard to me, to spend
My years, which my youth promise will be many,
In solitude—I'm an ill comforter,—
And then, my fortunes are• before me too.
Be happy in them.
Poor ingratitude!
Farewell, great sir, if ever you remember
You had a Daughter-in-law deserved your love,
Pay it to my poor Son, at least forget not,
You had a Son that did deserve it well.
To him we will pay the love we owed his Father
Adieu sweet Princess—BELTAZAR, attend her.
I thank your Grace:— Farewell my dearest Boy;
But that thou still wilt dwell in my best thoughts,
I would I could forget I ere was happy,
Be thou so ever.
Madam, if you please not
To stay still with us, you'll, I hope, admit
Me in your solitude to do my duty.
Things of more weight will take thee up, be happy
And so shall I, when sighs have spent this breath
" A mortals happiness begins in death.
Com• SOFFIE, and lea•n to be a Prince▪
But (9) when thy hand shall close mine aged eyes,
And on thy head my Diadem shall shine,
Learn by my harms to eschew Tyranny;
It was thy dying Fathers Legacy,
And shall be mine too; and I leave thee more
In that, then in my splendid wreath of Oar▪
" For cruel Acts in them their torment have,
" Guilt on our souls, blots on our names they leave.

WEll met, Clindor.
I would it were so.
Why, what mis∣fortune
is happened, man?
A pox on Fortune,
she ne'er was friend of mine;
And now the wars are at end, there's no way left
For men of merit to supply themselves: But could I
Catch that Beldam by the foretop, I would so
Lug her Ladyship.
Thou mistake,
And threaten Opportunity: it is she that hath
A lock before, and bald behind; but Fortune is a•
Mighty Goddess, and must be reverenced.
A Queen, a Strumpet by this hand; and sh•
you talk of
Is her Bawd; they picked my pockets with a pair o•
Dice, giving the money to a Sot, that scarce knew
How to tell it when he had won it.
That was ill luck.
To lose a months pay in a night, now when In•
Never like to see another muster, nor hope of booty •los•
O I could eat these fingers!
Lose not thy patience, and then thy money•
Will not afflict thee.
Pray will ye lend me 20 Crowns, and keep i•
for me.
Keep what?
My patience.
Thou hast none.
To what end then was your grave advice,
My great Foolosopher! stand by.
Believe me, if the insolence of these Com∣manders
That are come back with the Prince be not restrained,
This Court, best ordered in the world,
Will grow to Barbarism and shame our Nation,
Chiefly us that should keep all in form.
My Lord, take heed whilst you too much study
A regularity, you not forget the proper time:
The Court is yet a kind of Camp, a place of free
access,
In which the Prince is as the Sun,
Whose cheerful rays give life to all.
Will it please your Lordship to buy a Fire∣tu
of me?
Sure I believe it is a very beggarly one.
Your Lordship's a witch; it is Patience indeed,
The beggars virtue; you shall have it for 20 crowns.
Sir, this sauciness may in time
Procure you the beggars punishment
To exercise your virtue, A whip.
Hum, a whip!
Your Lordships reply was by much too harsh
For harmless merriment, and argues you
Of a proud dogged nature.
Pray teach not me to speak, my Lord,
Until I go about to teach you how to fight.
I would your formal Lordship wore a sword,
I should most gladly learn.
I do not want when I intend to wear one.
Certain you do, pray put it on against
I see you next, let this remember you.
What insolence is this?
My Lord fight with him, or by this hand
Ye have got my patience, and you shall pay me for it.
How now you base Rascal!
Who's that he calls so?
One sir, that I have seen do bravely in the wars.
The attribute was very course:
Sir, you must know those whom I call fellows
•n arms, and who for you and me, and all
Have spent their bloods, must meet with better
Recompense then contumelious words.
It is such as you that buzz into my Fathers ears
A thousands tales, contract his bounties into nothings•
Or little to any soldier; and this not as good husbands
For your master, but your selves, that your shares
May be greater.
I hope your Highness will on better knowledge•
Change this hard opinion.
I dare engage my self, your Highness
May absolutely dispose my Lord.
Since you esteem him as a friend, I should not
Be displeased to have cause to believe it.
The occasion is only wanting, Sir.
Well my Lord, if it prove so, I know how
To reward those that serve me. Go Lucidor
And enquire if my Father be ready yet.
If it please your Majesty, I shall.
You forget, my Lord,
That title is only due to my Father.
To whom he had so great a mind to make
complaint,
That he forgot himself.
Let him complain: Those that are mine I
will secure.
Who are not such, deserve not your pro∣tection.
There, share that purse betwixt you; I'll go.
Be to night at my chamber at 9 a clock: now leave us.
The Gods bless your Highness.
What say you now to the old Beldam, is she not kind?
She durst do no other.
Sir, as I told you, upon my knowledge
Your Father is possessed with a belief
That your late victories and custom of commanding
In the Army, hath made you quite forget
How to obey; and Sir, to humble you, your greatest Captains
Do receive daily affronts:
My Captains! even my self do feel their
injuries.
My needful bounty's censured prodigality,
My curtsy insinuations; and all
What I have ever learnt for good or commendable
Turn to my prejudice: Nothing, I see,
Can please my Father, or free me from suspicion,
Unless I prove my self or base, or foolish.
The present affairs, sir, of this Kingdom
Call for a man both wise and valiant:
Such I must say you are; nor is this needful truth
Thus timely urged, to be esteemed a flattery,
Though spoken to your self. Your father, sir, was
what you are;
But now time and infirmities have brought him
Near to what we truly might call dotage
In a meaner man. And is it reasonable
You should stand by an idle looker on,
Whilst his weak or false Councellors and he
Make peace or war with foreign States,
Dispose of government and Offices at home,
Not on the best deserver, but the greatest briber,
Or such a Lords particular friend or kinsman.
Truth is, I do appear now at home of no
esteem:
Even those Princes lately made subject
By my sweat and blood, no one of their Ambassadors
Makes any particular address to me.
It were madness if they should,
The certain way to miss their ends; no sir,
Your younger brother Clarimant is the known
Powerful Advocate for favours from the King;
And for the Prince himself, and power,
Are both laid prostrate at the feet
Of his fair Cousin the Lady Clorinda.
Does she not deserve to be obeyed?
Doubtless no Virgin lives that equals he•
in merit:
And yet it is possible the Prince may have
Another end besides her personal worth,
Which makes him court her.
What end?
You know, sir, at least must needs have hear
Her ancestors have been pretenders, to this Crown,
And time hardly wears out the right of Princes.
It is true, hardly where right;
But a pretension not then prosperous,
Neither lives but to shame the undertakers memory
But were it otherwise in this particular,
I durst trust my brother, indeed in any,
For I know his love to me is firm.
Sir, it is a noble confidence in you,
Nor would I seek to change that quiet peace
That lodges in your mind, for a worse guest, suspicion
But if I do not freely speak my fears,
I shall be guilty of a treason to my Prince
And friend. Your brother sir, fosters ambitious hopes
And howsoe'r you slight Clorinda's title,
That is their chiefest nourishment.
It is impossible.
If I should tell you, some believe your fathe•
Holds what I have said, is conscious that he
Does keep the Crown by wrong, and so would
By a marriage set all strait; this would exact
A greater faith then you, I know, can yet allow.
It is true, for this implies my disinheriting
The falsehood of my brother, nay something mo••
Then this, which I may chance one day to tell yo•
freely:
But now I live curbed in my person,
Nay my tho•ghts pent up, when I would ease
My heart by uttering them.
Enlarge your self each way.
Oh I must not
Then I will for you. My grief to see my Country
Lose the advantage of your best of years
For action, makes me speak plain and home,
Though to the hazard of my head, if you mislike
The council; nor will I put you upon danger,
And not share it with you?
What is it you mean? I am confident you
love me.
As I do happiness, which is included
In your knowledge of my faith and love.
Speak then.
In short it is this:
Propose a war in Germany, raise a great Army▪
Live there a King, since here you cannot.
My father never will consent.
Whore's that Soldier or Commander, will
not obey
Your summons?
To raise an Army, my Father not allowing it,
Were treason; which once proclaimed, would startle
The most resolute.
Scarce a man, if you should on the contrary
Make known what your intents were for your Coun∣tries
Honour and profit.
But in the mean time should they seize my
person?
But in the mean time should you seize your
Fathers person, which is sure much easier to do.
There's but few Nations that adore the setting sun;
The braver spirits do attend his rise,
And hope to mount with him aloft.
Though I confess I willingly would aid
My Fathers feeble arm to hold the sceptre right,
I would not force it from his hands.
Two hands upon one sceptre; men will in∣terpret
Violence; however since it was ordained in one,
If violence at all, let it be powerful in effect:
The happy issue then may change the attribute
To providence care of the present &amp; the future state:
It is an affair of a high consequence,
Pray see me in the morning, I must take time
To think—
Do Prince, it is my desire, since thought
Must make that poison work, I have distilled
Into thy soul; the compounds are so strong
And operative, that it must cause destruction
To thy self, father, or brother, if not all.
But soft; much time, and many dangers
Must be past, ere I can hope to touch that happy
Period; the part I long have acted
Must be still maintained; a seeming faithful
Servant to the father and his sons,
By each believed so tender of their safeties
And their honour, as if I had no sense
Of what concerned the other two.
The grounds thus laid, and mutual jealousies growing
In each, I am secured from a discovery
By any general conference of theirs:
Nay, should an intimacy hold, as it is not like,
Betwixt the brothers, yet am I still secure
By their own nobleness, scorning to tell Councels
The secrets of an Enemy, much less reveal these of
a friend,
Which when I do, I shall no other but my self betray;
Friendship's an useful word, the substance thrown
away.
Nay, Lady, if you fly, being so able to
desend,
〈◊〉 shall suspect you have an ambush here:
•'le make good this ground, proud of my purchase;
I know it is of such value, that the restoring
Will press you to another parley.
Why think you so? To lose your company
withal,
Will make the loss of any thing I have about me in∣sensible.
Make good your word; change but your
maidenhead
For this; and if I ever trouble you again—
O insolence! can you believe that such a jewel
Is reserved for you? you may as well by your small
Single valour hope to surprise the strongest fort.
Nay perhaps sooner, Lady; may be you
Know the first impossible.
I know it is impossible you should be other
Then a rude Soldier.
True, whilst you are an uncivil Lady,
It is wisdom to frame our selves like to the company
We wish to keep.
Indeed I must confess you put upon me in this seeming
Censure, a mighty obligation: your words imply as much,
As if I would be wicked, you for conformity
Would be so too; in troth I do not doubt it:
But that you can as well conform yourself to better
Images, is that I have no reason to believe.
From these your hard opinions, yet in a
milder phrase
Expressed, judge charitably, that my disrespect
Is likewise lessening: And certain, Lady,
So many beauties as show themselves about your
Person, were gifts the Gods repented of,
Which made them place a soul whose pride might tel
the world
It was a goodly Temple built to show their power,
But not to share their adoration.
I see you are an experienced Soldier,
And are not without stratagems, making your
Battery on the weakest side. You praise the beauty
Of my person, and dispraise my mind:
That too for what we almost hold a virtue, (pride)
Grant us but fair, whatever we seem, it is
Impossible we should be angry.
No more of these ingenious confessions, Lady,
Le•t I become Apostate from my old religion,
And believe there may be other beauties in your sex
Then what the eye surveys.
I am wondrous sorry if I have said any thing
To gain your good opinion.
O fear not, Lady, I am not
so much taken yet
To trouble you with lamentable verses,
Or blow the candle out with sighs: breaking my buttons
After a full meal, •s the highest I can reach to: I
assure you,
Methinks that Princely pattern is scarce worth
The following. The King!
I see you lose no opportunity to become
Gracious with the Ladies, I like it well;
Your brother's more unnatural, and courts the men.
The men of action, sir, he does indeed.
The men of turbulence and ambition:
But I shall check his and their haughty spirits.
Let what you do, sir, be with moderation,
He's of a fierce nature, and can ill endure
Reproof, however just.
Fierce nature! shall I observe a boy?
I am his father and his King; and what he fails
In duty to the one, the other shall enforce him
To confess and satisfy.
It is just indeed.
And being so, I mst not fear to let him know
His faults.
Now sir, what would you with us?
I must not hope, sir, you will grant the suit
I come to move, until I see your brow more calm▪
If you mislike these looks, remove the cause.
Perhaps it is not, sir, in me, but in your self:
There are some waters where the billows rise
Though no cross winds do blow; Earthquakes are in
Another kind the same, the causes dark,
And yet not more then are your groundless distastes
From whence this tempest grows.
Your words explain your actions, and your
actions them:
From both you do conclude my weakness,
And your innocence from fault.
The latter is, and still hath been my study:
Show me wherein, sir, I have erred,
In what I have deserved your hard opinion:
Till when I would not, sir, by asking pardon
Create a guilt.
I know you rather do expect that I should
sue to you,
And I will do it. Pray give me leave to be
A King some few years more; you know
I shall not trouble you when your turn comes.
Dear servant, I find my self not well.
Heaven forbid!
Sir, I do find your age is wrought upon
By some unworthy men, who for their own ends
Keep me from that interest nature and reason
Ought to yield me in your love; which since
I cannot hope from you by my true service,
(Still misinterpreted) I scorn to seek
To gain it by a flattery of them.
I know those whom I favour,
Are for that cause the objects of your hate.
And it is not strange, that having forfeited
Much of your own obedience, you should mislike
Their faithfulness.
I see, sir, it is in vain to plead a cause
Already judged against me: Cunning
Weighs down my interest in your blood.
I came, sir, with a hope to obtain some suits
For others, which now reason commands me to let fall,
And rather beg what I am only likely to obtain.
What's that, I pray?
Your leave sir, to retire
My self, to free your Majesty
And me both from disturbance.
You ask and grant your self, it is well.
Sir, that retirement he intends,
Grows not from duty, but ambition.
Out of that cloud ere long he means to break
Forth gloriously; the world, sir, cannot admit
More then one Sun; and he's resolved to shine,
Though nature suffer in it.
It was still my fear, you have no other proofs
But your conjecture.
I would I had not, sir; but such my love is
to your Majesty.
That to preserve the Royal stem, I must not fear
To hazard breaking a corrupted branch.
At more convenience I shall inform you.
The King is old and sickly, inconstant by
nature;
And we must, whilst this heat of passion lasts,
Work for our safety by the Princes ruin.
If he should come to reign, our power, if not our,
lives,
Is at end; but both are likely to be safe
And prosperous under his brother Clarimant,
Who is of a soft and gentle nature,
Apt to be governed.
Especially when it shall appear
We have both will and power to serve him
In attaining to the Crown.
Perhaps Lord Cleon does resolve the same,
And he's man of power and blood; we being joined
How can we miss our end,
Since the whole Court does on us three depend?
Dear Lady, do not welcome sadness thus:
Trust me, it is an ill mannered guest,
And seldom leaves us; though we grow weary
Of its company, and wish it gone.
Not be sensible when there is cause,
Would show stupidity.
Wife men affirm there is no cause of sorrow
But for offending heaven.
These strengths of mind you Men enjoy,
Are certain to our weaker sex denied.
Alas, but I am none of those;
For if you grieve, I cannot be exempted.
Would I had kept my troubles to my self then!
I would not have them grow by being guilty
Of infecting you.
A sympathy with you for what concerns my self,
Though it be grief to me, is pleasing.
I must not say so much for you;
And yet this is the only time I ever wished
Your absence: pray sir be pleased to leave me
To my self.
And it is the only time I ever durst seem
Disobedient; be but your self, and I will leave you
But whilst you are in bondage,
A prisoner to your grief, I must not.
Ye are cruel in you kindness, sir,
And tie me faster: A ransom of my tears
Being plentifully paid, perhaps may free me;
And whilst you stay, shame bars me from the trial.
I would not see you weep; for if your tears
Were shed in vain, it would call in question
My religion, as having paid my vows
To powers insensible.
Take heed, sweet Prince, you do not jest your self
Into idolatry, and over-act that part you personate,
To please a brother; that were a guilt
Neither your tears not mine can expiate,
I fear your warning comes too late for me.
I hope I understand you not.
You do not Lady, nor I my self,
For I have spoke I know not what: shame forces
An obedience, which your commands could not.
All peace of mind wait on you.
Stay brother, whither so fast? I came to seek you,
Stay—
Not for the world, and pray henceforth
Let us not injure truth.
What means this?
My Lord, I know not well, some discontent.
Are we alone? is there no other eye but
that of
Heaven beholds us?
None that I know.
Blessed opportunity! still I am fearful; for your sake
I would not have our loves discovered now by chance
Which with such art and care hath been so long
Concealed from all men but my brother.
I would it had been so from him too, sir:
Why do you fear he will discover us?
O no sir, but—
But what?
The gods were witness enough for me, sir,
It were my glory, were it known; if in your fortune
But a slave, I should with joy proclaim to all
The world what your interest were in me:
But for your sake, considering how you father
Frowns already, I scarce dare to my self
Whisper the joy of being yours.
My father! let not that trouble you,
We will be free as he ere long, and our commands
Better obeyed.
O speak not again my fears! how sir? better
obeyed!
By those that love me, and will live and die
with me.
Die with you, sir! why should that come in
question?
Only as an expression of my friends affection.
But sir, were all men what they seem,
That which I fear you do intend, is that
Which heaven cannot approve; take heed of dis∣obedience,
sir.
Why doest thou plead against thy self, a∣against
thy joys
And mine? Now as I am, I dare not look on these
Bright eyes, the comforts of my life, nor touch this
hand,
These lips, not speak but by the assistance
Of my brother.
This is a freedom, sir, modesty could not allow
Did we oft meet; and as it is, do not again
Expect it.
Why, dearest, are you so nice? you do no•
love me:
Your hand you will not sure refuse me.
I shall, sir, if you presume upon an opportu•nity▪
You never did deny that favour to my broth•
As my substitute.
It is confessed, and that in public too,
More willingly I there would grant him any mode••
Favour, then here to you in private.
That's strange.
Do we not often give those praises to a person•
Absent, which modesty would make us blush
To speak unto himself?
It seems I must be only favoured by attorney▪
Not so; the mind being the noblest part,
I'st not enough if that be happy?
Yes, if it could subsist without a body:
Which since it cannot, dearest mistress, if you'll be just,
The beauties of your person must in some measure
Satisfy the flames that they create.
Sir, I believe you will not think it is
a forced modesty
That I put on; though I should tell you I am
not pleased
At all to be alone with you, yet how much
I do love you, it were in vain to speak.
That love enjoins, as you will keep your faith
To me, not to disturb the quiet of your Father
And this Kingdom, likely to be yours;
Do not expect to find them faithful in the time
To come, to whom you shall teach falsehood
By your own example.
Happily I have no such design; we are ingrate
To fortune and to Love, in spending this happy
Opportunity on any other subject
Then what may tend unto his glory.
I see, Sir, I must leave you, or my modesty.
Dear do not frown; pardon those faults
Your beauties and my love engage me in.
Should I grant that for an excuse sufficient,
Where should we find a guilty or immodest person,
Since all immoderate desires do find a beauty
In their object, which promises a pleasure
By enjoying? My love then yours is of a purer
Kind, and fit it should, as growing from
A nobler cause, your greater merit:
Be witness heaven, I never yielded yet
To any thought or motion, wherein your happiness
Had not precedence.
Should I pretend to what you do appropriate,
The greatest love, it would show presumption.
Yet here I offer what you dare not perform
To me, a free unlimited disposing
Of my person and my will.
I take you at your word; and though your
Humble servant, as a Mistress do impose
These two commands: Be modest in your love,
And patient in your expectation of a Crown;
Let all things be mature and ripened to perfection,
Then they are sweet and lovely; but on the
Contrary, many infirmities accompany
Abortive births, seldom or never lasting.
Sure you will not leave me thus.
Yes sir, I must,
The greatness of my love commands me,
Remember your promise.
You do express it strangely;
Would you stay longer, if you loved me less?
With much more confidence. I tremble, sir, lest
Some unwelcome person should find us here
Alone; if there were company with whom you
Might discourse, I should stand by and hear you
With delight, look on you with much more:
Now apprehension of discovery takes away
All pleasure from me.
If we must ever live with this constraint
upon us,
Where are the joys of love? It rests not sure
Alone in being beloved, but in possession.
He that despairs in love, hath a more happy fate
Then I: You do not love me sure; what have I
More then words to build my faith upon?
If you have pity in you, be more kind,
Or free me from my last engagement.
Not for a million.
Trust me, I shall not hold my self sufficiently
Obliged, unless I seal my promise on your lip.
He that will break his word, no other tie
Can hold him.
Yet never any fearful Creditor
(Such you appear to be) refused an Obligation.
This is the last you ever as a Mistress
Shall receive from me.
May your last words prove happily prophe∣tick!
Think on your promise, sir.
I do; so sweet was the engagement,
That whilst I think on it, even then
It prompts me to the breaking, the only way
For to attain a greater bliss in her. Promises
Made in prejudice of Love, I should be most profane
To keep; nor can she be offended, however fear
And modesty in her forbad me to attempt.
Power, and her dear Embraces, are alike
The objects of my soul: shall danger then make me
retire?
No, danger thrusts me on, and tells me there's no• safety
But in arms, which well employed, cancels my fault
Unto my father, and smooths Clorinda's brow:
•he cannot be so cruel to herself to frown
On disobedience that presents a Crown.
O Fool! for ever thou hast forfeited thy bliss,
She never will endure to hear thee speak,
Or look upon her more. What falsehood
•used she think me guilty of? I am so sensible
Of my offence, that though she would admit me,
•durst never see her more: How poor a value then
•ears life!
Brother!
Ha!
How strangely you are altered!
You do not err sir, I was not wont to be
thus sad.
Nor do I hope you will continue long so;
Your grief may prove infectious, pray shake it off,
You shall not else keep company with my Clorinda.
I never will, sir.
How, brother?
This sadness will not leave me.
Come, by all our interests I conjure you
•peak freely what troubles you.
Then sir, in short, you have undone me.
I! dearest brother.
Yes, you: Did you not enjoin
••at I should make in public address to your Mi∣stress,
〈◊〉 which received opinion you might be freer
〈◊〉 your love?
Had you engaged me in the like,
I should with joy have done it.
My care was such to do it to the life,
That I am really become what I did personate;
Are not you then the cause that I am miserable?
What do I hear! can there be truth in this
If it be so, speak it again.
It is that I never must deny,
I love her more then I do life.
Or faith, or honour, do you not?
Sure I believe nothing with her can stand i•
competion long.
Yet I will never see her more.
It is not fit you should. What do I feel
Can the mere name of Rival trouble me?
Yes, with the addition that he is my brother.
But whither am I falling? Assist me Reason,
Let me but weigh my Mistresses unequalled beauty
And her greater merit, and that must prove
Both his excuse, and my assurance.
I fear, sir, you are angry; Not that I valu•
Any danger, but that I would not have you so unjus•
Trust me I am not, brother,
I will admit you as a friendly Rival:
Make her inconstant once, and I shall gladly quit her•
Had you so mean a thought of her or me,
It were an injury I could not suffer.
Come, come, upon my life I have not.
Some business, brother, of the highest importance
Commands me from you, perhaps from Court er•
long.
And that I may assure you of my love and trust,
Carry from me this Picture to my dearest Mistress.
Sir, I beseech you pardon me; I would no•
see her
When I may avoid it; there's too much danger
In the object.
Remember she's your Brothers Mistress,
that will protect you.
I never did forget, pray send it by some
other.
I shall believe you do indeed intend to woo
My mistress from me, since you refuse to appear to her
My friend and messenger.
Sir, I will do it; but henceforth never mis∣doubt
The strengths you hold upon me; for I in it
•o break a resolution equal to a vow.
Farewell.
How hard a fate is mine! to what cross
actions
•oath our passions move? I fly from what I wish;
Yet to assist another flame, I grant what
so my own I had denied. Oh no, it is not thus;
•or every action rightly weighed, it will be found,
Our own advantage is the proper center
Where all lines meet: For if I true•y apprehended
• discontent from seeing her, I should not sure
•ave yielded to the enforcement of my brother.
•o, it is with me as with those men who are
•y nature strongly tempted to some lust,
••asked in the sin, yet grant no guilt,
Only alleging for excuse, They must.
Sweet Saline, it is not now that I shall need
•o make a declaration of my love,
•ou long have known the engagement of my heart.
My Lord, my obligations are so great,
•hat you may justly claim the utmost of my power
•oward the accomplishment of your desires.
I have been too unthankful to so true a friend;
But be assured that thou shalt have my best
Of fortunes with me; in the mean time wear this
To keep me in thy memory.
It needs not sir, I have already too many test••moni•
Of your favour, to forget.
When was Prince Clarimant with thy Lad•
When was he not? I fear, sir, her affection
To him is so rooted, that it will grow for ever.
Yet I have used those arts you taught me,
And some female practises of mine, but all in vain.
But sir, despair not, since as yet you never
Did make known your love to her; and were she
My mind, she soon would make a difference
Betwixt a boy, a child, and such a man as you.
Friendship doth blind thee, more then •o
does me:
The frost I wear upon my locks, will keep
My fire from kindling in her breast;
Whilst equal youth and beauty in the Prince
Gives nourishment unto a mutual flame.
I hope it will—
Yet prithee say that I would speak with h•
And have a care none overhear our conference.
My Lord, I shall endeavour it; she's now 〈◊〉
the garden.
It is not love alone unto the Princess person•
I know I cannot be so faithless to my own designs,
No, it is her interest to the Crown engages me
As much as does her beauty or her wit:
And yet she holds by those, when I do see,
Or hear her speak, great power upon me.
But I must watch my flame, no spark let fall
That may give any light of my affection to her,
In a third person I must try her,
Since she's of humane race, a woman to her moth••
Whether from her be not derived some seeds
Of the first female weaknesses, ambition and
Inconstancy; which if I find, I'll nourish them,
And in their growth my hopes; but if I see
Such powerful charm no alteration move,
She claims my adoration, cures my love.
She comes, be firm my resolution,
The splendour of her eyes is powerful; already
My designs meet with confusion: Love gives the lye
To my ambition, triumphs o'er my discretion,
And tells me that a Crown's an aerie nothing
Compared with the possessing of her personal
Beauty: what wonders will the magic of
Her tongue perform?
What means this?
It is best I should at once profess my love,
And in her scorn receive a glorious death—
Stay, let me be a King first; and then to offer
Up my self to my great Deity,
Brings no dishonour to her shrine.
My Lord, did you not desire to speak with
me?
Madam, I did; and the affair is of such
weight,
That though I had consulted with my self before,
I durst not utter it without a second thought,
And none but your dear self to hear it.
Leave us.
Madam, amongst those many whom your
perfections
Have devoted to your service, though not so happy
As with others to express my zeal,
There's none, without exception I dare speak it,
Would sooner undertake, or hazard more to serve you.
This if you can believe, I dare enlarge my self:
If not, I must be satisfied with this expression.
My Lord, if I be not mistaken, you are a frien•
To those whom all know I do value highly; that,
Were I ignorant of your own worth,
Is argument enough for my esteem and trust.
I here do call the Gods to witness,
That all my study, all my friendship tends to you•
advantage:
Nor is the Prince at all considerable to me,
But as he is your servant; but for your sake
I wish he were the the Monarch of the world.
For, how so much perfection can be ordained
To bless a Subjects bed, comes not within
The compass of my faith; and Prince Clarimant
Is never like to be a King.
To what tends this?
But had your love been placed upon his bro∣there
As his is upon you, ere long your beauties
Might have found their proper foil, a Crown,
To set •hem off as a bright constellation, there
All eyes might look on you with wonder
And delight; but in a Subjects name, your glory
Are obscured.
Either the Prince, as being his friend,
Hath made discovery to him of our loves,
Or he hath found cause to suspect.
Madam, I see what I have spoke, begets you•
trouble.
I must confess it, sir; can it do less,
When I shall hear a person of your merit,
A friend as you profess, persuading me
To quit my faith for the vain expectation
Of a Crown.
Madam, the Crown will soon be his, as certai•
As he loves you, and both as certain as I live.
It is impossible that Prince Agenor he should love,
And never speak his passion.
No more then it was in me.
How sir, in you?
Madam, I will confess a secret to you,
• burn with a more zealous consuming fire
Then ever yet was kindled in a mortals breast;
Have often seen my Mistress, spoke to her,
Had opportunities alone, as now with you:
Yet such was my respect to her, I never durst
Express my passion▪ Then, Madam, from the purity
Of my affection, judge of the Prince,
And reward his sufferings.
I must try him; Can this be possible?
Jove strike me with his thunder,
If what I now have said, be not a truth:
My Lord, if it be thus, I shall at least find pity
For his sufferings: my best of wishes too
For your success in love.
Would you be pleased, when I shall let you know
Her name, to be my advocate? I cannot doubt
My happiness.
Sure he means me.—Alas, my Lord, what
you desire
I should perform for any worthy person,
Much more for you, since what I shall persuade
Must tend for certain to her happiness.
Can I ask more? she courts me to discover.
Divinest Lady,
The Prince your servant desires admittance.
Hell take him! Madam, be pleased to grant me
The honour of your hand as an assurance
Of your promised favour.
If you believe I have the power to serve you
In your love, name but the time and person,
I am ready to assist you, were it this minute.
I should too much presume upon your favo•
The Prince your servant being so near attending.
Do not mistake sir, he may stay.
Why am I fearful? dare I believe my self 〈◊〉
happy,
That you would miss the Prince's company a minute•
To pleasure me?
Yes by my life, two minutes; nor is it in 〈◊〉
Mere curiosity to know the loves of others,
But that I hold my self obliged no longer
To be ignorant of one whose worth and beauty
Hath the force to ad your conquest to Lov's triumph
Yours who have been still observed victorious
In the subduing every other passion.
To force an inclination, is an act of power,
Where every common beauty can subdue the amo∣rous.
Not to have yielded homage here, had been
a flat
Rebellion, since all hearts are a tribute due
To her perfections; which justice will enforce you
To confess, when you know how much she doth
Resemble you.
It is plain he loves, rather would have me think so,
My Lord, your last words give me cause to doubt,
Not so much your attaining, as the over-value
Of the purchase; and that I may not have a less
esteem
Of you, I must confess I do not wish to know her now.
Madam, the Prince!
How shall I understand this dark Enigma?
Hope, or despair? it is time must clear it.
Sir, I presume to have that interest in you,
You will not be offended at your stay.
For the injury, name your own satisfaction.
So kind,
Madam, to me who have no other merit
But obedience, how can there be an injury?
In this unjust acknowledgment, much mo∣desty
appears:
How winning must your words and actions be,
When they are accompanied with truth?
That only must be truth with me,
Which you are pleased to have so; I will not own
A faculty that prompts me to a contradiction:
Yet never could I yield to my own praise,
But as I am dignified in being your creature.
In being so absolutely mine, you make me
richer
In my own esteem, then all additions which the world
Can yield besides.
This Lady can dissemble; but with whom
she does so,
I am yet to learn. It is not fit I should disturb
This harmony; the God of love is hovering
Not far off, delighted with the music
Of these melting accents: For I, a professed opposite
To all his sweetness, have forfeited my manners by
my stay.
Not so, my Lord; the excess of kindness
I have showed Prince Clarimant,
Must clear all suspicion in this Lord,
If he had any, that I love Agenor.
Sir, be happy in this Princess to my wish,
Which hath a latitude as great as you can
Think. Your Father by my means (if I may boast
A service to my Princely friend) highly approves
The match.—
All happiness attend you both.
How fortune mocks me!
Struck with a sudden sadness, sir!
Call for my servants, I'll go to Court,
Have you any service to command me, sir?
Madam, I see you fain would change the
Scene:
How soon are you weary of his company,
To whom just now you did profess so much?
Not weary, sir, but yet I hope
That you have not forgot to whom
All those professions were intended.
Yet they were spoke to me, the words ac∣companied
With proper accents, your eyes, to speak Loves lan∣gauge;
And here before Lord Cleon with more persuasive
Eloquence then ever.
It is true, it makes me almost blush to think
How much I courted you: Heaven knows
I could not for the world have spoke
Or looked so on your brother; the reason was,
I feared that Cleon did suspect whom I did
Love indeed.
And you to cozen him, used me so over∣kindly,
At first I doubt not but you laid the plot
Of thus disguising your affection.
You speak as if you did repent the obligation
You have laid upon your brother and my self.
Do you esteem it one?
A great one, sir, believe.
Heaven knows I not repent it then;
But can you think that when you look and speak
With passion, whoever hears must not be moved,
And in despite of duty wish
Though dare not hope, that he were the object
Of that passion:
Oh misery!
How could I then, to whom they were
addressed,
Having withal a sympathy of blood,
But find joy as a brother, at first no more,
Which warranted for just, at last that pleasure
Ere I was aware betrayed to me a deeper
And more peculiar sense of happiness in you.
Add not that vanity unto your falsehood,
To hope from me a common estimation after this.
Add not injustice to your cruelty,
To hate where you should pity: The injunction
Did proceed from you, you are the first
And the immediate cause that I am miserable:
Which makes me often doubt, since it proceeds
from you,
Whether it be a crime or no. When I shall find it
Such, you shall not need to frown or threaten
Punishment by hating me, once confident you do,
Without a cause I know you cannot;
I will inflict more, then happily you will wish
I should.
The Judge and the accused so near allied,
As we are to our selves, no crime is great enough
For punishment.
Madam, you much mistake; I cannot be
the Judge.
That am am the Plaintiff: for who does, at least justly
Can complain of injury but I? How is my love,
Since a requital is not in my wish, a wrong
To you or to my brother?
No! why did you by complaining
Make me know your passion?
Now you have named my guilt,
Alas I find I have too much approved that law
Which says, no man is bound to be his own accuser.
You are the proper Judge, truth speaks in you,
Let your severest censure fall, and by the Gods
I am your faithful Executioner.
Then—
Stay, first receive this Picture of my happy
Brother,
Sent from himself, the occasion of your trouble,
Now, I speak not this in my excuse,
To raise your pity up against your justice;
For I at last was pleased in the employment.
Nay, now profess to you and all the world,
Whilst I have life, I shall adore you.
And must I sentence you then,
Like to a desperate person that hath done
Some wickedness so great, for which the happiness
Of sorrow is denied.
You must for what concerns my loving
you.
Then hear a sentence proper to the guilt:
Your eyes and tongue, which did betray your
virtue,
Must never meet in me their objects more.
Misery! never to look or speak to you,
Is that my doom?
It is justly inflicted.
I not dispute; but shall it never be revoked?
It is from me inviolate by all the Gods;
You may to morrow break it, and I look you should.
I must confess, what ere I do resolve,
It is not unlike I should.
I thought no less.
But Madam, I will never see to morrow,
Death is more welcome then to disobey you.
Hold sir.
How long?
Sure you are not in earnest.
Not in earnest! death could have brought
no pain
•eke this; I see I did so well dissemble once,
That I am thought to do so still.
This is an injury so great, it frees me
From disobedience.
Oh hold, as you doe
love me.
As you do hate me, let me die.
No, you mistake,
Or would by death frustrate your punishment.
If you were dead, no longer should remain
The sense of your offence, or my just hatred
For it: Live to be sorry, that way expiate
Your guilt, I do not say your punishment.
But if you kill yourself on this occasion,
Making me accessory to your murder,
• call the Gods to witness I will revenge it
By making you like guilty of your Brothers
death,
For I will never see him more: how horrid
Should I look dressed in a scarlet robe
Dyed in your blood.
All these are trifles, whilst your (just)
Yet most hard sentence rests upon me,
Never to see you more.
Would virtue could permit to make your
noble sufferings less:
Your love might be received, and yet your
person
Never gain access.
O cruel pity!
Meet me with all the forces you ca•
Raise, at Lassent on the frontiers of Germany; th•
Employment you then shall know.
—As I could wish.
You Powers, why should I be thought a person
Capable of his temptation? but there's no help,
He that hath lost his own virtue, may well expect
To make another false. The Rocks, whose constance•
Denies an entrance to the beating waves,
Though they want motion, yet in their firmness
Seem to take revenge by casting the attempting
Billows with dispersed drops upon the movers
Face: So though all motion be denied
Against the person of the Prince, from reverence
To the Father, yet here I may revenge
My injuries, and manifest the vanity of his design
In this dispersion.
Hold, hold, why do you tear the paper •
What do you mean sir? it was but a trivia•
Note,
However the impertinence of the Sender
Moved me.
A trivial Note! can thy faith stile that so,
Wherein my safety is concerned?
How sir, your safety!
Come, come, dissemble not; we will be
both revenged.
Revenged, on whom?
On my false Son: No more I say,
For know, your tenderness hath trenched upon your faith,
I must know every circumstance,
Dare not hide it from me:
Remember, sir, he is your son, your heir,
A Prince in whom your peoples hopes and joys are
fixed:
•ay these close to your heart to move your pity;
And then what my unhappy memory contains
Of what was writ.
Nay, if a Councellor suspect his memory,
His Princes safety at the stake, it is fit he trust
His own care, I'll gather these.
Your pardon, Royal sir; you
shall know every
Circumstance: but sir, remember still
How dear your son is to your people,
Lose not their love by cruelty to him.
Not dearer sure to them then you.
Nay, then this be my witness of the con∣trary—
•o, read, till it kill all nature in thee,
And corrupt thy brain,
•uch loss to him must prove my greatest gain.
ALl these you say are ready.
All on my knowledge; there's no other fear,
•ut that your troops will be too full. Might I have
•iven advice, ere this you had been gone;
here's danger in your stay, so many flock hither
•rome the Court, your house is no way able
•o contain them, and some no doubt that come
〈◊〉 Spies.
To morrow early I'll be gone, I must this
night
Bid farewell to my dearest Mistress.—Now.
O sir, I have rid; my horse fell dead just at the door▪
You are betrayed, sir, proclaimed a Traitor,
Your Fathers Guard I overtook.
Where?
By this time they are at the gates.
O heavens! my fears are fallen upon us.
What's to be done?
Let us make good the gates against them▪
There's none dares touch my person.
Believe it not sir, there is no fafety:
Your Fathers jealousies are wrought to a strange
Height, and those whom you least suspect
I fear conspire your ruin, to advance
Your brother to the Crown.
Who do you mean?
Lord Cleon.
It is impossible.
I saw Prince Clarimant and him together
And Cleon's words were to the Captain of the guar•
Bring him alive or dead.
Sir, be advised, there is no safety
In the Kingdom for you, until this storm blow ova•▪
What, shall I fly?
Rather then fall. I know there's thousan•
Will live and dye with with you, but here they a•
not.
The Guard, Sir, do approach the house on every sid•
Make sure the gates.
That will not do it; fire soon will
op• there•
—Down with them, Fire the gates,
Hark!
Let's force our passage through them. 
My friends, this care is needless; why do
you hold me? I am not mad.
Mad, sir, we do not think it.
Nor can I swim, I do assure you.
What then?
Then you are sure I cannot scope your
hands, as the Prince did.
No sir, we'll look to you for that: Bring him
away before the King.
Before the King! of what will you accuse me?
For being accessory of the Princes flight.
O it is well, then we'll even hang for company.
For company!
Even so, if I be accessory, you let him scope.
Why, could we help it, when he leapt into the
river?
Had your Zeal been so hot to serve the King,
as you do now make show of,
You would have dows'd in over head and ears.
What, drown our selves?
Yes, any thing in zeal: My zeal to justice
shall hang all you and my self
Too, for in my conscience we deserve it; what, shrine•
for a little water?
He tells us true, our fault will be esteemed as
great as his.
Come, come along my friends, we must before
the King.
Very pretty.
You will not find so, when my most nob•
Lord Cleon shall with the King
Judge of your actions.
Well Captain, we acquit you; I find indeed
We should be fools to accuse each other.
Speak for your selves, &amp;c.
Urge nought in his excuse, he's a by•
Traitor,
And he shall know his birth is no excuse
For disobedience.
Sir, I dare pawn my life, my brother never• di•
Nor does intend ill to your Royal person.
If it were so, am not I wounded in m•
Ministers?
This natural tenderness of thine, a Brothers,
Condemns him most unnatural to me a Father.
Now speak, is the Traitor coming to assault us?
No sir, but he is escaped our hands.
How? escaped!
He resolutely made his passage through u•
And we pursuing to take him, he with Lucidor
Leapt into the river, and swam to a small pi•ace
Of his own, that always lay there for his
Pleasure, in which they are put to sea.
With all speed make to the shore, and se•
what course
They hold: if he sir in despair should go into New•stre•
With whose King you now have difference
About the staying of your ships of treasure,
And the Isle of Cires; no doubt much danger
Threatens your self and State; to prevent which,
Straight raise an Army, and make Prince Clarimant
Your General, that being in readiness,
You may prevent any attempt Agenor
Or the enemy can make against you.
Be all things ordered by thy faith and judge∣meant,
Thy care must be my preservation,
I do commit all power into thy hands:
Hearken to him, my dearest Clarimant,
In what he shall advise thee; my age
And griefs, I find, will quickly wear me out.
•'ll to my chamber: Give order, careful,
Faithful Cleon.
Yes, I shall be careful
to take order,
An order with you all, Father and sons.
Now my designs work prosperously;
Only the late discovery that Saline made,
Does trouble me; Agenor, not Clarimant
My Rival, is by her beloved: but all
Do love Clorinda; yet now Agenor's gone,
She happily may change her love to Clarimant,
Who is opinion now stands fairest for the Crown:
Rather I hope by this she hates him
As the cause of all Agenor's misery:
So far Saline is by me instructed
•o insinuate, whom I of late have wrought
To a belief that I do love her person,
But Clorinda's quality and title,
As being those steps by which I hope of ascend
The throne—See where she comes! speak my sweet
Agent; how moves our plot?
Not well, too fast I fear.
As how?
Obeying your directions, my Lady hath con∣tracted
•o much hatred against Prince Clarimant,
•he scarcely can endure to hear him named,
Resolves never to see him more.
Is not this well? it is all as I could wish?
Thus far it is true: but now Agenor's gon•
She so much apprehends the importunity
Of Prince Clarimants affection, that she's resolve•
Past all persuasion, in a disguise
To seek for the Agenor, which if she find,
She satisfies her love, however cures her fears.
My cunning hath undone me:
Thus chance oft triumphs over wisdom.
But what? there is some remedy in every ill—
Let me think it what disguise: soft, may she not
With you dissemble, as you with her?
And she does yet love Clarimant, and not Ageno•
No, I have that here does assure me
She hates Prince Clarimant.
What is it▪ a Letter? O let me see it!
By no means sir, you cannot close it
But the Prince will find it hath been broken.
You do not know my skill.
I need not trust it, upon my life I'll tell yo•
Every word that it contains, she read it to me.
Nay then I fear she did abuse you,
All Lovers are dissemblers, and she I fear
Is a cunning one.
What she hath done, I know not;
But now her sorrows and her passions
Are so raised, the heart's transparent.
There may be greatest art.
Such broken sighs, and floods of tears,
Agenor's name still called upon,
Gives me assurance of her love to him.
Change but the name, the griefs may still 〈◊〉
Counterfeit: I sigh and vow Clorinda,
Instructed by ambition; but yet my heart
Is more Selina's.
Well, my Lord, you may abuse me.
Prithee let me see the Letter.
The words are few, and I can write them
down:
Pray sir do not desire what may undo
My credit with my Lady, which truth is,
I do only value, as it may advance your ends.
The Prince! Make show as if you only
Did of me enquire for him.
My Lord!
There, Lady, is Prince Clarimant, whom you
Enquire for—If he do read it here, I shall
Observe his action.
From Clorinda this, accompanied with all
misfortunes:
How?
Pardon the duty of a servant.
Stay, Lady.
I must receive no answer.
Since from her hand, however I receive it
Thus—
Certain she hath abused Saline:
He kift the paper, as knowing the inside
Differs from the superscription.
Of Lovers most injurious, of Brothers
falsest,
Of all Mankind the worst! Yet know I wish now
What before I only grieved for, that Clarimant
Should love Clorinda, may it be to madness;
If less, only because the sense of torment
May be more, in which alone I can expect
A diminution of that grief, which by thy means
I suffer.—Thine everlasting enemy, Clorinda.
So long my Saint! O you Gods, do I de∣serve
this?
Yes, I do, for she like you is just;
And we blaspheme, when we in thought rapine,
As not conceiving how, though certainly
We have offended; my guilt is clear,
It is crime enough to be the accidental cause
Of misery to her.
This sure is real sadness; Saline, I believe
thee now.
Let me examine, have I not through am∣bition
Or hope to gain Clorinda for my self,
Been aiding to my Brothers wrongs?
Sure I am guilty: I but think I did
My best to appease my Father; yes, the Gods know,
And she as being divine, may see my real
Love to him, not only as my brother,
But my friend; did either want, and could be
So supplied, how gladly would I pour this
Blood into their empty veins? and yet she
Hates me thus, perhaps my brother does so too.
What's that? nothing: It is true, if I durst
Wholly yield my heart.
He meanly does deserve a Lovers name,
That can know mixture in his grief, or flame.
Though you have lost your Country for
the present,
All your hopes dashed in the minute of your greatest▪
Expectation; yet sir consider, the hand of fortune▪
That presses you thus low, may as she turns
The wheel, raise you again.
Never, oh never! it is not the hand of for∣tune
But my guilt that bears me down; Justice,
The justice of the Gods lies heavy on me,
Treason and disobedience, till now I never
Found their weight.
I know not, sir, what you call Treason:
Though what you did intend, succeeded not,
• hold your fortune to be better now
Then in in your Fathers Court; you are safe in this
Country, and your own disposer, neither of which
• take it was allowed you there.
Why do you injure truth, and seek to lessen
My foul faults? Think not to make my grief
Diminish so; rather express your friendship
In yielding as I do; so shall you quickly
Be informed that our crimes are so great,
No punishment can be too much; and I have now
No joy, but in this burden of my sorrows.
Nor I in my particular, no grief so great
As in the lightness of my purse.
We have enough, these Jewels will
From want secure us; for I am resolved
Never to quit this habit and condition,
Since justice hath imposed it as a punishment
For my ambition.
Make haste, make haste; sure we shall come
Too late.
Let's leave the street.
Do you think we shall get near to see?
Sure she'll choose one of the strange Princes.
Troth who can tell? Newstrea affords
Handsomer men then they.
Indeed she's past fifteen; I'll warrant she has
A Sweetheart, some at her age have two
Or three.
Trust me, she's the wiser to have plenty;
When age comes, they'll drop like leaves
In Autumn.
Daughter, this is the day
Wherein you have full power
To dispose my Kingdom, nay more,
Your self.
This freedom, sir, of choice, which custom•
And your Majesty allows, is that wherein
My bondage will consist; nay, all this
Glorious troop appear to me no other
Then if they came with joy to see me
Put into the grave alive.
How, daughter!
Many Virgins, sir, that have been forced to
Marry those they did not love, have rather
Chosen death as the less evil.
I understand you not; call you this force,
Where the election's absolutely free?
I grant, sir, I am free to choose;
But if I would not choose at all, does not
The same constraint still rest upon me?
Pardon, great Princes, whose expectation
To enjoy me and a Crown, have drawn you
From your Countries: you are all indifferent
In my eye, nor does my knowledge of your merits
Which I confess is great, persuade that in
The choice of any one I shall be happy:
And where the wife is discontented, the husband sure▪
If he have real worth, cannot be pleased.
From the knowledge of the liberal power
The law allows, and the necessity of a successor,
You cannot but have often thought on this days
Ceremony: Let not a fained modesty,
Or be it real, prevail above your duty and your
reason:
The ripeness of your years may justly challenge
All delight; and here a Husband, and the assurance
Of a Crown attend you.
If these do make you weep,
What can cause joy in woman? Since you are
My daughter, I dare not think that you have placed
Your love on any man you are ashamed to name.
The Gods are witness, sir, I never saw that
person
Yet, whom I thought worthy to exchange
My heart with; but custom, sir, and you impose
On me the prostitution of my love perhaps to one,
Who, were it not for the Crown I bring,
Nay even with that addition will happily refuse me.
Refuse you, Madam!
He must not sure be mortal,
That dare aspire a greater happiness.
The Gods have left heaven for mortals,
Then here there never was a greater cause.
Princes, these words do fitly wait upon
The action you are now engaged in:
I do not doubt you should refuse me,
But I perhaps may choose one whose affection
Is already given; how miserable am I then?
Since there to be refused, were the less mischief,
For his acceptance only grants a perjured
And ambitious husband.
How vain are these excuses, since the custom
And my age enforce a choice.
Like one condemned I beg for mercy:
Cross not the course of nature; even beasts, sir,
Do not couple till they woo.
Plead not the rights of nature, since those you
wrong
By thus refusing marriage: On your posterity
Depends the safety of my State, and I nor can
Nor will dispense with what custom and law
Appoint.
The law doubtless was made in favour of
The daughter, to make her happy in a free
Choice, which almost never is allowed to Princes;
But where like privileges are, if not demanded,
They are not enforced: Those Countries where the
Book's allowed to save the forfeit life
For theft, it is but if asked; so when a Virgin
Saves a life, and gains a husband,
Yet have they in those offers been refused,
And death embraced by the delinquent.
Then wonder not that I, a Princess, to miss
A husband, which being enforced I needs must hate,
Do that which common persons have performed.
My seeming disobedience set against
Their forfeit life, Justice will force
These Princes, and your sacred Majesty confess
That I have reason on my side, however will
And custom plead for you.
Fond Austella, too late I fear thou wilt
repent
This pride of soul; it is no other cause
Makes thee thus peevish: My Lords, your ear.
Ha! what object meets mine eyes? sure
there is
Something like a charm that works upon me;
Can this be natural? fie Austella,
Consider these Princes had no power;
Let not a glance then of a strangers eye
Kindle an amorous fire about thy Virgin heart:
The Princess eyes are fixed upon me,
And they are glorious ones, believe me friend.
Sir, we are all agreed; the honour to be
your
Son in law, which thus we still may be,
Is that we covet.
Know Austella, since you refuse the
privileges
Of your birth, and thus neglect my safety
And the State; that reason which you so much plead
Invests your sister with all those privileges
Which once belonged to you.
Ah me! that I had sooner se•n, or
never.
My sister, sir, will be better advs'id, I
know.
I wish, sir, I had not so far transgressed;
But do your pleasure.
My pleasure, dearest Austella, is to make
thee yet
What nature did ordain thee, if thou wilt choose
A husband.
I shall sir, so you will promise
What the law requires upon your part.
It is vain to make a second promise,
With the Crown I took that Oath.
These Princes and all that hear me, know
that I
Can choose but one; I hope none will rapine
Since for my self I choose.
None dares be so unjust to question the
actions
Of a Goddess, such all true Lovers
Ever should esteem their Mistress.
Sir, in obedience to your royal will,
I am resolved to give away my self—
Stay—pause Austella—It is no less:
How rash, how fatal may that bounty prove!
Shall the deceitfullest of all my senses
Be more powerful then reason, duty,
Or my resolution? No, no, my eyes,
Though as a woman I receive with joy
The beams which you convey, yet as a Princess
On whom depends the good of others,
Reason and virtue ought to sway me more.
Is it not extremely dark upon the sudden?
Just as it was.
O friend, I am undone for ever!
Daughter, why do you hold us all upon the
Rack
Of expectation?
In an affair of so high consequence
Blame me not, sir, though I advise. Were you to
give away
A Kingdom, you would do so. I shall not only, sir,
Do that, but likewise take from many,
Especially these Princes, a Kingdom, and your
Daughter;
And yet to balance all these discontents,
Please but one person:
Yes, dearest Austella, your self in your free choice
Of him whoever he be.
You encourage me; but I, sir, from my care
Of these your subjects for whom I am to choose
A King, as well as for my self a husband,
Humbly desire the Ceremonial part
Of this days custom may be dispensed with;
And where the manner was to praise the Gods
For him was chosen son in law, and so successor
To the Crown, you now would with more reason
And a righter set devotion go to the Temple,
And invoke those heavenly powers to inspire me
With their wisdoms in my election, which I will make
At my return.
I know not how I, or these Princes, or these
people
Can refuse you a request so just and pious,
•ending to all our goods.—Set forward to the
Temple.
Are not those strangers I sent for, come?
Madam, they wait your pleasure.
Wait! why did you suffer it? Oh bring
them in,
Yet stay.
What contradiction's here?
How hard a part necessity hath thrust
upon me!
Time, till for this cause, I never wished
Thy motion slower; desire them enter.
O you Gods, was this the Lady that sent
for us?
Noble strangers, for such your looks do
promise,
I took the boldness to send for you to know
A truth, which from our natives, or my fathers
Subjects, it is not like I shall, since all are apt
Still to approve the customs of their Nation:
Madam, when you are pleased to make me
and my son
Know your demands, so far as our abilities inform,
Truth shall not suffer.
Say you the same, sir?
It were alike vain as to dissemble with Di∣vinity,
Not to speak truth to you.
What I demand, is, how you do approve
Those actions of which you were late witnesses?
I must esteem that Kingdom made happy
By a custom, where their prosperity
And future bliss depends on your election,
Who have no doubt the care of heaven to govern
What you do, as well as it is expressed
In the harmonious composing of your person:
This flattery makes me despair to find
That truth which I expected, and you promised.
Yet necessity does urge me to demand
A bolder question: What Country do you hold
Produces the greatest beauties?
Madam, this Kingdom, even this place con∣tains
More then the world besides.
These words methinks fall from your
tongue,
As if you had been taught by Love to speak
Hyperboles: You have a Mistress, I perceive.
Ah me!
Speak, have you not?
She loves you, on my life.
Oh I fear.
What mean you sir?
Madam, I know the Prince.
How sir?
The Prince of Love I mean, Queen Venus Child,
Had never any power yet o'er my son,
The war hath ever been his Mistress.
How gladly would I flatter my desires
With a belief of something even above my hopes!
The words were strangely broken and abrupt,
Is he your father, sir?
Madam, you are the first that ever seemed to
doubt it.
I must confess I do: withal, whatever he says,
I must believe you are a Lover.
Madam, one truth's in both; the latter
I will swear, or seal it with my blood.
How sir?
That I do love.
How long have you done so?
Since the first minute that I saw the object
Of my passion.
I must increase your wonder at the strictness
Of my examination: Hath many days past
Since your passion first took birth?
Though it may seem an arrogance ap∣proaching
Madness; yet truth, which you enjoin,
And all must reverence, forces me say
The sun hath never set, since my affection
Rise; a glorious passion sure, if but considered
From your self the object.
Me! Know you to whom you speak?
I know you are the daughter of a King,
So to be reverenced: but I obey a power
That aws all scepters; your beauty hath erected
In my heart a greater monarchy, and that commands
Me, fear cast by, here prostrate at your feet,
Acknowledging my subjection.
Ye Gods, teach me to husband all my joys:
Although encouraged, he that dares thus profess
His love to me, must have a soul above the
Common rank: why do you kneel?
You are my destiny, give life or death:
So were you mine; time bars all ceremony
now,
At once receive all happiness that I can give you.
If this be real, I shall contemn addition;
Are we not in a pleasing dream? is all this truth?
All certainly, if she be flesh and blood:
Ere long I hope you'll be resolved.
Let none take notice of our conference,
I must in public choose you:
If but my Father then my act approve,
None ever was so happy in their love.
SIr, we are injured past all sufferance,
And shall return back to our Countries
The scorn of all the world.
Princes, I had no power to force the affection
Of my daughter.
Your daughter never durst have made a
choice
So much to our dishonour, had you not been
Before acquainted with it.
Or when she had, would he have given
consent,
But that it was his plot?
Let not my patient bearing of your slander
Make you believe I fear your angers,
Though united; yet that I may give you all
Satisfaction possible, the Gods be witness with me
I knew not her intent before, nor had I power
To hinder when the choice was made: You saw
Your selves, the people, as if inspired to his
Advantage whom my daughter chose, with strange
Unheard of acclamation did express their joy.
I wonder what they saw to be delighted
with,
Some of our persons are as promising as his.
They saw one like themselves, a common per∣son chosen,
And that begot their joy and friendship.
Know Princes, though in honour I am bound to
observe
Fairly my promise to content my subjects;
Not all your discontents, if joined, make up one half
Of mine: but if you hold your selves disgraced
By such a Rival, am not I more, both in his present
Interest, and future expectation of my Crown?
But now to manifest in public our discontent,
Will no ways suit the present joys attending
Hymen's rights; but you shall find your honours
Something righted by what I shall perform.
This music speaks the Brides approach to bed,
We must be wanting in no outward ceremony
Custom commands.—Now all retire, and leave
This happy man to enjoy a pleasure
Which the Gods may envy; these Princes do, I am
sure.
This Gentleman deserves so much, he is
above our envy.
Some Prince disguised, without all doubt.
Most mighty Monarch, we subscribe to your
high birth,
Fate did ordain us humble vassals to attend your
triumph.
That this divinest Lady judged me worthy,
Does raise me really to what your scorns
Do throw upon me; and were this time and place
Proper to right my self, the boldest of you
I would make seal with his blood, I were in worth
His equal, however I do boast no title.
Well spoke; he has cooled the Princes
blood.
I hope, sir, you'll remember he is my hus∣band,
So your son, in that at least an equal to these
Princes.
But happily their injuries take birth
From your expressed dislike: If so, let all
Your anger fall where it is only due, on me.
Yet Royal sir, remember you forced me choose
A husband, and Love instructed it was only he
Could make me happy.
Why, daughter, are your joys disturbed?
Do you believe you and my Kingdom
Bore so smalll a value with these Princes,
That they could part with all their hopes
And not be moved? Their murmuring proves but
A foil to set you off with greater lustre;
So raise your husband to an ecstasy of joy,
Since he a private man possesses that which Princes
Grieve to miss:
Madam, the King hath spoken what we had
Else alleged in our excuse.
It is time all should retire, and leave them
To the accomplishment of their full joys:
Remember what I enjoined.
Were not my faith strong
in your happy
Influence, a sadness now might give some little
Check to my full joys.
It reaches not so high as sadness,
Only some thoughts that crossed my fancy.
Madam, the Ladies of this Court are en∣mies
To Hymen's rights; else sure they would have staid
To undress you; all Brides that I have seen
Were in an instant ready for their bed,
So many busy hands about them.
Perhaps our customs in that point do differ
Yet you must grant we are no enemies to Love.
If so, you were ingrate, since that great
Deity
In your fair sex, hath placed his glory, power,
And all his sweetness: which when you freely do
Dispense to those that honour you, you pay
To him the proper sacrifice.
I do not understand what sacrifice you mean.
I would instruct you to bed, bright Queen
of Love!
All other attributes come short; the zealous ardor
Of my heart commands me stile you so.
Mine to you enjoins me study how to keep
Your flame (in which I glory) pure and high;
And I believe that our imaginations
Far exceeds the touches of our sense.
Be not deceived; if this, and this, beget
delight,
Which, if you love, it must; can an increase
Diminish joy?
No more, I must not trust to demonstration,
My faith grew by discourse.
I find you had a woman to your Tutor;
But know, this Logic is the properest for Love,
Yet this is not the fittest School to teach it in.
To bed; and if you do not there confess
Our loves and joys receive increase,
For ever banish me your sight.
Neither my love nor duty can admit that,
Since you are my husband
Not going to bed, both point to it.
You willingly mistake; I mean, both do•
forbid
Our separation.
Then sure they do conclude the contrary:
Come dearest, make me no longer languish;
You are an excellence so great,
You can no more receive addition by difficulty,
Then a rich pendant Diamond by a Foil.
But yet a while I must be worn so,
You cannot have me naked.
I know you will not be so cruel.
If there be any, Love be my witness
My heart does harbour none but to my self.
Take heed; the witness whom you call must
As a Judge condemn you; that Deity
And Hymen both are injured, you tempt
Their power to show a judgment on you:
But they I fear are partial, making me only feel
Their rage; no, I blaspheme, and they are just
In punishing my pride, that could believe
I merited so great a bliss.
I melt at this, yielding undoes us both.
I must not stay, dear sir good night.
An ill and everlasting one,
If thus you leave me.
What shall I do?
Madam, the King hath sent to see if yet you be
at rest.
Ha!
Tell him I now am going to my chamber...
It was well, I had been lost else.
Is it even so? this silence speaks me miserable,
From what a pitch of happiness am I fallen!
Sir, on my knees I beg a pardon for which
soever
You condemn; never was heart then mine
More full of love and duty.
I must not doubt it, but yet—
Lay by all fears, and let your dreams assure you
Of my faith; ere long, by this, and this, reality
Shall crown your wishes. Pardon me modesty,
I in these kisses only do bestow,
Rather but pay interest for what I owe.
There is division in me; if ever any heart
Did at an instant feel both joy and sorrow,
Sure then I do: No, it is impossible,
How near soever they appear (considered) there's
succession.
Though this last instant I enjoyed much bliss,
Yet now I am displeased for what I miss.
Madam, the last of whom I did demand,
Assured me in two hours we might reach the City;
The Forest is but narrow, as they say,
The way not hard to find.
But trust me I am weary,
I can walk no further till I rest.
You cannot find a fitter place then this,
My sister and I will watch a distance from you
Whilst you sleep.
Indeed I find I need it; my grief and travel
Hath wasted much my spirits. Yet since for thee
Agenor, I should rejoice in it, though my pains
Were greater.
She does begin to fall asleep,
Sister, let's walk a little further.
With you whither you please.
Hear me, thou fool, with the attention
As thou would do a God that should in speech
Declare his pleasure to thee.
What means this?
Thou know my love unto the Princess,
And I know thine to me hath made thee fondly
Hinder all those opportunities I had to enjoy her.
But now take heed; my passion raised by
These delays unto that height, it knows
No limits: If thou shalt speak, or call
From where I bind thee by all that can be sworn by,
Those sounds direct this dagger to thy heart.
O you Gods, can so much cruelty
Dwell in your breast? sure Love admits no such
Companion; I was a fool that ever could
Believe it.
I shall not greatly study to attain
Your good opinion: If by persuasion
I attain my wishes from the Princess.
Then this shall live; but if I must use force,
Then she must dye, she has a tongue.
There's some a hunting in the Forest;
But by the cry, they make quite from us.
O save me, save me heaven!
Dear Madam, what affrights you?
I had a fearful dream;
My heart beats hard to find a passage out,
As if there were no safety in this miserable
Habitation.
What Prince that lives would not receive it
Gladly, and give you his to undergo your fears?
All I dare say, being your servant, is,
Danger shall pierce my heart, before it reach to you.
I know it shall; full well thou hast discharged
By thy unwearied care and pains, all that thy sister
Promised me in thy behalf.
Madam, there's none that serve so truly
As where love is to pay the wages.
Love! what do you mean by that?
I understand you not.
Nor yet?—
Ha! much less by this; my wonder is in∣creased,
Shall I believe my eyes, or ears?
Madam, I am to claim a promise:
Behold the truest and most afflicted Lover
That ever begged relief, kneeling before you.
I must confess my promise was to assist you
In your love; but then, as now, most ignorant
Who was your Mistress.
He is not worthy to be held a Lover,
That makes his flame glair in the public eye,
Troubles the world with complaints: Let such a one
Reap scron from her he loves, and a cheap pity
From his hearers. If I must fall through your
Disdain, (for know you are the Saint of my devotion)
A silent grave shall be more glorious in my esteem,
If you in private shed one tear,
Then all the trophies whining Poets
Or repentant love ever adorned a hearse with.
Your words alone would vanish into common air,
If not made solid by your action.
It is some happiness to gain belief,
Add but your pity.
My Lord, you have all that's possible for me
to give,
Since I have but one heart.
But if that heart be sent you back,
You may again dispose it: you see the Prince
Careless of your commands, hath rashly through
Ambition lost himself, but first he forfeited
His obedience to his Mistress; for you confessed this
day,
You did enjoin a double temperance
Unto his love, and his ambition.
For him, as for my self, I must interpret
The irregularity of his actions
To grow from his unlimited affection:
And though I grieve the sad effects, his flight
And my pursuit, I must not love him less;
The power he aimed at, was but to make himself
More capable to serve me.
The same end, Madam, hath directed all my
actions,
Which you I hope will grant, when I have set
The Crown of Burgony upon your head,
Your right, this arm shall prove against the world.
Clarimant now, for the old King is dead,
Usurps that sceptre, the Merchant whom we
Travelled with assured me:
All you discourses have strange wonders
in them.
Madam, why are you sad at that which
should
Rejoice you? What though no subject but my self
Allow your claim? when I am known your servant
And your General, the Boy will be conten•ed
With the Principality of Cyrais,
Rather then venture losing all.
And certain, Madam, it is more glorious,
And should be more content to you to make a King,
Then to be made a Queen, at least to wander
Seeking one to do it, who happily
Hath found another that he more esteems.
I can no longer bear thy falsehoods,
Even thy disguises do discover thee.
To be the faithfullest of all your servants,
Lady.
The falsest that the sun beholds; touch
me not
I command thee.—Ho Saline, where art thou?
She will not answer you, I am engaged,
I read disdain and anger in her eyes,
Persuasions will not do, I must try other means.
I was to blame to speak so bitterly,
How much his looks are changed!—Saline!
In vain you call: Madam, I see neither my
sufferings past,
Your promise or present tender of my service,
Have power to gain your good opinion.
At least consider where you are, give me not cause
By your unkindness, back to reflect upon my own
Advantage, your happiness forgot. I tender you
once more
A servant and a husband: Acceptance
Makes me equal to a God in happiness;
If you deny, it is in my power to take
A sweet revenge.
Revenge, my Lord! I know not what you
mean.
Certain you do suspect, but I'll inform you
fully—
Sure you forget your sex; else you would rather give
Then have me force a pleasure from you.
How, Villain!
Offers to em∣brace
her.
Come Madam, you are mine; I must return
kisses,
Embraces for those frowns; nor art, nor force
Can free you from me.
Unhand me: Can you believe to scope hey∣vans
justice
After an act so foul?
So foul! so fair:
Yes, often I do hope to do the same.
It was well attempted; but now it shall
assist
The owner: Yield, or I'll pierce that
Unrelenting heart. She offers to draw his sword.
Traitor, thou dare not. [She spits at him.]
It is true, not kill you, had you done me wrongs•
Above what mankind ever suffered:
You cannot move me otherwise then to
Infinity of love; yield but consent,
And be a sharer in my joy.
Villain, think of the punishment that does
attend thee
Rather, from the just Gods: yet kill me,
And I will pray to heaven for mercy on thee:
Your beauty, and my love, both plead against you;
But you may think me cold to talk thus long,
We must remove into a thicker place.
Help, help you Gods! murder, treason,
help!
It is impossible this Bore can scope,
Having so many wounds; sure I shall track him
By his blood.
Within,
Help, oh help! Traitor!
Ha! it is sure a women's voice.
Rude slave, how can thou injure so much
sweetness?
I must not speak, but do.
O heavens, it is he! guard him, you powers.
Hold, oh hold, and hear me!
O my dear Lord, believe not ought he says.
Ha! what voice?
Villain, and Traitor both!
Oh—
Are you not hurt?
Pardon you Powers, whom I so oft blasphemed
In my despair, Deliverance! and by this hand!
O my joys, you grow too fast upon me.!
It is she, the too much injured Clorinda:
Why should I know her, that have so much
Forgot my self and virtue? O my shame!
Why hang you down your head? these un∣befitting
clothes
Nor you nor I should blush at,
Since love did both provide and put them on.
Your love to me?
Ha—My love to you! you cannot think
My heart is capable of other love.
I wish I could,
For then my falsehood had been so much less
Dear sir, what is it in me that offends your eyes?
This face, if it have less of beauty,
Yet even that loss, since cause by sorrow
For your misfortunes, merits from you more love.
Nor face, nor habit, dearest Clorinda—but—
But what? strangely unkind!
Oh here, receive this sword, rip up my breast,
And see what's written in my heart; there,
There thou shalt find the cause of this distraction:
No jealousy, I hope, nor apprehension
That I have suffered rape, my person so
Become unworthy of your love: If either way
Defiled, I should not dare to approach thus near you.
Then pardon me, divinest Maid, this seem∣ing
coldness,
That only grows from my respect to injured virtue
How sir I• what are you guilty of?
Be it an offence committed against me,
Pardon your self with promise of amends,
And I will seal it on this Princely hand,
That gave so late life to my dying honour.
O do not touch that hand,
It was too active in your wrongs.
Ha! O my fears! I dare not question more
And yet I must, my torment cannot well be greater•
Your hand, this hand; speak, oh speak!
What?
This hand which you so often have approach•
With trembling reverence, mine; this hand
Which to your letters set, assured the free gift
Of your heart to me, hath not persumed to give it
To another sure.
O yes, this hand hath instrumentally be∣queath'd
My heart unto another, with all the ceremonial
Rights of marriage.
Married! Oh me! pain, danger, and disgrace,
Fruits of a faithful love; behold your recom∣pence.
O men, false men!—Why then these tears? rather
revenge:
Such wrongs cry loud, and make a feeble arm
Like mine, heavens instrument of justice.
Strike where you please; but if you will
be just,
Here, this is the seat of falsehood, here dwells
The traitor.
But hear the miserable—
Offers to kill herself.
O dearest Clorinda, add not
unto my breach
Of faith, the guilt of murder; for your sweet inno∣cence
Could know no spot, but as by me infected.
Why do you make shows of repentance,
And yet persist in injuries? You seem to grieve
For having made me wretched, yet force me
To continue miserable.
It is to prevent your misery and mine, that
I restrain you:
You had wont to enjoin and teach me temperance,
Remember that.
O bid me not remember; it is loss of memory
Alone can ease my torments; and it is a study,
Since you will have me live, that I must practise:
Live, and live happily, or else I never can
do so:
Live as my friend, my dearest sister.
That is a title, had nature framed me such,
I had been happy in. Your brother now, or kinsman,
For I have lost my modesty so far,
Ever to take a women's habit; and whilst I so
Forget my sex, I likewise may forget part of my
grief.
Then as my friend, I will communicate my
fortunes
To you; where you will find, though nothing
Worthy of a pardon, yet something near a fair
Excuse, it Beauty and a Crown bear estimation.
I know you mean your wife: O me,
why did
I name her? Be not so weak, my resolution:
I shall discover who I am; so move her hate
Or scorn, and then you will repent my being
Near you.
I know I never shall.
I am no Rival; it is sin with passion
To affect you now, since lawfully another right.
This temperance I shall endeavour, however
I will do no wicked office, or seek to make
Appear her virtue, or her beauty less,
Since they are your excuse, my satisfaction grows
From their excess.
To force me choose a husband, yet bar the
rights
Or marriage! But I must bear it, since my Father
And my King esteem it fit.
What is the number of the Kings army, sir?
Ten thousand Horse.
What Foot?
None that appears, but doubtless they are
coming
After: Princes, you may now manifest your love
To me and to my daughter, by raising forces
To assist me in this need.
You have a powerful enemy, and doubtless
By some injury highly incensed.
Rather his power far exceeds mine;
It is that which makes me crave assistance from you:
My daughter, although married, is yet a Virgin;
It is possible, in time, that she may prove a widow:
These arguments may witness to you
I mislike her choice.
Indeed she looks as if she were not pleased.
But shall we credit this? Lay he not with her?
Not by my honour; perhaps he never shall,
Though all were carried formally to please the
people,
Who are enamoured of him now, more then
My daughter is.
Sir, though I cannot think there's likelihood
That any of us should ever enjoy your daughter,
Yet I will promise what assistance I can give.
The like do I, and for that cause we'll take
Our leaves.
I rather thought you would have writ for
forces,
And with your personal assistance and advice
Help to secure this City.
So we should lose our selves to no pur∣pose:
The King will suddenly with his Troops of horse,
If his design lie hither, appear before the walls,
And close us in: where if we leave you now,
We may return hereafter to your rescue.
I dare not force, although I would persuade
you.
Lady, we wish much happiness,
Till we return to serve you.
Now thou fond girl, thou may perceive
what
Thou hast done to choose a husband of the common
Rank; these Princes might have been a bulwark
To defend against the powerful foe:
Whatever they seem, they for thy sake
Will not prove enemies, I fear.
If you have done no wrong, sir, why should you
Fear? This King; whom you believe comes to
Invade, hath his dependence from the Gods,
And they can change or overturn all his designs▪
Thus thou did ever speak with piety
And wisdom, which made me in thy choice
Expect a worthy son in law.
But thou hast brought shame and disgrace upon
me.
The Gods give this allay unto my joy,
Lest in possessing you, I should contemn
Their happiness.
My dearest Mistress, (for by that title I must
call you)
He that does give you cause to weep,
Could have no other privilege but that of
Father, to defend his heart from shedding
Crimson drops: But since it is your will,
I must with patience hear yours, and my
Injuries:
Alas, my Lord, consider his years
Make him incapable to feel our fires
Titles and riches only please old age,
And with those favours Princes often die:
But yet his memory, methinks, might tell
Him by looking upon you, what his desires
Were when he married; and certain, Madam,
You have little of your mother in you,
That can obey so cold a precept,
Where heaven allows too, only man forbids.
But yet that man's my Father and my King.
Remember that my interest in what is just
Exceeds both these: pardon the violence of
My desires, which makes me urge this truth,
Since it arises from your beauties: but happily
You do repent your choice, won by your
Fathers threats or promises.
Although unkind, yet I must grant you
Not unjust, in this suspicion. Those sparks
Which quickly grow a flame, do oft
As hastily extinguish; perhaps you know
This by experience, that you so quickly
Find my guilt, indeed before it had a being,
But what you may instruct me to hereafter
By your example.
No more, fair soul, I only urged it
To obtain that which your Father bars me from,
Your bed; we must not differ thus, being one:
And yet such gentle quarrels only divide us
So, as to behold the beauty of each others
Love, proving at last the proper cement
Of a true affection.
Upon a reconcilement, friends (they say)
Are ever kindest: What is it you can deny
Me then?
Nothing that's in my power to grant.
Tell me your name and country, my dear
husband.
When I do really possess that title,
By this kiss I will.
Are we not married?
But I am ashamed to tell my name or qua∣lity,
And yet my wife a maid: When I do know you
Perfectly, you shall do me.
Now you are wanton, and I do not love you:
But whore's the pretty youth you promised me?
He will not tell you who I am, believe me.
Well, I'll not ask; pray you let me see him.
You shall; he waits without,—remember
That she knows not who I am.
A lovely beauty! what majesty dwells in her eye,
How earnestly she looks upon me!
He hath not sure betrayed me to her scorn.
I never saw so sweet a Youth;
That blush becomes him strangely.
Mistress, I here present a Kinsman to you,
One that hath given such testimonies
Of his love to me, I never shall forget.
You cannot speak that goodness, which his
looks
Not promise; however the tie that is
Betwixt you, does oblige me.
I am betrayed, and she does know me.
Are you not well sir?
Madam, I have a grief of a sad nature
Does oppress me.
Of body, or of mind?
Of both▪ and if I not express it, my heart
will burst.
What can this mean?
Looking upon your beauty, and considering
Your happy fortune, ay me! The very posture
Your are now in adds to my affliction: Oh I am
sick!
Fond man, what have I done?
Call for some Cordial.
No Madam, now it needs not; the qualm
begins
To pass, perhaps you wonder, Madam,
That the love betwixt you two should move
This passion.
Indeed I think it strange, unless you do believe
That he hath made a choice unworthy of him.
By all the Gods, I never saw a Lady yet
That I could think each way so excellent;
And for your love to him, no story's known
That equals your affection:
What might the cause then be of your
distemper?
I had an only sister, which of all the world
I loved,
•nd she was sued to by many Princes,
•no above her far in birth, but more in merit,
•t least she thought so; such power hath vows
•nd shows of service. I oft have known them sit
•s you do now; their hands fast joined, their eyes
••xt upon either, their sighs with all the eloquence
•f love, vowing an everlasting constancy;
••t O false Agenor!
Lost for ever!
So was he called; he soon forsook her for
another Mistress.
It was not the Prince of Burgonia, that loved
your sister?
Yes, he that loved, and left her and his faith for ever.
It was no wonder, he betrayed his Father;
••t certainly some heavy punishment attends him
•heresoe'r he is.
Perhaps he wanders up and down, to make
more women
•retched.
He's too much hated, to return back to his
Country.
Oh misery!
Madam, I by my sister was enjoined to seek him
•hrough the world.
Now she discovers all.
Whither?
I know the story; he hath told it,
•nd made me strangely sad: Trust me, I am much
•ispleas'd that you should •ear it, for that cause;
•he King too I know will wonder where you are.
Let him, I needs must hear the rest—
•nd did you ever find the perjured Prince?
—Sit down again.
Madam, I think I shall discover him.
It were as good he did himself.
I heard what Country he was fled to,
Who in his company.
What Country's made unhappy by so base
A burden? yet I have heard his person
Promised much, a handsome man.
Madam, trust me my sister had in him
All outward arguments that might produce
A passion; only you know there was no faith
Within; yet there was written in his face
All nobleness, which I dare say you will confess,
I have his picture.
Nay then—
What mean you?
I would not see a Piece, where Nature
Is so much disgraced.
Good heavens, what have I done with it?
I looked on it this day.
O you Gods, what mercy's this she shows•
me!
The King calls for you.
Sure, Madam, I have left it at my chamber.
I pray you find it, I must see it.
Yes Madam:—Alas, you need it no•
that have
The substance: Justice commands this should remain
with me;
True shadow, real misery:
If that you have informed me be not truth▪
Expect to suffer death; for on your word
I have altered my design, given the King
Time to gather men into the City; so as if now
He will be obstinate, he may endure a siege
Some days.
With pardon sir, there can be no great in∣convenience
By what I did inform; the Herald you have sent
Will soon return with answer to your demand.
But for your Brothers marriage to the Princess
Austella, there were so many witnesses of that,
My testimony will ere long be useless.
Good heavens, can it be possible? My bro∣there
married,
And not unto Clorinda? False Agenor!
She may be dead, sir.
Ha! what say thou, Scriech-owl? That
thought
Begets a fear that chils my heat;
One way or other there is death sure: Leave me,
All leave me!
I see no way for comfort; the least of mischief
Is to have a Traitor to my brother:
But rather be Agenor false, then she be dead:
In him our sex is only stained; in her the joy
And excellence of both is lost for ever.
Heaven could not be so cruel: Virtue and all pure
thoughts
Now by her happy influence are gathering strength▪
I know it by my self; and should she fall
Unripened for the grave, the Gods losing in her
Their brightest image, must likewise want
Much of their adoration. If she were dead,
He that so soon can love again, may, she alive,
As well forget his faith: Then she thus injured
May reflect a comfortable beam on me.
Vain and irrational hopes! his breach of faith
Were equal to her death; and dare I think
That she can do an act imperfect,
To admit a second love? But powerful time!—
No time can make me cease to be his brother.
Yet even beyond all these, if I remain my self
There is no hope, since her injunction was,
That I should never see, or speak to her:
And even since that upon mistakes, degrees of hatred
Are increased; my griefs summed up, my miseries
Are such, as they do leave no comfort
But in their abundance, whose weight must quickly
Press me to the grave.
These miracles do only grow from love,
That grief in their excess should comforts prove.
Avarice, thou bane of man, that steal into
Our souls with promises of happiness,
But ever pay'st us with disturbance!
The same in its effect is Pride, that sets
A gloss upon our selves and actions,
And throws contempt on others more deserving.
Covetous to keep a treasure, made me detain
What I unjustly stood possessed of:
Ambition made me use with scorn and injury
My daughters husband, even whilst he was in birth,
Although unknown, that which I wished, a Prince;
And now when I do know his blood and value,
Fear of this storm that hovers o'er my head
Must force me to deliver him up to his brother,
Although he be in birth that brothers King.
O you just Powers! thus do you make the
Breaches of your laws for our own covetous
And ambitious ends, the proper instruments
To execute your wrath by. Most noble Prince,
The injuries that I have done to you and Justice,
••mbles me thus low upon my knees
•o beg your pardon.
Ay me! This scorn exceeds all former wrongs:
Sir, what you do intend by this, I know not;
•ut well I know the posture cannot suit you:
•ou are my Father, sir, it is not your cruelty
Or injustice shall make me fail in duty;
•he sense of my first breach that way
•till dwells within me: Rise sir, I do beseech you.
I would not till you pardon.
Alas sir, why do you mock us thus?
For all our injuries must be the same,
However you strive for to divide us:
No, Austella, these tears be witness of
My real sorrow: The Gods inspired thee
When thou chose this worthy Prince.
How sir?
But found me too unworthy of a beam of light
Till now; that knowledge proves my greatest curse,
Since our misfortunes are remediless:
You have too soon, sir, robed me of the joy
To know he is a Prince, by this expression
Of your fears for something that's to come;
But sir, in this you were indeed the faulty person.
I fear I shall be found such.
Could you conceal such joys from me?
But I must pardon you all faults,
You are a Prince, I dare not chide you.
Upon your hand let me express my thanks:
But will you freely pardon for what I have
Concealed?
Gladly I do.
You will not sure.
Be your doubts clear's by this.
Daughter, you grant what you should beg:
Let that inform you who your husband is, 
My injuries to him, and our misfortunes.
Still your conclusions fright me: Good sir
read it your self,
Or rather in some gentler circumstantial way
Inform what it expresses.
First know, this paper does contain the Kings
Demands, who with his Army hath now enclosed
The City, which how we can deny or grant—
Pray read sir.
Your own injustice hath drawn me into
your Country;
Yet I take so kindly the alliance you have contracted
With my brother Agenor—
Agenor!
That if you will deliver up the Isle of
Ceris belonging
To my Crown, and my Brother to me alive, I will
quit
Your Country, well satisfied with my charge; but
if in
Any part of this you fail of an exact performance,
To morrow I hope to make my own conditions.
Be advised by him, who appearing your worst enemy,
May in this council prove your greatest friend—
Clarimant:
Oh Agenor!
Now can you pardon?
Now can I die; O fate, where have you
placed my love?
Do you repent? I ne'er was false to you,
Nor ever can be.
Let not my Father hear; I must forgive,
You are my husband:
I cannot blame your sorrow; your fortune
does command
A plenteous shower, in which I willingly could bear
a part,
If reason did not tell me council and advice
Better becomes my quality: I mean not council
From my self to you, but that we all advise
Since equally concerned, what's to be done.
Methinks justice and reason both chalked out
the way
Of your proceeding.
As how, dear son?
Too late, sir, from your heart you yield that
attribute.
Austella, thy reproof is just.
With pardon, sir, it is not; all the fault is
mine,
And justice bids me bear the punishment.
Yield sir to all my brother Clarimant desires,
Since by his speedy unexpected coming
Your forces nor supplies from others can be useful.
The treasure and the Isle most willingly I will
surrender,
(Would it pleased heaven we all were there!
Against that no forces could prevail.)
But to deliver you, that by your death
He may secure himself, first let destruction
Seize on me, already ripened for the grave.
My brother, sir, did ever love me,
Perhaps so as his brother; but now you are
His King in justice, but self-respects will point you
Out the object of his fear, not of his reverence.
He cannot be so impious to kill me.
You shall not trust him.
Consider then what hazard all must run,
The lives of thousands, a Kingdoms utter ruin.
Alas, it is true:
You may perish too, but in my hazard all
Are safe; it were madness to dispute it further.
What safety, and you lost?
No loss, if you consider truly what I merit:
You are a Virgin yet; I freely give you back
Your vows; justly you might revoke them
As not intended to a perjured person,
Such you now find I was.
But such I hope you are not now to me:
Think me such if I miscarry,
Twill make your grief the less.
But my guilt more in that suspicion:
Did I not think you loved me, yet duty
Does command me share in all that you can suffer.
But confident your heart is here, till death,
Not then, I must not leave you.
The glory of the action makes you too partial
To your selves; we must dispute this further
With my Council.
In vain you will dispute, if you intend to part
What heaven hath joined, which rules both power
and art.
Well, I perceive that we shall lose a noble
Prince:
How happy had we been in his succession!
Without all doubt the King his brother
Will soon by police or force destroy him;
Possession of a Crown will kill all natural
Respects of blood.
But why then should we not resist?
Justice hath a strong arm.
Yet in apparent dangers, fear still overcomes
Our faith and courage; but here's impossibility:
Our City, though great and populous, hath but poor
walls:
The Kings army, now his Footmen likewise
Are come up, are not without a miracle
To be resisted.
But was it not most dishonourable to invade us
Without proclaiming war?
To speak to you the truth, it was but justice:
Did not our King detain a mass of treasure
To which he had no right?
It is true,—but—
But what? Come, come, all unjust actions
However they seem profitable for the present,
Involve a curse within them; which when we find,
We must not lay the blame on others:
The best way to appease the Gods
When we have done amiss, is to confess;
Then mercy follows, or our blows wound less.
Think you they will surrender the treasure,
And yield Agenor to our King, or bide the brunt
Of war?
I'll tell thee what I fear, and what I wish;
And if thou doest not so, thou art an ass.
Well, speak:
I fear they will surrender, I wish they would not:
O Lads, might we but come to one assault,
We should be Lords, we that do venture blows;
Where in these Treaties we are sure to have
The worst on it: If peace be the conclusion,
Would I had been employed upon the Treaty.
Why, what would thou have done?
Heard no reason, nor offered any: the first condi∣tion
Should have been, that all the handsome young
Women and maids in the City should have come
Stark naked to have known our pleasure;
Then the rich men with their jewels and bags
Of money; then the King with a rope about his neck.
Stay there.
That may be your period, it is not mine
Then for the Prince Agenor—
What of him?
Nothing but good, I love him well,
He was a stirring youth, and bountiful,
But yet not like our King: were the people not
So base, he should (might I advise) be left Viceroy
To govern, and I to govern him.
In my conscience should our King show him
that favour,
Thou would persuade him to rebel against hi•
brother.
By this light I think I should, I love to be
in action strangely.
That love may chance to bring you to a
preferment
You have courted long, and in my conscience well
deserved:
Others that were less worthy when Agenor fled,
I saw advanced.
I understand you now, you are a bitter
Rascal;
And here's my hand, if ere there be more broils,
For this thy kind remembrance I'll cut thy throat.
I thank you sir, I'll look for it.
See all things ordered as I gave command:
I long to see the perjured Traitor,
That I may do a justice
To my Fathers ghost, and injured Mistress.
The King, his daughter Austella are coming,
With your brother Prince Agenor.
Traitor Agenor! It seems they mean
To bear him company in death; Attend them in—
Do all just as I did direct.
Brother, you see the advantage of your
power
Forces this visit.
Twill prove to you a sad one: Seize the
Rebel.
In the dead and living Kings names we do
arrest you.
And I in my own name, your King
In justice, command you hold▪
O sir!
Rise Madam; your intersection must not
interpose
In this, alone of power to save the lives
Of many Princes.
Just heaven, he's taken!
This was the mischief I feared.
No Madam; justice alone commands me to
surrender
This where it is due.
Long live Agenor,
King of Burgonia.
This is not real, sure.
What mockery is this?
O brother, the Crowns of Princes
Are things to which we owe a reverence,
Not to be used in sport; what are their
Sacred persons then?
Let me fall down and worship
What a strange God-like race of men
These pair of Brothers are!
Madam, I must not suffer that which I am
Infinitely pleased with, since it expresses
Your excess of love unto my brother.
I am confounded with such unexpected
Curtsy, that I am lost in all acknowledgment
That may express the power that you
Must ever hold upon me.
What I have done, justice commanded from me
If not, my love hath still been such to you
My brother, that had I been the Monarch
Of the earth, your power should have been equal.
This action is so noble, that it does make
Us more your servants then all force could effect,
You have subdued our minds.
You set so high a price on Justice,
That you confirm my resolution;
Though from the actions I must do,
Will seemingly arise my proper smart.
Command our fortunes, and our lives.
The hazard of your life is that I must demand▪
As how to be employed?
In taking mine.
Yours! what do you mean?
To kill you, if you cannot me:
I must not live, knowing whom you have injured.
And not endeavour to revenge.
You cannot be in earnest sure;
If so, look here.
Could you behold the Image in my heart,
In the true splendour that it wears;
You would not bid me view another object,
Excellent I confess, if not compared.
Brother, if you thus press me,
I shall forget all you have done;
Since there's no benefit so great, but may be
Cancelled by the doer.
I wish what I have done, had in it all
That could oblige, that I did love you more,
If Possible, that you were nearer to me
Then a brother, since all degrees of interest
Serve but like steps to raise the glory of my love
And justice higher.—
Choose which you please—
This; the time and place?
Be witness heaven, which what unwillingness:
Yet since you, Honour and love engage me:
I'll offer to my Goddess (left she suspect my zeal)
A much loved Brothers blood.
O Soldiers! will you suffer thus the worlds
Glories
To eclipse themselves?
Madam, in vain you urge;
I did before engage them by an oath,
Whatever I commanded, to obey me.
Cannot my prayers or tears? O dear my
Lord!
Your brother's young, and by the glory
Of his passion, hath lost much of his reason:
Consider what a mischief even victory
Must prove to either:
Necessity enforces me to accept the combat.
All circumstance considered, how more then base,
Ingrate, must I appear? how dull a sense
Shall I express of your perfections,
To hear another magnified above you?
If I with that dispense, who can com∣plain?
Such dispensations makes your value more,
And so adds to the justice of my cause.
To you I turn then: Will you needs end
An action so gloriously begun, in blood?
A brothers murder, or your own? What you have
done,
Showed you a Demigod, eclipsing all
That story hath recorded: but such an end
As you design, will cast you from the height
Of all your glory, and leave you to posterity
A hated name.
If so, yet still I stand engaged: Love, and
my fate
Appoint this way to show the ordure of my flame,
Which by no common action could be witnessed.
To that you urge, add this: I know I am
Inferior to my brother in skill and strength;
Yet what to others have been bars in combats,
To me prove arguments impulsive.
In short, the Deity that I adore's profaned,
Contempt and scorn thrown on her:
If by a feeble arm she right herself,
It more does manifest her power;
However I shall fall, since hers, a happy
Sacrifice.
Hold! rather a wretch profane, and most
Injurious to that Deity, to whom thy false
And counterfeit devotion seems directed.
O you Gods! Grant thy self mad, rather
Prove such; or by what's dearest to me,
I'll pierce thy heart.
Do so.
Ha!
I shall be known.
Have I not seen a face resembling this?
Does the guilt with which I justly tax you,
Abate your rage? let Gods and men hear what
I urge, nay, your own conscience be a Judge;
And if I then be found injurious, kill me;
No hand is fitter to give conclusion
To my misery.
How am I lost! this is no time for talk:
Soldiers, remove him.
Hear me!
Away with him.
By what you hold the dearest, I conjure you
Hear me! Deny that, and so make good
All I accuse you of.—This is some hope
He knows me not.
If I consent, by the same power
You may command me cease the combat.
I swear the contrary.
Be brief then; and for this interruption,
Soldiers, I conjure you by your oath
To kill him when the combat's ended,
My innocence acquits you from his blood.
Answer me then, you that pretend your self
So great a Votary to Love, and friend to
Justice: Is it lawful for any who is not
A Priest, to offer sacrifice?
None may.
What warrant for your present action then,
To sacrifice your brother, or your self?
If you allege, your love must know
No limits, are you not then profane?
But grant your youth and folly this;
That love that's so irregular, pays a devotion
Sure; but where? Not to a Mistress, but vain-glory
And self-conceit. Your Mistress, sure hath no less
Power with you, you think, then that of Kings
Over their subjects: Who dare make war
Without commission from his Prince?
You cannot boast one from your Mistress;
When if she be that excellence which you pretend,
It is not unlike she wishes well to him
Whom you would punish as her enemy:
Sure she hath cause to hate you for presumption,
Hypocrisy and treason: All which, if well con∣sider'd
By an impartial Judge, appear to be the
Groundwork of your present action.
It is she; for who could else so powerfully
Condemn me?
What I have spoke, is in my own defence,
Who am •ill now unknown, a brother
To the injured person; and had there been
A wrong resented by those that were concerned,
So far as blood might expiate, my sword
Of yours in justice had precedence.
She would not have me know her: I must
confess
Your former words have made so deep impression
In me, by sometime touching upon truth,
That here the difference with my brother ends.
But what you last urged concerning the
Precedence of a Brothers sword, I am so far
From granting, that if my reason
Cannot alter your opinion, my sword shall force
you
To deny it, when time doth better fit.
Most gladly.
In how poor things does she and Fortune
Give me power to server her!
Most excellent Prince! how much we all
do owe
You for our present happiness!
For me, I hold my Crown, my life, nay
more,
Possession of my fair Austella.
Since by the mercy of the Gods, the storm
That hung over our heads threatening blood
And ruin, is thus removed; let us with joyful
Hearts haste to the Temple, and there by
Hecatombs of sacrifice express our thanks:
Whilst I
That cause this joy, prepare to die:
O thou great Deity, observe her scorn!
What I have done, was fore-design'd by thee:
Revenge! but let her punishment prove love of me.
IF what hath been presented to your sense
You do approve, thank your own influence;
Which moving in the story that you told,
Infused new heat into a brain grown cold.
Thus far our hopes: But now just fears begin,
For much that is left out, for more brought in;
But since all change was to the better meant,
Although we fail, yet pardon for the intent.
Such sweet indulgence from good natures fall,
But the strict Critic will for censure call.
We would please both; and since we want the art, 
Sir, stay the sentence till the second Part:
Such favour oft your piety lets fall
Upon delinquents no less criminal.
Stay! even in policy your grant is fit;
Hope quickens, what despair makes dull, the wit:
Nay, could our Author some new arts display,
Yet this condemned, you'll slight the second Play.
HIgh laboured lines you may expect from those,
Whose pleasure is their studies: Most here knows
This Author hunts, and hawks, and feeds his Deer,
Not some, but most fair days throughout the year.
Such rude dull heavy Scenes expect you then,
As after suppers vapours from his pen.
Would you not ask, Why then does he write Plays,
Since now great Wits strive for Dramatic bays?
Pardon what's past: That way now counted wit,
Although enjoined, he'll deal no more in it:
Since dying to the Stage, his last request
Is, that you would not like the worst Scenes best.
If this desire injurious seem to some,
I wonder not: Divers to Plays do come,
Not to be pleased, unless the Play be bad;
So what the ingenious like, doth make them sad:
We tax not here their judgment or their wit,
But that so much ill nature's joined with it.
Others there be, which like the Austrian race,
Wits empire ties alone to those they grace:
Nay, so opinioned of themselves they be,
They'll praise things most absurd; and when they see
Those whose simplicity admires their wit,
To do the same, they laugh at them and it.
It is not these Bugbears that do haunt the Stage,
Should fright an Author; since it is plain, this Age
Hath more clear Judgments then was ever known:
But most Apollo's beams break from the throne,
And with a double sweetness doth invite
All that have gifts in Verse or Prose, to write.
Which he would still, but that his period's past;
For sure you'll find this Play worse then the last.
MY Lord, be confident, thus changed,
there's none can know you.
But dare I hope thou hast for∣given
me?
The mercy that you showed in unbinding me,
May well assure you; nor am I ignorant
How far our passions may transport, aided by hope
To attain our ends.
But now the current of my love runs in the
proper
Channel, and shall ever center here, a tribute justly due
Unto the ocean of thy love: Why did I fondly dream
There was a happiness exceeding this?
Your Kindness was so great, so unexpected,
That I am now more yours then ever: I never must
Forget the pains you took in coming to unbind me,
Creeping upon your hands, all smeared in blood,
It was well you escaped with life.
Thanks to my privy coat; had I expired
In such a pious action, yet so I scarcely had
Deserved forgiveness, much less this sweet continuance
Of your love, sure to be valued far above Clorinda's
hate,
Whose interest to a Crown made her
In my ambitious eye appear more beautiful;
But now, reason commands her yield to thee
Precedence in my heart.
How easily we give belief to what we wish!
Though the Gods know how all my love is
cacell'd,
Justly turned hate to her; yet love and gratitude to
thee
Commands me to attempt the Crown of Burgonia,
Offered into my hands.
As how offered?
I count it offered, when it appears in reason
Within the reach of our endeavours: Of ours, I say,
Mark me, my Queen, in thee it lies to rule me
And a sceptre.
It is fit the honour of your love should render me
Conformable to your desires: Name me the way
To this your happiness, so mine.
The seeming pious Druid here our Host,
I have discovered to have been a Mountebank
Physician; yet now disguised, esteemed by all
This Country a holy and most sacred person,
With whom the Gods are conversant here in this
solitary
Melancholy Grove. By him with gold corrupted,
I doubt not to effect revenge against Agenor
For this wound most basely given me:
Dispatch his brother Clarimant; nay even Clorinda
(As witness of my love to thee) shall likewise bleed.
This done, and this is in thy power to effect,
Is not the Kingdom of Burgonia mine
By right of blood?
It is certain, they removed, you are the next.
Consider then, my dear Saline, what it is to be
a Queen.
A Queen!
Take but these thoughts into thy soul,
And there's no action difficult or dangerous:
But we have only shadows to encounter with,
The issue real pleasures.
I must yield; dispose me, sir, which way you please.
That resolution does already crown thee.
I would not have you think it is my ambition,
But my love engages me; but yet I fear.
What can you doubt?
Swear sir by the immortal Gods,
To make me privy to all your actions;
And when you have attained the Crown, to marry me,
So to remove some jealousies.
I do by all that's sacred; nothing but death
Shall part us; this kiss be farther witness—
O sir, you are welcome! what news?
I have no leisure now to tell you:
I must disguise to entertain some curious
And devout people.
He every day goes to the City
In a several shape, so to enable himself
To appear more knowing here: I wonder much
None of the Court are so zealous to visit him,
At least to know their fortunes,
For he delivers oracles as from the Gods.
No doubt there are; but now the present time
Affords so much discourse of other peoples
Fortunes, that they neglect the knowledge
Of their own.
To know the fate of others,
Does often give a light to ours:
At least let us be diligent, whose industry
Can only make us happy: Perform but carefully
That which I shall impart,
And thou shalt have a Crown to crown thy art.
Most noble Prince! though you may well
believe
The forces you have brought unto my aid
I shall not use, yet I must ever be ambitious
To requite that love which cause your diligence;
Nay, I shall think my happiness defective,
Although great, till fortune point some way
Wherein I may express my gratitude to you.
Most royal Sir! fortune hath been to me
Auspicious, more then had I proved Austela's
Choice; and this expression you have made,
Emboldens me to let you know wherein.
Sir, I beseech you name it.
Know sir, not my ambition to enjoy your
Kingdom,
Could so far blind my judgment, but that I ever
Found your younger daughter Olinda, in herself,
The more deserving love, especially from me.
I would not, sir, say more, lest I should seem
To boast a happiness which merit never can attain
But by infinity of service, and much suffering.
Indeed I did observe, whilst you were in my
Court,
You much more did converse with her then with Austela,
Who ever was reserved. If Olinda's affability
Have gained your good opinion, your courtship hers,
It is a happiness beyond which I dare not expect.
If it be less then this, and that by the freedom
Of her humour you believe your interest greater
Then indeed it is; yet there will only be
Better occasion for my love to show it self.
My actions shall ever witness for me
How I prize your royal favour.
Did you not lately murmur against peace,
Cried up war as the only blessing?
Yes, I did so.
I scarce remember your sword did ever purchase
Such gay Caparisons.
I see thou art a very simple Fellow:
This is the harvest of the war; the King
Whom we did terrify, made Presents unto us
Commanders. If thou can show me where Soldiers
Are made much of in cold blood, then I will
Magnify thy mouldy mistress, Peace:
Till then, Bellona, thou art my Patroness.
Thou talk as if thou had done some mighty
Matters; and yet I fear thou art a Coward.
I love you, sir, too well to let you suffer
Such a grief as fear, for me: Draw.
Draw! are you mad? or is your wit so great
To spoil
Your memory? were not two shot to death that were
Seen fighting?
Very pretty, you grow valiant to abuse
me,
Because their valour found a punishment.
The Prince! Justice, sir, I beseech you.
For what, or against whom?
He told me, sir, he thought I was a Coward.
Perhaps you have given him cause to think
so.
Better and better! But sir, may men speak
all they think?
Why not? I do so, and never will again
Dissemble.
But may I, sir?
Yes, so it be not blasphemy or treason.
How, sir, do you distinguish treason?
Look what the Law says,
Pox on the Law!
How?
I cry your Highness mercy; I had forgot
the Law was so
Near kin to you: This scurvy fellow has made me
mad.
You would not live without law.
No, I beseech your Highness grant me the
Law.
Most willingly.
The law of Arms, sir, and let him prove
me a Coward
Before your Highness, and see how I will defend my
self.
I know not how in justice I can pardon this
Unless I do pronounce you mad.
I do beseech your Highness do so.
Sure you are mad.
Then I may kill this Rascal, and your law
cannot
•ang me.
Bind him, to prevent mischief.
Any thing to save my honour; let me not
have my hands
•ose; wear a sword, and be called Coward!
He did but think so.
Let him not think aloud then in my hearing.
Come, I will end the difference; I do
pronounce
•ou are no Coward, and him a fool for thinking so.
•e friends.
Not with a fool; you shall excuse me sir▪
Be gone, and leave me.
Why do I give this intermission to my sorrows?
•lorinda's Pleased I should be miserable:
••nce in no other way, in that I will content her.
•ut this obedience yields a satisfaction;
•nd satisfaction fits not perfect sufferings▪
Which she the perfectest of creatures feels.
• can no more admit to be less miserable
•hen my Mistress, then I could be content to be
More happy; is there no way to change my fate
With hers? O no, her torment rises from the
•alshood of her Lover, where she had placed her joys:
Mine, in the not attaining of a Love
Where I dare not pretend to merit:
• am a happy man, if by comparison I judge:
Still alone, dear brother!
Most noble sir, why do you thus retire your
self
From those who know no satisfaction
Greater then your company? I must pretend
The interest of a sister now; you shall not
Hide your passion, nor the cause from me,
I know it is Love.
Madam, it is confessed: But since despair
Is, and must ever be the only issue of my love,
I would not have those I esteem
Engaged with me in misery.
Can you be so unjust to your own merits
To despair?
So just to her perfections.
If not a Judge of this, at least make me
Your Advocate: yet all my eloquence
Will rest in showing her the happiness
That she refuses.
Madam, she is not capable of any increase,
She's dead to me and all mankind.
How mean you? by a figure, or dead indeed?
I'll take her off from this discourse,
Lest she discover Clorinda in disguise.
Dear Austella, in vain you strive to comfort him,
That can know none, his Mistress dead.
Rather in vain I strive to know what both
Resolve to hide from me: It was not curiosity, sir▪
But a desire to serve you: That belief
Will speak my pardon.
I fear she is displeased.
Reason hath too much power over her foe•
To be displeased without a cause: I hold her
Every way so perfect, that I durst make
A full discovery, crave her assistance;
But then Clorinda would more justly hate.
O brother, speak no more of hate; it is im∣possible,
If ever she did love me. You have my Entrust,
But much more prevailing must your unequalled merit
Prove.
Merit! dear brother, it is impossible:
Since what I have done, or shall ever do,
Grows from her influence upon me.
I see that I am yet to learn what it is
To be a perfect Lover.
Rather you have not practised what you
know.
Brother, I must confess it is my shame,
Though not my grief, since my inconstancy
Hath made me but more happy.
How!
Frown not: I mean more happy,
As my inconstancy leaves you Clorinda free;
And if she prove averse to your desires,
Her constancy to me admits of a just censure,
Not applause.
If you believe you have a power in her
After your breach of faith, such as may aid me
In my love; she is not that perfection
That I adore, and by such yielding
Could not make me happy.
Then you propose a love without a possi∣bility
Of satisfaction.
Yes, if it suit not with her excellence:
The Gods sometimes appoint us such sad fates,
That it is our duty to pursue and glory in our misery.
I see a miracle must make you happy:
Be not displeased that I invoke the Deity
In your behalf; and Brother, know that those
Who would be held the most devout,
Esteem things just and worthy, because they do
Proceed from a divine power; not that they are
Agreeing to our faith, or understanding.
Brother, what you would undertake in my
behalf
Becomes your love to offer, but not mine to accept.
A person truly humbled by sense of his unworthiness,
Sure dares not hope: And to admit an Advocate,
Supposes that; nay merit in himself, or in the
Intercessor; or which is worse, an easiness
To be overcome with words. Any of this
Is such impiety my love cannot be guilty of:
Her being his perfection, all things great or good,
Clorinda named, in that is understood.
Dear Lady, let me know how I have lost
Your favour.
First let me know why you believe you
Ever had it?
When I was here a suitor to your sister,
You did not then look with such scorn upon me.
Be so again to any other, and I will give you
cause
To think me every whit as kind.
Here you discourse of Love; express a sense
Of what you do prosess to suffer by way of
Martyrdom, perhaps accompanied with a sad sigh
Or two.
And can you yet be crueler? when you your self
Have cause a nobler passion then what I made
But show of to Austela.
It seems then you can counterfeit.
I must confess; but yet—
Nay spare excuses: As I live, I like you the
better
For it; and if you love me now, know this to com∣fort
you,
We only can agree in being dissemblers.
Most noble sir! methinks my Genius
Should have informed me the happiness of your ap∣proach;
And yet it is fit I leave you now,
But there does stay my best of wishes.
She had like to have said, her heart:
Alas poor Lady, how love does fool thee!
It must be so; this stranger is the cause
Of her neglect to me: With what unwillingness
She parted from him! I will not, cannot suffer
This second affront; I shall become the scorn
Of all men.
What means this!
But why, Saline, when I called,
Came you not to help me?
Alas, Madam, I was fast.
Could you so quickly be so sound asleep?
Weary with travel. But, Madam, what said
Agenor,
(The King I now must call him) when he perceived
It was Lord Cleon, his trusted friend,
That he had slain?
He does not know it yet, nor ever shall:
For since his passion to me procured his death,
His faults be buried with him: Besides, I know
It would have been no little torment to Agenor
To find such falsehood.
Is it possible that you can yet consider him,
Otherwise then to revenge his falsehood?
If thou had ever truly loved,
Thou could not ask me such a question: Clarimant!
I must not stay.
Sir, though you have hitherto found means
to avoid me,
Yet having now the opportunity,
I needs must press you to a short discourse,
And such a one as will require the absence
Of your servant.
I must obey necessity: Leave me.
Is it possible he does not know her?
I see you wear a sword, and make no question
But you know, or think you do, how to maintain
With it the assertions of your tongue.
In what?
Is it possible that you can ask? yet since
I must,
I will refresh your memory, and whet my own revenge
By repetition. You, as a brother, did pretend
You had more interest to right Clorinda's wrongs,
Then I her servant.
And proved it, did I not?
In part the oratory of your tongue prevailed,
And I condemned my self; but honour forced me
Make appeal unto my sword, and there you must
Overcome me too, before I quit so dear a cause.
Truth told me then, and bids me still maintain
That I am most concerned in what Clorinda suffers:
Your resolution pleases above expression:
Which forces me an enemy to beg the favour
To kiss that hand, though it may prove to me
An instrument of death.
Keep off; I dare not trust a reconciled foe,
Much less an enemy professed. Employ your sword,
Whose force I fear less then the empoisoned flattery
Of your tongue.
Then guard your self, your breast lies open.
You shall not find it so, if you dare strike.
Alas it is too true; you have a guard which I
Can never force; and since invisible, it is fit I yield;
Here to confess my self overcome, is to triumph.
But if you hold your victory your shame, which
much I fear,
Then purge that stain with my heart-blood,
A sacrifice most justly due to your disdain.
A Cowards blood can have no virtue in it.
Stay.
Employ your sword then, and nobly take revenge
Upon your enemy: I swear, that act
Will with me raise you to the highest estimation.
O Clorinda! that word pronounced,
Think what you do enjoin me.
I feared before you knew me,
But thought it fitter to practise the masculine part
I am to play, with you, then with another:
Perhaps with some I have to do, where my
Discovery is my ruin. Thus much, confident
Of your esteem, I dare discover.
What musick's in these words!
Trust me, Prince Clarimant, I am much pleased
To see you.
Madam, assure me that I do not dream.
Believe me every sense is free,
Only your joy is too much raised.
Too much! when you speak to me, and not
in anger.
Contain your self; for know it is in your Power
To make me happy.
In mine! witness you God•
There is no bar betwixt you and your wish.
None but your will.
My will! That, and my other faculties
Were ever yours.
Swear it.
By all that's sacred, it is and ever shall be so;
For you can will nothing but what is just
And noble.
My will then is, to which yours must assent,
That you do kill me.
How!
A miserable life considered, death is the hap∣pines
Opposed: That you must give me, or be perjured.
That Clarimant should kill Clorinda!
Self-murder is esteemed the highest guilt,
And yet this doubles it: I am deluded
By some spirit; for what proportion
Bears this imposition to your excellent sweetness?
It bears proportion to my sorrows.
Could death be granted as your only re∣medy,
Yet that my hand should give it!
Those servants are esteemed the truest,
That do the last and greatest offices of duty.
Having no love to pay your vows of service,
My gratitude proposed this as your recompense.
O heavens! was ever gratitude so cruel!
Will you not then obey me, nor your oath?
Is this the fruit of all your protestations?
Is not my will the same with yours?
You would not live, nor I then.
Kill me, and then do what you please.
The same say I; kill me, and then do what
you please:
Your vow was not to echo my desire,
But to obey what I enjoind.
It is true, in what was just and noble.
Is it not so to relieve a friend distressed?
Your oath past too?
No friend will ask, for shame,
The help does refuse to give.
The guilt remains with the first breach, and
that was yours.
Alas, you press what no example yet came
near,
To kill that person that I value more
Then all the world.
No doubt brave Brutus servant loved his
Master;
Yet killed him, being commanded.
Perhaps he was his slave, and gained his
Freedom by it.
And shall not you do so? A freedom from
the bonds
Of Love, the Tyrant-master that I fly. But did not
Herod
Doom to death in one his Wife and Mistress,
Lest any other should enjoy her?
And this caused from excess of Love.
Unto himself, as I dare never hope
To be so happy to have his interest,
So I shall never fear his punishment. 
This is that posture which my former vows
Best suit withal: Nor am I humbled thus,
To beg for pity to my self but you,
Divine Clorinda! who ought to be
As far from thought of punishment,
As you are free from guilt.
False perjured man! I can be free from
neither,
Whilst I stay here.
O misery! was ever man so wretched!
In the performing what she should command,
I still have placed my only hopes of merit.
Sure fate did never yet to any Lover
Put so hard a part,
To disobey, or pierce his Mistress heart.
COme sir, you must not be so sad:
Sure there is some strange sympathy betwixt
Prince Clarimant and you.
No sympathy at all, if he have any cause
Of grief; mine's merely natural.
I find you dissemble with me:
Your griefs have such resemblance, that knowing his
Is Love, I am assured yours is the same.
Love! I honour all the sex, yet never knew
That passion for a woman.
I must confess that you have in your self
So much of beauty, that looking in your glass,
It is not like you should be taken with another form:
But yet take heed, the Gods may punish pride.
To be such, is a punishment so great,
The Gods can add no more.
The interest you have in the King, hath
made me
Study your content: I find my sister loves you;
And what her blushes will not let her speak,
I must.
If she herself should tell me so, it were fit
for me
To think she said it to make sport, knowing
My own unworthiness.
How slow soever you are of belief,
must make known a Ladies passion to you
Every way your equal.
I have not seen that person, sure.
What do you think of me?
You! as of the soul of all perfection,
And only worthy him you do enjoy.
I must not think my beauty worth esteem:
For, gaining him, there is a conquest, which obtained,
Deserves a triumph. That blush shows you conceive
me.
Madam, it is impossible I should understand
A speech so disagreeing to that character
I had received.
It will be unjust to value me the less
For my esteem of you.
Of me!
Know, gentle Youth, not all the ties of duty
Have power to bar me the expressions of love,
That grows from such perfections as the world
Never knew: Hide not that lovely face,
Which even the King beholding, must excuse me.
Thou lie, false woman.
O Agenor! I never wished thee half so mi∣serable.
Why do you turn away? What, weep! Is
my love
Such an injury? Or if some word have past my
lips,
That moved this passion, my lips shall satisfy
By taking off these tears.
I can endure no more:
Just heavens, how my inconstancy is punished!
Clear up those Suns, and let them gently
shine upon me,
Or I am lost for ever! Not moved with all my
Courtship,
Continue thus unkind, insensible of a Queens love,
And I shall think you are no man.
The weakness of my passion hath discovered
me:
Madam, such an excess of happiness
To be thus favoured by you, produced this passion;
Tears are as well the effect of joy as sorrow.
A woman, I am confident! Now I can
read it
In her face, sir. I accept of your excuse,
But then you must forgo this sadness.
Madam, all other thoughts but the consi∣deration
Of your favour, are henceforth banished.
I yet am something doubtful of your pro∣fessions,
You may confirm me.
As how?
Sure you have a Mistress, some in the Court
That you do love.
None, trust me.
Then you do love the King so much, that
you hate me
For my inconstancy, you may forgive it, I know
he will;
He thinks it is no vice, rather a virtue,
To have choice of Mistresses.—Why do you sigh?
This touches; nay, now you break your promise.
Madam, I am not well.
Will you rest your self upon my bed?
I'll call the King, then you will be well,
It is he must cure you, Lady.
Lady! O my heart— 
What have I done? ho, some Cordial quickly!
Help—
Madam, he recovers.
Lay him upon my bed, gently for heavens
sake!
In this discovery I my end obtain,
But make provision for my future pain.
Such fruit our jealousy produces still:
Better not know, then know the worst of ill.
Pray you sir, shall I make bold to ask a
question?
A dozen, if you please.
You are courteous. Why was the King
sent for by the
Queen in such haste?
I must not tell you that.
Perhaps you cannot.
I cannot, sir, be ignorant.
O, wondrous easy; perhaps the King
knew not
The cause himself.
It may be so; Kings know not all things.
You do, it seems.
Seem, sir!
Nay, be not angry; you promised largely.
I promised nothing.
It is true; and nothing I expect. So fare
you well.
Remember, sir, I only gave you leave to ask.
It is true, I cry you mercy:
Then I May ask one question more.
You may ask any thing.
Do you not think I had ill luck
To find a man so overwise for my Informer.
Troth sir—
You need not answer, I am already
Satisfied.
I see you know not me,
You are a shallow fellow.
And you so deep a puddle,
No plummet can find the bottom;
You have no ground, sir: So fare you well,
My cautious Monsieur.
O dear Clorinda! how powerfully thy
beauties
Now present themselves, and minute gather
strength
By these thy sufferings! What cause hast thou and I
To curse my base inconstancy?
How sir! are you so ingrate to heaven,
That for your sake favoured that vice so far,
To give it the reward of virtue, happiness?
And that so great in your Austela,
That all men else are poor compared.
My Austela!
It is well I am denied then▪
Did she not court you as a man?
The heart she took from me, through you could not
Receive, your sex denying Entertain,
Is yet so tainted in the tender of it,
That I for ever must repent the change
I made: O Clorinda! would this hand
When it was joined in hers, had rotted off.
Do you believe to cure inconstancy
And breach of faith, by new inconstancy?
I see it was a vice dwelt in your blood.
It is no inconstancy, to cast an eye back
On your virtue, too late instructed
By present misery.
It is enough; this does express how miserable
You might have been: But know your happiness is
perfect.
The Queen prompted by jealousy, the fruit of
Ardent love, suspected me a woman,
And your former Mistress, and took this way of
courting me
To be assured.
Your virtue bids you make this fair con∣struction.
She comes! her sight begets new trouble;
Would I had changed this habit for my winding-sheet.
Sir, I am glad to find my chamber can afford you
So good company.
Absence at any rate! I must be gone:
Your Majesties pardon.
It seems you have cured him.
You made him sick; had I not reason?
It is fit I remedy your errors.
You have so many of your own,
It will take your time up.
But there's one especially that troubles me.
You would change a wife, would you not?
Do your thoughts prompt you to that quest∣on?
It is time when you deny me.
There was a time I might.
Had your hand rotted off, the present trouble
Had been saved: You are an inconstant man;
Which granted, both are miserable.
Both are no less in being jealous,
Which you must grant you are.
Having such cause, love could not be with∣out
it.
But having certainty that virtue is gone,
Love ceasing▪ ends that trouble.
The object of our guilt, shall be our Judge.
I doe not understand your riddle: who do
you mean?
One, that to me cannot be partial▪ your
Mistress.
Your servant.
Yes, Clorinda.
But doe you think that you stand clear in honour.
You cannot hope it sure; but there's the more
For me to pardon: Come, all your passages of love
Are plain; yours, and your brother Clarimants.
Persuade Clorinda that I think her still a man,
Lest modesty make her forsake the Court,
And both use means to make her love your brother.
These little quarrels, where the hearts are good,
The body of our Love keeps firm, like letting blood.
Come. thou shalt lend me ten Crowns;
As I am an honest man, Isle pay thee.
Gain that opinion with me first:
You see the Money's ready.
Why, thou hast known me long,
Did I ever deceive thee.
No, for I ever took thee for a Shark:
A Fellow too, that would abuse me
In my poverty, in words.
It was but in Merriment; I swear I ever
Loved thee truly.
Yes, and I will requite it; I know that money
Would but dull your Wit, spoil Industry:
I find it by my self, that care keeps close
My Purse.
Refuse a Comrade little Coin:
•Eec poor.
But yet the custom of the Rich, and things
Must be proportioned to our Fortune.
It is well Fortune and you are friends;
That makes you proud.
I have a sense of her great benefits, I were
a Fool else.
Well! I may live to repay this scorn.
Yes, sooner then the Money you would
borrow;
Which makes me ask no Bond.
Come, prithee supply me, and leave fooling.
Spare your own pains, Sir, you have done
enough.
As I am clad, I am not fit for any honest com∣pany.
Nor clothed in Scarlet trust me.
You are a base Fellow: the Tide may turn.
O admirable fruit of poverty! Valour in∣fus'd
I vow:
Yet remember, Friend, quarrels are dangerous.
Tell me of danger—
I cry you mercy, Sir; I had forgot you
were poor.
Nay, if you be outrageous, I must leave you.
We shall meet again.
Yes, no doubt on it; how calm and tem∣pirate
Will Money make one: a man might almost pull me
By the Nose, yet I not angry; such admirable sa∣tisfactions
Here.—
This Youth I have seen oft, had a strange
Mind to talk to him; yet still the brat avoids me.
Stay my pretty knave, shall I borrow a word or two
On good security you will ask no more.
Why is your Mistress staying for you i•
the Lobby?
If she were, what would you give to suppl•
my room?
I do believe what ever it were, she would
repay the sum.
O fie! you look not like an Amorist; tha•
face would fright her.
A martial one: Atones was not always•
favourite,
Mars had his turn.
Were you that Deity? your reign is out.
But I can prove a Jupiter, and court your
Mistress in a shower
Of gold; and that, I take it, in all times is powerful
More then your face.
Descend, descend, and show yourself a simple
Mortal▪
Else I shall leave you.
Tell me first what Country you are of;
My mind gives me I have seen that face.
You have a foolish mind that does abuse you,
So fare you well.
And so have you a foolish tongue that
does betray you;
A certain coy disdainful look too, that stiles you•
woman.
How sir! you shall find me masculine; take
that.
This cannot hide you; confess your sex
and name,
Or by this light I will untruss your points,
And then you know what follows.
Sir, you in this restraint preserve my modesty,
It was my desire that you should know me:
I dare not say you are the cause of this disguise,
Yet you may think your pleasure.
Now by this light have I mind to beat thee
As a man, for all the scorns thou hast put upon me:
For as a woman I am sure thou wilt abuse me,
Especially if thou pretend'st to love me.
Your scorn's so just, that I must suffer it:
How! let's see; no moisture! spare, spare your
Linen, good Saline.
Oh whither shall I fly to hide my shame!
Even to your mask and petticoat: Carry
your bum
A little out, you will need no Fardingale a while.
Alas sir you mistake, I have no other burden
But my sorrows; from those you only can deliver
me.
Bar marriage, and I will be your midwife:
Where lie you?
As you have honour in you, do not discover me,
Hereafter you shall know.
Madam, having received such testimonies
Of your favour, I could not leave the Court
Even in civility, till I had kissed your fair hand.
What sad things do you utter! It is not
possible,
You do but fright me sure.
Necessity enforces; for I shall leave behind
That which I value far above my self.
Does the King and Queen know what you
do intend?
They must not.
Your resolution is full of cruelty;
That though you do oblige me by imparting it,
Yet I must fail your trust, and give them notice.
For your own sake you must not: this paper,
I being gone, will let you know a secret
That concerns your happiness, and by my stay
You will be miserable.
Alas, that is impossible:
To have your company, includes all joys.
Since you esteem it so, if I live I will return.
How soon?
In a short time; but if you read this paper
Yet this two days, when I come back you have
my curse.
Weep not dear Lady, yield me the honour
Of your hand.
O me most wretched! you shall not go,
I die if you thus leave me.
Alas I must.
Madam, I cannot choose but wonder
To see you court a Boy thus.
My wonder is greater at your arrogance
And ignorance, to tutor me, and slight a person
Then your self more worthy.
What's this?
From him I may receive that death I seek:
Defend your self.
Ah me! help, help! oh help Prince Clarimant,
The gentle Youth is hurt.
Hurt!
O heavens, grant me a little
space.
Why this to me?
To ask your pardon, that he lives
That drew that precious blood.
I grieve your hurt, yet thank you not for
interposing.
My Brother wounded! speak, by whom? A sir∣geon,
quick.
The Prince of Aquitain.
Make after, seize him:
Dear Clarimant, how is it with you?
Well; happy to die for such a cause.
You Gods extend your pity: O dear Clo∣rinda!
•our some balm into his wounds.
One word from you may clear his fainting spirits.
Heaven knows I wish his life more then
mine own.
We must do more then wish.
Although my reason tells me that I owe my
thanks
To your despair, yet the sound comforts me:
O there bestow your cure! my cure lies there.
Thou soul of Lovers, in thee dwells such truth,
Well may thy merit save our faithless Youth.
IS there no news? what is become of this rude
Prince?
You need not seek for him; his wounds and
his disgrace
Are punishment enough.
My reason now does tell me so; but had
my brothers
Wounds proved mortal, no corner of the earth
Should hide him from my revenge.
I cannot choose but grieve the sad accident;
Yet know I am obliged in honour, he coming
To my rescue with such a powerful Fleet,
To look with less severity upon his fault:
Besides, which happily you know not,
I gave him leave to be a suitor to my daughter.
His punishment would be so great to see
Clorinda,
As herself whom he would then have wounded
As his rival, that I confess I wish him here.
Besides, those of his Fleet, or he scoping to
That, may do some sudden mischief.
He cannot be so base, your fears are needless.
Madam, in modesty I could no longer
Wear the habit of a man, once known a woman:
But humbly I beseech you on my knees,
〈◊〉 you respect the honour of our sex,
When you return, to licence my departure
From the Court; since misery and discontent
•wels here, though I were circled in
With all those honours you or the King can grant.
I must confess I am made happy by your
misery,
And therefore hold my self obliged to study always
For your satisfaction. But know, besides this tie,
• have so great opinion of your merit,
Hold it so far to exceed mine, that I am confident
The Gods reserve for you a greater blessing then
Agenor,
A person tainted in his faith.
Although your own, I must not suffer
Such an undervalue of the King, whose worth is such,
So far exceeding all, that it admits of an allay.
Here it was not so, rather addition;
A change produced by such perfection,
Is not to be esteemed inconstancy, but wisdom:
It is not now, rather hereafter that I shall
return
This argument upon your self: Now let us go do
What charity enjoins.
That and my duty forces me to attend you.
How is it with your Highness?
O too well, Clindor: my outward wounds
Heal much too fast, since these within do fester.
Well sir, you little know what service I may
do you.
I know thou hast and wilt be careful of my
health.
But sir, I mean that I can serve you in your
love.
O Clindor; speak no more; thou trouble
me.
Will it trouble you to let you know Clo∣rinda's
here?
Here! where?
Not in this room, but in this Country, nay
in this Court.
Alas I know it, and so by this does all men.
But do they know Selina's here in habit of
a man?
Yes, yes.
But yet they do not know she is in love
with me,
Most desperately too.
Nor dost thou know it, fool,
she does abuse thee.
She dares not; by this light I will beat
her.—
The Surgeons, sir, are come to dress you.
Must I be dressed?
The Queen your sister! Clorinda, as I
live, sir.
O fool, thou lie; it is impossible—
Can it be she?
Brother, how is with you now?
So well, that I could kiss that sword that
made these
Wounds; for I by them receive a benefit
Which I durst never hope.
Come, I must dress your wounds; no com∣mon
hand
Is fit to touch you. I know this Lady will apply
One plaster, since for her sake you did receive
These wounds.
Led by your example, I am compelled to
follow.
You Gods, what happiness is this! may
they be long
A healing, if still this application will continue.
Pray not against your self, heaven is offended,
Granting your request, I fear; for if I not mistake,
They bleed afresh. Fair Clorinda,
These drops express his passion, and your power.
I grieve for both, and know no remedy so
good
As a perpetual absence.
Know dear Clorinda, it was a thankful heart
That sent those few drops forth to kiss your hand
For so great favours: your cruel resolution
Sends them back, their errand scarce performed:
For see, I bleed no more; but know withal
It is the destruction of the fountain; the coldness
Of despair must quickly freeze all motion:
I owe a reverence to that blood upon this
hand;
O let me kiss it as a most sacred relic
Of the truest Lover the sex did ever boast.
That spot, Clorinda, you may wipe away,
But never shall the memory of him
Whom you thus cruelly do murder
By disdain.
Madam, free from that guilt, I cannot appre∣hend
A punishment. The Gods are just; they be my wit∣nos
If I had happiness to give, I should prefer
This Prince before my self; But I am such a piece
Of earth, so sunk beneath all joys,
That should I yield what he can ask,
Yet I must lie like lead upon his heart.
Yet for the present, sure,
It is fit you speak comfort to him.
Comfort from me! it is contradiction
To my being, who am made up of misery.
Pray come near, and speak to him.
I am so careful, that I would not hurt him.
Brother, be confident her rigour cannot last,
I shall persuade her to relent.
O Madam, you mistake; she only hath the
beauties,
And not the weaknesses usually depending on her sex:
Her resolutions have their ground from reason ever,
And know no change till it command.
How can she then esteem the less deserving brother
Worthy her love, when he that most deserved
Foully betrayed her? Life could only prove
No curse, if I might be assured she would
Forgive the injury she suffers by the trouble
Of my love; to hope her pity of my torments,
Is much above my faith.
Madam, too long we have disturbed the Prince;
Our absence would be more conducing to his health.
There is a care his merits methinks should
command
Over your gratitude: which that you not apply,
Too late you may repent.
I so much wish his health and happiness,
That I will ever pray that he may never find
Disquiet thought, and to my prayers likewise add
My latest counsel: Forget Clorinda, and make her
happy.
Forget Clorinda, and make her happy!
How can I understand this cruel sentence?
Waste not your spirits, sir; I think I under∣stand
her,
And it shall not be long ere I procure her
To explain herself.
You are the comfort of my love, and life.
What do I owe my stars that did direct me
To this place, where I find safety for my person,
Cure for my wounds, and such a friend who chalks
me
Out a way to all I can desire on earth!
Follow my counsel, and be constant in it,
You are the master of your wish▪
Constant! can there be other ends proposed
Powerful to change me? Revenge for my disgrace;
And the possession of that Kingdom I aimed at
In Austela, now to prove mine with one I more
esteem,
The fair Olinda. But how when this is done,
I ever can requite your pains?
It pays it self; and to secure you more
Of my intention and performance,
Know I am not the man I have appeared,
But one whom both revenge and love does likewise
Animate.—
My Instrument returns:
When we have heard what's his intelligence,
I will lay my self more fully open,
And we'll conclude how to pursue what we design.
What is thy news, good?
As you could wish.
We'll hear't within.
A man so holy and so knowing, say thou,
That can give com•orts to all griefs,
Call back the peace that is fled from any mind?
Certainly, Madam, the spirit of the Gods
Dwells in him, or rather he is a God descended
To the earth to comfort the distressed world:
I am confident, had you but once discoursed with him,
You would not be thus sad.
O fool! the Gods themselves have not a cure
for me
But death: If he their substitute would give me that,
Then I would visit him most gladly. Prithee leave
me.
Well Madam, I grieve you have not faith
To trust my words. My words! nay, all the City
Speaks him Wonderful for sanctity and knowledge.
Well, perhaps I will see him: Prithee now
leave me.
Alas Madam, I cannot, whilst you are thus sad.
I am not so, thou but deceive thy self;
Or if I be, company makes me worse.
Madam, since I must, yet still my duty
Presses you to receive this comfort.
Well, be gone, I will think on it.
Why do I trifle time out thus, when every hour
I feel a torment more then death can be?
Besides, if I were gone; from the impossibility
To enjoy me, Prince Clarimants affection
Might abate; and yet when I consider,
His love appears none of those sickly passions
Which time can triumph over, since I believe it such,
Where is my gratitude to see him languish?
Nay, to see him die? die of those wounds
That he for me received? I never can forget
His blood fresh streaming from his wounds
At my approach; that faithful witness of his joy,
More worthy of belief, then if a thousand tongues
Or pens should be employed: I find my self
More wretched now then ever, fitter to die;
For if I live, I to my own shall add
His sufferings too: And yet methinks that should be
Pleasing: To grieve for him, is to discharge
Part of that debt I owe; I would not be ungrateful:
Live then Clorinda, till thou find some way
To make him happy. No, it is impossible,
Since I cannot •e so; yet I may seem content,
And by that seeming give him real blessing:
And see, fortune presents an object that confirms my
hopes
It may be done, at least I will endeavour.
Dearest Clorinda! not less dear, because
a woman;
For such perfections in a man I solely could not
Have possessed, my own defects barring that happiness:
But as a woman sure, none can pretend
With greater merit to your favour;
All my wants supplied by my firm love,
Which cannot know another object then your fair
self.
I must esteem my self most happy
In the continuance of your love,
Rather your friendship; for all affection
Is from us proper to the better sex.
Which sure is ours, you being a woman.
Your sister will not grant you that,
Whose example you ought to follow, in acknowledge∣ing
Love and superiority due to the men,
Especially such men as the King Agenor
And his more worthy brother Clarimant.
These words of Clarimant, if heard,
Would cause a general joy through all the Court:
But he himself must know his happiness by degrees,
Lest the excess again disturb his health;
Since your last visit he is miraculously recovered.
You attribute to me what is more justly due
Unto the King and Queen's, nay your sweet con∣versation.
Methinks you four would be most aptly joined;
Two brothers and two sisters, whose perfections
All the world cannot equal.
Dear Clorinda, I must not understand you;
Or if I do, you have a mean opinion
Of my Judgment, less of my Constancy,
Which did but now profess my heart for ever only
yours:
I take for granted that your heart is mine,
Which I express in that I would dispose it,
And so I would do my own, if I had any:
But know that what I once do give I never resume;
Or if I had a heart, could that be worthy Clarimant
Another had despised?
What now you speak to me, expresses your
respect to him,
And so must not displease; for I confess
His merits are so great, that in his happiness
All that love virtue must be sharers:
But I beseech you do not entertain a thought
That you can breed a change in him or me.
Dear Clorinda, your virtue and your beauty
Is the object of our Loves; such a conformity
As may arise from that, betwixt Prince Clarimant
And me, is only fit.
I for my part do ask no more, but that your
lines
Of love do meet in me: But reason in him,
Friendship in you may give me power in time
To tie a happy knot; this hope the Gods inspire me with.
Take heed, they needs must be offended
with you
For a hope that is so unjust.
Dare you refer your self unto their sentence?
I dare do any thing that you think fit;
But this I know you cannot.
Heaven knows that I desire it.
But do not hope it, when two wills oppose you.
Yet when the Gods shall give their sentence,
Your will and Clarimant's, it all your vows be true,
Must then submit to mine.
Should we grant our obedience, how have
the Gods,
Or can they unto us declare their will?
That great Deity that did infuse
A reasonable soul into us mortals,
Enthroned that Reason as a King to govern
All our actions. But beyond this I am informed,
Nor is it possible but you must know it,
That here without the City in a sacred Grove,
There lives a man so pious, and so knowing
The will of heaven, that all men in distress
Or doubt repair to him, and find a happy issue
Of their troubles.
It is most true, his fame is great:
If curiosity do move you to go visit him,
I gladly will attend you; but since I have resisted
What you commanded, dear Clorinda,
No mortal man must change me.
I love this firmness in you; the fitter you
Will prove hereafter for Clarimants affection.
In hearts of wax, Love easily impressions make,
But those of diamonds hardly new forms take.
Clindor, I make no doubt your joy is not
the least
To see your Master thus recovered of his wounds.
Faith sir, his outward wounds are pretty
well;
But there's a foolish shaft sticks in his heart.
The little Archer should be whipped for shooting Sol∣diers,
What has he to do with us?
He aims still at the noblest marks.
But those, sir, that are wise, wear privy
coats,
And then his darts prove but burbolts, and drop
down
At our feet: And is not that, sir, better then by our
whining
Or in verse or prose, make these she-gossips think
themselves
Our Deities, who by creation rather are our slaves.
I see thou art an enemy to Love.
Just as to Idleness: why are we not in
arms?
Methinks there is now a brave occasion.
How? we have no enemies▪
Let's make some then: But sir, you have
a cause
Of just revenge against that base Prince which hurt
your Brother:
Let's fall upon his Country, they say a rich one,
And he no doubt lies here obscured to do some mis∣chief:
At least let us seize upon his ships here in the road.
It were dishonourable:
He came to the assistance of the King my father,
And for his sake I rather do desire his friendship,
However he appears not to receive it.
That shows his hatred; he may be in his
Country
Raising forces to invade your Kingdom in your ab∣sense:
Prevent him sir, and seize on his; it is a shame, sir,
To lie here hugging a wife, wasting your best of
youth
On poor delights.
Thou know not what it is to be rich in
pleasure.
Yes▪ to have money purchased by my sword.
Is it not as well to have it without blows?
Not by the half: If your Majesty should
give me now
A thousand crowns, in the mind I am in,
I swear I scarce would give you thanks for it.
Well Clindor, I had such an intention; but
since I see
It will be no more acceptable, it shall be reserved for
some other.
Your Majesty, if you please, may lend me
such a sum:
At the first City taken by assault, I shall pay it.
The war is so distant from my thoughts,
So long I cannot spare it.
Nay, as you please sir, I am full.
Able to lend me, are you not? I am a
stranger here,
And may need gold.
Make haste, sir, back to Burgonia, your
credit's good there:
And to say truth, I wonder why you stay so long;
Your subjects will believe you have forgot them,
Your fathers death, sir, left things much unsettled.
Clindor, I thank you for your care; it is
worth my thought,
And shall be worth to you the thousand crowns we
spake of,
Nor shall you pay so much as thanks to me:
Only be careful of my brother; he is full of melan∣choly,
For which I know no better cure then your com∣pany.
He shall not stir a foot without me:
But this same foolish Love does trouble us; A little
Bout, sir,
In the field, War, war would cure us all.
Divine Clorinda! how quickly is my joy
To see you here, lost by the cruelty of your com∣mands!
All your neglect was just; but now to bid me
Cease to love you, nay to impose a new affection,
It is such a studied tyranny, that I in this particular
To Gods and men may justify my disobedience
To Clorinda.
I must not hope that any argument
That I have used can be of equal force
With her perfections; if they want power,
It is vain to plead it further: but henceforth
Be assured I never shall impose any command
Upon you, nor will I ever see you more,
If with convenience I may avoid you.
Stay, you cannot think it is possible
I should obey you.
I think you will not rather; so fare you
well.
O stay! was ever man so wretched?
May I not be allowed some time to try
If I can be inconstant?
Yes.
How long?
Two or three days.
Oh! years, years will not do it, sure not an age,
I cannot suffer such a thought: To pierce my heart
Is much more easy; O give me leave to do that
Rather; then you shall see your character
So deeply printed there, that not Clorinda's self
Can ere deface it, not by this injury,
Although the greatest that ever yet was offered
To a faithful love.
Tears from those manly eyes! it is not fit I
urge it more:
But know withal it is impiety in you
To hope I ever can be yours:
For though no contract past betwixt me
And the King your brother, I hold my self
Unfit to be another wife; my vows of being
Ever his, are sure in heaven recorded.
Think seriously of this; but withal be assured
That person does not live to whom I hold
My self so much obliged as to Prince Clarimant:
The Gods grant you much peace,
Nay greater happiness then they permit me to be∣stow.
Thunder and music in one voice; despair
and joy!
•et reason bids me hope from her last word:
The heart that pities once, may love afford.
Saline, I am now resolved to see this
Holy man; and if he be what you relate,
Hereafter I shall credit you. Prince Clarimant
And fair Olinda too will go along:
Let it be ordered so, if possible,
That none take notice of our going.
That may with much ease be effected: Some
hours
As in the morning he wholly dedicates
To his devotions, and does admit of none to visit him:
But persons of your quality are not obliged to any
rule.
It false out happily; be ready then to guide us.
Madam, I shall not fail; and if you find him
not above
What you expect, for ever banish me your favour.
Austela, I much wonder why this
Unhappy Prince appears not.
Doubtless, sir, he is shipped; the sense of his
disgrace
Will hinder him for ever appearing in this Court.
Why shoe•lt you think so? his action was
not such
As you would make it; although Clorinda
Were a woman, he knew it not, but as a rival
In your sisters love did wound her.
That is true, sir; it is not that which I allege•
In his disgrace, but that he with such odds
Could not defend himself from Clarimant.
It was his misfortune, and not want of courage,
Nor can I think that he consented
To that assistance which his servants gave:
However I must value him a friend,
For such he showed himself in my distress;
Nor shall he suffer in my Kingdom, if it lie
In my power to serve him.
I am not, sir, to counsel you: but for my part
The little knowledge I had of him, does make me wish
Never to see my sister married to him;
And I am confident, if not enforced,
She never will receive him for a husband.
It is not come to that: I rather fear
His wounds were mortal; and should he thus be lost
And no account given of his life or death,
It might be prejudicial to my honour,
All neighbour Princes would avoid my Court for ever.
It were no loss, if they were all like him.
Daughter, I find you are so partial for your
Husbands brother, that you forget my interest quite:
I cannot be so severed by a husband,
As to forget a loving father: My sisters good
Obliges to speak thus much, for whom
I must believe Prince Clarimant would prove
A nobler husband then this Prince
You so much seem to favour.
It is true; but his affection's settled on Clo∣rinda
sure,
Never to be altered.
You know not, sir, what time may do;
Clorinda's self labours to make Prince Clarimant
Change his affection to my sister: For her,
She vows never to marry, as having lost Agenor
Whom she loved. This I both gather by mine
Own observance, and likewise know it from my
sister,
To whom Clorinda hath in part expressed as much.
Things standing so, I must confess, if honour
And my word engaged permit, I quickly should con∣sent.
You would have reason. I know Agenor
So much loves his brother, that he might be per∣swaded
After your death to live here, and leave the govern∣meant
Of Burgonia to Clarimant.
It were a high point of state, could it be so,
And we should aptly pay the care we owe
Unto this Kingdom. That State is much more happy
Where the Prince himself remains,
Then howsoever governed by a Substitute.
Add to this, what happiness it were for me
To live here in that Kingdom, which I
By your favour brought my husband.
My dear Austela, I rejoice in thy instruction:
My daughter and my Tutor, to thy clear
Judgment I leave the managing of this affair.
Will you not let them see my art?
No, no, it were loss of time.
On peril of your lives keep
close, till you be called.
Speak not of calling;
As soon as you perceive them once entered
This thicket, break forth and seize them:
If any men come in their company,
Unless they yield, kill them; whilst we convey
Away the Ladies to the ship. Where lies the Boat?
Who guides to that?
Fast by here in a Creek.
But why should not we rather let them come
Unto his Cell? then we might better seize them.
Oh by no means! he must remain here still
In the same reputation, until by poison
Or some other way the King Agenor be dispatcht;
And then come to receive a D•kedom
For thy recompense,—or else a halter.
Doubt not, I will deserve it.
My mind misgives me that they will not
come.
Oh fear it not; both love and curiosity
Advance their steps, either of which
Hath power to make young people run:
The boy that brings them, hath his interest too:
I judge it near the time.
I see them coming.
Stand close.
Madam, it is but a little farther
Within the Wood.
Whilst they enquire for Oracles,
I'll talk with you: It is a notable witty rogue—
The place methinks invites:
Traitors!
Help, help, you Gods!
Make good against them.
Lose no time.
O Clindor, that we had
wings!
It is strange that they should be so long re∣turning,
It is not a mile without the City.
It seems they find a pleasing entertainment.
O my heart! what object's this!
Clindor, what mean these wounds?
To kill me, sir, I think; and if they do,
It matters not, life hath with me no value:
Your Brother's lost.
How lost?
Surprised by the base Prince of Aquitain,
As they were going to see the holy Druid.
O heavens! and whither carried?
To his Fleet that lies here in the Road.
Prince Clarimant and I, when we had killed
Those that opposed us, pursued to overtake them,
But came just as they put their Barge from shore:
The Prince not considering his wounds,
Transported by his passion, leaps into the sea,
And swam after the Boat; but you may think
In vain, although he could have reached it.
And so was drowned!
Not drowned, but perhaps worse:
Whether moved by the Ladies prayers, or that they
〈◊〉 might not
Lose the profit of his ransom, or with more cruelty
To make an end of him, I know not which;
I saw them take him up into the Boat,
Having disarmed him first.
He's lost, he's lost!
Just Gods grant me revenge upon the Traitor,
And after punish me which way you please for all
my ills.
The hope of that revenge is my excuse to
outlive
My master: Think what you are to do.
Thou counsell'st well.
O sir, your help! what is to be done?
I am so distracted with the accident—
Lend me your power.
Most willingly.
Furnish such ships with all speed possible
As are not so; such as be ready, clap men aboard
Them strait: For me, were there but one,
By all the Gods, with that I will attempt their rescue.
Then I must go along.
You!
Yes, I.
Let some watch on the shore, and see if the
Admiral
Hoes sail, what course he holds.
That shall be my employment; but be assured sir,
Whilst the wind keeps where it is,
They cannot pass into the Main.
Continue good heaven, and grant your
aid!
Fortune! thou enemy to wit and industry,
How I could curse thy deity, and this same giddy
Prince,
That by his new affection gives thee power
To ruin my well-laid plots! But I unjustly
Do complain of both: Clorinda's beauty
Is my fate, all my disasters take from her
Their being; I will forget her, tear her from my
heart:
But then I overthrow the groundwork
Of my great design; no Kingdom,
Nor no happiness without Clorinda.
How! no happiness without Clorinda!
No happiness without Clorinda dye,
You know her title to the Crown of Burgonia
Takes place of mine.
And why then does she live?
It is a question I may better ask,
I gave you poison to dispatch her.
Rather a Cordial to comfort her,—see,
I dare take the rest.
Hold, dear Saline!
Dear Saline! False perjured man, have I
from love
To thee, attempted wickedness so great,
That horror strikes my soul to think upon it;
And after all cast off like a scorned property,
Your work performed?
This jealousy does set a greater value on
thee:
Come, I will open to thee all my heart;
To make my title strong, I must be married
To Clorinda.
You must•!
Hear me with patience,
I mean in policy it were fit:
But to secure your fears, before that pass,
The Priest shall secretly join us together,
Which disanuls a second marriage.
If this be real that you speak,
Perform it now betwixt our selves,
And call the Gods to witness.
Our hearts already have consented,
What needs there more?
Is it even so; I left nothing undone
To the last circumstance, that you desired;
Gave Clarimant, Clorinda, and the Princess
Olinda into your hands. But I perceive
Where your heart's fixed, and I was strangely fooled,
That ever could believe again.
I like not this, dear Saline,
If you consider well, you have no ground
For jealousy from me. The Prince, within whose
power
We for the present are, neglects his former Mistress,
Makes all addresses, in my judgment, to Clorinda.
In this you more confirm me, that you still
Do love Clorinda: since jealousy makes you
Imagine that for which there is no ground;
Or if this Prince like you should prove unfaithful,
Can it be thought Clorinda can be moved
To love again, that had no sense of all
Prince Clarimant hath done or suffered for he• sake?
But she is within his power; and what time
Or force may work! nay, if you will observe,
You'll find she shows no great aversion to him.
Lend me your eyes, I cannot see it else:
No more; be confident, Saline, I am what
I was:
Yes, I am confident,
False as the Fiends, too late I find it.
Most noble Cleon!
Ha! Cleon?
Lend me your help, to let these Ladies know
Nothing but service is intended.
What mean you sir? she must not know me.
Cleon: Did you not call him Cleon?
No, Madam.
Sure you did.
Then I mistook.
Cleander is my name, a servant to your beauty
Lady, and this fair Princess; whose merits
Are so great, that by your selves considered,
May well assure of all observance,
Especially from this noble Prince your servant.
I must confess sir, I believe him every way
So worthy, that I much grieve fortune allotted
Him no other way then force to gain
Possession of his Mistress. Come, Madam, be not sad;
A noble husband makes a large amends
For loss of friends or country; nor are they lost
But for the present.
I know not how (Clorinda) you may
value him;
But I must tell him plainly, his actions
Speak him base and treacherous.
Madam, I shall not so much grieve to find you
Cruel; since this fair Lady not condemns me.
You shall in nothing, sir, oblige me more,
Then by your using Clarimant with curtsy:
Although your enemy, he is my friend;
A nearer interest though he most deservingly
Hath sought, my inclination never could allow him.
I shall forget my wounds received from him;
Neglect all opportunity to take revenge,
If it may be to you a satisfaction.
Your noble usage of him whilst he is your
prisoner,
At last may turn to your advantage:
Your peace will be the easier made with both the
Kings;
Nay, without doubt this fair Princess
Would easily be granted to you
In exchange for him.
Me in exchange! first I will be wedded
to my grave.
Lady, I shall not press you much:
Your pride and scorn darkens your beauty,
Whilst curtsy sets off what in this Lady
Needs no foil.
It is so.
I see you are a Courtier, sir, and know how
To oblige those who have power to assist your
wishes:
Your favourable opinion of me, engages my
Best performance with my dearest friend
To make her yours; this coyness shall not last,
Leave me to win her for you.
If you be pleased to hold me worthy, I shall not
Study to maintain a meaner happiness.
He is taken past recovery.
Ladies, we dare not longer bar you
The happiness to enjoy your selves.
Dispose of all things freely in this ship,
Were it the Empire of the world, most
Excellent Clorinda, your power were still the same:
I know you borrow but my name,
The power intended here; and so she •used
Conceive it.
Sir, let me crave some conference with you:
Command that boy straight from them,
As you respect your happiness:
I'll give you reason for it.
O Madam!
Sir, you must go with me.
What mean you?
The Prince would speak with you.
Can I yet live, and know Clorinda prisoner,
Subject to all the injuries of power,
And I incapable to serve her? I am not so;
My hands are free, only my heart is slaved
Under misfortune. Were my love such as justly
Might arise from so miraculous a cause,
The ardor of my flame would prompt my heart
And hand to find some way to set her free,
And take revenge upon the treacherous Prince▪
But I do find the cause of all this deadness:
My thoughts are active, but there wants
Her favourable influence upon me.
O me! what do my fears suggest!
My eyes and ears, those traitors to my peace,
I will not trust your base intelligence;
You are but the servants of my fear, and not my
reason:
Can injuries or importunity prevail
To make her love this Prince; where love and
service
On my part procured but frowns? O yes,
It may be so; there is a cruelty in Love,
By which that Deity does magnify it self:
Reason or merit must pretend no share
In the free bounties of a heart that Love inclines.
Prince Clarimant!
Ha!
Why are you so amazed?
What light breaks from that cloud,
And with the sudden brightness dazzles my sense!
My happiness is such, O speak again,
That by two witnesses my joys may be confirmed▪
Why are you thus disturbed? you oft have
seen me.
But never thus, never thus unexpectedly,
When I despaired the happiness.
Had fortune been so envious to deny an
opportunity,
As I confess this hardly was attained,
To give you thanks for the last testimony of your
love;
Yet reason, and the estimation you do hold of me,
Might well assure you I could not but resent it
Highly.
O heavens!
You are sad; does this acknowledgment
offend you?
Offend me, dear Clorinda! it is such a joy
As justly might transport me from my self:
But when I do consider all my merit was but intention
And that I can do nothing real in your service,
The sense of my misfortune sinks me down low as
despair.
The Gods themselves in what we owe to them,
Do not require above what they enable us
To act: much less is due to me,
Who rather am your debtor; which to acquit in part
I chiefly came to clear any suspicion
You might have conceived from my kind usage
Of this traitor Prince; yet know if you believed me
Guilty, it was a crime I can as hardly pardon
As your too much love.
The last is such a guilt as every minute mule∣tiplies;
And though you cruelly condemn it, such is yet
The riches or my soul.
But if you wish, as you profess, my happiness
And satisfaction, temper it so, that I may pay the like;
The affection of a brother to a sister I will allow you.
In this you do so far exceed my hopes or
merit,
That it were ingratitude not to acknowledge
A bounty infinitely great: But since that
Sisterly affection does not debar you
From conferring a greater happiness upon some
other,
A happiness which I must burst with envy to behold:
Nay, curse whom you so bless, you do but raise me
high,
To throw me down with greater violence.
To cure this fear, the Gods be witness,
No others interest ever shall exceed Prince Clari∣mint's.
Nor shall their happiness then, by this fair
hand.
But if beyond this you but hope, you in∣jure
me
And virtue.—So peace dwell with you.
Alas, already you forget your promise;
You wish peace, and remove it from me,
Would any sister do so to a brother?
Yes, to preserve herself and him:
Were we discovered, you were lost.
The Prince which my unhappy beauty hath surprised
Neglects Olinda, and certainly does fix his thoughts
On me: With him, as far as honour would permit,
I have dissembled, entertained his flame
With no dislike; by which you are preserved as yet▪
And not ill used: But this stolen visit
Would to him express more kindness
Then he must think I have for you—
I hear some entering the Cabin—
Heaven! it is the Prince:
Who have we here? Death seize him,
And throw him overboard.
O heavens! what art can save him?
O for a sword!
Dare you presume to speak of love to me,
And do an act so base? The mere intent,
Were you not rooted here, would cancel all your
interest.
My interest!
But if you value my respect so little,
And your own promise for his noble usage,
Yet wisdom bids you not forget the advantage
That his life may bring more then his death.
She tells you true; remember why we did
at first
Preserve him to make our peace, should not our plot
Take on Agenor.
Take him away and bind him.
Why sure he cannot fly: To leap into the sea,
Were to perform himself that which you threaten.
Remove him hence however.
Fortune! that gives this man this power.
I look upon him as a hated Rival,
away with him.
Come, I forgive this passion, the cause
That it proceeds from being love to me,
The error too that you are in is punishment enough.
Though I suspect all for dissembled,
Yet I am pleased to hear her; what was my error?
A gross mistake of this stolen visit,
And yet love was my grand errand.
Whore's my mistake then?
Patience, and hear me: You thought Olinda
Once did love you, and you were not mistaken;
She did so till she knew the Prince:
You found her altered; and of me mistaking
The true cause, were jealous. Now by the Gods,
If I have truth, she loves the Prince.
And so I fear do you.
By way of gratitude; but for affection,
Heaven witness with me I loved another:
Yet where I find distrust and disrespect,
Such as you have expressed, I am no longer bound.
Infinite cunning!
But to proceed: Finding this Ladies passions
Strong to Clarimant, my obligations great,
By way of gratitude, I thought my self obliged
To make him happy in Olinda's love,
And doubt not to effect it, though I must blush to
say so.
I found some arguments besides that pressed me
To this undertaking; for were their hearts so fixed
On other, your peace with both the Kings were
quickly made,
And you stood free to make a new election:
Yet were all women of my mind,
You should stay long enough without a wife, you are
so passionate.
Most excellent Clorinda, pardon the rashness
of your servant,
Who henceforth yields himself for ever to be disposed
Of by you.
Well, if I find so, I never was
ungrateful.
How with a twined thread does she ride the
Ass,
And turns him how she please! but when I consider,
It is no wonder, she hath a depth of policy
Which all my art could never fathom: True,
Blinded by my love, I could not reach her aims:
But stood I free, she wanting the advantage
Of loves power upon me, how poor and shallow
Were the arts of all the sex? But as it is,
Fortune hath given this silly Prince
The power to crush me into nothing;
Breaks his contract with me touching Clorinda,
Which was the soul of all my undertaking.
Is there no way to right my self? yes,
This could revenge my wrongs on him,
But then I perish in the act, and leave Clorinda
To be enjoyed by Clarimant: that must not be,
No, ere my Rival shall so happy prove,
I to my hate will sacrifice my love.
SIr, pardon this disturbance of your thoughts.
Your presence rather, fairest Lady,
May rectify any disorder,
Since you are all a harmony of sweetness.
Sir, I perceive your power great with this
noble Prince,
And I believe so much a friend to him,
That he would hearken to your council:
If you would join with reason, and so persuade him
To set Prince Clarimant and the Princess at liberty,
I think it were an act would show much friendship
To him, and for your self gain what reward
You would desire from both the Kings.
I have observed, most beautiful Clorinda,
Such an excess of nobleness in you,
I scarcely dare express what I would undertake
To serve you: but then you really
Must let me know all your desires.
It is Cleon.
Lady, dare you adventure to speak your
wishes?
I have done so.
That Clarimant and the Princess should be
Delivered, I do believe is your desire:
But is that all? are you pleased to be here?
Why should I not? am I not nobly used?
I know those who are wicked fear not
To break an oath; but such whose heart
Is filled with virtue, as, I am sure yours is,
Would not be perjured for the world.
To what tends this?
That you do swear not to discover
What I shall propose touching your service.
You need not doubt, if it do suit
With what I have expressed is my desire.
My end shall be the same, their liberty and yours,
Though happily our ways to that may differ.
My liberty!
Yes, yours the most desired:
Swear, and then hear what I propose.
I do, so far as virtue binds.
That tie all men have on you.
If your intents be fair, why will you ask
A stronger obligation then?
I dare not speak my thoughts without an
oath.
What can he mean?—I swear never to speak
Of that you shall propound; nor need I,
Since the Prince does overhear.
Then know, I am not ignorant how you
dissemble
With this treacherous Prince, whom you
And all the world must hate.
This will undo me; I hate the Prince!
Yes, Lady, deadly; yet less then I.
It is well.
All for your sake; and for that noble Prince,
If you consent, this hand, if Clarimant's
Be not more able to effect it,
Shall take revenge, and right our general wrongs.
I do complain of none;
If I did, how could this be effected?
With ease; nay more, it is not impossible,
The deed done, to escape to shore in the ship-boat,
Into which the Prince and you, the night assisting,
May get before.
It is impossible; you are deceived—
A Guard there!
Seize the Villain.
How? what mean you sir? All that I spoke
Was but to let you see how she abused you,
And this the plot that Clarimant and she had laid:
You know, upon your life depends my happiness.
Mine in thy death:
This cunning cannot save you, Cleon.
Nor do I wish it should,
If you indeed believe me guilty.
Bind him, I will have thee tortured limb from
limb,
Till thou confess all truth.
Let me entreat, sir, for his life,
However I am by him accused.
For hating me; which I have too much reason
To believe is truth.
How can you think so?
Did I not place you to overhear him?
But knew not what he would deliver.
See Clarimant fast bound; and (Madam)
My cabin this night shall be your chamber.
Perhaps my death-bed; Lost for ever!
O you just Gods! how all my treasons
Against my sweet and innocent Mistress are returned
Upon my head! Prince Clarimant, I am thy mur∣dress,
To the fair Olinda, by my means betrayed:
O horror! what will my torments be for this
Hereafter in the other world? All this
For love of thee false Cleon have I done,
Thy cursed brain gave birth to all my plots:
Is this the Crown thou made me fondly hope for?
And shall I die without revenge? revenge!
My hands fast bound, there's nothing left that I can
Reach thee with but curses, fruitless curses.
He shall live happy, gain a Kingdom and Clorinda,
By her a Kingdom: why should I pity her then?
It is she that is the ground of all my misery,
His love to her makes me thus wretched:
For Clarimant, he may hereafter marry with Olinda,
All but my self may yet be happy:
Must I alone die wretched, contemned and scorned?
Why do I longer live, my guilt and miseries so great?
You Gods, or Fiends, remove me from this miserable
Earth, and let me feel new punishments,
If punishments there be hereafter,
These they cannot exceed: how sweet were yet
Revenge! O for revenge, that Cleon's heart
Were in my hand! false Cleon's!—no way.
O dearest Olinda, what are the miseries
That we are fallen into! Thinking to rid my self
Of a false Vilain, I have brought ruin
On us all; no art can help us now.
Oh the hard choice! to marry with this traitor
Prince; or Clarimant must die.
It were better you consent to marry with
the Prince,
Then that Prince Clarimant should suffer;
Let not him die however.
I know your love to Clarimant
Makes you persuade me thus: and I would quickly
yield,
Did not my oath to Clarimant forbid;
But would kill my self ere go to bed.
I must confess I love the Prince,
Be not offended that I say so;
It was your persuasion first: since, I have seen
Such noble actions, as raises him so far
Above all other men, that they appear
Not worthy of a thought: And yet my love
And estimation of your virtue's such,
I gladly would submit, nay much rejoice
To see such merits joined.
Clarimant, behold your Judge: for know,
Clorinda,
This minute you must give consent to marry me,
And go to bed; or else immediately his head
Goes off.
A cruel choice!
Base man! can thou expect to scope the hand
Of justice, after such cruelty?
It is not from you, Madam, that I expect
An answer: Speak Clorinda, give your sentence;
For by the Gods there is no way but one of these.
O Clarimant!
Heavens, can you suffer
What you have made so excellent, to be thus
Miserable?
These lamentations boot not:
Speak Lady, I can admit of no delay.
What can I say?
No! strike off his head then.
Oh hold!
Speak, are you mine?
Say, Clarimant.
Madam, to me death will be ease,
Since I have lived to see you injured thus,
And have not power for to revenge it.
Are you resolved?
To suffer what thy barbarous nature can
inflict.
O help! fire, fire!
What cry is that?
Quench, quench the fire.
O sir, we are all undone! the fire hath taken
Amongst the Cabins, past all hope of extinguishing.
Fly, fly! the ship, the cordage is a fire:
For all the water we can bring, it still increases.
What, burn in the sea! slaves, quench the
flames.
The Sailors, sir, descend into the Boat:
Make sure of that, and reach your other ships,
The only means of safety.
Hell and confusion!
There's none obey command; but each man
looks
To his own safety.
O heavens! must then Clorinda perish!
Make sure of the Long-boat for me: Some
one kill Cleon,
Or rather let him perish in the flames.
My wounds received from Clarimant, I Will revenge
My self. [Offers to kill]
O sir, if you have hope in me!
It is true; he shall not die yet,
But the Gods hereafter shall not save him,
Though they thus crossed my wishes now: Come
Lady,
I will take care of you.
We must not part.
I mean it not; there may be use of her,
Nay for your sake bring Clarimant along.
It is for thine own, false Prince.
But look well to him.
You Gods!
Your powerful justice in these flames is shown,
Preserve Clorinda, and your mercy's known.
Gramercy fire! the element of water never yet
Afforded me so much: this I can swim to shore
With; yet the wind blows high; but to the
Shoreward I may escape; if not, why so
Whoever finds my body, shall give me thanks.
O gentle Sailor, untie my hands!
A pretty boy; come,—It will not do,
My knife: so, can swim?
Oh no.
Then get some board or pack: I fear I shall be
Drowned, I am so well natured on the sudden.
No use of this—
Just heavens!
True, Cleon; never so manifest,
Gentle Saline, unbind my hands:
I were ingrate else, Cleon: you did as much
for me.
And would do more; any thing; unbind
me, Sweet,
I'll swim with thee upon my back to shore.
You cannot swim, I am sure you shall not.
No creature living better; I oft have swam
two leagues
For pleasure: O delay not, the fire approaches.
But will you marry me, and make good all
your promises?
By the Gods I will.
Sure you will again deceive me.
Never, by my hopes.
The only time you ever yet spoke truth—
You shall not: yet still thy heart is false:
It is not; quick unbind me, gentle Saline.
Well, for once I'll try what your heart holds.
Blessed Saline! O cruel! yet
spare me
Dear Saline.
Yes, when I see your heart, or blood come
from it.
O witch, devil▪
I am to thee so: What policy can now
defend?
Know to thy greater torment, I set the ship
On fire, only to be revenged on thee,
Not hoping such a happiness as this,
With these to behold thy false heart blood.
O that my eyes could look thee dead!
I will see them closed, my dearest husband,
It is my duty.
First we'll to sea together.
Since we must—
It were best to enter further within the wood:
A Boat made after us when we forsook the ship:
Some Fisherman, that to avoid the storm,
Put to the shore.
Let the winds blow and split, since we are
Here: Fire, air, and water have opposed my wishes;
Kind mother Earth grant what they have denied.
But why should I entreat, that may command
All my desires? Once more, Clorinda,
I propose the choice; say, shall he die,
Or will you make me happy who loves you
More then he?
Traitor thou lie: He that truly loves
Clorinda,
Would give some noble testimony: Unbinde my hands,
And by my death, as a worthy Rival,
Win her from me: I ask no sword,
Only the freedom of my hands; but if thy coward heart
Think that too much, take all these to assist:
You need not pull death faster on you
By injurious words; it is ready,
Speak Clorinda, or he dies.
Hold, and give me leave to speak a few sad words.
Dear Clarimant, I know to save your life,
And yield my self another, were such a choice
You never could allow, since to the miserable
Life is a burden: Could my death
Make you happy, the Gods be witness
I would lay it down with joy,
Our fates I find are one; the merit of your love
And sufferings for my sake is such,
That I should hold my self ingrate,
Did I not grant you any thing
That I might think might comfort you in death.
But shall I dare to speak wy wishes?
More then dare; I do enjoin it.
There is a happiness would make my death
My triumph.
I understand you. Here! alas that I should
give
My hand to Clarimant, and he not able
To receive it 1 Our hearts may yet be joined
For ever, and only by these miseries
They could have been.
Is this the fruit of my delay.
To hear my Rival courted?
Know tyrant, it is the same,
One stroke dispatches both.
Strike here then, vilain.
Devil, dost thou believe there are no Gods?
Clindor, this way I saw them enter.
I am out of breath, sir.
Ha, who are these?
See sir, the traitor Prince.
Unbind me, dear Clorinda.
O dearest brother, how is it with you?
Well, Clarimant, never so well.
By all that's good, you never in my eye Looked half so lovely as now: yet till this day
I never could have said I loved another better
Then your Majesty.
If it be Clarimant, my joys are then com∣pleat.
It is he, sir; who could else deserve it?
How favourable are the Gods unto the
virtuous!
How just to wicked men! How glad will my Au∣stela be
Of this, who with the King will straight be here?
They from the shore beheld your ship, when it
Took fire, saw you put off from it,
And watched your landing certainly.
Know you what Bark it was
That followed us at sea?
I was in that, and Clindor,
Some twenty with me to watch the ship,
Till other Vessels were prepared:
So swift she was of sail, that all the Fleet
Could not have hurt us.—See, the King!
What happiness? all safe?
Welcome again, my dearest.
Let's lose no time; delay were now ingra∣titude:
See, a Temple close by prompts us
To the performance of two duties:
The burial of this unhappy Prince;
But chiefly to render thanks unto the Gods.
Deliverance so great, alacrity commands
In giving thanks: that done, we'll join your hands.
It were folly now to deny the ceremonial,
The real part already past.
O dear Clorinda!
It were vain to think words could my joys express,
Raised from despair to such a happiness.
FIrst, Ladies, unto you I am addressed;
As those who judge of Lovers actions best:
If Clarimant your suffrages hath gained,
Our Author hath his chiefest end obtained:
Now Sirs to you—
Sure here's no Lover will Clorinda blame
For gratitude, since you must hope the same:
Perhaps you rather think she was too nice,
That such a flame no sooner thawed her ice:
Our Author hopes she did but her just part;
He nobly wooed, she timely gave her heart:
To both the sexes we prefer this suit;
Ere you give sentence, with your selves dispute:
If then condemned, to whom should we appeal,
But to that Prince that pardons faults of zeal?
If then condemned, it were pride to make appeal,
Yet there remains a pardon in our zeal:

AND what! you stick upon a Women's Dreams?
Can such weak Subjects trouble this great Soul?
And this heart so approved in War, can it
Receive Alarm from an idle Fantasy?
I know what a Dream is, and what belief
We ought to give to its extravagance,
That a confused mass of Nocturnal Vapours
Forms vain Objects, which at waking vanish;
But you know not, Sir, what a woman is,
Nor the just power she takes upon a Soul,
When having long time found the art to charm us,
Bright Hymens Torches flame about our Beds.
Pauline without reason plunged in grief,
Fears and believs already that she sees
My death, which she hath dreamed; she doth oppose
Her tears to my design, and labours
To hinder me from going forth the palace;
I slight her fears, but yield unto her tears;
And my heart tender, but not terrified.
Dares not displease the eyes have conquered it:
Nearchus, is the occasion so pressing
That it may not a little be deferred
Upon a Lovers sighs? let us a while
Wave this design which burdens her with grief,
To morrow we can do it a swel's to day.
Yes, if you were assured to live so long,
And to persevere in your faith; that God
Which holds our soul, and numbered our days,
Hath not engaged himself that you shall see
The morning break; he is all just and good,
But his effectual grace descends not always
With the same efficacy; after certain moments
Which we lose by delays, she quits those darts
Which penetrate our souls, the arm that freely
Dispensed her unto us, stops his bounty;
As being offended, our dull heart is hardened;
That holy heat which carries us to good,
False on a Rock, and operates no more.
That zeal which pressed you to have recourse
To sacred baptism, languishing already,
Ceases to be the same; and for some sighs
Which you have heard, its flame doth dissipate
It self; and is upon the point to vanish.
You know me ill, the self same heat still burns me,
And the desire increases when the effect
Recoils; those tears which with a Husbands Eye
I look upon, leave me as good a Christian
In heart as you; but to receive the seal
And sacred character thereof, which washes
Our sins in saving water, and in opening
Our Eyes with a divine Ray, doth restore us
Unto the first right which we had to Heaven,
Though I prefer it before all the greatness
Of Empires as the supreme good, and that
Which I alone aspire to, I believe
I may, to satisfy a lawful love,
Defer this sacred baptism for a day.
Thus the malicious enemy of man
Abuses you, what he can't do by force,
He doth attempt by policy, still jealous
Of good designs, which he endeavours
To shake; when he can't break them, he put• on
With all the power he can to stop their course.
With obstacle upon obstacle he is coming
To trouble yours, to day by tears, to morrow
By something else; this dream so full of horror
Is but the slourish of his first illusions,
He sets all things a work, both prayer and threatening,
He assaults always, and is never weary,
He thinks to do at last what yet he cannot,
And what we do defer, concludes half broken.
Destroy his first strokes, let Pauline weep:
God would not have a heart that the world rules;
Who looks upon him when his voice doth call him
At distance, and as doubtful in his choice,
Hearkens unto another voice then his,
To give our selves to him, must we love no body?
We may love all, he suffers, he ordains it;
But this great King of Kings, this Lord of Lords
Will have the first love and the chiefest honours.
As nothing's equal to his supreme Greatness,
So nothing must be loved but after him,
And in him; we to please him must neglect
Wife and wealth, friends and fortunes; for his glory
We must not stick t'expose our selves to dangers,
Yea, even to death, to pour our blood forth for him;
But how far are you from this perfect love
Which I could wish you as so necessary
To your salvation, and eternal good?
I cannot speak unto you, Polyeuctes,
But with tears in mine eyes; now that we are
Hated in every place, that all believe
They serve the State well when they persecute us,
Now that a Christian is exposed a butt
Unto the sharpest torments, how can you
Or'ecome the grief on it, if you can't resist
A Women's tears?
You do'nt astonish me;
The Pity that doth wound me doth proceed
From a great courage rather then from weakness;
Nearchus, on my equals a fair eye
Hath had much force, he fears to offend it,
That dreads not death; and if we must affront
The cruel'st punishments, to find delights
And pleasures there, your God whom I dare not
Yet to call mine, in making me a Christian,
Will give me strength enough to undergo them.
Haste then to be one.
Yes, I fly, Nearchus,
I long to bear the glorious mark of it,
But my Pauline doth afflict her self,
And can't consent, so much this dream doth trouble her,
To leave me to go forth.
Your safe return
Will be more pleasing to her; in an hour,
Or little more you shall wipe off her tears,
The happiness will seem again to see you
More sweet, by how much more she hath lamented
So dear a Husband. Come, we are expected.
Appease her fear, and calm her sorrow then,
She comes again.
Fly, fly.
Alas! I cannot.
You must, Sir, to be safe; Oh fly an Enemy
That knows your weakness, that doth find it easily,
That wounds with the eyes, whose stroke doth kill
And please, because received not against your will.
LEt's fly then, since we must, adieu, Pauline,
Adieu, within an hour, or little more
I will return again here.
What occasion
So pressing doth invite you to go forth?
Doth it concern your honour, or your life?
Much more then either.
What's the secret then?
You shall know one day, I am loath to leave you,
But yet I must.
Do ye love me?
Witness Heaven
A thousand times more then my self I love you,
But—
But you care not for my discontent;
Should you have Secrets that I may not know?
What proof of love is this; in the name of Himen,
Give only to my tears this fatal journey.
A dream makes you afraid!
I know those presages
Are vain, but I do love you, and I fear.
For an hours absence fear no hurt; adieu,
Your tears prevail too much upon me, and
I feel my heart even ready to revolt,
There's no resisting her but in my flight.—
GO, and neglect my tears, hast to precipitate thee
Before the death, which the Gods have predicted
Unto me, follow that same fatal Agent
Of thy ill destinies, who, perhaps may give thee
Into the hands of murderers. See, Stratonica
In this sad age wherein we live, what Empire▪
We have upon the stubborn Spirits of men;
See what is left us, and the ordinary
Effect of that love which they offer us,
And of the vows they make us; whilst they are
But Lovers, we are Sovereigns; and until
They've gained the conquest, we are used as Queens,
But after Marriage they are Kings by turn.
Sure Polyeuctes, wants no love for you;
Though with full confidence he treat you not.
In this affair, though he depart in spite
Of all your tears: it is a part of prudence;
Without afflicting you presume with me,
That it is fit he should conceal the cause,
Assure your self he hath just reason for it:
A Husband must not tell us every thing,
Let him be sometimes free, and not abase him
To render us account still of his steps.
We both have but one heart, which feels the same
Traverses, but this heart hath notwithstanding
Its divers functions; and the Law of marriage
Which holds you together, ordains not
That he should tremble when you tremble, Madam,
What makes you afraid, troubles not him,
He's an Armenian, and you are a Roman,
And you may please to understand that our
Two Nations ha'nt the same impressions
Upon this subject. A dream p•sseth with us
For a ridiculous fancy, it doth leave us,
Nor hope, nor fear, nor scruple; but it carries
Authority in Rome, and passes for
A faithful mirror of fatality.
Mine's very strange, and though Armenian,
I believe that thy fear would equal mine,
If by my bare recital such like horrors
Had struck thy Spirit.
To recount our evils,
We ease them oftentimes.
Attend me then;
But I must tell thee more, and that thou may
The better comprehend this sad discourse,
I will discover unto thee my weakness
In the relation of my first amours;
A woman that loves honour may confess
Without shame those surprises of the senses
Which reason doth or'ecome, chiefly it is
In these assaults that virtue doth break forth,
We doubt that heart that hath not combated.
In Rome where I was born this wretched face
Captived the courage of a Roman knight
Called Severus. Pray excuse the sighs
Which yet a name too dear to my desires,
Snatches out of my bosom.
Was it he
That not long since at th'expence of his life
Saved th'Emperour Decius from his enemies;
Who dying drew the victory from the Persians
And turned the chance upon the Roman Eagles?
He that amongst so many bodies sacrificed
Unto his Master, could not be found out,
Or at least known, to whom Decius at last
Made sumptuous monuments to be raised in vain?
Alas! it was the same, and never did
Our Rome produce a greater heart, nor saw
A braver man since thou hast understood him,
Il'e speak no more of him; Statonica,
I loved him, he deserved well; but whereto
Serves merit where blind fortune is defective?
The one is great in him, the other weak
And common, too invincible obstacle,
O'er which a virtuous Lover very seldom
Triumphs with a father.
Fair occasion,
And worthy a rare constancy!
Rather say
An overnice, foolish and base resistance;
What ever fruit one might receive from thence,
Tic not a virtue but for who would fail:
In this great love which I had for Severus,
I still expected from my Fathers hand
A Husband, and my reason never owned
The amiable Treason of mine eyes.
He did possess my heart, my thought, my wishes,
I hid not from him how much I was wounded,
We sighed together and wept our misfortunes,
But he in stead of hope had nought but tears,
And notwithstanding his sweet sighs and prayers
My Father and my duty were inexorable.
Lastly I left Rome, and this perfect lover,
To follow here my father in his government,
And he, even desperate, went unto the Army
To seek the illustrious fame of a fair death.
Thou know the rest; my coming to this place
Made me see Polyeuctes, and I pleased
His eyes; My Father finding that he was
The chief of the Nobility, was ravished
With joy that he should take me for his Mistress,
And he believed himself by his alliance
Sure to be more redoubted and considerable.
He liked his love, and did conclude the marriage.
And I seeing me destined to his bed
Gave unto his affection through duty
All what the other had through inclination;
If thou can doubt thereof, judge by the fear
Wherewith for him thou see my soul is troubled.
You love him, I believe, as well as one
Can love, but after all what dream could have
Disturbed you?
This last night me thought I saw
The unfortunate Severus with revenge,
In hand, and with an Eye flaming with anger;
He was not covered with those sorry rags,
A desolate shade doth bring with it from graves,
He was not pierced with those glorious strokes
Which cutting off his life assure his memory;
He seemed triumphant like unto our Caesar
When on his Chariot he victoriously
Doth enter Rome; after a little fear
Which his sight gave me, carry unto whom
Thou wilt the favour that is due to me,
Ungrateful, (said he) and this day expired,
Lament at leisure him thou hast preferred
Before me. At these words I trembled,
My soul was troubled; afterword an impious
Assembly of the Christians to advance
The effect of this fatal and sad discourse.
Threw Polyeuctes at his Rivals feet;
Forthwith I called my Father to his aid.
Alas! it is this that most doth trouble me,
I saw my Father enter with a Poniard
In hand, and his arm raised to pierce his bosom▪
There my grief too strong hath conceived those Images,
The blood of Polyeuctes hath contented
Their furies, I know neither how, nor when
They killed him, but I know that to his death
All have contributed. Behold my dream.
It is true, tic sad, but your soul must resist
Those fears, the vision of it self may give
Some horror, but no just fear unto you.
Should you a death fear from a Father, who
Doth love your Husband, and doth honour him.
And whose just choice hath given you unto him,
To make himself thereby here in this Country
A sure and firm support?
He hath himself
Told me as much, and laughed at my alarms,
But I do fear the Christians plots and charms,
And that upon my Husband they'll revenge
The blood my Father hath so freely shed.
Their Sect is mad, impious, and sacrilegious,
And in their Sacrifice use sorcery;
But this their fury goes no further then
To break our Altars, its pursues the Gods,
But reaches not to mortals, whatsoever
Severity our anger doth display
Upon them, they do suffer without murmur,
And die with joy, and since the time they were
Treated as criminals of State, one cannot
Charge them with any murder.
Peace, my Father.
DAughter, thy dream hath plunged me in strange fears
Since yesterday, I doubt the effects thereof,
Which seem t'approach.
I do beseech you, tell me
What first you feel?
Severus is not dead.
What evil doth his life do unto us?
He is the Favourite
Of the Emperor Decius.
After having saved him
From the hands of his Enemies the hope
Of such a rank justly might be allowed him,
Thus Fortune to great hearts so often cruel,
Resolves her self sometimes to do them justice.
He's coming here himself.
What? is he coming?
Thou shalt receive his Visit.
That's too much;
But how do you know this? Sir.
Albin met
In the adjacent field, a troup of Courtiers
Attending him in crowds which showed plainly
His rank and credit, but Albinus tell her
That which his People told thee.
You know, Madam,
What that great Expedition was, which made us
So fortunate by his loss, where the Emperor
A Prisoner, dis•engaged by his hand,
Confirmed again his almost conquered party;
Whilst that his virtue fell amongst the number,
You know the honours that he cause to be
Done to his shadow, when his body could not
Be found amongst the dead. The King of Persia
Witness of his high acts, though to his damage,
Caused him to be carried off, and brought
Into his Tent, he did desire to know
His face though dead, every one did lament him,
Covered with wounds, though jealous of his glory.
Within a while he showed some sign of life:
This generous Monarch was o'er joyed therewith,
And though overcome, thought not of his misfortune;
To honour virtue in its very Author,
He cause that special care should be tan of him;
His cure was secret, and at a Months end
His health was perfect, when the King, to gain him,
Offered him dign•ties, alliance, treasures,
And used a thousand means: when all things failed,
After high praise bestowed on his refusal,
He sent to Decius to propose exchange,
And presently the Emperor transported
With pleasure, offered to the Persian
His Brother and a hundred chiefs to choose.
So came unto the Camp the valorous
And brave Severus, to receive the recompense
Of his high virtue: Decius favour was
The worthy price thereof: we fought again,
And were surprised, yet this misfortune served
T'increase his glory, he alone restablish'd
The order, and recovered the victory,
So fair and plain, and by such glorious feats,
That our stout Enemies offered us tribute,
And made us peace; The Emperor expressed
An infinite love unto him, and being ravished
With the success, sent him into Armenia;
He comes to bring the news into this Country,
And by a sacrifice to render thanks
Unto the Gods,
O heaven! to what estate
My fortune is reduced!
I learned this
From one that doth belong unto his train,
And hasted here, Sir, to acquaint you with it.
Oh without doubt he comes to marry thee,
Daughter, the order of a sacrifice
Is a small thing to him, not worth his presence,
It is a false pretence, whose cause is love.
It may well be, he loved me very dearly.
What will not he allow to his resentment?
And to what point will not his anger carry
A just revenge with so much power to prop it?
He will destroy us, daughter.
He's too generous.
Thou wilt in vain flatter a wretched Father;
He will destroy us, daughter. Oh regreet
That kills me now, in that I loved not
The naked virtue. Oh Pauline really
Thou hast too much obeyed me, thy courage
Was good, but thy nice duty hath betrayed thee.
How thy rebellion had been favourable
Unto me, how it would have privileged me
From a deplorable condition!
If any hope rests with me, it is now
No more but in the absolute power which he
Gives thee upon him: Husband in my favour
The love that doth possess him, and from whence
My evil doth proceed, produce the remedy.
Shall I, Shall I see such a Puissant Conqueror?
And expose me unto those eyes that pierce
My heart? Father, I am a Woman, and
I know my weakness, I perceive my heart
Already to be interested for him,
And will without doubt in spite of my faith
Thrust forth some sigh unworthy both of you
And me, I will not see him.
Re-assure
Thy soul a little.
He is always lovely,
And I am always firm, in the power which
His looks have had upon me, I can't answer
With all my virtue, therefore I'll not see him.
Daughter you must, or you'll betray your Father▪
And all your Family.
It is my duty
To obey since you command, but see the perils
Wherein you hazard me.
I know thy Virtue.
Without doubt it will vanquish, the success
Is not the thing that my soul doubts, I fear
This stubborn combat, and puissant troubles
That makes my senses to revolt already;
But since I must combat an Enemy
I love, permit me t'arm against my self,
And give me some time to prepare to see him.
Without the Ports I'm going to receive him,
In the mean time call home your straggling force,
And think that in thy hands thou holdst our destinies,
True, I am born to sacrifice me still▪
In serving as a victim to your will.
WHilst Felix gives order for the sacrifice,
May not I take a time to see Pauline,
And render to her fair eyes that high homage
Is due unto the Gods? I have not kept
From thee, that it is this which brings me hither;
For the rest I'm not troubled much, I come
To sacrifice, but tic unto your beauties,
Whereto I dedicate all my devotions.
Sir, you shall see her.
What joys do I feel!
Doth this adorable object give consent
That I shall see her? have I any power
Upon her soul yet? hast thou seen in speaking
To her of me, that she was troubled,
Or what transport my coming causes her?
May I hope all things from this happy sight?
For I would rather perish then abuse her
With Letters recommendatory, which
I have to marry her, they are for Felix,
Not to triumph of her, my heart was never
Rebellious unto her desires, and if
My evil fortune should have changed hers,
I would vanquish my self and pretend nothing.
Sir, you shall see her, I can say no more.
How comes it that thou tremble and sigh?
Doth she no longer love me? clear this point.
Sir, I could wish you not to see her more,
Carry unto some higher place the honour
Of your Caresses, you shall find at Rome
Ladies enough that will be proud to be
Your Mistresses, and in this high degree
Of power and glory wherein now you are,
The greatest will esteem your love a happiness.
What should my soul stoop to such humble thoughts?
Should I esteem Pauline as inferior
Unto my fortune? she hath better used it,
I ought to imitate her, I love not
My happiness but for to merit her.
See, Fabian, thy discourse doth trouble me:
Come, let us go to cast this haughty fortune
Even at her feet, I found it happily
In fights seeking a death worthy her Lover,
So then this rank is hers, this favours hers,
And I have nothing that I hold not off her.
No, Sir, but once again pray do not see her.
Oh! it is too much, at last clear me this point;
Hast thou seen coldness when thou prayd'st access?
I tremble to declare t'ee, she is—
What?
Married.
Sustain me, Fabian, this thunder-clap
Is very great, and strikes so much the more,
As more it doth surprise me.
What's become, Sir,
Of that brave generous courage?
Constancy
Is here of little use, when such displeasures
Burden a great heart, the most masculine virtue
Soon loses all its vigour, and when souls
Are taken with so glittering a fire,
Death troubles them far less then such surprises.
I can scarce yet believe thy sad discourse.
Paulina's married; fifteen days have passed
Since Hymen did appear in saffron robes
To solemnise the nuptials; Polyeuctes,
One of the chiefest of the Armenian Lords
Doth taste the infinite sweetness of her bed.
I cannot blame her of an evil choice,
The name of Polyeuctes is esteemed,
As being descended from the blood of Kings.
Weak comfort for a cureless misery!
Pauline, I shall see thee by another
Possessed! Oh Heaven! that spite of me did send me
Unto the light again! Oh fate! that give me
A new hope of my love, take back the favours
Which you have lent me, and restore me death
Which you have taken from me; yet let's see her,
And in this sad place make an end to die
In bidding her adieu, that my heart carrying
Her Image to the dead, where I do go,
With its last sigh to her may homage do.
Consider, Sir.
All is considered.
What inconvenience fears a desperate heart?
Consents she not?
Yes, Sir, but——
It is no matter.
This lively grief will thereby become stronger.
It is not an evil I intend to cure,
I only will but see her, sigh, and dye.
You will break forth without doubt in her presence;
A Lover that doth lose all hath no more
Complacence, but in such despair he follows
His passion which doth thrust him on to injury,
And imprecation.
Judge otherwise
Of me, my respect doth continue yet;
My despair, violent as it is, adores her;.
What reason have I to reproach this Lady?
Wherewith can I accuse her who hath promised
Me nothing; she's not perjured, she's not light;
Her duty hath betrayed me, her Father,
And my misfortune; but her duty was
Just, and her Fathers reason guided him;
I impute all the treason unto my
Misfortune; somewhat less of prosperous hap,
And arrived sooner, would have gained one
By the other, and conserved me; too happy,
But too late, I could not have gained her, I,
Leave me to see her, then to sigh and dye.
Yes, I will go t'assure her that you are
In this extreme misfortune strong enough
To overcome your self, she fears like me
Those first provoked motions which a sudden
And unexpected loss raises in Lovers,
The violence whereof excites much trouble
Without the presence of the object to▪
Redouble it.
I see her, Fabian.
Remember, Sir—
Another is her Husband,
Alas, my sad fate! she doth love another;
It is impossible my grief to smother.
Tic true, Severus, I do love another,
And plead not here for it, every one
Except my self do flatter and abuse you;
Pauline hath a noble soul, and speaks
With open heart, the report of your death
Is not that which destroys you, if just heaven
Had put my marriage to my choice, I should
To your sole virtues, Sir, have given my self,
And all the rigour of our former fate
Against your merit had made vain attempts;
I saw in you Illustrious marks enough
To give you worthy preference even before
The happiest Monarchs; but since other Laws
My duty did impose, what ever Lover
My Father had assigned me, though your valour
Had added to this greatness which it gave you,
The splendour of a Crown, though I loved you
And hated him, I should have sighed at it,
But yet I should obey, and o'er my passions,
My reason being Sovereign, should have blamed
My sighs, and dissipated all my hatred.
How happy are you that a sigh or two
Can easily acquit you of your troubles!
So always absolute Queen of your desires,
The greatest changes find you still resolved;
Your spirit is carried in the strongest love
Unto indifference, and perhaps to scorn,
And your stout firmness without trouble makes
Favour succeed contempt, and love disdain.
Oh how a little of your humour, or
Rather your virtue would comfort the evils
Of this dejected heart! a sigh, a tear
Shed with regret, would have already cured me
Of losing you, my reason would prevail
Upon enfeebled love, and from indifference
Would go even to oblivion, and my fire
Henceforth commanding over yours, I should
Esteem me happy in another arms.
O too too lovely object, that hast charmed me!
Must we thus love? is it so that you have loved me?
I loved thee Severus, and if I
Could smother in my soul the flame remains there,
What rigorous torments, Gods, should I avoid!
It is true, my reason tames my passions,
But whatsoever Authority she hath taken
Upon them, she reigns not, but tyrannizeth;
And though the outside be without commotion,
The inside is but trouble and sedition.
A certain charm, I know not what, inclines me
Towards you yet, your merit sure is great,
Although my reason's strong, I see it still,
Such as it lights my fires, so much more strongly
To work on my affections, as it is
Environed with puissance and glory;
I see that in all places after you
It draws triumphant victory, that I
Best know the price on it, and that it hath not
Deceived the generous hope I conceived of it.
But that same duty which in Rome subdued it,
And makes me subject to the Law of Man here,
Repulses still so strongly the assault
Of so many allurements, that it tears
My soul, but doth not shake it; it is that virtue
Even cruel to our own desires, which you
Should praise when you blaspheme it; if you please
You may complain on it, but yet praise its rigour
That triumphs o'er you and over my heart
At one time, lower thoughts could not have merited
That perfect love which you have born unto me.
O sweet Pauline, pardon a blind grief,
Which knows nothing but excess of misery.
I named it inconstancy, and took
For crimes th'indeavours of a virtuous duty.
I do beseech you show less to my senses
The greatness of my Loss, and of your worth,
And so through pity hiding this rare virtue,
That feeds my fires even when she separates us,
Make some defects appear that may successively
Weaken my grief together with my love.
Alas! this virtue, though invincible still,
Makes but appear a soul too sensible,
These tears are witnesses thereof, and these
Effeminate sighs which stir up the remembrance
Of our first fires, too rigorous effects
Of a beloved presence, against which
My duty hath too little of defence.
But if you do esteem this virtuous duty,
keep me the glory on it, and cease to see me,
Spare me those tears that trickle to my shame,
Spare me those tears that with grief I or'ecome,
Lastly spare me those sad discourses which
Do but stir up your torments and mine own.
So shall I rob my self of the sole good
That remains to me.
Save you from a sight
Fatal unto us both.
What recompense
Of all my love? what fruit of my devotions?
That's the sole remedy that can cure our evils.
I'll die of mine, Oh love my memory.
I'll cure mine, they would sully my fair glory.
Oh! since your glory doth pronounce the sentence,
My grief must yield unto its interest,
From such a heart as mine what is it that it
Cannot obtain? you do awake the cares
Which I owe to my glory; farewell, Madam,
I go to seek in honourable combats
That immortality which a fair death
Doth give, if I after this mortal stroke
Of fate, have life enough to seek a death.
And I, whose punishment your sight increases,
Intend to avoid it even in Sacrifice,
And alone in my Chamber shutting up
My sorrows, I will make my secret Orisons
Unto the Gods for you.
May righteous Heaven
Contented with my ruin heap up happiness
On Polyeuctes and Paulina's heads.
May brave Severus find after so much
Disaster, a felicity that may be
Worthy his valour.
In you he could find it.
I depend of a Father and a Husband.
Oh duty that destroys, and makes me desperate!
Adieu too virtuous and too charming object.
Adieu, adieu, thou too unfortunate
And faithful lover.
I Have bewailed you both, and cannot choose
But shed tears, yet your spirit, I do believe,
Is free of fear now, for you plainly see
Your dream is vain, Severus comes not
With revenge in his hand.
Leave me to breath,
At least if thou hast (as thou say) lamented me,
Thou call again my fear unto the Fort
Of all my grief, suffer my troubled spirits
To take a little rest, and lead me not
By those redoubled evils.
What! fear you yet?
Stratonica, I tremble,
And though I am apaid with little justice,
This unjust fear continually produces
The Image of the sad misfortunes which
I saw last night.
Severus is most generous.
Notwithstanding
His staidness, Polyeuctes all in blood
Strikes still my sight.
You are your self a witness
Of his devotions for him.
I believe
He would be his support upon occasion,
But whether this belief be false or true,
His abode in this place doth make me fear,
To whatsoever his virtue may dispose him,
He's strong, he loves, and comes here to espouse me.
YOu shed too many tears, it is time to dry them,
Let your grief cease, and your vain fears fly hence,
You see me living. Madam, in despite
Of the false intimation of your gods.
The day is long yet, and what most affrights me
Is, that the half of the Advertisement
Is found already true, I did believe
Severus dead, but he was here just now.
I know it, and am nothing troubled at it;
I am in Militene, and let Severus
Be what he will, your Father doth command here,
And I'm considerable. Besides I'm confident
That from a heart so generous as his
A Treason cannot spring, I was informed
He gave a visit to you, and I'm come
To render him an honour he deserves.
He is gone very sad, and much confounded,
But I've prevailed with him that he will
See me no more.
How! Madam, do ye suspect me
Of jealousy already?
I should do
Unto all three too sensible an injury,
I assure my repose which his looks trouble;
The firmest virtue still avoids hazards
Wo doth expose himself to danger, would
Meet with his ruin, and to speak to you
With open soul of him, since a true merit
Could have inflamed us, his presence always
Hath right to charm us. Besides that one must▪
Be out of countenance to leave ones self
To be surprised, one suffers to resist,
One suffers to defend, and although virtue
Triumphs o'er these fires, the victory
Is painful and the fight dishonourable.
Oh Virtue, if it were possible, too perfect,
And duty too sincere! what sad regrets
'Cost you Severus! how at the expense
Of a fair fire you render me most happy!
And to my Amorous heart how sweet are you!
The more I see mine own defects, and do
Contemplate your perfections, the more
I do admire.—
My Lord and Master Felix
Hath sent me to desire you to make hast
Unto the Temple, for the Victime's chosen,
And all the People on their knees; there wants
But you, Sir, to begin the Sacrifice.
Go, we will follow thee, will you along, Madam?
Severus fears my sight, it stirs his flame,
I'll keep my word with him, and will not see him;
Adieu, you'll find him there, think of his power,
And the great favour that he hath.
I fear not
His credit nor his power, and as I know
His generosity, we shall encounter
Each other only in civility.
Where do you think to go?
Unto the Temple,
Where I am called.
What, to join your self
To the Devotions of a company
Of Infidels, have you forgot already
That you are Christian?
You by whom I am so,
Do you remember it.
I hate false Gods.
And I detest them.
I do hold their worship
Most impious.
And I take it for abominable.
Fly then their Altars.
I will overthrow them,
And in their Temple die, or drive them thence.
My dear Nearchus, come, lets brave Idolatry
Before the eyes of men, and show us Christians;
Heaven doth expect it, and we must perform it:
For my part I do promise, and am going
T'accomplish it: I thank God that hath given me
This opportunity to express my zeal,
Wherein his goodness ready even to crown me,
Deigns to approve the faith that he will give me.
This zeal, Sir, is too ardent, moderate it.
We cannot have too much on it for the God
Which we adore.
It will procure your death.
I seek it for him.
If this heart should shake?
He will be my support.
Tic not his pleasure,
We should precipitate our selves therein.
If we die willingly, the more's our merit.
To wait and suffer is sufficient,
We need not seek out danger.
We suffer with regret when we dare not
Offer our selves.
But in this Temple Death
Is most assured.
But in Heaven the Palm
Already is prepared.
A holy life
Must merit it.
Living, perhaps, my crimes
May take it from me, wherefore should we hazard
What death assures us? When she opens heaven,
Can she seem hard? I am a Christian,
Nearchus, and I am so altogether;
The pure faith which I have received, aspires
To its effect; who flies believes faintly,
And hath but a dead faith.
Know that your life
Imports God himself, live to protect
The Christians in this place.
The example of my death will better fortify them.
You will die then?
And you desire to live?
To tell you truly, I've no mind to follow you.
I fear to fall under the horror of
The Torments which they will inflict upon us.
Who goes on boldly needs not fear to sall,
God doth impart at need his infinite force;
Who thinks he shall deny him, in his soul
He doth deny him, he believs to do it,
And doubts of his faith.
Who fears nothing
Presumes too much upon himself.
I expect all things from his grace and mercy,
And nothing from my weakness; but in stead
Of pressing me, it is fit that I press you,
Whence doth proceed this coldness?
God himself
Hath feared death.
He offered himself;
Let's follow this divine instinct, and raise
Altars unto him on the heaps of Idols;
We must not (I do remember yet your words)
Neglect to please him; wife, and wealth, and rank,
We must not stick to expose our selves to dangers,
Yea even to death, to pour our blood forth for him;
Alas! where is that perfect love which you
Wished to me, and which I now wish you?
If it remains yet with you, are you not
Jealous that I scarce Christian yet, should show it
Stronger then you?
You come immediately
From baptism, and the thing that animates you,
It is his grace, which yet no crime in you,
Hath weakened, yet it acts fully in you.
And to its vehement fire all things seem possible;
But this same grace in me diminished,
And by a thousand sins continually
Extenuated acts with such faintness
In hazardous attempts, that all things seem
Impossible unto its little vigour;
This base effeminacy, and cowardly
Evasions are the punishments which my
Offences do draw on me, but our God,
Whom we must ne'er distrust, gives your Example
To fortify me; Come, dear Polyeuctes,
Let us go before the eyes of men to brave
Idolatry, and to show who we are;
May I to suffer give you the Example,
As you have given me that of offering you?
By this most happy transport which Heaven sends you,
Again I know Nearchus, and I weep
For joy on it, come, let us not lose more time,
The Sacrifice is ready, let's uphold
The interest of the true God, lets tread
Under our feet this feigned Thunderbolt,
With which th'abused and too credulous people
Arm a corrupted piece of wood; let's go
To make this fatal blindness manifest,
Those gods of stone and mettle, let us break
In pieces, and lets dedicate our days
To this celestial heat, and so let's offer
A triumph unto God; let him dispose
The rest.
Come let us make his glory to break forth
Unto the eyes of all, and for him dye,
Who for us suffered death and infamy.
WHat floating cares! what confused clouds
Present inconstant images to mine eyes!
Sweet rest, which I dare not so much as hope,
Send thy divine Ray speedily to clear them;
A thousand diverse thoughts which my sad troubles
Produce in my uncertain heart, are lost
In wishes; no hope flatters me, not where
I dare persist, no fear affrights me not
Where I dare fix my self, my spirit embracing
All what it doth imagine, would sometimes
My happiness, and sometimes my destruction;
Both one and tother strike it with so little
Effect, that it can neither hope nor fear.
Continually Severus troubles
My fantasy, my hope is in his virtue,
I fear his jealousy; and I cannot think
That Polyeuctes with an equal eye
Can see his Rival heer; as between such
The hate is natural, the interview
Soon ends in a quarrel; the one sees
In the hands of the other what he thinks
He merits, the other sees a desperate
Would take it from him; whatsoever high reason
Raignsin their courage, th'one conceives envy,
The other jealousy: the shame of an
Affront, which each of them fears to see,
Either received of old, or at this present,
Destroying all their patience from the first,
Forms choler and distrust, and seizing on
The Husband and the Lover both together,
Whether they will or no delivers them
Over to their resentment, and their passion:
But what a strange Chimera do I fancy
Unto my self! and what an injury
Do I to Polyeuctes and Severus?
As if the virtue of these famous Rivals
Could not triumph over those common evils.
The minds of both, Mistresses to themselves
Are of too high an order for such baseness;
They shall see one another in the Temple
Like generous men; but alas, still I fear:
What is th'advantage that my Husband hath
To be in Militene, if Severus arm
The Roman Eagle against him, if my Father
Command here, and doth fear this Favourite,
And doth repent already of his choice?
The little hope I have is with constraint,
And born it is abortive, and gives place
To fear; what ought to fix it, doth but serve
To dissipate it. Gods! grant that my fear
Be false, and my sad fancy, a Chimera.
BUt let us understand the Issue on it.
Now my Stratonica what's the conclusion
Of this great Sacrifice.
Alas Pauline!
Have my Prayers and Devotions been frustrate:
I see an ill sign of it in thy face,
Have they unfortunately quarrelled?
Nearchus, Polyeuctes, and the Christians—
Speak then, the Christians.
I cannot speak.
Thou dost prepare my soul for strange afflictions.
You ne'er could have a juster cause of grief.
What have they murdered him?
That had been nothing
Your dream is all true, Polyeuctes is
No more.
What is he dead?
No, he lives, but
(O fate to be lamented!) this great courage,
This divine soul is no more worthy of
The light, nor of Pauline, he is no more
That Spouse so charming to your eyes, he is
The common enemy of the gods, and State,
An infamous, a Rebel, a perfidious,
A Traitor, Villain; a base Particide,
An execrable plague to all good men,
An impious and a sacrilegious Wretch,
In a word, Madam, he's a Christian.
This word would have sufficed without that torrent
Of Injuries.
Can there be any titles bad enough
For Christians?
He is what thou say, if he
Embrace their faith, but he's my Husband, and
Thou speak to me;
Consider him no more
Then the God he adores.
I have loved him
With duty, and this duty still continues.
At present he doth give you cause to hate him
Who doth betray the gods, would make no scruple
To betray you.
Although he should betray me,
Yet I should love him. And if thou, Stratonica,
Dost wonder at this love, know, that my duty
Depends not of his, let him fall in it,
(If he be so disposed) I will do mine.
What if he loved elsewhere, should his example
Persuade me to embrace unlawful heats?
Let him be Christian, I'm not troubled at it.
I love his Person, and I hate his error.
But what resentment hath my Father of it?
A secret rage, and an excess of choler
Possesses him, though yet for Polyeuctes
He shows some; he'll not let his justice
Fall upon him before the punishment
Of false Nearchus be presented to him
To see how that will work upon his spirits.
What is Nearchus Christian too?
It was he
Seduced him; see the unworthy fruit.
Of their old amity; this perfidious
Taking him lately from us against his will,
Drew him to baptism: now you have the secret
That seemed so mysterious, which your love
Could not draw from him.
Thou did blame me then
For being too unfortunate.
I foresaw not
Such a misfortune.
Ere I will give up
My soul unto my griefs, I'll try the force
Of my laments, in quality of Wife
And Daughter, I hope to persuade a hue•band,
And pacify a Father: if I fail
With both of them, I'll take no other Counsel
But what despair shall give me: tell me now
What did they in the Temple?
The impiety
They acted there was such as it is without
Example, I can't think on it without trembling:
And fear, I should commit a crime but in
Relating it; in few words understand
Their beastly insolence. Scarce had the Priest
Obtained silence, and towards the East
Settled his countenance, but their small respect
Appeared plainly, both of them expressed
Their madness at the ceremony, they mocked
Aloud the sacred mysteries, and despised
The gods that were invoked; all the people
Murmured thereat, and Felix was offended;
But both of them carrying themselves with more▪
Irreverence, what, said Polyeuctes, raising
His voice, adore you gods of stone or wood?
Dispense me from recital of the blasphemies
They vomited' against Iupiter himself.
Adultery and Incest were the least
Crimes they objected to him. Hearken Felix.
Pursued he, and hearken all ye people;
The God of Polyeuctes and Nearchus
Is absolute Monarch both of heaven and earth,
Of Destiny sole Master, and the only
Being that's independent, substance which
Never receives change; it is the God
The Christians adore that we must thank
For victories he gave the Emperor Decius;
He in his hands holds the success of battles,
With him are (saith the sacred Text) the issues
Of life and death, his power, his infinite goodness,
His justice is immense, it is he alone
That punishes, alone that recompenses;
You vainly do adore inpuissant Monsters.
Casting themselves at these words on the wine
And Incense, after they had thrown against
The earth the holy vessels without fear
Of Felix, or of Thunder, with like fury
They ran unto the Altar. Heavens! was ever
The like seen? there you might behold the statue
Of the chief god o'rethrown by impious hands▪
Lye at their feet, the mysteries disturbed,
The Temple sacrilegionsly profaned,
The fl•light and clamours of a mutinous people,
That fair the anger of offended heaven▪
Felix.—but here he comes; the rest he'll tell you▪
How sullen is his countenance and full
Of trouble! he expresses much of sadness
And indignation.
DUrst such an insolence appear! in public too, and in my sight?
He shall die for it, the Traitor.
Suffer me
To embrace your knees.
I speak not of your Husband,
But of Nearchus, Polyeuctes hath
Too near relation to me, though his crime▪
Deserves no favour, to be banished
My love for ever.
I could not expect
Less from a Fathers goodness.
I could sacrifice him▪
To my just anger, for you are not ignorant
To what a height of horror the blind fury
Of his impiety hath boldly mounted,
You might have understood it from Stratonica.
I know tic fit he see Nearchus punished.
Hereafter he shall better be instructed
In taking Counsel, when he shall behold
Him punished that seduced him to this evil;
The bloody spectacle of a friend, whom he
Must follow, will so work upon his soul
That he'll repent his wickedness, and renounce
His new faith, an example more prevails
Then Threatening; this mad heat will suddenly
Turn into ice, cheer up your drooping spirits.
You hope then that his courage will come down?
He should be wise, sure, at Nearchus cost.
He should be so, but alas! I do fear
There must be time to work it, may I hope
To obtain this favour from your goodness, Sir?
I do him too much favour in consenting
That he shall lie upon a quick repentance:
Like punishment is due to like offences,
Yet I have put a difference between
These two equally guilty, and thereby
Betrayed Justice to paternal love,
I've made my self a Criminal for him,
And did expect from you more thanks then plaints.
First give me, then I'll thank you; I know well
The honour, and the spirit of a Christian;
He doth continue obstinate to the end,
He'll dye before he will repent.
His pardon
Is in his hand, let him consider on it.
Give it him fully.
He may finish it.
Give him not over to the furies of
His sect.
I'll give him up unto the Laws,
Which I ought to respect.
Is this all the support a Son-in-Law
May hope for from the Father of his Wife?
Let him do for himself as much as I
Have done for him.
Alas! Sir, he is blind.
It pleases him to be so, he that cherishes
His error never will acknowledge it.
In the name of the gods.—
Invoke them not.
The interest of the gods requires his death.
They hear our prayers.
Well then, Petition them.
In the name of the Emperor whose place
You hold.
It is true, his power is in my hand,
But if he hath committed it unto me
It is to display it against his enemies.
Is Polyeuctes so?
All Christians are
Rebels.
Hear not these cruel maxims for him.
In marrying Pauline he's become
Part of your blood.
I look upon his fault,
Not on his quality, where a crime against
The State, is mingled with black sacrilege,
No• amity nor blood have any privilege.
Excess of rigour!
Less then his offence.
Oh effect too true of my fearful dream!
Know, that with him, Sir, you destroy your daughter.
My Family is not so dear to me
As the gods and the Emperor, are honoured.
Cannot the ruin of us both arrest you?
I fear the g•ds add Decius both together;
But we need doubt no sad thing yet; think you
He will persist in his blind error? if
He seemed to us to run to his misfortune,
It was but the first heat of a new Christian.
If yet you love him, have not that opinion
That he will change belief twice in a day:
The Christians are more constant, you expect,
I doubt too much Legerity from him;
It is not an error sucked in with the milk,
That his soul hath embraced without examining:
No, Polyeuctes is a Christian,
Because he would be so, and brought with him
Unto the Temple a resolved spirit.
You may presume of him as of the rest,
Death's neither fatal to them, nor dishonourable.
They seek for glory in despising of
The gods, for earth blind, they aspire to heaven;
And thinking that death opens them the gate,
Torment, dismember, murder them, they care not;
Tortures and racks are the same unto them
That pleasures are to us, and bring them to
The Butt where their desires and wishes tend;
They call the cruel'st and most infamous death
Sweet Martyrdom.
Well, Polyeuctes then
Shall have what he desires, no more of him.
My Father.
I Sit done, Albin?
Yes Sir, and Nearchus
Hath paid for his fault.
And Polyeuctes
Hath seen him?
Yes, but with an envious eye;
He was on fire to follow him, far from
Retreating, and his heart was firmly fixed,
In stead of being shaken.
Oh! my Father,
I told you so; once more I do beseech you,
If ever my respects gave you content
If you esteemed them, if you ever loved them.—
Pauline, you love an unworthy husband
Too much.
I had him from your hand, my love
Is without crime, he was your worthy choice,
And for him I have quenched the fairest fires
That ever were kindled in a heart; I beg
In the name of that blind and quick obedience,
Which I have always rendered to my duty,
Since you had all power on me and my love,
That I at my turn now may prevail with you.
By this just power too much now to be feared,
By those fair sentiments which I must smother,
Take not your presents from me, they are dear
Unto mine eyes, and have cost me too much
Not to be precious to me.
You are troublesome.
Good gods! what do I hear!
I love not pity
But at the rate I would receive thereof,
To touch me with it whether I will or no
By so many vain trials, is to lose
Time and your tears, only to anger me:
You gave it me, but you must understand
I disavow it when you snatch it from me:
Prepare to see this miserable Christian,
And use your best endeavour to persuade him,
When I have used mine; go, and no more
Provoke a Father that doth love you tenderly:
See if you can by your persuasion• gain
Your Husband to himself, presently
I'll cause h•m to come hither, in the mean time
Leave us, I'll try what my discourse can do.
Suffer, I do beseech you.—
Once again
Leave me alone your grief offends me
As much as it afflicts me, all your industry
Must be applied to gain you Polyeuctes,
The less you do importune me, the more
You shall advance.
ALbin, how died he?
Like a Beast, like an impious desperate writs•
In braving torments▪ in despising death,
Without regret, astonishment, or murmur,
In obstination, and insensibility;
Lastly, he dyed like a Christian
With blasphemy in's mouth.
What did the other?
I have told you already, nothing touched him,
So far was he from being dejected at it,
That his heart grew more lofty: they enforced him
To quit the Scaffold: he is now in Prison.
Where I saw him conducted; are you ready
To entertain discourse with him a litt•e?
Oh! how unfortunate am I?
You are
Lamented every where.
None know the evils
Wherewith my heart's oppressed, thoughts upon thoughts
Trouble my soul, cares upon cares disturb it:
I find that love and hate, that fear and hope,
That joy and grief by turns, press and provoke it.
I enter into sentiments that pass
Belief, I have some that are violent,
And others that are pitiful, some generous
Which dare not act, and likewise some ignoble
Which make me blush. I love that wretched man.
Whom I chose for my Son-in-Law, I hate
The blind and dangerous error he is in;
I do deplore his loss, and being willing
To save him, I must look too on the gods,
Whose injured glory I must vindicate:
I fear their thunderbolts and Decius wrath;
It is my charge, my life depends upon it.
Thus sometimes for him I expose my self
To death, and other times I expose him
To save my self.
Sure Decius will excuse
A Fathers amity, besides Polyeuctes
Is of a blood that should be reverenced.
His order for the punishment of the Christians
Is very rigorous, and the more the example
Is great, the more it is dangerous and dreadful.
There's no distinction when the offence is public;
When we connive at a domestic crime,
By what authority, by what Law can we
Punish that in another which we suffer
Amongst our selves?
If you dare not to have
Regard unto his person, write to Decius
That he ordain his pardon.
Should I do so,
Severus would destroy me, tic his hate
And power that make my greatest care, if I
Should but defer to punish such a crime,
Though he be generous, though he be magnanimous▪
He is a man, and sensible, and I
Disdained him formerly, his spirit offended
With those received contempts, and desperate
Through the unexpected marriage of Pauline,
Will from the anger of the Emperor
Obtain my ruin. Every thing seems lawful
To revenge an affront, and opportunity
Tempted the most remiss, perhaps (and this
Suspicion is not without some appearance)
He in his heart conceives again some hope,
And thinking to see Polyeuctes punished
Recalls a love with much pain banished:
Judge if his anger in this case implacable
Would hold me innocent to save a Criminal,
And if he'd spare me, seeing his designs
Twice made abortive by me. Shall I tell hee
A base, unworthy, and low spirited thought?
I smother it, it springs up again, it flatters,
And angers me, ambition still presents it
Unto me, and all that I can do is
But to detest it; Polyeuctes here
Is the prop of my Family, but if
The other by his death espouse my daughter,
I should acquire greater advantages,
Which would raise me a thousand times more high
Then now I am. My heart thereat by force
Takes a malignant joy, but rather let
Heaven strike me with a Thunder-bolt, then that
I should consent unto so base a thought,
Which hitherto my glory hath belied.
Your heart is too good, and your soul too high;
But do ye resolve to punish this offence?
I'll use all my endeavour to subdue
His error by the fear of death, but if
I can't prevail, then I will afterword
Employ Paulina's power.
What w•ll you do
At last, if he continue obstinate?
Press me not on that point in such displeasure,
I can't resolve, and know not what to choose.
Sir, like a faithful servant I am bound
To advertise you that the Town murmurs
In his behalf already, and is even
Upon the point to mutiny, if you
Proceed against him further, I perceive
The Inhabitants are all resolved to oppose you,
And will not see their last hope, and the blood
Of their Kings pass the rigour o the Laws:
Besides his pr•son is not very safe.
I left about it but a pitiful troop▪
I fear they will be forced▪
Then take him thence,
And bring him here, where we will be sure of him.
Then take him thence your self, and with a hope
Of pardon, pacify the fury of
The multitude.
Come let us go, and if
He still persist to remain Christian,
We will dispose of him, and carryit so
That what's resolved upon, they shall not know.
WHat would you with me, Guards?
Pauline, Sir,
Would speak with you.
Oh how I dread her presence!
This combat will be hard; Felix▪ o•'e thee
I triumphed in Prison, and despised
Thy threatening, I beheld thee without fear,
I see, that to revenge thy self thou take
Stronger a mes then thine own her tears do terrify
Mo•e then thy Execution•rs; O Lord,
Thou see here the danger that I run,
In this my pressing need double thy force;
And thou my dear Nearchus, coming forth
Lately from a Triumphant victory,
Look on my travel, from thy glorious residence,
Lend me thy hand from Heaven to overcome
So strong an Enemy. Guards, da•e you doo me
One civil office?
Sir, we have strict order
To render you no service.
You mistake me,
I have no purpose to apply my self
Unto you as a means for my escape,
But I desire that one of you (three being
Sufficient to guard me) would oblige me
To seek Severus, and entreat him here;
This might be done with safety, I presume.
If I could tell him an important secret,
He would enjoy more happiness, and I
Should dye content.
Since it is for Severus,
I will dispense with all things.
He himself
Will recompense thy pains, if I should fail.
The sooner that thou go, the better it is,
Dispatch.
I fly, and you shall have me here
In less time then a moment.—
DElicious Spring of love, yet fruitful still
In misery, of me what is your will?
Y• flattering pleasures, ba•ts of flesh and blood,
Why fly you not, since I esteem you mud?
Vanish vain honours, worldly glory pass,
Which shines, and is as brittle too as glass:
Hope not that I'll sigh after you at all,
It is in vain your weak charms to estall.
Why show you me Gods enemies in state
And flourishing? he doth reserve a fate
That shall confound those great ones, and the sword
Suspended o'er their heads, at his least word
Shall fall on them, so much more heavily,
As that they dream't not of their misery.
Thou cruel Tiger Decius that dost thirst
For blood, thou shalt be glutted till thou burst:
That God, which we adore, hath for a while
Permitted thee, wild forest Boar, to spoil
His lovely Vineyard, but thy fearful fate
Draws near which will thy glory terminate.
The Scythian comes like an impetuous flood,
To revenge Christian and Persian blood:
A little yet, and then thy hour is come,
When thou shalt sleep until the day of doom
In body, not in mind, out of the name
Of Christian, that is fed still with a flame,
Which never dies. Nothing can warrant thee,
The thunder's ready in the cloud, I see;
And will no longer hold in expectation
Of thy repentance, wretch in obstination!
In the mean time let Felix sacrifice
Me to thy rage, my Rival blind his eyes,
And make himself his Son-in-Law, I yield
Unto my loss, rather I win the field:
Vain baits, I slight you and despise your art,
For in this Christian and Regenerate heart,
I feel a divine flame, whose Ray will dim
Paulina's beauty in her brightest trim.
I look upon her now but as a toy
That would detain me from my heavenly joy.
Adoreable Idea's, sweets above
You fill a heart that's capable to love;
The souls Possessed with your sacred fire
Fix there, and firmly settle their desire
Never to change; you promise, and give more,
Your benefits do still increase your store:
The happy death which I expect, to me
Is a sweet passage to eternity.
It is you, O divine flame, which nothing can
Extinguish, that make me more then a man
Look on Paulina's face, and never fear;
Her assaults and temptations I can hear;
I see her, but my heart inflamed now
With holy zeal, to her charms cannot how,
And my eyes cleared with celestial light,
Hers appear clouded in a vail of night.
MAdam, what's the design that brings you hither?
Is it to fight me, or to second me?
And the fair proffer of this perfect love
Comes it to aid me, or to overthrow me?
Bring you here with you hate, or amity
As enemy, or as my dearest moiety?
You have no enemy here, Sir, but yourself
Every one loves you, none but Polyeuctes
Hates your virtue, it is he alone
That executes my dream, do not destroy
Your self, and you are safe; how great so ever
Your crime be, you are innocent, if you grant
A pardon to your self; deign to consider
The blood from whence you're sprung, your noble actions,
Your rare endowments; think, Sir, that you are
Beloved by all the people, favoured of
The Prince, and Son-in-law unto the Governor
Of the whole Province, the name of my Husband.
I reckon t'ee as nothing, that's a happiness
Only for me, which is not great for you;
But after your exploits, after your birth,
After your power, look upon our hope,
And give not up unto the hangmans hand▪
What to our just desires so fair a fortune
Doth promise.
I consider more, and know
My advantages, and the hope which on them
Great courages do frame, they aspire not
But unto transitory good, which cares
Disurb, which dang••s follow, and which death
Take from us, fortune makes her sport with them,
To day in the throne, to morrow in the dirt.
Their greatest glory never is without
Some discontent, few of our Caesars have
Enjoyed it long, this greatness perishes;
I have ambition too, but mine's more fair
And noble, for I seek immortal glory,
A happiness assured that hath no end
Nor measure, far above the reach of envy,
O• destiny; and is a sorry life
Too de•r a purchase for it which immediately
May be tan from me, which makes me enjoy
But even the flying instant, end's not able
T'assure me that which follows?
See the dotage,
And the ridiculous dreams of you fond Christians;
Behold how their lies have seduced you!
You think that all your blood is not enough
For a felicity so sweet; but, Sir,
This blood is not yours to dispose of it;
You have not life as an inheritance,
The day that gives it you at the same time
Engages it, you owe it to the Prince,
Unto the Public, to the State.
I would
Lose it for them in honourable fight,
I know what is the happiness thereof,
And what's the glory, you do boast the memory
Of Decius Ancestors, and this name yet precious
Unto you Romans, put into his hands
At the end of six hundred years the Empire.
I owe my life unto the peoples good,
To the Prince and his crown, but I do owe it
Much more unto the God that gave it me:
If to dye for ones Prince be held to be
A glorious fate, when one dies for his God
How shall his death be crowned?
What God?
Peace, Pauline,
He hears your words, for he is not a God
Like your false gods, insensible and deaf,
Weak, made of wood, of marble, or of gold,
Even as you please: he is the God of the Christians,
He is mine, he is yours, the heaven and earth
Acknowledge him, who made both them and us.
Adore him then in mind, and outwardly
Express it not.
Oh no! I should be then
Idolater, and Christian both together.
Dissemble for a moment till Severus
Be gone, and let my Fathers goodness work.
The goodness of my God is to be cherished
Much more, he doth remove me from the dangers
I would have run into, and without suffering
Me to look back, his Favour crowns me
Entering in the career, with the first wind
He brings me to the Port, and coming forth
From baptism, he doth send me unto death.
If you could comprehend the little worth
Of this frail life, and the eternal sweets
That follow after death—But to what end
Is it to speak of those concealed treasures
To souls whom God hath not inspired yet:
Cruel! for it is time my grief break forth,
And that a just reproach oppress a soul
Ungrateful; Is this that fair fire thou boasts of?
Are these thy oaths? expressed thou for me
The smallest sentiments? I speak not to thee
Of that deplorable estate, wherein
Thy death will leave thy poor disconsolate Wife,
I think that love should speak enough of that:
But that love so firm and so well deserved
Which thou did promise me, and I bare thee,
When thou wilt leave me, when thou make me dye,
Can it not draw one sigh, one tear from thee?
Ungrateful, thou dost quit me, yea, with joy,
Thou hid'st it not, but wilt that I should see it,
And thy hard heart insensible to my sad
Attractions, figureth unto it self,
A happiness that I shall never see;
Is it then the disgust that Marriage brings?
Am I grown odious after having given
My self unto you?
Alas!
How that alas came hardly forth!
Yet if it happily showed any sign
Of a repentance, Oh how charming were it
Although enforced! but courage, he is moved,
I see he sheds tears.
True, I weep, Pauline,
And would to God that therewith this heard heart
Might happily be pierced, the sad estate
Wherein I leave you doth deserve the plaints
My love doth give me, and if one can carry
Griefs unto Heaven, I carry them to see
The excess of your misfortunes; but if in
This luminous abode of highest glory,
This God all just and good, allow my Prayer,
If He vouchsafe to lend an ear unto
Conjugal love, He will display his light
Upon your blindness; Lord, I do beseech thee
Let me obtain this of thy goodness, she
Hath too much virtue not to be a Christian,
It pleased thee to give her too much merit,
Not to know Thee, and to adhere unto Thee,
To live still an unfortunate Slave of hell,
And to die as she's born under that yoke.
What say thou, miserable, what dare thou wish?
That which with all my blood I fain would purchase.
That rather.—
Tic in vain to make resistance,
This God touches the heart when least we think on it;
That happy moment is not yet arrived,
It will come, but the time's not known unto me.
Leave this Chimera, come and love me still.
I love you much more then my self, but, pardon me,
Less then my God.
In the name of that love,
Forsake me not.
In the name of that love,
Follow my steps.
Dost thou not ear to quit me, wilt thou then
Seduce me?
Care thou not to go to Heaven?
I will conduct you there.
Imaginations!
Celestial truths.
Strange blindness.
Rather everlasting lights.
Thou prefer death before Paulina's love.
You the base world before the divine goodness.
Go, cruel, go and die, thou never lov'dst me.
Live happy in the World, and suffer me
To die in peace.
Yes, I will leave thee, trouble not thy self,
I go—
BUt what design Severus brings you here?
Is this done like a generous Cavalier
To come to brave here one in misery?
Pauline, you treat ill so rare a merit,
At my sole prayer he renders me this visit.
I have committed incivility,
Noble Severus, which I know you'll pardon,
And impute to my want of liberty.
Being possessor of a Treasure which
I was not worthy of, before I die
Suffer me to resign it unto you,
And to leave the rar'st virtue that a Woman
Could ever receive from heaven unto the hands
Of the most valiant and accomplished man
The earth hath honoured, or Rome hath produced.
You're worthy of her, she is worthy you:
Refuse her not, Sir, from a Husbands hand;
If he hath dis-united you, his death
Will make amends, and join you both again:
Let not a fire which sometimes was so fair,
Become less now, give her your heart, and take
Her faith to you, live happily together,
And dye like me, it is the glorious good
Which Polyeuctes wishes to you both:
Guards, lead me to my death, I've nothing more
To say; come, all is finished.
I Am confounded
In my astonishment to see his blindness;
His resolution's so unparalleled,
That scarce can I believe mine ears; a heart
That holds you dear, (but what heart is so low
That could have known you, and not cherished you?)
A man beloved by you, as soon as lie
Possesses you, without regret he leaves you,
Nay he doth more, he doth resign you over;
And as if your fires were a fatal present,
He himself makes a gift on it to his Rival:
Surely the Christians either have strange whimsies,
Or their felicities must be infinite,
Since to pretend thereto they dare reject
What one should purchase at an Empires price.
For my part, if my destiny a little
Sooner propitious, had been pleased to honour me
With your fair Nuptials, I should have adored
No glory but the lustre of your eyes;
I would have made of them my Kings and gods.
They should have first reduced me to dust,
Before that—
Sir, no more of this discourse,
I fear I've heard too much, and that this heat▪
Should thrust forth some unseemly consequence
Unworthy of us both. Severus, know
My Polyeuctes wholly doth take up
Paulina's thoughts, he hath but a short moment▪
To live, you are the innocent cause thereof:
I know not if your soul might have presumed
To frame some hope to your desires upon
His ruin, but assure your self, there is▪
No death so cruel whereunto I would not
With fearless steps address, nor in Hell horrors
So dreadful which I would not rather suffer,
Then fully my fame to espouse a man,
After his sad fate, who in any kind
Might cause his death, and if you should believe me
Of so unsound a mind, the Love I bear you
Would turn all into hatred; you are generous,
Be so unto the end; My Father is
In a condition to deny you nothing;
He fears you, and I will be bold to add
This word, that if he doth destroy my Husband,
It is to you he sacrifices him;
Save this unfortunate, use your interest for him,
Endeavour, pray, to serve him as a Prop;
I know tic much what I demand of you,
But how much greater the endeavour is,
So much more is the glory on it, preserve
A Rival that you're jealous of, it is
A tract of virtue which belonged not
But unto you; if this be not sufficient
Renown unto you, tic much that a woman
Sometimes beloved, and yet perhaps whose love
May touch you, should owe that to your great heart
Which she esteems most dear. Lastly, remember
You are Severus, after this Petition
I'll go without an Answer, and if you
Be not the same which Isle presume to vaunt,
To prize you still, I will be ignorant.—
FAbian, What feel I? what new clap of Thunder
Falls on my fortune, and reduces it
To dust? the more I do esteem it near
The farther it is, I find all lost, when I
Think all is gained, and envious Destiny
Resolved to hurt me still, cuts off my hope▪
As soon as it is born. Before I offer
My fair devotions, I receive refusals,
Sad always and ashamed to see that basely
It durst spring up again, that yet more basely
It durst appear, and lastly that a Woman
In an afflicted state should give me lessons
Of generosity. Your fair soul, Pauline,
Is as high as it is unfortunate,
But tic as cruel too as generous,
And your griefs tyrant ze with too much rigour
Upon a Lovers heart that's wholely yours.
Tic not enough to lose you then, unless
I give you, I must serve a Rival when
He doth abandon you, and by a cruel
And generous trial, to give you unto him,
Must snatch him from his death.
Leave this ungrateful family to their fate,
Let it accord the father with the Daughter,
The Husband with the Wife, and Polyeuctes,
With Felix; What reward hope you to have
For such a cruel trial?
Only Fabian,
The glory to show to this beauteous soul,
Severus equals her, and doth deserve her,
That she was due unto me, and that Heaven,
In taking her from me was too injurious.
Without accusing Heaven, or Destiny
Think on the danger you draw on upon you
By such an Act, you hazard very much;
Consider well, you enterprise to save
A Christian, you cannot be ignorant
What is, and always was the hate of Decius
Unto that impious Sect; tic unto him
A crime so great, so capital, that even
To you his only Favourite may be fatal.
This were good counsel for some common soul,
Though he hold in his hand my life and fortune,
I am Severus still, and all this great
And mighty power can nothing on my glory,
Nothing upon my duty; honour here
Obliges me and I will satisfy it;
Let fortune afterword show her self kind
Or cruel, as her nature's still inconstant,
Dying in glory I shall dye content:
I'll tell thee more, but with some confidence,
The Christian Sect is not the same we take it,
We hate them, and the reason for it I know not,
And I can see Decius unjust in nothing
But in this point; for curiosity
I fain would know them; they are held for Sorcerers,
Whose Master Hell is, and on this belief
The secret mysteries, which we are not able
To understand, are punished with death:
But Ceres, Eleusina, and the goddess
Bonna at Rome, and in Greece have their secrets
Like them; we suffer likewise in all places
All kind of gods, their God only excepted:
All the Egyptian Monsters have their Temple
In Rome; our predecessors, as they liked,
Made a god of a man, and their blood with us
Retaining still their errors, we fill Heaven
With all our Emperors; but to speak truly
Of so much Apotheosis, the effect
Is very doubtful of these Metamorphoses:
The Christians have but one God, absolute Master
Of all, whose only will doth execute
What he resolves, but if I durst to speak
Between us what I think, ours very often,
Me thinks, agree together very ill,
And should their anger crush me before thine eyes,
I must speak this, we have too many of them
To be true gods. Perhaps these public faiths
Are but inventions of wise Politics,
To keep the People under, and to awe them,
And to establish their power on their weakness.
Lastly the manners of the Christians
Are innocent, virtues do flourish with them,
Vices appear not; never an Adulterer,
A Traitor, Drunkard, Murderer, or Thief
Is seen amongst them, there is nothing else
But love and charity, they live together
Like Brothers, they pray for us that do persecute them;
And have we ever since the time we first
Tormented them, seen them in mutiny?
Have we seen them rebellious! have our Princes
Had Soldiers more faithful; fierce in war
They suffer our tormentors patiently;
Lions in fight, they die as meek as Lambs.
I've too much pity for them not to help them:
Come, let us find out Felix presently,
And so by one sole action satisfy
Pauline, my compassion, and my glory.
ALbin, perceiv'st thou Severus plot?
See thou his hate, and my sad misery?
I see nought in him but a generous Rival,
And in you nothing but a rigorous Father.
How ill thou know him? all he doth's but show,
In heart he hates me, and disdains Pauline,
And though he sometime loved her he esteems now
A Rivals Relic too unworthy of him.
He speaks in his behalf, prays, threatens me,
And says he will destroy me, if I grant not
Pardon unto him, p•ssing from generous
He thinks to fear me, but the Artifice
Is too gross not to be discovered:
I know the Court, and all its subtle windings
Before him, I'm acquainted with its plots,
And all its practises, it is in vain
For him to storm, and feign to be in fury,
I see what he intends to the Emperor,
Of that which he requests me, he'd accuse me,
Sparing his Rival, I should be his Victim;
And if he had to do with some young Novice,
The plot is well laid, without doubt he would
Destroy him easily, but an old Courtier
Is not so credulous, he sees well
When one's in jest, and when he is in earnest;
And for my part, I've seen so many of them
Of all kinds, that if need were, I could give
Lessons even unto him.
Gods! how you torture
Your self by this distrust?
To stand in Court
It is the highest skill; when once a man
Hath cause to hate us, we ought to presume
That he seeks all the ways he can to ruin us;
Then all his friendship is to be suspected;
If Polyeuctes forsakes not his Sect,
What ever his Protector intends for him
I'll boldly follow the order is prescribed me.
Pardon, Sir, pardon, let Paulina's prayers
And tears obtain it.
The Emperors pardon, Albin,
Shall not come after mine, and so far am I
From drawing him out of this perilous pass,
As not to do what will destroy us both.
But Sir, Severus promises—
I mistrust him,
And know better then he the hate of Decius,
In favour of the Christians if he should
Oppose his anger without doubt he would
Ruin himself with us, I will try yet
Another way.—Bring Polyeuctes here,——
And if I send him back again, if he
Remain insensible of this last attempt,—
At his departure hence he surely dies.
Your order is too rigorous.
I must follow it,
If I'll prevent disorder which may happen;
I see the People moved to take his part,
And thou thy self lately advertised me;
In the zeal which they do express for him,
I know not how long he may be within
My power; perhaps this evening to night,
To morrow I may see the effects I fear;
And suddenly Severus flying to
His vengeance, may go to calumniate me
With some intelligence, I must break this stroke,
That would be fatal to me.
What a strange evil is this diffidence?
Every thing hurts and ruins you, gives you shadows,
But see you not, Sir, that his death will put
This people into rage? tic a wrong way
To cure them, for to make them desperate.
After his death it is in vain to murmur,
And if they dare proceed to any violence,
Tic but to give way for a day or two
Unto the insolence, I shall have done
My duty whatsoever may arrive;
But Polyeuctes comes, let us endeavour
To save him, retire Soldiers, and guard
The port well.—
HAst thou then such a hate to life, unfortunate
And wretched Polyeuctes, and the Law
Of Christians? doth it thus enjoin thee to
Forsake thy friends?
I hate not life, and love
The lawful use of it, but without dotage,
Which savours of slavery, always ready
To render it to God▪ from whom I hold it,
Reason ordains it and the Christian Law,
And thereby I instruct you how to live,
If you have but the heart to follow me.
To follow thee into the Gulf, where thou
Wilt cast thy self?
Rather unto the glory
Where I am going to ascend.
At least
Let me have time to know it, to make me Christian,
Be thou my guide, and be not scrupulous
T'instruct me in thy faith, if thou refuse,
Tic thou shalt answer't to thy God for me.
Felix, Jest not, tic he shall be your Judge,
There is no flying from him, Kings and Shepherds
Are of one rank with him, he will revenge
The blood of his upon you.
I'll shed no more,
And come what will on it, in the Christian faith
I'll suffer them to live and will protect them.
No, no, proceed to persecute, and be
The Instrument of our felicities;
A Christian is at best, when he doth suffer;
The cruel'st torments are but recompenses
Unto us; God that rendered the Centuple
Unto good actions gives persecutions
To make up the full measure, but these Secrets
Are very hard for you to comprehend,
Tic but to his Elect that God reveals them.
I speak to thee unfeignedly, and would
Be a true Christian.
Who can then retard
Th'effect of such a great and signal happiness?
The presence—
Of whom? of Severus?
Only
For him I've feigned so much anger against thee.
Dissemble for a while, till he be gone.
Is it thus, Felix, that you speak unfeignedly?
Bear to your Pagans, carry to your Idols
The empoisoned honey which your words power forth:
A Christian fears nothing, knows not
How to dissemble, to the eyes of all
The world, he's still a Christian.
This zeal
Of thy faith serves thee but to seduce thee,
If thou run to thy death before thou dost
Instruct me.
I should speak unto you here
Unseasonably, it is a gift of Heaven,
And not of reason, there it is that I
Seeing God face to face shall obtain for you
This Grace more easily.
In the mean time
Thy loss will make me desperate.
You can
Repair it; free of one Son, you may have
Another when you please, whose quality
Answers yours better; my loss, Sir, would be
But a change advantageous unto you.
For bear to injure me with this discourse,
I have esteemed thee more then thou deserve,
Bt in spite of my goodness which increases
When thou provok'st it, in the end this insolence
Would make thee odious and revenge me on thee
As well as our gods.
How? do ye change so soon
Honour and Language? doth the zeal of your gods
Enter again into you? and to be
A Christian vanishes? was it by chance
That you said you would speak unfeignedly?
Go to, presume not, whatsoever I swear
Unto thee, that I'll follow the imposture
Of thy new Doctors, I but flattered
Thy madness, to the end to snatch thee from
The fearful precipice whereinto thou art
Ready to fall, I would gain time to Husband
Thy life after that Decius Favourite
Were with-drawn hence, but I have done too great
An injury to our omnipotent gods.
Choose whether thou wilt give thy blood unto them.
Or incense?
I'm not doubtful in my choice,
But, O heaven! see Pauline.
WHich of you two do murder me to day?
Is it both together, or each at his turn?
What? can I neither bend nature, nor love?
And shall I obtain nothing either from
A Husband, or a Father?
Speak to your Husbond,
Live with Severus.
Tiger, murder me
Without this injury.
My pity seeks
As much as possible it may, to comfort you.
Our love doth carry you to such true griefs,
That nothing but another love can cure
Those wounds; since then so great a merit could
Inflame you, his fair presence hath a right
To charm you, you did love him, he doth love you,
And his augmented glory.—
Cruel, What have I done unto thee that
Thou treat'st me thus, as to reproach me with,
In contempt of my faith, so great a love
Which I've subdued for thee? see now, to make thee
Vanquish so strong an adversary, what attempts
I was to make against my self, what combats
I had to give to thee a heart, so justly
Due to its first subduer; if ingratitude
Sway not my heart, make some attempt upon thee
To give thee to Pauline; learn of her
To force thy proper sentiment, take her virtue
For guide unto thy blindness, suffer her
To obtain thy life from thee thy self, to live
Still subject to thy laws; but if thou can
Reject such just desires, at least regard
Her tears, attend her sighs, and make not desperate
A soul that doth adore thee.
I've said to you already, and Pauline,
I say again to you, live with Severus,
Or die with me, I despise not your tears,
Nor yet your faith, but henceforth I must have
No commerce with you, nor know you no more
Unless you be a Christian. Felix, it is
Enough on it, take again your anger to you,
And on this insolent revenge your gods
And you.
Oh Father! I confess, his crime's
Scarce pardonable, but if he distracted,
You, Sir, are reasonable; nature is too strong,
And its fair characters imprinted in
The blood are ne'er defaced, a Father is
Always a Father, and on this assurance
I dare hald up some small remains of hope:
Cast a paternal look upon your daughter,
It is decreed my death shall forthwith follow
The death or this dear Criminal, and the gods
Will find her punishment unlawful, since
She'll mingle innocence and crime together,
And so by this redoublement will change
Into an unjust rigour, a just chastisement.
Our destinies made by your hands inseparable,
We ought to make happy or miserable
Together, and you should be cruel even
Unto the extremest point to dis-unite
What you have joined, one heart to another
United once, never retires it self,
You cannot separate them unless you tear them;
But you are sensible of my just griefs,
And with a Fathers eye behold my tears.
Yes, Daughter, it is true, a Father is
Always a Father, nothing can raze out
The sacred character thereof, I carry
A sensible heart, and you have pierced it,
I join me with you against this distracted.
Unfortunate, and wretched Polyeuctes,
Art thou alone insensible, and wilt
Thou only make thy crime unpardonable?
Can thou hear so many heart-breaking sighs
From such a tender breast? can thou behold
So much love, and be nothing touched with it?
Acknowledge thou neither Father-in-Law
Nor Wife, without amity for the one,
Or love for the other? to resume the names
Of Son and Husband, wilt thou see us both
Fall at thy feet, and so embrace thy knees?
Oh! how unhandsome is this artifice,
After twice having tried threatening,
After making me see Nearchus dying,
After employing love, and its effort,
After declaring to me that great thirst
Of baptism to oppose to God the interest
Of God himself. You join your selves together?
Oh policy of Hell! must we overcome
So many times before we triumph? sure
Your resolutions are so slow, take yours
At last, since, I've already taken mine.
I adore but one God, the Master of
The Universe, under whose feet, the Heaven,
The Earth, and Hell doth tremble, one God which
Loving us with an infinite love, died for us
With ignominy, and which by an excess
Of that same love will every day be offered
As Victim for us; But I am too blame
To speak of this to those can't understand me:
See the blind error that you dare defend;
You defile all your gods with foulest crimes,
You punish not one sin whose Master's not
In the heaven by your account,
Adultery, Incest, Prostitution,
Theft, Murder, and what ever we detest,
It is the example which your Deities
Give you to follow; I've profaned their Temple,
And broken down their Altars, I would do it
Again, if I could reach them, even before
The eyes of Felix, yea, before Severus,
And more, even in the presence of the Senate,
Or of the Emperor himself.
At last
My goodness gives place to my just fury,
Adore them, or thou dy'st.
I am a Christian.
Thou impious wretch, I say again, adore them,
Or renounce life.
I am a Christian.
Art thou? O heart too obstinate! Soldiers, execute
The order that I gave,—
Where lead you him?
To death.
To glory.
Adieu my dear Pauline, love my memory.
I'll follow thee throughout, and even to death.
Forsake your error, or not follow me.
Take him away, and see I be obeyed,
Since he desires to dye, it is fit he perish.
ALbin, I do me violence, but I must,
My gentle nature would have easily
Dest oy'd me, let the peoples rage at present
Display it self, and let Severus thunder,
And f•et with fury having performed this
I am secure; but art not thou surprised
With this unshaken constancy? sees thou
Impenetrable hearts like his, or such
Horrid impieties? I have satisfied
My grieved heart, and have neglected nothing
To make his soft and yielding; I have feigned
Before thy eyes base wickedness, and surely
Had it not been for his last blasphemies,
Which filled me suddenly with fear and anger,
I should have scarce triumphed o'er my self.
You'll one day curse perhaps this victory,
Which savours of I know not what an action
Too black, unworthy Felix, and a Roman,
Shedding your blood thus by your proper hand.
So sometime Brutus, and stout Manlius shed it,
Which added to their glory, far from lessening it;
Never have our old Hero's had ill blood,
But they have opened their proper bowels
To let it out.
Your hey• seduces you;
But whatsoever it tell you, when you once
Shall find it cold, when you shall see Pauline,
And that her sad despair expressed by
Her cries and wailings shall come forth to move you.—
Thou make me to remember that she followed
That Traitor, This despair which she will show,
May interrupt the effect of my command;
Go therefore, and give order it be done,
See what he doth, break any obstacle
Her griefs may give unto it, and withdraw her
From that sad spectacle, if thou can endeavour
To comfort her; go then, who holds thee?
There is no need, Sir, she returns her self.
BArbarous Father, finish thy black work,
This second sacrifice is worth thy rage,
Join thy sad Daughter to thy Son-in-Law,
Why tarry'st thou? thou see here the same crime,
Or the same virtue; thy barbarity
In her hath the same matter; my dear Husband
Left me his lights in dying, his just blood,
With which his Executioners are coming
To cover me, hath opened mine eyes:
I see, I know, I do believe, and am
Free of mine error, I am undeceived,
Thou see me baptised with that blessed blood;
Lastly, I am a Christian, have I not
Spoken enough? keep in destroying me,
Thy rank and credit, fear the Emperor.
And doubt Severus, if thou wilt not perish,
My death is necessary, Polyeuctes calls me
Unto his happy death, I see Nearchus
And he both stretching forth their hands unto me:
Bring me to see thy gods which I detest,
They broke but one, I will break all the rest,
There you shall see me brave all that you fear,
Those silly Thunder-bolts which you depaint
Within their hands, and holily rebellious
Unto the Laws of birth, thou once shalt see me
Fail in obedience to thee; it is not
My grief that I do make appear therein,
Tic grace within me speaks, and not despair.
May I say it again? Felix, I am
A Christian, settle by my death thy fortune
And mine, the stroke to both on's will be precious,
Since it assures the one earth, and lifts me
Unto the Heavens.
Unnatural Father, wretched Politician,
Ambitious slave to a Chymerick fear,
Is Polyeuctes dead then by your cruelties,
And think you to conserve your sorry dignities?
The favour which for him I offered you,
Instead of saving him, hasted his death;
I prayed, threatened, but I could not move you;
You thought me false, or but of little power,
But you shall know at your cost that Severus
Boasts not of any thing but what he can
Perform and by your ruin he will make you
To judge that he who can destroy you, could
Have protected you; continue to
The gods this faithful service▪ by such horrors
Show them your zeal, adieu, but when the storm
Shall break upon you, doubt not of the arm
From whence the strokes shall come.
Severus, stay,
And with a quiet mind suffer that I
Give you an easy vengeance, by my cruelties
Cease to reproach me more, I do endeavour
To keep my sorry dignities, I dispose
Their false deceitful lustre to your feet;
That glory whereunto I dare t'aspire
Is a rank more Illustrious, I do find
My self forced to it by a secret bait,
I yield to those transports I do not know,
And by a wo•king which I understand not,
I from my fury pass unto the zeal
Of my blessed Son-in-law; tic he no doubt,
Whose innocent blood prays an Almighty God
For me his Persecutor, his love spread
On all the Family, draws after him
As well the Father as the Daughter, I
Have made a Martyr of him, and his death
Hath made me Christian, I procured his bliss,
He will work mine, so is it that a Christian
Is angry and revengeth, happy cruelty
Whose event is so sweet! Pauline, give me
Thy hand, bring fetters here, and sacrifice
Unto your gods these two new Christians
I am one, She is so, observe your anger.
How happily at last I find my Father!
This blessed change makes my joy complete.
Daughter, it doth belong but to the hand
That doth it.
Who would not be touched with
A spectacle so tender? I believe
Such changes come not without miracle,
Your Christians without doubt, which we in vain
Do persecute, have something in them which
Surpasses humane, they do lead a life
With so much innocence, that Heaven doth owe them
Some great acknowledgement; to show themselves
More strong the more they are oppressed, is not
The effect of common virtues; I still loved them,
What ever might be said on it, I ne'er saw them
To dye, but this heart sighed for it, and perhaps,
I shall one day be better known unto them:
In the mean time I like that every one
Should have his own gods, and that he should serve them
After his own way without fear of punishment,
If you are Christians, fear no more my hate,
I love them, Felix, and from their Protector,
I will not make a Persecutor of them
In you: guard well your power, take it again,
Serve your God, serve your Monarch, I will lose
My credit with his Majesty, or he
Shall shake off this severity, by his
Unjust hate he doth too much wrong himself.
Deign gracious Heaven to end his work in you,
And one day to give you what you deserve,
T'inspire into you all his sacred Truths:
For us we bless this fortunate adventure,
Come, let us go to give our Martyrs burial,
To kiss their precious bodies, and to put them
In holy place, in consecrated ground,
Then let us make the name of God resound.

IF ever Dog was weary of a
day, then have I cause to bee
weary of my life; I am a
Blacksmith by my Trade, and
(though I say it) I have bin
accounted a good Workman,
but I could never yet forge, or hammer out means
enough to satisfy the insatiate gut of my son Simple∣ton.
He will not work, and yet no sooner is his nose
out of the Alehouse, but his head is in the Cupboard:
His insatiate stomach may well defy a Giant, or the
great Eater of Kent; but I have thought upon a way
which he shall either take in hand, or graze with
Hob my horse; Sirrah Simpleton, where are you?
Within. Here, here, Father.
Where, where, Sirrah?
At the Cupboard Father, at the Cup∣board.
I thought as much; but come you hither
sirrah, or I shall make your ears sing prick song for
you.
It is a miserable condition that a man
cannot eat a little bit for his afternoons Lunchins,
but he must be disturbed in the best of his stomach.
A bit dost thou call it, O my conscience
this devouring rascal, old as I am, would eat me if he
found me in the Cupboard.
I do not think there is such a genteel
Smith in the town, that has such an old niggardly
Coxcomb to his father as I, he knows I have no
better a stomach then a young green-sicknesse girl,
and yet he grutches me every bit I eat.
Leave off your muttering, and lend me
an ear a while.
Truly I cannot spare one father; yet now
I think on it, you have great occasion for one ever
since the last pillory day, but since you are my father,
I will vouchsafe to listen a while.
You know that I am old.
The More's the pity, that you were not
hanged while you were young.
Thou hast drunk most of my means
away.
I'll eat out the rest.
Leave your ill breeding, and give me sen∣sibly
a reason why you will not work?
Because I am lazy father.
Nay that's true.
True; why do you think I would be so
unmannerly, to tell you a lie father.
How I shall maintain that coming sto∣match
of yours, unless your self endeavour for it: I
know not, but if thou wilt be ruled, I'll make thee
a man.
A man! why what am I now, a mouse
what would you make of me?
An Ass, an Ass, a gross Ass.
You may well make me a gross Ass, you
have so good a pattern.
Listen to me; you know the widows
daughter at the corner, sweet Mistress Dorothy, shoe's
both young and handsome, and has money too.
I, and that will help to buy victuals.
Go and woo her, and I dare lay my life
thou carry her.
I carry her, father; alas, I have but a
weak back, and besides I am somewhat lazily given,
as you say, it were a great deal better that she would
carry me.
Thou hast no more wit then my hammer
head has, and no more brains then an Anvil, which
every one may strike on, but never move it; go
take your Fiddle, at that they say you are excellent,
and when she thanks thee from her Chamber win∣dow,
say thou art my son, and that I sent thee about
the thing she wotes of.
O must I bumfiddle her under her Cham∣ber
window; well, I will go wash my hands, and
starch my face, because I may be sure to go cleanly
about my business.
A pox of fortune, she was never my
friend yet; the money that I got with so much
trouble, I lost with one unlucky chance at dice. I
have no means nor hopes left to supply me, but
what my sweet-heart Dorothy affords me, she has and
must again take pity of me, this is her window, I hope
her mother will not hear.
Who's that calls so boldly; speak,
what are you?
Oh Doll thou know my fortunes, and
my love last night hath broke me, and by thee
my fortunes must be splintered; one half piece does
the business.
How often have I pieced you, and still you
break; and I shall do the same if you continue thus;
you know my mother keep's a look over my will,
yet once again Isle venture, come in the morning a∣bout
five of the clock, and Isle be ready for thee.
Oh my sweet Doll, thou never did de∣ceive
me.
Now must I go play an Alampadoe. under
Mistress Dorothy's Chamber window, and all that
time perhaps she is a snorting, for to say the truth my
music will hardly have the virtue to waken her, and
if she should wake, I could not tell what to say to
her unless it were to desire her to go to bed again.
And because I will be sure to be acceptable to her, I
will join my nightingale voice thereunto.
What slave is this presumes to court my
Mistress, could I but see him, I would satisfy my anger
with the ruin of his limbs, but he is gone, and I loose
time in seeking Exit.
That was a roaring Rogue, he has made
my heart jump upright into my mouth, and if I had
not held it fast with my teeth, without doubt it had
forsaken my body; but he is gone, and now I will ven∣ture
forward.
I heard some music at my sweet-hearts
window, could I but find him, I would cut him, and
flash him till his whole body were anoatmized; but he
is gone, and it was his wisest course.
That Roaring Rouge was far worse then
the tother, he has almost frighted my song out of my
head. Oh! we true and faithful lovers, what perils
and dangers must we undergo, to gain the wills and
affections of our dearest deers; but now to my mu∣sick,
and because she shall take a great pleasure to
think on it, I will sing a song of a young wench
that had a great mind to be married before her time.
Oh! mother let me have a husband kind,
with toitre loytre loitre.
That day and night I may comfort find
of a toitre, &amp;c.
I care not whether honest man or knave,
so that he keep me sine and brave,
And that none else but I may have
his toitre &amp;c.
Oh daughter you are not old enough
for a toitre &amp;c.
And husbands often prove rough
with a toitre &amp;c.
Your tender heart no grief can carry
as they must do sometimes that marry
You yet may well a twelve-month tarry
for a toitre &amp;c.
Oh! mother I am in my teens
for a toytre &amp;c.
And younger wives are often seen
with a toitre &amp;c.
I pray let not me so Idle stand,
for I can do as well as any can.
I have had a proof with Iohn our man
of his toitre &amp;c.
Well if she does not run mad for me now, it is pity
she should have music under her window, as long
as she lives again.
What owl is that shrieks so at my window,
if he meant music sure he was mistaken, I was about
to have eaten my breake-fast, but this fool has turned
my stomach. What art thou that art so troublesome.
Good Mistress Dorothy, it is I, your none
sweet-swotterkin, and if you please to throw your
eyes out of the window upon me, you shall behold
one of the faithfullest lovers that ever took hammer
in hand. I love you better and dear, then a Bear
does honey, and I hope you will affect me as much
as a Sow does a bunch of Carrots.
Oh is it you? I thought none but a puppy like
your self, would have disturbed the neighbours with
your gridiron-musick, a Saw were far more pleasing.
Forsooth I am very sorry that you have
no better skill in music, in my opinion I sung most
melodiously, but if you will be pleased to look with
eyes of judgment upon me, you will express your
love in a better manner to me.
I shall express my love if you continue here,
in a far Worser manner then you think for; do you
see this chamber-pot, it longs to be acquainted with
that trainless head of yours; therefore be gone, and
save your self a washing.
If you should wash me, I think it would
be but labour in vain; yet if you please to distill any
of your sweet water upon me, I shall desire to be
smelt out by you.
You ass, you puppy; must you needs force a
drowning.
Is this the beginning of love? it is almost as
bad as the proverb to me: stay, it may be it is rose∣water.
Voh, it is as rank urine as ever any Doctor
cast. I'll call this same old Simpleton my father, that
set me about this business. Oh! Father Simpleton,
where are you.
Oh mine Son, how hast thou sped boy?
O! I have sped most abominably, father,
I got a great deal more then I expected.
Oh my own natural boy!
I natural, to be sure; I had ne'er come
here else.
But how did she relish thee.
Why she relished me with a whole cham∣ber
pot full of water.
Why thou ass, thou puppy, thou fool,
thou coxcomb.
Nor I neither, come let's to bed pre∣sentlie,
and afterwards we'll talk on it.
No, no, first to Church, and then to bed.
Oh then you won't follow the fashion of
our country, we commonly go to bed first, and to
Church when we can, but come I am contented.
How now friend, what make you here∣abouts?
My business is the same, I think, with
yours; is it not for Dorothy?
I do confess it, and have known what
love you long have born her; let us go together.
Stand close, what means this?
Here comes the bride and bridegroom on so stately,
That were but maid and bachelor so lately.
And now let all the Blacksmiths be invited,
Cause Vulcan and his Venus are united.
What should this mean, Doll has a hat on?
She did not use to wear one.
Oh gentlemen! though I desire your com∣pany,
yet now I heartily could wish your absence.
Why, what's the matter Doll?
I am married.
To whom?
Do you not know him? Young Simpleton the
Smith.
That fool, that Coxcomb; I'll break
his hammer with his own jolt-head.
Stand close, I hear him coming.
Sweet-heart now we are married, things
ought to be well carried.
And the first thing we should take care for, is how
to get victuals, what's that?
Nothing but the Rats and Mice.
As sure as I live, I'll lay a trap for those
Rats. But what's the matter now?
Nothing but the Neighbours Dogs.
It is a thousand pities but such Currs were
hanged up presently.
Oh Gentlemen! I would you were out of
the house, for I am afraid hee will return again ere
I can handsomely shut the door.
Why Doll, Doll.
Come ye behind me presently, I pray dis∣patch.
Doll: I have considered, that to set up
my trade is the way to get victuals, and I wont no∣thing
of my tools but only a pair of Bellows.
Fear not husband, I have a little money that
you know not of, and if I can but hear of a good
bargain, I will not fail to buy a pair of Bellows.
Oh thou pretty loving kind pigsny, but
what makes thee wear thy coats of
that fashion.
Do not you know husband, it is the fashion
for new-married wives.
Is it so? it is an excellent fashion in the
Summer time; but I'll go out and return presently.
What will you do? it is ten to one he spies
you, and then my reputation runs a hazard.
Appoint what way you will, we are con∣tented.
I see him coming back; and truth to say,
the course I shall advise will seem a strange one, yet
it must be: you know he did appoint that I should
buy for him a pair of Bellows; now if you two can
bear it lustily, and blow it strongly, this visit may be
kept off from his knowledge.
Nay any thing good Doll, we cannot
now be choosers.
So, lie down: I'll fetch a Chafingdish of
Charcoal hither, and practice you a while before he
come.
I have plaid many a mad prank in my
life, yet ne'er till now acted a pair of Bellows.
So, so, blow lustily and fear not.
Wife: I have considered with my self,
that if we lay out all the money in a pair of Bellows,
we should have little or nothing left to buy victu∣alls.
Oh husband! you are deceived; for I have
bought you a pair of Bellows, the whole town
shows not a neater.
Is this a pair of Bellows, let me see? this
is an alamoda pair of Bellows, but look you Doll;
when the Bellows-mender comes by, let him stop
this hole here, for the wind comes out abominably.
I'll call my Father Simpleton to see this pair of Bell∣lows.
Father, father, come hither.
Did you ever see such a pair of Bellows
as my wife has bought.
A pair of Bellows, Son! me thinks this
would serve better for an Anvil: Let's try how it
will bear our strokes.
Well, a match.

BLind Cupped hath made my heart for to bleed,
Fa la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la.
But I know a man can help you at need,
With a fa la, la, la, la, fa, la, la, la, la, la.
My husband he often a hunting goes out,
Fa la, la, &amp;c.
And brings home a great pair of horns there's
no doubt; with a fa la, la, la, &amp;c.
How is it Monsieur Simkin, why are you so sad?
Fa la, la, la, &amp;c.
I am up to the ears in love, and it makes me
stark mad, with a fa la, la, la, &amp;c.
I am vexed, I am tortured, and troubled at heart,
Fa la, la, &amp;c.
But Isle try my skill to take off your smart,
With a fa la, la, &amp;c.
And on that condition I give you a kiss, Fa la, la, &amp;c.
But what says your husband when he hears of
this? with a fa la, la, &amp;c.
You know my affection, &amp; no one knows more,
With a fa la, la, &amp;c.
'Uds niggers noggers who knocks at the door?
with a fa la, la, &amp;c.
There is a Roister at the door, he seems a Fell∣low
stout.
I beseech you worthy friend, which is the back
way out?
He swears and tears he will come in,
And nothing shall him hinder.
I fear he will strip me out my skin.
And burn it into tinder.
I have considered of a way, and twill be sure
the best.
What may it be my dearest Dear?
Creep into this same Chest.
And though he roar, speak you no word,
If you'll preserve my favour.
Shut to the chest, I pray, with speed,
For something has some savour.
I never shall be quiet if she use me in this fashion.
I am here to bid you welcome; what mean you
by this passion?
With some young sweet-fac'd fellow I thought
gone out you were.
No sooth, the sweet-fac'd fellow
is kept a prisoner here.
Where is the fool thy husband? Say, whither
is he gone?
The Withal is a hunting.
Then we two are alone: But should he come
And find me here, what might the Cuckold think?
Perhaps he would call the neighbours in,
And beat you till you stink.
Yet in the bloody war full oft,
My courage I did try.
I know you have kilt many a man.
You lie, you slut, you lie.
I never came before a foe,
By night nor yet by day,
But that I stoutly roused my self,
And nimbly ran away.
Within this chest Isle hide my self,
If it chance he should come.
O no my love, that cannot be,
I have bespoke the room.
I have a place behind here,
Which yet is known to no man.
She has a place before too,
But that is all to common.
Wife, wherefore is the door thus bared?
what mean you pray by this?
Alas! it is my husband.
I laugh now till I piss.
Open the chest, Isle into it,
My life else it may cost.
Alas I cannot open it.
I believe the key is lost.
I have bethought my self upon a dainty trick.
What may it be my dearest love?
I prithee now be quick.
You must say that your enemy
Into this house is fled,
And that your heart can take no rest,
Until that he be dead.
Draw quickly out your furious blade,
And seem to make a strife.
Swear all th'excuses can be made,
Shall not preserve his life.
Say that the Rogue is fled in here,
That stole away your coin,
And if Isle not deliver him,
You'll have as much of mine.
Here's no man but my self,
On whom shall I complain?
This great fool does not understand,
This thing you must but feign.
My husband thus must be deceived, and afterwards
we'll laugh.
Wife, since you will not op the door,
Isle break't op with my staff.
Good woman show me to the slave,
His limbs I strait will tear.
By all the honestly I have,
Theres no man came in here.
When I have fought to purchase wealth,
And with my blood did win it,
This Rogue has got my purse by stealth.
But never a penny in it.
She's big with child, therefore take heed
you do not fright my wife.
But know you who the Father is?
The Roarer on my life.
She knows not of your enemy, then get you
gone you were best.
Peace husband, peace, I tell you true, I have
hid him in the chest.
I am glad on it at my heart, but doe not
tell him so.
I would not for a thousand pound the Roa∣rer
should it know.
When next we meet his life is gone, no other
must he hope; Isle kill him whatsoere comes on it,
Pray think upon a rope.
What kind of person is it that in the chest
does lie?
A goodly handsome sweet young man,
as ere was seen with eye.
Then let us both entreat of him—Pray
put us not in fear: we do beseech you go from hence.
But to morrow Isle be here.
Wife, run with all the speed you can, and
quickly shut the door,
I would not that the roaring man should come in any more.
Mean time I will release the youth, and tell him how we
have sped.—Be comforted my honest friend.
Alas I am almost dead, my heart is tortured in
my breast with sorrow, fear and pain.
Isle fetch some Aqua vitae, to comfort you a∣gain.
And cause I will requite you,
Whose love doth so excel,
Isle graft a pair of horns on your head,
That may defend it well.
Good husband, let the man stay here,
It is dangerous in the street.
I would not for a crown of gold,
The Roarer should him meet.
For should he come by any harm,
They'd say the fault were mine.
There's half a crown, pray send him
out to fetch a quart of wine.
There's money for you Sir,—Pray fetch a
quart of Sack.
It is well, it is well, my honest friend, Isle see
you shall not lack.
But if he should dishonest me,
For there are such slippery men.
Then he gets not of his half crown
One penny back again.
Thy husband being gone my love,
VVee'l sing, we'll dance, and laugh,
I am sure he is a good fellow,
And takes delight to quaff.
I'll fold thee in my arms my love,
No matter for his listening.
Gentlemen, some forty weeks hence
You may come to a Christening.
O sirrah, have I caught you,
Now do the best you can,
Your Schoolmaster ne'er taught you
To wrong an honest man.
Good sir, I never went to School,
Then why am I abused?
The truth is, I am but a fool,
And like a fool am used.
Yet sirrah you had wit enough to think to
Cuckold me.
I jested with him, husband, his knavery to see.
But now you talk of knavery,
I pray where is my Sack?
You shall want it in your belly, Sir,
And have it on your back.

THis is the place, the way me thought was long,
And my slow pace did my affection wrong.
For who is he that would not wing his hast,
When by Oenone's eyes he shall be graced.
Most potent Shepherdess who hast power t'enthrall
Not only my poor heart alone, but all.
For every one that reigns here, strives to be
Rather her captive, then at liberty.
Her eyes do perfectly two Suns present,
And yet but one graces the Firmament,
The colour of her lips doth justly show
Like that of Cherries when they kindly grow
And such a form they have, they may entice
To think such only grew in Paradise.
The Lambs are fatter that by her do feed,
And all her Ewes more frequently do breed
Then any Shepherds, and do yield each year
A larger fleece then any others bear;
As if she brought a miracle to pass,
And fed them with her looks more then the grass.
If then she will (when other Shepherds stand
To beg a favour from her eyes or hand)
Esteem me most, my poor heart then will be
Taught the true sense of a felicity.
But soft,—me thinks from yonder grove I hear
Voices that are familiar to my ear,
Isle not go to them; for Love says my duty
Is to attend none but Oenone's beauty.
YOu have forgot then (Dorus) your protest.
No, I have not my Cloris, it is confessed.
But yet I saw you slide, a Garland neatly tied
Into Uranias' hand; let it suffice,
Though Love be blind, Lovers have many eyes.
Will you appear so strangely full of passion?
I have cause to fear dissembled love's in fashion.
Then why did you, I pray,
With Strephon sport and play?
You kissed and danced, till day was past its prime,
And all the while my heart did beat the time.
May I not dance, or harmlessly be kissed?
So I may chance give garlands if I list.
But when you are so free,
Me thinks you steal from me.
For every Lover will this Text approve,
There's charity in all things but in love.
That day the storm fell to be true you swore,
When the sun shined again, you vowed much more.
Those faithful vows I made,
were by yourself betrayed:
For I have learned to know it is my due,
To be no constanter in love then you.
Then jealousies be gone, and keep my sheep,
Lest that the Wolf should make their number small,
But of my love nothing command shall keep
But Cloris will, and Cloris will is all.
Shepherd, thy love is most unnatural:
For Nature does command friendships observance,
But by the fond desires thy heart is filled with,
Thou prov'st thy self ungrateful.
That Character was never coveted,
Nor must I wrong my innocence so much,
Not to demand a reason of this slander.
I will produce the truth thou would profess,
A witness against thy self: How oft have I
With care and industry preserved thy flock?
And when thy tender Lambs have been in danger,
How many times have I opposed the wolf,
And made my strength defender of their weakness?
And when thy self hast followed idle pastimes,
Thy Flocks and mine have still been twined together,
Till by my vigilance I have instructed
The enemies to Shepherds and their Flocks.
They were to fear me, as thy sheep did them.
Nor have I had a thought (except those dear ones
That have been busied by Oenone's virtues)
Which has not still paid tribute to thy friendship.
You then would have prerogative in love,
And leave no privilege to me but friendship,
If you allow Oenone virtuous.,
And that her eyes have power to pierce all hearts,
Why should the man which you will call a friend,
Be banished from the blessed socitie
Of those who are her servants? It were a crime
Against her beauty to believe she should
Merit but one mans service; he which reigns here,
I know must love, and that necessity
Makes rivals necessary.
Tic a truth
I must acknowledge, pardon me my friend,
I find the Nymph Oenone is too worthy;
Yet her perfections (were they centupled)
Shall not dissolve, nor in the least diminish
What has bin formerly esteemed a triumph,
Which is, a perfect friendship.
In that confidence
Thus we unite again—But who comes here?
It is Hobbinall,
One that believes it is but Oenone's duty
Directly to confess her self beholding
To him for his affection: he supposes
That his deserts are greater then her beauties,
And is as confident the fair Nymph loves him,
As we are that she does not; yet his fortune
Is more to be commended then our fate;
For she is pleased to smile at his rude actions,
The best of our endeavours are not valued.
What paper's that he ruminates upon?
Let us observe a little.
It is a strange thing I find my self out every
day more then other, to be one of the understandingst,
sweetest, neatest, and completest Shepherds that ever
took hook in hand. Tother day I saw my face in a pail
of water, and I had much ado to forbear drowning of
my self: it is no wonder then, that the beauteous
Nymph Oenone makes much of me, and lets all the
other Shepherds shake their ears like Asses; And the
truth is, if I can find never a handsomer she shall serve
the turn. This was her birth-day, she being born in the
year—one thousand six hundred,—nay hold a
little; but on this day of the month it was, Winter or
Summer, in the honour of which we all keep holiday;
and therefore for the credit of her beauty, and the honour
of my own Poetry, have made such a Copy of Verses
on her, as will make her a thousand times handsomer
then ever she was in her life.—
I will peruse them now with the eyes of understan∣ding.
OEnone fair, whose Beauty does enrich us,
Tell me the cause why thou dost so bewitch us.
On this day thou were born, though not begotten,
This day Isle think on when the art dead &amp; rotten.
And though thy coyness and thy pretty scorn
Makes many wish that thou had ne'er been born.
Yet for my own part this Isle swear and say,
I wish thy time of Birth were every day.
If she do not run mad for love of me now, it is pity
she should have Verses made on her as long as she
lives.
Let's interrupt him—Hobbinall well met.
It may be so.
But why so strange man? I hope you will re∣member
we are your fellow Shepherds.
You were once, but now I command you to
know, I am a Master Shepherd; for the fair Nymph
Oenone, that makes all your mouths run over with wa∣la,
does acknowledge me to be both Master and Mi∣stress.
In part it is true, yet if you well consider, she
makes you but her sport, no otherwise.
If she make me her sport, it is more then ever she
can make of thee: for thou art one of the sourest
looked fellows that ever crept out of a vineger-bottle.
Here comes the fairest Idae ever nourished.
I will accost her.
Forbear a while good Hobbinall.
It was my fault.
To be so credulous; but it was his sin
To be so lavish of his protestations.
Oh Paris, Paris, thy inconstant nature
Argues the fickleness which Poets fancy
In women, but a Fiction.
I that have formerly acknowledged thee
The only person meriting respect,
Must now produce this thy particular falsehood,
As one to dare example; let no more
The Shepherds be at strife to please Oenone,
Let every Maypole-meeting every feast,
Be honoured by a happier Nymph then I,
To be the Mistress of those harmless pastimes.
Hail to the Nymph that graces Idaes vale,
Accept my service at this days solemnity.
And if the same from me can be accepted,
nothing so pleasing is as to present it.
I, you may talk as finely as you will, but when
I come to speak once, I'm sure you will be kicked off.
What you profess may well claim an acceptance.
Now will I see who is the most deserving Shep∣herd
in all the vale of Idae—little rogue, howdost thou?
O Hobbinall, you are welcome, I thought
you had forgot me, you are my sport, and should be
ever near me.
Look you there, I am her sport she says; when
will she give any of you such an honourable title: but
Sport, I do not think but thou art a Conjurer, or a
Witch, or a Devil at least; for thou hast infused such a
combustion of Poetry in my head, that I fear I shall
never be my own man again, nor my Masters neither.—
There's a Copy of verses, read um; nay, they are my
own, as sure as my name's Hobbinall.
I thank you Sport, Isle study a requital.
Fair one, we come to celebrate this day
With other Shepherds who admire and joy,
To know so fair acreature as your self
At this time of the year made the world happy.
And we as bound to honour you (the fairest)
that ever graced our sex, are come to attend upon your
recreations.
Your expressions,
(As they cause blushes) do exact a thanks.
Honour me
With your fair hand, Nymph, that I may lead
The way to all those pastimes which will follow.
The honour is to me, and I accept it.
It laugh at that, no Sport, Isle dance with thee
my self.
Some other time,
By chance I may be at leisure.
Will you not? well, by this hand then Isle stand
out and laugh at every thing you do, right or wrong.
Pshaw waw, this dancing is like my mothers Mares
trot, Sport, shall I show thee a dance of my own fashion?
It cannot but content.
Nay, I know that, hark hither, Lads.
Thus I beguile my passion, shadowing over
With a false vail of mirth, my real sorrows;
For when time takes an end, not all the stories
Which ever did lament forsaken Lovers,
Shall show a parallel to my misfortune.
My griefs shall stay, when all my joys depart,
And nothing but sad thoughts shall fill my heart.
How like you this Sport:
Beyond Expression, Sport,
I see your Virtues were concealed too long▪
I so they were, but I mean to show them every day
as fast as I can. But sirrah, Sport, yonder's God Pan,
with a company of the bravest Satyrs that ever wore
horns on their heads: come, Shepherds, let's go make
them drunk, and saw off all their horns.
Hail to that Nymph that graces Idaes Vale,
Whose beauty adds a Lustre to all those
That doe acknowledge Pan as their chief Patron.
Not any Satyr henceforth for thy sake,
Shall own the nature he was bred withal.
But all their actions shall be like thy beauty,
Smooth and delightful, and when thou commandst,
Sweet Philomel shall quite forget her Rape,
And overcome with joy that thou art present,
Join with the other birds in cheerful notes.
The very trees shall entertain no whisper
From the rude winds, but what shall please thy ear,
And when thou speak the beasts shall dance more
nimbly,
Then when the Thracian Orpheus charmed their senses.
And every object that can yield delight,
Shall be Oenones vassal: in the mean time,
I, and those Satyrs that attend my person,
Will move in dance, to let Oenone find,
She can make gentle a rough Satyrs mind.
Since my weak fortune knows no retribution,
But my weak thanks, accept them, being presented.
Approach then Satyrs, and let each one strive
To express the service due unto Oenone.
Now honour me to grace my Bower a while,
Where I will strive to let my Patron prove,
How fain I would be grateful to his love.

FRancisco, well met; whither in such hast?
I am going to a feast; where, if you
please, you shall be welcome too.
I am willing to believe you, and will wait on
you.
Isle promise you a dish of mirth, that's all, and
if my hopes delude me not, well dressed too, so quaintly
relished, that it will provoke a laughter far above thy
spleen to suffer.
How can these times afford such entertain∣meant?
Why, Isle inform you: It was yesterday my
luck to be encountered by a rustic Sea-man, (or one at
leastwise of as course condition.) This fellow, like a
perfect son of folly, began to rail extremely at his for∣tune,
and needs would make me Judge of his abuse.—
I have (says he) about some two years since, married
a wife, (wo worth the time I saw her) and in my ab∣sense
she hath got a trick to make me Cuckold when∣there
I will or no; a barbarous Barber makes a beast of
me, Cutbeard his name, whom I do vow to be the
cut-throat of.
I know the fellow well, he lives close by; but
on I pray.
I finding that his humour might produce some∣thing
worth laughing at, encouraged him; he like a
bladder that is swelled with blowing, was straight puffed
up into a desperate humour, so that he vowed this day
for a revenge: And hereabout I am to meet this Her∣cules.
It cannot choose but produce excellent mirth,
which Isle assist with all my best endeavours.
See, he is come laden with several instruments
of death; he means to play a prize with him, I think,—Well
Iohn, I see you are prepared for murder; have
mercy on the Barber, I say.
No, I scorn it, I will have no mercy, he has made
a whore of a wondrous honest woman, and a Cuckold
of one, that for ought I know, might have been a Cour∣tier.
For which abominable deed I scorn to show my
self a Christian; for I do mean to use him worse then a
Jew would.
Nay, but consider, he's a man how-ere, and
you can boast your self to be no more, although you
have the spirit of a Giant; you have brought weapons
here as if you meant to kill him twenty times. Troth
tic too much.
If I bate him an Ace of forty, call me Cox∣comb,
I will draw his teeth one by one, with an instru∣meant
called a pair of Tongs, then let him blood in the
right vein, and bid the Devil take him at his own
peril.
Let me prevail with thee to calm thy rage, and
take acquaintance of this Gentleman a worthy friend
of mine.
Do you long to be acquainted with me, Sir?
By any means, Sir.
Tic granted then; Isle toss a Can or a Pot
with you, as soon as I have dispatch't this bawdy Bar∣ber;
would he were dead that my business might be
over.
What's your profession Sir? and how may I
call you?
I am a Seaman, Sir, my name's Iohn Swab∣ber
—an Officer of the ship, sir.
I cry you mercy, sir.
Nay, never cry for the matter,—But I had
forgot this Barber all this while: Barber come forth, or
by the beard of my great Grandfather, I swear, I will
so shashado, mashado, pashado, and carbonado thee,
that thou shalt look like a gallimafry all the days of thy
life. Come forth I say,
Why neighbour Swabber, who pro∣vokes
you thus? what do you mean? who has offen∣ded
you?
Oh slave of all slaves, who has offended me?
why thou base, beastly, boisterous, Babylonian, bawdy∣faced
Barber, thou hast, thou hast made me fit to chew
the cud with oxen, climb the mountains with wild
goats, and keep company with none but Ram-headed
people, for which I will tie thee up on the next sign-post,
and there thou shalt hang a twelve month and a day a∣live,
for an example to all such notable shavers; but if
thou come and submitst to my mercy, I will do thee
the favour to let thee hang till thou be dead.
Francisco hark—Isle pawn my life this fell∣low's
a rank coward, keep you his fury up, and Isle per∣swade
the Barber to a greater vein of roaring then ere
was practised by a suburb blade, Isle make him at the
least seem valiant, fear not.
Do if it be possible, Isle hold him in discourse.
—But, Mr Swabber, what think you if he does com∣pound
with you, will you be won to take an arm or two,
or both his legs, and save his other members?
Pish, tell not me, tic neither his arms nor his
legs that I stand upon, he has cause me to go in dan∣ger
of my life: for t'other day I had an occasion to
pass by a worshipful Gentleman's pack of hounds, they
no sooner looked upon my forehead, but they came at
me in full cry; and I for fear left such a sent behind me,
that they came after me as perfectly by it, as if I had
been a Stag; and if I had not got shelter of a house,
without doubt I had been presented to some great man
for Venison, and my honchos had been baked by this
time.
You were in danger there I must confess.
And the Butchers Dogs still take me for a
Bull, and fetch such courses at me; and all this the Bar∣ber
is the cause of.
I would revenge it, were I as you he should not
have a tool left him to work with.
No nor to play with neither, Isle have an inch
of every tool he has.—Barber come forth, and let
me kill thee upon fair terms, or else I will enter thy
house by force, pitch thee down the stairs, and send
thee of an errand headlong. And if thou dost submit
to my mercy, I will shave thee to death with thy own ra∣zor,
therefore take heed.—So, now let him come if
he dare.
Well, now I see there is no hope to appease him,
blood must ensue, and death will take its course.
With whom? what's the matter?
The Barber is preparing for the combat, he has
took his pole to serve him for a lance, and one of his
basins for a buckler, and vows to make you the wind∣mill,
whilst he plays Don Quixote against you furiously.
A windmil!—Isle begone.
You will not offer that sure. Who afraid?
Would it not make any one tremble with the
thought on it, first to be made a Cuckold, then a wind∣mill?
No, Isle begone, and come again to kill him when
I can find him in a better humour.
Consider what you do; he'll call you coward,
proclaim you Cuckold still in every Alehouse, and what
disgrace will that be?
I care not, tic better be a Cuckold then a wind∣mil;
if he had meant to make a fool, a puppy, or an ass
of me, or any such Christian like creature, it were another
matter: but to be made a windmill of, and never to be
respected but when the wind blows, is not to be endured,
therefore let him make windmils of my weapons, if he
will, for my own part Isle defend my self with my heels.
Come, I have brought him to a better temper,
he will come armed with nothing but a Razor, with
which if he does slit your wezand-pipe, it will not be a∣miss
to take it patiently.
Let him not spoil my drinking, and I care not;
but hark you, if you should let him hurt me, I should be
as angry as a Tiger.
Where is this slave that has provoked my rage
to his destruction, I will swinge this Boor, then hang
him up for Bacon in my chimney, and send him to be
broiled for Pluto's breakfast.
Why This is worse then to be made a wind mil.
Do you hear sir, if ever you had the fit of an ague upon
you, or ever knew the trembling of a man troubled in
conscience, that would be loath to die till he had made
even with all the world, consider me; alas, sir I have
my rent to pay yet, and if I should be sent to hell of an
errand, they'll like my company so well, I should never
come back again; pray persuade him to send me to Ie∣rusalem,
or Ierico, or any those places nearer hand.
Why can not thou excuse thy self? whore's
thy brains?
Alas, my brains are fallen intomy breeches; but
if you'll stand between me and harm, Isle venture to re∣council
my self to him,—Cut—honest Cutbeard, did
not thou think I was in earnest all this while.
What ere thou were, thou shalt be nothing pre∣sently,
death waits for thee, come quickly I command
thee.
Sir, pray persuade Mr Death to have patience
for a matter of 40 or 50 years more; for I have a great
deal of business to do in this world yet.
Shall I be dallied with, let me approach him, for
all the entreaties of the world shall not preserve him past
six minutes.
One minut's past already,—and theres two.
Nay, prithee Cutbeard, be more merciful.
Three—four—five.
Will no entreaty serve? Then take your course.
Six, O now I am gone.
If he submit he may live, let him know it—dost
thou acknowledge thy own cowardice and my heroic
valour?
O mighty Hercules, I confess my self a Pygmy, and
I will never think otherwise while I live; these Gentle∣men
be my witnesses.
Why then ell's well again.—Remember Cutbeard,
Isle spice him fear not—give me thy hand Jack,
Thus do I grasp thy friendship.
He grasps my hand devilish hard tho.
I hear pronounce thy wife to be a Venus.
O rare! Is my wife a Venus? That's more then
ever I knew before; why then I will be her husband
Cupped.
No, Cupped was her son.
It is no matter for that, he shall be her husband
for once, and we two will get such abundance of young
Cupids, that we will make all the world in love with one a∣another.
Since we are reconciled, know, honest Swabber,
that I will make the whole world dote on thee, Isle wash
thy face, and powder thee to'th purpose, and shave thee
if thou wilt too.
No, by no means, I dare not venture my throat
under thy fingers; but for washing and powdering, that
all the world may be in love with me, I am content.
Sit down then in this chair, look on this powder,
the snow is nothing to it, twill create such a complexi∣on
on thee, that no Art did ever set upon the proudest
Lady.
But hark you Cutbeard, how shall I do to satis∣fie
all the women that will follow me for kisses, if you
make me too beautiful, my lips will be worn thread∣bare
before I can get home; and then Parnell my own
dear wife, will have the least share of her own sweet
husband.
For that we will take a course,—wink, wink, good
Jack, my Ball will search your eyes else.
My eyes are honest, and fear no searching
Now I begin to sprucifie thy physiognomy,—This
powder was extracted from the Phoenix, when she last
burnt her self, and is indeed the quintessence of odors.
Nay, it is as odious as ever I smelt, that's cer∣tain,
good Cutbeard let me have enough I prithee.
Nay, Isle spare no cost,—Judge Gentlemen, is
he not strangely altered?
Past belief; I would not that my Mistress saw
him now, my hopes would soon be cooled then.
I think so, but I would have you to take no∣tice,
I will have nothing to do but with great persona∣ges,
for I must not make my self common.
What this fellow will com to no man knows yet,
his fame no doubt will travel ore all countries, and I am
full resolved in my opinion, the Queen of Mauritania
will run mad for him.
If she run as mad as a March Hare, she gets not
a bit; no, Parnell and my neighbours shall have all.
Now if the Painters will draw Atones out, let
them come here for copies. So I have done.
Prithee Cutbeard lend me a Looking-glass.
By no means; what did you never hear of one
Narcissus how he pined away for love of his own sha∣dow:
No, go home, your house is hard by, let Parnell
see you, and bless her self with wonder.
Honest Cutbeard, this Gentleman is a worthy
friend of mine, prithee bestow some of the same powder
upon his face.
No, no, you shall be beautiful alone, tic best.
Parnell I come, and if thou be not stupid,
Thou'lt say Jack Swabber is a kin to Cupped.
Well Cutbeard, thou hast dressed him hand∣somly,
I'd give a Crown that I were by when first he
finds what beauty hoe's adorned withal.
This day I am to meet with pretty Parnell,
pray Heaven the Fool be absent when I come, some
two hours hence if you will meet me, Gentlemen, Isle
tel you how he takes his transmigration.
We will not fail. Farewell.
I wonder that my Barber stays thus long, can he
neglect me thus? Well, I will fit him; for if he use me
once again thus basely, I will cashier him, and bestow
my love upon some one more constant: forty to one but
Swabber comes before him, and spoils all.
Who's this in the name of blackness? the clothes and
walk of my dear husband, and Isle lay my life he has got
a vizard on.—Nay pray now, indeed you'll fright
me presently, take heed.
She does not know me that's excellent,—
Parnell believe it, I am flesh and blood, I would not have
thee take me for a Goddess.
A Goddess quoth, a black one if you be one;
what hast thou got upon thy face I prithee?
Do not look too wistly upon me, Parnell, my
beauty will put your eyes out if you do, and then I must
be at the charge of a Dog and a Bell for you.
A Dog and a fools head; pull off your vizard.
Do not touch me unless you make forty curt∣sies
first. Come kiss me, and thou wilt be out out of thy
wits presently.
Nay, then I see tic a trick put upon him; Isle
fetch you a glass, you shall behold your beauty.
Do, and I will venture to be in love with my self
for once. How shall I requite honest Cutbeard? By this
hand he shall have the honour to be Barber to all my
wenches.
Are you not wondrous fair? Look and ad∣mire
your self.
O Parnell, Parnell, I am gul'd most basely, I
have not half so much beauty as a Chimney-sweeper:
Isle kill the Barber the first thing I do.
Was it the Barber used thee thus?
I Parnell, it was he: Isle go fetch a company of
my Fellow-Saylors, drag him out, and hang him up at
the main Yard presently. Parnell farewell: if I be appre∣hended
for the death of Cutbeard, what ever thou dost,
send me a clean shirt; for I shall have need on it.
Well Cutbeard, I commend thee for this pro∣jest,
thou hast dressed him handsomely; would thou were it
here, I would kiss thee for the jests sake.
Oh are you come, Sir?
I watched the time my Parnell, and have found
it; How does the gul become his feathers? Ha!
As I would have him: Oh Cutbeard, this kiss,
and this, for the device.
Where is he, Parnell?
Why gone abroad in his new-fashion'd face,
to fetch a gang of Sailors, who he vows shall hang thee
up at the main Yard, and shall use thee worse then the
Prentices a Suburb-Bawd on a Shrove-tuesday.
And those same water-rats are Devilish things;
what a slave was I to use him so?
What can thou fear when I am in thy pre∣sense?
Away you milksop, hence from me, avaunt.
Nay, gentle Parnel, by this hand Isle fight with a
whole Army, if thou say the word: prithee be reckon∣ciled.
Why Parnell, Parnell, here's thy own
sweet husband; open the door dear wife.
O me, my husband's come, what shall I do?
Let me into the well▪ if thou think good, or
hang me in the chimney stead of Bacon.
Alas, that's full of hazard.—No device!
Why huswife, housewife, must I wait half
a day?
My peticotes fallen off, but I come presently—Oh
I have thought, come hither, put on this biggin, I
made it for my child that is at Nurse, and cram thy
self into this cradle here: there is no other way, there∣fore
dispatch.
O me, thou never think upon my beard, that
will betray all presently.
Take you no care, Isle make him to believe you
were born with it; be quick, I say.
Necessity compels me, send me off of this brunt
once, Isle hunt the smock no more—Cover me close
good Parnell.
So, keep you close, and when he prattles to you,
sneer in his face, and call him Dad; do you hear?
Why you proud, peevish, petty, paltry Parnell,
why did you make me stay so long?
I made what hast I could, but the child cried so.
The child! what child? have you got bastards
here?
Bastards? they are your own then: Simon's come
home, the boy I had a twelvemonth since by you, he
was born when you were at sea.
Is he brought home? As I'm an honest man
I'm glad on it. Let me see him Parnell.
Look here he is, the goodliest boy, and even as
like thee Iohn, as if thou had begot him all thy self.
Whoop, here is a boy of a twelvemonth old: if
he grow but thus much this next year, he'll be able to
fight with a Giant presentl. But Parnely, he has got a
great beard too, how comes that?
Why he was born with it; many children are
so, and it is a sign he will be a man betimes, a wise discreet
one too.
Dad dad, dad.
Nay, it is a wise child, I perceive that; for he
calls me dad at first sight. Good Parnel fetch me some
milk for him, Isle see him eat.
He had milk but just now; prithee Iohn be pa∣tient.
You are a fool, he has been starved at Nurse, and
we must make him fat. Fetch some, I say.
I will not truly Iohn, you'll spoil the child.
I saw some stand in the next room, Isle fetch it
my self so I will.
What will you do? You must endure with pa∣tience;
I mingled batter but just now for pancakes and
that he'll bring, as certain as I live.
I shall be crammed to death; mercy upon me.
He comes, lie close again.
Dad, dad, dad.
I mine own boy, here's milk for thee, Simon.
Look Parnel look, how greedily he eats it.
Now fie upon you Iohn, you'll choke the child.
I mean to make him grow as high as Pals, and
show him for a wonder in Bartholomew fair. Fetch me
some more milk, this is all gone.
What, do you think Isle murder the poor infant?
By this hand Isle go to the Milk-woman and
fetch him a whole gallon.
Up quickly and be gone; for when he comes
he'll choke you without fail.
A pox upon him, never was child fed thus. But
what will you do now?
Do not you fear; Isle fetch my own child; it is at
a neighbours house, &amp; say the Fairies have exchanged it.
Send thee good luck; farewell sweet Parnel.
So, if this child will serve him for a Simon, all
will be well again.
He comes,—Oh Iohn.
Come, give me Simon on my lap, Isle feed him
till his guts crack again.
Alas, I went but in the next room, and in the
mean time the Fairies have exchanged him; look what
a little thing they have left in's place.
Isle have none on it; go fetch me Simon, and tel
the Fairies Isle indite them at the Sessions for this. Oh
Simon, Simon, what's become of thee?
Nay, prithee take not on so.
The goodliest boy of his age, that ever man
saw. Pshaw, this has ner he beard, Isle have none on it.
Why how no Jack, what in a passion? ha! it was
that blackt thy face to day for mirth sake, and thou
did think it was Cutbeard.
I care not for my face, Simon is gone, that had
a beard as big as Cutbeards here, the Fairies have ex∣changed
him; and look what a chitty-face they have
left in's room, a thing of nothing for him.
Come, you must use this they have left with
curtsy; for they will whip Simon every day in the week
else. I know the nature of them.
Will they so? Nay then I must make much on it.
And now you must be friends with Cutbeard
too.
With all my heart, for I am angry with none
but the Fairies now.
We have brought music, and some neighbours
with us, and mean to have a dance. Come Iohn.
I can dance nothing but a melancholy dance.
For I am in a grievous dump for Simon still
I warrant thee. Strike up there.
Why that's well done; no time is counted lost,
Where civil mirth is gained with such small cost?

IF in this present thriving age,
A poor man may become the Stage;
Or if abused Charity
And honest minded poverty
May please, or if bad men ingrate,
And strumpets foul adulterate,
So whipped and punished for their crimes,
At once may like and teach the times:
We have our •ymes, so to your sight:
The poor man offers up his mite.
STay fair Vrania, thou whose only beauty
Would make a desert rich, and force Kings leave
Their purple thrones, to come and gaze at thee.
Lisander craves thee stay, he that does dote on thee,
More then the female on her new fallen kid.
You should be still a flatterer by your tongue.
By all my hopes I swear, return my love
But that fair grace it merits, and on my faith
A trial, beyond which the covetous thought
Of man ne'er went, Isle undergo;
And in the Achievement lose my self ere thee.
You overvalue me, were I possessed
Of so high passions, what you term love;
Alexis equal suit should sooner move
Then you, whose birth is all unknown to me.
Ungentle maid, let not thy cruelty
Force me despair, he that so oft has song
And won the prize for dance and roundelays;
He that has vowed his chaste thoughts to thy shrine,
Given thee the tender firstlings of his flocks;
Who amongst the fairest Lasses of the plains,
Chose thee his prize, when at the public games,
He crowned thee with the wreath, which for his merit
In songs and active sports he did inherit,
From the deserving swains; Do not forget
My seven years service, which to attain thee yet,
Would seem but as one Summers day.
You are too forward.
True love does charge, and that fault lay on me;
Oh did thy yielding heart feel but the fires!
Alas! I feel too much, in modesty forbear
Thy violent suit, which breeds suspect; true love being ever mute,
When lust finds means to speak.
Command thou cruel maid this heart to break,
Which only words give life to.
Nay then I fly thee, or else I shall not know—
How to deny me! Oh! speak that word once more.
Will you enforce my love?
Rather then live, stay but and hear my vow.
Whom ha we here?
Lysander and my daughter got so near.
Where two such chaste breasts meet, I need not fear.
Some earnest suit belike, were it her love,
He merits it; she cannot but approve
His worth and person fitter for a State,
Then the employment of so low a fate.
Oh do not wrong me so!
I do appeal to you, who well do know
The loyal service: These seven winters past
Have stood impartial witness, if I have gained
Least happiness in ought, but might express
My constant labour; Have I in excess
My Masters store consumed, or robed his flocks
To serve a private riot? have I not born the shock
Of sharpest storms, to drive my weary herd
To place of shelter? did the Sun behold
The d•wie plains before me? or the days heat,
Force me unto the shade? did the robed Females bleat
For loss of tender young, whilst sleep possessed
My slothful eye, by ravenous wolves oppressed
Or time-observing fox? If to make known
A grateful mind, I have so well begun;
Oh! think how happy by enjoying thee,
The period of my lingering pains would be.
Thou speak most true.
These tears that speak my love do witness it.
You well have told how much we do forget
Your labours Sir. For my part I confess
You merit much, nor am I pitiless.
Speak to my Father, he esteems you high,
I am only his, if he shall not deny
That equal •uit, I know not what should want.
(Beshrow my tongue, how ready tic to grant)
You might in time prevail; Sir only so.
No word so hard in a maids mouth as No.
Oh! let me stay thee yet to crown this hour
With stiles of Happiness, and by it place
In memory this curse, if ever I embrace
Another love, if ever I forget
The pity shown me in distress; then let
My fate run backward, let no good attend
My present being other then in the end
To make my misery greater, may I obtain
Contempt from thence, where most I do affect.
Thou art to blame to make such deep protests,
Isle be thy gage unto my daughter, say Vrania
Wo't take my word, believe it girl he loves thee;
If he prove false, lay all the blame on me.
You oppress me Sir with this high courtesy.
Is it not sufficient that you gave relief
Unto my fainting life, when torn with grief?
My sad fate forced me hither, which dispossessed
True virtue of his crown, and low depressed
The Kingly Ferdinand, making sad way
To the usurping Tyrant, who now sits
High in the Sicilian blood: Is it not enough
Your pity gave me being, but to add more
Unto my feeble merit? my heart you had before:
And beyond that I have not, which with the acknowledgment
Of love and duty shall be the annual rent,
Isle make just payment of.
I credit thee so well, that what is mine,
My flocks, lodge, and Vrania, all is thine.
This day I will possess thee of them, and retire
My weary thoughts from covetous desire
Of this uncertain good, and only spend
My hours in thanks and payers, that ere my end,
So great a good befell me; I tell thee son,
I only be thy beadsman, and return
On thee and thine as payment for my board, unnumbred blessings.
Alas Sir! you afford
Deeds beyond words, which makes me find my self
A banquerout ere set up; such interest your love exacts.
I am sufficient blessed enjoying such a son; and so in happy
time Cosmo and Licippus; they shall be witnesses unto the contract,
and my performance.
Yonder he is boy, and thou can put on a good fate, she's
thine own boy; let me alone to work her father.
I had rather you would work the Daughter; I shall turn
tail as soon as ever I come at her.
Such a bashful fool was I in my infancy; the boy will
spoil all, can not tell what to say to her?
I think I had best begin soundly with her, tell her I am in
good health, I thank her, and so kiss her.
Whoreson ass! thou must kiss her first.
What before I am in good health? that will show scurvily;
pray let me alone, these old men, though they be never so weak,
will be doing in the marriage business still.
Take courage boy, my tongue shall plead thy smart,
Love were no god, should he not crown desert,
And just affection. The happiness of the day,
Befall to Gisbert and his lovely daughter.
The like to good Licippus, your company is rare Sir;
You're welcome both.
I have a suit to you concerns me near.
Your are happy then, for you are like to speed.
Your daughter saying so, I were indeed.
Behold the miserablest youth that ever Love
Made captive yet, whose sight alone would move
The hungry Lioness to leave her pray,
And turn compassionate• if pity ere bore sway
Within a female breast, now let it speak
And cure the wound, made by those beauteous eyes
Which pierced his tender heart: in you it l•es
To make me fatherless or happy.
I would it did, thy griefs were at an end then.
This strikes me dead.
Know Gisbert that the same desire moves him,
Has brought me hither, your land adjoins to mine:
For which much suit has past, make but my son
Your daughters husband, both our stares are one,
And my death gives him all.
He's half rotten already Sir, besides the chincough, the
Usurers disease the gout, and the heart-burning, the Physicians
have given him over long since, because his feeling's gone.
I have no Lands to give, my flocks are all;
Which were they more, are his: thin• of his love.
My wealth will last, when his vain passion's spent.
It is only riches gives the true content.
Contend no further: to cut off tedious hopes,
Know you this day I have assured my daughter
Unto Lisander.
Your servant?
Unequal Heaven!
Unequal Hell, I say, this answer has brought me low
enough Ime sure.
Content thy self Alexis, this is the wise man• cure,
That any thing which Fate wills he can endure.
Nay I must bar't, and though Fate cross my will
To enjoy thy person, yet I love thee still.
Her husband will not thank you for that, all that I can
promise is this, though I cannot dance where I would, Isle shake my
heals at your wedding.
You shall be liberally welcome, next morrow is the day,
in the mean time Isle pass ore my lands.
Which should be mine, had I my wishes, farewell, come boy.
Nay we will entreat you stay a while, come let's in,
From this day to expect my happiness Isle begin.
And I my sorrows.
A clap of thunder stay the clamorous throats of this rude
multitude, these virginal jacks, that skip and make a noise as each
hand moves them.
Oh fly and save your life my Lord, the day is lost!
Our treacherous troop• making with Ferdinand, turn head
against your force, to who• the Lords joining themselves, once
more proclaim him King, and give free oath for their fidelity.
Be ruled and fly, the Forests near will stop their pursuit.
Some dismal planet strike you ever mute.
You will not second me?
It were bootless.
I won't curse you; but may you die like peasants, slaves, and
cowards: and since there is no remedy▪ but I must survive, Fortune in
spite of thee, Since not, amongst men, a King ore beasts Isle be.
Take hence that Crown, it was not Sovereignty,
But to release you from the Tyranny
Of my usurping nephew, made me leave
My long retired life, and throw my fate
Into the doubtful scale of war, which to make good;
Know that by solemn oath I have tied my self,
Never to gird these Temples with a Crown.
Forbid it heaven!
Let this express your loves, you will not move me
Beyond my vow; yet that we may not leave you joyless,
We have a son, what want is in his youth,
Your best experient wisdoms will supply.
Make him your King: besides his right in us,
I have procured the heir of Sicilie our adjoining friend,
To be his wife. But why with such sad brows
And silent gestures do you take our wishes?
Alas my Lord! your Son—
What makes this sad Apostrophe?
My heart misgives me, if my son be dead,
Our hopes and joys with him are buried.
Speak, doth he live?
He lives, But—
But what?
Alas! he's not himself.
Whether his grief, deprived of all his friends,
Driven to obscurity, and forced to live
Beneath condition of a subject, borne a Prince;
Or some just fate, for our ingrate offence,
To rob us of so rich a hope as he did promise,
In his fair lineaments, is all unknown,
Whilst he that should be ours is not his own;
Overcome with strange distraction.
Distraction is the soul of woe,
Poor boy! could not thy father undergo,
The weight of misery without thy help?
Oh let me see him yet, and if his heart
Give the least life unto his faculties
Of sense and knowledge, with Arguments and prayers
I will recall his soul, that overpressed
With melancholy blood, is bared her active use;
Like fire suppressed for want of heat and flame,
Turns to a choking vapour; it may be, our presence
May give his flame fere vent, and make more light▪
That gross and earthy load.
I wish it might.
Fortune did never envy nature more,
Then in so rich a Cabinet to look so poor,
And undervalued spirit. See where he comes.
Your violent passion much may wrong him Sir.
Unhappy Ferdinand! beyond this cross,
Thou well might dare thy fate.
Not a step lower, I am in hell already.
If you move him any further he'll turn Devil, claw you
horribly, he'll give you his recognisance, the paw, nails and all.
More weight on this side, I shall overturn else;
Dost thou not see how heavy he hangs here?
Thou art a crooked piece, here's more weight.
One hundredth pound more and I go right.
Half the money would make many a Lord in Thessaly go
wrong, are you well now?
I am reasonable well.
And you are reasonable well, that were well indeed.
I have a mad hand with you I am sure.
I want a language to express my grief.
Poor Sigismond I could dissolve in tears,
To make a passage to thy pent up soul.
If thou hast any sense look mildly on me.
Why dost thou all in fear and terror gaze
Upon thy father thus?
Help, help, help.
Here, here, what's the matter?
Has he not eat my bowels out already?
Who do you mean Sir?
Yonder Hyena.
Yonder he•?
Dost thou not see his tears?
See how cunningly he would •eise me in his paw.
See how he follows me, shoot, shoot I say.
My powder's damp, it will not off.
Some God or good man help.
He comes, he comes, he comes, fly, fly, fly.
Can none prescribe me comfort?
May be some music would allay his passions.
Please him with music, you may as well catch a hare
with a Taber, the very tuning of the fiddles would make him
stark mad.
Art thou acquainted with his humours then?
Who I Sir? I have almost lost mine own wits in his
service. Humours call you them? Isle tell you Sir, sometimes he will
be dumb two hours together, and then must I be speechless as
long; then do we two sit making of faces one at another, like a
brace of Baboons, or a picture-drawer at his counterfeit; anon
he will start up, and make way with his hands, for fear you
should run a tilt against his nose, which as he is persuaded, hangs
two fathom in his light at least: If any body looks on him he
takes it in snuff, and rails at him like a Copper-smith; then
must I turn Physician, and make him believe I pare away two stones
at least in collops.
Did ever hear him speak of his parentage;
Talk of his Father?
Oh Sir! It's a Tragedy if he name his Father once, it is no
boot for me to stay by it.
I prethe why?
He says they took his crown from him, and banished him,
and then he false upon me in his fathers right, and so malls me
that I am not able to lift up mine hand to mine own crown. I have
lost much blood in your quarrel Sir.
Poor boy! it was our loss deprived thy sense
Of her best residence; and me eternally
Of joy and comfort. Here friend we will reward thee better,
If thou wilt follow him still.
Should he run out of his wits never so far, here be they
would drive me after him, tic for these the whole world runs mad
nowadays.
I prethe leave him not, till we by art,
And good men's prayers find out some means to cure him.
Yet that we may not seem all buried
In our own particular grief, and to 〈◊〉
Commons good ungrateful, know we confirm•
Your ancient privilege of Senators;
Who may determine the affairs of State.
Next be it proclaimed that whosoever stand
Banished in our cause, shall be restored to honour,
And endued with our best love.
What death shall we inflict upon these Traitors tan in
the field upon the Tyrants part?
Release them freely.
This is the difference twixt bad Kings and good,
The one through peace doth prosper, the other with blood.
Proclaim our general pardon; Kings oft do grant
That happiness to others, which themselves do want.
Let each brow put on joy, we'll only mourn,
Our good is you•s, our grief shall be our own.
Be this the saddest day you ere may know.
If ever Hymen tied a happy knot,
Or that a parents blessing ere procured
A good from Heaven, this day a fathers prayer•
Be powerful in your joys.
Our love and duty shall deserve your wishes.
We cannot doubt it; each man unto his •eat.
The neighbouring Shepherds to express their love
Born to my daughter, and to grace the day
With harmless sports, are making to our lodge,
These notes proclaim them—
What news Venalcas?
A poi•• from Court scouring along the plains,
Inquired thy lodge, and hearing that my service
Belonged to you, charged me on my allegiance
Deliver this Proclamation, that with instant, speed
It might be published.
My blood turns cold, I pray heaven all be well!
Did he exchange no other words with thee?
His haste denied much talk, only in brief
He told me, that King Ferdinand by the •id
Of the Sicilian Prince was reinthron'd,
The Tyrant fled, and those that er'st bewailed
Their exile fortunes are again restored.
This Proclamation speaks it, which doth by name give
note to Lord Vincentio, late Senator of State, Francisco Ipinolo 〈◊〉.
Not my name mentioned?
Lord Lutius.
The same; I thought he had forgotten me.
With all other Lords, Knights or Gentlemen, that have will∣lingly
for our love, or forcibly been constrained to suffer ba∣nishment,
be forth with restored with double interest, for all their
losses as well in goods as rents, to be received at our Exchequer up∣on
demand thereof made. Most worthy Prince!
His gratitude best speaks him.
And this Proclamation doth confirm it, which craves my
haste neighbours, you must along with me, all fears are past.
This doubles our present joys, but time doth call,
A Tyrants death makes a true festive•ll.
This news transport me, Ferdinand restored:
Which calls me home, and adds unto my name
The honour of my Ancestors. Heaven cannot give
A good equal to this; but I forget my self,
This is my wedding day: my wife the daughter
To a poor Shepherd—Disgrace unto mine Honour,
And perpetual shame to my posterity!
This news hath much distempered him, tell me love,
What means this sudden pale that doth possess thine eyes with
fear? this happy day invites all mirth and triumph, you have not
now a thought that can give colour unto disconte•t.
Forbear, you are troublesome, your words trouble me.
How, trouble you? you speak not like a lover.
I would I did not, prithee Vrania leave me.
Some old renewed grief possesses him—
What ere it be, let me bear equal part,
It is my due and duty. I have a heart
Beyond my sex to endure calamity.
You will offend.
Rather my soul then thee.
Away then, get you in.
To death should thou command.
Grief pressed heart, this day thy tears back keep,
Thou'lt find hereafter time enough to weep.
She's virtuous and fair, why should I leave her then?
Her birth is low, that's Fortunes fault, not hers.
Besides, she is my wife, I have married her,
And shall I leave her now? there is a thing
Called Conscience would pursue me. Dull and abject thought!
You fit Lisander a poor shepherds s••l,
Not Luci• son unto a Senator.
I cannot stoop so low, no Isle abjure her sight,
Sell both my lodge, and 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 me
As is my breeding. Suppose old Gisbert curse,
His daughter rail, talk of ingratitude,
They beat the air, great men are above their crimes,
Who has a thriving soul must change with times.
But for a chapman let me see, 〈◊〉,
His hate to Gisbert will embrace the bargain.
Father I must leave you and return to the Bride-house a∣gain.
Is there more to be done yet?
It would be ill for the Bride else, I must lend a hand
to untrusse her husband, he is a great Lubber, he must to
hose go down there, and see where he walks to keep himself in
breath for the attempt.
Cosmo the man my thoughts direct me to; I word with you.
Now will he ask him some 〈◊〉 question, or an other,
As how to get such a •hopping boy as I am, bless the example,
or being now to set up, what course is best to maintain a
standing table? for his wife comes of a free stock, and will
keep open house.
You make but trial of me Sir?
By all my hopes they are thine, give me the Crowns
and here is the Deed.
Beyond my expectation. 300 Crowns; there they be Sir.
The Flock and Lodge are thine, take instantly possession.
Do you not crave this nights forbearance?
Not an hour Sir; necessity will make them ply their
work, not follow me.
I am ravished with the thought on it, my imaginations lost me.
Gisberts Lands are mine, there's nought so sweet,
As when revenge and thrifty profit meet.
The old knave commits sin with himself; the Flock and
Lodge gone already. I think he means to keep open house in earnest.
This peasants service may much pleasure me.
Can thou be secret Surdo?
As a court Midwife, no Ba•d like me.
Then know, I am a Lord
And that may be indeed, for he's sold all.
Take but thy fortunes with me, and Isle raise thee.
Say, wot along with me?
Will you swear by your honour you are a Lord?
My Father was no less, a Senator.
And by the Edict of the restored King
That honour's mine, thou shalt be next about me.
Your Tailor will prevent me of that, I had rather come
next behind you, for great men cast their sins behind them, and
some bribes must needs fall to my share. Are there any wen∣ches
where you go?
Selected beauties, such as Art and Nature contend to
make perfect.
Art and Nature they commonly go together indeed; well I
well leave my fortunes at home, and run after my destiny a∣broad.
If you prove a Lord, like a fool I may the better follow
you. If you gull me like a knave, you shall follow your self,
I have been brought up long enough at home, to find the way
back again, that's the best on it.
Never doubt it man, Arcadia farewell:
Who parts from a loathed bed is freed from hell.
Turned from my home, deprived of all my goods,
My flocks, my hopes! thou art not honest Cosmo—
Give them but respite to provide themselves.
Not a minute.
Let me but speak with him I am content, he shall sell all.
You may go seek him, you have little else to spend your
time about, we were too mean to match with your fair daughter—
Your wealthy heir you have advanced her now—
You are too bitter Cosmo, too pitiless,
Tic baseness self to trample on distress.
You may relieve them Sir, they used you well,
Were very pitiful to you, twill argue love;
And that goes naked too; give me their hates,
So I go warm and clad.
Hard hearted creature!
Beggar slave, p•ck hence from my door,
Isle set my dogs upon thee else, my •ounds, I keep them for
No other use, if long you stay
Isle give you music to your nuptial day.
Unmanly wretch!
Inhumane monster!
My heart I think would break,
Did not mine eyes in stead of words thus speak.
Ingrate Lisander! Happy were thou that curedst
The wounded Lyon, thou Roman Captive;
He did acknowledge thee in thy distress,
And saved thy life, yet was he reasonless,
Had not the faculties of soul to apply
The good of pity to him—My poor Vrania,
Unhappy child! tic her grief wounds me more,
Then any sorrow my spent age can know.
Alas! I am young Sir, able to undergo•
The worst of misery, tic not my loss,
But your tears make me weep, pray try me Sir;
Do not you mourn, and see with what heart Isle bear
Your woes and mine, Isle not so much as weep:
Unless by chance I hear Lisander named,
And then for your sake not mine own Isle blame
His much unkindness. Isle say you used him better,
That shall be all my plaint, Sir credit me—
Poor girl! How well thou mock calamity?
Never did grief look with a lovelier face.
I could even court it now, and hold the 〈◊〉,
Man is not happy but in misery.
Thou all of virtue, though my fate deny
The blessed enjoying thee, make me thus proud
To give thy wants relief, our homely Cottage,
My Flocks and Lambs are thine.
Both his and mine,
Shall pay the duty; by my best hopes I swear,
Or may my younglings pine, my 〈…〉 bear.
We give you credit.
••cept them fair on••
I am more wounded with this cur•esi•,
Then all Lisander• malice.
Thou shall accept their boons Vrania, as for me,
I have an other part, to play a Tragedy;
Where Justice shall rip up the heart of Cosmo,
And lay his treachery open. Isle to the Court,
If until my return you will support
My haplesse daughters state.
Make it not questionable.
Nay do not weep, here's my hand, Isle not stay long from thee.
You must not seek me here then: No Lisander
Where ere thou art, I will or find thee out,
Or lose my self, thy sight at least Isle have:
Since not thy wife, may I but live thy •lave.
We'll bring you on your way Sir.
Your loves oppress me: Come my daughter, yet
We may ere death in joy each other meet.
Too vain a hope.
Unhappy Father! Isle do thee thus much right,
Thou shalt not double sorrow by my sight.
Where am I wretched Adelezia?
What soil contains thee? You airy powers,
What further ill remains behind me?
That amongst so many dear and worthy lives,
As has paid tribute to this fatal night,
Mine only stands exempt? had it not been better,
The Seas vast womb had given me burial,
Then the unhallowed bulks of savage Beasts?
And now long-wisht for day, what dost thou bring,
But eyes to view my sorrow? Should I hap
To meet some passengers, it were to exchange
My honour with my fear, and so renew my sorrow,
Woe-curing sleep, who is only pitiful,
Would shut these casements up, which do admit
But sight of grief, then gentle Morpheus
I will obey thy arrest, thy leaden mace
Doth lie upon me, down poor ill starred maid,
Thy birth did promise better: but I see
Want best discovers Idol Majesty.
Ho! illo, illo, illo.
The game's not up yet Sir. I think some golder had a hand
in the getting of him, he understands no language but the born.
Isle hunt no more then.
You'll hunt a 〈◊〉 then, and that will tame you, when all
is done. If a poor man had had this disease it had been whipped out
him; but great men may be so• or madmen, and they must be
humoured forsooth. Will you go home again? Now he's as
speechless, as an unfeed Attorney, not a word for the world. But
how now? what creature's this? it should be a woman, for she lies
as her mother taught her, she has the common fault of her sex,
she sleeps so soundly that a man may do what he will with her.
So ho! how the fool gapes, he'll ride her anon, What not—
more yet? What an excellent thing a woman were and she had no
tongue? Hello, illo. They say women must be roughly handled,
she turns up the white of the eye, she should be either a Punk or
a Puritan by that.
Alas! I am betrayed: as you are men,
I do conjure you.
La• poor soul! I thought she wanted mans help.
As you are virtuous, be compassionate
Of a distressed maid, Fair Sir to you,
My suit's to you, your eye speaks pity.
A fire burns within me.
What a treacherous wol•'s this? I cannot blame him, tic a
pretty wench; if I could talk wisely, I might perchance exchange
a precious stone with her.
Not one poor word of comfort? tell me gentle friend,
where am I!
You're in a wood yet, but for one of your precious jewels,
and some light courtesy besides Isle help you out.
If wealth will buy• my freedom, you cannot ask
Beyond my payment; below yo• hanging rock
The bodies lie of many Shipwrecked Gentlemen;
Yield them but burial, they'll pay thee liberal hire.
And if they be drowned, I may take my payment otherwise.
I would be loath to take a gallants word now adays.
Are you sure they are dead?
I am too sad a witness to it.
Below yonder, I shall break my neck with haste to be their
Executor. It was told me, hanging or drowning would be my desti∣no;
Isle put my self in fashion and be with you presently.
She is some Goddess sure!
What moves this stay? his looks congeal my blood.
Why doest thou kneel? why wring thy hands and weep?
Thou doest not know my griefs that they should move compassion in thee?
Rare, more yet! speak more.
Here's sure distraction, Oh! if thou be a man,
Art capable of passion, grief, and fear;
Leave thy amazed looks, and tell the cause
Moves this strange action.
Art thou a woman?
Yes, a miserable woman.
Let me embrace thee then,
Thou happy anchor of my better being.
Defend me heaven!
Why dost thou flee me, to whom thy charmed breath
Hath given a second soul, thy language hath exhaled
All clouds whose foggy mists did captivate
My freer sense. I am thy creature, Fair,
Deprived of thee, I lose that vital air
In which I only breathe, I must, I will enjoy thee.
I know thou made me not, now to destroy me.
Keep thy unchaste hands off, thou barbarous creature.
Were they thy unchaste thoughts, that moved thy lust
To speechless ecstasy? You powers above more just,
Preserve my Virgin flame, from the pollution
Of this insensuall creature. Keep off I say.
I would, should all the Devils in hell say nay.
Let me but draw in thy delicious breath:
But touch those lips of thine.
—Rather to death
Would I give up my life. If there be a power
That guards distressed chastity, Oh! hear me.
Did thou but know my thoughts, thou wudst not fear me.
Upon my knees I do conjure thee stay.
To my escape some better power make way,
See he pursues me, some god or good man aid me.
If not my words, let sighs and tears persuade thee.
Thy search is vain Alexis, unkind Vrania,
Thy p•essence was too great a good for me,
Long to enjoy, nor will I ere return;
But like a banished man ever inhabit
These solitary woods, deprived of thee,
Isle fly all others, as thy love doth me.
Help, help, help.
What echo beats mine ears? is there no place
But sorrow finds a passage to it?
It is a women's voice, speak once again,
And gain thy freedom, whosoere thou art.
Here, here, save a poor maids honour.
Thou wrongst my just thought much;
I seek for love.
Rather thy boastful lust, for which
Receive this punishment, foul monster lie thou there.
Oh save his life! I do conjure you Sir.
Thou art too pitiful, rise beauteous maid,
Remove all thoughts of fear, let me persuade;
I have been virtuous, thou unfortunate.
This thy humanity orewhelmes my joy,
And quite confounds the power of my mind.
The bliss of thine own thoughts is my reward:
I am happy yet to guard so fair a dame.
Soho! illo, illo, illo.
But hark! the following noise of some persuers;
It may be they are known by thee.
Tic not in use for grief to have companions,
My woe knows no partakers.
Isle be thy partner then:
Wilt thou give credit to my loyal breast?
As unto heaven; true virtue knows no lust.
Follow me then, though mean may be thy fare,
Content and safety, may give thee ample share.
It was a thunderbolt, you have the odds of me, you are above
me, sure I had mauld you else: but where is Europe? see where she
swims away upon a bulls back; my kingdom for a boat, for a muscle
boat; lay more sails on; the envious wind! blow, whirl into a
mountain, Isle after her; sowze, I come I come.
Your breeding I perceive hath been in the Country then?
It has been plain and honest.
It makes no matter, now thou art a Gentlewoman, my
daughter's a Gentlewoman, and though I say it, as good a servants
Mistress as any in all Thessaelie, you shall do no worse then she doth
her self, nay she shail spare it out of her won belly, rather then thou
shall want it. Can you handle your needle?
True stitch, or so.
You will be past that shortly, your Mistress will set you
a new example, and though I say it, she has laid her hand to as
many good pieces, as most Ladies in the Kingdom; at this instant
she is about a piece of work for the Lord that is with her, she'll make
him a pair of hangers ere she has done.
Beshrew her fingers: what might you call his name?
His name is Lucius, this day he is to be made a Senator;
has been seven years in the wars amongst the Turks, and killed
Jove knows how many, and now he swears bloodily he loves
none but my daughter.
A bloody oath indeed, my heart doth make it good,
His cruelty will cost mine and an old man &amp; blood.
We do you sigh so? are you in love?
I have small cause forsooth.
It's an unprofitable disease indeed, it gives that to one
would serve many, and those that are men of fashion too. You
shall have gallant upon gallant here, none of your thirteen
pence halspenny jacks; if you have grace you may rise, for the
worst here comes a horse back.
Has my Mistress more Suitors then this Lucius here?
We had weak doings else. Good shopkeepers have wares
of all sorts, some for show, and some for fashion; and yet to speak
truth, he doth well for both, his countenance keeps the painted
staff in awe, and saves us many a fair bribe; besides my daugh∣la
makes him come off at her pleasure, and yet it is not one
wind can keep her Mill a going: one of these days she'll
turn him off to thee; if thou please her well, thou may have
him in reversion.
I should have, Had I my right, but tic too great a happi∣ness
for me so much unworthy; Lisander a poor shepherd
was my husband, and would he had been so still; forgive me
Lucius, tic my love that wrongs thee, and here he comes;
And had I but mine own,
Those happy Arms might about my waste be thrown.
I know no reason for it, and yet my heart
Seems to proclaim some sadness, I would
This day were ore.
I could be more merry now; and yet I have had a heavy
night on it too.
Would I had eased you of your burden.
How melancholy you are Sir? I believe you have an other
Love, hie ho! the very thought of it.
I prithee do not wrong my faith so much; by my hopes, till
I beheld thy face, I knew not what love was, by this I did not.
Thou art perjured then, and yet thy vow's nothing,
Tic a false book thou take thine oath on.
Tic early morning Sir, walk one turn more in the back
side, stirring will get you a stomach. Do you begin to weep al∣ready?
we shall have a day on it then; no sooner is your back
turned, but here is figh upon sigh, her heart goes in her
pulses, and beats pit a pat, pit a pat, till the tears trickle
down again, never was young Gentlewoman so overborne
with affection, heaven give her good on it, if you should leave
her in the suds now—
Time shall be false to truth first: come I shall be angry with
you, come prithee smile upon me Love.
I could shed tears, might they be so tain off.
Soho! Mris. Gullman I have been knocking below till my
heart•ache; Where is my Lord?
Your business Sir.
My business, nay that's done Sir, the Senate has staid for
you any time this half hour.
Thou wrong'st me friend to rob me of my Love.
Sweet Lucius thou shalt not part from me.
My honour doth enforce me to it, by this diamond I will
not stay a minute longer then necessity constrains me.
This Gentleman protests most nakedly, upon such an
oath Isle believe any man.
By this French crown, Isle be with that new gentlewoman,
Will you believe me now?
Isle talk with you upon the premises.
This is the arrantest ba•d in Christendom, my Master
like a Gull lies tiring upon a Ringtail, whilst I am at variety
of fresh tame soul: Tic the bravest life; since I turned Courier
I do nothing but drink, whore and sleep. Will you be going Sir?
You shall hear her sing first, in troth you shall.
Have you a good voice Castadora?
A sad voice Sir.
Isle have you sing a merry song, I am a maid and I cannot mend it.
I have no variety, I can sing but one song.
Let's have that, What's the subject?
Tic of a haplesse shepherdess forsaken by her false Lover.
Tic too sad, I do not like it.
I would you did not, I might sing merrily then.
This wench has been with a Conjurer I hold my life.
She knows all my Lords knavery.
This day is ominous I fear, farewell, till night we part;
No hell but in an absent Lovers heart.
That proves thy cruelty,
That suffer mine so long in hell to be.
Cannot you persuade him?
He's troubled with the great mans ill, cannot endure to
hear of his faults, you'll remember me, I have left a familiar token
with you—The French thing you wot on.
Be confident; is he gone?
Hang him Gull! I am as weary of him as of a fever: but see
here come Jaspero my dearest Lover.
Monster of women!
I cannot stay with you beauty, I only come to give you the
maidenhead of my new clothes, you are for the show.
The new upstart Lord would have provided me a standing,
but I took an order with him before he went.
We can have standings there without his providing, I have
been put in ere now in the lobby, when my betters have stood bare
before me, and have had many a sweet bit out of the pasterie, and
out of the pantry too; they are as kind men—
I believe Madam, you are welcome.
Fair, what Gentlewoman's this?
A poor Virgin wants help, heaven send it her.
When shal's come to the breaking up of this Giblet pie?
When will thy love be out of the way?
Hang him Hornpipe, a small mist puts out his eyes.
When you will.
Though he should see, what cannot we persuade?
Man was asleep, when women's brain was made.
Immodest strain• of womanhood! Did ever
Poor Creature• fall upon so hard fortune?
What misery can belong to her, hath seen
Her aged Father turned to beggary,
Laden with contempt, his silver hairs pressed down
With the same weight? Life I am weary of thee,
Isle flatter thee no longer, my Lucius hand
Shall force thee from me; if he deny this good
By violent hand, to shed my hated blood,
A word of his shall do it; Isle only hear him speak
Once more, denied, I know my heart will break.
This is the Court sure, whose eminence proclaims
Fair Justice seat is here, who sits on high,
That no man suspect partiality.
Here in rich purple clad, her followers go
Each man for his desert, and not for show.
The oppressed poor mans advocate, whose unfeed tongues
Turn willing Orators, retort the wrongs
Upon the oppressors head. Cosmo shall find
The bribing sorcerers picture Justice blind;
She has eyes to see his cruelty, he shall perceive
Poor men have friends though they be far off.
He leave a president behind for it, and see where some of them appear:
I must not yet give interruption to them, their brains are
Troubled about business of state, the Kingdoms good,
Whilst other sleep secure, these spend their blood,
Out watch the tedious night, only to gain
Titles of honour, hardly worth the pain.
I shall never sleep till I find out for which of his good parts
this Lucius was made a Senator.
Thou art in the high way to madness then; which of his
good parts! do•t, make a Gentleman Usher of him?
I have examined my self, and my glass tells me, I have
as simple a chin, speak as few languages, can wear perfumed boots,
and beggar my Taylor, keep a whore, be lousy; be as impudent,
jeer at that I understand not, make antic faces, and lie as damn∣bly,
all as forward—
Backward in the way of preferment. Isle tell thee, it may
be he broke his shin, and having a good Surgeon kept not his
chamber above three days, and so his valour raised him, or took a
box on the ear, swore he would put it up, and so his patience raised
him: some unknown virtue or other did it.
Nay that's certain, but we neglect the show.
Their serious talk is ended. Most honoured Sir,
I have a suit to you.
Let me have the preferring, I am your first man.
By this hand Isle share with thee, speak it old man.
Did not I tell you, here are true States-men,
How they contend in virtue? even ambitious
To do poor men good? This paper speaks my right.
Can read Jaspero? a monopoly, transportation or conceal∣meant.
Tic a particular grief Sir.
Of some particular Corporation.
That lies as heavy on the bearers shoulders.
Some suit from porters hall, belike not worth begging.
Beggary it self, the petition of Gisbert and his daughter dis∣possessed
of a cottage, two roods of land, and a sheep-walke by the
lewd practise of—Dost take us for Justices Clerks?
The friends of Justice Sir.
So are they, their Mistress could not share with them
else, take your humble complaining and pack hence, the Porter will
give you a make to be known by, and know men of our rank a
little better else.
My cause is just, and I poor, pray will you read my Pe∣tition.
We had rather thy cause were wrong, and thou rich.
Do we look as though we lived by relieving the poor?
You whoreson Gull, you shepherd!
How the slave smells of tar and hogs grease!
These are not virtuous sure, I am mistaken;
Justice has not her being here, and yet
I had directions hither, Isle make a farther trial.
Pray Jove the sight be not past yet, this suit will bear
me out, I am in fashion from the beaver downward, I would
be loath to have the repulse.
Most worthy Sir.
I know none of that name. If the Gent. Usher might but see
my roses, it would prick him forward to my admittance.
How's this? a word with you, do you know where
might find Justice?
Justice! what's that? a man or a woman?
The poor mans friend Sir, she that never yet did take
or give tribute.
What dost thou look for her so near the Potters lodge?
Honest friend be ruled by me, return the way thou came.
Here's no place for such fellows.
Oh hear my reply Sir!
Should I be but seen to con•er with a fellow of his rank,
it were enough to call my wit in question, and that were simon∣ple,
very simple in sooth.
Monstrous! all man is lost in it, what an ass have I been?
Who all this while have thought that which should make
Up perfect man had been within him: how ignorant
Were our fathers, that spent so many tedious hours
In Art, that by so many precious acts did strive to
Attain those types of honour and regard,
Which now a Taylor and ten yards of silk,
Will throw upon a man—I can but pity them, silly, weak
Men they clad in russet gray!
By deeds sought titles, these have a nearer way,
To what? to hell; Damnation follow them.
Happy Nuseus now I well perceive,
Thou by experience notes sage not in vain
Foretell till the change of times, when to the plain
From these tempestuous hills thou did retire.
I have forgot how oct thou would bemoan
Astrea's flight to heaven; that Justice gone,
Extortion took her •eat, attended on
By Pride and Ignorance. Oh I could curse!
Dissolve to tears, yet laugh too, for this sight
Affords both. Who is it would not smile
To see an Idiot proud? as garnished po•••, whose house
Is but a •ink, 〈◊〉 rottenlesse within:
This silly ass, what good within himself
Can make him proud? his silks are none of his,
He only bears them as a Camel treasure.
Should the poor worm take from him what is hers,
How naked were he? nay how pitiful; Oh! twould distract
A temperate virtue to behold his piebald jaws
Sit on the Eagles perch; these ai•ie bubbles,
Out sides, waering more wealth beneath their knees,
Then would relieve the want of twenty worthy•
Yet distressed souls. Here comes another of them,
Has, if mine eyes deceive me not—
Now Surdo, are all things fit?
They are all ready Sir, your men I mean.
Mary how fit, you may imagine, considering most of them
wear borrowed clothes, there was never Senator I think had
half so many Attendants.
Why prithee, thy reason?
There's never a man of yours but has a follower or two of
his own, for fear they should run away with their borrowed
goods, you shall have them at a beck, they are watched for •tealing.
Tic he, my son Lisander, heart thou art oppressed with joy,
I could even blame my unadvised thoughts, that ere were moved
with loss of my estate, which with his merit has thus advanced him;
I, he has too much virtue in him to want preferment long.
My honoured Lord, the Senate doth attend you.
Isle instantly attend them: hart! Gisbert this way!
Stay worthy Son, mine eyes are drowned in joy,
Lisander stay, old Gisbert speaks to thee.
To me! thou art mistaken, give the poor man an alms.
Have you any single money about you? give me •ix pence,
here's a great, we that carry the purse must profit by it.
Is not your name Lisander? this Surdo? did not you marry
Vrania my daughter?
How? he marry your daughter? marry faugh.
I wonder such are suffered to approach so near the Court;
Command the officers to void him.
Oh inhuman wretch! I will pursue the Villain.
Nay, then you'll be too troublesome.
Foot! have you no more wit then to think a Lord will
acknowledge you for his father? were you my father, it should be
upon good terms ere I would take acquaintance on you.
Leave me your faculties of reason, virtue thou art a beggar,
I will hate thy company.
There's none but fools and knaves that happy be.
Can thou deny thy name? did not thou come
From the Arcadian plains?
What an ass is this? we came from a bawdy house, stay
but a little, Isle show thee the way thither, we will be very jovial,
I command all the under whores; thou shalt go upon the ticket with
her.
Insufferable! man cannot bear it.
It will try your back, that's certain; marry then you shall
have your Eringo roots, Crabs guts, Doves pizles, sryed Clary,
and Lambs stones that shall—
Thou wilt provoke me slave.
Oh! beyond all measure; what is it makes threescore ven∣ture
upon a girl of sixteen? stay but a little till the Senate rise, and
thou shalt to it old lad; make it not strange, if it be a fin, tic of a good
standing, ever since Adam. Isle be for thee presently.
Dissolve thou seat of life, that dost not yield one good that's
Worthy life, so many deaths each hour pursue us.
Thou dastard earth, why doest thou on thy aged shoulders bear
More sorrows yet, when as one groan would end thy misery,
And ours? what ill can thou expect
Beyond this age of fin? would thou behold more bribery?
Do•t think thou can sustain more?
More sighs of wronged innocents, whose tears
Have eaten into thy bowels? Dost thou desire
To bring forth more ungrateful monsters yet;
Whose sighs have turned all charity to flint?
Hast thou no place of refuge left? ye•, the Senate,
They will relieve thee Gisbert, these are men
Bred of superfluous humour, the sound blood
Lies at the heart, thy wrongs once understood
By those impartial Judges, thy woes are cured;
They are the Kingdoms props, by whom secured
The harmless Lamb lies by the ravenous Wolf,
And smiles to se• him grin. Oh! pardon me
You honourable men that sway this monarchy,
As the first Mover doth the general globe,
In equal motion: I will recant mine error,
And to posterity speak your partless dooms,
For their base minds are swayed by bribes and blood.
The world shall know great men are just and good.
Bea• back, room for the Senate, bear back, you are too
forward. I do not speak to you Sir, make room for the Gentleman
in the embroidered doublet.
My hose are suitable to it, I assure you Sir.
I beseech you Sir, my entrance much concerns me.
What's that to me? Dost think I stand here for nothing?
You must pardon my ignorance, here's all I have—
Nay▪ then you will in Sir.
I swear he stands not there for nothing, the heaven of justice
must needs be seated there, here is such hard entrance.
What means this rude companion? stand back.
This Officer must have somewhat too, but I have never an
Aspire left, I shall never be able to purchase an other entrance,
if I do not speak.
This fellow dotes.
Not of thy company. Justice grave sirs, let me have justice.
Death! Gisbert here!
If ever you'll deserve the prayers of good men, or have
Your names preserved to happy memory.
When souls corrupted rot, give a free ear
To mine inhumane wrongs.
Fellow, stand back.
Officer forbear, speak freely aged man.
Some Planet strike him dead, this fellow's mad,
Talks of a daughter lost, has had some hinderance by her;
And being crossed, will rail at any man he meets.
Most shameless impudence!
He's far gone indeed, it were fit he had some Physic given
him, or carried to the house of the Insane.
His age doth make him past recovery. Poor man! who
brought him hither?
How's this? do they take me for a mad man?
I see no sign of such distemperance. Speak aged father,
Who has done thee wrong?
That Monster Lisander, that ungrateful wretch.
Ha, ha, ha, al•s good old man!
Lisander! thy passion blinds thee sure, •ere's none of that name.
Is not your name Lisander? did not you marry my daughter?
I told you as much before, a place more private, or less free
of air, would fit him better.
See how his eyes turn, how fearfully he g•zes on us; It
is a deep Lunacy.
As I am a States-man, I pity him.
It may be I am mad, have lost my senses, I must confess I
have not been mine own man this 20. days.
It seems no less.
Yet let me tell you Sir, were you Lisander, as you look very
like him, I could unfold a tale, that had you harts of flint—
His words me thinks speak no distraction:
Say aged Father, if thy griefs be curable,
Thou shalt find comfort.
Nay it makes no matter, I shall but trouble you. I find
my sorrows have overcome me, and or•turned my brain,
And id be very loath—
To trouble us: Poor man go home; thou but disturb'st thy
soul with the renewing of some ancient grief.
Look on me once again, and tell me if I be mad, have lost the
faculties of a reasonable man, as sight or hearing.
Lost all as I am truly virtuous.
You wrong your judgement.
Isle be tried by you Sir, you which do seem to have some
spark of man left, Isle trust your eyes, compassion speaks in them, Am
I my self a knowing creature able to di••inguish?
Thou art, discourage not thy self, how ever grief
Transports thee, thou art as free from Lunacy as my self.
Vexation!
Then he that fits in purple there's a villain.
Now by mine honour Isle pluck thy tongue out.
This violence proves some guilt•.
Nay let him come, has only le•t me life,
And that I am weary of, hear let him take it.
The groaning earth, the silent air shall speak
In thundering Accents my inhumane wrongs.
Leave circumstance, name the particulars.
I must give larger vent first, they have too long possessed
This narrow seat• Know honoured Sir his name,
I cannot name him, once did bear Lisanders name,
But that (as all his deeds) may well be counterfeit.
Some ten years since, laden with grief and sorrow,
Made to my lodge, though poor, yet happy• far
Then those whose terrets much more lofty are.
It was that day made fatal by the loss
Of virtuous Ferdinand.
Some Planet strike him dead.
His eyes and silent gesture spake his griefs,
No tedious way was made to his relief.
It was sufficient, that his wants were known,
True charity makes others wants their own.
I gave him safe respose, no gold prevailed,
Though much was offered• to have his life betrayed.
Unto my da•ghters love; poor maid! pardon my tears!
She did deserve—
You wrong your worthy ears,
To hear a mad man thus.
You wrong your self,
By all my Ancestors I do suspect—
Your wisdom, do you not?
Rather thy honesty.
You are too forward Vincentio.
What, in relieving misery? would you had no greater crimes.
Father proceed.
Nay I was almost at an end, beyond that ill
Fortune cannot extend a curse;
I mean the saddest nuptial betwixt
My child and him, with whom he had all,
And more he could not have. To express him in a word,
No sooner happy sate our King restored,
But he ungrateful not only le•t his too
Too miserable wife, but to express
The hateful soul of •as ingr•titude.
Sold both our house and flocks, not did he 〈◊〉
To expose those limbs to hateful beggeris,
That fed and clothed his naked 〈◊〉.
A tale as sad as true.
Peace howling Peasant▪
My merit's known to stand above deprave
Of such a Bedlam tongue. For you that please to sit,
And hear my honour scandalised, know•ime
May turn his glass, and give me cause to smile
And laugh as much at you.
Do you then fear him?
If Justice selfbe awed, no marvel then,
If strange oppression prey on weaker men.
You are too violent old man, a while give way.
Most willingly.
To such foul crimes we may allow no favour.
You do forget, he's high in birth and place.
His highness will add so much more honour
Unto the justice of the punishment.
Who strikes a Lion must be sure strike home,
Lest aiming at his life, he lose his own.
Such game I like not: old man come near;
May I advise thee, thou should leave thy suit.
First I will leave my life.
Nay, since you are so peremptory, know,
Thy accusation's idle, thou bring no proof.
No proof!
His worth is known, thy age and poverty
Do move thy tongue beyond a certainty.
Howsoever his desert, for so mean a fact,
Does plead sufficient pardon, were the act
More capital; men of your ranks
Must put up injuries and render thanks.
Good, very good!
He tells you true, it may be our own case,
Shall we upon complaint of men so •as,
Be questioned? no, C•dars are C•dars still;
The valley must not dare to climb the •ill.
Poor men must suffer, rich do what they will.
Better and better!
I admire their judgements that with mine just 〈◊〉;
And I with the•, as m•n blessed in one fate:
Should I dissent from them, I were not wise in State.
Best of all!
Poor man I pity thee! but cannot help:
Thou had best go home, thy sorrows make thee sad,
The good that I can do thee, is this, the world is bad.
Have you now said? I hope you'll give me leave,
At least to answer you. Ha! all gone, tic not possible.
Not possible? This is the Senate house,
The poor mans audience chamber, it cannot be.
Thou shalt have justice sure, see with what silence
They attend thy griefs: He that erst put thee back
How quietly he stands to give thee passage.
He lies that says this judgment seat's not free,
And open unto justice, yes Gisbert thou shalt have justice.
Most worthy Senators, this paper speaks my grief,
An old mans grief, an old mans crying griefs.
See with what greedy eyes they read it? tush!
Gisbert, thou shall have right man, Equity
It self sits here, This place admits no favour,
Bribe nor fear.
What's here? Gisbert craves justice against a Peer, a Sena∣tor,
the man's distracted sure.
Far gone indeed, see how his eyes do turn,
How fearfully he gazes on us, poor man!
Come hither, alas it were more fit,
Thou were in Bedlam there to learn more wit.
As I am just, I pity him, lead him hence,
A shepherd sue a Lord! Poor innocent,
What make with us? thou art out of the way sure, we
Si• here about affairs more profitable.
But not more j•st, now by my blood you wrong
The man, tic not distemperance but grief that moves
His tongue, his cause is just, and he shall find—
Your weakness; shall he not? do you forget he's low
And base, his adversary great, old man be ruled by me
And leave us, yet if thou needs wo't stay know this.
Thy accusations were they ne'er so true,
We must respect his eminence, not you.
Poor men are born to wrongs, low are their ranks,
The more they are trod upon, the more they must give thanks.
He tells you true, it may be our own case, should one
Great thief condemn an other? it were base.
Let them steal on: Cedars, are Cedars still,
Poor men must suffer, rich do what they will.
I admire thy wisdom, that with mine just aimed;
And I with them, as men blessed in one fate; should I
Dissent from them, I were not wise in State.
Poor man! I pity thee, but cannot help,
Thou had best go home, or stay here and run mad;
The good that I can do thee, is this, the world is bad.
You empty pated Judges, painted Idols
Whose souls are purpler then the robes you wear.
Whose ear's more deaf unto the poor mans cries,
Then hel's to pity. I will go home,
And every step my soul shall utter a curse;
Which meeting with the repercussive earth
Shall beat you marble vault and wake the Gods;
Who with a leaden hand hold justice back,
From falling on the impious heads of men.
And when mine fails Vranias tongue shall help,
Lysanders name will make her eloquent
In exclamations; the day thus spent
With jealousy we will watch the wanton night,
No sooner shall a star dart forth his light
Through her Eben vail, but from our eyes
A dauney vapour like a mist shall rise,
To choke his fir•s, and fright the partial watch.
The day we will spend in curses, the night we will weep
Till tears glow down our eyes, to mock sad sleep.
Move us no more, having seen the fort and taken
Order for those Soldiers, we will choose a wife for Lucius,
To equal him in birth, and place him as our Lieutenant
O•er them, till this be done we will take no sleep.
How now, from whence these letters?
From Sicily.
How fares your King Valerio?
In perfect health.
These Letters crave perusal withal speed.
Our leisure serves us no•• till soon Vincentio
We will defer the reading of them; and with the morning Sun
Let our Secretary dispatch him with an answer.
I do beseech your Majesty.
Be not so importunate, forbear till morn.
Tic news I fear, though late, will come too soon.
What a mad Gentleman's this? whither will he lead me?
I take you are a magician can blind men's eyes with appear∣tions,
and turn your self into divers strange shapes and proportions.
Who told him of my purpose trow?
I will put you to your purgations Sir, I will have you
show me a sort of Virgins about the age of 20. honest.
Tic impossible, Art cannot find them out I assure you.
I will have them poor too: then thou shalt find me 20. honest
Lawyers that are rich.
They are not in nature neither.
And they shall marry with those Virgins, and so we may
chance to have an honest breed of them, I am a good Commonwealths
man, I will have it so, do not defer it, art not a conjurer?
A poor Scholar Sir, and that's next door to beggary:
They are cousin germanes.
I am mistaken, thou art a Philosopher, pick me a sallet for
my dinner, and by that time Isle be with you in Philosophy.
Pick you a sallet! I had as live pick rushes. I cannot tell
how to pick a sallet, not I. Who comes here? another mad man? hel's
broke loose sure, I were best to run away.
Tic done in dismal characters, how black it looks!
Especially towards the latter end, where they did
Make away my daughter, now let me see what shape
Would fit me best.
An Asses shape if your Advocate hath left you worth your ears.
Rare! I have it, into a night ravens, it will smite with my
Revenge, for when the evening grows late, these prying Statesmen
sit in their closets plotting some innocents fall, which to their
net may bring a golden draught: my wings shall beat their
casements open, and with horrid clamours and
Croaks affright their guilty souls, Oh! twill be rare,
To see those made others make themselves despair.
Do'ye hear Sir? before we enter into disputation,
Isle put a case of State upon you, I know you are a Politician.
A word with you Sir, Is this a Senator?
Dost make a doubt on it? is he not clothed in purpls, shalt
hear him give his charge. Grave father take your seat•
This world will not last long sure, Learning is so
suddenly advanced.
Now Sir? have you any business with this Learned man?
Special business! Does not your Lordship know Gisbert?
That name is known to me.
And his daughters too, is it not?
He had a daughter.
But thou hast murdered her.
Oh! save the Physician, learning's overthrown else.
Hold Sir, hold, I am no Senator, I am a foolosopher.
A Philosopher, then rise Aristark ass.
You have made a stark ass of me I am sure.
Are you a Philosopher too?
Keep off I shall break in pieces else, I am made all of glass;
Can thou not see quite thorough me?
I took him for a Senator, a man of State, those we call
great ones.
You have made a little one of me, I might have kept me
out of your claws like a coxcomb as I was, if I had known you
would ha played horse play with me.
But since you are a Philosopher, Isle put you to your books.
Not I Sir, I was put to that before: and since i• will not
save me, Isle be hanged ere I trust to it any more: There's a Gen∣tleman
of your own humours, he'll dispute like a Puritan, with∣out
all sense or reason.
Then this Learned man, shall be Moderator, nay sit down,
if you prove not a Philosopher, Isle make an ass of you presently.
I would be loath to crack, the least touch makes a •law
in me.
Thus I oppose you Philosopher, If justice be corpu• 〈◊〉,
a simple body, as Philosophy defines it, how comes it that she de∣sires
composition, and deals not simply according to her nature,
without a working element be joy•'d with her?
This Question's able to put te• Constables and 〈◊〉 bills
to silence, yet Isle answer you Sir. •ustice is a simple body, now
Sir, the more simple the body is, the better clothing it requires;
and great reason, for the most part she wears loose garments, and
now being to cut her coat out of a broad cloth, she had not need
of slender comings in Sir.
But Justice is blind Sir.
True Sir! and therefore subject to go astray; and therefore
she had need have the more help to put her in the way.
Isle have another bout with you Philosopher.
A few more bouts will make me turn F•ncer and run away,
tic the safest ward when all is done.
Have at you Sir. Thus I oppose you Mr. Philosopher, If
heavy bodies that are composed of earth, descend downward, how
comes it, that so many fools and Usurers, rise upward?
As I am a honest man, I shall never be able to answer him.
I have put you to it, make no demurs, lest I join issue
with you.
Hold, hold, he'll beat that into me, which he wants him∣self.
Are you ready?
You are I am sure else, but Isle answer you. The reason that
fools and Usurers rise upward, is this, Fortune's a whore, now your
whore is a light creature you know, and of her self turns upward;
now this whore doting upon none but fools and Usurers, with a
violent hand bears them along with her.
Why had not this whore Fortune been carted then?
Because she has the Usurer to her friend, and buys it out Sir.
Let me embrace thee, most wise Lucull•s;
Give Learning place.
Alas! you have beat out his bottom, did he not tell you, he
was all glass. We shall never joint him together again.
I find my self in two, hold! or I shall fall in pieces.
What bad fortune had I to break so rare a piece of workman∣ship?
Fair Adellez•• shipwrecked, let each eye drowned in tears,
Participate her loss. Command through out our Land
An universal day of sorrow; haplesse maid!
Not thine, but my impartial fate had sway.
In thy untimely object; behold him that confirms it.
My all of grief and joy, poor boy could I
Recov•• with my lives loss, thy well being;
But thou art all incurable.
True Esculapius, I am.
You must bear with him, he 〈◊〉 no wiser then he should be.
He thinks he is glass, and with this f•ll broke in a 1000 pieces.
Let him into our palace, henceforth we will not expose him
To experiment of art, our self will be his keeper.
His sight at least will do a true friends part,
And banish flattering comfort from my heart.
What aged man is that in whom grief look••
So pale? It makes us fearful to behold him.
It is the King of birds sure, how all crouch to him;
and do him willing homage.
Speak, ••at art tho•?
Though old dread Sovereign, yet vouchsafe him hearing,
Will lay such black deeds •pe will b•nish night
For ever from her vail, or loath the light.
Peruse this paper.
Alas poor man! my soul doth pity him.
See here the Villain comes, Lord 〈◊〉
We purpose to prefer you to a wife
Of our election.
I do beseech your grace to pardon •e,
I have vowed to live a single life.
You have vowed to live a single Villain!
Peace monstrous wretch, I hardly check my tears,
Unhappy King that must trust others ears!
No marvel Heaven so many ills down hurl,
N•ught but injustice can destroy the world.
Corrupted Judges, the States most dangerous foes,
They smile and strike, there's no sense for their blows.
Vengeance and rage! I could forget my b•ing,
And be your executioner my self.
This 〈◊〉 speaks an other language.
We humbly do confess our crimes, and on
Our knees 〈◊〉 your 〈◊〉 pardon.
Pardon•! may 〈…〉
Ungrateful Monster! Can 〈◊〉 deny this schedule?
Recall thy self old man, I am thy Prince,
And will revenge thy wrong.
Are you a man Sir?
As thou art. Speak Villain.
Can thou disprove this too just accusation?
I cannot; only for the murder,
As I shall hope for 〈◊〉, I am free.
Lives my Vrania then!
I left her near the Lodge,
Whither in grief she made—
Abhorred viper, that coldest behold her smart,
Who with her own cured thine, I loath thy sight;
And here deprive thee of all dignity
Due from thy Ancestors, thy Land we seize,
And give thee only four days space, to find Vrania out.
One hour deferred, our Kingly word is past,
Thou for her loss, shalt taste untimely death.
So thrust him forth our presence.
True Prince indeed!
Pardon, renowned King, my much forgetfulness•
Oh! let some pinnacle, made a God, whose height
May reach to heaven, bear thy name stamped
In golden characters, untouched by envious time.
Rise much wronged man, you worst, but first in place
With him that did so easily second thy false doom,
We banish both of you into the woods,
As most unworthy mans society.
Thou shalt enjoy the place and honour
Of our chief Justice; infer no denial•.
What want is in thy 〈◊〉 pre-eminence,
Thou hast in virtue and in innocence.
So lead away, thy daughter being not dead,
Thy joy ore' flows, all sorrow's cancelled.
Perjured slave! hast a wife? coldest think l•cheri would
have a better end? out of my doors seducing V•rl•t.
Hear me but speak.
Out upon thee penurious Rascal! my flesh shake•s to be at
thee, thou hast made little better then a whore of my daughter.
And a baud of your Ladyship.
Were it not for modesties sake I would have my penny words
out of thy flesh.
The hangman will rid us of that care; beggarly slave!
Why dost not laugh at him 〈◊〉?
I could shed tears for thee poor Lucius.
Though many months thou could endure my gre•f,
One day seems long till I yield thee relief.
Is then all love and pity banished? In lieu then of the good
thou stand possessed by me, grant me but one nights being in thy
house, thou see tic late, and I unfurnished of means and credit.
Would one night save thy life, restore thy name and thy
degraded honour, I would not grant it, for know I hate thee more,
then all thy wealth in•orc'd me love before.
You are no who•?
So let's in if longer you stay here,
I will provide you of a Harbinger.
You shall have a lodging at the cost of the Parish if you
stay a little longer.
Baud, blood-sucker Cannibal.
Afflicted man! I that for comfort sought thy company,
could now afford some pity unto thee.
Ill destined Lucius, but in vein's complaint, then tell me Surdo,
what cure can thou apply unto my miseries?
Such as the world gives to men in distress. As I am a Cour∣tier
I must leave you.
How leave me?
Would you not have me follow the example of my betters?
I promised you to serve you only as you were a Lord; and so
I have done, and will till I see you at the gallows, and thither you
shall have followers enough.
Wilt thou not help to find my wife out then?
Isle see what I can do. Oyes! did any manner of man
take up a woman child, of the age of 22. lost for want of a husband,
let them look into her mark, and if they find her a Virgin bring
her to the Hangman.
Ungrateful groom, doest mock my misery?
Are you such an ass to think she'll be found to save you
from Hanging, that have left her swimming all this while? she has
more hope of her widowhood then so; the old saying is, Marry a
widow whose husband was hanged; and then she cannot upbraid
you with them• Isle see if I can find her and put it in practise. Fare∣well,
I will look to hear from you by the next new Ballad; pray
Jove it be to a good tune, and come off bravely to the life, t'will be
to your own com•ort and credit of your followers, to see and hear
so many bear parts in your death.
Contemned and left of all! where are my parasites now?
Honours shadows that seem to move with an obsequious right,
as if they were in•eperably tied unto our persons. When the
truth is, their motion is from the sun, which being done once,
we are lest naked. Why should I blame this world then,
Since means and honour sway the greatest men?
For give me one that ere loved virtue poor,
Show me an Usurer charitable, or an honest whore.
I cannot Flavia with just cause condemn thee.
It is the leaden weight of time that moves thy hate,
And with a violent hand doth force thy soul
To this observing world, for well thou know,
Were thou as chaste and fair as the Greekish dame,
Famed for her twice ten winters constancy,
And had no foil to put thy virtues off,
Thou might spin out thy days to get thee food,
Or turn base prostitute, and sell thy blood,
At every comers price.
Where night I find this most unhappy man!
Whose grief will not permit my jealous soul
To trust him with the night: Oh! did he know
How much beyond my self I prize his love;
T would move him to afford me pity, if not love.
But see where suiting with his fortunes, on the ground
He has cast himself, could we our fates foreknow,
He had kept the happy mean, not Iain so low.
My honoured Lord why with so hard an eye,
Do you behold your friends?
Thou doest forget thy self, I am poor, and poverty,
When none else will do it, makes all men fly.
You much mistake me Sir, I am Castadora
One that did never •own on your prosperity;
Yet cannot choose but love you, whose sympathy
Speaks mine own woes: pray Sir accept this.
O! tell me true,
Did not Flavias hand commit this charge to thee?
Can you yet think she loves you Sir, whose hate
Has reached a height so far above her sex?
Or is your weakness such to love her still?
My constancy is such I ever shall.
Alas! tic not her hate but fear to suffer in my disgrace, tic her
want that moves her thus to my injury.
These are the effects
Of lust whose seat is in the blood and swayed by that
As by the nourishing food, whereas love
Having her residence only in the soul;
And settling her affections once is not more moy'd by
Any outward accident then are our thoughts by
Captiving our bodies.
Thou speak beyond a woman.
You have a wife Sir, or it seems you had one,
Though by your much ingratitude undone.
Compare these two, the strumpee and your wife,
One seeks your death, the other gives you life.
Thy words do trouble me, I am not well.
Alas! how can you Sir, you are in hell?
Tied to the flames of an enchanting Harlot.
Pardon me Sir, if beyon• modesty,
I press a strangers ear, in whom I see
My own sad fate, answer me one demand.
Freely speak what ere it be.
What one particular
Most moves your love unto this creature?
Her beauty which alone I would enjoy.
But never did.
What pleasure has the Usurer in seeing
Another gold he cannot horde? or what
Particular happiness gives that which every day,
Man for a Pistollet may make purchase on.
O! think that willingly you would not wear
The garments of another; nor lay your body
In the common bed of a suspected Harlot.
Think how much more you should abhor to mix
Your blood with an adulterate courtesan;
Wash in a leprous bath; a strumpets womb;
And she your love is such another.
Impossible!
How if I make it apparent?
I should die willingly, and think my tortures
Too gentle for so foul a change.
Attend me then,
Here are three ducats all the store 〈…〉 me.
What will you say, if for this gold you obtain,
To lie with her this night.
As I am Lucius, whom she so contemns.
The same; Embrace her lustful wast, receive
As much content as ever, yet in the morn,
She shall reject your sight with loathed scorn.
Make me so happy in my misery;
My soul shall bless thee.
And if I do not may I lose my hopes;
Come saddest soul, your doubts Isle not prolong,
Thus honest wives avenge their husbands wrong.
How like you fair this solitary life?
As shipwrecked men the shore, or prisoners liberty.
I never thought a good in life to be,
Until I found it here.
This your content doth bring in to my mind
Those days that Cavus lived upon his plain,
Unhappy Courtier, yet a happy swain.
Me thinks I now do hear his well-tun'd pipe
That drew the covetous ear of listening shepherds
To hear him chant his passed misery.
But I forget my self and stay too long,
Our supper's yet to kill, and night draws on.
You need not make such hast, our store's not spent;
Here's enough left: small viands serve content.
But time calls forth, and promise liberal prey.
I must be gone, and if my horn you hear,
Think I have sped. I promise thee rich cheer.
Take your own way, why now I thank thee fate,
Thou hast made a double mends for my lost state,
In stead of honours and a marriage bed,
To chaste thoughts and content my soul is wed.
Vain world I hate the stead of thy flattery;
Heaven is my Book, virtue my company.
Where should I seek out death, or find some means
To stop the gaping jaws of famine, I could on equal
Terms encounter with a Tiger, whose rage hath
Sucked her dry. Ungrateful hunger that feeds upon
His bowels, whose want denies him sustenance.
Thou wound me more then all mine enemies. But
See some Angel, yet her face speaks her woman. Meat!
Should Devils guard it, thus would I reach and eat.
Amazement to my soul, how greedily he feeds, it was want
sure forced him hither, if so I am glad our poverty supplies him:
Oh! did he know who with a licorish palate feeds to surfeit, how
many empty souls would be made happy in what he vomits; or felt
one days torture of piercing hunger, with what temperate hand
he would enjoy these natures medicines! food is no other.
So I feel my self in reasonable temper now. But I forget
my happiness, here's a better course. Pardon me beauty, that I
scoped so fair a mark as your lips, but now Isle make amends.
What mean you Sir?
Nay I know you will plead chastity, tic the common fault
of your sex, you have been some under vessel, waiting woman, and
fallen into the Butlers hands, had an untimely broaching, and now
are laid aside here for ripening.
What do you take me for?
A woman made for the use of man.
I am a haplesse woman,
Wrecked at Sea, and cast upon this shore.
Did not I tell you, ye had a leak; Come, come, leave cir∣cumstance,
thou see I am mortal, and thou art flesh and blood,
born to fall and therefore let's down together; nay, nay, do not resist.
Not resist? know brutish creature, I am too well provided
to lose mine honour, so long as this frail flesh which we call life
can ransom it. Villain keep off! chaste Lucrece shall be my president.
So I would have her, lie with Tarquin first, and then kill thy
self after if thou hast a mind to it. Lucretia she was the first cunning
whore that ever made a fool of a Cuckold, when she saw the more∣ning,
her night villainy was discovered, to prevent the fire fell upon
the sword; but since you'll needs be stabbed, Isle help you.
Prevented! if there be a power that helps
Distressed chastity, rescue a spotless maid.
She should be a maid, she's so unwilling to her business.
But since you force me to enter into bonds with you, Isle make you
seal to the Articles of agreement, ere I have done with you.
Help, help, if I have deserved thine anger Heaven,
Oh let it fall at once! Let one death expiate.
She should be a sinner, death's so often in her mouth. What's
here? Epistles? To the high &amp; mighty Prince Ferdinand. From whence?
Yours Valor• of Sicily. We have sent you here our
daughter—Fortune, thou hast returned amends for all
my wrongs. Revenge, I wonot keep thee fasting one minute
longer.
Heaven thou art just; now Monster doe thy worst,
Beyond Hells torture; What Villain blows that Horn?
A virtuous Woodman, who with his followers.
His followers? Nay then I am trapt, the bellowing Ox
that with his groans did fright the Earth carried not half that tor∣ture
in it, I shall dissolve through fear.
The baseness of thy guilt, unworthy wretch! Yet know
how worthy merit stands; I pity thee, Distract thy self no fur∣there,
by my chaste blood, I'll set thee free, so hence•orth to this
Wood thou wilt become a stranger.
Hell swallow me else.
I'll take your oath, unbind me first, then fall
To your meat, with as good stomach as before.
Recall your spirits, grief-afflicted men.
Time may restore those honours he hath borrowed.
It is but to try how you will bear it; nor shall I think it my least
happiness to have been Author of your change.
Your virtuous arguments have overcome us.
Now Lady I have brought you: Ha, what stranger's that?
A miserable almost famished man,
He hardly could speak well when he came in,
His body was so weak, his mind so ill.
She'll spoil all; I was a poor soldier in these wars, and
have been in some reputation with our King. I have been trow∣blossom
to this Gentlewoman: I would fain bee unmannerly,
having filled my belly, be out of this Forest.
His guilt admits no trust, pray give him free conduct,
I'll force your stay, since we have met thus happily.
We will not part till supper, no place I see
But gives us means to practice charity.
What wants in fare, your welcome shall supply,
Make good my promise Lady.
With a willing heart.
If you knew all, you'd say I had reason for it.
Hell choke you with your Supper. But may these two be,
Sileus and Leonardo, that helped to disthrone me?
What new turn of State has forced them hither?
I'll question him, it may be he can resolve us, if Oswell lives;
Me thought I heard thee name thy dependence on the banished King.
I did hang on him as others did, as long as he had nap, you
ha my meaning; came you not from Court?
Against our wills; for know, we are banished thence by un∣mindful
Ferdi•and, who for one bad, has quite forgot the many
goods he still enjoys by us.
I know it too well; Hell take you for it.
Leaving our merits; Let it suffice
He turned us down, that by our aid did did rise.
Can you resolve Sir, if Oswell live?
And if I could, think I would betray him! I'd suffer first.
Protest no further, there's none here means him less good
then your self.
This false out to my wish; a word with you Gentleman:
suppose Oswell lived, and by your aid might repossess his Diadem,
would you prove honest?
As Heaven to virtue!
Then know I am the man, and to regain my Crown
want only but your assistance.
Command us as your Vassals.
As our friends, and those that shall have equal shares with
us. First then know this woman is Valerius his daughter.
The woman of this cave.
The same, sent hither to be matched with Sigismond, and ship∣wrecked
in her passage, fell upon this shore.
A most strange accident.
It is her disgrace or death must raise our hopes.
How is this to be made possible?
Thus; my self not taking notice of her birth, will charge her
to the State for companying in lustful action with this woodman,
which seconded by you, will seem so clear, that being returned
with shame, or here with death paying her forfeiture, her father
that overwhelmed our state in just revenge bears us up again.
A most unheard of Villainy.
Doe you demur upon it?
We only want disguise, that and it is done.
Here's gold to furnish you, this night I'll raise the neigh∣boring
Village to apprehend um, make you hence and fail not
to morrow to meet me in the Senate.
Our lives be gaged, if we one minute miss,
Be this the last day of our happiness.
Your wishes be your own. Thou Queen of Fate,
Forbear thy restless motion but one hour,
Revenge is mine, Oswel's above thy power.
HAve I not kept my promise? did you not find her base
and mercenary?
She is as all the world is mercenary,
Except thy self chaste virtuous Castadora.
But art sure he has no more gold?
Not an Aspire; but I'll try, come you dissembling wan∣ton,
thou dost not know how I love thee, •ast ne'er a toy, a Ring,
nor Jewel lest?
Pardon sweet Flavia, I ha not any, yet such is thy impul∣sive
and attracting beauty, I can as well live without free air, as be
debarred thy presence.
How's this, my presence?
The fellow's desperate, he would fain be hanged at our door, we
want no sign; good Wine needs no bush, we have custom enough
already.
Thou dost but put this trick on me to try me,
Thy last nights love showed thy affection to me.
Affection! marry foh—I would not end•re such ano∣there
nights torment; Pack hence, or call an Officer.
Thy worst foul Monster! I will not leave this place,
Wast thou as high in malice as in lust,
Here will I end my life, to prove Heaven just.
Let me entreat you for this day forbear him.
Out upon thee pu•i•anical filth, we may thank thee for this,
that preferst the Cart before the Horse; turn
Procurer, before the art past procreation.
This young B•with will confound all our doings.
I shall set you in with a mischief.
Thou hast done thy wrost already, and my miseries in spite
of thee shall end, this hour doth gain.
My Lucius love, or kills me with disdain.
You will not go then?
Not stir from hence.
Look to the door daughter while I go for the Constable;
Would make a vaulting school of our house? thou ma•st hang thy
self and thou wilt, but not here neither, yet if thou hast a mind
to it, Isle go fetch a Hangman.
She tells you true; this in a circle follows,
Fools and knaves nourish us, and we the gallows.
Monsters in nature! my apprehensive thoughts
Present a thousand tortures, the least of which
Wounds more, then the bloudiest E•acute••ner.
Thou tell-tale conscience, cease thy b•uling clamours,
Here's that shall stop thy throat, yet now I think on it,
My poor Vrania dyed a lingering death;
Each thought whereof like to a greedy Vulture,
Feeds on my tyred heart Thou discont•n•ed ghost,
Where ere thou wander stay thy restless course.
Behold thy most ungrateful husbands blood,
Siting the thirsty earth. And thus V•any, I boldly come to thee.
And thou art welcome, as heaven to misery. Mistake me
not, I am V•any, she that in this shape, pursued thy wished •ight,
attending this blessed hour.
Vrania! •home and my joys at once confound me.
•anst thou forgive my wrongs?
As freely as I wish forgiveness of my sins, say but thou
love me, I have double interest for my sorrow.
Love thee! I am thy vassal, my joys come on so fast,
I fear they are too violent to last.
I think here comes a 〈◊〉 to remove you How'• this,
Lucius and my maid so familiar? impudent strumpet, Isle tear the flesh
off thy face.
Perpetual hag, take this for it.
Devils and •uries! I am slain.
Alas! what hast thou done?
Nothing but what my life must answer, fly my V•any,
Though thou for give me, heaven will not;
By what thou hold most dear, abandon me.
No, Should the racks and tortures presently
Be fixed unto my limbs.
Thou add'•t to my afflictions, if prayers
Will not prevail• Isle fl•e and leave thee.
Rather of life then of this sight bereave me;
Know I will accuse my self as chief•st actor in this Murder,
It thou make motion to go without me.
See, this is the fl•sh fly I told you of, open that box, you
may swear l•wfully you took no bribe of me, Constable do your
office, Oh my daughter, Constable, my daughter!
How came this murder?
This bloody hand did do it.
Set on by me.
Let me tear her eyes out.
By all that may be sworn by, she is free; the act is only mine.
Most unnatural villain to thrust a woman into the body
thus unmanly, I will have both your bloods for it.
Mine, he is innocent.
Mine, I desire it.
Nay, ne'er st•iv, Isle hang you both I warrant you, my
daughter was not unknown to some of the bench, and if they
would not speak for her in such a case as this, would they might
never have good of women's flesh. Oh my daughter! my chaste and
virtuous daughter.
Thou art a Lady fair one.
I, a horrible painted one.
And a mighty great one, and therefore Isle court thee.
Tic beyond the art of man to court me fair, I am not to
be dealt withal in that kind, and therefore keep off, I am not for
your turn, keep off saucy jack.
Not for my turn? why I am a Prince, and will ingirt thy
brow, thy Ivory brow, with stones as precious.
Stones! you can do no good upon me with your stones.
Grant me but assurance of thy love, Isle dart against Ioves
thunder, my rival Jove, whose bolt did cleave my heart, threw
and threw, and made a bro•dway to my brain, when I last cour∣ted
thee in yonder thicket.
Oh horrible! he has got the true property of a Lover, he
can lie bravely. Court me in yonder thicket?
Why? hast thou forgot ray sweet duck, look on me my
pigsny, cast but one smile, one gentle smile upon me.
Some smile! I cannot smile for laughing.
Well remember this, you will not afford me a sheeps eye,
say no more, nay ne'er entreat, thou get not a kiss, a look, nor a
touch, nor a feel, nor a bit of my thums length.
That's but short allowance for a Gentlewoman.
I must to her again, you do not love me, you do not.
Alas! I am ignorant of your tricks, you have forgot, Since you
and I plaid last at Maw, when your Ace of harts could not
command my Knave of diamonds, till you were glad to lay your five
fingers on it.
Maw! fie upon him, what a noddy is this?
You have forgot since I talked bawdy with your Ladyship
by moonshine, and how you swore you dream't of me, till you
tickled again, and ever since doted on me with the very conceit of
the dream, and now I will make your Ladyship kneel for a kiss,
nay humble thy self, and I wo'not come over thee.
Fie, fie, never had Gentlewoman such a suitor. Now by my
poating stick; a fit oath for a chambermaid, you shall have him
court me in all the true Elements of a drunkard, Fox-like, Lyon-like,
and last, Maudlin-like, and so turn all his smiles into tears.
Not yet? will she not stoop? I must close with her, Come,
come, I know you swell now, you grow so plump about the lips,
suppose I should vouchsafe to kiss this chop cherry now.
I scorn to kiss I can assure thee.
Disdain a Prince, a Lyon, curtrash parboiled stuff. What's
woman but a hollow vessel, an Aquavit bottle, a washing tub,
a box? What is your Ladyship proud of?
Of my Virginity Sir.
Isle try what kind of stuff your Ladyships Virginitie's made
of.
Thou wilt not ravish me, wilt thou?
By Mars his standard but I will.
By Venus buckler but thou shalt not.
Thou wilt not draw I hope.
But I will, and defend my maiden honour with my life.
Put up fair maid, thy chastity orecomes my spleen,
Forgive me gentle Love, and I will weep my self to water.
That may be, for your brain swims I am sure, What an ass
is this to be in love with me? I am no Lady, Sir, I am your man
Catzo.
Keep off, I shall orewhelme thee else, dost not see me sue•
and tumble mountain high? thou art Pinnace, art thou?
A kind of a flie-boat, there's a storm toward, my best is to
put into harbour.
Sea room enough or we are lost, amain, amain,
Now up, now down again.
I am sure I have a leak already, help, help, help.
What means this out•rye?
I think he has thrust out my bottom, I shall never live to
prove the old proverb true, a young Courtier and an old beggar, I
have had so many maims in his service.
Neptune has laid the storm, how calm's the sea now? how
silent the winds? ell's done, ell's done.
Ell's one for that you, shall not draw me to sea with you
again.
How came thou thus attired?
He said he would make a Lady on me, but as many Knights
do, he has made a poor one of me, he began very hotly. But at
last he cooled me over head and ears, He handle a Lady!
This makes me think that love was the original• of this
untimely ecstasy, did never hear him speak of some strange beauty?
He spoke too lately with me, and now I remember me, I
left him in the wood with a good handsome Female, and
when I found him again, he was as mad as a Hart in rutting
time.
Her sight sure did transport him. What news Vincentio?
No great news, only a woodman and a maid accused
of soul lust, this day receive their doom.
Where were they taken?
In an obscure Cave within the Forest.
That maid would I fain deal withal, command her hither.
Why dost not fetch her?
Be patient, thou shalt along with us.
Dost know the face that late ith •orrest lost you?
I have cause to know it, they talk of countenances, I got
more by that face in an hour, then the best countenance in the Court
will get me in an age, though I were Usher to the best Lady of
them all.
My heart presages; Good heaven work thy will;
When we least hope, the heavens prove kindest still,
Sir bring him along.
Come Sir, will you jog into the Garden?
You'll bring me to the Lady then.
Yes presently, as soon as ever we can overtake her.
Stand forth Alexis, though my soul doth tell me,
Thy thoughts are clear from foul 〈◊〉,
Yet since thy Accuser by just course of Law
Pursues thy life, thou must endure the hand of peerless Justice.
I crave no other,
Let equal combat prove us worthy death,
Or else just vengeance stop his perjured breath.
I seal to thy Request; if in one hour
Two witnesses besides my self doe not make good
This accusation.
Your offer stands confirmed. Officer at Arms
If ere the appointed time, these witnesses
Make no Appearance, bring into the Lists
Those Combatants equally prepared.
It shall be done.
Although my place forbids to doe thee other Right
Alexis, yet this comfort I will give thee, which stands for all,
No power were just, if guiltless men should f•ll.
I have no other hope, who bears a spotless breast,
Doth want no comfort else, how ere distressed.
That speaks our happiness, for spite of destiny
We can nor live nor dye unhappily,
How ever Isle conceal my parentage.
What other cause depends to crave our hearing?
Bring em forth; away with em.
How now, what noise is this?
Justice, let me have Justice Noble Senators.
Speak freely, woman 〈…〉.
Behold the bloody 〈…〉.
How Lucius one of em? vile wretch;
Doest thou not know this day doth end thy life,
If thou shalt fail to find thy hapless wife.
That sentence thus is void, 〈…〉
Your daughter and my wife.
My daughter.
Oh think that I am lost still, or that
You ne'er were happy in the enjoyment of a 〈◊〉
For know I stand guilty of this abhorred 〈◊〉.
She wrongs her innocent soul, it was this hand did it
In just moved Anger.
But it was I that bid him,
And that in Law is principal.
Between em both I have lost my daughter;
A very chaste Virgin and a virtuous.
A noted whore, a Courtesan.
Divided soul, in what amazement stand thou?
On this hand Justice stands, but here a father;
Nature thou art powerful in me; Immaculates Robes,
You shall not blush at my partiality.
What mean you Sir?
To be a man, a father, oh my Vrania!
This violent passion needs not, Sir possess your seat again.
It suites not with my fortunes, vouchsafe
Me leave to plead her cause, you worthy Judges;
Behold three lives laid in a doubtful scale,
Against which a strumpets Lust the balance sways;
Three worthy lives, if age and fate deny
To make mine miserable, which if your gentler hands
Refuse to poise, are lost, and must pay the price
Of an adulteress blood. Oh think what a whore is!
A creature only shaped like woman, that we might see
In that fair foil '•est her deformity.
The womb of sin from whence all horrid crimes,
As Rivulets from the Sea, derive their streams;
The Devils warehouse, for though we void all snares,
This surely takes, and here he vends his wares:
Which no shop else wu'd utter, hence avarice,
Pride, pale murder, all black deeds doe rise; besides,
Think how she stands in Law, to whom denied
A Christian Burial, this Law by which we are tried;
Oh let it not exact such payment then,
For those deserve not common Rights of men.
This is the only fa•our I doe crave,
Judge her unworthy life as of a grave.
Your Arguments are forcible; only let's know
The Motives to her death.
Her sensual rage
Brought her into the place, where much unlooked for
Joy forced one embrace,
The wretch at sight hereof overcome with spleen,
Or hateful Jealousy, with violent hands
Did seize my wife, which sight on sudden raise•
My just incensed blood, that with one stroke
Her cursed life unhappily I took.
Make it your own case, think how free they stood,
In height of their own Joys from others blood.
The case is plain she sought her own death
Wilfully, and seeking her own ill
We judge them free, now take your place again.
Bear witness, I have played a fathers part.
A careful father.
One most kind and loving.
Let me embrace you both; farewell; think here
Your father dyes, and now you're to be doomed by an impartial Judge.
What means this Circumstance?
Know that a man consists of soul and body;
The one by Nature, the other by Justice ruled;
So he is less then man that swerves from either,
And disobeys these equal Governors.
What Nature might command I have performed;
Now Justice takes his place, true partlesse Justice,
That heavenly Names bestows upon us here.
That we like Gods might no Affection bear;
Which once again commands unto the Bar
Those bloody murderers.
Strange and unheard of.
Stand forth you haplesse wretches, that have robbed
A creature of her life, which to restore,
Would make the world turn bankrupt; nay more,
You have robbed Heaven of a soul, enforced her hence
Laden with all her sins without defence;
Not given her time to shed one penitent tear,
That might plead for her before that severe
And all-confounding Judge, with loss of breath,
You have reprieved her soul to far•e worse death.
Lastly, you have feloniously usurped
The sword of Government, violated Law,
And being borne Subjects, you have assumed
The seat of death-inflicting Sovereignty; for which
We doom you—Weak heart, why, doest thou faint?
Thou injurest me: You traitorous eyes, since that
You dare not see to doe such worthy Justice
On these wretches, I will blind and bar that light,
Whose partial view doe make so few doe right;
Now know we doom you for this your horrid murder
To present Execution, and command
That where the fact was done, a Jibbit stand,
On which you both shall suffer forthwith; Officers away,
Your lives are forfeit in one hours delay.
Beyond all president!
For mine own life,
It is justly forfeited, but to this creature
Vrania, not as she is my wife,
But thy daughter, the hope of thy name,
And wished posterity, be pitiful.
Thou beatst the Ayre, though all the world should fa•l,
Justice must be her self, bear equal sail.
Be patient gentle Love, since it is for thee,
I cannot think it is an Ill to die.
Father Farewell, your doom I will not grudge,
Above I hope to find a milder Judge.
Away with em—Heaven on their souls have mercy.
Stay, let me embrace thee, thou perfect'st man
That ever made Nature proud▪ Renowned Gisbert,
Lo as thou gave unto thy Countries good
Thy only daughter, having no other gift
Worthy thy merit, I return again
Thy present, which to recompense with any
Other Benefit would speak us poor
And much ungrateful, in us they both shall live
With pardon, so receive them, then.
As a reprieve sent to condemned men.
In whom moist thou survive to endless days. As for this loathed
Creature Hells Harbinger, this Bawd to sin, her daughters loss shall
take away her bodies punishment, only we banish her six miles from
any City.
I had rather be Carted six times about the City then live in the
Country, unless your grace will make a continual progress.
Away with her, what means this sound?
It gives a signal to a Combat•t that has accused a stranger
of foul lust with a known Shepherd.
Our self have heard so much, give him his oath.
Swear by thy trust in Heaven thou come not Armed, led on by
malice, or in hope of gain, but in the Justice of thy cause without either
charm or guile.
This Isle make good.
Administer the like Oath to the other.
Swear by the equal powers, •o hope or confidence,
Doth raise thine Arm besides thine Innocence.
I swear, and if not truly, of Heaven I crave,
Instead of aid, to send a shameful grave.
Give signal to the fight.
Stay.
What means our son?
This she, that brow, that eye, that face doth speak it,
give me my Armour there.
Give him his brains there, has most need of them.
Villain, Isle tear thy soul out, if thou defer one minute.
Divinest Beauty, oh let me kiss thy hand!
This accident confounds, speak gentle son.
And if I have a Being worthy you,
Deny not my request, or with my Breast
Isle naked thus oppose the traitor.
Thou hast thy wish fair son, bring weapons forth,
Some fate directs him thus.
More Champions yet; what mean these strangers?
To prove this Traitor a malicious villain;
That Lady chaste and free.
The same cause moves me to equal Arms.
You shall be damned, first; by my blood and Honour,
Who makes an offer to deprive this Arm
Of this fair Conquest, draws one on himself.
They shall not, I must entreat you give free way unto his pas∣zion,
being assured the hand of Heaven draws him to end his life or
misery.
Shall we not have the Honour then?
Our son has begged it, and it must be his.
We will free him from that danger.
Vexation.
How dare you being exiled approach this place?
Though not from death this deed shall free one stain, know that
our love to Justice, whose wrong erst lost our good names doth force us
hither, this is traitorous Oswell.
Oswell, lay hands upon the Monster.
This Adelizia king Valerius daughter,
To whose untimely fall that villain bribed us;
When this blessed Shepherd that preserved her breath,
Redeemd our lives from a despised death.
Astonishment!
Dread Sovereign, accept this Beauteous Princess, fair A∣d•lizzie
by me preserved after her shipwreck.
Joy overcomes me, can Adelizia live?
That Letter speaks no less.
I know you are the same, my love pursued in those spacious woods.
I am the same.
Thou hast revived my son, restored mine age,
So many Blessings, Heaven I wish no more.
If any good my Being brings with it,
This virtuous Shepherd well may challenge it.
Our love and high regard shall speak it freely.
To you we give your means and liberty, to thee.
Doe but command us we will tear him piecemeal.
Though his desert to such extremes might sway,
We will have no blood shed on our wedding day.
We doom him to perpetual prisonment.
Had I my 〈◊〉 you should all keep your wedding day in hell.
So lead him hence. Now fair Adelezia there remains,
Only thy free consent to accept my son.
I am her own, the marriage Heaven begun,
When her blessed sight restored me.
Speak gentle maid.
Since Fate ordains it so,
I like your son so well, Isle scarce say no.
Then lovely daughter, true Subjects, worthy friends,
I embrace you all, and here our woes all ends;
Which teaches us, how ere vain man may trust,
The end makes happy those only that are just.

THey will not come?
They will not.
They had been better—
What was their answer?
Thus said Fitzwater, father of the faction,
That was General for the Barons against your Majesty:
Tell John,
John!
That was his Epithet;
(Alleging how you stood at Rome, put from
Your Kingly office.) Tell John, quoth he, (and frowned)
That here at Baynard Castle, we intend
A settled stay for private reformations.
Of conceived injuries, which by the peace
The King made with us, were not thoroughly searched,
But like green wounds, closed with too swift a salve,
(Upon your private ends) are with more danger
Doubts and distracted difficulties again
Broke forth; but having drawn them to a head,
They would send them to you to be ratified,
And then give their attendance.
This is brave;
Who was there else?
Richmond, imperious Leister, and old Bruce.
(The second in this revolt,) who sent the same return.
A•nest of Rebels; to try the truth of these fine florishes,
You with Lord Mowbray, post unto Guilford,
And being there, (pretending a visit unto Bruces Lady,)
Wind into observation of the Castle so from her,
(The engine upon which these factions move,)
Discover the intent of their designs.
Sure sir, the Lady is noble; but your Majesties
Injunction shall be obeyed.
This not only advantages
Our meeting with Fitzwaters Daughter,
(O how the thought) startles my blood)
But likewise furthers our resolved proceedings:
Chester the news?
Conceal your self sir,
I have trapt her with a snare.
Again, then I shall see he•—
You told me Chester
That the Queen did earnestly request my attendance:
You said she was here in the Garden,
But it seems you were mis-inform'd.
Excellent innocence how art thou trapt!
I must attend the King; please you walk Madam
But towards the Grove, I was told the Queen and Ladies
Retired there for shade.
I shall,
And I must vanish
Oh heaven, the King!
Thy friend.
False Chester!
Fair Matilda,
Mistress of youth and beauty, sweet as a spring,
And comely as the holy shining Priest
Decked in his glorious sacerdotal vestment;
Yet hear the passions of a love sick Prince,
And crown thy too too cruel heart with pity.
Yet let fall your too too passionate plea•ings,
And crown your royal heart with excellent reason.
Hear me.
The Queen will hear you.
Speak but a word that—
What?
That may sound like something,
That may but busy my strong labouring heart,
With hope that thou wilt grant, and every morning
I will walk forth and watch the early Lark,
And at her sweetest note I will protest,
Matilda spake a word was like that note.
Oh how you tempt: remember pray your vows
To my betrothed Earl Robert Huntington;
Did you not wish just as the poison touched
His manly heart, i• ever you again
Laid battery to the fair fort of my unvanquished
Virtue, your death might be like his untimely,
And be poisoned. Oh take heed sir,
Saints stand upon heavens silver battlements,
When Kings make vows, and lay their
Listening ears to Princes Protestations.
So did Matilda swear to live and die a maid,
At which fair Nature like a Snail shrunk back,
As loath to hear from one so fair, so foul
A wound: my vow was vain, made without
Recollection of my reason; and yours, Oh madness!
Maids have sure forsworn such vows:
For Huntington, he like a heap of summers
Dust into his Grave is swept; and bad vows
Still are better broke then kept.
Alas great sir, your Queen you cannot make me;
What is it then instructs your tongue? Oh sir!
In things not right,
Lust is but loves well languag'd hypocrite.
Words shall convert to deeds then; I am the King.
Doe but touch me,
And as I grasp steel in my trembling hand,
So sure the King shall see Matilda fall
A sacrifice to virtue.
Cruel Maid,
Crueler then the Kid that eons her young
On the rough bosom of a ragged flint:
Go get thee to the woods, for thou art wild
As flame, or winter; where so ever thou walk
May wild winds chide thee, and the reeling Trees
Like a confused fall of many waters
Rail on thy rudeness; may the birds that build
Among the wanton branches, stead of teaching
Notes to their young, sing something like thy niceness:
And lastly, may the Brooks when thou shalt lie
And cast a pair of cruel busy eyes
Upon their subtle slydings, may the water,
The troubled image of my passions war
With the stones, the matter of thy heart, that thou moist learn
Thy hardness and my sufferings to discern;
And so whilst I (if it be possible) study to forget you,
May beasts, and bird•, and brooks, and trees, and wind,
Hear me, and call Matilda too unkind.
Isle unto Baynard Castle to my father,
Oh she had a violent need of Castles, where a King
Lays such violent siege; but Oh truth,
Thou art (whilst tenant in a noble breast,)
A crown of Crystal in an Ivory chest.
Shall I be dazzled with effeminate darings?
With a women's ward, a knife too.
Here I left her.
But here she is not now sir.
Oh Chester run, run as thou love my peace,
Feather thy feet with lovers wishes, let but my desires
Dwell in thy eyes, thou'lt find her, were she compassed
With a Cimerian mist.
I will do my best sir.
Thy best; do every thing, do any thing,
Do all things that may find her; whether Love
Leads thy dark Labyrinth; cannot Kings be free
From thy impetuous buffets? I have de••'d
A heartened heart, obdurate to thy shafts,
And some times am so, when in the very minute
Calling to mind Matilda's tears, like drops
Continued upon marble, they pierce through,
And I am soft again. Hast found her?
No sir, she is by this in Baynard Castle,
Where her Father and the Lords—
Command our Barge, we'll after her like lightning:
We must have pledges Chester for their faiths; if they refuse,
Thunder shall meet with thunder, and each eye
Shall see strange Comets in this troubled sky.
My noble Lords, and honourable friends,
Not to particularlize (what need plain dealing
Be apparelled in particulars?) to a short supper,
Or a poor pittance rather, ye are all
Heartily welcome, very heartily, I must tell truth still.
Brother we thank you.
I would we had my sister your wife, at Guilford with us.
Where are the Ladies?
Comfo•ting Matilda, sad returned from Court.
Betrayed by Chester, and again escaped
Like a chaste Dove out of the fowlers Net,
The lustful King.
Oh John, John, wilt thou never
Leave thy wags tricks? but let it pass, tic best
Because indeed tic past.
I wonder how he received our resolved answer.
No matter how, he's like to have no other;
Now by my blood, you vexed my very soul
That you s•ned any.
Son, have a tamer spirit.
Yes, and like horses,
Be held by the nose by frivilous respect,
Whilst he casts Copperis into our sores, and searches
Past honours patience.
Nephew, Nephew, hear me,
Lets bear a little; faith he is the King,
And though at Rome he does stand interdicted,
Yet now and then takes a good start or two
Towards regularity, till the fit comes on him;
And for your neat horse simile observe me,
Richmond and you are young men, we three old,
But not too old to tell truth; the horse that will not
Stand till and endure searching, how ever in summer
With warmth and pasture, he may strike at flies,
And play the wanton in a wealthy meadow,
For all his summer pastime, yet tic said,
Winter will leave him but a lean scaled jade;
Come, come, you're fools, you're fools.
Well let us—bear then.
•et us? Oh my blood!
Besides, our in uries in his breach of promise,
He made by stains and public grievances,
How in the flames of his adulterate heart
Pursues he my chaste Cousin, by flights gets her
Within his talon, and but this afternoon,
(Had not her friendly knife enfranchised her)
Even in the face of he•ven, in his own Garden
He would have ravished her.
Bro•her, we are bound in honour not to bear it.
Let him know our griefs, and if—
Well, well, with iss and ands
Mad men leave Rocks, and leap into the Sands;
But something shall be thought on.
The King attended
Only with the Earl of Chester, Oxford, and some
Other Gentlement, is new landed on the Stairs.
The King!
Shut the stairs Gate.
It were better Gate and stairs
Were floating through bridge; we are safe my choleric cousin,
As in a Sanctuary; tic enough
(A man would think,) to see a great Prince thus,
Cause weed not go to him, to come to us,
Indeed, indeed, you speak unkindly.
Behold great Lords,
The Cedars of the Kingdom, how the King
(A shrub) shrincks out of majesty.
And comes to you; here's a fine Conventicle,
Are ye blowing up new sires? and must Fits•waters
(Plain-breasted as his unaffected habit,)
Be General again, again be called
The Marshall of Heavens Army and the Churches?
Are you Planet st uk• you cannot talk.
Your pardon sir,
I led the Barons, but it was when they could not choose
But choose a leader, and then me they chose;
And why so think ye? they all loved your Grace,
And grieve, grieve very heartily, I tell you,
To see you by some state mice so misled:
This state mice that nibble so upon the Lands impaired freedom
That would not so play in the Lyons ear,
But that by tickling him themselves to advantage;
This troubled us, and grieved the body Politic,
And this we sought to mend; I tell truth John, I,
We are thy friends John, and if ye take from friendship
The liberty of modest admonition,
Ye leave no mark whereby to distinguish it
From the fawning passion of a Dog-base flattery;
If I speak plain, this truth be my desence,
A good mans comsort is his Conscience:
And so much for plain Robin.
Fitzwater, Bruce, Richmond, and stubborn Leister,
This is the last of our admonitions,
Either lay by those Arms, those lawless arms,
Which you have listed against your Lord the King,
And give such pledges as we shall accept
For settling of your loyalties, or here
By the abused sufferings of a King,
And by the unkind scars with which you have
Deformed the face of England; misery
Shall over take you in a shape shall fright
The Iron heart of faction, and the King
Shall come no more acquainted with compassion,
But call the bloodiest ends a righteous vengeance.
I will not leave mine arms,
Nor break my word to you,
Unless provoked, and justly; you have my faith,
If you mislike that pledge—
We do.
And I reply that I can spare no another.
D's hear sir?
Already we have pawned the now scorned gage
Of our afflicted honours, which refused
Flies back again, and so we stand discharged.
King John, King John,
Perform but the sealed Covenants you are fled from,
The Charter running thus, given by our hand
The seventeenth day of June, and in the year
215 (the whole Realm being sworn to it,)
And six and twenty Peers and Barons sworn
To the execution (who if you fail) are perjured
Do this, and like a plat of Osier wands
We shall bow any way, and you shall work us
Into what fashion you shall fancy; but
if you be melancholy, love-sick John,
Or Lyon, unyoak'd Heifer, head-strong John,
(As in the matter of the Loss of Normandy,
When Anjou, Britain, Main, Poictou, and Turwin,
Were delivered up to Philip) you'll find your friends
Not facile Willows, but abrupt brambles,
Whose intricate irregularity
Whilst you shall go about to rectify,
They'll prick your fingers, and with unkind scratches,
Expose you to a late deplored experience:
Come, come, know this, when love in our side sings,
The unkindest wounds are those we take from Kings;
I am plain Robin.
A down right Rebel.
Rebel!
So are ye all.
Rebels!
Traitors.
Traitors!
Rebels and Traitors; Chester, Oxford, Gentlemen,
Stand on your guards, there's danger in the room.
You ate too passionate, perform with us,
You shall walk over us, if not, we stand
Our injured Countries Justicers.
Proud boaster.
This night shall raise a storm: Braved? with you Bruce
We will begin; and yet he is the Brother
Unto Matilda's Father, but his insolence,
Oh love; a little while let revenge reign,
This night shall beget passages shall prove
Your King a Lyon (vexed) as (pleased) a Dove.
Lights for the King; there Gentlemen.
What will you do? a tempest curled his forehead
Into the fashion of an angry Ocean,
Made wild with winds.
We must resolve on something.
And suddenly, for in his executions
He is swift as lightning, air is not more light.
Pandulph the Popes stern Legate, tic divulged,
Is again come over from the Pope, to proffer
The King his readmission into the Church,
And take off his six years interdiction
Upon some propositions yet concealed,
And this may busy the King yet.
This? the Greyhound
Is not more eager at his flying game,
Then I know King John is in his passions
Gf love or anger.
Why Brother, is this a time to study?
Troth I was thinking of—stay, stay, I hav't,
I was thinking brother Bruce,—now tic gone again,
And farewell it, lets ply our business now:
If you marked, he said he would begin with you;
I Would have you to night (stay not for the Sun,
Which sure will rise blushing at this nights brawling)
Do you and Richmond, with some score of men
Post to your house, tic but an hours riding,
And something more; there fortify your selves,
Your Lady, and your pretty little Sonnne,
Poor knave he dreams not of these Thunderbolts:
You my young mad cap, with your Cousin my daughter,
Shall unto Hartford Castle, she is the brand
I fear will fire our Troy; Leister and I
Will gather Powers, and thither after you;
You two for Guilford, you two for Hartford,
And we two, wheither wast we two must go?
Go? we two must stay in the City.
Passion of me, where was my memory;
But come, come, when Kings our Dials retrograde do run,
We leave to look on them, and go by the Sun:
Lights, lights, good Gentlemen:
Good Lady take not on so, Oxford says all
Is very well at London.
Yes, very well;
Why then followed he your Grace with a Troop of horse,
A band of men? why hath he seizd the Castle,
Cashiered my Servants? Oh Madam can it be,
Your Grace (the Alter where I ever paid
A Subjects devout Love,) should by a slight,
a fained accidental visit make,
An entrance for hostility and terror.
Hubert, redeem you in this Ladies faith,
And relate the truth.
Only upon mine honour
Was I sent to seize this Ladies young Son George,
As a pledge to'th King for her Lords loyalty.
No Hubert, my Son is far enough from thee,
Thou fatal keeper of poor Boys.
You mean
Concerning Arthur, the unfortunate Son
Of Jeffery Plantaganet; Oh mad rumour!
Who would trust thee but with so much reputation
An honest beggar boasts of?
In that believe me Madam, report hath wronged him,
Which I can witness Lady.
The King come to,
Oh my sweet George, my joy; what wilt thou do?
All is to our desire; whore's Bruces Son?
Conveyed to Wales she affirms Sir.
Where thou shalt never see him John.
Good Madam,
We'll speak with you anon, Queen Isabel,
Thou must be still an agent to secure
Me and my Kingdom, straight with the Earl of Chester;
Post thou to Hartford Castle, whither we are certified
Young Bruce is fled with old Fitzwaters daughter,
Try if by fair means thou can win her to
Attend on thee at Court; if we have not her
A pledge, (as this) for her Fathers faith, we stand
The food of faction, get her any way;
If she deny, Chester with forces ready,
Of from the Castle, shall give them fierce assault,
And force them past entreaties; go my love
And play the Amazon, with her surprise,
Secure a Kingdom.
This craves hast and care; come noble Chester
You shall along; but good my Lord forget not
That Ladies kindness to me.
Oh my sweet.
What a fine thing he makes the Queen; Oh lust,
With what smooth craft thou creeptst to things unjust.
Oh my Matilda, if power or policy
may get thee once more in these arms, I will hazard
Even to a Kingdom for thee; come Madam fear not
I wear no frowns, I am all mirth, lets see your pretty Son.
I fear your mirth is like the Porpoised pastimes,
My Son hath been in Wales this month.
Hubert, see the Gates locked, a guard upon the Walls,
Whilst we take some to search.
Where will you search King John?
For heavens sake do not search.
Nay and't be come to that.
Let me go,
In these proceedings the Kings safety rests,
The Lyon must not bend to baser breasts.
Heaven to thee I kneel, who affrighted Mother am,
Oh from this Lyons claws keep my poor Lamb.
The Castle Gates are shut, swift footed Tyranny,
That can when thou pursu'st thy wild desires,
Out run the wanton Roe; Oh Richmond, Richmond,
I fear our stay all night, he's made me witness
Of a day darker then night.
Yonr fears and your afflictions
Meet in one Center, for it seems the King
Sent Oxford in the night on the walls;
Behold where Oxford stands, I fear they have seized
Your Son, your Wife and Castle.
Oxford, thou sign
Set up to show me where my sorrows dwell,
Martyr me not with circumstances; but tell me,
Is it (as from thy ominous presence there)
We may conjecture.
Because you request brevity,
Then by my ominous presence here great Lords
You conjecture that you come too late.
Let force our entrance,
We have tweuty men of spirit to dare.
A score of Cowards, Oxford,
Dare thou be honourable?
An other time,
But now I have no leisure, the King is here.
In person.
Yes, and power;
And if the Queen and Chester speed as the King has,
We shall have a pledget too for Fitzwaters loyalty,
And so good day, ye meet the proverb here,
Ye both are early up but near the near.
We strongly may conclude from their intelligence
Of your Son, and fair Matilda's flight to Hartford,
Thither the Queen and Chester are repaired,
Either by force or policy to obtain her,
So that the nearest path to our proceedings.
Is to post back to London, and to hasten
Her Father thither with his powers, and so
Secure your Son, his Daughter, and it may be,
Surprise the Queen and Chester.
If we do,
If but a hair of my betrayed wife,
Or my poor boy do perish, a head royal
Shall be sent back, slight scratches leave no scars
But deep wounds are seeds of Civil wars.
YOu would not then produce him.
Think of it Madam,
And for your own discharge, give up your Son.
I have him not to give.
We will no more be mocked, are all the people,
Horses, and Cattle voided forth the Castle?
All but this Hamper which stood underneath
The stairs that led into the Dungeon.
A place suspicious, search it.
Let not rudeness boast sir,
She was born in the presence of a Prince.
Tic locked my Lord.
Where is the Key?
I know not, lost.
Cut it open.
Do not, do not, indeed you'll spoil it then.
Well then they shall not.
Now the King is gracious.
But fetch each man a Torch, and here before me
Set it a fire.
Oh rather cut it sir in a thousand pieces;
Why did you tell me that they should not cut it,
And now would burn it? who did teach you sir
To mock a wounded heart? look, look, and they do not go
To cut it too; good sir, I have a Jewel
Lies concealed there, which I hid for fear of the soldiers,
Of infinite value.
Tic open my Lord.
what's in it?
Marry youth in a basket sir, here is the pretty Jewel
Of infinite value.
Hold him fast fellow, Hubert keep back the mother.
I would be kept back, is that a Boy
To crush with a rude hand, alas a grisly
Look, and his very looks do not fright my Child.
Oh mother here is a man looks very black,
(Pray do not hurt me) indeed, and if you doe,
You'll make my mother cry
For heavens sakellet me kiss him, I warrant you the
Child was almost smothered, come from him George.
A wo'not let me go, if I were your match,
Id give you a good sound box of the ear,
Come, Come, 'we will not part you, Hubert there waits
One Brand without, servant to the Earl of Chester,
With a guard, let him Convey them both to Winsor Castle,
And by this signet to sir Walter Blunt,
Detain them in his custody, until
We shall direct him further.
Oh brave, mother I have heard of Wiusor Castle, my father
Told me there are brave bows and arrows; and drums there.
Oh happy Innocent, who in spite of foes
Can play the pretty wanton with thy woes.
The Lord Steward sir
Is come it seems from London.
My Lord of Winchester the meaning of your speed?
The Popes legate Sir,
The Cardinal Pandulp is arrived at London,
What news with him; Six years we have stood
An inte•dicted man, can he bring louder thunder?
He brings proffers of peace sir,
Advantagable peace too, if that you please
To make a resignation of your Crown:
Ha!
Good sir suffer me,
And that to him to the Popes use; withal;
(Paying an Annual tribute for your Kingdoms
Of England, and of Ircland, in the presence
Of the whole body of the Peers,) he has power
From his Holiness to reinvest your temples
With the rich Diadem; and with all pronounce you
Again admitted into the Church, your power
Weakened and wounded, yet may by this means
Lyon like, rouse it self and remove all obstacles
Twixt you and the high calling of a King,
Which by the reason you stood Cursed at Rome,
Received affronts so frequent; besides Fitzwaters,
With Leister (who by the return of Bruce and Richmond
From thence to London, were upon expedition,
With there powers for Hartford Castle to intercept
The proceedings of the Queen and Chester;)
I have staid upon the Legates special chardge
To attend your resignation, potent nessesity
(The great dispenser with all Ceremony,)
Calls it a point of Policy, whereby
You build your self, ruin your enemy.
And then you stand again, sir a King absolute
And dazzle faction.
Come we will catch craft
With imitation, he that would screw his ends
To his own aims, must mingle (when he wins)
Secret dissemblings amongst his venial sins.
You are mine Sir.
Tic false, I am Fortunes.
This day to fortune then I sacrifice,
As to my Mistress.
A Whore is then your Mistress.
A Whore!
A rascal Jade,
That takes with the dexterity she gives; tell me
Of your Mistress and the Devil: Oh my stars.
O sir we have ways to tame you, you remember
You braved me in the presence of the King,
At Baynard Castle.
Oh I am mad,
Yet not so mad, but I dare still brave Chester,
And from the top of my affliction,
Upon thy light heeled Mrs. wanton fortune,
Cast from the manly temper of my blood
A noble scorn.
You shall be fettered first.
Fettered:
Yes, and sent
Up to the King as an arch Rebel, to whom,
To whom (before) we have by Letters sent our happy fortune.
Rebel:
By that boiling sea of blood which thou hast troubled,
Had my desires but bodies, I would burst
Fetters of steel, tear off thy cankered flesh,
And with thy Jaw-bone, (thou honour wounding man)
I would kill a thousand of these Rascals.
Drag him
Into the Castle, since your fortunes move you,
We•'l force you to a madness.
Fool thou can not;
Frost makes fire fervent, he that wisely knows
His wealthy fate, bravely becomes his woes.
Are you so armed, away with him.
Come forward fury, witch.
Alas, why thus
Great Queen do you mis-use me? credit me
I do not fear to die, young Infants do it;
Nor wish I life, the murderer enjoys it;
But let me know my trespass.
I'm made your stale,
The King, the King your strumpet; oh thou wretch,
The matter my spleen!
Hear me but speak.
Yes, I will thee speak,
That every syllable may serve instead
Of a fierce wind to blow my fiercer fury
Into the fashion of a punishment,
Fitting the daring of thy trespass.
Hear me;
By these red marks, registers of your rashness,
And by these tears, the fruits of my affliction,
That the King passionately pursues my love,
Is truth uncontr•dicted; but if I
Did ever think you wrong, let mine honour be
buried in dark oblivion.
Sin's a sweet tame Serpent, they must beguile
Cloth rude errors, in a soft smooth stile:
•ut str•mpst thou shalt ruin't.
Shift for your self Madam,
Richmond escaped from London with the powers
Levied by Leister, and Fitzwater, (who
Were stayed by Winchester, and the Legate Pandulph)
Hath rescued Bruce, got again the Castle,
And make you now their search.
Cease on the Queen;
Madam you are our prisoner,
Keep Chester safe good Ricmond;
Ha! oh what rude hand
Hath rased this Book of beauty? a face where virtue
Intelligibly stood to charm the Reader: Tell me Cozen,
And by the thousands of thy tears, and fears
No tittle, place, degree, the very Grave
Shall not secure the offender.
There is death in's angry eyes.
The rude Soldiers
My noble Cozen hailed me thus, and tore me,
And would have sure done worse, but that the Queen,
The wondrou• kind Queen in her royal person,
Came with a troop of well appointed Soldiers,
and rescued me.
She mocks me sure.
The Queen so kind.
O Cousin had you seen
How good she was in her quick speed, how zealous
To relieve innocence, you would have thought
She'd killed them with her frowns ever she came at them,
So lamentably miserable were my sufferings,
So excellently noble was her charity.
Now by my life, it was honour in the highest,
Because a foe, and gracious Madam, not
To be out bid in this brave Mart of honour,
You shall have a safe Convoy, and of quality
Fitting your person, to convey (with your freedom)
To th'angry King our loves, that he may see
How plain to him we mean, and how nobly
Unto a goodness of so fair deservings
As this now shown; see there be present order
For her Majesties attendance, and sue Cos
With-draw from the cold air.
Farewell Matilda;
Oh pardon me for heavens sake, now I find
Thy soul is Crystal.
Remember to the King
Good Madam my great sorrows; and forget not
To tell him this, that woman in whose heart
Virtue and honour stand a pair of Sentinels;
The Sea may sooner flame, fire admit frost,
Ever such a woman fall from heaven: Oh she,
Who as a regular star, keeps virtues spear,
Shows like a Pearl hung in an Angel• ear.
Thou noble soul of goodness.
Lo in the sight of Prelates Peers,
Of Earth and Heaven, of all that hears
My words; I John Plantagaent,
(With all submissive reverence,) set
My Crown at the most sacred foot
Of Innocent the Third, unto't
I join my Kingdom•, give them free
Unto his pious clemency:
And for the follies of my Reign,
Heats of my youth, and the rough strain
Of riper years, my Rebellions, my high hand,
My six years Interdiction, and
A•l my mis-doings; I this, and those,
Submit to the Popes power to disclose.
You have by times recracted, and your foot now
Beats out a certain path; in these Lords sights of I do
Produce the Letter, drawn Obligatory
From John of England to his Holiness,
Peruse it sir, you are there obliged to pay,
(As yearly from this day Renting your Kingdoms)
To Innocent the Third, and to his Successors
A thousand marks per annum.
It runs so.
Yes, three hundred for Ireland, &amp; seven for England.
Do not peruse it John, though thou and we
Have had some bickerings, yet let me counsel thee,
This is my Countries Cause.
You, and your Country
Have cause in this Cause to rejoice.
Good, good, Sir Pandvlph,
Though in our filial love to our Mother Church,
By his Holiness command, we stayed from Hartford,
Yet lets have fair play, do not wrong that mother,
Apparelling her comely holy face,
With a forehead full of frowns, plaited proceedings.
You rail.
I do not rail,
Although I hold and reverence the Chair,
(We had been at Hartford else, and not at London,)
Yet in a true breast we should nothing see,
But holy pure, unmixed simplicy.
Give me the pen.
Will you then sign?
Yes, you rough Sons of faction,
And hook your stubborn nostrils, this is Rubarb
To your smooth palates: give me the pen to write.
Do not write John.
Do not prate fool.
In sooth that write
Will wrong thee; Children and Fools tell truth,
Remember that.
There was no way like this,
To beat a path out to your peace.
Right Reverend
And holy Sir, receive to the Popes use,
His will, and your own charge: Sir, descend not,
But ere you re-invest me, hear me tell
A tale of sorrow, behold here these Lords,
Who had been now bruising the face of peace
With unkind buffets, but for VVinchester,
Your strict compulsion, and their seeming fear
Of deserved interdiction; but oh spright,
No Devil deceives like th'houshold hypocrite,
These of my Court, with young Brace now ensconced
At Hartford, whither it may hair brained Richmond
hath retired his discontents.
We miss our hopes else.
These bandy faction with me, and with their drum•
(Lewd linguists to interpret their disloyalties)
Brave me in the field, deform the afflicted face
Of trembling England with foul bloody stain•,
Larums at hideous midnight, they break my sleeps,
Fill them with fearful dreams, terrible startings,
And with the grief of my unfriendly fears,
Force me to pierce my pillow with my tears.
Unnatural cruelty,
Able to melt marble into compassionate tears.
Dainty dissembler.
Now may it please you—
Peace until his holiness command be sinished;
Ascend your now true Seat sir, and from the hand
Of my self Pandulph, Legate for the Pope,
Observing the due payments specified,)
Receive your Crown and Kingdoms; and with them
We here pronounce your absolute readmission
Into the Church, and from his holnesse
We re-invest you, with all Powers, Prerogatives,
Freedoms, Communities, (and in the strength of efficacy,)
That constantly adhears to lawful Princes,
And an obedient Son unto the Church,
Long life to John of England, VVales and Ireland,
The lawful King!
I am mad.
So, so, now we must suffer
The Kingdoms ancient Liberties, Land, lives,
And all to run the course that he shall steer,
Good heaven that I were dead, what do I here.
But i'll not asse-like bear my Countries wrongs,
Mine own at home, and like a Court Chameleon,
Give thanks unto mine injurer: hear me King John.
You shall hear us sir first; we have been clouded
Six years, but like the Sun in his Meridian,
We now again are glorious; thus in brief,
Leister we require strong pledge for your loyalty;
Bruce call your mad Son home from Hartford,
Your Wife and Son shall better speed at Guilford,
For Richmond in our re-assumed power.
We will proclaim him Traitor, and Fitzwater,
Either give up Matilda for your faith, or hear
What we shall sentence.
We must stand then
What thunder you shall throw, perform with us,
We kiss your royal hands.
If not, we stand
Rocks in our resoluton.
Do ye hear them now sir?
Nay, nay, let him hear me too then:
Lord Legate Pandulph; thus it is,
And thus you may inform his holiness,
In a field called running-Mead' twixt Staines and VVinsor,
After some bloody noses on both sides,
I tell truth I; there the King and Barons
Met for discussion of conceived wrongs,
And indeed not misconceived, our Houses, Honours,
Our Fathers freedoms, the Lands ancient Liberties
(Unjustly to increase some private Confers)
Felt daily Demunition, there to Covenants drawn,
(Bearing the name and sense of Magna Charta,
Which many hundred years may be seen hereafter)
King John subscribed, we swore him fealty.
Which fealty they denied, till our assoylment
Of our six years Interdiction, forcing us therefore
To seal unlawful liberties.
Upon our honours,
They were but what Antiquity proved lawful.
Oh but my Lord.
Tut, tut, Lord me no Lords,
He broke, we pouted, I tell plain truth I,
Yet fell into no relapse of hostility,
But wot ye what, he casts a covetous eye,
Upon my Daughter, passionately pursues her,
There had been other pledges but our oaths else,
(For heaven knows thtm he had) and (amongst the rest)
Matilda must be my pledge, for well he deemed
They yielding their•, shame would brand my denial,
But catch craft, when we put truth to trial,
Kings should have shining souls, and white desires
Inflamed with zeal, not parched by Paphian fires;
So shines the soul in which virtue doth shroud,
Is a serene sky bespotted with no cloud,
But a Copper conscience whilst the head wears Gold,
Is but a plain down-right untruth well told,
Come, come, I cannot fawn.
But in the passion
Gf a Dog sir you can snarl; have you talk all your words?
I have told truth I.
Then we will fall to deeds,
Oxford command a Guard, and presently
Take them to'th Tower; we can now talk and do,
Away with them, and mussel those fierce Mastiffs,
That durst leap at the face of Majesty,
And strike their killing fangs into honours heart;
Are they not gone? we shall be passionate
In your delay.
Come Leister, let us wear
Our sufferings like Garland.
Tempest nor death,
Could never ou• do Leister, who dares dye
Laughing at times poisoned integrity.
Now by my troth it was very nobly spoken,
Shall I turn tale; no, no, no, lets go,
But how things will be carried; ha! are these tears
Body of me? they are; Shall I go like a sheep
With this pair of Lyons; ha, ha, ha,
I do laugh now John, and i'll tell thee why,
You are yet in thy green May, twenty seven summers
Set in our Kalends, but when forty Winters more
Shall roun'd thy forehead with a field of snow,
And when thy comely veins shall cease to flow,
When those majestic eyes shall float in rhumes,
When giant Nature her own self consumes,
When thy swift Pulses shall but slowly pant,
When thou art all a Volume of my want,
(That like a tale-sp•ned fire thou shalt s•nck,)
Then John upon this lesson thou wilt think•
He dyes a happy old man, whose sweet youth
Was a continued sacrifice to truth;
I must weep now indeed.
Away with them.
Unto King John, the favour of his holiness,
With peace and happiness.
Which we return
With all filial obedience—look up Oxford,
The day breaks, and the Sun hath chaste the night
Out of our Hemisphere.
Your news sir?
Letters from the Queen sir.
Was the Earl Richmond there with any powers
Ever your departure.
No may it please your Majesty, we heard not of him,
But all on your part went fair and fortunate
Oh Oxford now they have her, fly back like lightning,
Tell him this day we'll meet them all at Barnet.
But her Father and her friends imprisonment
May obdurate her hey•t, they dare not sure
On the great peril of a curse to fall
Into a Relapse now you are absolute.
Faith 〈◊〉 try smooth paths to your ends, to release them,
I hold the winningst way to captivate
Their duties, and Matilda to your wishes.
Good, do not kill me •oy before our going
Instantly thou shalt fly with the Lords release,
We pine in our delays, oh Cupped swiftly
Fly into Paphoes, and from thy Mothers shrine,
Catch but a nimble wanton flame, and cast it
Into the busy Kingdom of my heart,
That it may teach my tongue the art of victory,
And every year unto thy well-spent Quiver
I'll add a shaft, and call it Cupids love Dart;
Come Oxford, I tread methinks on air,
Until I read that Volume of sweet grace,
The well writ story of Matild•'s face.
She yields at last my life on it sir.
WIll Brand, these are to certify, That Fortune, Mistresses
of Changes, with my unlucky stars, hathrendred m• a pri∣sooner
to my most mortal Enemy young Bruce.
That mad Tamberlaine.
My entreaty is none of the noblest, but direct against my
blood, my desires, and my deservings.
Oh that I had a leg of that young Bruce, but minced
and buttered.
I am credibly possessed, his Majesty hath into your custody
comm•ited his Mother, and her young Son George, whereby you
have occasion cast into your hand to parallel their; sufferings with
my fortunes, not that I would have you banish humanity.
He need never have writ that Bawds and Sergeants have
saved me the labour.
Nor give to deep a wound to Conscience.
Another labour saved too,
Usurers do it daily
But as I let you understand how I am here accommodated,
so shape the duty of a Servant to parallel in their persons, your vile∣lified
Mr Ralph Chester.
Brave Lord, the Laddar of my fortunes, 〈◊〉
suffer on that side, and for humanities sake, and thred-b••
conscience (a couple of cousin-Germans, that thrice a week
know not where to get a supper;) shall the friends of him that
stands Lord of thy fortunes, and thy professed foe, fare well
here; now I talk of fare, I received this Letter yesterday, and
since they have uei•h•r eaten bit, nor drunk drop, nor by these
ten stealers shall not, till I hear again from my Lord—:
Come o•lt madam Mother, and your young prating brat—they
do look hungry already.
What would our unkind Jailer?
Sure Mother Mr. Brand hath brought us v•ctuals.
No sirrah, I come to tell you to day i• fasting day.
Two days together,
Good Mr. Brand, it is not mine own want begs,
But my poor Boys; I have held him pretty pastime,
To have him yet forget that wild woolf hunger,
And still the harmless soul would point each period
Of his sport, erying Mother give me bread.
She has a winning way,
Her carriage and her person are both exquisite:
Fai•• tell me Madam, what would you give for some victuals
To give your Son?
Any thing, set thou the price thou shalt have Gold.
And truly sir, if you'll but give me a Cake,
Or a Capons leg, when I am a man,
I'll give you twenty shillings to buy your Boy fine things.
If you dare lye with me,
You and your Son shall both have sustenance.
Hearken good heaven, what says the man?
He would Isle with you Mother,
But then when I am a bed too, there
Will be no room for my, Father.
Be as plain and brief as I was, dare ye do'•?
No thou bad man, I dare no•.
No body shall see• by this hand,
Thou lie thou fiend, should thou 〈◊〉 Ca••e do'•,
The Towers would tremble, and turn Intelligencers
To all the passengers; the walls would shudder,
The E•cutchions, Streamers, Baune• s, all the Relics
Of fame and honour, would fall down, to see
Honour and Fame so wounded.
See! I am ashamed to hear you,
If such sins could not be done without being seen,
Informers would have a fine trade on it, a Parators place
Would counvaile five Sergeants; ha, ha, seen kither;
Why there would not be sheets en ugh in the Land
For the penitent, and innocent Beadles enough to correct the
Guilty; Come, come, we will do it in•h dark then,
In he dark said thou?
Oh in the deepest darkness, the white Angels
Will stare upon thee, and with flaming eyes.
Will make make the room appear to thy wild conscience,
Twice lighter then the Sun:
It is a foul Devil that insinuates to thee,
The sower sweetness of a d••uded minute;
He has borrowed a white robe, pluck it off from him,
And thou wilt see him a black hideous monster,
How with a slavish look he will creep from thee,
Displeased that thou art fallen again in love,
With holy goodness.
How my Conscience wambles.
Do, do, good sir, think of it,
It will make you give's some bread.
And then you'll be a very honest man,
I have heard you.
And with a thirsty soul I hope.
Yes, as Usurers hear Sermons, more for novelty then
integrity, I love good words when I pay nothing for 〈◊〉;
what do you see in me that I should appear unworthy of your
grant•
Because in that request,
Thou appear'st to me as ugly as a Toad.
A Toad •
I, and a Frog to if you go to that,
Doe not cry Mother.
Get you both in, by this victorious sword,
And by the horrid odious comparison,
(for such a one first •u e made comparisons odious)
Ye get not a bit this seven days.
By that time
My Boy and I shall make a pair of happy ones
In youder glorious Kingdom; tell me George,
Shall this bad man abnse thy Fathers bed?
Or shall we fast yet longer?
The boy will consent I warrant you,
The Pages have instructed him.
Indeed I am very hungry:
Did I not tell you so.
But rather then this Goat shall lie in my fathers place,
Indeed •'le fast this seven years.
Ah noble boy,
Sweet plant of goodness, thou hast proved it true,
Virtue will wish the good it cannot do.
Aterribly ugly Toad.
Good sir ye must be patient.
Patient,
Bitterness dwells with me: if I do not put him
To an eternal patience, that shall dare
To witch me into that dull fit of fools;
Matilda won and lost•
Good sir
Away;
Struggle not with the tempest of my blood,
That will undo th•e.
Richmond Lyon like,
(After we sent our Letter with the Foree•
The Barons had prepared,) clouded our day,
And made our fortunes his.
They •out of the Tower to,
Fitzwater Bruce, and Leister, with fresh powers,
Are not a league hence.
The Lyon Richmond, a Hare had he met with any
But field Mice, Rats, Run-awayes, and Weezles,
Frighted even with the waving of a Flag,
They would have called• scar-crow stufi'd with straw,
And bound upon a ten groats Irish Garron,
The Glorious Richmond •pone his fiery Steed;
Oh there is nothing certain but our sorrows,
Our borrowed bliss is but the shuttle•-cock
Of a days pastime.
I have pastim'd her, if tearing be a pastime,
Let that comfort you,
I have torn her almost to d: ath.
Matilda.
Yes.
And would you have it comfort me?
I know it does, call but up your Troops
Brayely again, recover her, and read
Upon her face my fury.
Oh ye cruel one,
Crueler then the flame that turned to Clnders
The fair Ephesian Temple; wilde as a Woolf,
The Bear is not so bloody, tear her hairs,
Which when they took their •esteem with the winds,
Would charm the astonished gazer; tear that face,
Lovely as is the morning in whose eyes
Stands writ the history of her heart, intioing
The ravished Reader to run on, upon whose eye lids
Discretion dwells, which when a wilde thought
Would at those Casements like a Thief steal in,
Plays her heart's noble friend, and shuts out sin.
O why then sir, if she be such a volume
Of white unvanquished 〈◊〉 would you stain.
And blot the seer leaves with your 〈◊〉 desire•
Ghaste, frosty bosoms, brook no lust-born fires.
She has put me to my sophistry.
I knew I was made
Your stay for her obtaining.
Oh why
Raise you so high a Piramis to her praise,
And prostrate your own virtue? if she be
Such a Book of goodness (with bad desires)
Why do you read her? He no truth intends,
Seeks to corrupt that Text which he commends,
Good sir consider it.
Well, I will think on'•, and you will have done.
Now is the time my Lord,
If ever you would be fortunate in your desires,
Richmond, young Bruce, Matilda,
(With the Earl of Chester prisoner,) •and a slight convoy
But of some threescore Horse, and two hundred Archer•
Are now in the valley crossing of the County,
It is thought for Essex.
Where are their main Forces?
Inscon'st in Hartford Castle, our Forces yet
Not so diminished, or in rout for want
Of their lost General, but if you please,
We dare with hope assail them.
I will be General,
Order the Powers you have for present on-set.
My Lord, you said you would consider.
I am considering bravely how to charge
The Foe just in the face: Matilda I am now thy Soldier,
Friend of my heart, the King himself comes for thee,
Who shall in this days doings amply prove,
Honour takes fire from the flame of love.
Good fortune on our side sir.
Hear not that prayer
Good heaven, oh tempt not virtue to adorn
A foul Cause with fair fortunes: Hark, hark, they meet,
And now pell mell the angry Lords do list
Unnatural swords, good heaven keep safe the King,
But let his Cause miscarry; I w ll not stay
To see him so pursue those wild desires,
Which cannot sure end well; i'll to the Lords
So near at hand, and with Matilda's Father,
Accommodate my griefs, and let there be
Her fears, my tears, the Kings infirmity.
Oxford, sh•'s now the Kings.
Most miserable Maid.
Most excellent Matilda all are thy friends,
Imperious love fat on my l•ance just then,
When on the pan•ing breast of daring Richmond.
(Who like a me•ancholly sullen Cloud,
Eclipsed thy Chariot) thou did see me print
My re••less passion: Oxford keep my happiness,
Just with that care thou would oreserve that pair
Of pr•c os things, thine eye; Chesters engaged
Deep in the Cha•e, and we must te•ch him off;
Pardon me honour that I plac•d love first,
My doings now are thine.
Keep near the King, Gentlemen,
His unbounded spirit may loose him el•e; good Madam
Do not lament so, though your friends are •catered,
You're in a sphere of happiness.
Oh that great power,
That many times out of this toy I hath taken me,
Deliver me again, because again,
Virtue hath made me miserable.
Oh that necessity
Should force us unto flight, base flight, repugnant
To man and honour. Ha! nappy flight now,
That brought me this way.
Cozen.
Oxford, either give back
That pure unspotted Dove, from the killing Talon
Of the forgetful King, or thou or I
Must never see him more. •
That to our fortunes,
I must not fail the King sir.
I must not fail then
To get her as I can sir.
We are scattered now
Paste making head again.
But I have made shift to get my Cousin again sir.
Let us not stay now to expostulate, Necessity
Directs us to our friends not a league distant,
If we not fly we are lost.
Good Cousin lets fly,
Tic no difgrace to obey necessity.
Oh I could stamp and tear that hag necessity,
Bitter necessity, thou scourge of things
That forces Lyons to wear Swallows wings.
You have plaid the Soldier sir.
The Soldier Chester; I am so light with joy,
I could do any thing.
Troth sir would it might please you then to grace
Me with the President-ship of Picardy,
Fallen in this last Rebellion from the Lord
Bruce un•o your Crown.
Tic thine as certain
As Matilda is the Kings: Oh Chester, now Matilda
Is in the Kings power.
No sir, she is in heavens.
Who's this, Oxford, lets help to raise him up.
What say thou man? Matilda, where is Matilda?
Young Bruce in his flight happening upon this way
For her recovery gave me fierce assault;
I did stand for you sir as much as man could,
Till my mis-fortune found me, then I fell;
To him eame Richmond, and with all speed possible
They have carried her to'th Lords on tother side the h•ath.
Oh villain, villain•
Suppose he had cut thy hear• strings, had thou cast•
Thy dying eye upon Matilda's face?
She would have shot another spirit into thee,
More daring then the first, at least more fortunate.
Let him be conveyed to'ch Town and dressed,
Our best course is now to with-draw, the Lords
Are strong, and may give us dangerous chase else.
What are our hopes
Like Garlands, •pone afflictions forehead worn,
Kissed in the morning, and at evening torn.
The day is then the Kings.
White victory
Clapped on her silver wings, with a sullen face,
Took leave of us, and pitched upon his Tent,
Where she sat smiling, while necessity.
Enforced our flight.
Oh that witch Necessity.
Well, well, away with the witch,
Tic well you brought Matilda off; come, come,
And brther Bruce you have a Wife and Son
Unjustly detained from you, I am injured,
I pray set you our feet into the path
Of our proceedings.
Lets with our powers
Raze Winsor walls.
Now you are in the field straight,
Give old men leave; you would raze! what would you raze•
Your reputation with your rash proceedings;
Come, come, hear your Father.
Why let him speak them,
First let us take up our affronts in order,
And fix by ours, the Generals grievances,
The crying groans of England, whose blubbered cheeks
Are stiff with tears, to see their privildedges
Daily impaired.
What's to be done?
Let's send to the French King,
Proffer him our assistance, to transfer
The Crown from John to him, if at such a day
He will put over a strong Navy Royal,
With an Army for the attempt, with which (our Forces
Making one body) both at at Sea and Land,
We bid fair for our freedoms.
I do not like it.
S'foot, you will like nothing;
Let us be ringed and noosed,
Besides, being assoil'd of his six years Interdiction,
Those that before fled from him as a Leper,
Will now flock to him.
They begin already,
(Although we seek (with our own) their good,) to censure
And call hostility plain faction.
This is my resolve, I say there is no way
To fix our freedoms, but to call in Philip
And make him King.
So think we all.
I but I think not so,
Though you're all wise for Philip, he'll be a gainer,
But what will you get by it? They run on Rocks and shelves,
Can can counsel others, not secure themselves.
We must and will do something.
You will send to Philip,
Instruct him to proceed, it may be furnish
His Navy with our Pilots, he lands, we proffer
Change, John for Philip; oh can you think,
That we can undergo a heavier stroke
From a Natural, then from a Foreign yoke;
Go to, go to, who in no estate can rest,
They may change oft, but seldom comes the best.
I am diverted.
Which way would you steer then?
By the same Compass, but not upon this parallel,
I do not like the line; but this we'll do,
We'll send for Lewis, Philips Son the Dolphin,
And to him (seemingly) praetor the proffer,
A Crown will fire him; may be he shall land,
But with no more Force then we please; and it may be
He shall take a fisher Town, for every Nation
Can take away their trading as the time goes,
Our m•in Force being ready, we will hover
Twixt John and Lewis; if John deny an oath
To redress our griefs, and become regular
And Hostage for the keeping it, we join
With the French and fright him further; If he consent,
We fall on his part then, expulse Lewis,
And send him to the Seas again; the Dolphin
Is young and may be wrought on, but old Philip
Is dangerously politic, with foot ashore,
He will brook no juggling, both ease, and safety
We work on Willows, but when we strike at Oaks,
We sweat, and sometimes hurt with our own strokes.
It shall be thus effected.
But let report divulge his Landing,
With more eminent danger then we will let him practise.
For this time
Rise then; See the Queen and Ladies,
Good Madam cast off sadness,
Matilda we are all here in the City safe;
The very hearts of the Citizens (men injured
In their privileges as we are) they are ours,
What should we fear then?
You are all such friends,
I am poor in my well-meaning thankfuln̄esse.
A Barge with divers youthful Citizens,
Apparelled rich like Masquers, is now land'd
Upon the Stairs, hearing the Queen was here,
•idol this meeting of their noble friends,
Proffer their loves and duties to conclude
And grace the evening with their Revels.
In the Hall we'll meet them. Did not I tell you
These Citizens were noble lads our friends?
Waite on the Ladies Lords, I am here your Graces servant,
By my troth I thank'em, they will crown our feast,
And credit me, having such a princely guest.
Now by my troth they are gallants,
Citizens said you; now I remember to,
Ye do go gallant in your Shops, no wonder then,
If in Masques you cut it. I remember Gentlemen,
Your Fathers wore a king of comely habit,
Comely, because it well became the reverend name of Citizens,
But now let a Knight walk with you in your shops,
(And I commend you for it, ye keep the fashion)
We know not which is which—; how my tongue ranges,
And night grows old, mad times, must have mad changes;
Come, come, a Hall, a hall.
Believe me you have done well.
Pox a' these Cats guts, how they squeak.
Methinks a rattling sheep-skin lustily boxed,
Would thunder brave amongst them.
I can dance no more indeed sir.
I am deceived if that fellow did not carry
A Torch even now;
Will you shame the Gentleman?
Dance when I bid you.
Oh me, that grasp was like the Kings.
Dance Cousin.
In good deed dance,
Or you will make me angry.
Body of me, that's too much for a Torch-bearer,
You sir Jack, sir Jack, she is no whit-leather,
She will not stretch I assure you, if you come hither
For love so it is.
For love.
But if you and your Company,
Put on forgetful rudeness, pray take your Cupped yonder,
Your thing of feathers, and your Barge stands ready
To bear ye all aboard the ship of Fools,
I am plain Robin—passion of me!
Look if he do not threaten me; I will see thee,
Were thou King John himself.
The King!
Oh which way shall I fly?
I would not leave so sweet a chaste companion.
What's this, one of her Fathers Gloves?
This shall be drawn upon the lucky hand of a thriving plot.
Behold thy King, thine Bruce, one of the Fathers
Of these retired factions; Richmond, the King,
And thine •ough Leister; is this still your nest
Wherein to hatch another Scorpions Egg,
To sting the afflicted bosom of your Country,
To bruise her sides with the earth-wounding hooves
Of War-apparell'd Horses, whose dreadful neighings
May fright her pale face to a bloody blush,
And again make her groan.
Your pardon sir,
By my good Sword I knew ye not.
No, if you had,
Your dangerous Brother Bruce and you, had laid
Some plot for his sacred person; then pleaded ignorance,
That ye took him as he seemed, a saucy stranger.
Chester, Thou art not noble in thy c•nsure,
And sawn 'st thy self into the abused favour
Of the to-credulous King.
Oh temptation, what a Devil art thou;
Now by my blood young man, you court my spleen
In a vain glorious shape; Chester fawn,
Just heaven forbid it.
An Axe upon your neck, che just heavens give you•
And that in heaven were justice—
Son, you're too full of choler.
Choler, Halter.
By the mass that's near the choler.
Upon your lives no more, the King is here;
Fitzwater, I did not come to quarrel with thee,
I would have such a good man ever near me,
And for a flourish to the rest (of whom
As of old Bruce we have) we will require strict pledges, and
Fitzwater let thy Daughter live at Court, she shall be kept.
In the custody of the Queen, but as no pledge.
The Queen is gracioue.
Come, to their ruins leave these turbulent Lords.
But suppose the Queen should ride abroad to hunt,
And leave Matilda solitary at home,
I think the King would come and comfort her.
I am of thy mind, I think he would.
Would he so?— I would have no one hear.
They cannot man.
Pray tell the King, isle keep my Girl at home,
And comfort her my self.
You will.
John, John, now I speak out;
You made your Masque for this, a Masque indeed,
And we-aday! that it should prove a Cover
For such a night of Tempests, such wilde affections,
Such an ill-favour'd night.
Hubert, is it done?
Past expectation, I have bettered your plot,
And got the Queen too,
And will bring them early in the morning to'th Court.
Have the Torch-bearers given fire to the plot?
They mixed with opportunity.
I do not like this whispering,
Where are the Ladies and Matilda?
The Ladies are at the further side the Castle,
But by a Glove you sent by a Gentleman,
That said he served Earl Leister, that with him
She and the Queen should fly for safety whither
You had directed him, glad of any scare,
They took a Barge, another leapt in after them,
But whom he was I know not.
Sent you a Glove.
A Glove indeed I miss, but I sent none.
This is a Riddle.
I will play Oedipus, and expound it for you,
As Hubert has infused; you dropped your Glove,
Ingenius Hubert found it, and (though we
Had directed otherwise,) he employed a Gentleman
Of our own Chamber, one unknown to Matilda,
To bring it as your close intellige ce
For her flight with him; he that leapt into 'th Barge,
As they put of, was Oxford, now we have her
Never again to lose her.
By my vexed blood
King John, this is not honourable.
We are betrayed,
All that bore Torches in the Masque to night,
Were of the Guard, who upon a received watch-word,
Fell to their Arms, beat down all opposed them,
And are shaping their course this way.
Lets meet'em,
We have an injured patience, came death in whirle-winds,
Isle be the first shall front him; to thy prayers John,
Pray heartily, that thy friends fatal points
May pierce these hearts; for if they miss 'tshall prove
The bloodi st beauty story ever told
To fright the Readers souls; a purple cloud
Shall shadow England, the whole Land shall •eel,
The Center gr•a•s, thy very Crown shall stand
Trembling upon thy Temples, till it fall
A Mourner at thy fems black funeral.
Oh noble Nephew.
Ha, ha, ha, let 'em rave on; Ingenious Hubert•
That could so swifty apprehend a smooth
Path to'th possession of Matilda!
Quit Oxford from her charge; unto thy care
The King commends the Mistress of his heart,
In the morning let me see her.
She shall waite upon you sir.
The Barons threaten high sir.
Let them burst.
Come Gentlemen, to'th Barge, and so to'th Court,
To clip our wishes, perils appear sport.
I Wonder how my pair of Prisoners fadge?
I am something dogged too a to'ther side,
That thus long have not seen them, nor have they eat•
I am sure since they came in; in yon Madams eye
I am as ugly as a Toad, I will see her,
And contemn her—, you and your brat come out,
Here is meat, I am sure you are hungry.
O Mother, will you be sick now?
Mr. Boand hath brought us meat.
Oh on my knee sir
I thank you, not for my want, for I feel
Nature almost quite vanquished; but for my Son;
He may live long to thank you.
Give but my Mother
A little piece of bread, and if I live,
(as yet I may do, if you can be merciful)
I will tell my Father such good things of you,
He shall return your kindness treble back
To your honest bosom; Oh Mother for some bread.
Some bread?
Why to have an honest bosom (as the world goes)
Is the next way to want bread; i• faith tell me,
How have you past the time you wanted Victu••l•?
Very hardly,
And still the poor Boy sighin•, would say, Mother
You look very hungry, I did think straight how ha•d
Your heart was, then we both did fall a weeping,
Clung our lean arms about each others neck,
And sat a pair of mou•ers.
Delicate pastime, Toads love no other;
Look ye, here is bread.
Oh if you be a good man, give me but a bit
To give my Mother, poor soul look how she looks!
Indeed she's very hungry.
Yes, so is my Dog,
I must keep this for his breakfast.
Give but my boy one bi•,
And the Saints sure will look how good you are,
They will be glad to see you charitable,
And call it excellent compassion.
No, cunning from a Toad twill p•yson him.
It will not sir, indeed I am so hungry,
I could eat Rats or Mice.
Your to'ther hair brain,
Your wilde mad Son, retains my Lord a Prisoner,
Uses him basely, and you must suffer for it.
Give me but Paper, Pen and Inck, i'll wrile,
And charge him to fall down, and li•k the dust.
Thy Lord shall set his foot on, I will conjure him:
And woe away his wildness by the groars
I su•fer'd for him, I'll threaten his denial
With a Mothers family-consounding curse:
This I will do, or any thing that may
But purchase my poor Boy one bit of bread.
No.
O harder then the Rocks, more merciless
Then the wilde evening Woolf.
Mother do not die,
For heavens sake help my Mother; look up
And ye shall see me dance, and then the Gentleman
Will sure bestow a piece of bread upon us.
Look here thou Iron-hearted man. upon
A palre of piercing miseries.
A Scoene of mirth;
I am all hard, the heat of lust which stood
To clip revenge, we stem a stream of blood.
How do ye Mother?
How doth my Boy.
Very sick indeed; but I warrant you are more hungry
Then I a great deal, are you not?
Oh no,
Thou art weak, and famine plays the Tyrant with thee;
Look here my boy, bite on thy Mothers arm,
The blood will nourish thee.
Will your blood nourish me?
Yes, yes, I pre•hee try.
Why should not mine then nourish you? it is the same;
Good Mother eat my arm, bite but a bite,
Truly I shall hurt you if I bite yours,
I warrant you'll be better presently.
I shall my Son, and so shalt thou, come near me,
Let us go hand in hand to Heaven.
Oh mother, something pinched my very heart,
And I shall die, my dear, dear mother.
Art thou gone my Son?
My soul shall overtake thee: oh friendly death
That give that gripe, sure when thou kill the guilty,
Frowns curl thy angry forehead; but when thou steal
Towards innocence, (their pale fears to beguile)
Thou deck'st thy lean face with a lovely smile.
My Lord recovered by the valiant King!
In all his battles he is fortunate,
And now tdey shall have meat; ha! meat said I?
I have made them worms meat;
Oh what a talking is within me! if I stay,
The building sure will crush me, i'll ha• to•h Court,
My Lord here intimates the Kings observance of me,
I must hence; oh gnilt, thou draw deaths image horrid,
When we begin to like our ills, how sweet a face hath sin!
Which but past by, a cheater she appears,
Joys are her promise, but she pays us fears.
Your care in the conveyance of Matilda
To this appoited place, the King shall recompense,
With-draw your self.
I shall my Lord.
Matilda, whore's that spirit that kept thy virtue
Valiant and bold•
If virtue so ill pay us,
Who would be virtuous?
Virtue! pale poverty
Reproach, disaster, shame sits on her forehead,
Despisings fill her sleep•, ill 〈…〉
Meet her at every turn, tears are her triumphs,
Her drink affliction, Calumny attends her,
The unclean tongue of slander daily licks her
Out of her fashion; but if you be Kings Johns friend—
Oh strong temptation.
Matilda—
You may like
A nimble wind, play on the rustling bosom
Of that fantastic wood, the world; your sleeps a paradise
hung round with glittering dreams, then your dissemblings
〈…〉 called dev•tions, your rigged 〈◊〉 hypocrisy
Religions holy heats, mirth dee•• the Court d•i•s,
The wanton minutes glide just like a stream,
That clips the bosom of a wealthy mead,
Till't get it great with child, a sweet green blassing.
Consider, it is the King.
I, I, the King.
Trust not this tempter, lusts irreligious linguist,
Remember virtue is a holy flame,
A sacred inclination of the soul
To all things honest.
I can resist no longer,
Oh Hubert, you are a victorious tempter.
Can this be possible?
Forget not, at the beginning
Of this sweet race, honour hold out for you
A golden Garland.
Oh remember,
At the end of chastities white race, an Angel
Holds in his hand (shot through a silver Cloud,)
A Crown for Conquerors.
Will ye loose the pleasure that—
I, I, those pleasures Hubert, there is a voice
Of flesh and frailty in me, that still cries,
Matilda take those pleasures, and I am now
The Kings for ever.
Let the Queen then cut from earth
Such a dissembler.
Nay but you shall not.
Shame and death dwell
With a goodness so short-si•'d, thou handsome hypocrite,
Thou faith-defrauder, a religious qualm
Crossing the stomach of a seeming Saint,
Which falls straight into humoor, all thy devotions
Prove now but well-clad cheaters of Times Charity,
Thy griefs, and sighs, are but sins crafty games,
Their soon sp•ned flashes play like holy flames.
It shall be so: to some remote place, shut
from the danger of the angry Queen i'll carry you,
And thither bring the King.
I long to see him.
Hubert, wilt thou play the Court Camclion,
The persum'd Pander.
Yes marry will I, Panders have need of perfumes.
Oh merry sin!
We smile towards Hell, but howl when we are in,
Name but the place Madam, and religiously I vow,
By th'unstain'd honour of my Name and Thou•e,
By the white reputation of a Gentleman,
And as I wish for after happiness, my care
Sha•l I see it instantly in execution.
My Cousin Bruce, Earl Richmond, with the convoy,
The King discomfited, they would madly have carried me
To Dunmow Abbey in fruitful Essex.
S••oot a thousand Kings
could not thence recover ye, but name the place
Whither I shall carry you, good Madam whither?
Good Hubert thither.
What to a Monastory?
Call her dissembling,
No ••nne good heaven, for she is still a Saint.
Upon my knee I beg it, and every day
When I shall drop a Bead, I'll strongly pray
That you may find a blessing.
Hark Hubert.
There is something telis me there is honour in it,
To grant her good request.
Mark how your Oath ran,
By the honour of your House,
By the white reputation of a Gentleman.
And as you wish for after happiness.
You'd put my wish in speedy execution.
Oh Hubert mark, he his house pulls down,
That wounds his honour, though to please a Crown,
By Heraul'ds he's a Gentleman maintained,
Whose reputations whiteness stands unstained,
And he in after happiness stands high,
That dares not with a sin by sovereignty.
Excellent Oratory!
Hubert, for truths sake.
Oh Hubert, for the glorious Crown of chastity,
For the victorious Palm of Wedlock faith,
By the immaculate souls of holy Maids,
And by the unstained truth of honest wives,
By the tears of Virgins,
By the truth of virtue,
Oh now to honour Hubert give thy name,
Sweet blooming virtue knows no blush of shame.
The rareness of your souls has ravished me,
We'll change our course, steer through bridge, and so
For Essex and for Dunmow, victorious Maid,
Rhetoric is poor in thy praise, whom a King,
Nor sovereignty, (the soul of women's longings,)
Cannot corrupt!—Oh women! Men-subduers!
Natures extremes! no mean is to be had;
Excellent Good, or infinitely bad!
Most noble Hubert.
It was well yet that the trick has caught this old one,
Where are the rest?
Richmond is gone for France,
Leister escaped to Winsor.
How I thirst
To make mine arms wealthy with sweet Matilda.
Oh if a Fathers prayers, an old mans tears,
An injured old mans tears, were ever prevalent,
Good heaven keep my Girl a Crystal Fort,
Firm and unvuanquish'd.
Hnbert my friend now has her:
Will it please the mighty Emporor of the Barons,
The King may kiss Matilda, she will be here presently,
Then• shall the great Fitzwater sit in state,
And see Matilda and the poor King dally,
And teach the winds to wanton; Hubert now has her,
The faithful'st of my friends, from contrary•ties
We will produce soft pleasures, sweet perfections;
Sir•ah, Chester shall tell me when she then frowns, and
We'll Court her checks into a comely smile;
If she but raise that milky hill, her breast,
With respirations, Oxford shall swear
it is a sigh, and I will seem to chide
His rashness, and protest love raised that gale,
Just as her heart for my heart had set sale.
Hear heaven!
Chester shall watch her when she weeps, and tell me
They are Matilda', tears, when I will presently
With a lovers pleasing fervency, protest
They are Pearls, by passion forced from Cupids Chest.
But what shall Hubert do,
Your bosom friend?
He shall with pretty thwarting passages
(To please Matilda,) seem to make me angry,
And tell me'tis impossible now to obtain her;
Whereupon (impatient, to illustrate love
With a new passion) oh how I will rave!
Misuse him strangely, and close up the sweet Sco•no
Upon Matilda's lip.
Letters from th'Earl Hubert sir,
His name but now,
(Like a beloved passenger,) took leave
Of my unwilling lips, he waits directions
Concerning her from me, good Chester read it,
I cannot read and rejoice too, Fitzwater
Listen, and rave.
Letter. May it please your excellent Majesty, it hath, pleased
heaven so thoroughly to captivate my reason by the potent pleadings
of your virtuous Queen, and unmatched Matilda, that I hold it
now impossible for your Majesty ever to obtain her.
Ha!
That last was music.
Nay kill us all, kill us all; will ye read on sir?
 Briefly, by that time these Letters kiss your Royal hands,
she will be cloysterd up in Dunmow Abbey, and end her days a
Vestal, wheither I could not choose but convey her, being thereun∣to
forcibly charmed by her tears and entreaties, and especially
forced by a secret command from heaven to mine own conscience;
I remain your most excellent Majesties transgressing servant
Most excellent villain!
Observe King John, ever heaven will virtue fail,
Contrary means, all winds shall sill her sail.
How like a Hare, the Greyhounds chaps still at her,
Yet still she scopes! the King is full of tempest.
She's gone for ever.
Oh Hubert let us never meet again,
Never more meet; Fitzwater fetch herbut back,
As from the first, so from this Isabel
We'll be divorced, marry and set Matilda
In the regal Chair, the Kings admired Mistress.
But will ye say and do sir?
Yet there is hope; now by my Crown I will,
We shall be Son and Father, thou and I
Will walk upon our Palace battlements,
And thou shalt carty up a covetous eye,
And thou shalt cast that covetous eye about
The fair, delightful village-spotted valleys,
Thou shalt stand still, and think, and recollect
The troubled longings of thy large desires,
And whatsoever thou shalt ask the King,
(Of all thou see) the King shall give it thee.
Well, let one one ride before, and certify
That we are coming.
Chester, put on wings:
Thou good old man, the bird that croaked now sings.
THese are the Abbey walls, Oxford what news?
Matilda is afraid to venture forth,
But on yon battlements it was her promise,
With the Lady Abbess to appear—and see sir.
Give us leave• Oh were that habit
Not so unkind, a foe to fair increase,
I'd call it then celestial, and swear.
A bright star moved in that immaculate sphere:
Matilda! Mistress of many Graces!
And lovely as the blush that breaks the day!
Cast thy commanding eyes upon a King,
Whom love hath made a beggar;
Why hunts the King
With such a violent poursuit, a chaste Dove,
That hath given up her name to heaven, and stands
White as her spotless vesture.
Lady Abbess,
Pray give me leave, and hearken my Matilda,
I bring thee gol•n news my Girl, we have cast
An ill-becomming Calumny upon
The Kings love all this while; for he protest•
To be divorced from Isabel the Queen,
And by marriage set thee in his B•d,
A plant to spring and prosper; women naturally
Do aflect sovereignty; wilt thou run retrograde
In 〈◊〉 fair Zodiac? though all ways yet
Have failed, this will take I am sure.
Who hath taught my Father
To tum Apostate to that integrity
Slept in his noble breast? through a divorce
I run to golden ruin; the King marry me?
And make thee Queen of him, and two large Kingdoms,
The Christian world when they shall hear, shall wonder,
And magnify in their abundant praises,
The glory of our Marriage.
Oh my Lord, here I can call necessity,
Excellent Pyhsick for a vast desire,
Our wants are holy waters, cast on lust's fire.
Oh brave, brave Girl!
That I had thee here to buss thee,
Her very breath did smell of heaven.
Matilda!
I have found thee Gold my Girl,
These are glorious wrestlings,
Celestial strugglings; passion of me, that joy
Should carry April eyes.
Matilda, Look upon thy sovereign courting,
Thy cruelty with a pair of wooing eyes,
Labouring for mercy.
No, no, Matilda, look upon thy sovereign,
Thy chastity with tempting wanton eyes,
Labouring in lust.
Thou man of rude defects, let me alone.
Thou man of wilde desires, let me alone.
Ha!
Tut, tut, I know whose Cause I have in hand,
And neither he's nor hems can fright plain Robin,
The wound that foolish love-Boy there (what call ye him?)
Had struck your heart with, because your smooth tongue,
You could not come to supple it, as the Dog does his foot,
With fair fine words you could lick me, and then
Lift me to stroke it, and heal it by Attorney,
He steers not steady thae delights to roam,
Craft sets out swift, but ever comes short home:
I tell ye truth I.
Abbess, deliver up Mattlda,
Or with an Army filled with Ruffians, Ra•ishers,
The very Sons of darkness, we will level
This building to the bottom.
We know the King,
(Being reconciled unto his mother Church,)
•annot conceive such out-rage.
Now ye stamp, do ye.
Father farewell, and to my Lord my King,
The service of his most obseq••os Hand-maid,;
And good your Majesty be •l•asked to remember,
How excellently-admirable your Crown
Will then become ye, when you shall •ast off
The habit of your passions, I will pray for you sir,
And if it be possible with prayers and tears,
Quench your de•res, and fortify my fears.
A Fathers blessing, like a welcome cloud
With child of friendly showers, hover o'er thy goodness,
And keep it evergreen—; she is gone sir.
Go thou and run into the Sea.
Ha, ha, So the great Emperor of the Ba•rons,
As you called him,
May come out aagin in the guts of a poor John:
No, no, I will live and laugh, you would have made her
The mistress of the King, and she is married
To •he Kings Master, oh to the noblest King
Poor supplicant ever kneeled to, to your King,
And her King, and to my King she's married;
Oh married, married, let the Satyrs dance it,
The sweet Birds sing it, let the winds be wanton,
And as they softly with an evening whisper,
Steal through the curled locks of the lofty woods,
Let them in their sweet language seem to say,
This, this was chaste Matilda's Marriage day.
It resolved irrevocable; who waits?
Sir?
Have an eye upon that Fox; whore's our Confessor?
Attending sir.
Your ear—do this,
I shall sir.
And hark you, without all expostulation, speedily
Make Brand the Instrument.
I shall not fail sir.
All my blood turns, she is now past all recovery;
Oh day draw in thy light, Time do not keep
This Deed for story; Memory fall asleep
In black oblivions Cavern; let this day
Still skip the Kalend, and be wiped away
From all discourse; oh let no chaste Maid.
(Remembering how Matilda was betrayed,)
With bitter tears, curse the too cruel King;
No Satyr dance this day, no sweet bird sing,
But let the Raven and Screcth. Owl cry,
Matilda the chaste Maid, must this day dye.
 These are to giye you to understund, that instant∣lie,
and without any the least expostulation, you see convey'n into the
outward Garden adjoining to the Abbey, your new Votary Matilda,
that the bearer (this Gentleman) may without the least intercep∣tion,
have freedom of access unto her; let this from me be your
safety, and forget not, the wills of Princes are indisputable—
No, no, no cloud of niceness, order, or regularity,
Must intercept this Mandate; Sir, the Kings will,
The Confessors advertisement, and your hopes,
Shall meet this minute; but virtue is I hope
The Rudder of your voyage.
I tell you Madam, it is unspotted truth,
The King is changed so excellent, such a lover
Now of Matilda's noble constancy,
That therefore as his (Confessor there certifies,)
Your duty is expected
To work my admittance to her, which is only
To let her know, how heartily his Majesty
Admires and commends her.
Tic a joyful hearing,
See where she walks, souls •o heavenly simple,
It seems the Court digests not, and (being cloyed,)
Commends them to the Cloister.
And she be so simple,
She's the fitter for the Saints, things I near think of,
Unless to stuff our similes—excellent Lady.
There's such a deal of heaven in her face,
It makes my black soul tremble—excellent Lady,
Your will sir.
To let you understand the will of him,
Whose will the will of heaven hath new made;
Thus said King John in brief, tell that sweet Saint,
(And there he wept as I do at the thought on it)
The immaculate Mistress of my dear devotions.
The King by this (with her eye not unacquainted)
Commends to her his hate of all that love,
The feavor of his blood contaminated:
Oh tell her (and he sighed there bitterly)
That as I was her tempter, I am now
Mine own despiser; as mine own despiser,
I will remain her virtues strong admirer;
And there just thus he kissed it—; if it chance, quoth he,
Her gentle lip return the Kings chaste meaning,
Mark but which place of this (then happy (Glove
Receives that heavenly print, and bring it back,
That my lips there (like a pair of willing Pilgrims)
May pay my hearts devotions. This was all,
And this, his Glove, the Token.
Excellence Change!
Heaven now hath heard my prayers, return his goodness;
I am sorry thou hast kissed the Glove before me,
For fear thy lips have lain where the Kings did,
And cozened mine of that grace fell from them,
When he spake things thus good, Give me the Glove.
Ha: He looks towards the Garden door, and whilst she
turns her self that way, he changes the Glove, and gives her the other poisoned.
Thy looks made me believe, that some were coming.
No Madam, I have cozened you, it was but the wind.
No wind shall keep my duty from his Majesty
With my observance; say thus, I returned
My love of his great goodness; and if he ask thee
How I received the news of his rare change,
Say, as a teeming soil after a drought,
Welcomes a wished for shower: what a strange sent
Strongly beats up into my brains, while I hold this Glove
So near my breast! thou art not honest sure?
Near death we prophecy, and it is so sure,
You cannot breath three minutes.
Ha!
Tic neatly don, and there's no dallying,
I know it is strong and swift, as by a Glove
You were carried from your Fathers to this Cloister,
So by a Glove you are from this Cloister sent
To the chaste Court of Saints.
Heaven! is this right?
No, it was a left-handed Glove, look ye,
I kissed the right and cozened you,
So that a sinister act with a left-handed Glove, very prettily
Imports a wittiness in wickedness.
Thou art a merry murderer, the King was wont
To call me friend; oh if he bestows
On's friends such gifts, what sends he to his foes?
Uncharitable love-token; oh what harsh hand
Tempered this dram of death.
I could do it no better.
Merciless man, Tyg•rs to thee are tame;
Oh cozening Crocodile, that with thy tears could take me•
How wilt thou hows
When thou and I meet next? when I shall sit
Above my sufferings, then will my blood be
A cloud betwixt eternity and thee.
Clouds? yes, much clouds.
There was the last call; to the King, commend me,
And tell him, when in stories he shall stand,
When men shall read the Conquerors great name,
Voluptuous Rusus, that unkind brother Beaucla•k,
Comely King Steven, Henry the Wedlock-breaker,
And Lyon-hearted Richard; when they come
unto his name, with sighs it shall be said,
This was King John—the murderer of a Maid;
Oh tell him I am past his strong temptations,
And though wild burning backed his hot desire,
Like perfect Gold I did out-live the fire.
She's dead and I must shift for one,
I hear some trampling,
What's he has leaped the Garden walls? has awenching look,
And should be a good Vaulter, guilty knaves make excellent
Eves droppers, and I love to sound strange bosoms, I will lye
To see and hear, and yet not heard nor seen,
Here rumour gives, my cousin, chaste Matilda
To live a Votary: ha! on the ground!
Murdered most certainly, and so warm, that yet
The murderer at my approach, may lurk
About the Garden, for through the Abbey tic
Impossible to pass; oh my grieved blood,
Who made it so unfortunate to be good.
He mumbles something to himself.
This parallels my Mother and my Brother:
Ha! something sty•s in the Grove, passion I know thee not,
With a new art we must catch old Blood-hounds: well,
Although I am the Kings well-wishing friend,
And have raised forces for his part at Winsor,
Yet with my heart I am glad, a friendly hand
Hath ma le thee happy.
S'foot this is one of our side,
But it seems he knows not it was the Kings injunction.
Now business will be minded, state affairs,
With vigilance effected, which before
Were so entangled in your hair forsooth,
Suitors could find no end of their beginnings.
By this light I have done a good deed.
Thou honest soul,
That (by the heat of thy happy hany-work,)
Can not I am sure but be in hearing; If
My irregular start (upon private necessity)
Frighted thee off, be not ashamed to let
Thy unknown friend possess thee.
Oh bras young spark.
Or if thy modesty must keep thee off,
So well I love thy work (and as I the Kingdom)
Let this Purse of Gold, this Diamond fastened to it,
Tell thee thy friend was here, if thoul'dst know him,
He is a kinsman to the Earl of Chester;
And because thou shalt not doubt thy friends fair meanings,
I will return the way I came, although
With danger to my person.
Here is one sir, wishes better to his friends.
What art thou?
One that will take your honoorable Purse,
And yet pass quit at the Common Law.
Were thou the expert Master of this piece.
You being kinsman to my Lord and Master,
(Who ever hated this blood;) I dare tell you,
I practi•'d first a business late at Winsor,
Upon a Mother and her Son—
Hold heart, old Bruces Lady,
And the brat her Son?
Were it thou the happy instrument
To cut these Houses down? did thou do that?
It would deserve (well prized) another Purse sir.
Gold must not part us, did do it?
Both that and this, by this stand sir.
Son of the Devil have I sound thee?
Sure he knows me.
Fool, dost thou draw a sword;
What a loud lye thou dost give heaven, to think
A sword can shield the guilty, look here villain
Upon my horrid point, where death in tempest
And whirle-winds, stares upon thee, thou murderer:
Of my Mother, Brother, and my Kinswoman.
S'root here was a Purse wi•h a bob at the end ont,
Pray take your Purse again.
Toad, I will take thy heart first.
I deny nothing then,
Resolution crowns my craft; for those at Winsor,
(Let me free the King) I •ami••'d them, because
Your Mother was too coy, you may guess the rest;
For this it was King Johns in junction,
And I have done it daintily by this light.
By darkness and •er Angels,
Thy near kinsmen,
Thou shalt not live five minutes for it.
O sir, what mean ye?
To ask thee for a Mother, a sweet Brother,
A chaste kinswoman; oh that thou could be
Ten days a dying; Slave! i'll stick thy Trunk
So thick with wounds, it shall appear a Book
Full of red Letters,
Characters of thy cruelty
This is no bleeding month fir.
Thou lie, look yonder;
There lies mine Almanac, a celestial body,
Whose revolution, period, pale aspect,
All tell me'tis high time that thou should bleed.
Oh.
Thy veins are all corruption,
Toads belch not fouler;
And should thy Trunk be thrown upon a dunghill,
(As it deserves no better burial)
The sent would poison swine, the very dogs
Would with howlings fly as from a mid-night •end,
And every Raven that should 〈◊〉 upon it,
Would seek forsaken Deserts, and there die
Full of infection.
Oh that last has finished me,
And where I go I know not, a bloody Cloud
Hath hid heaven from me like a purple shroud.
Feast thou the Crows,
This body i'll convey to Winsor, where my Mother,
And my sweet murdered Brother, we'll expose
(As spurs of righteous vengeance) to all eyes;
Conscience, and Blood, are strong incessant cries.
You Sons of death and disobedience;
Why is the King kept out?
You shall know sir;
Is it not enough the whole Lands Liberties
Lye yet a gasping by your head strong passions,
Wounded by your neglect, but through blood
D'•e chase your vast desires, my Wife and Son sir.
A game as we are Prince, in our Royal word,
The villain past our precept.
As you past heavens
In your bloody masquing night at Baynard Castle,
When all the floors, and the white walls wore bloody
Deep crimson blushes, to behold a Prince
In blood pursue his passions.
Bared out and braved,
You bate and chafe a Lyon; bring old Fitzwater,
Thou Bruce and grumbling Leister, either speedily
Give up the Castle, and upon your knees
Fall to the mercy you have scorned, or here
Before a pair of minutes pass, the sword
Of incensed justice shall even in your eyes,
Leave this old Rebel headless.
Now by the blood
I lost in holy Palestine with Richard,
Oh that right real Soldier! King John I swear,
That foul-word Rebel ha•unrivited
The ba•s of reason, and made me very angry;
Is it to take truths part to be a Rebel?
To ease my groaning Country, is that Rebellion?
To preserve the unstained honour of a Maid,
(And that maid my daughter) to preserve your glory,
That you stand not branded in our Chronicles,
By the black name of Wedlock-breaker; is this
(Good, heaven!) is this Rebellion? Come, come, the Axe;
Oh that wronged soul to death so falsely given,
Flies sweetly singing her own truth to heaven.
Stand on your guard-sir,
Young Bruce with twenty thousand
Strong able men from Cambridge and Essex,
With a speedy march, and with as dreadful threatenings,
Comes thundering towards Winsor, all his Ensigns
Crimson and black, which in their want•n wavings,
Cry to the frighted Country (as he marches)
Nothing but blood and d•ath.
Oh noble Son of a murpered M•there.
Honourable young man.
Draw up our forces like a pair of angry winds,
That have got a hollow Cloud with child of tempests,
We'll make the valleys tremble.
Resist now sir,
Or the whole Kingdom trembles, •ewis the Dolphins
By th'politique working of ingenius Richmond,
(Who was sent for him) with six hundred sail,
And fourscore Flat-boats is let in at Dover,
Subduing as they march, and the Towns willingly
Given• •hem way; they have reached Rochester,
And if a speedy swift prevention meet not,
They will for London certainly.
Now John thy Crown sits quivering.
These here so resolute—
Youug Bruce so potent—
And which strikes deep, a factious foreign foot
Upon our earth, it is a dangerous triplcity,
So that our Forces were they three times trebl'd,
(Distracted with a division thus triangular)
Cannot promise safety.
Take it not Time, for now
The goodliest Oak in the whole wood must bow.
Oh that was very well said sir, nor shall ye bow,
But unto heaven and virtue, for Kings have boasted
To be her servants; oh in this tempest sir,
Give her the helm, good brother Bruce, the King
Has faithfully acquitted him of the bloods
Of your Wife and Son,; Leister, the King now looks
Upon his passions with a displeased eye,
Trust to our faiths sir, give the Land her Liberties,
And do but look upon my poor Matilda.
Oh, oh.
With Kingly chaste eyes; and a holy soul;
My brother shall command his Son to obedience,
Leister and he shall give ye up the Castle,
We will call Richmond with his powers from Lewis,
We will be all one soul again, and force
The skipping French to put to Sea again,
And you shall stand a King then absolute;
Good brother Leister, sir upon my knee,
I urge your goodness now; shall we still stand
And chain our freedoms to a foreign hand?
When we shun seen Rocks, then we safely sail;
Good, good, King John, let the old man prevail.
Oh Chester run to Dunmow, and if Brand yet
Have kept his hand whi•e, bid that Brand forbear,
For fear of burning everlastingly.
I shall sir.
Mowbray, with the bindings of the King,
Go meet that angry young man Bruce, and tell him,
Here's now no use for steel.
Twill be good news sir.
Meet us at least (you stubborn men,)
In our facile affections:
Why send ye not for Richmond? must we bend, and
And beseech too?
Pass but your Royal promise
In the words of a King, to perform what
You're fled from, the wind not with more swiftness,
Shall fly to play with Richmonds lofty Plume,
Then shall be shown in his repeal.
It is granted upon our Kingly word—that time in me,
shall read that Giants force necessity!
With all submissive reverence we descend,
And kiss your Highness hand.
Right happy day,
My Girl is safe, and all clouds blown away.
Look what Death hath done! here laid
(In one) a Martyr, and a Maid.
Angels Crown Those with just applause.
Dye in defence of Virtues Laws.
Such was her cause! Death! boast not of thy hands•
Cruelty, since the vanquished victor stands.
Her Chastity, to Time shall last
Like Laurel, which no lightning can blast.
Sweet Maids, with Roses deck her Hearse,
Whose Virtue stands above the reach of Verse.
Heaven hath her pure part, whilst on Earth, •her Name
Moves in the Sphere of aresulgent Fame.
Hubert interpret this Apparition.
Behold sir,
A fad writ Tragedy so ferlingly,
Languag'd, and cast, with such a crafty cruelty,
Contrived and acted, that wild Savages,
Satyrs, and the rude rabble of the Woods,
Would weep to lay their ears to, and (admiring
To see themselves out done) they would conceive
Their wildness, mildness to this deed, and call
Men more then Savage, themselves rational;
And thou Fitzwater, reflect upon thy name,
And turn the son of tears, oh forget
That Cupped ever spent a dart upon thee,
That Hymen ever coupled thee, or that ever
The hasty, happy, willing messenger,
Told thee thou had a Daughter; oh look here,
Look here King John, and with a tembling eye,
Read your sad act, Matilda's Tragedy.
Matilda!
By the labouring soul of a much injured man,
It is my child Matilda.
Oh cruel King, go •ate thy bloody eye
With thy black command, which there lies executed.
Sweet Niece,
Chaste soul,
King, go and read thy cruelty.
Do I stir Chester?
Good Oxford, do I move? stand I not still
To watch the when the grieved friends of dead Matilda,
Will with a thousand stabs turn me to dust?
That in a thousand prays they may be happy;
Will no one do it? then give a mourner room,
A man of tears; oh immaculate Matilda,
These shed but sailing heat drops, missing showers,
The faint dews of a doubtful April-morning;
But from mine eyes, ship-sincking Ca•erects,
Whold clouds of waters, wealthy exhalations
Shall fall into the Sea of my affliction,
Till it amaze the Mourners.
Unmatched Matilda,
Celestial Soldier that keep a Fort of Chastity
Against all temptations.
Not to be a Queen
Would she break her chaste vow, truth crowns your reed,
Unmatched Matilda was her name indeed.
Oh take into your spirit-piercing praise,
My Scoene of sorrow; I have wel-clad woes,
Pathetic epithets to illustrate passion,
And steal true tears so sweetly from all these,
'tshall touch the soul, and at one pierce and please.
What will he doe?
To Pretty and Purity, and Lilies mixed with Roses.
How well you have apparelled woe, this pendant
To Piety and Purity directed,
Insinuates a chaste soul in a clean body:
Virtues white Virgin, Chastities red Martyr,
Suffer me then with this well-suited wreath,
To make our griefs ingenious, let all be dumb,
Whilst the King speaks her Epicedium.
His very soul speaks sorrow.
And it becomes him sweetly.
Hail Maid and Marty! lo on thy breast,
Devotions Alter, chaste truths chest,
I offer (as my guilt imposes)
Thy merits Laurel, Lilies and Roses,
Lilies, intimating plain,
Thy immaculate life stuck with no stain;
Roses red, and sweet, to tell
How sweet red sacrifices smell;
Hang round then as you walk about this Hearse,
The songs of holy hearts, sweet, virtuous verse,
Bring Persian silks to deck her Monument,
Arabian spices quick'ning by their sent.
Numidian Marble to preserve her praise,
Corinthian Ivory her sweet shape to raise.
And write in gold upon it, in this breast,
Virtue sat Mistress passion but a guest;
Virtue is sweet, and since griefs bitter be.
Strew her with Roses, and give Rue to me.
My noble Brother, I have lost a Wife and Son,
You a sweet Daughter, look on the Kings penitence,
His promise for the Kingdoms peace, perfer
A public benefit. When it shall please,
Let heaven question him, let us secure,
And quit the Land of Lewis.
Do any thing,
Do all things that are honourable, and the great King,
Make you a good King sir; and when your soul.
Shall at any time reflect upon your follies,
Good King John weep, weep very heartily,
It will become you sweetly, at your eyes
Your sin stole in, there pay your sacrifie.
Back unto Dunmow Abbey, where we'll pay
To sweet Matilda's memory and her sufferings,
A monthly obsequy, which (sweetened by
The wealthy woes of a tear-troubl'd eye)
Shall by those sharp afflictions of my face,
Court Mercy, and make Grief 〈…〉
Let my wild errors, tell to time this truth;
Wh•l'st passion holds the Helm, Reason and Honour.
Do suffer wrack; but they sail safe, and clear,
Who constantly by Virtues Compass steer.
MAtilda! Now go take thy Bed,
In the dark dwellings of the dead.
And rise in the great Waking-day,
Sweet as Incense, fresh as May.
Rest thou chaste soul, (fixed in thy proper sphere,)
Amongst heavens fair Ones; All are fair ones there.
Rest there chaste soul, whilst we (here troubled) say,
Time gives us Griefs, Death takes our joys away.

WHatever Element we light upon,
(Great Monarch &amp; bright Queen) it is yours alone.
Shook from my station on that giddy Shore,
That flotes in Seas, in wretchedness much more,
I hardly escaped to tell what storms arise
Through rage of the Inhabitants: mine eyes
Behold a wonder; Blustering Tempests there,
Yet Sun and Moon fair shining both so near.
Should your Land stagger thus, I wish the Age,
Might end such acting sooner then the Stage:
Yet in these Tumults you shall only see
A tottring Throne held firm by Majesty.
Well met sweet Morphe,
Empress of my heart,
And all hearts else, if made of flesh like mine.
You must not pass untouched.
What mean you Sir?
To print you Mine;
Hands off Sir Amorous.
Why should such coyness wrinkle such a Brow?
Why should such boisterous incivi∣lity
Defile your Courtship? All your court∣lie
Arts
Of Singing, Playing, Dancing, Poetry,
Will grow suspected pleaders of mere Lust:
Forbear for my sake: this rude force in you
May chance to blot a white repute in me.
The blot Isle thus rub out.
Isle wash it thus.
How can the eye, that sees not love the light?
Blame your own beauty if you blame my
Love.
I blame the Expression.
If the thing be good,
Expression makes it better.
Yes, if chaste,
Chaste Love is nothing.
Nothing to the unchaste.
Forbear I pray, and fear a near example.
Do you not know the King hath taught the Passions
Within this Floating Isle more modesty,
By banishing your child Concupiscence?
Others perhaps shall quickly know
I know it,
And that I know it as rough tyranny.
What for a trick of youth such Discipline?
Doth breeding Subjects call for Banish∣meant?
Or giving life deserve a civil Death?
Hold; stand; in vain you strive; I am re∣solved;
Should now the King look on, and call a
Kiss
Treason, should poison punish this sweat touch,
Thus far I durst presume.
Shame on your rudeness.
Are not our Eyes and Lips and touch our own,
Not to be used without a special warrant?
At length we shall not satisfy mere Na∣ture,
Nor spit without a Counsel. If my Girl
Partake my spirit, then like me she'll try,
What fury Love can in the Passions raise,
To shake this Stoic from his chair of
Rule.
Isle move my Fellows.
How? not fight this Duel?
Duel forbidden to the Valiant?
Some other cause, it seems, moves these already.
Be sure, Irato, by Prudentius law
Personal Valour now is nothing worth.
Hope with his Pen, Sr. Timorous with his knife,
Or Desperato's man with single Halter
May pass in equal rank with you, or me,
Or Captain Audax.
Not with me, I trow.
Yes, if this Law should stand.
Not so however.
Not if?
If to a generous Passion?
I see these sparks are glowing. No∣ble
Sparks,
Let Amorous add fire. Love burns with
Hate.
Thy Hand Malevolo, and against the King.
Why what's your grief?
My Daughters Banishment.
Great cause: yet none need press a single grief:
We find our selves all pinched of liberty:
We walk in chains, called Justice, Tem∣perance,
Such rusty curbs; and none can further start
Then the strict keeper will allow us length.
Tic so; we're used like Dogs, or ringed like Bears;
Whither Prudentius leads us we must follow:
But if we take a loose, or swell and roar,
We must be whipped for it; Sirs, Prudentius whips us.
Can this be brooked by them that draw the Sword?
And amongst them, by one that will exact
Life for a word, pay death for crabbed looks?
And amongst them, by one that scales the wall,
That swims in Armour, flies against the mouth
Of thundering Ordinance? must also He,
Must He be ordered by a sit still thus?
So he hath been. For my part, if I broach
Some biting Libel, venomous word or Book
Against some prosprous Object which I hate,
My Ears are questioned. Locks which I have scorned
Must hide my Ear stumps.
And me thinks I spy some want upon your Nose.
Is your spleen up?
Rage for your self. You also may remem∣ber
Brave Lord Irato when you hardly kept
Your Neck. Some fellow Peers, for as few blows,
Have lost it quite.
My Veins will burst.
And Captains
Not to be numbered; All as bold and stout
As Audax here, for undertaking reskues,
And following them too far in open streets,
Have been cashiered of Lberty and Life.
But shall not be again. Isle hang the Law.
Then as for you, Sr. Amorous, you may talk
Not only of your Daughters Banishment,
But of your Sisters whipped, your carred
Aunts,
And Mulcts upon your self.
The truth to tell,
My hard restraint is worst of all. I live
(If it be life) confined to mine own Bed:
Prudentius bridles up my mouth from kiss∣sing,
Yea and from speech, and calls that stinting manners.
I cannot cast a fair inviting look,
But he pulls back the Nerve. I scarce dare think,
Or sigh beyond my stint. One Sigh a day
Is all that I must spend for her that keeps
And may command my breath. Pruden∣tius
Locks up my wind like Aeolus; it is calmed,
And may not issue forth to bear a whisper.
Mend your Comparison. Prudentius
Like Aeolus? No, Aeolus sometimes
Permits a Tempest: does Prudentius so?
The Passions cannot stretch beyond his line,
But they are censured, Perturbations called,
Breakers of Peace; if calmed, they nothing are:
We lose both Name and Nature by re∣strained.
For what's a Lord I ask you but his
Anger?
Or what's a great man but op∣pression?
A Captain but his Cutting?
And a Knight
What but his Pleasure? O this frost of
Reason
Hath numd my Joints. I that with spright∣lie vigour
Dancing to please my Mistress, could have rose
To fetch her from the Moon (had she been there)
Or as she stood salute her, now have lost
Those active legs, and not by doing service
To any Creature but Prudentius.
I live a Hermit in the Court; to me
It seems a College or a Nunnery.
To me a Prison.
A mere School to me.
To me an Inquisition: worse: a
Hell.
Where Objects still we meet, and may not reach.
You Amorous like Tantalus behold
Two red white Apples in a well made face,
Which you as soon may touch as reach the
Sun;
Which doth but scorch the gazer.
Isle to Hell:
Tic less to starve for Apples then for
Cheeks.
You being stirred Irato thirst for blood,
And thirst you may, but not be satisfied:
You must take blows and beare'em; your Reward
(O poor!) is to overcome by suffering;
As now I kick you; stand: you must not rage,
For this is Patience; now I pull your Nose;
You must not fume, least you impatient prove.
Let me kill thee, or serve Prudentius still.
you must keep Peace. I speak but as a Friend;
And only tell what you have told your self.
You Audax, like Ixion, though you dare
To set on Heaven, must wheel about your self
When Reason bids you.
Audax will run on
Though thunder meet him.
Yes; but I my self
Like Titius vainly feed the Vulture Hate
With mine own heart, and wreck it not on others,
Those Favourites which I hate. Shall this be ever?
How long shall I like to a painted
George
Advance my idle Sword? What must I strike
Like Jack of the clock-house, never but in season?
How long shall I like a grim Sty∣tu stand,
Look hatred and use none? Prudentius
Hath he Medusa's head?
Hey ho, how long!
How long shall I like a fell Mastiff held,
Yelp for the glorious danger that I love!
Water it self if bounded in too straight,
Will foam and swell and break thick bonds of Rock.
I wish we Passions were as strong as water.
My limbs I will fling
Out of joint, and sing,
And dancing will shake my hair:
Not how at each beck,
Nor break my neck
With sorrow and deep despair.
Such a chirpiu din,
with mirth within,
And a head not needing a clout,
Is much better far
Than a careful chair,
And a wreath of thorns without.
The Boy may be our Tutor. Hilario my Boy!
Sir.
We were taking care how thou may be merry thus always; never be checked for drinking, for singing, or for playing thy pranks.
I imagine your design: and thereto promise, give, grant, let, set and submit my full assent and consent: In witness where∣of here's my hand with a clap, and my seal with a kiss; Your son and servant Hilario.
But stay, whence now?
From my blubbering Sister Con∣cupiscence;
who desired me forsooth
To arm and conduct her to Lady Fancy.
And whether bound?
I go to be merry with or upon
Melancholico and Desperato,
Either to quicken their dumps, or by laugh∣ing
at their dullness to heighten my self.
Where are they?
Not far; close by; here at the
Hart.
Courteous Sir, send them hither,
I shall or will Sir.
We must no longer ripe up grei∣vances,
But think of Remedy.
Passions must not stay.
Why with a murrain do we stay to say so?
In brief do all consent to free themselves
From this oppession?
What a Question's that?
Give a Command that it be asked no more.
We all consent.
All are not here.
Indeed
We want two serviceable men now sent for.
Delays intolerable!
We want besides
Sir Timorous Fear all.
We'll force that dowty Knight
To know his good when all is done; and so
Prevent his Treason.
Consultation too.
And where is Livebyhope?
No matter where.
His hopes will make him turn to any side
That shall succeed.
For female Passions,
Their fortune lies in ours.
Then to proceed,
The way to free our selves lies, thus, or thus;
Kill, or dethrone Prudentius.
I begin
To think on Sr. Raviliack, and Sr. Garnet.
The boldest way is safest.
Yes, if bloodiest.
Or if he will escape.
Let him go far enough.
Then who shall do the fear?
I.
I, or else
Isle kill some other; what? should I for get
My ancient Trade of killing?
Let him do it
Who first hath opportunity.
To this
We all must swear.
By all the wounds which on my flesh are scored,
And all the ghosts I've made.
By all attempts
And all the mines of Bullets in my Entrails;
By all my pangs of hare and black designs;
By all the goodly Nymphs, and
Morphe chief.
Do ye long for action? have ye too much Peace?
Orecloy'd with blessings? you Malevolo
Bend hate against the unjust.
My hand is cramped;
Strike Audax.
O his brow! I turn to fear.
You Amorous love true beauty,
Honesty.
Thy spleen Irato.
Thou Irato fight
Merely for public peace.
Sweetness!
Witchcraft!
Audax, be bold, but stay till I have bid
S't. Liveby hope
I must attend his Majesty.
Go back, and secretly oreheare this meeting.
Ha! What Schooling call you this?
What Vision?
That Eye of subtle Intellectus Agent
Troubles me somewhat; and I doubt of
Liveby.
Now I could kill my self.
Now I, Prudentius
He came upon us like the Basilic,
Or like a Wolf; but had we seen him first—
You could not do it then: never by day.
Why so?
You saw the cause. His flaming Temples
Strike with such charming Power, such secret Spells,
That if you see the Light upon his Face,
Your spirits quail; it must be done by night.
And Desperato, he must be the man.
Why He above All Us?
Tush, we are foiled;
Already foiled; and may be so again.
Besides Irato spends himself: hoe's now
So full of heat, I doubt he will then grow cold.
But Desperato to his mischief goes
With art and argued resolution,
Strong in cold blood.
I perfectly abhor
All Judgement, Plo••s, and Consultations▪
To canvas thoughts, to toil and vex the
In weighing means, and picking out the best,
This is as bad as to have served Prudentius.
And how thinks Audax?
So. Or else I'm mad.
To plot is base; and to demurr contrivance
Of things that should be done, as soon as thought,
Is foolish too. What turn our powder up,
Then smother't under ground, then by degrees
Give fire! Such creeping mischief hath no luck.
Come Martial Law, come Captain
Martial Law
And wise Malevolo, when have you ever heard
Of great attempts without the hand of Au∣dax?
Come we'll too't presently.
Even as you please.
 I sweat with hearing.
Il now run with this Least I may come too short of telling more.
Only this word.
Then yet I'll stay.
Be sure,
If you miscarry we are all undone.
Go with Ʋlysses in this night-attempt,
Be each of you to him a Diomed.
Stay till they come.
Lo here they are. Who else?
What and Sr. Timorous too? Come▪ mend your pace.
What? doth Prudentius moderate your feet?
And make you snails as well as slaves?
Free Passions,
(So ye must be) we know your grievances.
Brother Melancholy, discreet you are,
But not expressive; unprefer'd you are,
Because precise; but say, would you with
State
Insold your arms; look sad, and feel content;
Live careful over bags, retire your self
To solemn grief in Temples of delight,
Sigh in a Sisters bosom, and complain
Of Persecution at a plenteous Feast?
Yes, yes. I'll answer for him.
Sooth, you may.
Sadness is pleasant, but the cause is not.
And Desperato, once my old Comrade,
Once Noble, and again to be the same,
But now as void of cash as of employment,
Would you, in Peace forgot, bard of a Pen∣zion,
Having no lands but bare high-wayes, now run
All hazards for new Fortune?
Yes apace.
Why parley then? can he not first draw blood?
Do Cutters ask what money have you first?
Blood and Cutters? his speech is rough.
hoe's mad.
Say on.
Nought's done through such long talk.
Such Choler.
Would thou have power to raise more flames then Narrow,
To fire the World, prevent his final doom,
Stare awfully, stab others with applause,
Hang, drown thy self, to immortality.
Such change I long for; roused from Lethargy
I am revived.
Thou lie, thou art not yet.
Hold, hold thy hand: I did but tempt thy mettle,
To search the truth.
And Sir, it is well you say so.
This Bully,s right, why now I'm pleased
Sr. Tim.
My fellow Knight, you know (but do not tremble)
How oft the King hath misimpos'd on you
Those dreadful, those horrible, terrible
Good Sir.
Those heart-labouring employ∣mints,
Which Audax begged.
I pray.
He sought thereby
Merely to vex and to disgrace your spur▪
But would thou hug thy Pillow or thy Love
Without disturbance, or the noise of danger?
How say?
I love to live, and love in safety.
Then in a word.
He first kick hence this Knight,
He will prove a five through fear; his tremb∣ling humour
Will shake our secrets out.
Which to prevent,
He stirs not from this company.
Then know,
Our common medicine is Prudentius ruin.
Last comers, do ye twist in full consent?
We do.
then kiss the Sacramental Sword.
Sr. Tim. you came unsought, but being come,
You must consent, or will be beaten too't.
I, I do consent—but caution must be had;
This is no common sport: what Engines use ye?
Not you, be sure. Will Desperato join
With me and this brave Count?
Yes, and strike home.
Then for the time: we think close midnight best.
And fittest; cause the crowned
Fox is watchful.
Be sure you take disguise to pass unknown,
Though it be night.
O wit and valour both!
Vizards to Passengers will be but signs
Hanged out to move suspicion; and to leave
Him ignorant whom we assault is loss▪
Unto the glory of our bold revenge.
What shall be done with Memor the Recorder,
One whom I hate, yet have no reason for it,
Like an old debt-book, or mine own Con∣science▪
Shall he be blotted out, or shall he stand?
Alas he's all Record, Example, Custom,
What's done Quadragesimo primo Henrici tertii,
Tricesimo primo Henrici octave;
And these suit more with Passion then with Reason.
What shall be done with Com∣mon sense the Judge?
He also more inclines to sense then Prudence,
Leanes to the Commons rather then the King.
As for the rest, they ne'er shall trouble us;
Cut off the head, we need not fear the Members.
Who shall succeed? I mean, in place, and show,
Not in the tyranny of strict Command;
Who shall assemble, lead, encourage us,
And give some fashion to our Common∣wealth?
What say to Fancy? will not
Fancy do it?
No better choice: for Fancy nearest is
To unyoak'd Passion.
And it is most proper,
That since by Passion this revolt is made
From Reason unto Sense, the Rule should pass
From man to Woman.
She, she, Fancy she.
 O now for wings like thought, this to relate
First to the Agent of Prudentius;
And then to bear first news to new Queen Fancy.
She, Fancie's Queen.
She'll be a pleasant Mistress
Rather then Governess, leading each Passion
Whether himself inclines. Nay she'll in∣vent
New Objects for their several content.
Silence through all the Court, the
King would rest.
Let him Eternally.
The time grows nigh.
You three to the task of Blood: the rest to
Fancy.
I doubt this earnest talk portends no good,
The business hath been hot.—
We would be private.
Liveby the Relator is most creditable.
A right ingenuous man.
And you have sent him
To take advantage of the changing State,
With Caveat to reserve his heart for Us.
The Pinch and my best thoughts did so instruct me.
Tic well, I dearly thank your sharp observance,
Suspecting Treason by their startled brows;
And then your art of finding out, and now
Your Providence for our Restablishment.
But O, O this ungrateful Rout, whom I have taught
Both how to Fear and Love, and what to
Loath,
Wherefore to Grieve and Joy, and in what place
To rouse their anger and audacity
By Rule and Circumstance, and with such
Sweetness
As might befit a Wooer more then King.
Have I these Vipers bred within my Breast
With greater Care and Pangs then can a
Mother
The Child within her womb? have I broke sleep
Tossed after slumbers, early rose, and spent
The day from Sun to Sun in painful Coun∣sell;
Sent Birds about their Coasts, sent Eyes and
Tongues
Abroad the world, to watch and guard,
and work,
And keep all safe, and make them great, for
This
For This Reward? Ask Heaven and Earth, if I
Have not with utmost care procured them
Bread,
Cloth, Health, Peace, Manners, and Reli∣gion!
For Prudence is the womb and Forge of all
This mortal bliss. What ere I took from
Them
Was for their use; like Vapour now ex∣hauled,
And soon returned in Showers to fat their
Land.
Oft have I bore them under both these wings,
One under each, when they inclined to
Fury,
Would push each other down a Precipice,
Not steep like the Alps, but steep on ei∣there side,
There on a narrow ridge, an edge, a Third,
(Such is the mean, so placed betwixt two
Gulfs)
I bore them in their Strife. For this and more
They have not paid (what's cheaper?) Single Duty.
Nothing but Grudgings, Whispers, Evil words:
These are their Thanks.
The greater glory yours:
What Crown like This to govern out of alms!
But now they seek the Crown; my life they seek.
They'll beg hereafter that you'll take the Rule,
Which now they wrest out of your hands.
Perhaps.
Mean while your life is safe.
And while it is safe,
Though they forget their Duty, I, le not leave
A Fathers care, but will be still a King
In love, though not in power.
This is a sign
Of future greatness. Then cast off this
Crown
As but the sheddings of renewing State,
Now to be burnished. Leave it on your
Pillow:
For that they seek. But it returned shall be
With double service both of Heart and
Knee.
Be Thou my Prophet.
Ware; the Caitiffes come.
This Torch must out, or some must blind their eyes;
And look not all at once, least all be
struck.
The Chamber's here.
Come set your Points
And Postures right; stand sure.
Why should not I
Step in, and daunt them?
Tic not safe to tempt
United Impudence too far: withdraw.
When Folly's ripe, Isle to my Dili∣gence.
And I to serve you with Intelli∣gence.
I'll guide you to some Cloister.
Now: there's the Nest.
But what? the Eagle's flown.
Damned Treachery!
Treason amongst us Traitors!
Less Resolution
Then mine had served this Task.
How'ere my Lads,
Our Labour is not lost. Here's what we
 seek for.
Thus when the Beaver smells the Hunters aim,
He throws away the price of his escape.
Now shall I offer what affront I please.
Isle stab with honour at what word mislikes me.
No Peace shall stand unless our pleasure make it.
Fancy, we come. Stay, hark, stand, hark. This sound
The Sirens make, because Fancy shall be crowned.
The Scene turns to Fancies Court.
The Day appears in Scarlet; and the Sun
Seconds the luster of our rising Queen.
I ne'er longed more for night, then for this morning.
Twill be to you a double day, and bring
Your Mistress Majesty, you Liberty.
Fuga, the case is altered; he that banished,
Himself is vanished. Thus the King and I,
Or I and he, are up and down like
Buckets.
Ha wench! these Moral men are taught,
I trow,
What it is to wrong kind hearts. Return with me
Periwigs, Powders, Fucuses for Ladies,
Chioppiens for short, for crooked Farthin∣gals;
For tainted Artificial breath; Teeth move∣able;
Such as may serve a Family by turns,
To eat, and laugh abroad: now welcome helps
For all decays of Nature, Arts for allure∣meant;
Be licenced Ladies for Variety
Now to mistake your Servant, Usher, Page,
For your own Lords, and without Heresy
In married State.
Fie Madam how you talk!
How talk I Madam Simpers? do not thus
And broader too as mincing Dames as you,
When met together? Do you see your
Servant?
Sr. Timorous Fear-all inches and inches to you
Just like a Spy.
And still he comes in secret
Least he be spied.
What's this? a silent motion?
The Bill hung out will show us what it is.
Lady, I dare not with the praise of arts
With any thing but Love assay your parts;
Which are so rare, that when I strive to write,
The scant Expression seems not Love but spite.
Well wrote Sr. Tim.
You cannot say well spoke.
Can you not use your mouth? no way, Sr Tim.?
Why do you love? you are not fit to love;
Think me your Mistress; now address your self
In form befitting.
Hum!
I must make up
Your will with my performance.
Hum—I fear
Fuga will frown.
Thy Mother was a Fuga.
Nor give nor take? not in a fair Salute?
Tongue-tide and Lip-bound too? O that
 it were
In fashion for my Sex, my Sex, to woo.
Lady, you seem to me in word and action
Too loose and open.
My Complexion
Is I confess the same with Mescaline's;
We might have lain together in one Egg
As well a Helena and Clytemnestra.
To me no such desire as of our Like,
No Joy like Union. But your ears and age
Want breeding yet;
I'm sorry for offending:
I thought I knew my Sex; but if I do not,
I know my self.
What here ye whirligigs, while
Queen Fancy calls you? Whore's Concu∣piscence, whore's Concupiscence? After all your Starching, Quelling, Turning, Seeking,
Pinning; after your Jury of Peddlers, Tire∣women,
Lacemakers and Semsters, still whore's Concupiscence? Your Lady Fancy finds many grievous defects; there wants a Pin or two at least. One of her ribbon
Fancies are loose; a long hair hath un weaved it self out of its curled Sphere, and passionately broke forth out of Order.
Fly, fly, ye Baggases.
Baggases?
As for my Sister, shoe's one I'm sure: She colours for it; her willow gown with •ay me forsaken wretch is a
Challenge, a mere Challenge to all pitti∣ful-minded
Amoroses: She's true touch, all the world can tell. Wu'd you were so too Lady for Sr. Tim's sake. Stay Fuga, you must stay one minute; for I must show on you how Sr. Tim. must woo.
I see every one's ready to be a
Dunces Teacher.
Thus Sr.
This is Loves Trenchmore.
Fie on you all.
A pretty wench. Sr. Tim, but that she's sawe'd
With some of her Fathers Humour; this coyness calls her
Ma'evolo's Daughter. But what of that?
Every coy lass is of Cockerel condition,
And must be wooed as Cockerels fight, chase and retreat;
And then sheel love you like your shadow;
Fly thou, sheel follow; follow thou, sheel fly,
For I say no, and for her no say I.
Thus when a long time ye have turned backs one to another,
Ye may at length turn faces.
Sr. I shall sometimes
Repair to your wit for my direction.
You may—and I shall readily afford it to your folly
For mine own merriment.
The Queen's at hand.
And they not ready yet with their tedious Phantastticalia!
Just in that Posture, Madam, as you walked,
Horacius killed three men.
Three? what no more?
Why, I have killed three hundred, would three thousand.
Whore's that appearance which we have expected?
And whore's my glass?
You have one in your watch.
That's not big enough. Run Few∣ga; come hither
Concupiscence, pin this handsomer.
Au. Desp.  Isle bear
The Crown or nothing.
 I the Crown or nothing.
 Isle fit each
Passion to his own content.
Boy, fill up the Time with noise.
Hail thou great Queen of various Humours,
Some loving hearts, some raging tumours,
Some sadder souls embracing Rumours;
Such a mixed crew
None yet ever knew
So steady and true
As these in heaping honours on you.
Great goddess, most adored of men, behold,
Amorous thy lovingst Passion, brings the rest
To offer at thy Feet Ensigns of State.
I that unsheathed my anger with my Sword
To make thee great, present this Sword of
Justice.
I that with Plots have wrung this awful Secpter
From other hands, will hold hold it fast in thine.
Isle find or make new matter of great ruin
To raise thy Throne,
This massy Crown of Gold,
The price of nightly danger, won by Au∣dax,
Left by Prudentius, let it crown thy Tem∣ples,
Else let thy shining brow re∣crown this Laurel,
Worn but by Caesar Monarch of the world,
And thy Ovidii, makers made of thee.
Let Desperato wrap thy semal head
With Imniu State, the Crown of that grand
Seignior
Who worships most these two, Woman and Fate.
But Timorous brings the Persian
Cydaris,
Which dropped from Xerxes Temples in his flight.
Liveby a Crown of Feathers here presents
To represent the light and easiy yoke,
Which all the Passions hope.
Model thy Tireman
Offers for company this Crown, not costly,
But yet of pretty Fancy, new Invention.
We thank the wit and pains of all your service.
We will wear these Crowns in turn, and try them all.
Liveby, reach hither.—Whore's Recorder
Memor?
Here.
First take this, the chief true real
Crown.
These were the honours which
Prudentius wore.
Were those his honours? they shall ne'er be mine.
Those only I except.
Wisely excepted:
Great Lady, say not so: put on this Crown,
And with your Head crown it: then let
 your Hand
Give Life unto this Sceptre, and to Us:
Isle rather not be Empress, then assume
Or that, or this.
Say so?
Prettiest of pretties;
We here would have a Queen, and she'll not wear
The Badge and Ensign that should make her so.
Is none a Prince, but she whose head supports
The burden of a Crown?
Indeed Authority
Lies not in this: then Kings could do no more
Without the leave of this Authentic toy
Then can a Constable without his staff.
A Crown would crook my neck, which for a Realm
I would not mar.
Nor mar that Ruff for three.
If this condition needs must be enforced,
I willingly resign what you confer.
Then some of us shall be a gainer by it.
Do not so slight the labour of your Servants,
Who ventured far to gain this wreath; in which
Lies the significance of all the rest.
Let her refuse once more.
My Noble friends,
It signifies too much, too great a Care,
Too high Command. Should my free wandering thoughts
Be hooped and compassed in with weight and care,
Or should that staff keep down your sprightly humours,
Fancy might then be styled Prudentia.
No; though I reign, provide your selves live free.
This only is my Law, that each man use
His proper humour, be it Vice or Virtue,
Inordinate or stayed. Who minds his pleasure
Shall best deserve; my self will teach him how;
And guide him in it. For your own sakes and mine,
Offer no more that badge of Tyranny.
Fancy beyond all Fancy.
Plague on Dissemblers;
First on her self; then on these rascals here;
Who first persuaded her to take the Crown,
And then admire her for refusing it.
Pleases your highness with your radiant hair
To grace some other badge of Majesty?
To show I do not quite reject your Favours,
Nor slight the proffered Rule, reach me the
Laurel,
And then the glass.
Even thus did mighty Caesar!
Ti's too Imperious This.
Wit beyond Caesars!
Excellent Lady!
Tic too Imperious
If rule it mean; if height of wit, too low:
Tic like a Tavern, Bush and begs for sale,
Which Fancy scorns. Small Poet, take it you.
What's next? the Turban.—What a Turk am I now!
Had I with this a large Seraglio,
I'd lend them to Sr. Amorous.—The next.—
This Persian Cydaris hath made some
Sophies
That scarce were wise before: when I sit next
In Solemn Counsel, Isle wear This.—
But now;—
This feathered Crown like a Mercurial hat
Shall lift me from the ground; herein Isle grace
The present Fashion.—The Tiremans
Coronet
May be in Fashion too; and pity it is not;
I like it well.—But Liveby, tic your Fa∣four
That must take place, and give us Majesty.
Set it on firm, and somewhat glancing.—So.
I, marry Sir; why, this befits us right.
Wu'd I had brought my Fools
Cap to present her,
My fools Cap would have gotten the start of Favour
From Live by for ever.
Thanks Liveby, and Isle study a
Reward.
Your humblest Creature.
This fits the Quality
Of our intended Rule, which shall be light,
Light as your Liveby said, and soft and sweet,
And various, and pliable to every passion.
I'm bound to All, and much to Amo os,
And most to Liveby For besides this pre∣sent,
You brought me tidings first of this ad∣vancement,
And Crowned me in my Ear. Who likes the news,
Must needs regard the teller.—One I miss
Amongst the Passions, Melancholico.
He sullen grew because he might not bear
The massy Crown.—
—Now he hath brought him∣self.
And somewhat else.
Although I wanted Grace
To plant the massy Crown upon your head
In the true substance, yet I found a way
To crown you in this Picture. Here's the
Painter;
And here a tried Musician; men of Arts,
Which Melancholy much affects.
And I.
But mend your peace. That Crown de∣lights not me.
Some sudden business calls me to confer
With certain Female Artists!—Liveby,
Take you the keeping of those Orna∣mints.—
What? have we made a shuttle∣cock our Queen?
Stay, I had quite forgot to strew mine honours
On these deservers. You Malevolo
Be our chief Counsellour: be you Irato
The Lord Controller: Livebyhope shall be
The Master of Requests: you Amorous
Shall be the Master of our Ceremonies;
For which here's Poet, Painter, man of
Music,
And man of Properties: I give you leave
To use them for your self in wooing
Morphe.
But you my Poet whom I well respect,
Shall be my Secretary, and you shall turn
The long-breath'd stile of Proclamation
To Lyric Verse.
Most understanding Queen!
A pretty Cur! my hands now itch to try
Whether he be true Spaniel breed, or no;
O I could beat and kick him, and see whether
He'll fawn then to.—You were not best to flatter
Your self into an Earldom, one degree
Above mine Honour.
Take heed my Lord: he's likely to be great;
A Favourite can hurt.
What then? must I
Therefore take heed? bid me take heed again,
And it shall be the last, last Caution,
You ere shall give. What? give a Lord
good Counsel?
The rest, if they themselves can find a way
How I may pleasure them, I'm crowned their servant:
You know your Law; each man pursue his humour.
Isle rule by Fancy since I am Queen
Fan;
And use as little wisdom as I can.
And so it seems.
Ha ha ha ha ha ha—
How merry shall I live!——
Sr. Shall I mend
This peace?
Mend! mar, or break it if you will.
Now shall I turn far more precise then ever,
And praise Prudenius days throw discon¦tent.
Slighted? contemned? bafled? fools preferred?
I'm well rewarded.
Hark Sr. Timorous,
You gave me Counsel.
Out of Love indeed Sir.
You gave Prudentius warning to escape.
Not I, indeed not I, Sr. Amorous knows
How ere Isle kick thee now, cause tic my humour;
Isle take thee to be Liveby, tic my Humour.
The Queen shall know how you
have kicked my Knighthood.
I kicked thy breech, two foot above thy Knighthood.
I trust I shall have cause to kill thee too.
Mean while, to stir my choler, Isle con∣trowel
Roughly, most roughly.
I to feed my humour,
(For little I shall have to feed my body)
Must run some desperate course. The stream of Favour
Runs cross from me, to Hope and Amcrous.
Did we expose our selves to utmost danger
To gain a Crown for Her that more regards
A Cap and Feather?
I her Counsellour
Who alters with each puff, more flickering
Then Flag or Streamer? Then Isle write on Sand,
Or print the Air. But still I wonder much,
How Liveby being absent from our Coun∣sells,
Carried the first Intelligence. His telling
In Her esteem outweighs our Action.
This shows what women love, the Tong and •atling.
How says this man of Fate? is Livebyhope,
That primrose thing, that forward bud, long lived?
Ha! I think no; unless I may con∣troule him
To be no Favourite.
Men of that calling,
If I might counsel them for their best safety,
Ought not to live too long. For we can hate.
Challenge.
Or stab.
And call these things our Humours.
The safest Armour is un weapon'd boldness.
Thus privileged Isle trust their savage hands.
All happiness, that is, true Liberty
Unto the Passions; how d'e like your choice?
First tell us where Prudentius hides himself.
Within a Sanctuary, where his thoughts
Are sequestered from earthly cares to hey∣ven.
Our choice we like beyond Pru∣dentius,
Just so, as Fancy Livebys feathered crown
Beyond my Golden.
We like the power of choosing.
And some variety though joined with loosing—
Who ere Usurps, considers not his task,
How he must sooth the lowest of his vile∣loins,
Give highest place and all to every one,
Else all will be displeased. The King shall know,
What seeds of discontent and headlon folly
Appear already in this warring state.
Closed in too safe, they broke their hedge; what less
Then wandering now through wretched wilderness?
I think your cause exceeds the Cognisance
Of common sense. He like a Juryman
Can only sinde and judge the outward fact:
As whether now your kicks look white or blew;
Whether his threatening words were high or low;
What favour followed, whether sweet or sour;
Whether the kicks were Rough or gentle;
(Rough
Your Grinkling says) These with some other notions
Thereto belonging, as the quantity,
The Figure, Number, the swift motion,
Or ceasing of your kicks; these he can judge of.
But as for higher speculations
Of Passions rising out of mere conceit,
How it was raised, what punishment is
due,
This proper lbyelongs to Fancie's audience.
Was there no cause?
None given, but apprehended.
The worse for you; this shows there was no malice,
But single heat. Were the kicks thick and many?
Six strong ones in one instant.
Still the worse.
It shows mere heat. What said he, it was his humour?
Even so.
Yet worse. Tic Law, that every
Passion
May follow his own humour. Anger's his.
Besides he's writ a Lord: all things con∣sidered,
I give you counsel to be patient,
To ask if he be pleased to give you more;
To break a Tooth, pull Hair, strike out an
Eye.
Accept my thanks: I see the
Law it self
Is very Timorous against great Per∣sons.—
I now can see no use of Law at all,
Law is cashiered: where all things are permitted
What need of plea? what can be called unjust?
And are not these the Popular days we looked for,
When we expected Cunning should be
Sovereign?
In mischief we must use the men we hate.
You are the man I seek. Have you con∣sider'd
Those State-projections?
Sr. we want some Laws,
Such as were made for certain Lord Pro∣tectors.
Indeed this lawful murder is an
Art
Of Excellence, and yet as easy too
For Statesmen Lawyers as Physicians.
An Art familiar in the Roman
State,
As ancient too as the first Monarchy.
O I could tell you Laws worth millions to us,
By fair entrapping of the wealthy Clergy.
Have you no model to ensnare a Prince?
Henry the third, though wise and valiant,
Was caught in a strong line knit by him∣self,
Here ith mad Parliament,
As how?
Twelve Peers
Under pretence of evil Officers
And grand abuses, were selected out,
Strengthened with Laws to prune Pre∣rogatives,
To tutor and reform the State; to size
The Kings expense, and to appoint him
Servants,
Both menial and forinsecal.
I'st possible
The King should seal to this?
O Poverty,
She to Obedience is the Lay-mother.
As some say Ignorance is the Clarklike,
Betwixt Superiors and Inferiors,
Look either way, this rule is mutual,
The poorer must be servant to the richer.
Henry brought low with various Action
Could not subsist without their subsi∣dies.
Keep thy Prince poor, then thou shalt rule thy Ruler,
And subject thy Commander.
This we tried
To fasten on Prudentius: but he
Too wise, too frugal was. Now Fancy
Through giddiness of mind, and vast expense,
Will prove less wary and more prodi∣gal.
Let some insnareing Law be once proposed,
Fancy will yield, not ponder.
Well, think you;
Isle speak and speed. O it is the praise of hate
To practise ruin and pretend the State.
But Sir, I trust upon your fur∣therance
About impropriations.
You Isle remember
First, or my self I ever shall forget.
The Cydaris well fits me; now must I
〈◊〉 ••er this Persian Crown with mutual fitness.
What thing was proper to the Persian
Kings,
Say Memor.
Persian Kings did wed their
Sisters.
Though in my Person thus I can∣not wed,
Isle licence others. You Hilario
May, if you please, enjoy your lively Sister
Concupiscence.
I thank your Majesty
Both that I may, and may not; for to me
Nothing so pleasing is as Liberty.
I would not be bound to that neither, though I love it best;
If I were, I should long for the prison.
Bind me to be rich, I shall play at Ducks and Drakes with pieces;
Bind me to my good behaviour, I shall feel an itching desire to beat the Justice.
O what a Prentice should I make! I should run away no oftner then I came in fight
Of the threshold. And most of the Pas∣sions,
I think, have a spice of this humour.
But can no bond please you like
Liberty?
Neither bond of Matrimony, nor bond of friendship,
Nor bond of Usury, nor bond of iniquity;
I rejoice in the present, I desire nothing, and therefore would be tied to nothing.
Concupiscence your Sister's of an∣other mind.
I could well endure to be bound, so I might be loose too.
The Theme which I proposed was Royalty,
No less then Persian. Then Concupi∣sconce,
How first we are so thinly waited on,
By Female Passions? are there no more women
Of Passion kind?
Of Passionate enough.
But to say Truth, the Female Passions
As soon as they are born, turn all to sins
And they are all my Children.
Then have you
More Daughters far then Danaus, or Mar∣garet
Countess of Henneberg: whereof one did equal
The weeks, and the other the days of the year
With numerous issue.
I have more by thousands.
I'm as Fruitful and quick of Delivery
As any Vermin, spreading as Potatoes;
My race rues o'er the World.
Or what age are they?
As old as my self very near.
Then you
Continued a maid no longer then Quar∣tilla.
O never at all that I can remem∣ber.
You bear your age exceeding well.
I hope
I shall be young forever; I have the ver∣tu
Of making old folks young by touching them.
Are none of those your Children ripe and handsome
And fit for our attendance?
Pride my Eldest
She is the likeliest.
Let her be admitted.
She's now in the Spanish Court; but when she comes—
Then the Court and her Mother will teach her to fall both ways,
Forward and Backward.
Till she return, is it not in Fan∣cie's power
To change a Sex, and make some Passion
Female?
The like hath been; I have heard of a Female
By mere force of Fancy turned Male. So
Iphis
A Maid, in love with a Maid, was trance∣formed
Just on the marriage Eve. Tiresias
Was Male and Female annually by turns;
Some Hermaphrodites have been both at once.
Wud I could live and turn Her∣maphrodite.
Wud I could live and be of nei∣there
Sex.
What think ye of transforming
Amorous?
He's undone then: he cannot show his legs, nor use his Postures
Nor enjoy his Idol Morphe.
No, change Sir Timorous,
He's as fearful as a Hare, and may be as changeable:
He hath many Symbolical conditions of womanhood already:
He is Female in every part but one, and half Female in his clothes
Give me but an Inch of Ribbon from Few∣ga,
and I'll undertake to present him
The Lady Timida.
Fuga
Give him one of your changeable Fancie's,
Thus first our selves must whet our own
Invention;
Else others will not stir. Men do not strive
Methinkes to please me as they ought to do.
No other rarities these many Ages
But Powder, Printing, Seaman Card, and Watches?
So much vain dotage for the fond Elixir?
Why are not yet my Christals malleable,
To make our Gold no Gold, and foil the Di'mond?
Why want I Instruments to measure out
The Year, the Day, the Hour, without the help
Of Sun, or turning of these tedious wheels?
Nothing to carry me but Barges, Coaches?
Sedans, and Litters? through the Air I'd pass
By some new waftage▪ I must have my house
Conveyed by wheels and sails and plum∣mers hung
In some deep pit, deep as the way is did∣ant,
To hurry me, my Family, and it,
Whether I please. Isle travel like the Snail,
With all my house; but swifter then the Falcon.
Rare Lady!
Ravishing Inventions!
Why have not I not my Beds stuffed all with wind,
Baths filled with Maydew, Flowers pre∣served till winter,
As well as Snow till Summer: choicest Fruits
Growing and ripe in midst of January?
Why have not I Ponds running through my Cellars,
For Bottles and for Fish called by their names?
Why not in drough an Artificial rain,
Scattered by spouts, to cheer my Para∣dise?
I wish you had these things; I ne'er saw such.
Cheap I can have Aeolian bell∣lowes made
Within the Bowls of Andirons, where the water
Shall blow the fire by which it is rarefied.
I will have Vaults which shall convey my whispers
In steed of Embassies to foreign Nations;
Places for Echoes to pronounce a speech,
Or give a Suffrage like a multitude:
Consorts well played by water; Pictures taught
By secret Organs both to move and speak:
We spend our selves too much upon the Taylor;
I rather would new mold new fashion Nature.
Pleases your Highness to behold a Show,
Wherein some Passions are displayed by Dreams
How they affected are by Day.
Isle see it.
What means that whisper?
Tic an honest project
Thought on by Memor, out of love to Churches,
To buy back saleable impropriations
With charitable money. Doth it please you?
This task was fitter for Pruden∣tius
Then Sense or Passion. This although I grant,
Yet take it with condition. Memor knows
Conveyance old and new, the Right and Wrong.
In things not sacred he may use his cun∣ning,
In this he must be just. To you I say,
It was not seasonable to move this business
When Shows were coming.
This your self did move
By asking.
Now.
Then make you here a Law,
That none these three days shall prefer a Suit
Or motion under forfeiture of life.
Me you shall find content; I'm no Trow∣bler.
This trap is laid full right.
Stay, stay great Queen.
This Law will seal my mouth, and tie your hands,
And stop the necessary speed of business,
Whereby your Crown may be dissolved.
Away,
Away Malevolo.
My snare for Liveby
Is broke, but violence shall it supply.
You Memor have your wish.
Morpheus in a Cloud-coloured
Cassock with a wreath of Poppies and a Caduceus from a black Cell. Then at his call, six sleeping Persons in their night caps half down their Faces, and in their waistcoats, representing in their clothes downwards Memor,
Malevolo, Irato, Timorous, Heal∣rio,
Desperato. Morpheus shakes his Caduceus over them severally as they stand in Couples. Being moved they fall successively into their proper gestures, and lastly all dance together in those gestures.
I Morpheus King of Dreams, whose might
Can equal Fence's in the night,
Have cause the night six dreams to send:
As I appointed they attend
Now Memor turn thy Books and prate,
Plead with thy hands and fees then take.
Shrug, scratch, Malevolo, and grin,
Grasp thy foul heart and feel thy sin.
Irato, bend thy fist and draw,
Offer to thrust, keep fear in awe.
Shake Timorous, offer to fly,
Begin to sink, offer to die.
Hilario clap thy hands and laugh,
Skip, leap, and turn, offer to quaff.
Despair start, stand, and crush thy throat,
Then stab thy breast and groan death's note.
Whose labour was this sport?
Livebys invention and my country∣avenge.
For this I'll send you to your dearest Morphe.
Go at what hour you please, and say I want
Her company at Court. You, Hope, for this,
And for preventing that pernicious Law,
Ask what you will.
Grant the Monopoly
Of Watches, or of Beavers.
Fan take them both;
And ask again.
When woodlands shall be turned
To other use, grant me a twelfth as forfeit.
Be it confirmed▪
I was about to ask
The Patronage of Churches in Sea-towns;
Where popular choice maintains a Fa∣ction
Brought in with Merchandise from for∣reign parts.
But that were better taken to the Crown.
Take what thou wilt. Thou
begst to give us share.
None can please all, the best the better fare.
By this way Sir Timorous should come; whom I as sent from his wronged
Lady Fuga have engaged in a quarrel against Audax. And yonder comes the pitiful Earthquake most lovingly trem∣bling.
What should I do here? some desperate knave or other, Desperato himself
(it may be) hath robed me of my best weapon. I thought not to have fought with steel, but with Gold; and to have brought this needy Captain to an honour∣able submission by dint of Cash. What disasters have I? That unreasonably wicked, that divlish two faced Cutter knew me too well: for when I drew this harmless blade, he looked upon it as slight∣lie as upon a riding wand; and bad me familiarly put up that, and draw my purse.
Certainly I have too much of the Mother;
I am that which they call a Coward, and all the world knows it. Wherefore (O
Ribbon) I take it extreme scurvily of
Fuga, that she being of the same temper her self, doth not consider her temper in me.
Now this Craven stands as tick∣lish on the point of running as a Bowl on the top of a ridge.
Two steps further I'll move. I have been coming a quarter of a mile these two hours at least; and yet I sweat till
 the very drops run a race; my shaking fever is turned to a cold sweat, and that's a true Prognostication of death.
Good night to all the world; for this is that fatal peace of ground which I shall anon-measure with my Carcass. Never a Bush nor Hole here? though it be called Champion ground I shall not fight: perhaps I shall make use of its plainness, and give ground a mile or two; that shall be my way of fighting.
For if I the Challenger stand still on my guard, it will not stand with mine ho∣nor:
And then while I keep my back∣sword point still in his face (I have seen the play at cudgels) he will wheel about me, and falsifying a blow at the head will strike me just on the legs where my heart lies. Then shall I be quite spoiled for run∣ning away; which I think I had best do presently, for I hear him coming. O—
Now I see Sir Tim, thou art a Lad of mettle.
Mettle? I protest Sir I had rather drink this cold iron filed small to dust and be a Lad of mettle so, then to thrust it whole into any mans flesh whatsoever; much less into my Enemies. You see then what power Love hath, and how Fuga is beholding to me.
Most dreadfully.
Is not the time yet past? I think I may retire with honour, and say he durst not meet me.
It wants yet half an hour. If you hold not out your time, then he'll assault you openly in Court, and make your shame public, which otherwise will be but private. Isle stand secretly by you, and if need require will step in and part you.
Stand not far off I beseech you for when I am killed I shall not be able to call.—O my heart!—the Giant's coming—O—Hilario—
Malevolo passes by.
Saw you not here Irato?
No believe me Sir; no I thank heaven. Hilario!—Now comes Audax.
O—I have but a minute to live.
Irato passes by.
How now stinkerd, how does thy breech? saw thou not here Malevolo?
He past by in hast; just now in hast.—Well. Two Furies are past.
Isle not wait for the third, go Love and
Honour whither they will. Hilario!—I fear he hath left me. Isle raze my Flesh with a slight cut, and swear I received that wound in fight. But now I think on it better, I have an issue under my left arm;
Isle force that bigger till it bleed, and swear that into a wound. For sure a fresh one would be far greater pain. Soft, I am loath to suffer so much, if I may choose
Hilario?—
What a Champion are you? not dare to look a man in the face?
Sweet Hilario, I consider thou hast no Sword to help me: stretch thy wit, and invent some speedy way, how I may escape with honour, and not fight?
You cannot possibly escape fight∣ing.
Sweet Hilario do not kill me be∣fore hand with saying so.
Why then will you be ruled by me?
In any thing, any thing. Quickly for love of Life.
I have promised to furnish the
Queen with a new Lady attendant.
What then?
Put on Women's apparel, you shall be she; by name of Madam Timida.
Ha! Say on.
Then shall you be free, not only from this quarrel, but from all future beat∣ings and challenges.
Safe and sound!
Then shall you have perpetual ac∣cesse to Fuga, bully.
Safe and delicious!
Then to steal her affection you may habit your self like her.
Safe and wise!
Then as for you honour, who can upbraid you when you are no where to be sound: twill be supposed by your sweet friend, that you died in her quarrel, Audax if he himself talk will be dangerously questioned.
But will you be secret?
For mine own sake, mine own sake, Sir Tim.
Dearest Hilario, thou art my pre∣serving
Angel.
Make hast, before you can new cast your self Isle come to present you.
Poor snake, I delivered no Challenge; I only frighted him to a more willing
Metamorphosis.
Hey ho for a husband; Two three, or more,
As many as I meet; it is fit, that we
Ladies Attendant should be qualified
For three at least.
What ere the habit be, this is the Face
The Voice and language of Concupiscence,
Why, how now Sister, taking the Air a∣lone?
A safe Conscience never fears any man.
I think thou fear not any, but love all.
Such was thy wont; and hast thou now a Conscience?
Be grave or silent, know I'm rectified.
Pox on your train: by feigned honesty
You seek to woo me. I'll unveil you straight.
What think you of two husbands, three, or more,
As many as you meet?
Why did thou hear me?
Ladies Attendant should be qua∣lified
For three at least.
That I spoke merrily.
If thou had ten, thou still would cry more Hymens.
If so you think, think on, I think so too.
But when will all thy maiden∣heads be spent?
Tell me sincerely, truly, and bodily.
They come again like Teeth, I'm breeding now.
Then are thy maidenheads like Hydra's heads,
Not to be tamed but by a Hercules.
Who has the next?
I am resolved to part it
Betwixt a Courtier and a Citizen:
The Courtier has the maid, the Citizen
Shall have the head.
Sister, I cannot wed you,
You have too much complexion for my use:
But Isle provide you one shall bear the name
Of Husband.
Let him be honest, quiet.
Of you own garb, say he be Me∣lancolico.
And so Isle rid my self of Fence's march.
I care but for his shadow ha∣avenge Servants.
Farewell Carnality.
Hilario thinks
He took me, when alas it was my intent
The Boy should overhear, and so become
If not a Husband, such an Officer.
What's here? Concupiscence?
Nor stare, nor startle;
As I hope to look saire, I'm nothing changed
In mind or body. No where, but in habit.
And why in This?
O for Variety.
Fancy permits all change. This dress sometimes
Pleases the Courtier better then his
Ladies.
Is it but so? come then my Paphi∣an drum,
I'll brace the close.
Soft Sir, you march too fiercely.
I have a task which first you must perform;
I fear you will not do it; you do not love
me;
Promise me first; the task I can assure you,
Befits your Valour, and will pay it self.
Is it to kill the Queen, that thou may reign?
No, nor her maid; thou shalt but use her kindly.
Speak plain, be bold.
Then thou shalt ravish Fuga.
She twits me with my Servants, Favours, Looks,
My Words, and scopes: in This you bear a share.
If this to me bring shame, you are not free.
Is this your heavy task? no more but This?
Only to ravish? is not the work Reward?
Isle do it effectually; Her self shall thank me.
But I'll outthank her far; Isle ravish thee
With fast embraces. Take this kiss in earnest
Of future payment. Though I seem a
Vestal,
To thee I'm Venus.
Venus, be secured.
Then, when her fruit shall swell, and I stand simpering,
Turned to a seeming Saint, O how Isle triumph
In grave reproof and holy Admonition!
This it is to be too chaste.—here come the Stagemen.
Sir you and we were acted at the Court.
We losers are made laughing-stocks, and sport
For open Stages.
Tell my Sword the Author;
That it my write his doom upon his flesh.
This Creature can inform us.
Who I pray
Were your late witwrights in the Masque?
Hope pend it,
My Father Amorous (without Offence)
Contrived the Show.
This trick Malevolo
Was chiefly meant to you, because your pen
Hath scourged the Stage.
However Lord Irato
Shall act a red Catastrophe on Liveby:
Isle watch his haunt and hunt
him to his fall;
You Amorous too. This mirth of theirs at last
Shall close their sweetness with an Aloed taste.
These once removed, who can be great but I;
Whose word shall sway but mine? Then power is sweet
When Rubs are made the stairs to mount our feet.
Whatever change succeed, still wretchedness
My old inseparable mate hangs on.
Therefore I seem ridiculous; my grief
Is others mirth; Malevolo says I'm acted▪
Henceforth Isle find new Company: since
Fate
Bars me from others happiness, Isle spread
My misery to others; and Isle thrive
Merely in spite, to make men miserable.
This is my humour; it is begun already.
The Gold I took from Timorous, if que∣stion'd,
I can defend; I took it in my humour;
And that's good law; I took it in a humour
Most desperately bent; and it hath made me
Such as men see, an able man for mischief;
Clad me in the outside of a mystery,
Furnished my shelves with Pots, with
Boxes, Names,
Slight Medicines, and strong Poisons. Time hath been,
When I in War served Death a Prentiship;
There learned to open Veins, to lance and kill;
Now I am free of the Trade; a Soldier then,
Physician now; Isle do the self same work,
But now more Artificially.—
—The godly
〈◊〉 in distress; the wicked, that usurp
The Childrens right, do here grow fat and prosper:
Wherefore I thought of drowning. Verily
••ulesse that Conscientious Lawyer,
Good Memor, from rebought Impropria∣tions,
Had thus deducted and distributed
The better part to us oppressed Brethren,
Affliction some, and some Devotion
Had brought me to despair. Now Isle not see him.
Methinkes dejected Melancholico
Should prove fit Timber for my fatal work.
What, Melancholico? not know your friend,
Whose medci'nal skill cures Body, Mind, and State?
Trust thou art not over lucky; art?
Dost feel no misery?
I thought ere this should have had thy custom.
Verily
My sickness could but little cure your purse.
It might have brought me pra∣ctise howsoever,
And that's the only Fee of new pro∣fessours.
But are you then indeed a true professor,
And one of Us? Sooth I profess sincerity,
Hath not the same which cause sincerity,
Cause a foul spleen? no Hypocondrick
Vapours?
For that a godly Lawyer gave me physic:
Then take it next from a Divine.
That Lawyer
First took it from Divines, then gave it me.
And I can give you counsel to your phy∣sick:
You have a fair advantage in men's sick∣ness
To prick the Conscience, and to let them know,
Their only way is to relieve the Bre∣ren,
And 〈◊〉 their stock of holy usury
For new Plantations. You shall have a share.
This is a verier rogue then I my self.
And what I pray moved you to turn Physician?
Want set me on, a booty set me up.
Now let me know of mutual courtesy,
What was your Dos?
Twill buy all yours; it was Gold.
Why then, thou'st run unto pre∣sumption,
Not to despair. I hear you are to marry;
Which if thou dost, then thou wilt come to me,
For Ratsbane, Hensbane, some such whole∣some banes,
To cure thy bands of Matrimony.
Hence.
Friend Melancholico,
How is it? Sister, stand by a while. Me∣thinks
Upon a sudden you are grown brisk and cheerful,
Fit company for me, nay for a wife.
You'll never leave your waggery and jesting.
" You called Peculiars rags of Popery.
Sometimes you are too sad and solitary:
Is this jesting? and solitariness
Requires due Recreation; Is this jesting?
And Recreation much consists in
The yoke of a meet helper; you may call
This jesting too; but is it not sport in earnest?
The Saints allow no sport.
Then love in earnest.
You know you cannot well converse with men;
Your looks are indisposed, your language sparing,
Your manners different. But to a woman
A long Parenthesis of busied silence
Does passing well. Then in her company
You have a world, and none to contradict.
And in her Ear you may reform the Church,
Or purge the State, as safe, as if you spake
Ʋnto the Air or whispered to your self,
For so she is. Think on a wife.
No wife.
Then on a spouse.
Now you say somewhat.
Now.
He'll marry words not substance. The word whore
Would have spoiled all. This blockhead suites with me
As frost with fire. But for your sake Isle thaw him.
Have you not injured that fair pro∣mising
Sister
By leaving her alone?
She meditates.
She walk gravely, turns her eye devoutly.
The white's pure, the black as full of Adultery
As thou art of Hypocrisy; she harbours
A good conceit of you. Shall she conceive
Further?
If that her name be right.
She was
Concupiscence, now called Temperance
Sister
This is your Husband whom I so com∣mended.
I choose not for my self.
Sister and Spouse,
If so you please, our hands she'll us unite
Marches are made in Heaven; few words suffice
The Night consummates. As for other rites
I hold them superstitious Ceremonies.
I had forgot her Portion.
She's a widow,
He show you her Estate.
He first retire
And clasp her hand in zeal.
my Lord and Bridegroom.
The Devil and his Dam you are.
Come Brother.
Once more. I like your medi∣tation,
But do not spend your self therewith too much.
Now I am double sheltered in my hear,
With name of Husband, and this formal guise.
Now welcome Servant; have you won the Fort?
Hell take her, she's a man.
A man?
Just so
I found, scarce left him so.
O you mistook.
Sir Timorous is transformed to wait at
Court:
It was Phanci's own device. O I could laugh.
I made him so much woman as to cry;
" Else I had made him woman with my Sword.
Alas poor Timida.
The thing so trembled,
No leaf nor ague like him.
Ha ha ha.
Did you intend to put this trick upon me?
No by the kisses which shall satisfy
Thy height forthwith, and pay thy error full.
Besides I'm satisfied with this mistake
As well as with the right. Aspersion
Shall blot the name of Fuga full as much.
What's this? the He or She?
No matter which.
If it be she, I'll ravish her; if he,
Then thou shalt do it.
Neither▪ tic done enough.
Tim hath a fine time on it.
Come, you have a better.—
Is this to be a woman? O I could tear,
As timorous as I am, my lawns to rags,
And scratch my face, and stick my heart with pins,
Or straight turn valiant. Wud my Fuga knew,
What she hath escaped through me.
And here she comes.
O Fuga, female habit and strange sufferings
Have lent me tongue enough. Now I can speak;
And boldly say I have deserved your love.
Wherein Sir Lady?
Now in this your habit saved you from a hideous ravishing.
Audax with whom I should have fought, came on me
With love more rude then rage, blasted my face
With breath like brimstone, turned my limbs like twigs;
I live by miracle.
You came too near
Uuto a Sex from which you should keep further.
Shall I not then be near and dear unto you?
Experience tells you what a boy∣strous thing
Tic to be ruffled by a man.
Still so? Why I have been a woman for thy sake;
I hear within these weeds a mind as tender,
White skin, blew veins, and arms as soft as thine.
But still you are a man, and I still Fuga.
Nothing can merit love from peevish∣ness.
What shall I do? I'll straight turn man again,
And suffer for my self. Farewell coy wo∣man,
Ungrateful, and unwise. My ravishment
Is fairly past, but yours may be the next.
How ere when I appear my self, the noise
Of what is past will light upon your name.
I bore the loathsome suffering for thee,
Now shalt thou bear the foul reproach for me.
Much I was overseen, too much extremely;
I could run after him; but if he turn
I shall run back again. O I am lost;
My Honour, Safety, and perhaps some like∣ing,
All these are lost, with these I'm lost, lost Fuga.
This change of State gains me small perfect pleasure.
Mere meditation on Morphe's beauty
Will not suffice. Come Fuga, since thy Ocean
Cannot be minish'd by some drops, give freely
What Audax forced.
That I am miserable
Is it not enough, unless I bear more bur∣dens
Of common scorn, or (which is worse) true staining?
Good Sir, of all the Passions you are gent∣lest;
Though you esteem me light, which I am not,
Yet take some weight unto your self.
Consider
That after this you cannot worthy be
Of Morphe, never woe with confidence.
Thus still a Female Sermon puts me by,
And I gain nothing by my Liberty.
Once more I ask.
Once was too much before.
Once more.
First kill me.
Then to make you quick
Is past my cunning.
Joy to you Madam Fuga, you know why.
If I could give you Joy of what
I loath,
And you delight in, this if I could do
Without a sin, I would.
Is false report
Worse then true guilt? how i'st this fill∣thy
Strumpet
Looks like a Saint, and I as foul as hell?
Lady, an Eye refined sees more then dull ones,
And Holiness far clearer then Uncleaness.
I wonder what loose words and actions
Have passed from you, to give encourage∣meant
To the kind ravisher; for I have heard
None can be ravished without some con∣sent.
Be humbled, know you fault, live chaster
Lady.
Sure I should think I'm guilty.
Out upon thee.
Fie Temperance, what here? wilt thou have Eggs
And rotten Oranges flung at thee too?
What can you choose no other company
But this lewd, cracked abominable peace?
You see your company is scent∣lous,
I must take leave.
If there be any power
To see and judge, I challenge his assistance.
What have I done, unless too steadfast coy∣ness
Be now accounted looseness? what's my
Crime,
That such a general storm of loud dis∣grace
Conspires to bear down Innocence? Hold heart,
Hold my weak spirits: for if this continue
I shall grow desperate.—
—Pity me Father,
My name is stained beyond all patience.
Sir Timorous having foolishly put on
My shape; in stead of me was rudely ra∣vish'd
By blustering Audax. The reproach is mine.
You know a darksome cloud can much obe∣scure
The face of water though as pure as Chri∣stal.
Audax shall rue this base attempt, whose shadow
Blots your opinion, and portends more danger
Unto your Person. Cast your cares on me.
I may communicate, not cast them off.
I thought to use him in a bold de∣sign
Against Liveby, and I will; it is dangerous
Unto himself. If combat rain one,
Vengeance pursues the other: thus Isle make
The vanquished and the victor both my prey,
And whilst they fight, my self shall win the day.
What, you that Office? know your turn; give place
First to your betters. You be General?
Yes I. And know, that whilst I hold a Sword
To prove my worth, the Sun beholds none better.
Neither your Lordship nor Controwlership
Can dastard me.
But I shall teach you distance.
Make me draw back one inch, and gain this place,
Then thou gain'st That. Be calmer good Irato.
Unwing the Lightning, stop Araxes floods,
Then may thou stop my wrath, and guard thy self
Against my stroke.
Hold, hold; what means this
Fury?
May I be Umpire in your difference?
Know it you may; this fierce and haughty Lord
Crosses my aim, and stands Competitor
For what he understands not, to be Gene∣ral.
Not understand? give way Malevolo.
You may be fit to quarrel in a
Tavern,
But not to lead an Army.
Give me scope;
Unless thou would be broached on the same blade,
And coupled plunge in Styx; open the way.
Why would you seek this Office?
Cause I scorn
That any man should be preferred before me.
And why would you?
Because I can do service;
And would gain honour, equal unto His.
There's yet no Army levied, there's no cause,
But doubtful Rumour.
When there is, Isle lead it.
Yes, both alike; while you con∣tend for shadows,
Liveby will bear the substance from you both.
Rid him, then you may talk.
What says Irato?
Agreed.
Then you shall take him now in the Evening,
Coming from Intellectus: there's his haunt,—
Now try your fury on a third; for I
Stanch'd not this combat out of love, but hate,
To turn them hot, and mad, on Liveby's blood;
That done, meet seas again; I'll be no
Isthmus;
But spur their heat, and clap them on the shoulder.
For I my self first raised this bruit of war,
For fuel of some new commotion;
Which luckily takes fire betwixt these two.
Now Amorous; you sit in For∣tunes lap,
Your Mistress sits in yours; you spend your days
In Honour, and Delight.
I shall the more,
If with your liking.
Mine? I am your Theme
For mirth at Court; one of your Hobby-horses:
And glad of such perferment; but I'll dash
And poison your sweet delicates.
Your hate
Shall not break off my Scene of Love.
Stand there,
And send thy notes like shafts through
Morphe's Ear.
Sweet Morphe lend a feeling ear
To the soft strains wherein I bear
My soul, and sigh it out to thee
Composed of sweeter harmony;
With one kind word or smile
Reprive the man a while,
Who life doth crave
Thy print to save,
And fears to make his breast, thy Pictures grave.
 Why do you trouble both your self and me,
With such fond circumstance of open woo∣ing?
I'm glad at any rate to hear your voice,
Though sent in chiding. But my dearest Morphe,
I have a business to you from the Queen,
Besides mine own.
This you pretend to wrong me.
Though I be loyal, yet my loyalty
Ought not to make me Traitor to my self.
If I be false or any way immodest,
Accuse and shun me.
Shall I then believe you?
Add to that curse a greater if you can,
And may it fall upon me.
Well, I come.
Now having liberty to act my will,
No Law but this vain curse to hold me in,
How shall I bear my self?
What wills the Queen?
She calls you to her company at Court.
She wants your privacy; you likewise want
Her public presence: O you wrong your beauty
By shutting such a Jewel from the gaze
Of solemn adoration.
Pray excuse me;
If I have beauty, let me keep it well.
The various Fashions, and new Fancies there,
In the opinion of us plainer beauties,
Do but Sophisticate the Elements
Of native Colour, and distort the lines
Of proper figure. What should I do there?
Say I am sickly, as this news hath made me.
Farewell Sir Amorous.
Nay, tic not modesty
But blunt stupidity to part so soon.
May I not walk and take you by the arm,
And pass a fair discourse? what hurt in
This?
May I not feed my spirits with the air
That fans your cheeks? lighten mine eye from yours?
Is this immodest?
Hark.
It is the clash of weapons.
Help Amorous, help.—O—it comes too late.
Ignoble Swords, and bloody butcherers!
Who would believe that two such Her∣cules
Should join against a single Hylas thus.
It was not manly.—Morphe—O my life!
This hideous sight hath struck her gentle spirits
With frighted numnesse. Water, spirits, help.—
Out strip the wind, fly for a Physician.—
I'll rub her Temples, rouse her by the name
Which she best knows: Morphe.
O!
Life there appears;
Is there none here? how should I save them both?
Help there, it is but a Sown. I feel some breath.
I'll bear her hence.—O that my arms might clasp
Her living thus, and willing.—
—Hence did thrill
That piercing noise. What's here? see false mine eyes!
Poor Liveby slain? then for thy Sove∣reigns favour
Thou died a Martyr.
O, Intellectus help.
He speaks; ther's hope of life. If Art can save
A third so mangled, thus Isle bear thee to it.
Although my breast have used to bear it's burden
Within, and not without.—
—Look carefully
Unto your Lady. Let the Physitan
First speak with me.—Now to my se∣cond load.—
What? vanished? I have heard of walk∣ing ghosts,
Never of walking carcasses. Then surely
The Murderers have dragged him hence. His blood
Will rise upon their cheeks; and it shall speak
Loud on my Tongue.—
—Now in my Turkish Turban
I walk to find Sir Amorous in his heaven.
Be not so deeply discontented Fuga.
Unless you clear me openly, I die.
I find you Amorous somewhat near your Center.
Your Morphe fittest is to be a Queen.
I go to waite on her, and fetch her home
With me.
Sweet Soul (that's all she is by this)
I cannot tell you in what world she is,
Nor where I am my self.
And why?
She's dying,
Frighted with such a dismal accident,
That when I tell it, I much fear your high∣ness
Will be as weak as she.
Speak, I am armed.
Whore's Livebyhope?
The same I fine would know:
Last when I saw him, he was laid for dead.
How dead?
Tic so. Just now: not far from hence,
Two bloody Villains, Audax and Irato,
Pursued and sped him with two mortal wounds.
I ran to help; Morphe fell in a Sound;
I bore her hence; mean while his Corps were gone.
I am perplexed beyond my power of bearing.
My arm is lopped, my Kingdom is all tumult▪
The Passions taking vantage of my Law,
Follow their humours to their mutual ruin;
And run like Vessels till they quite run out.
Mix some ingredient to excite her
Love.
Doctor, thou shalt be rich,
I'll fit you all.
Morphe for physic sends, Malevolo
Hath purchased me long since to give her poison;
Sir Amorous buys a Love-pill: I my self,
Even I, that will be Master in conclusion,
Intend to mix them all: then fight con∣fusion.
Pleases your highness to decide by choice,
Or leave it to our Swords, who shall be
General?
Then I am bound to honour one of them
For their good service. Bloodhounds, have ye murdered
One worth you both? and dare to ask re∣ward
Of me? of me so wronged? So both will join
In mutual revenge, and fall together,
Fight for it.
Fond Queen, what if our rage pro∣ceed,
To hew Sir Amorous for telling this,
You for distasting? all will be but humour.
Then give us not occasion to pro∣ceed.
Proceed, I pray you, do. Lo, here's my breast.
Tent it; to find the grief which I con∣ceive
For Livebys Death, and your more horrid
Lives.
What, have ye surfeited with blood? good
Amorous,
Do it thou, do it straight: what these refuse as Rebels,
Do as a Friend. Kill me, but kill me gently,
With some sad strain under this spreading
Oak.
I hope twill ease not kill you.
Sing of Venus.
Once Venus cheeks that shamed the morn
Their hue let fall;
Her lips, that Winter had out born,
In June looked pale:
Her heat grew cold, her nectar dry.
No juice she had but in her eye,
The wonted fire and flames to mortify.
When was this so dismal sight?
When Atones bad good night.
The same which turned her beauty, turns my Fancy,
Alas poor Liveby.—What dee mean to thrust?
Fie what a press is here? stand off; for I
Am but a Cloud: your Elbows pierce me through;
Your hot and angry breaths will straight dissolve me.
And I shall crack into a shower of Tears.
Alas she's crooked indeed, the
Queen's distempered.
Do you not see, and hear a Lamb there bleating?
Pray kill him not, he bears the head of
Liveby.
In a mad world what use of place? what business?
Now had I any anger left, I'd shred
That Fiddler into Atoms.
O, I'm struck
(Plague on Malevolo that fets us on!)
I'm struck at heart with leaden heaviness!
I feel my veins now curdled; what success
But Horror of this Fact?
I see and hear
Enough to grate me. O that plots well laid
Should thus be dashed and foiled.—
—That naughty Boy
Hilario hath matched me to the Devil.
Hell flames are in her; she hath stuck a brand
" Into my bones; I sue for just divorce∣meant.
Did not you snuffle till you matched my Daughter?
Peace, or you'll shame your self.
A pretty Picture,
Here's Day and Night united in one peace;
Look here a Swan, look there a foul black
Raven.
Justice great Queen against a mule∣titude.
That's hard to be obtained.
Against Irato,
Tilario, Desperato, Audax:
Some beat, some cheat, some rob, some ra∣vish me.
What say? Go on and still that howling kennel.
I know you well, for all you are a Tortes,
And have lived like a frog in diverse Eel∣mints.
Of what Gender are you? Go learn of
Protens
How to do tricks. If you be dull and blockish,
You must be beaten. Come to me for
Justice?
Judge one another, or get you all to Liveby.
He's in his grave.
And therefore get ye to him.
No doing's here: I'm gone.
And I: but whither?
No Amorous, Liveby sleeps, but Morphe's dead.
Heaven help you Lady.
But I can soon restore her.
" Take you the sent of a Travellers toes,
" The sneeze of a Sleeper fresh from his nose;
" The fat of a Friar well fed with fasting,
" The lean of a Drunkard consumed with tasting;
" The juice of a Lemon tha's civil at sea∣sons,
" Twelve dancing Capers, ten lunatic Reasons;
" Two dying notes of an ancient Swan,
" Three Sighs a thousand years kept if you can:
" Some scrapings of Giges his Ring may pass,
" With the skin of a Shadow caught in a glass;
" Six penny worth of Thoughts untold,
" The jelly of a Star before it be cold;
" One ounce of Courtship from a country-Daughter,
" A grain of Wit, and a quart of Laughter.
" Boyle these on the Fire of Zeal or of Lust,
" With some beech Coals, least the Ves∣sell bust.
" If you can get these Ingredients, In com∣pound them for you.
" Then when she is perfectly recovered, she shall be married
In rich cloth of Rainbow laced with Sun-beames.
I hope Desperato hath given her other Physic.
Desperato? is he her Physician?
Since hope is dead, we all must to despair.
Pardon the messenger if he re∣late
What he could wish were false. Morphe once was:
But after physic brought by Desperato,
Raging and crying Amorous, She died.
Lo now, believe your Cybill next.
—If madness
Be now so near allied to prophecy,
I shall grow Prophet too. What angry Star
Thus frowns on all the Passions, most on me?
Ere since Prudentius days, we only toiled
In wretched mazes of confusion,
Mischief, and discontent. I have not passed
One hour in those delights whereof I dream't;
And now the object of my happiness
Is clean extinct. But how? O there's the torment!
My torment's doubled through my self the cause.
Cursed be my heedless Love, which not content
With likely hopes, with honest ways of wooing,
The ways to long injoining, headlong ran
To arts forbid. She had such Innocence
Even in her body, Temper so unforc'd,
That violent mixtures tending but to Love
To her were poisons. Yet methinks, some∣times,
There's Death in Desperato's looks; per∣chance
He's devil in his dumps, as I in lust.
Where shall we find the bottom of our woe,
Who but on Passion have no ground to go!
The Scene turns to the house of
Despair. A Table there laid.
Grow blacker yet my thoughts, grow blacker yet:
Your Plummets have not fadom'd the full depth
Of Passions misery. I have invited them;
But I must change their Cheer; and make it stronger
Then food and bare discourse. I only live
For others-death, and then I'll fill the heap
With mine own ruin: rather with mine ease:
For now the Passions flow like shoals of Fish
Into my net; they sue to me for Counsel;
Even to me; whose joy is in their death.
Just so the fearful Dear pursued with dogs,
Flies to the keepers lodge, a surer Fate.
To poison is dull art; my self am sorry
For doing ill so poorly; my design
Is now more glorious; for I'll make them act
Their death upon themselves, and thank me for it
Amidst their groanings. There have been with me
Fancy herself, distracted for her Liveby;
Irato, Audax for massacring him;
Sir Timorous and Fuga for impatience
Of their abuse. Unless Recorder Memor
Skil'd in the Law, have ways to scope my
Noose,
I doubt of none. I've bid them to a Feast;
But such a one, as Tantalus would shun;
Where I shall feed on all the guests that come.
Black Desperato, did I lay two thirds
Upon thy spindle? hast thou cut them both,
Morphe's and mine?
Why Sir, I mixed your Philtre.
She lives not me to love nor to be loved.
Did thou mix nothing else?
You know sometimes
That Death and Cupped do mistake their sh•••es:
Had I mixed Poison too and served two humours,
Both mine and yours, it might be well di∣gested.—
If I had not a dear request unto thee,
To give me of the same, I would exact
Thy life for hers, however it was spilt.
If I had not designed to kill some others
Out of mere kindness, thou shoulst try my skill
Of letting blood as well as giving physic.
But since I owe thee kindness out of hate,
Come to my Banquet, thou shalt have thy sauce.
There thou shalt meet thy friend Malevolo,
Who shared in this, and gave as much for
Poison
As you did for your Philtre. I dealt ho∣nestly,
And pleasured Both. Come, thou shalt have thy sauce.
Devil, I thank thee.—
—Now▪ Malevolo.
To hate was still my honey. But this gall
Of being hated totally of all,
I cannot bear: for now I cannot hurt,
Having no Credit. Give me from thy store
A dram of Poison. I have been thy friend,
Let it be strong.
First shake hands you must
With all the Passions, or at least make show
Of formal reconcilement: stay a while,
My Guests and Cheer are coming.—
—Have we found
This monster here? we will send thy ugly soul
Unto her fellow Fiends for tempting us.
I prompted you to kill. Were not you ready
To do as bad as I could say? Mean while
I turned you from destroying one another.
It was for thine one black Ends.
And say it was:
Might not I hate, as well as you might kill?
My humour was as lawful.
Had thou kept it
Home to thy self.
I labour not excuse,
But accusation of your equal Crimes.
He says the right; and hospita∣lity
Doth now require, ye should defer your
Broils.
Sir, here's a Crown, (and tic the worst of mine)
Not to be matched in all the globe of hey∣ven
Now shall I feed upon Ambrosia?
Most devilishly. What gods are these two Mars-es?
Hell is broke loose; here are more Fiends then two.
It shames me to look up; through grief I cannot.
Wud I could die a sleep in some dark hole
Unknown unto my self and all the world.
Malevolo, the art damned.
How know you that?
And thou must sink to hell now instantly
For killing Morphe. Thou shalt drink the same
That very Poison.
Well, so you'll begin.
Now Sister you are right: now you can snuffle
' As well a Melancolico. Care of fiction
" With help of somewhat else hath brought perfection.
" None come in Pomp but you: weak∣ness is stately.
" It were brave if these two beasts that draw without
" And these two rotten carcasses within
' Made it not look so Cart-like. My clean couple,
If you would be divorced, there's none can do it
Like Desperato; he can separate
At a worlds distance; that ye ner'e shall meet
To clamour me or others, or your selves.
A pretty kind of Coach; one horse before
And one behind!
Horses? why, these are Men.
I see it now; it is the glass∣mans pack.
Have you good choice of Glasses, made in Figure
Of Guns and Trumpets, or of Rats and
Owls?
Last time I saw the like, I bid a Gallant
Begin a health, and after break his glass:
So did the rest; but do not do so now,
Least for a Glass some should mistake a
Lady.
Femals are Venice mettle.
These sad men
Use to be sumptuous in their Feasts.
And witty.
I fear twill be too great.
Too tedious.
Welcome and bold I'll be.—
—Aerious Queen,
Here are no Phoenix eggs; had nature any,
You should have some: and eggs sublimed with Amber
I thought too mean. I have not now se∣lected
Rare filling meats, but rarely physical,
And swiftly curing all the maladies
Which time can throw upon the face of man.
Each dish contains a general remedy,
Beyond the Elixir, or the golden Liquor,
Though it were drunk in the Antimonial
Cup.
Open and try.
What's here? Knives, Bodkins,
Daggers?
Ropes, silken, hairy, hempen?
Little papers,
Of witty, loving, raging, sleeping poisons?
There's Wine to temper them.
So, whore's the Wine?
I still come somewhat merry to a Feast,
And still go merrier back. This is my mess:
All this to all.
Is this our entertainment?
Could Art invent, or Wealth procure you better?
The Greatest, Wisest, Stoutest, and the fairest
Have chose these Cates to relish their last palats:
Have you not heard of Mithridates, Cato,
Of Hannibal, and Cleopatra? These?
These gods on earth have travl'd to their home
With such provision. Taste. One taste of these
Forever frees from Hunger, Thirst, Want,
Grief:
These are receipts for immortality.
But through a mortal way.
That sleeping Dos
Will steal thy fearful soul insensibly.
Then that shall bear me hood∣winked unto Lethe;
There I'll forget my wrongs.
Manners however;
First let the Queen begin. I broke that
Rule
My self, and therefore m•m.—Well danced your Scaffold.
These things the most of you desired; All want,
You're welcome all.
No, no more I thank you.
Death to the wretched soul as needful is,
As sleep unto the weary. Why should men
Condemned to misery thus toil to mend
Their Fates which cannot alter?
This Desperate
What a gift he has! he never was at the
University;
Never took Orders, and yet lectures as good Divinity
As commonly we find in most Dutch
Systems
Or City-conventicles.
Pleases your Highness
To choose and give the signal, that we all
May waite upon your dying.
Reach me then
The witty poison.
Me the loving mixed;
That when I die, embracing her Idea,
My Soul may keep that print, and bear from hence
A heaven within me. He that stripped of flesh
And lust still loves, will show true love indeed.
But you Malevolo shall take my part.
My place in heaven is sure; what need I hast?
Yes, because I live in hell.
Then take these banes
Mentioned before.
Do; as good he poison thee
As thou else drown thy self.
Poison I have too much,
Already, and in vain. Reach me your hal∣la.
Ho ho ho; a halter? a dagger, he's so rotten,
He'll ne'er hold hanging. Now for my part, sleep
Kills me sufficiently; Isle die before hand.
In lust I lived with man; to kill that sin
Lend me that poniard, so I'll manly die.
This Bodkin is my husband; this alone
Shall know my flesh, and find I was a Fire∣gin.
Come join Irato, as we lived lets hang,
Two nooses and one rope will serve us both.
Tic a dogs death, and therefore not unfit.
Ho ho ho.
Choice I neglect whatever can dispatch
Loathed life is sweet. My hate would fine turn home,
But cannot: Still me thinks I feel con∣tent
In seeing such a fruitful race of mischief,
Because it sprung from me. If Fancies madness
Had not unhinged the course of my design,
And brought remediless confusion
On all the Passions here at once; unseen
Beloved and honoured, I with Art and Plea∣sure
Had done what Desperato does by chance.
He only held the Net; I hunted in
The store of game: The praise is mine. And now
I die not with remorse of hate, but want
Of objects to be hated. Thus the worm
Having consumed the Orb wherein it lived,
Doth lastly turn its hunger on it self.
Should I survive I could not find more work,
Unless I learn,d to pity what is done.
That's worse then death.
When I have rid you all,
If I slink off let all the world besides
Fling stones. In such good company to fall,
Must needs be lightsome. And before out death
A Hymn is necessary. Then sing good
Fellow.
An Attendant sings in a base.
Come heavy souls oppressed with the weight
Of Crimes, or Pangs, or want of your delight,
Come down in Lethe's, sleepy lake
Whatever makes you ache.
Drink health from poisoned bowls
Breathe out your cares together with your souls.
Cool Death's a salve
Which all may have
There's no distinction in the grave;
Lay down your loads before deaths iron door,
Sigh, and sigh out, groan once, and groan no more.
Ha! thou come to challenge: but thou art spirit,
I cannot wound thee. Stay some few short minutes,
Till I have quite undressed me of my flesh;
And stand on equal terms, then I will fight.
Else if thou can, kill me; and take my flesh;
Then I'll kill thee again. Thus o'er and o'er
Wel'l kill each other and be ghosts by turns.
My anger is not high: I only guess
He comes to show the way to following ghosts.
I gave him once a house, my most remote,
Perchance it is in Elysium, he invites me.
But Morphe stands as if she bid me come
Like a clear spirit fitly to salute her.
Why should that sight fling Ice into this heart?
and Fug. O horrid!
Come what will, I can but die.
Hath this shrewd Scholar con∣jur'd up these ghosts?
I see you are amazed; the snares of death
Are tangled on your hands: you think these sights
A pair of ghosts; feel, and when you feel them
True flesh, alive and warm, next you must know
They are a token sent from Prudentius.
How? from Prudentius? hath he raised the dead
And wretched both at once? and sent me
Morphe?
And given me hope again? a dainty show,
Who'ere contrived it.
Be thou shade or substance,
Since thou appear'st in such a lovely shap,
My soul In mingle with thine airy hand,
And strive to suck from thence the hated poison.
But soft, I may do rashly.
Know once more,
These are not ghosts, nor ever were; but live
Preserved with care, and sent with love from him,
Whom ye refused, your King Prudentius.
By heaven, true flesh and warm.
Why speaks not Hope If he have breath?
Speak: free us from thy blood,
For which we have been angry with our selves.
Speak, if thou can, thou must.
I feared to startle
Unsettled heads with unexpected speech.
High Mistress, your distracted grief for me
Had almost killed me when I was recovered.
I am recovered by this voice.
Then tell me
Thy preservation.
Audax and Irato
Know how they left me.
Kill us for amends:
Alas your death's would pro∣fit me no more
Then mine could you: but gracious Intel∣lectus
Found and relieved me, while Sir Amorous
Carried in Morphe.
Him I took up gasping
Tempered like Ice before it thaw and crack,
In such a glimmering state of doubtful life.
As Candles have before they blaze and vanish.
These ropes will all be mine.
And her I saved.
By looking on her mixed and poysnous physic.
The simples I extracted, and gave out
The same effect which likely would have followed.
Pardon my fault, I nothing mixed but love,
Those villains added poison.
Heaven forgive
As I forgive you all.
Give me some poison,
You stay me too?
Although I love thee not
Beyond an honest man, I cannot see
Thee die neglected.
What a coil is here
With ghosts? I cannot take my rest for ghosts.
People, you're welcome to this world. How fare
My fellow sleepers, ghosts, your Country∣men.
Thank not my care for this, but thank Prudentius;
Ask not what Genius sent me to relieve
Expiring Hope, it was Prudentius:
Ask not what star compelled my timely visit
Of Morphe poyson-trap'd, it was Prudentius.
From him proceeds their preservation;
And yours in them. Snatched from the jaws of death
As lights blown in again you live through him.
This is your cast-away, your dross, Pru∣dentius.
I think we wronged him in our heedless anger.
And yet his love seems payment for desert.
How shall I rule this crazed and tottring State?
I smell in what half point the wind is turning.
One breath will carry all the Passions
Back to Prudentius sails. Now for a fetch.
Well, I'll prevent them all. Call back
Prudentius,
Let's sue to him for grace.
Call back Prudentius.
Tic quickly done. If this way lead to peace
I opend it; but still I would stand safer.
Audax, you have a Drum. Now do not you
And Lord Irato end your business sneak∣ing.
Liveby you kept the Crowns: go with him Amorous,
Carry his own: I ne'er esteemed the Gol∣den.
I can be Queen alone, and govern subjects.
Of mine own making; more, then Kings can muster
Or Earth bring forth.
I'll take Recorder Memor
To lay our suit in form. Then on our knees
We will beg to serve him so, even so forever.
Come, to our old new Sun.
He's in his Court;
And now me thinks his presence guilds the walls.
Though weak we will go along.
Weak legs can kneel.
This peace of mine own banquet le assume
And walk in penance of a solemn hal∣la.
Isle go some nearer way, and re∣compence
My forward breach with much more for∣ward duty.
For this Event spun out by Intellectus
Makes me think honesty may weigh with cunning.
Some sheep, some Fox will make a perfect man.
However, me thinks, these Sword-men might compound
Our Peace in Arms, and plead with vio∣lence.
Without a Seizin no possession.
Your Crown is undefiled, untouched.
Place thou
The world in my balance, place in theirs
All Levity, then weigh them both. Next tell me
How ended those commotions which arose
Betwixt the third King Henry and his
Rebels?
He sentenced his Metropolis to flames
Their goods to his Exchequer, and their lives—
No more. Should I do so? do not I know
What dooms have passed upon untrusty
Lawyers?—
I Sink before your mercy, be it like Henries.
Kneeling is but a Subjects Com∣plement.
I sink.
And I.
we might have stayed to hear
What means this Drum.
—We have descried a Fleet;
And therefore called to arms.
Submissively
We prostrate our repentance with a suit,
That I and Audax may decide in Duel
Who shall be sacrificed for both to justice,
And the Survivor may be General.
The Fleet which you suspect, is your defence;
Unknown to you I sent it forth to guard
This Island from the dangers you have called,
By Tumult, Lust, Debate, and Discontent.
As for your Duel, it is a Savage fury
By us forbid. But you have lately tried
A new found Duel, (was it honourable?)
Two upon one. Or was it Captain like
To kill a friend? In any likely way
Hope would have furthered Audax: but when boldness
Grows impudent it turns a foe to Hope.
King of Affections:—
Queen of Inventions.—
Unless you think your self be∣holding to me
You are not fit to be my King. The
Passions
I have so suffered in absurdity,
That now they beg your reign which they shook off.
I see there is some mirth in misery.
I kneel unto your grace to use me so,
As one that hath been Queen, and yet no
Queeen,
Rather a show then Sovereign. I walked
But in mock-majesty. Say it were true,
I sought it not, and what is worth a taking
If not a Kingdom?
Down my frolic joints,
Kneeling is now in fashion. Down, down
Fuga;
Concupiscence and Melancholico
Favour your selves with kneeling.
I kneel not
To thee, but to thy power; I kneel to thee
But not adore thee.
Pardon.
—Thus attired
I wear my sentence. Sir, I can but offer
That power of doom which I my self might take.
If you ask pardon, ask it of your
Prince;
For I nor am, nor will be.
Royal Sir,
Why have you given us lives, if not to take
Or to preserve them?
Hope, speak for us Hope.
Be pleased thou god on earth.
I likewise join
In this request.
Isle send them Epimetheus
My Brother Afterwit; and he shall rule them.
Those fools whom Prudence cannot prerestrain,
The lash of Afterwit brings home again.
We will die upon this place.
And each man turn
To his own grave.
Do, and do not burden
Me with new cares for new Rebellion.
We groan unto you?
Why? for here are many
That would be Kings, Amorous, this gay thing,
Which overlookes a
Kingdom, may command
All Choice of pleasure: take it for that use:
No? then Malevolo to devour your flock,
To engross the Elements, and let none breath
That may resist, and only spare a few
That may for fear do service, i'st not glo∣rios?
Work with this Engine. No? are you grown modest?
Then Desperato, what a life it is
To have the power of hanging, or of cause∣ing
Some to prevent the gallows in their prison.
What, hang your head so dully at a Crown.
This is to offer Sallets unto dogs.
Irato, anger is a Kings perfection
As roaring is the Lions. When his eye
Darts lightning, when he snaps his dagger hard
Cries ho and starts, doth he not then seem god like,
And well deserve the name of Thunderer?
Be thou that Jove. Not you? Then Cap∣tain Audax.
You took great pains to win, now wear this Crown.
Any but yours I would.
Could ye get Crowns
Abroad as soon as pull off one at home,
Ye should be Kings or Deputies all over.
Now there can be but one: would that be Memor.
In all records I find no Lawyer Crowned.
A Lawyer needs it not: to pen the Law,
And then interpret it as much as making.
Fancy you must be troubled once again
With this bright load.
I loathed it at the first.
Grant me the Sovereignty of changing fashions,
Promotion of new Projects, leave to wear
Such Coronets at these, I ask no more.
When I am King, be this thy Royalty.
Poor Diadem, since here thou can not get
A Master, lye thou there for the next com∣mer,
Or sink into thy Oar.—None stoop
to take thee?
What all refuse, I once refused of all
Am fit to wear.
Long live Prudentius.
Then once more chained in Gold, Isle bear your burden.
Henchforth to awe your folly, be assured,
None of your crooked actions words or looks
Hath escaped my notice. They camefresh unto me
With tongues of spirits: But Isle leave the chiding
To your own Conscience. Now, thus re∣concil'd,
I'll pardon your deserts, cannot reward them.
If you expect in sign of peacesome matches
You are deceived. Amorous shall not wed
Morphe, without a fair probation.
And Timorous I forbid; such must not marry
As have no mettle, least they spoil their race.
But Melancolico and Concupiscence
Shall keep their state; in the suburbs, or new-England.
Now rise. For show of future correspon∣dence,
Rank your selves friendly with your oppo∣sites.—
I live not by my line of life, but yours.
Love is a willing Passion, full of sweetness,
But not so serviceable as loyal hate;
This loves with zeal and with comparison,
Works against all for one. to serve your State
Let others love, whilst I for you shall hate;
My self, if that you please; and others so,
That hate with virtue hand in hand shall go.
Tic well, tic very well. Live as you look,
Irato bear the Sword: I'll view them all.
Thus betwixt love of good, and hate of ill.
With slight of this; and chaste desire of that,
With sadness to be wise, joy for good ends
Boldness for just attempts, Fear of un∣fit;
Hope for true peace, despair of nothing less
Then mere Impossibilities, we will walk
To Immortality upon those lines
Which a wise Princes breast nought else defines.
BY this short Model of self-policy,
We find what use of Outward Sovereignty.
The Isle is settled, rage of Passion, laid,
And Fancy stoops to Prudence. Things so staid,
Our Scene which was but Fiction now is true;
No King so much Prudentius as you:
Whose Rule is Reason, Throne the heart; And now
No souls so Passionate as we; that bow
Both with the weight of Duty and of Debt.
Henceforth our hearts all motion shall forget
But yours. Your Rule alone is fit to sway;
Yet we no less your benefits obey.
Twixt both, our loyalty will nameless prove;
That makes it Virtue, these will have it Love.
THe Isle is settled, Rage of Passions laid
Fancy to Prudence bows. Let all be staid
In your Acceptance too, and then each breast
Will cease its Floating, and as firmly rest
As doth our Scene. One Passion still would prove
An Actor when the Scene is shut, Our Love.

