A Pprove my weakness, and suffer my grief,
It is but too just in so great a misery;
such storms as these ready to power upon them,
will shake the stoutest courages; the least
dejected masc'line Spirit without disorder
can't exercise its Virtue; although mine
receive amazement at these rude alarms,
the trouble of my heart can nothing work
upon my tears, and amongst all the sighs
it send's to Heaven, my constancy reigns still
over mine eyes. When one doth stop the course
of the Souls sadness and affliction,
though it be less then man, it is more then woman:
in this extremity to command tears,
is to show strength enough in our weak sex.
Enough, and too much for a common Soul,
that from the meanest danger doth expect
but one misfortune; a great heart doth scorn
such an abasement, it despairs of nothing,
though in occurrents doubtful; the two armies
stand in battalion before our walls;
but Rome knows not yet how to lose a field,
we need not fear her, rather lets applaud her;
since she goes forth to fight, she goes to conquer:
then banish, banish quite so vain a fear,
and conceive brave desires worthy a Roman.
I am a Roman, since my Husbands is so,
marriage makes me embrace Romes interest;
but it should hold my heart like a chained slave,
if it did make me to forget the place
where I was born. Alba, where I began
to breath my first air, Alba, my dear Country,
and my first love, when between us and thee
I see the war commenced, I fear our Victory
as much as our destruction. Rome, if thou
complain'st that I am partial herein,
fix upon enemies that I may hate:
When I see drawn up'fore thy walls both Armies,
my three brave Brothers in the one, and my
undaunted Husband in the other, can I
pray for thee, and without impiety
importune Heaven for thy felicity?
I know thy State, yet in its infancy,
cannot without war fix its puissance:
I know it must grow great, and that thy destinies
will not at home be bounded with the Latins;
I know the Gods have promised to thee
the Empire of the Earth and that thou can not
See the effect of it, but by the war:
so far am I from off'ring to oppose
this thirst of Glory, which obeys so readily
the Gods decrees, and posts to thy greatness,
that I would see thy Crowned Troops already
pass the Pyrenees, carry thy battalions
into the East, plaint thy Pavilions
upon the banks of Rhine, make the proud columns
of Hercules to shake under thy feet:
But love a town to whom thou owe Romulus:
Ingratful, know that from her Kings rich blood
thou take thy name, thy walls, and thy first laws:
Alba is thy original; stay, and wisely
consider that thou carry the sword
into thy Mothers bosom; turn elsewhere
the force of thy triumphant arms: her joy
will break forth in her childrens happiness;
and overcome with a maternal love,
her prayers will be for thee, if thou art not
against her.
This discourse surprises me,
since from the time that we first armed against
her people, I have seen so much indifference
in you for her, as if you had been born
within our walls: I admired in you
the virtue that reduced your dearest interests
unto your husbands, and did pity you
in the midst of your plaints, as if our Rome
had caused all your fears.
Whilst they encountered
but in light skirmishes, not strong enough
to cast each other down; whilst a glad hope
of peace flattered my trouble, it is true,
I took a vanity to be all Roman:
if I saw Rome prevail, with some regret
I suddenly condemned this secret motion;
again, if I resented in her contrary
success any malignant joy in favour
of my three brothers, suddenly to smother it,
calling my reason to me, I lamented
when Glory entered into their house.
But now alas! that one of them must fall,
that Alba become slave, or that Rome sink,
and that after the battle there remain
no obstacle more to the conquerors,
nor hope unto the conquered, I should
show an unnatural hate unto my Country,
if I could be all Roman yet, and should
ask of the Gods your triumph, at the price
of so much blood which is so precious to me.
I tie me not so strictly to the interest
of a man, that I should forget my Country:
I'm not for Alba nor am I for Rome;
I am afraid for one, and for the other,
in this last conflict, and must be of that side
which fortune shall afflict; indifferent
to both until the Victory, I will
participate the else without assuming
any thing of the glory, and will keep
my tears in store for the conquered party,
and my hate for the conquerors.
How often
we see such traverses as these arise???
in diverse spirits diverse passions!
In this Camilla acts clean contrary;
her brother is your Husband; yours, her Lover???
but she sees with an eye far different
from yours; her blood in one camp, and her Love
in the other; when you did conserve a spirit
all Roman, hers irresolute and fearful,
uncertain, feared the storm of the least mixture,
of either party hated the advantage,
to the misfortune of the vanquished
still gave her plaints, and so she nourished
eternal griefs; but yesterday when she
understood that the Armies did advance
resolved to join battle, on her brow
a sudden joy appeared.
Oh Julia, how I fear so quick a change!
Yesterday in her fair and pleasant humour
she entertained Valerius; without doubt
she quits my brother for this happy rival;
her spirit shaken by the present objects
finds nothing amiable in an absent one
after two years. But pray excuse the heat
of a fraternal love; the care I have
of him, doth make me fear all things from her;
I frame suspicions from too light a subject,
The day of battle is unfit to change,
with a new dart few hearts are wounded then,
in so great trouble one hath other thoughts:
But who can have such pleasant entertainments,
and such contentments as may equal hers?
The causes are as obscure unto me
as unto you, I can't he satisfied
by any thought, any conjecture on it;
it is constancy enough in so great danger,
to see it, to attend it without grief;
but surely it is too much t'expresse it further
even unto joy.
See how a gentle Genius
hath fitly sent her to us! Try to make her
discourse upon this point, she loves you
too well to conceal any thing from you:
I leave you, Julia, entertain my Sister.
I am ashamed to show so much of melancholy,
and my heart hurthened with a thousand fears,
seeks solitude to hide its sighs and tears.
Why flies she, and would have me entertain you?
thinks she that my grief's less then hers, and that
as more insensible of such misfortunes,
I should mix less plaints with my sad discourse?
My soul's affrighted with the same alarms.
I shall lose in the one and the other army
as well as she; I shall behold my Lover,
nay more, my only Joy die for his Country,
or ruin mine; and this dear object of
my love become for my afflicting punishment,
or worthy of my tears, or of my hate.
Alas!
Yet she is more to be lamented
then you: one may change Lover, but not Husband;
leave Curiacius, and receive Valerius,
so shall you fear no more for the adverse party,
so shall you be all ours, and your ???pirit
released of it's trouble, shall have nothing
to lose more in the camp of the Enemy.
Give me advises that may be more lawful,
and, without proposition of crimes,
wail my misfortunes; although I can scarce
resist my evils, yet I would rather suffer,
then merit them.
How, Madame! do you call
a fair and reasonable change a crime?
What? think you that the breach of faith is pardonable?
Towards an enemy what should oblige you?
Who can absolve us from a Solemn vow?
It is to no purpose to disguise a thing
that is so clear: I saw you yesterday
receive Valerius court-ship, and the favour
which he received from you, gives him encouragement
to nourish a sweet hope.
If yesterday
I entertained him with a pleasing countenance,
think nothing on it but to his disadvantage;
of my content another was the object.
But to remove your error, know the cause on it;
I look on Curiacius with an amity
too pure to suffer my self longer to be
thought perjured. About five or six months after
my Brother married his Sister (Julia
you know it) he obtained of my Father
that I should be his Wife. This day was prosperous
and fatal to us both at once, uniting
our houses, it did disunite our Kings;
our marriage and the war were both concluded
at the same instant, our hope as soon dead
as born, all promises lost as soon as made:
Oh how extreme then were our miseries!
how many blasphemies did Curiacius
Vomit forth against Heaven? how many Rivers
flowed from mine eyes? I need not tell it you,
you saw our farwels; you have since beheld
the troubles of my soul, you know what prayers
my flame hath made for peace, and what sad plaints
at every encounter I have uttered,
as fate disposed it; sometime for my Country,
and sometime for my Lover: my despair
at last constrained me to have recourse
Unto the Oracles. Hearken unto
the voice that yesterday they gave unto me,
and give me your opinion, whether I
have reason thereupon to reassure
my dismayed spirit. That Greek so much renowned,
who for so many years foretold our destinies
at the foot of Aventine, he I mean,
that inspired by Apollo ne'er spake false,
doth promise in these verses a quick end
Unto my travels.
Thy prayers are heard, Alba and Rome shall be
to morrow in a fair confaederacy,
and thou with Curicius shalt be joined
never to part, so have the Gods enjoined.
Upon this Oracle I ground a firm
belief, and as the success passed may hope,
I gave my soul over to ravishments,
which passed the transports of the happiest Lovers:
Judge you of their excess. I met Valerius,
and he could not, as he was wont, displease me,
he spake to me of Love without my trouble;
I perceived not that I discoursed with him,
I could not show him coldness, nor contempt;
all that I saw seemed Curiacius to me,
all that he said unto me, spake his fires,
all what I said assured him of my love.
A general fight to day is doubted much,
I heard the news on it yesterday, and was
not troubled at it, my Spirit did reject
these fatal objects, charmed with the sweet thoughts
of marriage and peace: But this last night
hath dissipated those so charming errors.
A thousand fearful dreams, and bloody Images,
or rather heaps of slaughter and of horror
snatched my joy from me, and filled me with fear:
I saw dead bodies, blood, and nothing else,
a spirit appearing suddenly took flight,
they defaced one another, and each fantasme
redoubled my fear by its confusion.
A dream for the most part should be interpreted
in a contrary sense.
I should believe it so, since I desire it;
but notwithstanding all my prayers and wishes
I see a day of battle, not of peace.
Thereby the war will end, and peace will follow.
Last still the ill, if this must be the remedy!
Whether Rome fall, or Alba be o'rthrown,
dear Lover, think no more to be my Husband:
my heart (how great soever the fire be
that doth consume it) will not have the conqueror,
nor Slave of Rome. But what new object here
presents it self? Is it thee, Curiacius?
Camilla, doubt it not, behold a man
who neither is the conqueror, nor yet
the slave of Rome: fear not to see my hands
blush with the shameful weight of Irons, or
the blood of Romans; I believed you loved
glory and Rome enough for to despise
my chain, and hate my Victory, and so
in this extremity I equally
feared captivity and Victory.
It is sufficient, Curatius,
I do divine the rest, thou fly'st a battle
so fatal to thy wishes, and thy heart
wholly mine, to the end thou may not lose me,
denies to lend thy arm unto thy Country:
let who will herein look on thy Renown,
and blame thee to have too much loved me,
Camilla must not disesteem thee for it;
the more thy Love appears, the more she ought
to cherish thee: and if thou owe much
unto the place that gave thee birth, the more
thou quit'st for me, the more thy Love appears,
But hast thou seen my Father? can he suffer
thee in his house thus? doth he not prefer
the State before his private Family?
regards he not Rome more then his daughter
Lastly, is our good fortune well assured?
hath he beheld thee as a Son in law,
or as an Enemy?
He looked upon me
as son in law with tenderness and love,
which witnessed enough an entire Joy:
but he beheld me not, by any treason
unworthy honour, enter in his house:
I give not up the interest of my town,
I love my honour yet, though I adore
Camilla; so long as the war hath lasted,
I have approved my self as good a Citizen,
as faithful lover. I would with my Love
reconcile Alba's quarrel, I sighed for you
in combating for her; and if we must
yet come to strokes, I should, alas! fight for her,
and sigh for you: in spite of the desires
of my charmed soul, if the war should continue,
I should be in the Army: it is peace
that gives me a free access unto you,
peace, unto which our love owes this happiness.
Peace! by what means may one believe this miracle?
Camilla, at the least believe the Oracle,
and know we fully by what blessed effects
the happiness of a battle hath produced
this peace.
Ye Gods, who even could have thought it!
Already the two Armies animated
unto the combat, with an equal heat
threatened each other with their eyes, and fiercely
advancing, looked for nothing but the signal
to give the charge, when our discreet Dictator
putting himself some distance fore the ranks,
demanded of your Prince a minutes silence;
it being granted him, 
What do we, Romans,
(said he) what devil provokes us to arms?
let reason rule, and clear your understandings.
We are your neighbours, your fair daughters are
our wives, and ours are yours; Hymen hath joined us
by so many reciprocal strong knots
that there are few of our sons which are not
your Nephews; and to speak the truth, we are
but one blood, and one people in two Towns;
why should we tear our selves by civil wars,
where the death of the conquered weakens
the conquerors, and the most beauteous triumph
is watered with tears? Our common enemies
expect with joy, when one of us defeated,
shall leave the other as a prey unto them;
they have too long enjoyed the benefit
of our divisons: let us for the future
join all the forces that we have against them,
and let us drown these petty differences
forever in Oblivion, which make
so ill allies of such good Warriors:
but if th'ambition to command each other
makes your troops and ours to march to day,
if we would but appease her with less blood,
she will unite, far from dividing, us.
Let us name Combatants for the common cause,
each people fix it self unto their own;
and as the chance of Arms shall dispose of them,
the weakest party shall obey the strongest;
but with this reservation, that the conquered
without indignity to such brave Warriors,
shall not be slaves, but subjects, free from tribute
or shame, without other subjection
then to be bound to follow in all places
the Colours of the Conqueror. Thus our
two States will make but one resplendent Empire.
He ended here, every one figh'd with joy,
and looking each into the others ranks,
knew there a friend, a cozen, or a brother:
they wondered how their hands, greedy of blood,
flew rashly to so many parricides,
and showed a face at once covered with horror
of battle, and with ardour for this choice:
At last the offer was accepted, and
the desired peace on those conditions
was swore of both sides, three should fight for all:
but for to make the better choice, our Chiefs
will take a little leisure. Your election
is in the Senate, our within a Tent.
O Gods, how this discourse contents my mind!
Within three hours or there abouts, by common
accord, the fortune of our warriors
shall rule our fortune; in the mean time all
are free, expecting when they shall be named;
Rome's in our Camp, and our Camp is in Rome;
free access being allowed of both sides,
every one goes to find his ancient friend,
and to receive his Love; for my part, Madame,
my passion made me seek your noble Brothers,
and my desires met with so good success,
that the Author of your days hath promised
to give me the unparalleled happiness
of your fair hand to morrow; you will not,
I hope, become a Rebel to his power.
The duty of a daughter is obedience.
Come then, receive that sweet command which must
heap up my happiness to its full height.
I follow you, but for to see my Brothers,
and to know the end too of our miseries.
Go, whilst that I at the foot of the Altars,
freed so propitiously from their fierce rods,
give thanks for you to the immortal Gods
THus Rome hath fitly placed her esteem,
she should have chosen otherwise unworthily;
this City proud in you and in your brothers,
hath found three warriors, which she doth prefer
before all others, and opposing to us
no other arms but yours, braveth all ours
with one sole house: we will believe that, seeing
all is committed to your hands, there is
no Roman besides Horace and his Sons:
This choice can fill three Families with Glory,
and consecrate their names to future ages:
Oh yes! the honour which your doth receive
by this choice, can immortalise all three;
and since with you my fortune and may flame
have made me place my Sister, choose my wife,
that which I ought to be, and what I am
to you already, makes me take your part
as much as possibly I can: But sadly
another interest doth restrain my Joy,
and mingles bitterness amongst those sweets;
the war hath cast such a refulgent ray
upon your Valour, that I shake for Alba,
and foresee its misfortune; since you combat,
her ruin is assured; in making you
the choice, even destiny her self hath sworn it.
I see herein too plain her fatal projects,
and do already count my self your subject.
So little reason have you to lament
for Alba, that Rome rather should be pitied,
seeing those she rejected, and the three
she names; alas! it is a fatal blindness
for her, in having so many brave Hero's
to choose, and yet to take the worst; a thousand
of her fair Children, far more worthy of her
then we, could better have sustained her quarrel:
But though this combat points me out a grave,
the Glory of this choice doth swell me up
with a just pride, my spirit doth receive
a masculine assurance by it, I dare
by virtue of it to hope much from my
small Valour, and what ere the projects be
of envious fortune, I do not account me
it'h' number of your subjects: Rome hath too much
attributed to me; but my ravished soul
shall satisfy her expectation,
or lose its life; he that resolves to die,
or overcome, is seldom overcome;
this generous despair doth hardly perish:
but come what will, Rome shall be free, not subject
until my last gasp assure my defeat.
Alas! how much am ??? here to be pitied!
that which my Country will, my Amity
forbids: Cruel extremities! to see
Alba enslaved, or her Victory
bought at the dear rate of a life so precious,
and the chief good whereto her wishes tend,
purchased at the price of your last sighs:
What prayers shall I form? what happiness
expect? on every side I must shed tears;
on every side my desires are betrayed.
What! would you weep me dying for my Country?
Such a death for a generous heart hath charms;
the glory that attends it doth allow
no tears; and I should bless my fortune, if
the State and Rome could lose less by my death.
How ever, Sir, permit your friends to fear it,
they only in so fair a death as this
are to be wept, the glory ont's for you,
the loss for them: it makes you immortal,
and rendered them miserable; what is it
one loses not in losing of a friend
so faithful! But I see Flavian approach,
he brings me here some news. Hath Alba yet
made choice of her three combatants?
I come
to tell you of it.
Well, who are the three?
You, Sir, and your two brothers.
Who?
You, I say,
and your two brothers. But why this sad countenance
and this severe look? doth the choice displease you?
No, but it doth surprise me,
I thought my self unworthy of so great
an honour.
Shall I tel (Sir) the Dictator
that sent me to you, with what little joy
you do receive it? This cold entertainment
doth make me wonder.
Tel him, that Amity, Love, and Alliance
can't hinder the three Curiatii
to serve their Country against the three Horatii.
Against them! oh! it is too much for me
to speak in few words.
Carry him my answer,
and leave us in repose.
How heaven??? hell and earth conspire against us,
and make us war! Gods, devils, men, and fortune
prepare a general assault against us;
in the condition that we are, I dare them
to do their worst now, what so ever they have
of horrible and cruel, is much less
then the honour which they do unto us both.
Fortune, that opens us the lists of honour,
offers a glorious matter to our constancy,
she draines her force to strengthen a misfortune.
To measure her self better with our Valour,
as she esteems us not common souls,
she doth exclude our fortunes from the common.
To fight an enemy for the general safety,
and to expose ones self alone to strokes
against a stranger, is but the effect of
a simple virtue, thousands have already
performed it, thousands can perform it still:
to lay ones life down for his Country, is
so fair a fate, so worthy an exposure,
that all should strive to purchase such a death:
But to be willing for to sacrifice
unto the public that which we do love,
to tie us resolutely to the combat
against our other self, to assault a party
that takes the Brother of a wife, and Lover
of a dear Sister for its sole defender,
and breaking all these knots, to arm for's Country
against a blood which one would purchase with
his life, is such a virtue as belongs not
but unto us: The glorious lustre of
its great name makes but few jealous of it;
very few men have so imprinted it
in the heart, as to dare to aspire unto
so much renown.
It is true, our names henceforth
shall never dye, the occasion is fair
it is fit we cherish it, we shall be held
the mirrous of a virtue very rare.
But for all that, our constancy and courage
savours a little of barbarity:
few even of the great hearts would be proud
to go this way to immortality;
at how high price soever we do set
such a smoke, such vanity; obscurity
is better then so much renown: for my part,
I dare avouch it, and you might have seen it,
that I consulted not upon my duty;
nor our long amity: Love, nor alliance
could ever suspend my spirit a moments space;
and since by this choice Alba shows indeed
that she esteems me as much as Rome
doth you, I think to do as much for her
as you for Rome; I have as good a heart:
but lastly, I'm a man. I see your honour
consists in shedding of my blood, that all
mine doth depend on piercing of your body:
ready to espouse the Sister, I must kill
the Brother, and all for my Countries sake;
although without fear I fly to my duty,
my heart is fiercely angry, and I tremble
for horror on it; I cannot choose but pity
my self, and cast an envious eye on those
whose lives our war hath ravished, yet without
any desire to retreat, or relinquish;
this sad and Violent honour moves me,
but shakes me not; I love that which it gives me,
and wail that which it takes away from me:
and if Rome doth demand a higher virtue,
I thank the Gods that made me not a Roman,
to conserve yet something of humane in me.
If you are not a Roman, make your self
worthy to be so: if you equal me,
make it appear more plainly. Solid virtue,
whereof I boast, admits no weakness with
its constancy, and it is ill to enter
into the lists of honour, and at first step
to look behind us; our misfortune's great,
it is arrived unto the highest point,
I look it boldly in the face, without
trembling to see it. Against whom soever
my Country doth employ me, I accept
this glory blindly, but yet joyfully:
that, to receive such fair commands, should smother
in us all other sentiments; who considers,
besides to serve her, any other thing,
disposes himself poorly to his duty;
this sacred right breaks all other bonds;
Rome hath found out my arm, I'll not examine it;
with as sincere and full a joy as I
Married the sister, I will fight the brother.
And lastly, to cut off this frivolous speech,
Alba hath named you, I know you no more.
I know you yet, and that is it which kills me;
but this sharpe virtue was not known unto me;
as our misfortune now is, 't is arrived
unto the highest point, suffer me to
admire it, and not imitate it.
No, no,
embrace not virtue by constraint: and since
you find more pleasure in complaint, enjoy
so sweet a good with all full liberty.
Behold my Sister comes to lament with you:
I'll go to see yours, to resolve her soul
unto this thought, that she is still my wife,
to love you still, though I dye by your hands,
and to take to her in her greatest misfortune
the sentiments of Roman.
Sister, have you
heard what account they make of Curiatius?
Alas! my fortune hath much changed her face.
Arm you with constancy, and show your self
my Sister: if your Lover by my death
return a conqueror, receive him not
as murderer of a Brother, but as a man
of honour, that doth what he ought to do,
that serves his Country well, and shows to all
by his high virtue that he's worthy of you;
and so, as if I lived, finish the marriage:
But if this sword cut off his destiny,
give to my Victory such entertainment:
do not reproach me with your Lovers death;
your tears flow from you, and your heart's oppressed,
consummate with him all this weakness, Sister,
quarrel with Heaven and Earth, curse envious fortune.
but think no more of death after the combat.
Sir, I will leave you but a moment with her,
since we must go together where bright honour
doth call us.???
Wilt thou go, my dear Heart? art thou pleased with
this fatal honour so far, as to purchase it
at the expense of all our happiness?
Alas! I see I must, do what I can,
either of grief die, or Horatius hand;
I go to this illustrious employment
as to my punishment, a thousand times
I curse the account they make of me, I hate
that Valour which doth make Alba esteem me,
my flame doth pass from despair even to crime,
it quarrels with and doth assault the Gods;
I wail you, and my self, but I must go.
No, no, I know thee better, thou desire
that I should pray thee, and that so my power
excuse thee to thy Country. Thou art but
too famous by thy other brave exploits,
Alba already hath received by them
all what thou ow'st her, none then thee hath better
sustained this war, none with dead bodies hath
more covered this ground, thy name cannot
grow greater, there is nothing wanting to it;
suffer some other here to ennoble his.
Should I premit, and see before mine eyes
another head crowned with immortal laurels,
which glory doth prepare me, and my Country
reproach this to my virtue, that it might
have trimphed, if I had combated?
and by my Love, my Valour lulled asleep,
crown so many exploits with such an infamy?
No, Alba, after the honour thou hast given me,
thou shalt not fall, nor vanquish but by me;
thou hast committed to my hands thy fate,
I'll give to thee a good account of it,
and live without reproach, or dye with shame.
I hope thou wilt not so betray my trust.
Before I'm yours, I must be for my Country.
But wilt thou for it so deprive thy self
of brother in law, thy sister of her husband,
I of my brothers?
Such is our misfortune:
the choice of Alba and of Rome, takes off
all sweetness from the names (sometime so sweet)
of Brother in law and Sister.
Wilt thou also
come to present me with his head, and ask
my hand for guerdon of thy Victory?
In the condition wherein I am,
I must no more think of it; without hope,
to love you, is all that which I can do.
You weep, my dear Heart.
I have cause to weep,
my cruel Lover doth ordain me death;
and when our Hymen lights his torch, alas!
he with his hand doth put it out, and opens
a tomb unto me; this unpitiful heart
is obstinate to my destruction,
and says it loves me, when it murders me.
What powerful discourse hath a Mistress when
she's blubbered with tears? and how strong is
a fair eye with such help? how tender is
my heart become at this so sad a sight?
my constancy against it labours
with some regret. Assault not with your griefs
my glory, and leave me alone to save
my virtue from your tears, I feel it tottering,
and ill defends it self: the more I am
your Lover, the less am I Curiatius,
already weak in combating against Amity,
should it o'rcome at once both love and pity?
Begone, love me no more, shed no more tears;
where I oppose the offence to such strong Arms,
I shall defend me better against your anger;
and to deserve it, I'll no more look on you,
revenge your self of an ingratfull person,
and punish an inconstant. Show you not
your self as sensible of this injury?
I have no more eyes for you. Yet you have
for me! must there be more yet? I renounce
my faith unto you. Rigorous virtue, whose
Victim I am. What! can not thou resist,
without the assistance of a crime?
Commit
no other crime, and I attest the Gods,
that far from hating thee, I'll love thee more:
yes, I will cherish thee, false and ungrateful,
and cease to aspire unto the name of fratricide.
Why am I Roman, or why Art not thou so?
I would prepare thee Laurel with my hand,
I would encourage thee, and not distract thee,
and I would treat thee as I do my brother.
Alas! I was to day blind in my wishes,
I did against thee when I did for him,
He returns: what misfortune! if the love
of his wife works no more upon his soul,
then mine doth upon thine!
Good Gods! Sobina follows him. Is not
Camilla strong enough to shake my heart,
but you must join my Sister too? And leaving
her tears to conquer me, bring you her hither
to seek the same advantage?
No, no, Brother,
oh no, I come not here but to embrace you,
and to bid you adieu; your blood's too good,
fear not that there is any baseness in it,
nothing that may offend the constancy
of these great hearts; if this illustrious fate
should shake either of you, I should not own him
for brother, or for husband: may I yet
make a request unto you worthy of
so brave a Husband, and so brave a Brother?
I would at once take off impiety,
render unto the honour that expects it,
its purity, without mingling of crimes
set its fair lustre on it: in a word,
I fine would make you lawful enemies;
I am the sole bond of that sacred knot
which joyneth you; when I shall be no more,
you shall be nothing unto one another;
breaking this chain, you break off your alliance;
and since your honour doth require effects
of hatred, purchase by my death the right
and privilege to hate: Alba and Rome
will have it so, it is fit that you obey them;
let one of you two kill me, and the other
revenge me, then your fight shall not be strange,
or at least one of you shall justly fight
for to revenge his wife, or else his sister.
But what! you would fully so fair Glory,
if any other quarrel should provoake you:
your zeal unto your Country doth forbid you
such cares, you should do very little for it,
if less then this; unto it you must sacrifice,
and without hate, a Brother in law, no more then
defer that which you ought to do; begin,
and practise by his wife to shed his blood,
begin to pierce his bosom by his sister;
begin to make a worthy sacrifice
of your illustrious lives to your dear praties
by the death of Sabina; you're enemies,
you unto Alba, your to Rome, and I
to both of them: what! think you to reserve me
to see a Victory, where I shall behold
the laurles of a brother or a husband
smoke with a blood that I so cherished?
can I between you two govern my heart then?
fulfil the duty of sister and wife?
embrace the conqueror in weeping for
the conquered? no, no, before Sabina
shall feel this stroke, the death which expect
from one of you, shall readily prevent it.
If you deny your hands, my own shall execute it;
on then, who holds you? on, inhumane hearts!
I shall have means enough to force you to it;
you shall not be busy at the at the fight,
but in the midst this body shall arrest
your Swords, and spite of your refusals, force them
to make way here before they reach at you.
O my wife!
O my sister!
They begin
to mollify.
You sigh, your Visages
grow pale! are you those great hearts, those brave Heroes,
which Rome and Alba have tan for defenders?
Wife, what have I done to thee, wherein have I
offended thee, that thou seek out against me
such a revenge? what have my honour done thee?
and wherefore come thou with all thy force
tassault my virtue? satisfy thy self
at least to have astonished it, and leave me
to finish this great business. Thou would fine
reduce me to strange point, if thou lov'dst
thy husband, thou would not seek to prevail;
be gone then, and no longer leave the Victory
doubtful and in suspense, the dispute on it
makes me ashamed already: suffer me
to end my days with honour.
Well, proceed,
fear me no more; he comes to thy assistance.
How comes this, Children? doth your love lull you
asleep, or do you hearken to its charm?
Lose you yet time with women? even ready
to shed blood, look you on effeminate tears?
begone, and leave these blubbered fools to their
misfortunes; their complaints have too much art
and tenderness for you; they would participate
their weakness to you, and there is no way
to shun those strokes but only to fly from them.
Fear nothing from them, they are worthy of you,
in spite of our endeavours; I perceive,
you may expect what ever you desire
both from a Son and Son in law; and if
our weakness could have changed them, we leave you
here to encourage them; come, Sister, come,
let us lose no more tears; against such virtues
they are but weak arms, it is but to despair
that we must have recourse, Go, Tigers, go
to fight, and we will go to die.
Father, I do beseech you, entertain
these passionate Women; above all things see
they come not forth, their troublesome affection
would come with glory by their cries and tears
to interrupt our combat, and what they
do to us, would with justice do; we may be,
perhaps, suspected of this evil artifice.
The honour of so fair a choice would be
too dearly bought, if we should be suspected
of any cowardice.
I will have care of them;
begone, your Brothers do attend you: think
of nothing, but what's due unto your Country.
What fare-well shall I bid you, and what complements
use to express my self?
Oh! do not mollify
my sentiments here: to encourage you
my voice wants language, my heart cannot form
thoughts strong enough: At this adieu I have
my self tears in mine eyes. Do what you ought,
and in your combat have no other thought.
MY soul, we cannot stand indifferent,
one side it is requisite I take; I must
be wife unto Horatius, or sister
to Curiatius; cease we to divide
our fruitless cares, let us desire something,
and fear a little less; but which to take,
alas! I know not, in a chance so contrary;
it is a hard extremity to choose
a husband or a brother for an enemy;
Nature or Love doth speak for each of them,
and by the laws of duty I am tied
unto them both: on their high sentiments
rather lets rule our own, be the wife of the one,
and sister of the other both together,
let's look upon their honour as a good
unparalleled, let's imitate their constancy,
and let us fear no more; the death which threatens them
is such a fair death, that we should not be
afraid to hear the news o'nt; let's not call then
the destinies inhumane, let us think
upon the cause, and not upon the hands,
let us behold the conquerors as if
we had no other thought but of the glory
which all their house receives from their Victory,
without considering what blood is shed
to raise their virtue to that glorious hight,
let's make our interests of their Family,
in the one I am wife, in the other daughter,
and hold of both by such strong obligations
that they cannot triumph but by my arms.
Fortune, whatever evils thy rigour sends me,
I have the means to derive joy from thence,
and to see now the combat without fear,
the dead without despair, the conquerors
without confusion. Flattering illusion,
sweet and gross error, vain endeavour of
my sonl, impuissant light, whose false sparks take
a privilege to dazzle me! how little
thou list's, and how soon vainshest! much like
unto those lightnings which in the thick shades
thrust forth a sudden day, and afterword
renders the night more gloomy and obscure;
thou strike mine eyes but with a moments brightness
to overwhelm them with eternal night.
Thou too much flattered'st my punishment,
and Heaven offended at it, sells me
this moment of refreshment very dear,
I feel my sad heart pierced with all the strokes,
that now deprive me of a brother or
a husband; when I think upon their death,
what ever I propose, I think by what arm,
and not for what cause, nor can I ???ehold
the conquererours in their illustrious rank
but to consider at what bloods expense;
the house of the vanquished party only touches
my soul, in one I'm daughter, wife in the other,
and hold of both by such strong obligations,
that they cannot triumph but by my arms.
This is that peace then I so much desired!
Too favourable Gods, you heard my prayers!
what thunder-bolts dart you, when you are wronged,
when even your favours are so full of cruelties?
And in what manner punish you offence,
if thus you use the prayers of innocence?
Is it done, Julia? what news bring you me?
Is it a bro???ers or a husbands death?
Or hath the sad fate of their impious arms
of all the combatants made as many sacrifices,
and envying me the horror which I had
of the conquerors, condemned me to tears
for all o??? them together?
Know you not
what hath passed yet?
How should I understand it?
know you not that Camllia and my self
are shut up in this house, as in a prison?
they fear our tears: we should without doubt
have interposed our selves between their arms,
and by the just despairs of a chaste amity
we should have drawn some pity from both Camps.
There was no need of such a tender spectacle,
their sight brought obstacle enough unto
their fight; as soon as they were ready to
measure their swords, both one, and the other Camp
began to murmur, that persons so near
allied, should sacrifice each others life
unto their Countries quarrel; one was moved
with pity, and another seized with horror,
some wondered at the madness of their zeal,
others extolled their virtue to the Heavens,
and some presumed to name it sacrilegious
and brutish; all these diverse sentiments
had yet but one voice, every one accused
their Chiefs, all with a general consent
abhorred their choice, not able to endure
so barbarous a combat, they cried out on it,
advanced thereupon, and parted them.
Great Gods! what incense do I owe unto you
for hearing my devotions?
you are not yet where you imagine now;
you may hope, you have less to fear: but yet
there doth remain unto you cause enough
wherewith to wail you. Vain was the endeavour
to free them from so sada fate, these generous,
or rather cruel combatants could not
consent unto 't; the glory of this choice
seemed so precious to them, and so much
charmed their ambitious souls, that when they were
deplored, they esteemed themselves happy,
and took the pity that was showed unto them
for an affront: The trouble of both camps
seemed unto them to sully their renown,
they rather would combat with both the armies,
and dye by the same hands that parted them,
then quit the honours were conferred upon them.
What? were those Iron hearts so obstinate?
They were so, but the armies mutinied,
and uttering their cries both at one time,
demanded other combatants, or battle.
Scarce was the presence of the Chiefs respected,
their power was doubtful, their words not attended:
the King himself was much astonished at it.
Since every one (said he) dislikes this discord,
let us consult the sacred Majesty
of the great Gods, and see we if this change
be pleasing to them: whore's that impious soul
will dare oppose their will, when in a sacrifice,
they shall be pleased to manifest it to us?
He held his peace, and these words seemed charms,
yea from six combatants snatched away their arms;
and this desire of honour which shut up
their eyes, though blind, respected yet the Gods:
their boiling heat submitted to the counsel
of Tullus; and were it by an appeal,
or by a ready scruple, in both armies
it was made a law, as if they both acknowledged him
for King; the victims death will show the rest.
The Gods will not allow an impious combat,
I hope well of it, since it is deferred,
and I begin to see what I desired.
Sister, I'll tel you good news,
I believe,
I know it, if we may but name it such;
I was in presence when it was told unto
my Father, but I gather nought from thence
that may assuage my grief; this intermission
of our misfortunes, will but make their strokes
more rude; it is but a longer time allowed
to our inquietudes, and all the comfort
that one may hope from thence, is only this,
to lament those we love a little later.
The Gods have not in vain inspired this tumult.
Let's rather say, sister, that we consult them
in vain; the same Gods have inspired this choice
into the breast of Tullus; and the public
is not always their voice; much less descend they
into such low receptacles, but in
the breast of Kings, their living Images,
whose absolute power is, and authority,
a secret ray of their divinity.
It is to form you ostacles without reason,
to seek their voices otherwise then in
their oracles, and you can't to your self
figure all lost, without belying that
was rendered to you yesterday.
An Oral
can ne'er be comprehended: for the more
we think to understand it, commonly
the less we understand it, far from settling
on such a sentence; who sees nothing in it
obscure, ought to believe that all is so.
Let us build more assurance upon that
which makes for us, and entertain the sweetness
of a just hope; when Heaven is favourable
half ways to op its arms, who doth not promise
some good thence to himself, deserves it not;
he oftentimes hindered this favour from
showing it self, and when it doth descend,
his cold refusal sends it away.
Heaven acts without us in these events,
and ordered them not on our sentiments.
He makes you not afraid but for your good
Adieu, I go to know what's done at last;
assuage your fears, hope at my return,
to entertain you, Ladies, with no other
discourse but love, and that we shall employ
the end of this day to the sweet preparatives
of a blessed marriage.
I hope it also.
And I dare not to dream on it.
The effect will make it plain t'y', which knows best
to judge thereof.
In the midst of our sorrows, give me leave
to blame you: so much trouble in your soul
I can no way approve of; if you were
in my case, Sister, what would you do then!
if you had so much cause to fear as I,
and were to expect from their fatal arms
such else as mine, and such unparalle'd losses?
Speak more indifferently of your sufferings
and mine, every one sees those of another
not with the same eye that he sees his own;
but to look well on mine wherein heaven plunges me,
yours after them would seem ty' as a dream.
Horatius death is only to be feared
by you, a brother's nothing to a husband;
the marriage that tyeth us unto
another family, untyeth us
from that wherein we lived maids; these knots
so different, are not to be compared;
we must leave Parents, Friends and all the world
to follow a dear husband. But if, Sister,
so near unto a marriage, the Lover
which a glad farther gives, is less unto us
then husband, and not less then brother, surely
our sentiments between them do remain
suspended, our choice is impossible,
and our desires confounded. Thus you have
in your complaints where to direct your wishes,
and terminate your fears: but if heaven should
resolve to prosecute us, for my part,
I must fear all things, and can hope for nothing.
When one must dye, and by the others hand,
it is but an ill dispute this which you make;
let the knots be as different as they will,
we must not leave our parents in oblivion;
although we leave them, Hymen doth not raze out
those deep engraven characters; to love
a husband, we are not obliged to hate
our brothers; nature always doth conserve
her first rights, when the death of either one
or other is proposed, we cannot choose,
they are as well unto us, as a husband,
our other selves, and all evils are alike
when that they are extreme: but happily
the Lover that doth charm??? you and for whom
you burn, is not so to you as you'd have him,
an evil humour, or a little zealousie,
may banish him your good opinion;
and put him quite out of your fantasy;
what they do often, do the same by reason,
and leave your blood out of comparison:
To oppose voluntary bonds to those
whom birth hath rendered necessary, is
a crime indubitable: If heaven should resolve then
to persecute us, I have the most reason
to fear all fortunes, and despair of all things;
but for your part, duty directs you
in your complaints where to address your wishes,
and terminate your fears.
Sister, I see
you never loved you know not Love, nor felt
his darts: one may resist him in the birth,
but when he's grown, and become Master of us,
we cannot banish him; especially
when the consent of Father in engaging
our faith hath made this tyrant lawful King.
He enters with sweetness, but he reigns
by force; and when the soul hath tasted once
his sweet temptation, to love no more
is that it cannot do; since it cannot
desire but what he will, his chains are for us
as strong as fair.
I come to bring unto you sorrowful news;
my daughters, but in vain I should conceal it you,
which could not but a little time be hidden;
your Brothers are in fight, the Gods ordained it.
I must confess this news doth much astonish me
I thought there was in the Divinities
much less injustice, and much more of goodness:
comfort us not, reason is troublesome
when it dares to oppose such a misfortune;
we have the end of our griefs in our hands,
who can resolve to dye, can brave disaster.
We easily could make, Sir, in your presence
a feigned constancy of our despair;
but when one can without shame be without
resolved courage, it is a cowardice
to counterfeit it: the use of such art
we leave to men, and will not pass for that
but what we are: It is not our desire
that such a stout spirit should abase it self
by our example to complain of fortune;
receive these mortal tidings without trembling,
behold without mingling your own with them
our tears flow down our cheeks; lastly we crave
(as all the favour we desire in such
calamities,) that you will keep your constancy,
and suffer our sad sighs.
I am so far
from blaming the tears which I see you shed,
that I can scarce defend me from their force,
and should perhaps yield to such strong assaults,
if herein we had both like interest:
not that your Alba by her choice hath made me
to hate your brothers, all three are dear persons
yet unto me; but amity is not
of the same rank, and hath not the effects
of love nor blood. I do not feel for them
the grief that doth torment Sabina as
a Sister, and Camila as a Lover;
I can behold them as our enemies,
and give without regret my prayers and wishes
unto my Sons; they are (thanks to the Gods)
worthy their Country; no astonishment
ever perished their glory, and I saw
their honour increase highly when their courages
refused the pity of both camps. If they
by any weakness had desired it,
if their high virtue had not presently
refused it, my hand should have revenged me
upon them of the affront which their effeminate
consent had done me; but when in despite
of them they would have other combatants,
I'll not deny it, I joined my prayers with yours;
if pitiful Heaven had hearkened to my voice,
Alba should be reduced to choose anew,
we should see then the Horaces triumph
without seeing their hands stained with the blood
of the bold Curiatii, and upon
the event of a combat far more reasonable
the honour of the Roman name would now
depend. The prudence of the Gods doth otherwise
dispose thereof, on their eternal order
my spirit doth repose, it arms it self
on this occasion with generosity,
and of the public good makes its felicity.
Endeavour both of you to do as much,
to ease your griefs, and think that you are Romans:
you are become so, you (Camllia) born such;
so glorious a title is a treasure;
a day, a day will come that Rome shall make
its glorious name feared like the thunderbolts
through the whole earth, and all the universe
shall shake under its laws, it will become
the ambition of Kings; for the Gods have promised
this glory unto our Aeneas.
Come you to tell us, Julia, the Victory?
But rather, Sir, the fatal sad effects
of the fight Rome is subject unto Alba,
and your sons are defeated; two of the three
are dead, her husband only doth remain.
O effect of a sad fight truly fatal!
Rome subject unto Alba, and my Son
to free her from it not employ himself
unto the last gasp! No, this cannot be:
Julia, you are deceived, Rome's not subject,
or my Son's slain.
A thousand from our Ramparts
saw it as well as I: he made himself
adimir'd whilst that his Brothers stood; but when
he saw himself alone against three adversaries,
ready to be encompassed by them;
he saved himself by flight.
Would not our soldiers
dispatch the traitor! would they give this coward
retreat into their ranks?
I had no heart
to see more after this defeat.
O my Brothers!
Soft, mourn them not all, two of them enjoy
a fortune that doth make their father proud
and jealous too; See that their tomb be covered
with the most noble flowers; the glory of
their death hath paid me for their loss: this happiness
hath followed their unconquered courage, that
they saw Rome free as long as they had life,
and would not have beheld her to obey
but her own Prince, nor to become the Province
of an adjacent State. Lament the other,
lament the irreparable affront
his shameful flight imprinted on our brow,
lament the foul dishonour that he casts
on all our race, and the eternal stain
he leaves unto the sometime glorious name
of the Horatii.
What would you have him do, Sir, against three?
What! I would have him dye: a brave despair
would have assisted him perhaps, had he
deferred his defeat a minute longer;
at least Rome would have been a little later
subjected; so would he have left my hair
with honour grey, and that were a reward
worthy his life. He is accountable
unto his Country of all his blood,
every drop spared, perishes his glory;
after this base bout every instant of
his life doth publish, with his own, my shame.
I'll break the course of it, and my just anger,
against an unworthy son using the rights
of father, shall make in his punishment
appear the glorious disacknowledgment
of such an action.
Hearken somewhat less
unto these generous heats, and render us
not altogether miserable.
Sabina,
your heart may easily be comforted,
hitherto our misfortunes touch you little,
you have no part yet in our miseries:
Heaven hath saved you your husband and your brothers,
if we are subject, it is unto your Country;
your brothers are the conquerous, although
we are betrayed; and seeing the high point
whereto their glory mounts, you little look
upon our shame; but your too much affection
for that so infamous husband, will persuade you
to grieve as well as we ere it be long;
your tears in his behalf are but weak guards:
I swear by the great Gods, the supreme powers,
that ere this day end, these my proper hands
shall wash off with his blood the stain from Rome.
Let's follow him anger transported him.
Gods! shall we see nothing but such misfortnnes?
must we fear greater still, and must o???r fates
always proceed from friends and parents hates?
Ne'er speak unto me in the favour of
an infamous person, let him fly me as
the Brothers of his wife; to save a blood
that he esteems so precious, he hath done
yet nothing, if he keep not from my sight.
may give order for it, or I
attest the sovereign power of all the Gods.???
Oh, father, take a sweeter sentiment,
you shall see Rome herself to use him otherwise,
and by what fate so ever she be oppressed,
to excuse a virtue so o'r-charg'd with number.
Judgement herein makes but little for me,
I'm a father, and I have
my rights apart. I am not ignorant
how the true virtue acts: there is no triumph
where number doth oppress, her masculine vigour
always in the same point falls underneath
the force, but yields not to it. Peace, here comes
What is his business with us?
Sent by the King to consolate a father,
and to express for him???
Take you no care on it,
it is a comfort which I have no need of;
I rather would behold them dead, then covered
with infamy, that come to take me from
an enemies hand; they died both for their Country
like men of honour, it is sufficient.
But, Sir, the other is a rarer blessing,
of all the three he ought to hold with you
the chiefest place.
Would he have made the name
of the Horatii perish with himself!
You only treat him ill after the deed
that he hath done.
His fault belongs to me
only to punish.
What fault can you find
in his good conduct?
What brave virtue can you
find in his flight?
His flight is glorious
on this occasion.
You redouble, Sir,
my shame and my confusion: sure the example
is rare, and worthy memory, to find
in flight a way to glory.
What confusion,
and what shame is it to you to have brought forth
a Son that doth conserve us all, that makes
Rome triumph, and gains an Empire to her?
What preservation, triumph, and what Empire,
when Alba ranges underneath her laws
our destiny!
What speak you here of Alba,
and of her Victory? you know not yet
half of the story.
What? is not the combat
finished by his flight?
Alba Though so
at first, but she perceived soon, that he
fled like a man, that knew well how to manage
Romes best advantage.
What! triumphs Rome then?
Be pleased to understand; the valour of
this son, whom wrongfully you do condemn,
resting alone against three, (but in this passage,
all the three being wounded, and he free)
too weak for all, too strong for either of them,
he thought it fit a little to retire him;
he fled to fight the better; this quick policy
fitly divides the brothers, each of them
follows him with a pace more or less eager,
as he doth find himself more or less hurt:
their heat was equal to pursue his flight,
but their unequal blows did separate
their pursuit: when Horatius saw them thus
scattered one from the other, he returned,
and thought them more then half conquered already:
he did expect the first, and it was your son in law,
who all enraged that he should stay for him,
in vain did make a great heart to appear,
assaulting him, the blood that he had lost
weakened his strength: Alba began to fear
a change of fortune, she cried to the second
that he should aid his Brother; he made hast,
and spent himself in vain attempts for her,
but found his Brother dead when he came up.
Alas!
Quite out of breath, he took his brothers place,
and soon redoubled Horatius Victory;
his courage without strength was a weak prop:
desirous to revenge his brothers death,
he fell down by him. The air did resound
with cries, which all sent unto heaven upon it;
Alba breathed sorrow, and the Romans joy.
As our brave Hero saw his enterprise
near at an end, he would a little vaunt
as well as conquer: I am come (said he)
from sacrificing two unto the Ghosts
of my dead brothers: Rome shall have the last
of my three adversaries, it is unto
her int'rests that I offer him: This said,
he presently flew at him; between them
the Victory remained not long time doubtful;
the Alban pierced with wounds, could hardly stand,
and as a Victim brought before the Altar,
he seemed to present his yielding throat
unto the deadly stroke; so he received it.
His death establishes the power of Rome.
O my son! O my joy! O honour of
my days! O unexpected succour of
a tottering State! O virtue worthy Rome,
and blood worthy Horatius! Thou support
of thy deer Country, glory of thy race!
When can I somother in my close embraces
the error wherewith I formed such false sent'ments?
When my love bath thy victorious front
with tears of joy?
Sir, presently you may
Use your caresses, the King goes to sent him
unto you, and defers until to morrow
the pompous sacrifice which we owe to the gods
for such a benefit; only to day
we pay them but with songs of Victory,
and ordinary vows. The King doth lead him
unto the Temple, whilst he sends me
to do this office to you both of joy
and grief together: But this is not yet
enough for him, he will come here himself,
perhaps to day; this noble action
so highly touches him, that he will thank you
with his own mouth, for giving your brave sons
to the good of his State.
Such high acknowledgments
have too much glory for me; I account
my self already too much paid by yours
for the one service, and the others blood.
The King can't' do an honour (Sir) by halfs;
and his Crown snatched from the enemies hands,
makes him esteem the honour he intends you
beneath the Father's merit, and Son's.
I'll go to let him know what noble sentiments
Virtue inspires into you, and what ardour
you express for his service.
I shall be very redeonble to you
for that good office.
Daughter, this is no fit time to shed tears:
it is not handsome when we see such honours:
We mourn unjustly for domestic losses,
when public Victories proceed from thence:
Rome triumphs over Alba, and that is
enough for us; all our ills at this rate
ought to be sweet unto us; in the death
of a dear Lover, you lose but a man,
whose loss is easy to repair in Rome:
after this victory, there is no Roman
but will be proud to give his hand to you.
I must go to Sabina with this news;
this stroke (without doubt) will be grievous to her,
her Brothers stain all by her Husbands hand,
will give her juster tears and plaints then you:
But I hope easily to dissipate
the violence thereof, and that a little
discretion assisting her great courage,
will make the generous love she owes unto
the Conqueror, reign on so noble heart:
In the mean time, smother this unbecoming
and poor low passion. If he comes, receive him,
and show no weakness; make your self appear
to be his Sister, and that in one womb
Heaven formed you both of the same blood and substance.
Yes, I will make appear plainly unto him,
that a true Love can brave the Destinies,
and cannot take Laws from those cruel Tyrants,
whom an injurious Star gives us for Parents.
Thou blam'st my grief, thou dare to name it base;
so much the more I lov't (unpitifull Father)
as the more it offends thee: by a just
endeavour I will make it equal to
the rigours of my fortune. Was there ever
seen any yet, whose rude traverses took
in so short time so many several faces,
that was so often sweet, so often cruel,
and gave so many various strokes before
the mortal stroke! Was ever seen a soul
more seized with joy and grief, with hope, and fear;
subjected (as a slave) to more events,
and made the piteous pastime of more changes!
An Oracle assures me, a Dream frights me,
Battle dismays me, and Peace pleases me:
my Marriage is prepared, and in a moment
my Lover's chosen forth to fight my Brother.
The two Camps in a mutiny, disavowed
such an unjust choice, they brake off the party;
the Gods renew it; Rome seems vanquished,
and only of three Albans, Curiatius
hath not at all in my blood stained his hands
God! did I not then feel too little grief
for Rome's misfortune, and two Brothers death?
Flattered I not myself too much, when I
thought I might love him yet without a crime,
and nourish some hope? His death scourges me
enough for that, and the inhumane manner
wherewith my terrified heart received
the news thereof: his Rival told it me,
and in my presence making the recital
of so sad a success, upon his front
he wore an open joy; which grieved my heart,
and made the public good less then my loss
So building in the air upon another
misfortune, he triumphed over him
like to my Brother. But this is not all,
it is nothing unto that which doth remain;
In such a fatal stroke they ask my joy,
I must applaud the Conqueror's exploits,
and kiss a hand that pierces my sad heart:
in so great and so just a cause of plaints
it is a shame to weep, a crime to sigh.
Their brutish virtue would, that (in this case)
I should esteem me happy; so with them,
one must be barbarous to be generous.
But we'll degenerate (my Heart) from such
a virtuous Father; let us unworthy
of such a generous Brother: It is a glory
to pass for abject spirits, when bruitishnesse
is held the highest Virtue. My just Griefs,
break forth: to what end should I keep you in?
When one hath lost all, what's more to be feared?
Have no respect for this inhumane Conqueror:
Fiar from avoiding of him, come athwart him,
trouble his Victory, provoke his anger,
and take (if possible) pleasure to displease him.
He comes, prepare we show constantly
what a kind Mistress owes unto the death
of him she loves.
Sister, behold the arm that hath revenged
our two brave brother; that hath broke the course
of our contrary Destinies, that makes us
Masters of Alba; lastly, see the arm
that makes today the fortune of two States:
Behold these marks of honour, these fair testimonies
of glory, and give what thou ought unto
the happiness of my Victory.
Receive then
my tears; it is that which I do owe unto it.
Rome Will see none after such high exploits;
and our two brothers slain in the misfortune
of arms, are paid enough with blood, there needs
no tears to mingle with it. When the loss
is revenged, it is recovered.
Since they are
satisfied by the blood that shed, I'll cease
to mourn more for them, and forget their death,
which your hand revenged. But who shall now
revenge my Lovers, to make me forget
his loss too?
What say thou, unfortunate!
O my dear Curiatus!
Infinite boldness
of an unworthy Sister! Must the name of
a public enemy, whom I have conquered,
be in thy mouth, and his love in thy heart?
Thy criminal heat aspires to revenge,
thy mouth demands it, and thy heart longs for it;
follow thy passion less, stint thy desires,
make me not blush to understand thy sighs;
thy flames henceforth ought to be smothered,
banish them from thy soul, and think upon
my trophies, let them ever be hereafter
thy only entertainment.
Give me then
a heart like thine, barbarian. If thou would
have me to speak my thoughts, restore unto me
my Curiatius, or leave my flame
to act; my joy and griefs depend upon
his fortune: I adored him living, and
I morn him dead. Seek not thy sister where
thou left'st her; thou shalt see no more in me
but an offended Love, which like a fury
fixed to thy steps, incessantly shall haunt thee,
and still reproach thee with his death. Inhumane,
blood thirsty Tiger, that forbid'st me tears,
that would that in his death I should find charms,
and that extolling thy exploits to heaven,
I should my self kill him a second time!
May such misfortunes waite upon thy life,
that thou fall to the point to bear me envy,
and sully soon by some unworthy act
that glory dear to thy brutality!
O heaven! who ever saw so high a madness?
Believe thou then that I should be insensible
of such an outrage, and that I should suffer
this foul dishonour in my blood! Love, love
that death which makes our happiness; but prefer
that which thy birth owes to the interests
of Rome, before the memory of a man.
Rome, the only object of my sad resentment!
Rome, unto whom thine arm hath sacrificed
my Lover! Rome, that gave thee birth, and whom
thou dost adore! Lastly, Rome that I hate
because she honours thee! May all her neighbours
conspire together in a league against her,
and sap her yet unsettled foundations:
and if this of all Italy be not
sufficient, let the East join with the West
against her; let a thousand several Nations
(from the ends of the Universe) pass the seas
and mountains to destroy her; let her self
orethrow her walls upon her self, and with
her own hands tear her bowels; let the anger
of heaven (by my prayers kindled) make a deluge
of fire to rain upon her; may mine eyes
see those brave thunderbolts to fall upon her,
her houses ashes, and her laurels dust;
fee the last Roman breathing his last gasp,
and I the cause of this, to die with pleasure.
It is too much, my patience gives place
to reason. Go thy ways to hell, and join
thy self there with thy Curiatius.
O Traitor!
Such sudden punishment let every one
receive, that dares lament a Roman enemy.
What have you done?
I think, an act of justice,
Such a fault such a punishment requires.
You should have used her with less rigour, though.
Tell me not that she is my blood, my sister;
my father for his daughter can no more
acknowledge her: Who is so bold to curse
his Country, doth renounce his family:
Those names of love are then no more allowed him,
he makes his dearest friends his enemies;
the blood it self arms them in hatred of
his crime, the speediest vengeance is the best for it.
This impious wish, though forceless, is monster
that must be smothered in the birth.
Horatius, why stays thy illustrious anger here?
come, see thy Sister in thy Fathers arms
render her spirit: sacrifice unto
the Country of the virtuous Horatii
the sad remains of Curiatius blood:
So prodigal of thy own, spare not theirs,
join thy Wife to thy Sister, separate not
Sabina and Camilla; our crimes are
alike, as are our miseries; I sigh
as well as she, and do deplore my Brothers;
more guilty in this point 'gainst'gainst thy hard laws,
in that she wept but one, and I weep three,
and that after her punishment my fault
continues.
Dry thy tears, or hide them from
my sight, Sabina, make thee worthy of
my chaste half, and endeavour not to oppress me
with an unworthy pity; if the power
of a chaste flame leaves unto us both
but one thought, and one soul, it is thy part
to raise thy sentiments to mine, not mine
to descend to the shame and poverty
of thine; I love thee, and I know the grief
that presses thee; embrace my noble virtue
to overcome thy weakness, share my glory
in stead of sullying it, put it on rather
then take it from me: And thou of my honour
so mortal enemy, how much better should I
have pleased thee, if fallen in infamy?
Be more a Wife then Sister, and conforming
thy self to me, make thee of my example
a law immutable.
Seek more perfect souls
to imitate thee. I impute not to thee
my loss: I have the same sentiments
I ought to have of them, and have a quarrel
to fortune rather then unto thy duty.
But withal, I renounce the Roman virtue,
if to possess it I must be inhumane,
and cannot see in me the Conquerors Wife,
without discerning there the Sister of
the Conquered. Let us participate
in public of the public Victories;
let us at home weep our domestic evils,
and not regard the common happiness
when we behold our private miseries.
Why (cruel) dost thou covet to act otherwise?
Entering, leave here thy Laurels at the door,
mingle thy tears with mine. What? doth not this
effeminate discourse arm thy high virtue
against my sorrowful days? Doth not my crime
(redoubled) move thy choler? O how happy
art thou, Camilla! She could soon displease thee,
and receive from thee what she did pretend:
she could below recover all her loss.
Dear Husband, of the torment that doth press me
dear author, if thy anger ceases, hearken
to pity; exercise the one of the other
to punish my infirmity, or end
my griefs. I ask death either for a favour,
or for a punishment (I care not whether.)
Let her be an effect of Love, or Justice,
it matters not; all her darts shall seem sweet
unto me, if I see them to come from
a Husbands hand.
What an injustice is it
unto the Gods, to give up unto women
so great an Empire on the fairest souls,
and to be pleased to see such feeble Conquerors
to reign to strongly o'er the noblest hearts?
My Virtue, unto what point dost thou come
to be reduced? Nothing can better warrant it
then flght. Adieu, follow me not, or hold
thy sighs.
O Anger! Pity! deaf to my desires!
You care not for my crime, and my grief tires you;
and I obtain from you nor punishment
nor favour. Well, once more by tears I'll try,
and if that fail, then by myself I'll die.
LEt us withdraw our looks from that sad object,
to admire here the judgement of the God;
When glory puffs us up, they can confound
our pride; (our sweetest pleasures come not to us
without some sorrow) oftentimes they mingle
infirmities with our Virtues, and grant seldom
the entire honour of a glorious Actions
to our ambition; I mourn not Camilla,
she was a criminal; I lament my self,
and thee too more then she: I for producing
unto the light a heart so little Roman,
thou for dishonouring by her death thy hand.
I find it not unjust, nor yet too quick;
but (Son) thou might have spared thy self the shame on it:
her crime, though great, and worthy death, were better
unpunished, then punished by thy arm.
Dispose my fortune as you please; the laws
command it so: I thought I owed this stroke
unto the place that gave me my first being.
If my zeal to my Country seems criminal
unto you, if thereby I must receive
an everlasting stain, and by this action
my hand become disgraced and profane,
you can with one sole word cut off my destiny.
Receive your blood again, whose purity
my baseness hath unto so little purpose
defiled: My hand could not suffer crime
grow in our race; suffer you not a spot
in your own house: It is in those actions
(wherewith honour is wounded) that a father,
such as you are, shows himself interested.
His love must not appear, where all excuse
is null; himself takes part when he dissembles them:
and he makes small account of his own glory,
when he forbears to punish what he doth not
approve.
He is not always rigorous,
but spares his children often for himself;
his old age doth delight to lean upon them;
and punishes them not, to the end he may not
punish himself. I look upon thee with
another eye then thou behold thy self.
I know???But the King comes, I see his Guards.
Oh Sir, this is too great an honour for me,
I should not see my King in this poor place.
Suffer me on my knees???
No, Father, rise;
I do but what a good Prince ought to do:
so rare a service, and of such importance,
requires the rar'st, and most illustrious honour:
you had for pawn thereof his word already,
I could no longer have deferred it.
I know by his report (which I ne'er doubted)
how brave and like your self you bear the death
of your two sons, and that your soul already
being resolved, my consolation
would be superfluous: but I come to know
what strange misfortune hath followed the virtue
of your victorious Son, and how it comes,
that his too much love for the public cause
bath tan an only daughter from his father
by his own hands: I know what such a stroke
can do upon the strongest spirit, and doubt
how you may bear this death.
Sir, with displeasure,
but yet with patience,
It is plain, this is
the virtuous effect of your experience:
Many have taught by a long file of years,
as well as you, that miseries succeed
the sweetest happiness; few know like you
to apply this remedy, and all their Virtue
yields to their Interest. If my compassion
can ease your sorrow, know that it is extreme,
as is your evil, and that Tullus laments you
as much as he doth love you.
Sir, since Heaven
doth put its justice in the hands of Kings,
and the force of the laws; and since the State
asks rewards for virtues, and strict punishments
for crimes, of lawful Princes; suffer that
a just occasion make you to remember,
that you lament too much what you should punish:
Suffer???
What! that we send a Conqueror
to punishment?
Allow him leave to finish,
and I'll do justice; I am bound to render it
to all, at all hours, and in every place:
it is by it that a King makes himself
a demi-God: and hence is it that I pity you,
that after such a service, against him
they should demand me justice.
Suffer then,
O great King, and the justest of all Kings,
that all good men speak to you by my mouth:
not that our hearts, as jealous of his honours,
urge us to this; if he receives much,
his high deeds do deserve it; add unto it,
rather then lessen it; we are also ready
to contribute unto it: but since he
hath showed himself guilty of such a crime,
let him triumph as Conqueror, and perish
as malefactor: stop his fury, and
save from his hands, if you desire to reign,
the remnant of the Romans: hereupon
depends the loss or safety of the rest;
seeing the blood shed by this fatal War,
and so many fair knots of marriage
wherewith our happy destinies have so often
united such near neighbours, few of us
have enjoyed such a happiness, as not
I'have lost a Cousin, or a brother in law,
an uncle, or a son in law in Alba,
whereby to have occasion to shed tears
for their own losses in the public joy:
If it be an offence to Rome, and that
the fortune of his arms allows him
to punish this crime of our tears, what blood
will this fierce Conqueror spare, that would not pardon
that of his Sister, nor excuse the grief
which the death of a Lover doth infuse
into a Mistress heart, when ready to be
lighted by the fair nuptial Torch, she sees
her hope in the grave with him? Making Rome thus
to triumph, he enslaves it: by this means
he hath a right of life and death upon us,
and our offending days shall last no longer
then it shall please his clemency to suffer them.
I could add, for the interests of Rome,
that such a stroak's unworthy of a man:
I could demand, to be brought here before you
that rare exploit of a victorious arm;
you should see then a fair blood (to accuse
his rage) retort into his cruel face:
you should behold horrors which cannot be
conceived; her age and beauty (sure) would move you,
but I hate those means that show artifice.
You have deferred the sacrifice till to morrow;
Think you that the just Gods (styled the revengers
of Innocents) will receive incense from
a parricide hand? This sacrilege would draw
their punishment upon you. Look upon him
but as an object of their hate, believe
(with us) that the good destiny of Rome
in all these three fights did more then his arm,
since these same Gods (the Authors of his Victory)
permitted that he suddenly should fully
the glory of it; and that such a courage,
after so brave an Act, should in one day
be worthy of a Triumph, and of Death.
It rests (Sir) that your Sentence decide this:
Rome never saw a parricide till now.
Fear what may follow, and Heaven's anger; save us
from his unnatural hand, and fear the Gods.
Defend your self, Horatius.
To what purpose
shall I defend me? Sir, you know the action,
as being told it now: what you think of it
must be a law to me. One ill defends
himself against the opinion of a King:
and the innocentest soul that ever was born
is guilty, if he judge him to be so:
It is a crime to excuse himself unto him.
Our blood's his goods, he can dispose thereof;
and we must think, that when he doth do so,
he deprives not himself without just cause.
Then (Sir) pronounce, I'm ready to obey.
Others love life, and I am bound to hate it.
I reproach not Valerius heat, which makes him,
loving the Sister, to accuse the Brother:
my wishes at this time conspire with his:
he asks my death, it is that which I desire:
We differ only in this point, that I
seek to conserve my honour in it, and he
to perish it. Sir, seldom is a subject
offered to show the virtue of a great
and noble heart complete: according to
occasion, it acts or more or less,
and appears strong or weak unto the eyes
of those that are her witnesses: The people,
that only looks upon the outside, judges
its force by its effects, and dares to think,
by an ill maxim, that who doth a miracle,
must do it still: After a complete action,
high and illustrious, what glitters less
ill answers their expectation:
they would have us to be all times alike,
and in all places: they examine not
if one could better do then, nor that, if
they see not still a wonder, the occasion
is less, and Virtue equal: Their injustice
destroys great names; the honour of the first
attchievements is forgotten by the second:
and when renown is passed beyond the mean,
if we'll not fall thence, we must act no more.
I will not boast the exploits (Sir) of my arm,
your Majesty hath seen my three encounters;
hardly again shall I meet any such,
nor ever the like occasion will be
to show my courage, and crown the success;
so that to leave here an illustrious memory,
death only now can keep alive my glory,
and I must have it too as soon as I
have conquered; for I have outlived my honour:
Such one as I beholds his glory perished,
when he falls into any ignominy:
and my hand would have freed me on it already,
if my blood durst come forth without your leave:
as it belongs to you, you must dispose on it;
to shed it otherwise, is to rob you of it.
Rome wants not store of generous warriors;
enough besides me will sustain your Laurels;
henceforward let your Majesty dispense
with me herein. And if what I have done
deserves a recompense, permit, great King,
that with this conquering arm I sacrifice
me to my Glory, not my Sisters cries.
Sir, hear Sabina, and see in her soul
the sorrows of a Sister and a Wife,
who (wholly desolate) at your sacred feet
laments her Family, and fears her Husband.
It is not that I would by any artifice
endeavour to take out of the hand of Justice
a guilty person; Whatsoever he
hath done for you, use him as such a one;
and punish (Sir) in me this noble Criminal:
with my unfortunate blood wash off his crime.
You shall not change your Victim for all that,
nor shall you herein take an unjust pity,
but sacrifice the dearest mosty of him.
The knots of marriage, and his extreme love
makes him live more in me, then in himself;
and if you grant that I shall die to day,
he will die more in me then in himself:
the death which I beg, and would fain obtain,
will raise his punishment, and finish mine.
See the excess (Sir) of my sad afflictions,
and the deplorable condition
whereto I am reduced: What honour is it
to embrace a man whose sword hath cut the thread of
of all my family? and what impiety
to hate a Husband for his service to you,
his Country, and his Friends? What? shall I love
an arm stained with the blood of all my Brothers?
Shall I not love an Husband that doth put
a period to our common miseries?
O (Sir) deliver me by an happy death
both from the crimes of loving, and not loving.
I shall esteem that Sentence a great favour:
My hand can give me what I crave of you,
but this death shall be much more sweet unto me,
if I can free my Husband from his shame,
and by my blood appease the anger of
the Gods, in dying satisfy the Ghost
of his offended Sister, and conserve
to Rome so good and glorious a Defender.
Sir, it concerns me then to give an answer
unto Valerius; I see my children
conspire with him against me, and all three
would ruin me: they arm themselves unjustly
against that little blood's left in my house.
Thou that by griefs (contrary to thy duty)
would leave thy Husband to go to thy Brothers,
go rather to consult their generous Ghosts.
It is true, they are dead; but they died for Alba,
and hold them happy in it, since Heaven would have it,
she should be subject: if that any sentiment
remains after life lost, this misfortune
seems less, and its strokes not so rigorous,
since all the honour of it falls on us.
All three will disapprove thy grief, thy tears
and sighs, they will condemn the horror which
thou hast of a brave Husband. Be their Sister
(Sabia) and observe thy duty like them.
Valerius in vain lifts up himself
against this dear Husband: a first motion
was never held a crime; and praise is due,
in stead of punishment, when Virtue only
produces this first motion. To love
our enemies even with idolatry,
madly to curse the Country for their death,
to wish the State an everlasting ruin,
is that which we name crime, and that which he
hath punished; the only love of Rome
provoked his arm: He should be innocent,
if he had loved her less. What have I said, Sir?
he is so, and this my paternal arm
had punished him already, were he guilty;
I would have better used the full power
I have upon him by the laws of birth.
I love honour too well, and am not of
a quality to suffer in my blood
affront or crime: of this I do desire
no other witness but Valerius:
he saw what rigorous entertainment I
prepared to give my Son, when ignorant
as yet of half the combat, I believed
that by his flight he had betrayed the State.
What makes him so officiously to trouble
himself with the cares of my Family?
What makes him to desire (in spite of me)
to vindicate my daughter? By what reason
in her just death takes he an interest
a father doth not meddle with? He fears,
that after this severity to his Sister,
he'll not spare others. Sir, we have no part
but in the shame of ours, and in what manner
another may act, what concerns us not
makes us not blush. Valerius, thou moist weep,
and in Horatius sight; he takes no interest
but in the crimes of his race; who is not of
his blood, can do no injury unto
the immortal Laurels that impale his brow.
Ye Laurels, sacred boughs, which envy would
reduce to dust, you that conserve his head
from the confounding thunder, will you leave him
unto the infamous Ax, that makes offenders
fall underneath the executioners hands?
Romans, will you permit that they should sacrifice
a man, without whom Rome had not been Rome
at this time, and that any Roman should
traduce the glory of a Conqueror,
to whom all owe so fair a character?
Tell us, Valerius, tell, since he must perish,
where thou would choose fit a place for his punishment.
Is it within these walls, which many thousands
of voices make resound yet with the noise
of his exploits? Is it without the walls,
in the midst of those places which smoke yet
with the blood of the conquered Curiatii,
between their three tombs, in that field of honour,
the witness of his valour and our happiness?
Thou can not from his Victory conceal
his Punishment: within the walls, without them
all speak his glory; all oppose themselves
to the endeavour of thy unjust love,
which would with such a glorious blood defile
so fair a day. Alba cannot endure
so sad a spectacle, and Rome with her tears
will put an obstacle to 't. But (Royal Sir)
you will prevent them, and by a just sentence
you can embrace her interest much better:
What he hath done for her, he can yet do;
he can secure her still from adverse fortune:
despair not yet (Sir) of my feeble years.
Rome now hath seen me father of four children,
three in her quarrel are already dead,
there is but one left me; keep him for her,
remove not from her walls so strong a prop;
and suffer me to address my self unto him,
to make an end. Horatius, do not think
the stupid people should be absolute masters
of a substantial honour; their vain voice
tumultnous enough makes often noise:
but as a moment raises it, a moment
destroys it; and whatever they contribute
to our renown, i'th'twinkling of an eye
it vanishes to smoke: It doth belong
to Kings, to great ones, to accomplished spirits
to see that Virtue in its least effects
be full; it is from them alone that we
receive true glory; they alone assure
the memory of the true Heroes, live
still in Horatius, and still after them.
Thy name shall remain great, illustrious, famous,
though the occasion, less high or resplendent,
deceives the unjust expectation
of th'ignorant vulgar. Hate then life no more;
at least live for me, and to serve thy King
and Country longer. Sir, I've said too much;
but the affair concerns you, and all Rome
speaks by my mouth.
Sir, suffer me???
Valerius,
it is enough, your sound discourse by theirs
is not defaced: I keep yet in my spirit
the pressing reasons on it, and all your arguments
are present with me still: this heinous action
(almost before our eyes) doth injure nature,
and even wounds the Gods. A sudden motion
of anger, that produces such a crime,
cannot excuse him lawfully; the Laws
that are the least severe condemn the act,
and if we follow them, he's worthy death:
If otherwise we will look on the guilty,
this crime, though great, heinous and inexcusable,
proceeds from the same sword and arm that makes me
now Master of two States: Two Scepters in
my hand, and Alba subject unto Rome,
speak highly in the favour of his life.
Had it not been for him, I should have yielded
obedience, whereas now I give forth laws;
and should be subject, whereas now I am
twice Sovereign. There are in all the Provinces
many good subjects, that by feeble prayers
only acquit themselves toward their Princes:
all can love them, but all cannot assure
their States by some illustrious actions;
and you are and power to establish Crowns
are gifts which heaven gives but to some choice persons:
such servants are the wealth and strength of Kings,
and also are to be above the Laws;
let them be silent then, let Rome dissemble
what from her birth she sees in Romulus;
She can well suffer in her Liberator,
what she hath suffered in her first Author.
Live then Horatius, live magnanimous soldier,
thy Virtue sets thy glory 'bove thy crime,
Its generous heat produced thy offence;
th'effect of such a fair cause must be suffered.
Live to doe service to the State, but love
Valerius; let not any hate nor anger
remain between you, and whether he followed
or love, or duty, without any sentiment
resolve to see him. Hearken less (Sabina)
unto the grief that presses you; remove
from this great heart those marks of imbecility:
in drying of your tears, you'll show your self
true Sister of those Brothers you lament.
But we do owe to morrow to the Gods
a sacrifice, and should have heaven but little
propitious to us, if our Priests before
the action, find not out the means to purge it.
His father shall take care on it, I believe,
it will not be hard for him to appease
Camilla's Ghost. I do deplore her fortune,
and to give to it what her amorous spirit
may happily desire, (since in one day
an equal heat of one and the same zeal
finished her Lovers destiny and hers)
it is our will that one day, as a witness
of their two deaths, may see in the earth's womb
their bodies laid, and shut up in one tomb.
thus heaven well advertised thee
what tragical events were to succeed;
but always it conceals a part o'th'secret
even from the most refined and clearest spirits.
It seemed to speak of thy approaching marriage,
it seemed to promise all things to thy prayers;
and hiding so from us thy sudden death,
it's voice too truly hath deceived our sense.
Thy prayers are heard, Alba and Rome shall be
to morrow in a fair Confaederacie;
And thou with Curiatius shalt be joined,
never to part: So have the Gods enjoined.

BUt tell me fellow Bumpkin, what's the matter?
Thou that hast formerly been heard to sing
As merrily and sweetly as the Cuckoo,
But by the posture thou dost now appear in,
Strangers will sooner take thee for an Ass,
Then for a man of mettle.
It may be so.
And for my own part, I am not such a fool, to think
the contrary; nay, I would change condition with an
Ass, and thank him too: never was any man (of parts)
so tumbled, Jumbled and Rumbled, as poor Bumpkin is.
Why what's the matter?
Nay, I know not, but every day my great
guts and my small guts makes such a combustion in my
belly as passes, and my puddings (like Lances) runs a
tilt at my heart, and makes me as queasy stomached as
a young Green-sickness girl newly come to a big belly.
Can thou not guess the reason of this trouble.
Yes, I think I can, and Isle be judged by thee,
if my case bee not desperate: I have a horrible
mind to be in Love.
With whom.
With any body, but I cannot find out the
way how to be in Love.
Why? Isle instruct thee: can thou be
Melancholy?
Yes, as a dog, or a hoglouse, I could even
find in my heart, to cry presently.
Can thou sleep well?
I cannot tell, I never saw my self sleep.
Is it possible, that thou who hast so long
Been an attendant on my Lord Action.
Should be to learn the way to be in Love.
I would it were not possible, on the condition
thou were hanged and quartered.
I thank you Sir, but Bumpkin list to me,
This day thou know the maids and young man meet
To sport, and revel it about the May-pole;
Present thy self there, tell thy cause of grief,
And I dare warrant thee a sweet-heart presently.
If thou can do that, Isle marry her first,
and learn to love her afterwards.
Hast thither Bumpkin, Isle go on before.
And I will follow there a dog trot.
Is it not pity, that a man of Authority as I am, having
been chief dog-keeper to my Lord Action this five
years, being a man so comely of person, and having
such a pure complexion, that all fair Ladies may be
ashamed to look on me, and that I should be distressed
for a sweet-heart:
Maypole I com, &amp; if the wenches there increase my pains
And scorn to Love, Isle beat out all their brains.
COme you young man, come along.
With your Musique, dance and song;
Bring your Lasses in your hands,
For it is that which Love commands:
Then to the Maypole come away,
For it is now a Holiday.
It is the choice time of the year,
For the Vi'lets now appear;
Now the Rose receives its birth,
And pretty Primrose decks the earth:
Then to the Maypole come away,
For it is now a Holiday.
Here each Bachelor may choose
One that will not saith abuse,
Nor repay with coy disdain,
Love, that should be loved again:
Then to the Maypole, &amp;c.
And when you well reckoned have,
What kisses you your sweethearts gave,
Take them all again, and more,
It will never make them poor:
Then to the Maypole, &amp;c.
When you thus have spent the time,
Till the day be past its prime,
To your beds repair at night,
And dream there of your days delight:
Then to the Maypole come away,
For it is now a Holiday.
It is possible, would Bumpkin be in
Love?
Yes, if he knew but how, and for that sickness
I have undertaken to become his doctor;
For, at the Maypole meeting it is decreed
A sweet heart must be purchased, come what will on it.
Nay, if he be distressed, twenty to one
he may find charitable persons there.
What Lass to such a writhled faced
companion;
One that by's looks, shows that his fathers orchard
Could yield no fruit, but Crabs or Apple-Johns:
Should he be granted a prevailing suitor,
I should not think it requisite or fitting
Women hereafter should enjoy their eyes;
Their very tongues too should be put to silence,
Only allowed to rail at that vile person,
Who by her choice of him, shamed the whole sex.
Nay, I would lay a heavier curse upon her,
She should not sleep without a wanton dream,
And waking find no hopes of what she dreamed.
That was a heavy curse and well consider'd,
But could you find our fellow Bumpkins parts.
He can loose none, and who can find
them then.
Do you believe him foolish.
It is a faith that needs no confirmation.
Laugh at him then, and we'll assist you in it;
but do it with Consideration.
So we will,hark Lasses.
Now if they be not hatching Eggs of
mischief, let me be counted addle, what think you sirs?
And if he have not love enough, good
Cupped,
Let me want Love when looked for.
In the mean time
Let us not starve our pastimes, pray sirs,
Being the Maypole revels.
So we will;
Come strike up a farewell to misfortune.
Thats a dance that I could never hit off,
Pray desist a while and hear my doleful tale.
He will make us cry sure.
Be it known unto all men by these presents
An obligation; we'll be no witnesses.
Why then isle hang my self?
We will be witness then.
What to my hanging? O my conscience! If
I should woo my heart out, I should never be the
fatter, for it.whore's your promise now?
You have not yet expressed your self, be plain,
Tell them your grief, a remedy will follow.
If that be all, it is but an easy matter, pray
take notice that I am in Lovewith somebody.
Would I were she!
Why? so you are, if you have a mind to it
Why then you are my own?
Pardon me, sister, I
bespoke him yesterday.
Yes marry did she.
But I was she that won him at the
Maypole.
Was that the cause you strove so for
the Garland.
What's that to you?
Would I had any one of them in quietness.
But yet I must have share.
So must I too.
I will not part without the better half.
Then who shall have me whole, what are you
mad?
There's reason for a madness in this
case.
I will not lose my right. Let go I say.
He shall be mine, or else he shall be nothing.
Away you Burrs, why do you stick thus on me?
Now by this hand, if nothing can persuade you
Isle drown my self for spite that you may perish.
Hark, hark, my Lord Actions warning piece,
That Horn gives us intelligence he does intend
To spend this day in hunting, Bumpkin, why stay you?
The hounds will quarrel with you, we'll come after.
Will you not stay my Love.
Isle see you hanged first, and by this hand ere I
will be in love again, Isle feed my hounds with my own
proper carcase.
Now he is gon, our dancing may go
forward.
My Lord Action stays, be quick, I pray.
Quick as you will, the doing of it
quick makes it show better.
ARe all the hounds uncoupled, let the woods,
Valleys, and hills, be filled with their sweet music:
Till the thick Air pierced by their harmony,
Return a willing Echo; Let your cunning
And care in this days hunting be expressed,
To make the world know that Actions pleasure,
Is honoured and obeyed, be nimble sirrah.
Nimble? yes, as a Bear that hath been lugged to
purpose: if Love be such a troublesome Companion, I
will entreat him to keep out of my company.
Where are your fellows? we consume the day
That should be spent in sport, with idleness.
Go find them out, and tell them of my purpose.
They have saved me a labour.
Fie! what mean you?
The glory of this day calls us to action:
The wild inhabitans of these fair woods,
Are to be instructed, they must fear our Javelins,
Our sloth will make them careless.
Sir, you may please to know, that yesternight
I lodged a Boar within the neighbouring Forest.
Yes Sir, and I lodged a Fox at a house hard
by.
His foamy tushes did proclaim defiance
To all that would oppose him, his vast length
And breadth of wonder, cause me to believe
These woods ne'er bred his equal.
He's then a worthy subject for my javelin,
Whose glittering head Isle bath so long within him,
Till I have died it Crimson with his blood;
Nor shall Diana's self, who every day
Honours these woods with her fair train of Nymphs,
Have power to ravish from my resolute arm,
The glory of this conquest: in the mean time,
Let musics sweet tunes in our breasts create
Desire of Action, whilst our active Feet,
Nimbly beguiles our duller thoughts of power
To contradict our pleasures: in the fall
Of this wild Boar, lies honour for us all.
This boldness ruins thee.
Isle follow though my ruin do attend me,
The unbridled boldness of Actions youth,
Merits a punishment to equalise
The nature of his crime; saucy young man,
Too much presuming of thy known deserts,
Be witness you that have vowed chastity,
How much he hath endeavoured to eclipse
The glory of our purity; for to me
And those that are my Votaries, honours precepts
Must strictly be observed; no Balm can cure
The wound of Reputation when it is made
Upon those bosoms that are vowed to virtue.
Shall she resolve his ruin?
Gracious Madam,
Mercy with chastity and beauty joined,
Are both with Gods and Men in estimation,
And though his fault beyond expression great,
Cries loudly on your wrath to execute,
Yet let his youth find pardon.
It will prove your charity unequalled.
Your goodness shall
Become example to my willing pity:
Therefore if young Action from this time,
Consider his own safety and my honour,
My vengeance shall be silent; but if again
He shall presume to tempt his most sad fate,
Ruin as quick as lightning shall demolish
What Nature did erect in him for wonder,
That so from men this truth may not be hid,
No one must covet what the Gods forbid:
Undress you now, for by this fountain side.
Our garments from our bodies we'll divide.
What wonders do I gaze on? Might I thus
Be feasted at my eyes till time grow old,
I would not wish a satisfaction
Of any other sense:Unkind Diana,
To be so much a miser of thy beauties.
Loves laws can not be perfect, till they part
Rebellion from the confines of thy heart.
We are betrayed! Oh Chastity defend us.
It was but a flattering bliss that did me cherish.
Fly, fly, Action, lest thy life do perish.
Fool! think thou to escape? Know that my will
Has power to reach, though thou bestrid'st a wind,
And as by hunting thy offence grew high,
So by the hands of Hunters thou shalt die.
My will prevails, his head is circled round,
The largest Hart ere beat the Forest ground.
And now forbear this fountain from henceforth,
Let my dishonour dwell upon the Spring,
The waters be corrupted, choked with mud,
Foul and infectious, like to Lethes flood.
Where Action comes transformed into the shape
of a Hart, his Huntsmen pursue him, and in the
conclusion kill him, and bear him away.

MOst Sacred Majesty, whose great deserts,
Thy subject England; nay, the world admires:
Which heaven grant still increase: O may your praise,
Multiplying with your hours, your fame still raise.
Embrace your Council: Love, with Faith them guide,
That both as one bench by the others side;
So may your life pass on, and run so even,
That your firm zeal plant you a Throne in Heaven:
Where smiling Angels shall your guardians be,
From blemished Traitors, stained with perjury.
And as the Night's inferior to the Day,
So be all earthly Regions to your sway.
Be as the Sun to Day, the Day to Night,
For from your beams Europe shall borrow light:
Mirth drown your bosom, fair Delight your mind,
And may our pastime your contentment find.
WHy so thus do I hope to please;
Music revives, and mirth is tolerable:
Comedy play thy part and please;
Make merry them that come to joy with thee:
Joy then Good Gentiles, I hope to make you laugh;
Sound forth Bellona's silver tuned strings;
Time fits us well, the day and place is ours.
Nay stay minion, stay, there lies a block;
What all on mirth? Isle interrupt your tale,
And mix your music with a Tragic end.
What monstrous ugly nag is this,
That dares control the pleasures of our will?
Vaunt churlish Cur, besmeared with gory blood,
That seem to check the blossom of Delight,
And still the sound of sweet Bellona's breath:
Blush monster, blush, and post away with shame,
That seekst disturbance of a Goddess name.
Post hence thy self thou counterchecking Trull,
I will possess this habit spite of thee,
And gain the glory of this wished Port.
Isle thunder music shall appal the Nymphs,
And make them shiver their clattering strings,
Flying for succour to their Danish Caves.
Hearken, thou shalt hear noise
Shall fill the air with shrilling sound,
And thunder music to the Gods above:
Mars shall himself breath down
A peerless crown upon brave Envies head,
And raise his chival with a lasting fame:
In this brave music Envy takes delight,
Where I may see them wallow in their blood,
To spurn at Arms and Legs quite shivered off,
And hear the cries of many thousands slain:
How lik'st thou this my Trull? it is sport alone for me.
Vaunt bloody Cur, nursed up with Tigers sap,
That so dost quail a women's mind:
Comedy is mild, gentle, willing for to please,
And seeks to gain the love of all estates;
Delighting in mirth, mixed all with lovely tales,
And brings things with treble joy to pass.
Thou bloody, envious, disdainer of men's joys;
Whose name is fraught with bloody stratagems.
Delights in nothing but in spoil and death,
Where thou may trample in their lukewarm blood,
And grasp their hearts within thy cursed paws:
Yet vail thy mind, revenge thee not on me,
A silly woman begs it at thy hands;
Give me the leave to utter out my Play.
Forbear this place, I humbly crave thee hence,
And mix not death amongst pleasing Comedies,
That treats nought else but pleasure and delight:
If any spark of humane rests in thee,
Forbear, be gone, tender the suit of me.
Why so I will; forbearance shall be such,
As treble death shall cross thee with despite,
And make thee mourn where most thou joyest,
Turning thy mirth into a deadly dole,
Whirling thy pleasures with a peal of death,
And drench thy methods in a sea of blood;
Thus will I do: Thus shall I bear with thee,
And more, to vex thee with a deeper spite,
I will with threats of blood begin the play,
Favouring thee with Envy and with Hate.
Then ugly monster do thy worst,
I will defend them in despite of thee:
And though thou think with Tragic fme
To prove my Play unto my great disgrace
I force it not, I scorn what thou can do
Isle grace it so, thy self shall it confess,
From Tragic stuff, to be a pleasant Comedy.
Why then Comedy send the Actors forth,
And I will cross the first step of their Trade,
Making them fear the very dart of death.
And Isle defend them mangre all thy spite;
So ugly fiend farewell till time shall serve,
That we may meet to parley for the best.
Content Comedy, Isle go spread my branch,
And scattered blossoms from mine envious Tree,
Shall prove two Monsters spoiling of their joys.
Anselmo?
My Lord and friend,
Whose dear affections bosom with my he,
And keep their domination in one Orb;
Whence near disloyalty shall root it forth,
But faith plant firmer in your choice respect.
Mcuh blame were mine if I should other deem,
Nor can coy fortune contrary allow:
But my Anselmo, loath I am to say I must enstrange that friendship:
Misconsture not, it is from the Realm, not thee:
Though Lands part bodies, Hearts keep company:
Thou know that I imparted often have
Private raltions with my Royal Sire
Had, as concerning beauteous Amadine,
Rich Aragons bright Jewel: whose face (some say)
That blooming Lilies never shone so gay:
Excelling not excelled; yet lest report
Does mangle Verity, boasting of what is not
Winged with Desire, thither Isle straight repair,
And be my fortunes at my thoughts are, fair.
Will you forsake Valentia? leave the Court?
Absent you from the eye of Sovereignty,
Do not sweet Prince, adventure on that task,
Since danger lurks each where, he won from it.
Desist dissawsion,
My Resolution brooks no battery,
Therefore if thou retain thy wonted form,
Assist what I intend
Your miss will breed a blemish in the Court,
And throw a frosty dew upon that beard,
Whose front Valentia stoops to.
If thou my welfare tender, then no more;
Let Loves strong Magic charm thy trivial phrase,
Wasted as vainly as to gripe the Sun:
Augment not then more answer; lock thy lips,
Unless thy wisdom sre me with disguise,
According to my purpose.
That action craves no councels,
Since what you rightly are, will more commnd,
Th best usurped shape.
Thou still art opposite in disposition.
A more obscure servile habiliment
Beseems this enterprise.
Then like a Florentine or Mountebank.
It is much too tedious, I dislike thy judgement,
My mind is grafted on an humbler stock.
Within my closet does there hang a Cassock,
Though base the weed is, it was a Shepherds,
Which I presented in Lord Julius Mask.
That my Anselmo, and none else but that,
Mask Mucedorus from the vulgar view:
That habit suits my mind, fetch me that weed.
Better then Kings have not disdained that state,
And much inferior, to obtain their mate.
So, let our respect command thy secrecy,
At once a brief farewell,
Delay to Lovers is a second Hell.
Prosperity fore-run thee: Auckward chance,
Never be neighbour to thy wishes venture,
Content and Fame advance thee. Ever thrive,
And glory thy mortality survive.
O horrible terrible! Was ever poor Gentleman so scared out of his seven senses? A Bear? Nay sure it cannot be a Bear, but some Devil in a Bears doublet: for a Bear could never have had that agility to have frighted me. Well, Isle see my father hanged before Isle serve his Horse any more: Well, Isle carry home my bottle of hay, and for once make my fatheirs Horse turn Puritan, and observe Fasting days, for he gets not a bit. But soft, this way she followed me, therefore Isle take the other path, and because Isle be sure to have an eye to her, I will shake hands with some foolish Creditor, and make every step backward.
O fly Madam, fly, or else we are but dead.
Help Segasto, help, help sweet Segasto, or else I die.
Alas Madam there is no way but flight.
Then haste and save your self.
Why then I dye. Ah help me in distress.
Stay Lady, stay, and be no more dismayed,
That cruel beast most merciless and fell,
Affrighted many with his hard pursues,
Prying from place to place to find his prey,
Prolonging thus his life by others death:
His carcase now lies headless void of breath.
That foul deformed Monster, is he dead?
Assure your self thereof, behold his head.
Which if it please you Lady to accept,
With willing heart I yield it to your Majesty.
Thanks worthy Shepherd, thanks a thousand times.
This gift assure thy sef contents me more,
Than greatest bounty of a mighty Prince,
Although he were the Monarch of the world.
Most gracious Goddess, more than mortal wight,
Your heavenly hue of right imports no less,
Most glad am I, in that it was my chance
To undertake this enterprise in hand,
Which doth so greatly glad our princely mind.
No Goddess (Shepherd) but a mortal wight,
A mortal wight distressed as thou see;
My father here is King of Are gone,
I Amadine his only drughter am,
And after him sole air unto the Crown:
Now whereas it is my fathers will,
To marry me unto Segasto,
One whose wealth through Fathers former usury,
Is known to be no less then wonderful;
We both of custom oftentimes did use,
(Leaving the Court) to walk within the fields
For recreation, especially the Spring,
In that it yields great store of rare delights:
And passing further then our wonted walks,
Scarce entered within these luckless woods,
But right before us down a steepfall hill,
A monstrous ugly Bear did hie him fast
To meet us both: I faint to tell the rest.
Good Shepherd but suppose the ghastly looks,
The hideous fears, the hundred thousand woes
Which at this instant Amadine sustained.
Yet worthy Princess let thy sorrow cease,
And let this sight your former joys revive.
Believe me Shepherd, so it doth no less.
Long may they last unto your hearts content,
But tell me Lady, what is become of him?
Segasto called; what is become of him?
I know not I, that know the powers divine,
But God grant this, that sweet Segasto live.
Yet hard hearted he in such a case,
So cowardly to save him  by flight,
And leave so brave a Princess to the spoil.
Well Shepherd, for thy worthy valour tried,
Endangering thy self to set me free,
Unrecompenced sure thou shalt not be:
In Court thy courage shall be plainly known,
Throughout the Kingdom will I spread thy name,
To thy renoun and never dying fame:
And that thy courage may be better known,
Bear thou the head of this most monstrous beast,
In open sight to every Courtiers view:
So will the King my father thee reward.
Come let's away, and guard me to the Court.
With all my heart.
When heaps of harms do hover over head,
Tic time as then (some say) to look about,
And of ensuing harms to choose the least,
But hard, yea hapless is that wretches chance,
Luckless his lot, and caitiff-like accursed,
At whose proceedings Fortune ever frowns:
My self I mean most subject unto thrall:
For I, the more I seek to shun the worst,
The more by proof I find my self accursed.
Ere whiles assaulted with an ugly Bear,
Fair Amadine in company all alone,
Forthwith by flight I thought to save my self,
Leaving my Amadine unto her shifts:
For death it was for to resist the Bear,
And death no less of Amadines harms to hear.
Accursed I, in lingering life thus long:
In living thus, each minute of an hour
Doth pierce my heart with darts of thousand deaths:
If she by flight her fury doth escape,
What will she think?
Will she not say, yea flatly to my face,
Accusing me of mere disloyalty.
A trusty friend is tried in time of need
But I, when she in danger was of death,
And needed me, and cried, Segasto help,
I turned my back and quickly ran away,
Unworthy I to bear this vital breath,
But what, what need those plaints?
If Amadine do live, then happy I,
She will in time forgive and so forget:
Amadine is merciful, not Iuno like,
In harmful hearts to harbour hatred long.
Clubs, Prongs; Pitchforks, Bills: O help,
A Bear, a Bear, a Bear.
Still Bears, and nothing but Bears.
Tell me sirrah where she is.
O sir, she is run down the woods,
I saw her white head, and her white belly.
Thou talk of wonders, to tell me of white Bears.
But sirrah, did thou ever see any such?
No faith, I never saw any such:
But I remember my fathers words,
He bad me take heed I was not caught with the white Bear.
A lamentable tale no doubt.
Isle tell you what sir, as I was going a field to serve my fathers great Horse, and carried a bottle of hay upon my head: Now do you see sir, I fast hudwinkt that I should see nothing, I perceiving the Bear coming, I threw my hay into the hedge, and ran away.
What from nothing?
I warrant you yes, I saw something: for there was two load of thorns besides my bottle of hay, and that made three.
But tell me sirrah: the Bear that thou did see,
Did she not bear a bucket on her arm?
Ha, ha, ha, I never saw a Bear go a milking in all my life. But hark you sir, I did not look so high as her arm, I saw nothing but her white head, and her white belly.
But tell me sirrah: where dost thou dwell?
Why do you not know me?
Why no, how should I know thee?
Why then you know no body, and you know not me; I tell you sir, I am goodman Rats Son of the next parish over the hill.
Goodman Rats son, whats thy name?
Why I am very near kin unto him.
I think so, but whats thy name?
My name? I have a very pretty name. Isle tell you what my name is, my name is Mouse.
What plain Mouse?
I plain Mouse, without either wlt or guard.
But do you hear sir, I am a very young Mouse, for my tail is scarce grown out yet; look here else.
But I pray you who gave you that name?
Faith Sir, I know not that, but if you would fain know ask my fathers great Horse, for he hath been half a year loneger with my father than I have been.
This seems to be a merry fellow,
I care not if I take him home with me:
Mirth is a comfort to a troubled mind.
A merry man a merry Master makes.
How say thou sirrah, wilt thou dwell with me?
Nay soft sir, two words to a bargain. Pray what Occupation are you?
No Occupation, I live upon my lands.
Your lands? away, yea are no Master for me. Why, do you think that I am so mad to go to seek my living in the lands among the stones, briars, and bushes, and tear my holy day apparel? not I by your leave.
Why, I do not mean thou shalt.
How then?
Why thou shalt be my man and wait on me at Court:
Whats that?
Where the King lies.
What is that King, a man or a woman?
A man as thou art.
As I am: Hark you sir, pray you what kin is he to goodman King of our parish the Church warden?
No kin to him, he is the King of the whole Land.
King of the whole Land! I never saw him.
If thou wilt dwell with me thou shalt see him every day.
Shall I go home again to be torn in pieces with Bears?
No not I, I will go home and put on a clean shirt, and then go drown my self.
Thou shalt not need, if thou wilt dwell with me, thou shalt want nothing.
Shall I not? then here is my hand, Isle dwell with you: And hark ye on sir, now you have entertained me, Isle tell you what I can do, I can keep my tongue from picking and stealing, and my hands from lying and slandering I warrant you as well as ever you had any man in your life.
Now will I to Court with sorrowful heart, rounded with doubts: If Amadine do live, then happy I; yea happy I if Amadine do live.
Now brave Lords, our wars are brought to end,
Our foes the foil, and we in safety rest:
It us behoves to use such clemency in peace,
As valour in the wars;
Tic as great honour to be bountiful at home,
As conquerors in the field.
Therefore my Lords, the more to my content,
Your liking, and our Countries safeguard,
We are disposed in Marriage for to give
Our Daughter unto Lord Segasto here,
Who shall succeed the Diadem after me,
And reign hereafter as I tofore have done,
Your sole and lawful King of Are gone.
What say you Lordlings like you of my advice?
An't please your Majesty, we do not only allow of your Highness pleasure, but also vow faithfully in what we may, to further it.
Thanks good my Lords, if long Adrastus live,
He will it l require your courtesies.
Tremelio, in recompense of thy late valour done,
Take unto thee the Catelone a Prince,
Lately our prisoner taken in the wars:
Be thou his keeper, his ransom shall be thine:
We'll think of it when leisure shall afford:
Mean while do use him well, his father is a King.
Thanks to your Majesty, his usage shall be such,
As he thereat shall have no cause to grutch.
Then march we on to Court, and rest our wearied limbs.
But Colin, I have a tale in secret fit for thee,
When thou shalt hear a watch-word from thy King,
Think then some weighty matter is at hand,
That highly shall concern our state,
Then Colin look thou be not far from me,
And for thy service thou to fore hast done,
Thy truth and valour proved in every point,
I shall with bounties thee enlarge therefore,
So guard us to the Court.
What so my Sovereign doth command me do,
With willing mind I gladly yield consent.
Tell me sirrah, how do you like your weapons?
O very well, very well, they keep my sides warm.
They keep the dogs from your shins well, do they not?
How, keep the dogs from my shins? I would scorn but my shins should keep the dogs from them.
Well Sirrah, leaving idle talk, tell me,
Dost thou know Captain Tremelios chamber?
I very well, it hath a door.
I think so, for so hath every chamber:
But dost thou know the man?
I forsooth, he hath a nose on his face.
Why s:o hath every one.
Thats more then I know.
But dost thou remember the Captain that was here with the King that brought the young Prince prisoner?
O very well.
Go to him, and bid him come unto me:
Tell him I have a matter in secret to impart to him.
I will Master, what's his name?
Why Captain Tremelio.
O, the meal-man; I know him very well,
He brings meal every Saturday; But hark you Master,
Must I bid him come to you, or must you come to him?
No sirrah, he must come to me.
Hark you Master, if he be not at home,
What shall I do then?
Why then leave word with some of his folks.
O Master if there be no body within,
I will leave word with his dog.
Why can his dog speak?
I cannot tell, wherefore doth he keep his chamber else?
To keep out such knaves as thou art.
Nay by Lady then go your self.
You will go sir, will you not?
Yes marry will I O tic come to my head:
And he be not within, Isle bring his chamber to you.
What, will you pluck down the Kings house?
No by Lady, Isle know the price of it first.
Master, it is such a hard name I have forgotten it again:
I pray you tell me his name.
I tell thee Captain Tremelio.
O Captain treble knave, Captain treble knave.
How now sirrah, dost thou call me?
You must come to my Master. Captain treble knave.
My Lord Sagest. did you send for me?
I did Tremelio, Sirrah, about your business.
I marry, whats that, can you tell?
No not well.
Marry then I can, straight to the Kitchin-dresser to John the Cook, and get me a good piece of Beef and Brewis, and then to the Buttery hatch to Thomas the Butler for a Jack of Beer: and there for an hour Isle so belabour my self, and therefore I pray you call me not till you think I have done, I pray you good Master.
Well Sir, away.
This it is, thou know the valour of Segasto.
Spread through all the kingdom of Are gone,
And such as have found triumph and favours,
Never daunted at any time: but now a Shepherd,
Admired in Court for worthiness,
And Segastoes honour laid aside:
My will therefore is this, that thou dost find some means to work the Shepherds death: I know thy strength sufficient to perform my desire, and to love no otherwise then to revenge my injuries.
It is not the frowns of a Shepherd that Tremelio fears:
Therefore account it accomplished what I take in hand.
Thanks good Tremelio, and assure thy self,
What I promise, that I will perform.
Thanks good my Lord: And in good time:
See where he comes; stand by awhile,
And you shall see me put in practise your intended drift.
Have at thee Swain, if that I hit thee right.
Wild Coward, so without cause to strike a man:
Turn Coward, turn: now strike and do thy worst.
Hold Shepherd, hold, spare him, kill him not:
Accursed villain, tell me, what hast thou done?
Ah Tremelio, Trusty Tremelio, I sorrow for thy death,
And since that thou living did prove faithful to Segasto,
So Segasto now living will honour the dead
Corps of Tremelio with revenge.
Blood-thirsty villain, born and bred in merciless murder,
Tell me, how durst thou be so bold,
As once to lay thy hands upon the least of mine?
Assure thy self, thou shalt be used according to the Law.
Segasto cease, these threats are needless,
Accuse me not of murder, that have done nothing
But in mine own defence.
Nay Shepherd, reason not with me,
Isle manifest thy fact unto the King;
Whose doom will be thy death, as thou deserve.
What hoe: Mouse come away.
Why how now? what's the matter?
I thought you would be calling before I had done.
Come help away with my friend.
Why, is he drunk? can he not stand on his feet?
No, he is not drunk, he is slain.
Flain? No by Lady, he is not flain.
He is killed I tell thee.
What do yo use to kill your friends? I will serve you no longer.
I tell thee the Shepherd killed him.
O did he so? But Master, I will have all his apparel if I carry him away.
Why so thou shalt.
Come then I will help: Mass Master I think his mothere sung looby to him, he is so heavy.
Behold the fickle state of man, always mutable, nover at one.
Sometime we feed our fancies with the sweet of our desires:
Sometimes again, we feel the heat of extreme miseries.
Now am I in favour about the Court and Country,
To morrow those favours will turn to frowns.
To day I live revenged on my foe,
To morrow I die, my foe revenged on me.
No passenger this morning? what not one?
A chance that seldom doth befall,
What, not one? Then lie thou there,
And rest thy self till I have further need:
Now Bremo sith thy leisure so affords,
An endless thing, who knows not Bremoes strength,
Who like a King commands within these woods?
The Bear, the Boar dare not abide his sight,
But haste away to save themselves by flight.
The Crystal waters in the bubbling brooks,
When I come by do swiftly slide away,
And claps themselves in closets under banks,
Afraid to look bold Bremo in the face.
The aged Oaks at Bremoes breath do bow,
And all things else are still at my command.
Else what would I?
Rend them in pieces, and pluck them from the earth,
And each way else I would revenge myself.
Why, who comes here? with whom dare I not fight?
Who fights with me and doth not die the death? Not one.
What favour shows this sturdy stick to those
That here within these woods are combatants with me?
Why, death, and nothing else but present death.
With restless rage I wander through these woods,
No creature here, but fears Bremoes force:
Man, woman, child, beast, and bird,
And every thing that doth approach my sight,
Are forced to fall, if Bremo once do frown.
Come, Cudgel come, my partner in my spoils:
For here I see this day it will not be,
But when it falls that I encounter any,
One pat suffices for to work my will.
What, comes not one? then lets be gone,
A time will serve when we shall better speed.
Shepherd, thou staft heard thine accusers,
Murder is laid to thy charge:
What can thou say? thou hast deserved death.
Dread Sovereign, I must needs confess,
I slew this Captain in my own defence,
Not of any malice, but by chance:
But mine accuser hath a further meaning.
Words will not here prevail.
I seek for justice, and justice craves his death.
Shepherd, thine own confession hath condemned thee;
Sirrah, take him away, and do him to execution straight.
So he shall, I warrant him:
But do you hear Master King? he is kin to a Monkey,
His neck is bigger then his head.
Come sirrah, away with him,
And hang him about the middle.
Yes forsooth, I warrant you, come you sirrah:
A, so like a sheep-biter a looks.
Dread Sovereign, and well beloved sir,
On bended knee I crave the life of this condemned Shepherd, which heretofore preserved the life of thy sometime distressed daughter.
Preserved the life of my sometime distressed daughter!
How can that be? I never knew the time
Wherein was thou distressed: I never knew the day
But that I have maintained thy estate,
As best beseemed the daughter of a King.
I never saw the Shepherd until now.
How comes it then that he preserved thy life?
Once walking with Segasto in the woods,
Further then our accustomed manner was,
Right before us down a steep fall hill,
A monstrous ugly Bear did hie him fast
To meet us both: now whether this be true,
I refer it to the credit of Segasto.
Most true an't like your Majesty.
How then?
The Bear being eager to obtain his prey,
Made forward to us with an open mouth,
As if he meant to swallow us both at once:
The sight whereof did make us both to dread;
But specially your daughter Amadine,
Who, for I saw no succour incident
But in Segastoes valour, I grew desperate:
And he most coward-like began to fly.
Left me distressed to be devoured of him,
How say you Segasto, is it not true?
His silence verifies it to be true: what then?
Then I amazed, distressed all alone,
Did hie me fast, to scope that ugly Bear,
But all in vain; for why he reached after me,
And hardly I did oft escape his paws.
Till at the length this Shepherd came,
And brought to me his head.
Come hither boy, lo here it is, which I do present unto your Majesty.
The slaughter of this Bear deserves great fame.
The slaughter of a man deserves great blame.
Indeed occasion oftentimes so falls out.
Tremelio in the wars (O King) preserved thee.
the Shepherd in the woods (O King) preserved me.
Tremelio fought when many men did yield.
So would the Shepherd had he been in field.
So would my master, had he not run away.
Tremelio's force saved thousands from the foe,
The Shepherds force hath many thousand more.
Aye Shipsticks nothing else.
Segasto cease to accuse the Shepherd,
His worthiness deserves a recompense;
All we are bound to do the Shepherd good.
Shepherd, whereas it was my sentence thou should die,
So shall my sentence stand, for thou shalt die.
Thanks to your Magestie.
But soft Segasto, not for this offence
Long moist thou live; and when the Sisters shall decree,
To cut in twain the twisted thread of life,
Then let him die, for this I set him free,
And for thy valour I will honour thee.
Thanks to your Majesty.
Come daughter, let us now depart to honour the worcesterthy valour of the Shepherd, with our rewards.
O Master, hear you, you have made a fresh hand now,
I thought you would beshrow you: what will you do now?
You have lost me a good occupation by this means:
Faith Master now I cannot hang the shepherd,
I pray you let me take pains to hang you,
It is but half an hours exercise.
You are still in your knavery,
But sith I cannot have his life,
I will procure his banishment for ever: Come on sirrah.
Yes forsooth I come. Laugh at him I pray you.
From Amadine, and from her Fathers Court,
With gold and silver and with rich rewards,
Flowing from the banks of gold and treasures:
More may I boast and say: but I
Was never Shepherd in such dignity.
All hail worthy Shepherd.
All rain lousy Shepherd.
Welcome my friends, from whence come you?
The King and Amadine greet thee well,
And after greeting done, bids thee depart the Court;
Shepherd be gone.
Shepherd take Law-legs: fly away Shepherd.
Whose words are these? came these from Amadine?
I, from Amadine.
Aye from Amadine.
Ah luckless fortune, worse then Phaetons tale,
My former bliss is now become my bale.
What, wilt thou poison thy self?
My former heaven is now become my hell.
The worst Ale-house that ever I came in, in all my life.
What shall I do?
Even go hang thy self.
Can Amadine so churlishly command,
To banish the Shepherd from her fathers Court?
What should Shepherds do in the Court?
What should Shepherds do among us;
Have not we Lords enough on us in the Court?
Why, Shepherds are men, and Kings are no more.
Shepherds are men, and masters over their flocks.
That's a lie, who pays them their wages then?
Well, you are always interrupting of me:
But you were best to look to him, lest you hang for him when he is gone.
And you shall hang for company,
For leaving me alone.
Shepherd stand forth and hear my sentence.
Shepherd be gone within three days, in pain of my displeasure,
Shepherd be gone, Shepherd be gone, be gone, be gone, be gone.
Shepherd, Shepherd, Shepherd.
And must I go? and must I needs depart?
Ye goodly Groves, partakers of my songs,
In time before when fortune did not frown,
Pour forth your plaints, and wail awhile with me;
And thou bright Sun, the comfort of my cold,
Hide, hide thy face and leave me comfortless;
Ye wholesome herbs and sweet smelling savours;
Yea each thing else prolonging life of man,
Change, change your wonted course,
That I wanting your aid, in woeful sort may die.
Ariena, if any body ask for me,
Make some excuse till I return.
What and Segasto call?
Do you the like to him, I mean not to stay long.
This voice so sweet my pining spirit revives.
Shepherd well me, tell me how thou dost.
I linger life, yet wish for speedy death.
Shepherd, although thy banishment already he decreed, and all against my will, yet Amadine
Ah Amadine, to hear of banishment is death:
I double death to me: but since I must depart, one thing I crave.
Say on with all my heart.
That in absence either far or near,
You honour me as servant to your name.
Not so.
And why?
I honour thee at Sovereign of my heart.
A Shpeherd and a Sovereign, nothing like.
Yet like enough where there is no dislike,
Yet great dislike, or else no banishment.
Shepherd it is only Segasto that procures thy banishmeant.
Unworthy wights are more in jealousy.
Would God they would free thee from banishment,
Or likewise banish me.
Amen I say, to have your company.
Well Shepherd, sith thou suffer thus for my sake,
With thee in exile also let me live,
On this condition Shepherd thou can love.
No longer love, no longer let me live.
Of late I loved one indeed, but now I love none but onlie thee,
Thanks worthy Princess: I burn likewise,
Yet smother up the blast:
I dare not promise what I may perform.
Well Shepherd, hark what I shall say,
I will return unto my fathers Court,
There for to provide me of much necessaries
As for my journey I shall think most fit.
This being done, I will return to thee;
Do thou therefore appoint the place
Where we may meet
Down in the valley where I slew the Bear,
And there doth grow a fair broad branched beech
That overshades a well, so who comes first,
Let them abide the happy meeting of it both.
How like you this?
I like in well.
Now if you please, you may appoint the time.
Full three hours hence, God willing I will return.
The thanks that Paris gave the Grecian Queen,
The like doth Mucedorus yield.
Then Mucedorus for three hours farewell.
Your departure Lady breeds a privy pain.
It is well Segasto, that thou hast thy will
Should such a Shepherd, such a simple Swain as he,
Eclipse thy credit famous thorough the Court?
No, ply Segasto, ply, let it not in Are gone be said,
A Shepherd hath Segastoes honour won.
What, hoe Master, will you come away?
Will you come hither, I pray you, what is the matter?
Why, is it not past eleven of the clock?
How then sir?
I pray you come away to dinner.
I pray you come hither.
Here's such a do with you, will you never come?
I pray you sir, what news of the message I sent you about?
I tell you all the Messes be on the Table already.
There wants not so much as a mess of Mustard, half an hour ago.
Come sir, your mind is all upon your belly,
You have forgotten what I bid you do.
Faith, I know nothing but you bad me go to breakfast.
Was that all?
Faith I have forgotten it, the very scent of the meat hath made me forget it quite.
You have forgotten the Arrand I bid you do.
What Arrand, an arrant knave, or an arrant whore?
Why thou knave, did I not bid thee banish the Shepherd.
O the Shepherds Bastard.
I tell thee the Shepherds Banishment.
I tell you the Shepherds Bastard shall be well kept,
Isle look to it my self: but I pray you come away to dinner.
Then you will not tell me whether you have banished him or no?
Why I cannot say banishment if you would give me a thousand pounds to say so.
Why you whoreson slave, have you forgotten that I sent you and another to drive away the Shepherd?
What an Ass are you? here's a stir indeed:
Her's Message, Arrant, Banishment, and I cannot tell what.
I pray you sir, shall I know whether you have drove him away?
Faith I think I have, and you will not believe me, ask my staff.
Why can thy staff tell?
Why he was with me too.
Then happy I, that have obtained my will.
And happier I if you would go to dinner.
Come sirrah, follow me.
I warrant you I will not lose an inch of you now you are going to dinner: I promise you I thought seven years before I could get him away.
God grant my long delay procures no harm
For this my tarrying frustrate my pretence:
My Mucedorus surely stays for me,
And thinks me over-long, at length I come,
My present promise to perform;
Ah what a thing is firm unfeigned love!
What is it which true love dares not attempt?
My father he may make, but I must match:
Segasto loves, but Amadine must like
Where likes her best: compulsion is a thrall?
No, no, the hearty choice is all in all.
The Shepherds virtue Amadine esteems.
But what, methinks the Shepherd is not come;
I muse at that, the hour is at hand.
Well here Isle rest till Mucedorus come.
A happy prey; now Bremo feed on flesh:
Dainties Bremo, dainties thy hungry paunch to fill;
Now glut thy greedy guts with lukewarm blood:
Come fight with me, I long to see thee dead.
How can she fight that weapons cannot wield?
What can not fight? then lie thee down and die.
What must I die?
What needs these words? I thirst to suck thy blood.
Yet pity me, and let me live awhile.
No pity I, Isle feed upon thy flesh,
And tear thy body peece-meal joint by joint.
Ah now I want my Shepherds company.
Isle crush thy bones between two Oaken trees.
Hast Shepherd, hast, or else thou come too late.
Isle suck the sweetness from thy marrow-bones.
Ah spare, ah spare to shed my guiltless blood.
With this my Bat I will beat out thy brains;
Down, down I say, prostrate thy self upon the ground.
Then Mucedorus farewell, my hoped joys farewell;
Yea farewell life, and welcome present death.
To thee, O God, I yield my dying ghost.
Now Bremo, play thy part.
How now? what sudden chance is this?
My limbs do tremble, and my sinews shake,
My unweakned Arms have lost their former force:
Ah Bremo, Bremo, what a foil had thou,
That yet at no time was afraid,
To dare the greatest Gods to fight with thee,
And now wants strength for one down driving blow?
Ah how my courage fails when I should strike!
Some new-come spirit abiding in my breast,
Saith, spare her Bremo, spare her, do not kill:
Shall I spare her that never spared any?
To it Bremo, to it; say again:
I cannot wield my weapon in my hand,
Me thinks I should not strike so fair a one:
I think her beauty hath bewitched my force,
Or else with me altered natures course.
Ay woman, wilt thou live in woods with me?
Fain would I live, yet loath to live in woods.
Thou shalt not choose, it shall be as I say,
And therefore follow me.
It was my will an hour ago and more,
As was my promise for to make return;
But other business hindered my pretence.
It is a world to see, when men appoints,
And purposely on certain things decrees,
How many things may hinder his intent:
What one would wish, the same is farthest off,
But yet the appointed time cannot be past,
Nor hath her presence yet prevented me:
Well here Isle stay, and expect her coming.
Some one or other is pursued no doubt.
Perhaps some search for me, tic good to doubt the worst:
Therefore Isle be gone.
Hold him, hold him, hold him: here's, a stir indeed; here came hue after the Crier; &amp; I was set close at mother Nips house,
and there I called for three pots of Ale, as tic the manner of us Courtiers; Now sirrah, I had taken the maidenhead of two of them, and as I was lifting up the third to my mouth, there came, hold him, hold him: now I could not tell whom to catch hold on, but I am sure I caught one, perchance a may be in this pot; Well Isle see, mass I cannot see him yet; well Isle look a little further; mass he is a little slave if he be here: why here is no body; all this is well yet. But if the old Trot should come for her pot, I marry theres the matter: but I care not, Isle face her out, and call her old rusty, dusty, musty, fusty, crusty Firebrand, and worse then all that, and so face her out of her pot: but soft, here she comes.
Come you knave; wheres my pot you knave?
Go look your pot, come not to me for your pot, it were good for you.
Thou least thou knave, thou hast my pot.
You lie and you say it, I your pot? Isle know what Isle say.
What wilt thou say?
But say I have it and thou dare.
Why thou knave, thou hast not only my pot, but my drink unpaid for.
You lie like an old I will not say whore.
Dost thou call me whore? Isle cap thee for my pot.
Cap me and thou dare;
Search me whether I have it or no.
How now sirrah, whats the matter?
O flies Master, flies.
Flies, where are they?
O here Master, all about your face.
Why thou least, I think thou act mad.
Why master I have kilt a dungcart full at the least.
Go to sirrah, leave this idle talk, give ear to me
How, give you one of my ears
Not an you were ten masters.
Why sir, I pray you give ear to my words.
I tell you I will not be made a Curtal for no mans pleasure.
I tell thee attend what I say,
Go thy ways straight and rear the whole town.
How, rear the whole town? even go your self, it is more than I can do: Why, do you think I can rear a town, that can scarce rear a pot of Ale to my head,
I should rear a town, should I not?
Go to the Constable and make a privy search,
For the Shepherd is run away with the Kings daughter.
How? is the Shepherd run away with the Kings daughla, or is the Kings daughter run away with the Shepherd?
I cannot tell, but they are both gone together.
What a fool is she to run away with the Shepherd; why I think I am a little handsomer man then the Shepherd my self; but tell me Master, must I make a privy search, or search in the privy?
Why doest thou think they will be there?
I Cannot tell.
Well then search every where,
Leave no place unsearched for them.
Oh now I am in office: now will I to that old Firebrands house, and will not leave one place unsearched: Nay, Isle to the Ale-stand, and drink so long as I can stand; and when I have done, Isle let out all the rest, to see if he be not hid in the Barrel; and if I find him not there, Isle to the Cupbord, Isle not leave one corner of her house unsearched, in faith ye old Crust, Isle be with you now.
Enough of music, it but adds to torment,
Delights to vexed Spirits are as dates
Set to a sick man, which rather cloy then comfort:
Let me entreat you to entreat no more.
Let your strings sleep, have done there:
Mirth to a soul disturbed, are Embers turned,
Which sudden gleam with molestation,
But sooner lose their sight for it,
Tic gold bestowed upon a Rioter,
Which not relieves but murders him.
Tic a drug given to the healthful,
Which infects, not cures.
How can a Father that hath lost his Son,
A Prince both wise, virtuous, and valiant,
Take pleasure in the idle acts of Time?
No, no, till Mucedorus I shall see again,
All joy is comfortless, all pleasure pain.
Your Son (my Lord) is well.
I prithee speak that thrice.
The Prince your Son is safe.
O where Anselmo? surfeit me with that.
In Are gone, my Liege, and at his parting,
Bound my secrecy,
By his affections love not to disclose it:
But care of him, and pity of your age
Makes my tongue blab what my breast vowed, concealment.
Thou not deceive me,
I ever thought thee what I find thee now,
An upright loyal man.
But what desire, or young-fed humour
Nursed within his brain,
Drew him so privately to Are gone?
A forcing Adamant,
Love mixed with fear and doubtful jealousy,
Whether report gilded a worthless Trunk,
Or Amadine deserved her high extolment.
See our provision be in readiness,
Collect us followers of the comliest hue
For our chief guardians, we will thither wend;
The Crystal eye of Heaven shall not thrice wink,
Nor the green Flood six times his shoulders turn,
Till we salute the Aragonian King.
Music speak loudly now, the season's apt,
For former dolours are in pleasures wrapped.
Now Mucedorus, whither wilt thou go?
Home to thy father to thy native soil,
Or try some long abode within these woods?
Well I will hence depart and hie me home,
What hie me home said I? that may not be:
In Amadine rests my felicity.
Then Mucedorus do as thou did decree,
Attire thee Hermite-like within these Groves:
Walk often to the Beech, and view the Well,
Make settles there, and seat thy self thereon:
And when thou feel thy self to be a thirst,
Then drink a hearty draught to Amadine,
No doubt she thinks on thee,
And will one day come pledge thee at this Well.
Come habit, thou art fit for me:
No Shepherd now, an Hermit must I be:
Methinks this fits me very well;
Now must I learn to bear a walking staff,
And exercise some gravity withal.
Here is through the woods, and through the woods,
To look out a Shepherd, and a stray Kings daughter:
But soft, who have we here? what art thou?
I am an Hermit.
An Emmet, I never saw such a big Emmet in all my life before.
I tell you sir, I am an Hermit,
One that leads a solitary life within these woods.
O I know thee now; thou art he that eats up all the Hips and Haws: we could not have one piece of fat Bacon for thee all this year.
Thou dost mistake me:
But I pray thee tell me, whom dost thou seek in these woods?
What do I seek? for a stray Kings daughter,
Run away with a Shepherd.
A stray Kings daughter, run away with a Shepherd,
Wherefore, can thou tell?
Yes that I can, it is this; my Master and Amadine walking one day abroad, nearer these woods then they were used (about what I cannot tell) but towards them comes running a great Bear. Now my Master plyd the man, and ran away, and Amadine crying after him: now sir, come, me a Shepherd, and he strikes off the Bears head, now whether the Bear were dead before or no I cannot tell, for bring twenty Bears before me, and bind their hands and feet, and Isle kill them all: now ever since Amadine hath been in love with the Shepherd, and for good will she is even run away with the Shepherd.
What manner of man was he? can describe him to me?
Scribe him, ay I warrant you that I can; a was a little, low, broad, tall, narrow, big, well favoured fellow, a jerkin of white cloth, and buttons of the same cloth.
Thou describest him well, but if I chance to see any such, pray you where shall I find you, or whats your name?
My name is called Master Mouse.
O Master Mouse, I pray you what office might you bear in the Court?
Marry sir, I am Rusher of the Stable.
Oh, Usher of the Table.
Nay, I say Rusher, and Isle prove mine Office good: for look you sir, when any comes from under the Sea, or so, and a dog chance to blow his nose backward, then with a whip I give him the good time of the day, and strew Rushes presentlie, therefore I am a Rusher: a high Office I promise ye.
But where shall I find you in the Court?
Why, where it is best being, either in the Kitchen eating, or in the Buttery drinking: but if you come, I will provide for thee a piece of Beef and Brews knuckle deep in fat: pray you take pains, remember Master Mouse.
Ay sir, I warrant I will not forget you.
Ah Amadine, what should become of her?
Whither should thou go so long unknown?
With watch and ward each passage is beset,
So that she cannot long escape unknown.
Doubtless, she hath lost her self within these woods,
And wandering to and fro, she seeks the Well,
Which yet she cannot find, therefore will I seek her out.
Amadine, how like you Bremo and his woods?
As like the woods of Bremoes cruelty:
Though I were dumb and could not answer him,
The beasts themselves would with relenting tears
Bewail thy savage and inhumane deeds.
My love why dost thou murmur to thy self?
Speak louder, for thy Bremo hears thee not.
My Bremo, no, the Shepherd is my Love.
Have I not saved thee from sudden death.
Given thee leave to live that thou might love,
And dost thou whet me on to cruelty?
Come kiss me (sweet) for all my favours past.
I may not Bremo, therefore pardon me.
See how she flies away from me,
I will follow and give attend to her.
Deny my Love? A worm of Beauty,
I will chastise thee: come, come,
Prepare thy head upon the block.
O spare me Bremo, love should limit life.
Not to be made a murderer of himself.
If thou wilt glut thy loving heart with blood,
Encounter with the Lion or the Bear,
And like a Wolf, prey not upon a Lamb.
Why then dost thou rapine at me?
If thou wilt love me, thou shalt be my Queen,
Isle crown thee with a chaplet made of Ivory,
And make the Rose and Lily wait on thee:
Isle rend the burly branches from the Oak,
To shadow thee from burning Sun.
The Trees shall spread themselves where thou dost go,
And as they spread, Isle trace along with thee.
You may, for who bu you?
Thou shalt barfed with Qails and Partridges,
With Black-birds, Larks, Thrushes, and Nightingales.
Thy drink shall be goats-milk, and Crystal water,
Distilling from the Fountains and the clearest Springs:
And all the dainties that the woods afford,
Isle freely give thee to obtain thy love.
You may, for who but you?
The day Isle spend to recreate my love,
With all the pleasures that I can devise:
And in the night Isle be thy bedfellow,
And lovingly embrace thee in my arms.
One may, so may not you.
The Satyrs and the wood-Nymphs shall attend on thee,
And lull thee asleep with music sound,
And in the morning when thou dost awake,
The Lark shall sing good morrow to my Queen,
And whilst he sings Isle kiss mine Amadine.
You may, for who but you?
When thou art up, the wood-lanes shall be strewed
With violets, Cowslips, and sweet Marigolds,
For thee to trample and to tread upon:
And I will teach thee how to kill the Dear,
To chase the Hart, and how to rouse the Roe,
If thou wilt live to love and honour me.
You may for who but you?
Welcome sir, an hour ago I looked for such a guest,
Be merry wench, weel have a frolic feast,
Here's flesh enough for to suffice us both,
Say sirrah, wilt thou fight, or dost thou mean to die?
I want a weapon how can I fight?
Thou want a weapon, why then thou yieldst to die?
I say not so, I do not yield to die.
Thou shalt not choose, I long to see thee dead.
Yet spare him Bremo, spare him.
Away, I say I will not spare him.
Yet give me leave to speak.
Thou shalt not speak.
Yet give him leave to speak for my sake.
Speak on, but be not over-long.
In time of yore, when men-like brutish beasts
Did lead their lives in loathsome Cells and Woods,
And wholly gave themselves to witless will:
A rude unruly rout, then man to man became
A present prey; then might prevailed,
The weakest went to walls;
Right was unknown, for wrong was all in all.
As men thus lived in their great outrage,
Behold one Orpheus came (as Poets tell)
And them from rudeness unto reason brought,
Who led by reason soon forsook the woods,
In stead of Caves they built them Castles strong,
Cities and Towns were founded by them then:
Glad were they, they found such ease,
And in the end they grew to perfect Amity.
Weighing their former wickedness,
They termed the time wherein they lived then,
A golden age, a good golden age.
New Bremo (for so heard I thee called)
If men which lived tofore as thou dost now,
Wild in woods, addicted all to spoil,
Returned were by worthy Orpheus means:
Let me (like Orpheus) cause thee to return
From murder, blood-shed, and like cruelties.
What should we fight before we have a cause?
No, lets live and love together faithfully:
Isle fight for thee.
Fight for me, or die: or fight or else thou die.
Hold Bremo, hold.
Away I say, thou trouble me.
You promised me to make me Queen.
I did, I mean no less.
You promised that I should have my will.
I did, I mean no less.
Then save the Hermits life, for he may save us both.
At thy request Isle save him, but never any after him
Say Hermit, what can thou do?
Isle wait on thee, sometime upon thy Queen,
Such service shalt thou shortly have as Bremo never had.
Come sirs, what shall I never have you find out Amadine and the Shepherd?
I have been thorough the woods, and thorough the woods, and could see nothing but an Emmet.
Why I see a thousand Emmets, thou meanest a little one.
Nay, that Emmet that I saw was bigger then thou art.
Bigger then I? what a fool have you to your man?
I pray you Master turn him away.
But dost thou hear, was he not a man?
I think he was, for he said he did lead a salt-sellers life round about the woods.
Thou would say a solitary life about the wood.
I think it was indeed.
I thought what a fool thou art.
Thou art a wise man: why he did nothing but sleep since he went.
But tell me Mouse, how did he go?
In a white Gown, and a white hat on his head,
And a staff in his hand.
I thought so, he was an Hermit, that walked a solitary life in the woods.
Well, get you to dinner, and after, never leave seeking till you bring some news of them, or Isle hang you both.
How now Rumbelo, what shall we do now?
Faith Isle whom to dinner, and afterwards to sleep.
Why then thou wilt be hanged.
Faith I care not, for I know I shall never find them:
Well, Isle once more abroad; and if I cannot find them,
Isle never come home again.
I tell thee what Rumbelo, thou shalt go in at one end of the wood, and I at the other, and we will both meet together in the midst.
Content, lets away to dinner.
Unknown to any, here within these woods,
With bloody Bremo do I lead my life;
The Monster he doth murder all he meets,
He spares none, and none doth him escape:
Who would continue, who but only I,
In such a cruel cut-throats company?
Yet Amadine is there, how can I choose?
Ah silly soul, how oftentimes she sits,
And sighs, and calls, Come Shepherd, come:
Sweet Mucedorus come set me free,
When Mucedorus (Peasant) stands her by;
But here she comes: What news fair Lady,
As you walk these woods?
Ah Hermit, none but bad,
And such as thou know.
How do you like your Bremo and his woods?
Not my Bremo, nor his Bremo woods.
And why not yours? methinks he loves you well.
I like not him, his love to me is nothing worth.
Lady, in this methinks you offer wrong,
To hate the man that ever loves you best.
Ah Hermit, I take no pleasure in his love,
Neither doth Bremo like me best.
Pardon my boldness, fair Lady, sith we both
May safely talk now out of Bremoes sight,
Unfold to me, if you please, the full discourse,
How, when, and why you came into these woods,
And fell into this bloody butchers hands.
Hermit I will: Of late a worthy Shepherd I did love.
A Shepherd (Lady) sure a man unfit to match with you.
Hermit, this is true: and when we had
Stay there, the wild man comes,
Refer the rest until another time.
What secret tale is this? what whispering have we here?
Villain, I charge thee tell thy tale again.
If needs I must, lo here it is again.
When as we both had lost the sight of thee,
It grieved us both, but specially thy Queen,
Who in thy absence evers fears the worst,
Lest some mischance befall your Royal Grace.
Shall my sweet Bremo wander through the wood,
Toil to and fro, for to redress my want,
Hazard his life, and all to cherish me?
I like not this quoth she:
And thereupon crave to know of me,
If I could teach her handle weapons well.
My answer was, I had small skill therein:
But gladsome (mighty King) to learn of thee:
And this was all.
Wast so? none can mislike of this:
Isle teach you both to fight, but first my Queen begin,
Here take this weapon, see how thou can use it.
This is too big, I cannot wield it in mine arm.
Is it so? we'll have a knotty Crab-tree staff for thee;
But sirrah, tell me, what says?
With all my heart I willing am to learn.
Then take my staff and see how thou can wield it.
First teach me to how hold it in mine hand.
Thou hold it well; look how he doth,
Thou may the sooner learn.
Next tell how, and when it is best to strike.
It is best to strike when time doth serve,
Tic best to lose no time.
Then now or never it is time to strike.
And when thou strike, be sure to hit the head.
The head?
The very head.
Then have at thine.
So, lie there and die, a death (no doubt) according to desert,
Or else a worse, as thou deserve worse.
It glads my heart this Tyrants death to see.
Now Lady it remains in you
To end the tale you lately had begun,
Being interrupted by this wicked wight:
You said you loved a Shepherd.
I, so I do, and none but only him:
And will do still as long as life shall last.
But tell me Lady, sith I set you free,
What course of life do you intend to take?
I will disguised wander thorough the world,
Till I have found him out.
How if you find your Shepherd in these woods?
Ah! none so happy then as Amadine.
In tract of time a man may alter much:
Say Lady, do you know your Shepherd well?
My Mucedorus, hath he set me free?
He hath set thee free.
And lived so long unknown to Amadine?
Ay that's a question whereof you may not be resolved:
You know that I am banished from the Court,
I know likewise each passage is beset,
So that we cannot long escape unknown,
Therefore my will is this, that we return,
Right thorough the thickets to the wild mans Cave,
And there a while live on his provision,
Until the search and narrow watch be past:
This is my council, and I like it best.
I think the very same.
Come let's be gone.
Nay soft sir, are you here? abot on you
I was like to be hanged for not finding of you:
We would borrow a certain stray Kings daughter of you,
A wench, a wench sir, we would have.
A wench of me? Isle make thee eat my sword.
O Lord, nay, and you are so lusty, Isle call a cooling-card for you: O Master, Master, come away quickly.
What's the matter?
Look, Amadine and the Shepherd O brave.
What minion, have I found you out?
Nay that's a lye, I found her out my self.
Thou gadding huswife, what cause had thou
To gad abroad?
When as thou know our wedding day so nigh?
Not so Segasto, no such thing in hand:
Show your assurance, then Isle answer you.
Thy fathers promise my assurance is.
But what he promised he hath not performed.
It rests in thee for to perform the same.
Not I.
And why?
So is my will, and therefore even no.
Master with a none, none so.
Ah wicked villain, art thou here?
What need these words? weigh them not.
We weigh them not, proud Shepherd I scorn thy company.
Weel not have a corner of thy company.
I scorn not thee, nor yet the least of thine.
That's a lie, a would have kilt me with his pugs-nando.
This stoutness Amadine contents me not.
Then seek another that may you better please.
Well Amadine it only rests in thee,
Without delay to make thy choice of three:
There stands Segasto, a second here,
There stands the third: now make thy choice.
A Lord at the least I am.
My choice is made, for I will none but thee.
A worthy mate (no doubt) for such a wife.
And Amadine, why wilt thou none but me?
I cannot keep thee as thy father did;
I have no Lands for to maintain thy state:
Moreover, if thou mean to be my wife,
Commonly this must be thy use,
To bed at midnight, up at four,
Drudge all day, and trudge from place to place,
Whereby our daily victual for to win;
And last of all, which is the worst of all,
No Princess then, but a plain Shepherds wife.
Then God gee you good morrow goody Shepherd.
It shall not need if Amadine do live,
Thou shalt be crowned King of Are gone.
O Master laugh, when he is a King, Isle be a Queen.
Then know that which neretofore was known:
I am no Shepherd, no Aragonion I,
But born of Royal blood: my Father's of Valentia King,
My Mother Queen; who for thy sacred sake
Took this hard task in hand.
Ah how I joy my fortune is so good.
Well now I see Segasto shall not speed,
But Mucedorus, I as much do joy
To see thee here within our Court of Are gone,
As if a kingdom had befallen me this time:
I with my heart surrender her to thee.
And look what Right to Amadine I have.
What barns door, and born where my Father was Constable? a bots on thee, how dost thou?
Thanks Segasto, but you leveld at the Crown.
Master, bear this and bear all.
Why so sirrah?
He says you take a goose by the Crown.
Go too sirrah; away, post you to the King,
Whose heart is fraught with careful doubts,
Glad him up, and tell him these good news,
And we will follow as fast as we may.
I go Master, I run Master.
Break heart, and end my pallid woes,
My Amadine, the comfort of my life;
How can I joy except she were in sight?
Her absence breeds great sorrow to my soul,
And with a thunder breaks my heart in twain.
Forbear those passions gentle King,
And you shall see twill turn unto the best,
And bring your soul to quiet and to joy.
Such joy as death, I do assure me that,
And nought but death, except of her I hear,
And that with speed, I cannot sigh thus long:
But what a tumult do I hear within?
I hear a noise of over-passing joy
Within the Court: my Lord be of good comfort,
And here comes one in hast.
A King, a King.
Why how now sirrah, what's the matter?
O it is news for a King, tic worth money.
Why sirrah, thou shalt have silver and gold if it be good.
O it is good, it is good Amadine.
O what of her? tell me, and I will make thee a knight.
How a Spright, no by Lady, I will not be a Spright.
Master get you away, if I be a Spright, I shall be so lean
I shall make you all afraid.
Then (Sot) the King means to make thee a Gentleman.
Why I shall want parrell.
Thou shalt want for nothing.
Then stand away, strike up thy self, here they come.
My gracious Father, pardon thy disloyal daughter.
What, do mine eyes behold my daughter Amadine?
Rise up daughter, and let these embracing arms
Show some token of thy Fathers joy,
Which ever since thy departure hath languished in sorrow.
Dear Father, never were your sorrows
Greater than my griefs:
Never you so desolate as I comfortless:
Yet nevertheless knowing my self
To be the cause of both, on bended knees
I humbly crave your pardon.
Isle pardon thee (dear daughter) but as for him.
Ay Father, what of him?
As sure as I am King, and wear the Crown,
Isle be revenged on that accursed wretch.
Yet worthy Prince, work not thy will in wrath, show favour.
I, such favour as thou deserve.
I do deserve the daughter of a King.
Oh impudent! A Shepherd and so insolent.
No Shepherd I, but a worthy Prince.
In fair conceit, not princely born.
Yes Princely born, my Father is a King,
My Mother a Queen, and of Valentia both.
What Mucedorus, welcome to our Court,
What cause had thou to come to me disguised?
No cause to fear, I caused no offence;
But this, desiring thy daughters virtues for to see,
Disguised my self from out my Fathers Court,
Unknown to any in secret I did rest,
And passed many troubles near to death:
So hath your daughter my partaker been.
As you shall know hereafter more at large:
Desiring you, you will give her to me,
Even as mine own, and Sovereign of my life,
Then shall I think my travels all well spent.
With all my heart, but this,
Segasto claims my promise made tofore,
That he should have her as his only Wife,
Before my Council when he came from war.
Segasto, may I crave thee let it pass,
And give Amadine as Wife to Mucedorus?
With all my heart, were it a far greater thing,
And what I may to furnish up their rites,
With pleasing sports and pastimes you shall see.
Thanks good Segasto, I will think of this.
Thanks good my Lord, and whilst I live,
Account of me in what I can or may.
Good Segasto, these great courtesies
Shall not be forgot.
Why hark you Master, bones what have you done?
What, given away the wench you made me take such pains for? You are wise indeed. Mass and I had known of that, I would have had her my self: faith Master now we may go to breakfast with a wood-cock-pie.
Go too sirrah you were best to leave this knavery.
Come on my Lords, lets now to Court,
Where we may finish up the joyfullest day
That ever hoped to a distressed King:
Were but thy Father the Valentia Lord,
Present in view of this combined knot.
What shout was that?
My Lord the great alentia King,
Newly arrived, entreats your presence.
My Father?
Prepared welcomes give him entertainment;
A happier Planet never reigned then that
Which governs at this hour.
Rise honour of my age, food to my rest:
Condemn not (mighty King of Are gone)
My rude behaviour, so compelled by nature,
That manners stood unknowledged.
What we have to recite would tedious prove
By declaration, therefore in and feast,
To morrow the performance shall explain
What words conceal: till then Drums speak, Bells ring
Give plausive welcomes to our brother King.
How now Envy; what blush thou already?
Peep forth, hide not thy head with shame,
But with courage praise a women's deeds;
Thy threats were vain, thou coldest do me no hurt,
Although thou seemd'st to cross me with despite,
I overwhelmed and turned upside down thy blocks,
And made thy self to stumble at the same.
Though stumbled, yet not over-thrown,
Thou can not draw my head to mildness:
Yet must I needs confess thou hast done well,
And plaid thy part with mirth and pleasant glee:
Say all this; yet can thou not conquer me,
Although this time thou hast got,
Yet not the conquest neither.
A double revenge another time Isle have.
Envy spit thy gall;
Plot, work, contrive, create new fallacies,
Teem from thy womb each minute a black Traitor,
Whose blood and thoughts have twins conception:
Study to act deeds yet unchronicled,
Cast native monsters in the moulds of men;
Case vicious devils under sancted robes;
Vnhasp the wicket where all perjuries roost,
And swarm this ball with treasons, do thy worst,
Thou can not (hell-hound) cross my steer too night,
Nor blind that glory where I wish delight.
I can, I will.
Nefarious Hag begin,
And let us tug till one the mastery win.
Comedy, thou art a shallow Goose,
Isle overthrow thee in thine own intent,
And make thy fall my Comic merriment.
Thy policy wants gravity, thou art too weak;
Speak friend, as how?
Why thus,
From my foul study will I hoist a wretch,
A lean and hungry meager Canibal,
whose jaws swell to his eyes with chewing malice;
And him Isle make a Poet.
Whats that to the purpose?
This scrambling Raven with his needy beard,
Will I whet on to write a Comedy;
Wherein shall be composed dark sentences,
Pleasing to factious brains;
And every otherwhere place me a Jest,
Whose high abuse shall more torment then blows.
Then I my self (quicker then lightning)
Will fly me to the puissant Magistrate,
And waiting with a trencher at his back,
In midst of jollity rehearse those gals
(With some additions) so lately vented in your Theater;
He on this cannot but make complaint
To our great danger, or at least restraint.
Ha, ha, ha, I laugh to hear thy folly:
This is a trap for boys, not men, nor such,
Especially deceitful in their doings,
Whose staid discretion rules their purposes:
I and my faction do eschew those vices:
But see, O see, the weary Sun for rest,
Hath lain his golden compass to the West,
Where he perpetual bide, and ever shine,
As Davits off-spring in his happy Clime.
Stoop Envy, stoop, bow to the earth with me,
Lets beg our pardon on our bended knee.
My power hath lost her might, Envies date's expired.
And I amazed am.
Glorious and wise Arch-Caesar on this earth,
At whose appearance Envie's stricken dumb,
And all bad things cease operation:
Vouchsafe to pardon our unwilling error,
So late presented to your gracious view,
And weel endeavour with excess of pain,
To please your senses in a choicer strain.
Thus we commit you to the arms of night,
Whose spangled carcase would for your delight,
Strive to excel the day: be blessed then,
Who other wishes, let him never speak.
Amen.
To Fame and Honour we commend your rest,
Live still more happy, every hour more blessed.

HE is indeed a pretty Gentleman.
How well his dancing did become him!
He had a very handsome and unaffected way.
His Discourse too (me thinks) I did extremely fancy, it was not too much starched with Formality, nor yet rudely loose.
He was though in my mind somewhat too full of his Complemints.
Yet they were still so fitted to, and grounded on what was said, that he cannot but have a sudden and quick wit.
He carried indeed the whole Entertainment through with an exceeding grace.
Some would have spent five times as much, yet forced our good natures in the end to have laughed at it. Prithee what is he?
Why do you not know, child of ignorance?
You know I came to the Town but yesterday.
O it is true: And I pray you how do a  our friends in Sirrey? My Cozen Norris? and Mrs. Nonesuch.
They all desire to be remembered; but
How did my Cozen like the Stuff I bought her for her Gown?
Very well. But prithee
I did the best I could to please her fancy.
But what was that we were a talking of? O, of the Gentleman; what is he?
Why he i one that lives here about the Town of a fair Estate, his name is Welbred, he has now for some while been a servant of your Cozens.
Me thought he applied himself much to her. Dot think she ere will love him?
Love him? How can she otherwise choose? Thre is not a La twix Lud-gate-hill and Westminster but is ready to run mad for him; at the first ight he smites and kis, where ever he comes, there's none that can withstand him.
But yet me thinks But rethee let us talk no more of him. 
Stay, here is your Cozen: Prithee what Girl is that wih her?
It is a friends Daughter of mine in the Country, that goes to School here in London; she came up with me.
Affection! Where hast thou been? I have been looking for thee all over the house.
I your Affection, and you keep things so close from me!
What things I pray?
You need not make so strange, for I know all: there is a Lad, they say, that smites and kills where ever he comes, and you are she in whom he intends to finish all his Conquests.
Smite! and kill! Where ever he comes! Why, I hope, it is ot the old bald fellow with the Sith on his neck, old Monsieur Time? Smite, and kill! Strange, terrible words! What meanest thou?
I mean, he makes them talk or dream of him for a week, or so, or perhaps sigh or whine a little.
Hold there, as for talking or dreaming I am for you, but do you think I ever shall sigh for him? I know whom you mean.
Why not?
Not I, as I live.
Spoke she but true!
And yet the man deserves well, as men now are. He is (I must confess) a handsome sprightful youth, well qualified in most things that become a Gentleman: and since it is my friends desire that I should marry, he is one (I think) I should not be ashamed in company to own for a Husband.
O my unhappy fortune!
The man I don't dislike, it is possible I might stay for a worse; and as possible, if I did stay, I might have a better, for I see nothing in him in which I could place my happiness.
No Bu how come we to talk of this Gentleman again?
Believe me, thou love him with a pretty indifferent love.
Her Love was certainly articled and agreed on by the old man her father. But let us find somewhat else to entertain the time withal. And now I think of it, what was that Gentlewoman who was there last night in the Sky coloured Satin Gown?
O she is one of the great wits of the Town.
I thought so, yet Mr. Welbred put her shrewdly to it.
Her mind runs on nothing but Welbred, I think.
They say that thou too (Affection) goosed for a kind of Country wit, what ever thou ail to be thus sober here.
Sitting up so late last night hath somewhat disordered me, I confess.
But as thou hope to be married under thirty, think not of it.
Why, I pray? for that is somewhat a terrible Conjuration.
Why? A female wit is a strange prodigious kind of thing, it frights off all that have no wit, and they that have will never come on, except it be for an Afternoon or so, to exercise their tongues. I have been out of conceit with it ever since I heard a Gentleman say, that he was going to a Lady that I know, a reputed wit, to prepare him for a Visit to his Mistress. Fie upon it, a thing fit for nothing, but to make one a common courting stock. I hate the very thought of it.
Well then, if we must not think on them that have wit, let us think on them that have none: and first, how did you like the Gentleman that was there last night with the black curled hair:
With the black curled hair?
O, I know whom she means, it was a friend of that same Gentlewomans, she was here with him this morning to invite me to such another business to night. But why, I pray, dost thou take him to have no wit? Doth he pay all the Reckonings where ever he comes? Will he drink deep with a Lad that will keep a brace of Geldings and a Lacquay out of twenty pound a year? A damme Captain, or an Oxford Majo, and then game with them?
No, I dare pass my word for him.
Why, these are the only modern fools.
Well, I cannot tell what you call a fool, (I must confess) I am a little too young to be his Godmother, but yet me thinks, a dull and stupid thing (as I conceive him to be) should have a name.
I am sure if he had had any thing in him, there was a Lady gave him a fair opportunity to show it.
Mr. Welbred would have paid her home.
I was a great while in doubt whether he could speak or no.
Well, I cannot tell,for ought I know, he might serve with a good Jointure to boot; for my part, I saw him do nothing much absurd. And had you been here to day, you would have thought his silence last night, to have been more out of choice then any thing else.
Really Cozen, there was a rare Gentleman in the slashed doublet, and a buttoned Cap, me thought he talked incomparably.
Whom doth she mean?
Mr. Lagul certainly
Alas poor soul!
Well, I must be going.
Nay, prithee stay a little longer.
No, I have appointed to meet one,
Who  Mr. Hadland, I'll warrant you.
It is no matter for that.
Well, I hope when you come to lye at this end of the Town again, we shall more enjoy your company. 
O Mrs. Pate.
My Cozen too is certainly in love with him, for I have obeserved her mind all this day strangely musing, although sometimes it be disguised with some forced flashes of mirth: what ever is talked of, her thoughts still run on him, and then she will recall her self, not thinking that affected hiding shows what else would ne'er be marked. It is strange to see how generally this Gentleman doth take: For my part, as I see not any thing in him that I much mislike, so truly nought that I admire: He has (I must confess) some graceful and becomeing parts and qualities, a handsome way in talk; yet when I mark it seriously, me thinks it is as curious Pictures, which (although they make a pleasing show, yet) for the most part are drawn on course and ordinary matter. I needs must say, he has this happiness, that if he excel in ought, it is in things of that familiar nature, that each place and company he comes in, afford him opportunity to show it. And this certainly is the only thing that makes him make a greater blaze then some of far more worth, whose eminence lying in that which is more choice, cannot so frequently discover it self, nor is their value prostituted unto every eye; but they, as great Bells, who are not easily nor on all slight occasions raised, yet being up, will far out sound any of these tinkling ting-tang blades.Would heaven a lot me but such a one to spend my time withal, it would be what I most desire; but yet I think I shall scarce run that odious fortune of a stale Maid in expecttion of such a blessing. 
Mr. Welbred is come (forsooth) and desires to speak to you.
Carry him into the Dining Room, and tell him I will wait upon him presently. 
Stay, He will now set hard upon me, what shall I do? Yield? No, me thinks my fancy at this time doth not prompt me to it; I will once more put him off, if handsomely I can. 
He will not out of my mind, but doth over rule my thoughts and force them to desires vain and impossible: I impossible, for h must needs fix on her, she is a Lady so without exception, of so fair a Fortune and such exquisite parts improved unto the height. He certainly then is hers; me thinks the very thought of that should be enough to master these desires; for usually Objects, though ne'er so pleasing, if not probable, scarce stir the mind; for since we all are rational, it were absurd our wills should act in vain. But on the contrary, when things with ease may be attained, we never give over until we are arrived at the utmost of our wishes. Thus nothing is more ordinary then for my Lady to love her Gentleman, or Mrs. Anne her fathers man. But if a Country Clown coming up hither, and seeking for his Lawyer in Greys Inn, should step into the Walks, and there should chance to spy some Master-piece of Nature, some famed Beautie, that for a time hath born the name, he would stand amazed, perhaps wish that his Ione were such, but farther would not be stirred, impossibility would stop more bold desires, and quench those sparks that else would turn to fires. But I without the remedy of hope, even in despair, begin a love that promises nought but grief and endless tears. But here he comes with my Cozen, I will stand and hear what they say. 
Come sweet Lady be no longer cruel, it is fit for vulgar common beauties to enhance the price of their Enjoyment by a long denyal; such Art were vain in you, and desperate in me, since I already am wound up unto the highest, and higher cannot go but break.
Must I answer to all this presently? that me thinks would bee the greatest inequality in the world; in all reason certainly I should have as much time as you had to study it.
Study it? He that is inspired doth not so little deliberate; I speak my very thoughts, on you my mind doth naturally run, nor can it varye, for Nature that hath in you raised Beauty to its highest pitch, outdone her own Idea's, hath thereby made you Commandress of my soul, and all its passions and affects to wait on none but you; therefore seeing you have the power, O do no longer tyrannize.
Why, what now would you have me say?
What would I have you say? Can that be a question? Could your breath create me owner of the world, could I have diversity of woulds? Alas my thoughts are long since fixed on you, and my desires forgot all other Objects but your self.
My self? then that is it you would have.
O God,Would have? I, above
I am lost, undone, undone:
Nay, pray now let me go, for you have me not yet, I must first chide you a little for this kind of language. What things do you think us women to be? Or rather, what would you have us our selves to fancy? For could I, me thinks, bu look into the breast of some fond silly Gole, and see what thoughts she entertains, by that time such a blade as you hath told her some such stories, that she gives Beauty being, and other faces to be accounted of as they partake of hers; that she can smite, wound, kill, as if the fate of all mankind did hang upon her will, and twenty such things more, which if the poor thing have but wit enough to uderstand, she is (without mercy) ruein'd, lost, undone.
Why I pray, Lady? for this is somewhat strange.
I'll warrant you I have a reason for what I say; for fist, she thinks her self somewhat (though what she cannot tell) that hath a just quarrel to Fate, that she can have nought but so poor a thing as man her mate; she fancies not this mean, she fancies not anotheirs Discourse, she hates this mans breeding, she hates another face, and for that coloured hair she refuses a thousand pounds a year. Thus she continues for some years, until at the last, about some twenty nine, she doth begin to understand herself. But now the tide of Suitors and her beauty being abed, she stands a Fare for the next that comes; and in all haste she makes some desperate match, proves some old mans Nurse; perchance not so well, but Will her fathers man, her Taylor, or some Reformado Captain must serve her turn; or else (if she have any spirit) in a melancholy pet, she vows a Virgin life, and for his sake that first deceived her, turns man-hater. Come, come, in faith Sir you are to blame, were I now some kind of Lass, forty to one but that I were merely cozened of a good Husband.
Did one ever see such a plaguy Wench as this?  Not at all, Madam, are we to be blamed for what we are forced unto, such high flown speeches are no more then what all will challenge, Epithets not of the fair, but woman, mere Titles due by custom and long use, nor can they be denied without breach of Civility: Although I must confess sometimes, I give them with as much regret as when I call some base poor spirited thing Right Honourable.
Truly, Sir, in my mind, a very ingenuous confession.
She were as fond that would believe them, as if she should give credit to her Mercer; meet words of course, a tone the tongue must run in for fashions sake.
Say you so? I have then so little hope to make you see your fault, that I will spend no more time about it. Your servant Sir, I must be going a little way. 
Nay dear Lady, I had as good part from my better Angel.
What? these are your words of course? Pray let me go.
Nay, but in earnest Lady, you are the only party of all the world, in whose enjoyment I could think all happiness confined.
She were as fond that would believe.
Slid, what shall I do now? Believe, do you say Lady? O could you but look into my thoughts: the tortured wretch speaks not a truth more credible; the latest breath of dying men is not so sincere as what I say. Believe me? it would question your Discretion (Madam) to do otherwise; it cannot but be so in nature; it is as impossible for you not to cause these passions in me, as for fire not to burn a matter combustible.
Language due by custom and long use.
Sfoot, what shall I do? she will outwit me this way, I must try another. 
Well Mrs. Crisis, come, the truth of it is, I love thee; thou art handsome enough in conscience; &amp; hast a little too much wit for a wife; but I don't doubt but I should rule it well enough: wherefore prithee keep no more fooling, but let the Parson be doing.
Well Sir, I will be as plain as you, it is possible you may love me, although the language you have chosen to express your love in, hath not (in my mind) a little prejudiced it. For my part, I do hate none living, nor will I forswear to marry you; but I must needs say, I am not yet quite resolved on it, in things of such consequence I cannot too much consider. Pray let this for this time suffice.
Well then, if it must, I will leave you to consider until anon. You will go, to Hide Park as you promised?
I shall be ready to wait upon you.
In the mean time, let this make you think of me.
Nay, Mr. Welbred.
It is but a trifle. 
As when a close besieged Town, opening a secret Sally Port to receive some scouting Spies, in rushes the pursuing enemy, and they with their Intelligence receive their ruin: So I, through my too inquisitive ear have let in that which cuts me to the heart. O Welbred! did I but know thee to be made miserable? Or should I have been more wretched in not knowing thee? It is impossible she should withstand a fresh assault; this Journey to Hide Park will end the business, and begin my wo. But shall I like some neglected wretch, left on an unknown shore, only look and stare after my happiness, that with full gale is flying from me? Can there be nothing done, but to prevent this present threatening mischief? O what? What shall I do?
Stay,that would go nigh to do it, if not, it will however be a handsome way to discover my affection, which custom hath made (in me) immodesty to do.it will be an odd kind of thing though; It is no matter, even nature bids us shun a present danger, though we future hazards run. 
What (Madam) is it a Massacre resolved, is killing one by one grown tedious sport?
Did ever poor Sir Iohn think thus to be abused?
Really Sir, it pleases you to speak far beyond my deserts.
O God, Madam, your Deserts are far transcending whatsoever I can say, Divinity inhabits in your face, and your cheeks contain the Elixir of all perfection.
I am confident Sir, it pleases you to say so.
Madam, I should esteem my self incomparably felicitous, if you would vouchsafe to honour me this Afternoon with your company to Hide Park, and grace my Coach with your transcendent beauty.
Really my company will be no honour, but rather disgrace you.
I presume not so (Madam) for your Beauty doth anihilait is all others.
Hark, Anihilatize, me thinks it is a pretty word.
It is a great deal of pity it should signify nothing.
For by this fair hand, Madam
He is almost spent, I know by his beginning to toy with her, I will go and relieve him. 
Monsieur Lagul, your servant; What? making new Conquests? Have you no pity on our Sex? If you go on thus, we shall look on you as on some common threatening mischief that will destroy us all.
It is my eternal felicity Madam,But I presume.
You do indeed, to forget your old friends; What was the matter, I pray, we did not see you in the Country according to your promise?
Really, Madam, I did ruminate in my thoughts to kiss your hands, but fortune was not so propitious to me as to favour me with that felicity.
It favoured her I am sure. 
Why what was the matter?
I must confess (Madam) there hath an accident or two falllen out of late, that hath taken me up, and made me extremely unclevile in this nature unto all my friends; I shall certainly be weary of these Duels in the end, if it be but for this cause.
So, now he is in. 
Then I see men sometimes feel your wounds as well as we. But I pray beware left in the end we may all rue some unlucky thrust.
These Duels (Madam) I must confess, are businesses of danger enough; but that is a thing which he that values his honour and reputation, must not entertain a thought of. But yet at the first, I must needs say, they seemed somewhat strange; but now me thinks they are nothing, I look upon them as a mere Exercise; I cannot scarce eat a Dinner with a good appetite until I have fought one: They clearly save me forty shillings a Month unto my Fencing Master.
Were I but now disposed to be merry. 
But I pray let me persuade you out of them.
It is impossible (Madam); for he that stands upon his punctillio's, must needs run into them every day. I have fought two this wek already, tomorrow I am to fight a third, and I look for a Challenge to another every minute.
Why, for Gods sake Sir?
I was yesterday (Madam) in the Afternoon at the Devil Tavern, there happened to be some words exchanged between a Gentleman and my self; as I remember, he called me, Empty prating Coxcomb: Upon that (Madam) by the rule of Honour I could do no less then give him the Lye; I expected then that he would have singled me out, and have whispered somewhat in my ear, but the ignorant fellow nothing but flung a quart pot at my head, and kicked me down the stairs.
Why, was not that enough?
No (Madam) the affront doth yet lye clearly on his side, it was so resolved afterwards at the Golden-fleece.
Me thinks that is somewhat strange.
Not at all, Madam, for the Lye is the highest affront that can be given, and so is the French mode, for once Franois de Valois, the French King, upon an affront that Charles the Emperor put upon him, sent him a Challenge, in which he gave him the Lye; the Emperor refusing to answer him, the French ever since in Complement to their King have esteemed it the highest affront that can possibly be put upon a man.
But how came you off in the other Duels you said you have fought?
Very well, Madam: for the first it was a business of nothing;
for at the very first pas I disarmed my Adversary, and I not seeking afla blood, but the Vindication of my Honour, was content to receive reasonable satisfaction, the acknowledgment that he had done me wrong, and so forth. 
Who is that at the door?
But the other was like to have proved transcendently more periculous: for (Madam) I stood upon my Guard thus. 
Bless us!
This (Madam) is Prince Ruperts Guard, He came ferociously upon me with a Passado or two, which I putting off, run at him just thus, as my Lord Shandos killed Compton. 
Villain! Draw upon a woman!
Hold Sir, he is but in jest.
In jest!
He knows it is against the Mode to make a quarrel among Ladies.
The Mode, you Coxcomb! 
Well let him go, for he is an Ass I'm sure, and so he ever will be, therefore it were a folly for to trouble my self any more with him.
He can fight I see, although he cannot talk. 
Now, Sir, I am not altogether of your mind; though the Gentleman (I must confess) doth appear absurd enough, my Cozen and I though, are not altogether out of hopes in time to make him a little more understand himself, somewhat I think we have done already.
It is impossible, Lady, except you should alter the Fabric of his mind, unbend its appetite, or give it new desires; for as long as the divine soul creating breath, is clad with different disposing matter, and cast in several moulds, there will be Wise and Fools.
Sir, if he were a natural Fool, I should yield much to your opinion, but in my mind his chiefest unhappiness is, only to have set his mind on some odd fancies, which if we could persuade him out of, he would be (at the least) not ridiculous.
Lady, it is likely you may know him a great deal better then I, for, I must confess, althoughgh he be one that I see almost every day in the streets, yet of all men living I have the least acquaintance with him: wherefore (Madam) if you please to make my knowledge to be so far indebted to you, as to let me a little more fully understand him, I shall take it as no mean favour.
That Sir would be a very tedious task.
A tedious task! Why, what have you to do, I wonder?
That question I think may not be unnecessarily put to a
Lady that is dressed, and hath dined, as I suppose you have.
Well Cozen, if you will help me, I will venture on it then. And to begin, Sir this Gentleman (as I have said) although he doth appear ridiculous enough, yet in my opinion not so much by nature as unlucky chance: for as when some common metals will serve for good substantial use, yet if you strive to force them to more curious shapes, they only such rude draughts will take as will render them more deformed: So this Gentleman (had his courser soul but had the luck to have acted in some downright way, to have managed some plodding Trade) he might by long experience have understood himself within his Sphere; nay, have had wit enough to have got a good Estate, and through the repute of that, have been looked upon by the world as wise; but this by his fathers industry being left to his hand, the common course of the world, unhappily doth fling him upon things fit only for more refined minds; which although he cannot master, yet some odd grudges and imperfect stamps have transformed him from what he was, nor can he be what he would.
So (Sir) that some laugh at him, some wonder, as one would at some monstrous thing; some, indigested vain attempt of Nature.
And first Sir, his Fortunes enabling him to keep variety of company; he hears indeed all sorts of wit enough, but that being a thing too subtle for his soul, nought stays with him, but some few words and phrases, which he rudely plucking from that natural chain that linked them with appropriating circumstances, show very strangelie.
Not much unlike (Lady) the relics of those species, which (although in a methodick way, and by the discursive hints of thought are represented to the mind, yet) in a dream appear with casual consequince, the fancy making absurd contradictions, whilst at one act it doth rethink things treasured up in different time and place.
Right Sir; for with some conceited speech, he is your Servant; what ever you answer, on he goes to what is next in hs memori.
Me thinks he sometimes puts me in mind of the Discourse between Clarangeus and Aleton, what ever Alcidon answered, Clarangeus went still on with the story of his wooden window.
But Sir, it is with Complements as with all things else, except they beget one another, they are quickly at an end.
His tongue indeed like the Germane Clockwork at Bartholomew Fair, is wound up but for a season.
You would take him for Fryer Basins head, made only to speak some certain sentences.
It may be so: for I must confess, for the most part, he doth use strange, high, and conjuring words; nor do I think his face wants brass.
Conjuring! You shall have him Court his Mistress, as if she were a Lady in some enchanted Castle. to be won with certain strange Ceremonies and mystical speeches.
When he i quite spent, he is wont to cry, O Lord. tel you, You are melncholy; but that we have almost laughed him out of; for now with some fond protestation, he will say somewhat, which in effect shall be only a denial of what you say.
A little better then the Canterbury Fiddler, that would still cry, You lye Sir.
Then he will talk somewhat of News, or of the Weather, tell you it hath not rained of late; some common places of the cried up Wits and Beauties of the Town, with certain formula's of censure on them all, may a little prolong his Discourse.
O if a Horse-Race chance to be, it serves in no small stead, (believe me) it will keep him in good talk for at the least a week.
You know, Cozen, what a stir he uses to keep sometimes with Trigunnel and his Mare.
But that which is his greatest labour, and which most perplexeth him to attain, as the only thing which in his judgment renders him right Gallant and most complete, is the punctilio Discourse, the Laws of Duel and the Sword.
He thinks that if he could go handsomely through with a quarrel without receiving a baffle, according to these Laws, he hath done more, and hath got more honour and repute then ever Montross, the Sweden King or Scanderbag.
Doth Fury know a Rule? Anger a Law? Strange Tyranny is this, that thus doth passions awe! Great spirits know your wrongs, can you whose actions might determine what is Valour, whose looks might daunt a fashion, and outstare the Mode, whose names might make your deeds, though interfering ustome, regular? Can you (I say) be governed by the paltry bylaws of a Tavern? Shall Honour, that Spring of worthy minds, that just Reward of Courage, Pains or Art, be measured by the dictates of a Crew able to degenerate the word, make it a term for Cowards, or a talk to busy fools; a thing, a well tempered mind ever long will scarce dare own. As I have known a man whose spotless life would seem to question Adams fall, yet would he startle at the name of Godly, Saint or Holy. But Lady, I doubt I have too much interrupted you.
Not a whit, Sir.
There is not a quarrel about the Town, but he labours to get the exact History of it; he will tell you its rise and growth, who gave the first affront, and where it last did lye; together with the judicious observations of the Sword men on it.
Then he hath strange Romances too of his own Adventures;
there is no Scout, Gazette or Weekly Intelligence will furnish you with more improbabilities. Captain Iones was but a mere Ass to him.
I, for yesterday me thought, he told a story that went beyond his wounding the man in the Air.
What was that, I pray Lady?
Why Sir, he said, as he was coming from Hide Park, there was five Bailiffs beset his Coach, which he routed; but with what do you think?
With his sword; what else?
No Sir, it was but a Ladies buck, that he said he had in his hand.
A pretty Instrument, and much in fashion with him of late.
He gives one (Hadland, I think they call him) fifty pounds a year to keep him company.
That is, sometimes to countenance him, and keep him from a Baffle.
Hadland! Certainly I have heard of that same Gentleman.
It is possible, Sir, for he is one of no less am then worth, although his decayed fortunes sometimes force him on unhandsome shifts.
Is not that he you said to day Mrs. P. hath been so much in love with?
The very same; he is one of the chief of our modern Hectors.
Hectors?
This it is to be so long in the Country; Do you not know what I mean?
Not I.
Why I mean a certain Order, more famous then that of Malta, the Garter, Saint Esprit, or the Golden-fleece, a race of Adventurers, who, out of what strange humour I cannot tell, have usurped the name of that famous Trojane Prince.
A Prince! a Pander, a fellow was killed in the quarrel of a whore.
And afterwards, Sir (as I have heard) dragged at a Carts tail.
Believe me, a very proper patron.
But whether is your Cozen gone?
The little Gentlewoman, Lady, went out presently after Mr. La-gul.
Poor silly Girl! She cannot though but put me in mind of my own folly, for (I must confess) when I was of her years, I did not a little admire this same Gentleman; but a little time did teach me more wit.
Yet still you did retain him though
Why such a one for some businesses, I will assure you, will not do amiss.
I must confess, for a walk or such a matter he may be as requisite as the Satin-peticoat.
And, believe me, I think a handsome young Gentleman, his hair neatly curled and powdered, sitting beside one in the boot of a Coach with his hat in one hand, may become the Coach as well, and be as necessary an appurtenance, as the rich Scarlet Livery, or the plumed Lackeys; and for treatments and such kind of things, you do not know the pleasure such a one may do.
But Cozen, you are well enough served, for I have heard that he will talk a little mystically sometimes; what, do you think men are fools, spend their money for nothing?
Well, Ladies, my knowledge is not a little engaged to you as to this Gentleman.
Truly Sir not much, no more then it would have been to a day or twos acquaintance with him.
But (Lady) I had almost forgot, how stand your resolutions for to night?
If you please Sir, I shall be ready at eight a clock.
Lady, It is a thing that company much improves.Wherefore if you please.
I, I, she shall come.
Sir, It is well you used that Argument, for I must confess, all that I can do in company is but to add to the number.
What must I say then? I have even pulled an old house on my head. 
Your further acquaintance (Madam) may furnish me with better Areguments; but, me thinks though, to help to increase a number is none of the worst things a fair Lady is good for. Well (Ladies) seeing you do intend to meet, I must go and take some order about things. But stay, what shall I do with this same sword?
Sir, if you please to leave it with me, I will see it restored.
I shall rely upon you(Lady) to do it. 
How now Cousin? What think thou? What, is he a fool?
I must needs say, I was a little deceived in him. But stay, this Mr. Lagul is as fit a man as I could possibly have thought of, and my having his sword, will give me a good opportunity to crave this curtsy of him. I will go therefore and find him out as soon as I can. 
 Happy you nobler substances that purely do impart what ever images your minds do form, and ca transfer your thought resembling species, without the abuse of this adulterating matter; matla that our souls doth dress in such disguising garbs; Don't Education, Custom and long use disfigure us enough? A few distant leagues making us to stare at one another as at some monstrous things: Will not the state fucus, and the holy Varnish serve, with all Arts antic Wardrobe, but that each soul must wear a natural mask, and such improving glosses and allaying dashes, take from the nice sitting of this
clayie Suit. Some whose flashy airy souls (if by judgment grasped) like air come to nothing, yet meeting with strange happy accidents, with a sly fallacy deceive even sober minds; each action draws attention, and each word regard; Their talk, though vain and empty, some odd, I know not whats, doth so become and grace, that the deceived fancy (as when one looks through some false mediums or abusing Optics) cannot but conceit strange shapes of Wit, which else would not appear. But this same Gentleman, (had not his better Fortune enforced my notice with a little acquaintance) I had o'er passed him as one of the common things of the world, but now, me thinks, I do begin to see a glimmering worth, though muffled with disadvantages. 
I Run him through the arm.
Who, I pray Sir?
The Gentleman I was talking of that I fought with.
Cry Mercy, I had almost forgot You were indeed a little interrupted in your story.
I, did you ever see so rude absurd a fellow, to make such a business before Ladies? But that you protected him, Madam.
We have told him of his fault, Sir.
Had not I been more knowing in my punctilio's, we might have been the Town talk for this month.
He doth begin to see his Error.
He shall else: Is his name Knowel, say you? And doth he lodge in Chancery-lane?
I think I heard him say so.
Stay, to morrow I must meet at Maribone Park.
What do you mean? the Gentleman hath sent you your Sword, and by me doth crave your pardon, which I did oblige my self to get.
This is as base as before he was uncivil; what doth he take me for a foot-boy, or a Porter, that I should put up an affront so? No (Madam) my Honour and Reputation is engaged; I am a Gentleman, and must have the satisfaction of a Gentleman.
Nay, I pray Mr. Lagul.
O God (Madam) Honour is the life and soul of a Gentleman,
it gives him being, it is the very heart and vital heat that makes him act and move, and can no more endure a wound. But (Madam) I must take my leave of you, for I have engaged to meet at the Horn Tavern at three a clock, and now I think it is somewhat past.
Are you going thither? You may then do me a small curtsy.
Madam, I do esteem my self incomparably felicitous that my stars are so benign as to make me capable of doing you any service.
Sir, I had best to let you rest in that opinion until I have an opportunity to requite you.
Madam, I am your most eternal Bond-slave to do whatsoever you shall please to imperate.
I am (Sir) so much the more engaged.
Upon my Reputation (Madam) I do not conceive so.
So now he hath done. 
But (Madam) what is that you would have me do?
You say (Sir) you are going to the Horn Tavern, there is a Gentleman there, one Mr. Welbred.
He that invited us last night?
The very same
He hath not affronted her, I hope, she would not have me fight with him. 
Only (Sir) there was a Letter I brought out of the Country for him, I quite forgot to give it him the last night; but if you please to do me the favour to deliver it.
I am glad it is no more. 
It is my ambition (Madam) to be subservient to you. But where is my Sword?
If you please to walk in (Sir) you shall have it. 
Come this is the fairer Room, it looks towards the street.
I, so it doth, we might have been here all this while.
Well, if this business succeed, now
Succeed I Will death succeed to life, the day to night? It cannot but succeed: 'Slid, old Oughthred never did demonstrate a consequince so certain, as I could this.
But if he should prove an angry boy though, be mortal and wound unto the death.
Come fear nothing, I'll warrant he is as arrant a Coward, as ever wore broad silver Belt.
Pray God he be.
There is another Youth too of the same breed above, I dare swear, I do not think but much good might be done upon him.
But prithee let us make an end with one first.
But I wonder what Hadland ails, to make us stay thus long.
He said he would be here almost an hour ago.
 take his milksop pocky face, for me.
That pocky face shall pay for it, if thou wilt.
Shall us jeer the Rogue, and make him mad, as we use to do?
I have this night studied some new matter for his purled taffeta countenance.
But take heed you do not provoe him unto fury.
I'll warrant you: do you think I do not know the man? But stay, I think he comes yonder.
I, there he is, but I do not see the Gentleman that he said he would bring with him; 
Come, you are a trusty Card in faith Dick, did not you promise upon your word you would be here an hour ago?
Promise upon my word, quoth the man! What dost thou take me for a Scrivener, that I should mind such things as words and promises?
A Scrivener! No, Dik, I do not think thou art a Scrivener: but yet I must tell you, thy face doth look not much unlike the blank side of a Bond.
Not quite so smooth, in my opinion.
Come you shall contrive no more of these stratagems, if you can look no better upon them.
The truth of it is, I did a little disorder my self the last night.
Disorder thy self! Why? what did thou go to bed without being drunk?
At nine a clock without a Wench?
No that he did not, if the Madam in Lincolnes-Inne-fields say true. What sait thou Dick?
Why, I hope you are not my Ghostly Father.
No Dick, I think thou look a little more Ghostly of the two.
An absolute Ghost, I vow: had he but a Surplice and a Torch, he needs no Chalk.
Chalk! he looks like any.
Come out with all thy paltry old Similes, and then we shall have done. What is it, Ashes, tallow Candle, Greene Cheese?
Well, Green Cheese let it be then, if thou wilt: but
if thy face be a Green Cheese, the Cheese-cloth was somewhat course.
Why prithee?
Because the coat is so rugged.
Why Dick? But what if it be a Candle?
What if it be a Candle! Was there ever such a question heard of? Why dost thou not kick him Hadland? he asks, What if thy face be a tallow candle?
He will give me leave to put the case I hope, I do but suppose.
Well then, suppose it were a candle: stay why then I say, it would be a Christmas on.
I, for it is all wrought crinckum, cranckum.
Come, the face is a face, and may be a face.
It may be (I grant) when it is finished.
Finished!
I, for yet i is but rough cast.
Come, it is no matter what the face is, or how it looks, I am ur if it had not been for him that owes the face, you might have both looked like Asses ere this.
As we did the other night when the Sussex Genlemon beat us.
Was not I the man, who when we were quite blown up by those same City Rogues: And we had been in three days consultation whether we should turn brethren of the High-way, down right beggars, or hang our selves: Was not I the man (I say) that found out this same Youth, this precious Squire, of whom within this week we have won some ninescore pounds, besides the expectation of this business?
Well, for my part (I say) the man speaks reason, and ought not to be so abused.
Yes, one touch more.
Come, out with it then, man.
I say, if we had turned brethren of the High-way, as he said, he for his part might have robbed without a Handcherchief.
Why, prithee now
One would take h face for a piece of Holland.
It must be purled then.
Come, are you not ashmed to abuse yor brother Hector thus?
You a Hector?
What am I else?
That wan pale sprightls thing drw Prims curtin in the mid of night, and told him half his Troy was burnt.
O Lord, why Dick what sai tou?
Why this Dick says, And first for you, you Rascal, Do you remember what you were when first I knew thee? a lean, starved, thin-gut, thred-bare Rogue, that had never a rag to cloth thy body, nay, scarce a body to thy soul: Do you remember where I found you? Clapped up in the Fleet for forty shillings, that thou owed in Ram-Alley for chippings of bread and porrage, when thou, Chameleon like, had for some days lived by nothing but air, and were just resolving into thy first principles? Did not I pay this dribbling debt for thee, set thee free, and since have made thee the man thou art? I must confess, I saw a good hopeful cozening countenance in thee, that did promise much.
Come, a truce, a truce.
No you Rogues, since you have provoked me, you shall repent it. And as for you my friend, with you I have been somewhat longer acquainted, I think I knew thee in the late Wars, thou went by the name of Captain, a thing could do nothing but drink and damn thy self, and run away, so monstrous a Coward, that thy prodigious fears were able to work upon the genius of an Army; And this you shall confess, or else I will beat it out of you.
Well, hold, I do confess here before my friend then, that I am a Coward, and thou art a terrible child of war; so thou wilt let me alone, thou shalt be no more Dick Hadland, but a furious Hector or Achilles, any thing what thou wilt: thy pock holes shall be no more pock holes, but scarce of dreadful Mars.
Why Dick?
Characters of honour in which may be read full mighty acts of Chivalry.
Characters say thou? it is some strange Oriental tongue; Stay, let's see, I think they are the Egyptian Hieroglyphics.
No it is Greek, for I think they are all Omegas, Hadland.
Sir, There is a Gentleman below would speak with you.
With me? I'll warrant it is Mr. La-gul. Prithee desire him to come up.
I will Sir. 
I must now vanish then. 
Stay, I will go meet him. 
Will you meet him, say you?
What should I do else?
Will he fight?
So he saith.
So now you have made a fine business. 
Come I'll warrant you,  Come Mr. La-gul sit down, here is a health to all our friends in the other world, you will remember
me to them all. 
What do you mean?
You will meet him, you say.
I shall be posted else: And I shall lose my honour and reputation.
I it is true, but
But what?
'Slid, you had as good meet Jove armed with Thunder, the sheers of Atropos: the dart of death it self is not half so fatal as his Rapier.
Say you so?
The Sword of Justice strikes not so certain; no fore man of a Jurye could breathe more sure destruction.
If it be so, in my mind the Gentleman hath a great cause of comfort; foe to know the certainty of his death, is that which many a good Christian prays for all his life long.
It is well you put him in mind, for certainly it is time for him to begin to forsake the flesh, the world and the Devil.
Some Ghostly Father indeed were fitter company for him then we.
No, no, Mr. La-gul, I say, drink on, it may be your last We will meet somewhere to morrow before you go, and sing a Psalm, and it will be well enough, I'll warrant you.
Nay, but Mr. Hadland.
Come Mr. La-gul, to deal plainly and seriously with you, you have chanced upon a man that hath not his fellow, I am confident in the Kingdom; he is absolutely one of the greatest Duellifts about the Town.
Prithee who is it, Mr. Hadland?
One Caster, as I take it, his name is
Caster! I have heard indeed very much of the man, he came lately out of France.
I, the very same, he killed a great Monsieur there in a Duel the last Summer, and was pardoned by the King for the gallant service he did against the Spainiard at the siege of Arras.
I believe he is fain to leave France now upon some such account, I have heard somewhat.
Nay to my knowledge he hath killed some of our own fellow Subjects, but that he hath had the luck to carry things closely.
The truth of it is, the Gentleman is a gallant spirited Gentleman; but he hath one humour in his fighting that I do not so well like of.
What is that I pray, Sir?
When once he is in the field he will make the utmost use of all advantages, he never spares any man.
I have heard that very thing disuted with him diver time, but he saith it is the only Mode byond se; cry, Un enemy le mindre.
But me thinks (Sir) that it doth not savour so much of magnanimity; true Valour shuld never think upon enemies in the way of fear.
What should I do then, Gentlemen, in this case?
Nay, for my part, I cannot tell.
Truly Sir, your condition in my opinion is somewhat desperate
This it is, when you will venture upon quarrels when I am not with you.
Venture! I could not possibly avoid it, I did but deny to lend him forty pounds, and straight he called me base uncivil fellow; and told me I did not like a man of honour.
I think so; could you expect any other consequence? 'Slid, could any man have been guilty of such an uncivility?
What, to deny a man I never saw before?
It was no matter, he looked like a Gentleman.
Upon that (you know) I could do no less then give him the Lye, and so the business began. For my part, I thought I might safely have done so, for I am sure I saw a Gentleman beat him not above an hour before.
Beat him!'Slid, Slur, what shall I say? What a Rogue is this he did not tell us of it?  In some cases, you know, one is not bound to strike again by the rule of Honour; as if I have given the Lye, or so.
No, there was no such matter here, for the Gentleman was at play with him, when on the sudden he told him he was a Cheat, and gave him a blow on the pate with a Candlestick.
And did he do nothing, say you? Pox what shall I say?
No, nothing.
You cannot tell what new Mode of quarrelling he may have brought over with him from France?
Strike him! if there be not some such matter in it, he had as good have struck fire into a Magazine.
Well then, I am resolved.
What to do?
I will not fight.
How! Not fight!
No.
Nay, now we have over done the business. 
Prithee have but a little patience,  What do you say? Will you not fight! Speak it again, for I cn scarce believe my ears.
I say, I will not fight.
What is all the pains that I have taken with you lost? Will you with one act forfeit all your Honour?
Honour! hang it, I am almost weary of it.
Do not you value your reputation?
I cannot tell what to do, it doth every day so endanger my life.
Your life? Can there be a life without it? To live to be the scorn of men, is worse then a hundred deaths. Can he be said to live, that is not fit company for a Foot-boy, that will be howted and laughd at, and posted for a Coward?
I care not, let them post me; it is but going into the Country for a while, or giving out that I am gone to travel, as you know one did not long ago in such a case.
No, that will not do, for you would as soon avoid your own shadow as him, no troubled conscience could more closely pursue you, divine Justice would not so soon end out the wicked as he would you: 'Slid, it was but the last Summer he followed from France, quite through Germany, into Italy, one that he had never seen, neither had the least affront past betwixt them, merely out of a generous humour, because he heard he was a man of Arms.
What shall I do then?
Come, Mr. La-gul, the truth of it is, your Quarrel was not an hour old before I heard of it; and I being extremely sensible of your danger, began to think how I might possibly procure your safety, at the last came into my mind a Gentleman, one that is an intimate friend of this same Casters, whom I have some acquaintance with. And to be short, I did a little feel him, to see whether he would be a means of taking up this matter, but
What?
Why, to be short, he I believe hath heard that you are a man of Estate, and he it seems hath had an ill hand of late, and is a little out of money, and so he thinks to take an advantage of this opportunity to request a curtsy of you.
What, would e borrow any money?
He talked as if he wanted 200.
200 l. I cannot Sir by no means, you know how much I have lost of late.
That is all one, he knows your credit is good; and if you should deny him this small favour, he is somewhat a humoursome fellow, and I cannot tell whether ever I should persuade him to serve you in this same business; and yet I know he is the only man that can do it.
I could spare now some twenty pounds, what if I offered to give him so much outright? would not he rather have it, do you think?
By no means. 'Slid, What? offer to give a Gentleman mony?
for ought I know he might take it for an affront, and then there would be another business.
An affront say you! nay, I will take heed how I run into any more of these affronts;  But if there be no remedy, I shall refer my self unto you in this same matter.
I will do my utmost endeavour to see what can be done then.  But what quarrel was that you were a telling me you fell into this afternoon?
Why there was a rude, uncivil fellow abused me; but because it was in the company of some Ladies, I let him alone; but I believe I must challenge him. 
Why, what was the matter, for Gods sake?
Why this same Gentleman (I know not for what cause) on the sudden fell upon me, and took away my sword.
I hope not so: Would you let him take away your sword?
How could I avoid it, except I had made a quarrel before the Ladies, and that you know I must not do.
O excuse me Sir: In your own defence you might.
Might I in mine own defence, say you?  That I had but known so much!  Well, but what is to be done as the case now stands?
As the case now stands, you cannot challenge him, for a man in Honour is supposed to have but one sword.
That is pretty, I vow.  That I could but think on these things my self!  But he hath restored me to my sword again.
Nay, then you must, for he hath restored you to your former condition.  But stay, upon what terms did he give it you? What said he?
He said nothing to me, for he sent it by a Lady.
A Lady! I cannot tell how that same circumstance may alter the matter.  Stay Mr. Slur, here is a pretty case, a Gentleman is dis-armed, and then the party that dis-armed him, snds him his sword again by a Lady; what do you think of it?
What say you Sir? A Gentleman is dis-armed, and then his sword is sent him again by a Lady?
I, that is (as I take it) the case.
I, that is the case.
Why then the first thing that will be considerable is, whenher the Law of Honour takes notice of a Lady; for you know Sir all Laws look on some persons, as in Jure nuas.
But in my opinion, thereafte s she may be qualified, the Law of Honour may take notice of her.
As how I pray, Sir?
Was there ever blood drawn in her quarrel?
then there may arise a question, whether that blood were drawn in the field, or no?
You say true.  This I see will be somewhat a difficult case; wherefore (I think) we had best to stay till night, when we may have the opinion of all our brethren.
Well, I see there is somewhat in these Laws, if I could but understand them.
Somewhat doe you say? they are beyond what Solon or Lycurgus ever made.
If you be not knowing in these, although you were more valiant then Hercules, you might be resolved a Coward.
Were Iohn of Gaunt now living, one of our subtle Duel Casuists would baffle him with a qurk.
Turn the affront upn him cleerl, in despite of his sword and buckler.
Well, I must leave you, for I have a little business with a Gentleman that is above. 
But Mr. Handland, do you think this Gentleman would take it as an affront, if I should offer to pay he reckoning?
I cannot tell, you had best to leave some money with me.
Your servant Sir, I shall think my self super-eminently happy in your farther acquaintance; and therefore I shall not be a little ambitious of it.
Sir, I shall prevent your desires.
I could wish that I had but the felicitous fortune to be any way subserviceable to you.
I shall esteem it no mean honour to be your servant.
Really Sir, I presume you think not so. 
Well, go thy way, God send thee more wit, and me more money, as they use to say.
Money you rogue! What would you have? Have we not now 200 pounds? Two hundred pounds! me thinks it sounds very roundly; but that we have forsworth it, we might go purchase Manors, you Rogue, Lands and Tenements.
take your Lands and Tenements, give me an Ass with a thousand pounds a year, 'is the only revenue in the world, it comes in clear without any taxes.
But if we go on thus, I know no reason but that they should rate us to the poor of the parih for him:
Such a lad indeed is a frank tenement that Plowden never dreamt of.
A frank-tenement! A fee-simple rather.
Two or three such youths, a I live, if I had but a mind to marry, were a jointure sufficient for a lass of a thousand pounds.
Why, there is another, just such a one, in my conscience, not far off.
I remember you were speaking some such matter to day.
Nay, I have enquired more of him since, and I hear he has at
the least fifteen hundred pound a year, besides some good sums in his purse.
Such a one, my boy, might be worth our notice: but what shall we do to him?
Faith, even modo quo pris.
Nay hold, all men are not aeke: Slid, he may be terrible and valiant, a child of courage and the sword.
Dost take me for a Fool or an Ass? Do you think I do not know men's tempers? He cannot in nature but be a Coward. Did I not see him the other day with a cp buttoned up on one side, and a Feather in it, upon a horse with a geat saddle, at Hide Park? besides, did I not hear him to day talk of his Honor and Reputation?
They are shrewd signs, I must cofse.
Come, let it happen as it will, I will take the business upon my self; and let the worst come to the worst, he shall not have a child to deal with.
Spoke like a Hector, and thy self, brave Hadland. But stay, shall I go call Caster, and tell him of our successe?
Hold: Shall we fright the Rogue a little, and make him believe he must fight?
It will be rare, I vow. But here he comes.
How now, my Lads? What is the matter you look thus sober? How go affairs?
Faith, even scurvily enough.
Why? He will not fight? Will he?
Fight! He was ready to fight with us two but for asking him the question.
Fight, do you say! He was got, I think, betwixt two furious Armies in the heat of Charge: he thinks, he speaks, he talks of nothing else but fighting.
In the while that he was here with us, but that we carried our selves discreetly, he would have given us twenty occasions of the Challenge
I looked out after him, and I saw his Sword out twice, merely upon some trifleng business, of a justly, or the wall.
We have a great deliverance I think: for my part, I never was in the company of such a furious terrible boy since the hour I was borne.
Come I am confident ou did not your parts handsomely; you did not fright him enough.
Fright him, say you! I am sure I made thee such a
dreadful thing, that I dare swear, had thou but heard me, thou would have been afraid of thy self this twelve month.
But that was so far from frighting of him, that it wrought an effect quite contrary, in stirring up a noble emulation in him: he swore such a one as I described thee to be, he would go through the world bu he would find out.
He blessed himself, that at the length he had the luck to to light upon one, in whom his sword might find some resistance, or in whose death he might gain some honour.
 Take you (Hadland) this was your doings.
Nay, prithee be not angry, I for my part did all for the best.
The best! Hang you, you knew it could not be otherwise.
Nay, do not judge of a business by the success.
What do you think I shall do now?
In troth I cannot tell, Now the matter is so far gone there is no flying off, you must even go through.
What? Would you have me fight?
Why not?
Do you ask why? You know it is against my nture: fight (quoth you!) I tremble at the very word.
Alas poor man!
Come, come, even fight, and if thou chance to fall, I will see thee honourably buried on the common stock.
Fight! What would thou do else? Hast thou not lived long enough?
I must confess, if I had been in his condition, I think I should have hanged my self some years ago.
Hast thou not lived to spend a fair estate, that hth kept thy Ancestors in good repute for many ages?
Hat thou not lived by thy profane debauchnesse, and base cowardliness to help to sink a cause in which we all do suffer?
Nay, now you are a little too serious, Dick.
Hang him, I would I could say any thing that would mad him, for jeering of my face.
Nay, then have at him. What dost thou live for? but to be a Moth and Canker to thy Country?
So it is well.
To pervet and seduce her youth?
O that my heart would but give me leave to fall upon either of these Rogues.
You damned Villains must you abuse me too? But there is no treefng in this matter; I must go see what may be possibly done for to prevent it. 
Shall we call him back again?
No, let the Rascal alone in his fears until we meet anon at night.
Well, here is a Health to the Rogue howsoever.
Come on: But you know whom we are to meet withal at night; we had not best to be too busy, for they are Lads we shall do no good upon, except we first drink them up pretty high.
Well, as you will.
But what becomes of your business?
O things are in an excellent posture; what will you say, if before night I have my Land again?
It is impossible.
Well, Do but mark the motions, and observe consequinces.
But how can it be man, that thou should ever make such an Ass of that old, wary, subtle fellow?
You are deceived in him, he is not so subtle as you think for; he is as fine a dull and stupid piece of matter as you would wish to work upon: I grant you, for this many ears he hath had the luck to be much employed in his way. And although he never read Cook nor Perkins, yet I cannot tell by what conspiracy of the world, he hath been that way accounted very knowing, so that for this many years he has heaped up huge sums, and now I think is owner of some Two thousand Pounds per annum; through the repute of which Estate he hath been lately made a Justice.
For all this, if thou bring this about, thou wilt bee more fmous then he that cozened the Jew, the Juggler, and the Broker in Long-lane.
Well, do but go a long with me; and you shall know how all the matter is, for you have a part to act this Afternoon, which you must do before we meet them we promised. 
What should this mean?
Well (Sir) you will be pleased to tell you friend, I shall not fail at the appointed time: and place. You are not ignorant, I suppose, of the business.
Sir?
I say, I will not fail to meet him.
Upon my honour (Sir) I cannot guess your meaning, I was only desired to deliver it unto you.
You will know more then I believe; for certainly you are the friend he means to bring along with him.
I the friend! Really, as I am a Gentleman, I do not apprehend you.
No? that is strange; why the Gentleman doth challenge me.
'Sfoot, am I falling into another Del?
But you say, you know nothing?
Upon my reputation, not I.
Well (Sir) Your Servat. I mst go find ot what this doth mean. 
Well, certainly in the end I shall be weary of this same Honor, it is such a dangerous thing; I am no sooner out of the hazzard of one quarrel, but straight I run into another; I cannot do anything, scarce move, or stir, or speak, but it is ready to bring me endanger of a Duel; one quarrel I fell into yesterday, another to day, and now they are drawing me into a third. Well, to prevent them, I will even take a Coach and go with my little new Mstress to Hide Park as I promised her. 
Stay, Whether do I go? If I fight, what shall I hazard? My estate, my life, my soul; for (as I am taught) I shall offend as well the Laws Divine, as Civil: If I do not, I shall be wounded in my honor. My Honour I, what is that? for I must confess (the word
of late hath been so abused, that) I scarce can tell. However, this I am sure of, that each man doth naturally addict himself to make a choice of some way gaining a repute with others; in which, if he receive a check, there is nothing can more undervalue him; hee being supposed to choose that in which he most excelled. I therefore, being a man of that condition, that doth pretend unto a sword, must run all hazards, rather then be foiled in that.
Now tic true, one that hath employed his endeavours to rase a same another way, might pass over such a business as this, and perhaps it would not at all reflect on him.
But these kind of men are not competent Judges of what in us they call rash; for wee shall see, when any thing doth happen that doth concern them in the way they have taken for to acquire a value and esteem, They will act things as strange and inordinate: You shall have a man made up of meekness; A man, whose life and doctrine preaches nothing else but patience and compliance unto others; yet he will venture for to end both Church and State, nay, tear the world in pieces, rather then yield himself worsted in one silly argument.
I must then fight!
Ha! What said I? fight!
Me thinks the word doth carry horror in it; I may be kill'd, or (which is worse) I may kill.
However, it is an action scarce consistent with humanity; Yet, my unlucky fortune will force me on it; for were I one who already had satisfied the world of my courage, I might then perhaps pretend a conscience, yet preserve my honour.
But being as I am, a fresh and raw young man, whose deeds will be looked upon without the countenance of former actions, Conscience (I say) will appear but a lame and pitiful excuse. 
She has an acute and handsome wit, a judgment too, not usual in a woman, then which there is nothing doth more touch my fancy; and yet, She wants not that which we call Beauty, that most divine proportion, that doth so lively strike our souls.
Nay, I needs must say, this was the only thing which at the first put me to a stop, and would not let me pass her over, as other common things: But now, a more noble Idea doth so fully represent it self, that I scarce feel its force at all; Nor doth it move me, more then those trivial petty ends, which in my childsh ignorance I have pursued, would now stir me: Nor is this strange; for certainly, Beauty's chiefest (if not only) Empire, is at the first; but afterwards, it yields unto, and is regulated by what farther conversation doth produce. For, without doubt, had she now all the deformity that age, or erring nature ever yet produced, I should make her my choice; and those impressions, that by the little acquaintance I have had with her, she hath made in my mind, would so over-rule my fancy, that in despite of the world, I should account her fair. 
Stay; yonder he comes.
Come, shall we go meet him?
Why how now Sir? What is the matter?
 Do you ask questions?
Was ever man thus abused? I will dye a thousand times rathere then suffer this you base uncivil villain. 
They are gone, but yet they have left somewhat behind them; for I do bleed a pace; the heat they have put me into, has byled my blood up unto that height, that it will all run over; well, I must go get a Surgeon as soon as I can. 
It doth bleed more and more, and I begin to grow weak and faint;
The fatal hour doth certainly draw nigh; for me thinks I do begin to feel my life run out with my blood. 
And now as when some impressions that the fancy doth by day receive, (other objects continually plying the sense) are not at all, or else but dully sensible, but at night appear more fresh then ever;
So, now me thinks, some odd kind of thoughts, which in the earnest pursuit of those things, my youth addicted me unto, I scarce did mark, (now I am going to my eternal rest) begin to stare upon me, and look somewhat strange. 
What a high piece of madness have I done, thus to lose my life about a trifle! I say, my life; that which is the chiefest good in nature, that to which all other goods are but subservient; nay, are not at all without it? What competent end then can any man propose in hazarding of it, since in all reason that for which we hazard should be of more value then that we hazard?
What dishonour had it been to me, if by my wife declining I had goven some cause to think I had feared them, more then if in such case I had avoided a Bear or Ox; for Honour, certainly, is nothing else but that respect and value that those things do draw, which buoy and prop one up in the world. Ths Wealth, Authority, good Friends and Knowledge, (furnishing us with those means by which the greatst actions are performed) must needs beget a reverence and esteem: but the force of the body is (without doubt) the most inconsiderable thing possible; he that enjoys the greatest share of it, how small a power doth he thereby acquire? We see he must be subject to each petty Constable; nay, a dagger or a pistol makes the weakest equal to him: It is true, those powerfuller arts of the more nobler part are to be honoured and admired. These many times with strange subtleties unite into one commanding power particular strengths, and being united, with as much cunning obtain its rule and Mastery. These flights we see, do make even weak, decrepit age, often formidable to and threfore honoured by the world. Had I this way employed! But oh! 
Help, help the Gentleman.
What, is he dead?
Almost, I think: look how he is wounded!
Me thinks I should know him: I, certainly he is a customer of my Masters, and he lodges in Chancery-lane.
We had best then to carry him thither.
Pull out his hand-kercheife to help stop the blood.
Look, what is that? you had best to read it.
What is this? I think it is a challenge.
A Challenge! Jesu bless us; then it seems this was some duel:
Will these Gentleman never leave off these same scurvy Duels? 
But wee had best to make haste whilst he hath any blood left in him.
I heard, Lady, that with much earnestness, he seemed to enquire for me at my lodging; and therefore because I think I heard you say he would be here about this time, I came hither to see what he would have with me.
The truth of it is, he appointed to come hither, and go to Hide Park with me; but since he hath sent his man to desire me to excuse him, because there was a business of consequence fallen out, that he was to go about.
Then all that I can say to it, is that he hath made me lose a little pains.
And so truly he hath me, for I have been almost this hour a dressing myself, thinking to go with him.
That were a great deal of pity, Lady, that any pains you have taken should be in vain; rather then so, if you will please to give me leave to wait upon you thither, although it be a place that I do but little frequent; yet Lady, upon this occasion, I shall not a little desire it.
By no means Sir, I would not put you to that trouble.
Nay, if that be the only obstacle.
I beseech you Sir. 
Come Lady, it is the first request I ever made to you, and I will not be denied.
Nay, if you will not, I cannot tell what to say to it.
And whither, and whither, I pray, in all this haste?
Only a little way, Sir, with this Gentleman.
A little way! And why am not I good enough to know?
We were a going to Hide Park.
To Hide Park? I thought it was some such place you were going to, you were so bedecked and trimmed up with all your Jin-combobs; will you never leave following of these idle fashions? Come, stand out in the light a little. Hey da! What, powdered and patched again? have not I time and time forbad you ever to do so? off with them, I say, those filthy blaines and scabs of pride,  off with them, or I will pull them off.
Nay, I beseech you Sir, with your pardon; I must needs say you are a little too severe, in not letting her please her fancy in these kind of things.
Mr. Know-well, I ever have had that opinion of you, that I do not a little wonder, that you, of all men, should speak thus if you speak according to your Judgement.
Sir, for my part, I speak what I think; for certainly, you have little reason to blame her thus.
Reason? though to her my will is reason sufficient; yet I would not have you believe that I speak without a cause. For do you think it doth become a sober, civil, modest Virgin, as I hope she is, to follow all the several fashions, those fantastic changes, and whimsisal dances led by the vain and empy part of the world?
Sir, for my part I could wish our habits were as constant as the course of nature, nor that we had more change of dress then birds or trees; but this I can but wish; for we see the general humour of the world ever yet has been so set upon the contrary, that one can scarce discreetly hope it; nay, hee that would but a little strictly enquire and search into our natures, and mark how prone and apt they are for variety and change, might almost demonstrate its impossibility; for certainly, as long as in the world there are men of several qualities and degrees, the inferior, and more base will imitate the ways of those of better rank, and strive to entrench upon, and gain their customs; which being no sooner got by the one, but the other will despise them, and seek for new. Seeing then these alterations are so unavoidable, without doubt, it will more become one in a moderate way to yield unto, then vainly to oppose them. For whatsoever the rigged do pretend, there is nothing can more argue a fantactic humour, or self-conceited pride, then with ones single whimsies to oppose what is received by the generality.
It is true Sir, I needs must yield thus far, for I should condemn her of the height of folly, should she oppose the general use in things that are indifferent: but that I chiefly blame her is, for certain knacks and fashions, which although in common use and custom, yet not being decent and comely in themselves, must needs be unlawful.
That, Sir, is impossible; for custom is the very square and rule of what is decent, and what not; indecency being nothing else but that harsh discord that any thing doth make, if it doth chance to interfere with the common course of things, and certainly, the soundest judgemints will not hold any habit to be simply in its self unlawful. Thus much, indeed, must be granted, that some attires, by being first used by (and therefore being reckoned for the badges of) the vainer and more fantastic sort, may from them acquire some accidental scandal, which afterwards (they growing into use, with the sober and more staid) by the same reason they must needs mew and let fall.
This Sir, is somewhat strange; for although I cannot tel to what narrow limits you may confine the word decency in its strictest notion, yet there is nothing more certain then that there are vain, light, &amp;
immodest habits, of their proper nature abstracted from all those glosses that custom may flng on them.
Truly Sir, I think not, nor I believe will you, if you but consider the business a little more; for vanity is nothing else but the affectation of the signs of those things we really have not; as in attires, if the aged do usurp what doth belong to youth, the poor to the rich, the inferiour to the more Nble. Now Sir, what is it that doth define to each of these their several Characterising Gabes, but use and arbitrary Custom? And so far is any habit in it self from representing what is grave or light, that should it please Omnipotence, (as there is nothing impossible) but to invert the common course of Nature, make those the marks of age, which are now of youth; the smooth chin would then be as reverend, as is now the bald head; Then should you have the grave and venerable slver hairs bee worn in amorous wanton Bracelets. Nay, nothing in this kind, but as to these respects, would have its altoration.
And as for Modesty; It is true, although it bee a virtue alike requisite in all; yet, what those things are wherein it is exercised, Custom doth only determine: You see here that familiar with our coyest, nicest Dames, which, in some places, would scarce be done by the most notorious strumpets; nay, what many times with us is but necessary, how strangely would it look in the other sex? And I would fine know that man could give me a solid reason of this difference besides common custom. I am sure there can bee no habit whatsoever fancied to be so immodest, as wee should now account none at all to bee; yet there are some that with no slight reasons will maintain our only natural dress (were it but backed by a nerall Custom) would bee the most innocent; and those desires which by restraint are now chiefly inflamed, would then grow cold and dull, as wee see some things which else-where are accounted a recompense sufficient for a stab, here through there facility are scarce valued; Nor was it said amiss of one who called clothes a mere device hatched in Madam Venus Closet;  for surely they are the greatest stratagem by which her Emper doth subsist.
I must confess, Sir, you do represent some things unto me, which before I did not so clearly mark; But yet (Sir) were it granted, that custom were the only rule for what were to bee done in these kind of matters, yet those things for which I did find fault with her, have nor obtained a general use; for if wee should go presently into the strees, wee should see not one in forty use them.
Herein, Sir, doth lie the grand mistake; for as many seviral sorts of men, the various accidents of forun doth produce; so many several fashions doth common use aloe; nor is this more
then what hath been provided for by public laws, in the best ordered commonwealths. Now Sir, If in my attire I do conform myself to those of my degree, I never shall offend against the rule of decency; and for my part, I see nothing in her dress, but what for some while hath generally been done by the civillest Ladies of her years and quality, especially in this place; for I must confess, that may be stared at in a Country town, that here would bee but needful. And this discourse, Sir, doth put me in mind of what I have known to have been the opinion of some Judicious men, that the dress which of these late years hath been in request amongst us (what ever the aged out of their usual vanity of magnifying their younger years will say to the contrary) is the civillest, most comely, and less extravagant that hath been used for these many ages.
Well daughter, Mr. Know-well hath so well pleaded for you, that I am content that you shall follow your own humour, for this day at the least.  And if you doe go, you had best to go presently, lest it be late before you come home, for I can tell, you the air is very sharp.
Your servant Sir. 
God bu'ye, good Master Know.
Now Mrs. you have no more to doe, then to take out execution, for you have a judgment of 5310 pounds.  Believe me, your adversary was like to have served you but a crafty Citizens trick of it, if I had not bestirred my self for you.
He that doth command you to plead the cause of the Widow, Sir, I hope, will reward you. 
But what was the reason, I pray Mrs. that your husband did entrust him with so great a sum?
Sir, going to the late Wars, and fearing what hazard hee might thereby run, did think he might have relied upon this mans fidelity, (he being his very intimate friend) little imagining that hee would have proved such a wicked knave, as to have cozened me his poor wife.  
Peace, Mrs. for seeing the matter has succeeded so well, you have little cause to weep.
I Sir, It is true: but whenever I think of the good man, I cannot forbear, O! little did he think I should ever have been put to all this trouble and vexation.
But the maine point now will be, whether this man be responsible?
O Sir, that is not to be questioned, for he is on you cannot look upon, but you must think of thousands, a fat, greasy Burgo-master, he commonly goes in a ruff, and a black pinked Satan doublet, you had as good doubt of my Lord Major, and all the Aldermen; the public Faith would not take up so much upon the Exchange, as his word.
It is well, if it be so.  But Mrs. where be those writings you sent for me to look upon?
You shall see them presently Sir. 
Sue, bring me the little black Trunk in my Chamber. .
Here they be, Sir, some old writings of my husbands, I would bee glad to know what they mean. 
Forsooth, your brother is below with another Gent. they are newly come out of the Country.
My brother!
But Heyk you hither, sweet heart; do you remember what you promised me.
I Sir, and if I durst, I could say somewhat.
Durst? Why, what is the matter?
O Lord Sir, I am afraid she will be angry.
Come, come, I'll warrant you: Here. 
O Sir, You are a Noble Gentleman, and for your sake, I will venture her displeasure. The truth of it is, Sir, (but I hope you will not say I said so.)
No, no, do not fear.
Well, Sir, I dare swear she loves you.
Say you so? Stay, here is somewhat more for you.
I, Sir, for she doth nothing but talk what a grave, comely, old Gent. you are, and very like her first husband.
Why, was her first husband an old man?
O, I Sir or else he never had had her, for I think there never was woman of so strange a humour as she is, in this world; for from her infancy, she ever doted on old men; I have heard her say, that in these her late Law-troubles, it has been no small comfort to her, that still she hath been conversant with grave Counsellors &amp; Sergeants, and what a happiness she has had to look sometimes an hour together upon the Judges. She will go and walk a whole afternoon in Charter-house-Garden, on purpose to view the ancient Gentlemen there.
And if she hear but of a man that is buried with as many old men following him, as he is years old, she will go a mile to see it: There is an old beggar that uses to come hither sometimes that she will talk with an
hour together: sometimes she will condole her self that she did not live before the flood, that she might have had one of those ancient Patriarks; the last year she was scarce persuaded, but that she would take a Journey into some of the far Northern Nations, where men do ordinarily live unto seven or eight score years of age. As we were coming by S. Dunstans not long ago, she spied the Picture of old Par, she needs would have the Coach stay until she had bought it, and since she has hung it up in her Closet, and will weep sometimes over it an hour together.
Nay, if this be true, I cannot tell what to think of it.
Sir, not long ago there was a young Gentleman here about the Town, who hearing of her Riches, and knowing this her humour, had almost got her, by counterfeiting himself to be an old man.
I?
O I shall never, I think, forget how he came in a white Periwig and his false beard; I cannot almost but laugh, when I think how handsomely he carried the business, how he made as if his hands trembled, and his head shaked, how he seemed to be deaf, and have the You, and twenty other Infirmities of age, insomuch that my Mistress was extremely taken with him.
And how came he to miss her?
The strangeliest that ever you heard: for all things were agreed, the very Writings drawn, and when he came to seal them, because he set his name without using a pair of Spectacles, she would nover see him more.
Nay, if she can love an old man so well.
But here she comes, Sir. 
Sister, I desire that you would entertain this Gentleman, Sir Thomas Cranfield, as my friend.
Madam, I shall think it no small happiness to be reckoned aamongst the number of your servants.
Sir, for my brothers sake, I shall be glad of your farther acquaintance.
Sister, I am laden with a number of Services to you from your friends in the Country.
How do they all, I pray? Sir Richard Howard, and my Lady Tanfield?
But, Brother, have you brought up the money I wrote for, you know what occasions of expense I have had in this Law business.
I could not in so short a time, Sister, procure so much as you wrote for; but I have made a shift to get almost 200 l. though among your Tenants, the rest they will pay you when you come down, which your friends hope will not be long first; I promised them to bring you down with me.
Ha! Tenants!
But, Sister, I must speak a word to you in private.
Sir Iohn, I take my leave of you.
What are you going Sir Thomas? I will wait upon you anon at your Lodging.
Madam, your most humble servant. 
Stay, what is here? A Mortgage of the Manor of Dove 
A Bond for seven hundred pounds 
A Bond in nine hundred pound to Iohn Tompkins of S. Clements Esquire. That was her husband suit.
Another Mortgage of Lands in Lincolneshire,to him too. There is no end of her Wealth.
And then the Land they talked of in the Country.  
How now, Sue? what news now?
What do you think?
What, prithee?
Did not you see a gallant Gentleman come with my Mistress her brother?
I, Sir Thomas, I think they called him: What of him?
I dare say, he comes to be a Suitor to my Mistress. Somewhat I have over-heard 
If you will but step in here a little, I believe you may hear more.
Sister, you see he is a proper Gentleman, and I can assure you he has almost seven thousand pounds per annum.
Speak no more of him, brother, for I shall never think of him in that Nature.
Why? what is the reason, Sister?
I desire that you would pardon me for that.
I hope you are engaged unto no body?
No, not engaged.But 
What is the matter, Sister? Come, let me be partaker of what ever troubles you. You do not use to be thus strange to me.
I do not indeed, but now, me thinks, I have too much cause for me to appear strange unto my self.
Why? what is the matter?
From you (dear brother) I cannot conceal any thing, yet I
could wish you could now guess my thoughts, and look into my mind, and see what strange passions there have ruled of late, without forcing of me to strain my modesty.
What? are you in love with any body? Come, let me know the party, a brothers advice may do you no hurt.
If I should tell, I know you would laugh at me; but truly I shall rather deserve your pity.
Come, come, tell me; who is it?
Did not you see an ancient Gentleman with me when you came in?
What, is it any son or kinsman of his?
No, no. 
Who then?
I have told you.
Who, that feeble and decrepit piece of age?
Nay, brother.
That sad effect of some threescore years and ten, that antic relic of the last Century?
Nay, brother, I told you, you would serve me so.
But, sister, prithee be a little serious. Dost thou love him indeed?
Alas, dear brother, it is but too true.
It is impossible.
One would think so indeed.
I grant, you may bear a reverence and regard, as you would to your fathers ashes, or your Grandfires Tomb.
Witness all that are good and just, never a youth of two and twenty stirred more amorous desires then he hath done in me.
I see now Sue, thou say true.
Certainly the Villain hath bewitched her, could ever woman be thus mad else, to be in love with age and rottenness, to be in love with a withered carcass, whom its own soul being weary of, is readie to forsake and leave?
Alas, brother, you know I never did affect those vain, though pleasing braveries of youth, but still have let my mind on the more nobler part of man, which Age doth more refine and elevate; then it doth depress and sink this same contemptible clod.
Well, Sister, to morrow you shall go down with me into the Country; I'll warrant we shall find them there shall make you forget this same reverend Sir.
O never, never.
Do but try.
I have a Coach here in the Town, come, come, you shall go, I will peently go and ache order about things. 
Now you will believe me another time.
I can scarce believe my self; but is it possible that she should so love me, and I could never perceive it all this while?
Alas, Sir, she is so modest, that I dare swear, except it had been to her brother, she would have concealed this same passion until it had broke her very heart.
But what had I best to do?
Nay, Sir, you see your danger, if her brother should carry her into the Country to morrow, how they may work upon her easy nature, I cannot tell.
You say true.
Even strike while the iron is hot; for ought I know, if you let this night pass, you are gone for ever.
Dost think she would marry me this night then?
That would be somewhat sudden, I must confess, but I dare swear you might persuade her unto any thing, if you do but take your opportunity when her Brother is gone.
Well, I will try what may be done.
But, Sweet-heart, They were just now talking of Tenants that she had, has she any Land too in the Country?
I, Sir, for my part, came to her since she came to London, and therefore cannot speak any thing of mine own knowledge, but somewhat I believe I can guess.
Why, I pray?
Sir, every now and then here comes a company of fellows in leathern breeches with money to my Mistress, and here they keep a talking of Leases, and renewing of Leases, and Fines; a deuce take them for me, I am sure I am fain to clean our Dining-Room some four or five times a week after them.
Say you so? Say you so?
Then (Sir) for a month together about last Lady-day, we lived upon nothing but Capons that these fellows sent us.
You were shrewdly hurt, were you not?
It was but the last week that one, she calls him herBailey, I think.
I, I, right, right; what of him?
Why he sent her a Gammon of Bacon seasoned with peppercorns, that were due to her, one from each Farm.
I?
And when that fellow comes up to the Town, there is such a talking of Rents, Quit-rents, Reversions, Harriots, and I know not what all 
There are some other things she has, they use to talk much of, that I have quite forgot; Stay, Mannals I think they call them.
Manors, you mean.
I, Manors, Manors, what are they (Sir?) any sort of cattle?
No, no, you Cockney.
How shall I wallow in Wealth! I shall never be able to am my luxuriant bags. I may found Hospitals, Colleges, or build Churches.
Sir, and have them turned to Stables.
Mas, thou say true, Wench. I may make Causeways or build Bridges.
Well (Sir) you had not best to lose all, while you are a thinking of it.
It is well said, I will go to her presently. 
YOur Physiognomy (Madam) will erect a Monarchy greater then that of the Ottomans.
Lord! What doth this mean?
I am confident (Sir) you do but complement.
Complement! No, upon my Honour, Madam; for certainly your beauty was composed to captivate the world, and amongst the rest, to make me your eternal Bondslave.
Truly Sir, I dare not think my self worthy of that honour.
Please your Honour, Madam, to have some Oranges: Please your Honour, dainty, curious, fine Oranges.
Let's see Woman.How many Oranges for two pence?
How many for two pence! Take you, you use to come to Hide Park, I'll warrant. I wonder under what Milk-pail you have been bred.
Was there ever such an affront?
What must I do now? May I draw upon a Woman by the rule of Honour? Or must I kick her?
You dirty whore, you.
You think your self a pretty fellow in your buttoned cap. 
I could wish (Madam) that she had been one that I could have in an honourable way, sacrificed my dearest blood to your incomeparable Beauty.
Please your Honour, Madam, curious Apricots Please your Honour to buy my Apricots?
I think, I will not be so affronted again.
Come woman, let's see your Apricots. What is the price of these two baskets?
They are three shillings a piece, if it please your Honour.
Three shillings a piece! What no more? Have you no better?
If it please your Honour, at the other end there are some that are Crowns a piece.
Are there so? And, I pray, why did not you show them at the first?
Because I did not think you such an Ass. 
Please you to choose, Madam.
I'll have this.
Come, I'll have one too.
Hold up your basket: There is an Angel, I think. 
God bless your Honours.
And send you more wit. I rose on my right side, I think, to day. 
What do you mean to spend your money thus, Sir?
O God, Madam, were I mala of the Indies, of all the hidden Treasures of the sea, your Beauty should command it all.
Truly, Sir, you make me that I cannot tell what to say.
But (Sir) had we not best go where the company is again?
I will go see (Madam) whether the Coach be where we left it. 
Madam, will it please you to walk, for the Coach is yonder?
For you, Lady, are the only she of whom I ever yet could seriously in this nature think of; And if I shall ever find in you an affection answerable to my desires, they then will rest, as having attained the chiefest good I ever could hope for from your Sex.
Am I the only she (say you) that you ever could think of? That very thing me thinks) doth make me suspect whatsoever else you have said.
It is true (Lady) I needs must say, that I have seen may a one in whose enjoyment, perhaps, I could have had no mean
content; we might have lived together with all the usual love, she might have made me a Father, and I have thought so; and if I should have lost her, I should have thought my self bereaved of one of those things that serve to pass away a troublesome life, as good company, or Sack.
But one, in admiring of whom I could be content to spend my time, one whom, rather then to miss, I should run all imaginable hazards, I never yet saw, till you.
Come, fie, fie, Mr. Know-wel. Truly, I did not expect this from you.
Should one of those youths indeed, who then think they show most of Accomplishment, when they express most Service unto us; not surely that they have that real value they pretend; but because (as sometimes great Doctors, upon trifling silly questions, will show their Learning) they judge us to be convenient properties to try their Wit and Courtship on: Should such a one (I say) have said so much, I should have esteemed it accordingly.
But what your most sober judgment can find out in me, a thing so trifling and inconsiderable to occasion these kind of words, I do not a little wonder.
Lady, do not wrong your self with these mean thoughts, for certainly there is not that person in the world that I do value like you. I will not so far trespass on your modesty to tell you why; yet I have not been esteemed to act things irrational.
Value me, Sir! for what?
Me thinks, were I but subject to those general imputations, to which our Sex is liable, it were enough to extinguish such a thought.
You see, Sir, I am a woman, one of the most undervalued Creatures living; we never yet by any polity were allowed to meddle with any thing but a needle: We are not esteemed to know ought of rational but our wills; nay, some will not allow us for to know our wills. And should I but consider my self by what some Satiric Wits say of us I could not but believe my self one of the most despicable things in Nature.
You have indeed no little cause for to quarrel with the general custom that doth put such a difference betwixt you and us. For have we not all the same rational souls, the same affects and qualites? Nay, I need must say, I have not seen more acute differentcing and discerning spirits, then I have in some women; nor do I see any reason, but if they should improve and blow those natural sparks they are endued with, by the same means that we do use (neglecting those poor mechanic things to which the absurd humour of the world doth usually addict them) but that they would make a greater blaze then the most eminent of men. And such accomplishments meeting with the usual beauty and sweetness of their Sex, must needs extremely captivate and ravish, nor would any thing come so nigh Divinity.
Well Sir, Although it were granted that there might be somewhat possible in woman sitting to be valued, what were that to me? I should no more dare to believe my self owner of any such thing, then that I did possess the Indies.
No!
Could I but upon as good an account believe you ever to be mine, I should believe my self to possess more then them.
Come (dear Lady) will you give me but the least of hopes to enjoy what ever perfection it be that you are owner of? Shall I think ever to call it mine?
Truly (Sir) I think not, for.
Hold Lady, let me have a little more warning before you intend to give me a stroke so mortal; do not in one instant make me a thing irrational, of no design. For since my hopes have once made you their end, there can nothing surely ever appear to me, so worthy as to fix a thought upon.
Sir, you did a little mistake me, for (as I think) I never did yet any thing that might encourage you to speak in this nature. So truly, thereby I needs must say, I did not intend to destroy whatsoever hopes you have conceived of me; for that which I was a going to say, (had you but given me leave) was only this:
Suppose me Mistress of all the Wit and Parts that ever yet was incident to our Sex,
And (now I am supposing of such impossible things) suppose me (as you just now said) yours; what were that to you more then to all the world? for you could as well hope to appropriate the Air as such Accomplishments. The Sun it self doth not afford more general and communicative influence then they would do.
Nay, perhaps as we now are, you might more enjoy such qualities; for what would wit in a wife serve for, but to interfere with yours. Nor have they been esteemed unwise, whom I have heard say, they could well spare all Judgment in one of that relation, save what were requisite to a handsome dress, or so.
I am so far, Lady, from thinking so, that were that realwhich you now supposed, the greatest Epicure could not more enjoy what ever his sensual appetite doth prompt him to, then I should those perfectonce of your mind; for then we should not only be linked in that mystical knot, nor with those more natural ties and charms, as you are woman or fair; but certainly we should close in that stricter conjuncture of friend and friend, the greatest cement possible twixt humane souls.
And where it joins us with the more refined minds, it is a happiness that the super-errogating Saint in his boldest error could never hope to merit. For to have one who as my better Genius, might regulate even in their first matter my imparted thoughts. What can be a greater bliss?
Or if I had any thing of worth or value in me, to have such a conscient judge and witness, would almost imitate the pleasure that some in the thought of an all-knowing Deity, can in any mis-construed action solace themselves against the opinion of the world.
It is true, I know some kind of Madam, who perhaps, having some not unhappy vain which a little too much taking with the world, might drive her into strange conceits of what she scarce can tell, and make her prove as troublesome and cross, as sometimes are the winds, and have as various and fantastic ways: but wee should no more thwart or differ from each other, then truth would doe from truth, the ways of judgment and discretion being as certain and demonstrative: wee should anticipate each others thoughts, our actions would be as harmonious as are those of Ants or Bees, as if by some secret law of nature we were designed to carry on some common work: what say you, Lady, should we not? shall I ever enjoy in you this happiness?
If not Sir. Your Fancy that hath thus largely supplied all my defects, will easily make good to you a greater loss.
Nay, Prithee be as serious as is the love I bear thee; and tell me freely and plainly what result that which you have observed of me hath wrought upon your thoughts; for this is the only thing by which I must either stand or fall: for should I by entreaties seek to force your will, it would be but vain, since if you cannot afford, to answer my affection, they must needs make you loath, if not contemn and scorn me.
Shall I answer you then, and will you not be sorry?
Hold, for me thinks I stand with the same pain, that the prisons doth, that is to receive sentence either of life or death; fine would I be out of doubt, but loath I am to undergo the trial; but speak, for certainly you have no condemning look.
Well then Sir; to be short, if I should say you are a man, like whom, I never yet saw any; such a one, whom when in my prayers I have thought of man, I have wished for, and desired; it is a truth Sir, which perhaps, by the exact rule of wooing you should not yet have known; and now you know it, you may be sorry that you so easily know it; but I cannot help it.
What could I more desire!
Sir, but I believe it is pretty late, wherefore, if you please, let us go to the Coach again. 
It was my better genius surely, put me on this device, it could not else have fallen out so luckily; for me thinks I have observed a more thn ordinary kindness between my Cozen and this Gentleman, since their coming home; and now I call to mind, this was the man whom she did so commend today, and defend against us all; I needs must say, that I was much mistaken in him, for surely, he is one of far more worth then I did take him for to be.
Well, if she have any such desires, would heaven inflame them to the height, and so finish my imperfect hopes, which already doe begin to take some shape and form. 
But here I think she is.  
What, are you come, Affection?
I, is it not time?
And how go now affairs at Hide-Park? what new beauties are there come to Town, since I have been in the Country? which is the chiefest planet that doth now shine in that round-moving orb of Coaches?
You should have asked, what was the newest fashion, who had the finest gown, or the handsomest dress; for these are things wee women only mark: This Gent. I believe, would better have resolved you that question.
What say you Mr. Know well, which was the handsomest Lady that you saw there?
That, Lady, would be a very difficult business to determine, I should rather choose me a Mrs. by her picture, or as the Italians, they say, do, through a window, and think my self subject unto less deceit.
Why, I pray Sir?
When one sees, Lady, nothing but a face, and that dressed up unto the height, I might as well Judge of a book by the fine Greek title; the Vardingales had not so much imposture; give me a place where I may see and Judge of all dimensions.
I remember I marked a Lady there whom I have seen somewhere before, she is one (Ladies) that hath the strangest antic shape as ever nature in her greatest whimsy was Author of.
But as sometimes you shall see a pretty neat device carved on a knotty crab-tree stick, her face, I must confess, is not much amiss, for as she ordered the business with her advantageous sitting in the Coach, she was the only shining planet, as you say, that drew all eyes upon her.
No Sir, she was but a false deluding Comet.
I, so she might, for I am sure she has a huge excrescence at her back.
Well, but Mr. Know-well, what say you to the Western Lady that I showed you?
She doth well, I must confess, at a distance, but when wee came nearer, me thought she was but ordinary.
There was one I told you of, that I said was newly come to the town, is not she handsome?
Handsome?
I will assure you there are some whose opinions are accounted very authentic in these kind of things, that say so.
Surely then I believe they have a mind to try how much their judgments can impose upon the world.
There was a lass in the Coach with the green Livery that you looked much upon.
She had indeed a good complexion, and I believe right; besides, a pretty innocent look, as if she meant no hurt, and pity it were to do her any. And although she have some features which, according to the exact rule are not esteemed handsome, yet certainly, there is somewhat in her face, will force one to believe them pleasing.
Do you remember Sir, she in the cloth of Silver wast-coate, that I bad you take notice of.
Yes, that I do, and truly she will serve well enough, only me thinks she has a kind of sullen look, as if she would be angry, if the artillery of her eyes should fail.
There was, when I was last in the town, a City Lady, that was much talked of.
O! I wonder how I have forgot her all this while, that was she we overtook, you eyed her much.
I did indeed, because I have heard so much of her; she has a most complete and perfect beauty, nor can the greatest critic in this kind find any fault with the least proportion of her face, but yet me thought I was no more taken with it, then I should with some curios well drawn picture.
That Sir, is somewhat strange. 
In my mind, not at all, Lady; for it is not always that we are Governed by what the general fancy of the world calls beauty; for each soul hath some predominant thoughts, which when they light on ought that strike on them, there is nothing doth me inflame.
And as in music, that pleases not most which with the greatest art and skill is composed; but those aires that do resemb and stir up some dormant passion to which the mind is addicted. So I believe, never yet was any one much taken with a face, in which he did not espy ought that did rouse and put in motion some affection that hath ruled in
his thoughts, besides those features, which only for the sake of common opinion we are forced to say doth please.
Yonder comes Mr. La-gull, I think.
I will stand aside here a little, then. 
Mr. La-gull, your servant.
What? are you come but now?
No, Madam, We staid somewhat the longer by reason of a small accident that happened.
What was that, I pray?
I hope it is not another story of a buck. 
This night, Madam, there was a horse-race, on which I had laid a trifling bett of some forty pounds. Wherefore I being desirous for to see it, (first, craving pardon of this Lady, for my so rudely leaavenge her) got upon my Barberry Mare that my Lackey had there. And (Madam) there happened to be there a French man, one who (as I have heard) is a Monsieur of much honour and repute in his Country: He (Madam) observing me, said I did ride well, and manag my horse handsomely for an English man; which I over hearing, told him, that I was transcendently engaged to him for his good openneon of me; but yet I could not in honour but take notice of the affront he put upon my Country in those words; wherefore (Madam) I told him, that if he pleased, he should find an English man could rule a sword as well as a Horse; and upon that (Madam) we drew.
There was no hurt done I hope? was there?
Not much, Madam.
Yet I must confess, I made a thrust at him, which he bearing down run quite through his Porte-canon; And he with a hanger that he had, stroke at my head, which I could not so fully ward, but that he cut off the button of my Cap; and then (Madam) we were parted by the company but he bid me look to hear further from him, and went his way, and I came back to this same Lady.
Truly Sir, your Country cannot but look upon you as one of her chiefest Champions.
O God Madam! the honour of my Country is far dearer to me, then my life. I should be unworthy to live in it, should I have suffered it to receive such an affront. 
Sir, here is one hath brought you a letter.
For me? I'll warrant it is the Gent. I talked of, hath sent me a challenge. For I have taken order to have one sent, the more to countenance this same story.  
A challenge say you, is it? pray let me see, I never yet did see the fashion of a challenge.
Nay Madam. 
Come, I will read it.
If you will, I cannot tell how to help it, for I was not born to contradict fair Ladies wills.
Stay, What is this?
Sir, I (according as you desired me) have found out the Gentleman you wot of, whom I do really find to have much interest in your adversary.
Hold Lady, for this is not a challenge, but a letter of some private business. 
It is no matter, now I have begun, I will make an end of it.
Excuse me, Madam.
Why Mr. La-gull, I thought you had not been born to contradict fair Ladies wills. 
Nay, Madam, I must have it. 
Here  She flings it t Crisis. La-gull offers to take it from her with some rudeness, she striving to keep it, in the midst of the bustle Enter Know-wel.
Why, you uncivil fellow, what is the matter?
What, is he here too? how unluckily it falls out? Mis-fortune on Mis fortune!
Here Mr. Know-well, read this.
Read this! 
But I could by no means prevail with him to be a means of taking your quarrel up, except you lend him the sum I told you of, which (you to day referring the matter unto me) I have promised him; and have procured one that will lay down the money. Wee shall be all at night at the old place, where I desire you would not fail, but meet, that wee may make an end of the business.
Your humble servant
Rich. Hadland.
No surely, this is no challenge.
What shall I do? I am disgraced for ever. My honour, my honour and reputation is lost eternally.
Not a whit Sir; for to tell you plainly, there is none here, that I believe, did ever think you had any to lose.
I am abused, some body has abused me with this letter.
You are abused indeed Sir, and will be more, if you do not take heed.
Come Mr. La-gull, you are amongst none but your friends, if you will be ruled by us, I'll warrant you you shall doe well enough yet.
You had as good take some counsel now, lest you repent when it is too late.
The truth of it is, Sir, you are happened into the hands of some sule youths, who knowing you to bee a man of a fair fortune, nover any Merchants Cash-keeper, or Lass of twenty thousand pounds, had more designs on them, then they have on you
What would you have me do?
Doe? Why, even as those of your temper use to do; leave this town, marry, and seat your self in the country.
Come not up hither, except it be in an Easter Term, or so, to buy your wife a new gown.
Trouble your self no more about these nice and subtle rules of honour, or in getting a fine affected strain of complement; but if you will needs bue your brain, you may learn the strange dialect of Hawks and Hounds.
Some fine speeches though, you may keep in Lavender, to excuse your Christmas cheer, or to use in distributing a Feasant of your own taking.
You need not then be so inquisitive after the modes and fashionce; a fine gaudy suit or two to wear on Market days, or in the assize-week, will be well enough.
In stead of roaring night and day in Taverns, or venturing with a company of Cheats, at some Ordinary, the price of a Farm, keep your drinking matches of tubs of Ale, and your bowling days, where your Crown rubbers will not do you much prejudice.
And when you have a mind to play the good husband, a nursery, or a hop-ground may sind you good employment.
You may learn to inoculate, and if any Ladies come to visit you, a dish of fruit, with a story how you your self did graft it, may serve for all your costly treatments here.
Upon a rainy day, or when you have nought else to do, you may read Sir Walter Raleigh, Lord Basins Natural History, the Holy War, and Browns Vulgar Errors. You may find too some stories in the English Eusebius, and the Book of Martyrs, to hold discourse with the Parson on a Sunday dinner.
Sometimes to your wife you may read a piece of Shak-speare, Suckling, and Ben. Iohnson too, if you can understand him.
You may read the Scout, and Weekly Intelligence, and talk politically after it. And if you get some smattering in the Mathematicks, it would not be amiss, the Art of dialling, or to set your clock by the quadrant, and Geography enough to measure your own land.
Thus you may employ your self, and do the business that you came for into the world, uphold your name and family, make your son somewhat at the better Gentleman, in making his pedigree the loneger by one.
I am highly engaged to you for this advice, and hence forward I shall study to observe it. 
Is not Mr. Know-well here?
My name is Know-well, friend, what would you have with me?
O, is it so? Then pray come along with me.
With you? for what?
Come away, I say, without dispute, for I am a man of Authority.
Cry mercy, for I might very well have mistaken you. But I pray, what is the matter?
The matter? as if you did not know. 
Not I, nor can I guess.
You do not know I'll warrant, one Mr.  Well bred, I think they call him.
Why, I pray, Mr. Constable, what of him?
I have some little acquaintance with him.
But what of him?
Why, what doth it concern you, I wonder, that you are so hasty to know?)
Nothing, but that this Gentleman hath killed him a little, he is only dead.
Dead!
I, as a door nail, I'll warrant you by this time; I am sure I left him gasping almost two hours ago.
Dead!
I, as a Herring, I dare lay my life, by this time.
How doe you Cozen? are you not well?
A kind of a fainting fit that uses to take me sometimes, since I had my Ague in the Country, it will presently over again.
What can be the meaning of this? I have not seen him to day.
Come, come, I am not to dispute that with you.  You did not send him a challenge neither? did you?
I, a challenge! certainly you are mistaken.
Yes I'll warrant, did not these eyes see it taken out of his pocket? but if I am mistaken, then pray come along with me without more ado.
What strange unlucky accident hath happened, that hath thus blasted all my hopes that did begin to bud, and made that occasion of my endless grief, which I had thought had been the way to what I had most desired. 
This is a sad story; wee had best to follow and inquire further into it.  Stay, Now I think of it, I will go to his ldging; Prethy Mr. La-gull, go bid your man get a Coach. 
Malicious wit could never have devised such a plague.  Fight I dare not.  'Slid, but here he comes I think, what shall I do? I will walk on, perhaps he may not see me. 
My man is out of the way, who shall I get to get a Coach?  But yonder is Caster, certainly he cannot but see me, yet he takes no notice of me; perhaps it is the mode not to take notice after a challenge: I will do so too. 
Nay Mr. La-gull, good Mr. La-gull, I did but. 
'Slid, I thought hee had been here. 
What a strange kind of thing is this same fear, that doth not only improve real dangers, but raises fantastic ones, where there are none at all. 
Surely he called me.
Thou prodigious and unruly monster, could I but quell thee!
He talks terribly, certainly he doth intend to fight presently.
Look, here he is again, if my fear doe not again deceive me. I had even best to tell him the truth, yield up my sword, and put my self to his mercy, I care not upon what terms.
It is so  he draws.  Hold. But they say he has no mercy,  I had then as good die according to the rule of honor. 
Hold, hold, I yield. Murder. Murder. 
Give me your sword then;
Here, here. 
Is it no more to fight then so? is this the thing all this while I have been so affrighted with? have I so easily mastered such a man? a man so valiant as they said he was? whom then need I fear?
Me thinks I could now fight with any body, would any living thing but affront me. 
What have I done? For they say he is like to dye. He was too (as I have since heard) a very accomplished man; Nay, certainlie I was much deceived in him, for his carriage had much of spirit in it, and a Gentleman.
Well, little did I think I should ever have been compelled unto these kind of courses; and nothing doth more vex me, then that I am fain to consort my self with such unworthy things, which I should abhor, did not my fortunes, broken by these late Wars, force me to make them the instruments of my subsistence, One of them though I would be now glad to light on, if I could tell where. But yonder I think he comes. 
Why, how now Caster? Where hast thou been? For I have been looking for thee almost all over the Town, I think.
All over the Town! You might have chanced to have looked beyond China and Iapan, and not have found me.
Well, I thank God I am here now, but I was like to have been further then ever Drake was, by this time.
Why, Prithee, where?
Where? Why, in that Terra incognito, the other world.
The other world! What would thou have done there? they do not there play at dice: or if they do, old Nick, I doubt, would go nigh to be the better Cheat.
But what was the matter?
Why, I met with the dreadful blade.
Whom do you mean?
Whom should I mean? the terrible Squire La-gul.
He has not spoiled all now, I hope. 
Well, and what then?
What then! He drew, and came upon me like any lightning, but my discreet and timely submission, together with the coming of some company, did a little assuage his fury.
Did you submit unto him, say you?
What should I do else?
If I did not think so 
I could now kick thee, could I but afford to take the pains.
Thou hast spoiled all that we have been plotting of this fortnight, when we had just brought it to perfction.
You would have had me (I'll warrant) have been such an Ass, as to have fought and ventured my life.
Fought! Thou need not so much as have made a mouth, rowned, or put thy self into a fighting posture.
What should I have done then unto such a son of Thunder?
A son of Thunder! a more arrant Coward then thy self, if possible.
Did not you tell me he was another kind of man?
I did indeed in jest to fright you a little, but we this night were to have had Two hundred pounds of him to have made you his friend.
Well, this it is, when you will put me on things that are out of my Element; I could have been a Cheat this seven years, and have done well enough.
Well, I have a business for you to do, which if you will do handsomely, you will redeem my opinion.
Is it to fight?
No.
Then I'll warrant you. 
BUt surely you were not always of this mind.
I needs must say, I was not; for it is not long since I did look on you, as one with whom rather by the Decree of Heaven, then my own desires, I was ordained to live as wife. Although (I must confess) I never saw any thing so unpleasing in you, but that (if such a thing had been) I could have afforded you whatver love and duty you could have expected from one of that relation; yet this is more then I am sure you could promise to your self from any thing I ever showed to you; But the various accidents of this day hath so fully represented to me a man with whom my soul would more agre, that in him I am resolved to rest as to these kind of thoughts.
Nay, Lady, if you be in earnest, even as you please; for I would this wound would but admit as easy cure as any you have given me. And I cannot tell what out of the height of Courtship I may have said, but I believe you do not think I was born to die of love.
Yet I know not, for the story that you have told me of your Cozen, hath raised some kind of thoughts in me that I never had before. And if this that she hath done be out of love to me (as it cannot but deserve, so) it must needs cause in me an answerable affection.
Well, Sir, the Gentleman is by this time before the Justice; it is more then time that I went and informed them of the truth.
But I had almost forgot: Here is a ring Sir, you gave me to day, which I desire you would take back.
Excuse me, Lady, It is not of that value.
Believe me, Sir, I will not keep it.
Well, then I will tel you what you shall do; even present it to your Cozen in my name as an earnest of my love. I hope it will not be long, before I may be in that condition, as to wait upon her my self, for I do feel my self much amended now my wound is stopped, my illness only proceeding from some loss of blood.
Well, Sir, I wish you a speedy recovery.
Nay, Lady, I may wait upon you to the door. 
Come, here they are, what will you do?
Let's see.
Faith, all our old devices, false cubed Dice with Quicksilver, the boxes with springs, besides all the other Arts of the hand, are grown as common as the Jugglers box.
They are only fitting to cozen Prentices of their Christmas Box-money.
What say you to that which I told you of the other day?
The business with the Loadstone?
That I believe is not very common, nor is it easy to be discoveered; but you know we are not now provided for that.
Then you must even see what you can do with your old Tricks.
These Lads I am afraid will go nigh for to discover them.
No I'll warrant you, they are drunk up unto a handsome pin. Besides, let the worst come to the worst, I will be here hard by. 
Mr. La gul! Your servant; I am glad to hear of your good success. They say, you have gained a great deal of Honour to day.
Take your Honour for me; I am not now for Honour, but for fighting.
And first I will begin with you, as the principal man that has abused me.
This is brave, I vow,
What is the matter with him?
Is your name La-gul?
Yes, I am the self same man, only I do a little better understand my self, what an Ass you have made me all this while. And to be short, I here demand of you satisfaction, you being the only man that either dares, or is worthy to give it.
Come draw, for I am resolved.
As I live, I like your resolution howsoever.
Hadland, Hadland, help, help.
Why how now, Sirs, what is the matter?
They are Cheats, arrant Cheats.
Cheats, Cheats, they have cozened us of almost 100 l. but at the last we caught them.
Rogues, Cheats, give me my money, or I will beat out your brains.
Come let them alone since they have made a couple of fools of you, do not you make your selves more by keeping such a doings. 'Slid they have cozened me of at the least 300 l. within this fortnight, and yet you hear me say never a word.
Fools of us, do you say!
I, most notorious fools and coxcombs; nothing more plain, for thus I will prove it: You came in with money in your purses, but this money you have lost, and are like to go away without it, therefore you are fools.
I deny your Minor, for I say, they have not lost it, but have plaid with Cheats, and have been cozened of it, therefore they are not fools.
It is true, they have plaid with Cheats, and have been cozened, but therefore they are fools.
Shall we endure this?
But they did not know them to be Cheats, and therefore they are not fools.
It is true, they did not know them to be Cheats; but therefore they are fools.
What say you? are you not Gentlemen?
Shall we lose our money and be abused too? you uncivil, rude fellow. 
Nay, if you be thereabouts, here is an Argument to prove you fools that you have not seen. And this shall make you confesse. 
Nay Gentlemen, two to one is too much, there shall be no unequal doings. 
This act hath reconciled me to thee; it was bravely done, I vow, and like thy self; for whatsoever courses you have run of late, I have not long since heard much of your worth and value.
The truth of it is, I have done some things, more for to satisfy my wants, then through my own desires. And I am now grown so weary of this kind of life, that I could wish any other employment, though never so mean, that would but maintain me but as a Gentleman.
I'll tell you what, I think I shall now shortly marry, and settle my self in the Country; if you will come and live with me, and bear me company, I will continue what I give you, and more will add (if you do desire) and whatsoever is past, I will forget, and never think of, except it be over a bottle of Sack when we have a mind to be merry.
Your offer is noble, and if a design that I have in hand, do chance to fail, may possibly be opportune. However, as it cannot but much engage me, so I shall endeavour to show how sensible I am of this your Civility. Nor
Hold, for I am now grown quite out of conceit with Complements; if you will come, I will assure you, you shall be wellcome.
And as for you, my brace of Asses, now I hope you are not so furious but that one may in sober sadness prove you a couple of fools for venturing of your money upon uncertain chance.
I hope not so.
Yes, but I will, and because they shall not take it ill, I will assure you it is no more then what a sober Gentleman proved me for the selfsame cause not above half an hour since.
That (Sir) in my mind, if you be in earnest, is somewhat strange; for although that the chance of dice is certain in it self, and doth (as all other things of chance) depend on sure and natural causes; yet these causes either being unknown to us, or else not in our power, their effects must needs to us, before they come to pass, be also unknown; and from this ignorance, if thereby we are concerned, must needs arise a certain strife and Altercation of hopes and fears, which with no little pleasure doth affect the soul.
Now Sir, all pleasures by providence being created for our better being, may rationally enough be (if but discreetly) used.
From hence it follows, that one may not only play at Dce, but also venture so much upon their chance, whereby these passions may arise.
It is true, Sir, if one venture no more; but to venture so much, as that the loss thereof may mke any considerable alteration in ones fortune, cannot but be (as he said) the height of folly.
Why so, Sir For have I not as probable and rational hopes for to improve, as to impair the same, Chance in reason being supposed impartial unto none?
But, Sir, then said he, ones estate and fortune, being the principal thing that makes one to be valued in the world, I cannot certainly more rationally imply the force and vigour of my wit, then about that.
Now (Sir) in a thing that so much concerns me, wholly to balk whatsoever benefit my judgmen might afford, and put my self into such a way, where the starkest ool has as much advantage as I, and more too, if the Proverb be tu must needs, in any sober mans opinion render me a fool.
Well, Gentlemen, I can no longer help you, but that I see there is a necessity you will be concluded fools.
Well then my couple of fools, adieu, and here also I do take my leave of whatsoever folly I have been guilty of.
Stay, there was a pair of Knaves too, that I should have bid God bu'y; but it is no matter, I shall see them again when I next come to Town;
For as long as London City doth endure,
In it a knave, as well as fool, to find you shall be sure.
That (Sir) is no marvel; for fools and knaves are the two main springs on which not only that, but all the world doth move; he that would have none of these, encounters providence, and would overturn the policy of the world: were all things of one temper, the Universe would not subsist one minute: were all men wise, the world would be at a stand, whilst each do prove unmalleable unto others designs.
Fools and Knaves are the two Poles on which the wheels of Fortune turn: It is these make Riches, Honour, with a healthfull
course to ebb and flow through all the world, which else would rot and putrefy in some particular names and families.
But I shall be staid for, for I have appointed to meet at a certain place.
Your servant 
Come my Chuck, now thou art mine, and whatsoever is in this house is thine.
But when my brother knows this, he will never endure me for serving him so.
It is no matter, so long as thou hast my love.
I Sir, if I were assured of that, I would despise all the world besides; but I doubt I have too much cause to fear, that it is my Wealth you have married, and not me.
But you shall have no such cause, I'll warrant you.
O my dear Honey, I could wish that thou were worth never a great, that thou might see how I love thee.
Sir, there is the Constable without, he hath brought a Gentleman.
What? Cannot he let me be quiet on my Wedding-day. 
Come Mr. Constable, what is the matter?
Why, Sir, an't please your Worship, I have reprehended a man upon suspicion of murder.
Of murder! God forbid man, I hope not so.
Look you (Sir) I do but charge him of suspicion of murder, I do not lay flat murder to his hands: I'll warrant you I know what I do.
Well, but how stands the case? What witness have you of it?
If it please your Honourable Worship, that which I have to say aagainst this Gentleman under correction, in brevity is only this.
Nay, an't like your Worship, I saw the first beginning, therefore, I hope you will give me leave to speak first.
Come on then friend, you look like an honest fellow; what are you?
An't like your Worship, I am by Trade a Black-Smith. I was a Prentice in Fetter-lane, and have been a man for my self ever since the last great Sickness, which is some thirty years ago, I think, for I am sure our Ned was born the year after, and hee is nine and twenty now this next long Vacation.
Well, but what can you say to the business?
Why, an't like your Worship, I this Afternoon, after I had bid my wife lay down the shoulder of Mutton that (an't like your Worship) I bought in the morning, I went out into the fields (an't like your Worship) to take a turn or two to get me a stomach.
But I had almost forgot one main thing, for as I was going, I met with an old companion of mine, one Will. Freeman by name. An't like your Worship, I tell you no lye, for as they say, Tell the truth and shame the Devil.
Well, but what then, friend?
Why, An't like your Worship, honest Will said I, it was a merry old world when you and I were Prentices together in Fetterlane. And upon that, (an't like your Worship) he would needs have me go spend my two pence with him.
Well, but come to the point, what do you know concerning this Gentleman?
Nay, by your Worships favour, I am bound to speak the truth, and the whole truth. But stay, where was I?
Your friend and you were a going to drink, you said.
O I, and then (an't like your Worship) we went to the Ca and Fiddle, and when we had drunk our flagon a piece, and we were just a coming away, in came a neighbour of mine,stay,I shall hit on his name presently.
Well, it is no matter for his name,but what of him?
An't like your Worship, he would needs make us stay the drinking of his flagon too; and by that time that was done, an't like your Worship, I began to think the shoulder of Mutton might be overroasted, and therefore I made as much haste home as I could; and as I was coming along by the wall, imagining no hurt, nor thinking of no harm, O I saw the saddest and lamentable sight.
What was that?
I never saw so much all the days of my life.
But what was it?
And I hope I shall never see the like again.
Nay, what was it?
Why, An't like your Worship, I saw a proper, goodly young Gentleman, as one shall see in a year and a day, lye in the most yearnful
condition, all in gore blood, that it would have grieved any heart to have seen the like; and then this same young man came.
And what can you say friend? I think I have seen you somewhere; is not Mr. Du-cape the Mercer your Master?
If it please your honourable worship, I am resident with Mr. Du-cape upon the account of a Journeyman.
Cry mercy, but what say you?
Why, if it please your honourable worship, as I was going a long upon a very civil account, to carry a piece of Satin to a person of Honour, in the Piazza, in Lincolnes Inn fields, just under the wall, I chance it to cast my eyes and view the aforesaid Gent. whose name is Mr. Well-bred, in the self same condition as this man has before specified and declared, and I upon that account deeming him to be dead, did debate with my self upon what account the said Man-slaughter should happen; but I approaching nearer, did descry him to be one that had been a customer to my Master, and I upon that account knowing his lodging, did desire this same man that upon that account he would be instrumental in conveying him thither. And when upon that account we bebegan to stir him, his wound upon that account began to bleed with a most extreme violence, in so much that I seeing his handkerchief, hang out of his pocket, did upon that account judge it requisite to pull it out, to help stop his wound; and pulling it out, I chanced upon that account to pull out a letter, which this man desiring me to read 
You may see that some are wiser then some.
 Upon that account I read it, and finding it to bee a challenge, upon that account did I estimate this Gentleman to have fought a duel.
Where is the letter?
Here, if it please your honourable Worship.
Read it Goos-quill.
Goos-quill reads.  Sir, I cannot but as I am a Genlemon take notice of the affront you put on me, in pretending to Mistress Crisis, to whom none living doth owe more service then my self; wherefore I desire that you would hence-forward desist, or else meet me at the back side of Islington, with your friend and a Rapier, where I shall in the same manner attend you, about five of the clock. In the mean while, I rest,
will these bloody and inhumane duels never be left off? shall wee never but be thus barbarous one to another? as
if we were not men, but Butchers, Turks or Tartars.
What say you Sir, are not you the man that killed him? do you not know that blood requires blood?
Surely Sir there is some great mistake, for my part I have not seen the Gentleman this day.
It will be well if that will serve your turn; I think the matter cannot be more clear; Come Goos-quill make a Mittimus presently.
Sir, If you please, I shall produce some, in whose company I have been all this afternoon. 
Hold, hold, I beseech you Sir, let him stay a little.
Mrs. Crisis! how doth your father, my very good neighbore?
Very well Sir, he will be here shortly.
But what is the matter, can you say any thing in this business?
Sir, only this, the Gentleman that Mr. Know-well here is supsed to have killed, is not dead.
How! not dead?
No Sir, He was only through much loss of blood, fainted away for a time; but now Sir, he is very well again, neither did hee give him the wound that he has, but he saith he had it in a quarrel that happened between him, and some that he met in the fields.
That is strange.
Sir, If you will have but a little patience, there will be some here immediately that will clear all things to you.
Well then, stay a little.
What, must he not be hanged then?
I'll warrant that Gentlewoman has begged him.
She must be a pure virgin if she have.
They say he has bought his life for a thousand pounds, and then he to have a lease of it for fourscore years.
There is a fine device indeed; this it is to be a Gentleman, I'll warrant one of us should have been hanged without more ado.
Bear back there. 
But Mr. Quorum, I hear you have stolen a wedding to day.
Such things will be sometimes; She was a fortune merely cast upon me.
But shall not I have the happiness to see your Bride in the mean time?
Yes that you shall.
Goos-quill, go and desire your Mistress to come in.
Speak but one word, you rogue, and I will cut your throat.
Witness. Surely I should know her.
I, that is she without doubt. 
Nay, It is I.
Do you know my wife?
I have a little reason, for I am sure she owes my Master almost  pound.
50 pound! that is nothing;  but I hope thou dost not owe many such debts, Chuck.
Why, what if I do?
Nay, nothing, but I hope not so. 
What, am I examined already?
Be not angry Love,  for I know thou hast wherewithal to pay them.
Have I so? Were I disposed, how could I laugh to see how thou art consent!
Ha! Consent!
I cozened, thou old doting fool: could you ever imagine any thing else?
Hey da!
Nay, but Honey, what do you mean? you are not in earnest, are you?
In earnest? Do you think I am not? could you ever be so mad, as to think that I in my heat and strength of years could ever doe on thy dull frosty carcass?
Oh, oh, oh, oh.
Do you think that I would mix my blood with thy cold phlegmatic, youy humours, had it not been to raise my sinking fortune, nd to keep me from those extremities of poverty, that did daily threaten me?
Oh I am undone, I am undone, undone.
And yet had my condition been ten times worse, were I to be tied only to thy bed, I should repent the change.
A brave Girl I vow.
For I already do begin to feel those warm desires that thou this many a year never hast been able to satisfy.
Come, Master Know-well, let us go into the next room, she will make me blush' else.  
What, are you going Sir, I hope now you know the house, I shall see you here sometimes, our years indeed would somewhat suit, and what ever we should chance to do, here is one must father all.
O impudence!
O patience, patience, patience, I shall run mad else, mad, mad, mad.
Now Sir, my revenge is perfect; do you not know me?
Mr. Had-land!
I, Do you not remember how some seven years ago you took the forfeiture of my Lands that were mortgaged to you, and ever since have unjustly kept me from them?
O, I do remember, and confess this is a judgment, a Judgment.
I'll warrant her she is a judgment worse then either fam sword or the pestilence, or I am deceived. 
You have wronged me, for I say mine was the first turn.
Peace.
Peace, you whore! I will not hold my peace.
What, shall I be called whore in mine own house? out you roq Mr. Constable, I charge you to turn him out.
Hee turn me out!stir but one inch you rogue, and you stir your last. 
And now I say, you are a whore, and a most damned whore.
And Sir, nothing so much grieves me, as that I have been the cause of helping you to this same strumpet.
O Sir, what is she? what is she? let me know the worst, for I am prepared.
That which I know of her, Sir, is this; I was first acquainted with her in the army, where I will assure you she was accounted a very necessary piece of ammunition, in some five nights, I think, she would serve all our troop; since (Sir) she has lived about the town, no small sinner, she has been as common as a Hackny Coach, and much about the same price, two shillings the first hour, and one shilling an hour after, as long as you will: she is as prostituted as some modern Works, only they are spread upon the stalls in the day, and she in the night.
Hold her.
And Sir, if the knowledge of men be the chiefest wisdom, believe she is not unwise, for in them she is not a little experienced;she will tell you (I believe) the difference betwixt the melancholy, and the sanguine, the fair, or the black haired youth: she could perhaps from her own knowledge, mend the observations of Culpepper, or Aristotles problems, tell who doth afford most pleasure the hot Italian, or the tough Germain, the nimble French-man, or the grave Spaniard.
Why, you villain you, if through the frailty of my youth I have committed any of these kind of things, must every rogue tell me of it?
On I go for all this  And Sir, about a year ago in this service, she got a certain mischance, that you may guess, insomuch, that what with her expenses to the Surgeon and Apothecaries, together with the intermitting of her trade, she was reduced to much poverty, and had incurred many debts.
Debts!
I, debts of all sorts, from her Mercer to her Milk-maid, all which have been some while forborne through the expectation of your paying them.
Oh, oh, oh, what shall I do? here Goos-quill, take my knife, I don't know what I may do else.
Believe me (Sir) you will have a very charitable employment of it, you will pay many a pound that for a long while hath been accounted desperate; but for you (Sir) many a poor man might have been undone.
This (Sir) will be almost as good as founding Colleges, or building Churches.
And although you build no Hospitals, yet she may chance to find you employment for Surgeons.
You may in time to come, repair and make bridges for your nose.
O thou damned perfidious whore.
O Sir, she is perfidious indeed, if you know how she has served me.
O How, how, how? let me hear, it will be some comfort to me to know any body else that has been consent by her besides myself.
Why (Sir) this Gentleman and I, (although for my part I must confess, I do repent of what I have done) did much assist her in the accomplishing of this her design on you, for which in gratitude to us, and also in respect of your years, she did agree, that we two should have a certain kind of employment (Sir) an ancient Roman office called Adjutores thori, conjunctim &amp; divisim, execute per vices, or by turns; And (Sir) by the bargain I was to have the first turn; but she (Sir) not minding the premises, fraudulently and maliciously, against all equity, justice, and good conscience, and against the true intent and meaning of the parties, hath let this Gentleman 
I that she has, I'm sure; when you sent me for her, I caught them both upon the bed.
Oh, oh, I shall never be able to endure: O give me my knife again, O give me it, I say.
You had best, and be accessory to his death.
Well, I am resolved on it; I know what I will do. 
Come, let us follow him, he may doe himself some mischief else. 
Which way went hee?
I cannot tell.
Up stairs, I think.
Go after him, for Gods sake, and see whether you can find him. 
2 pages missing
with you. Mr. Constable, I charge you for to seize upon her.
Hold, hold.
Why?
This is my reason; 
Was not I the man that married you?
Nay, Sir, it is a plain case, yours was clearly no marriage.
Nay, then I see I am cozened.
You are indeed, Sir, I hope, for we have taken a great deal of pains in vain else; I am sure we have been plotting this same business any time this month.
Well, I do yield my self cozened, and am glad it is no worse.
And now Mr. Had land, I see you have wit to get an Estate, I hope you will have wit to keep it. You are one, I must confess, of whose good parts I have heard divers times, and you shall shortly find, you have no more then I can well afford you.
And now, Sir, here the Gentleman hath made a shift to come hither in a Coach, that I was supposed to have killed.
And here I do acquit him.
I must confess, I had a challenge from him; but going for to meet him, I met with some other Gentleman, between whom and my self there chanced a certain quarrel, in which I got the wound.
I challenged you! Certainly.
Sir, do not wonder any longer, for I will resolve the doubt.
This Gentleman was this afternoon to go to a certain place, whithere, if he had gone, I had been for ever lot; wherefore I upon the sudden, not thinking of a better way, sent him that Challenge in your name, only thereby to hinder his going,for which, Sir, I beg your pardon.
Which I durst warrant, if it be but for my sake, you shall obetain.
Madam, you are so far from wanting pardon for what you have done, that to you I owe whatsoever happiness I do expect in this same Lady.
If, Sir, you owe any thing to me, I shall look for satisfaction only in this same Gentleman, for whose sake I did what I did.
I shall be, Lady, so far from quitting others scores, that what I owe you on mine own account, while I live, I shall never clear.
Well, Mr. Had-land, I cannot but blush when I think
what a part you have made me act to day.
Thou hast done that this day (my Dear) that will eternally oblige me.
Madam, I hope you will pardon what I said today, knowing to what end it was spoken; for there is not that Lady in the world of whom I have more honourable thoughts, then I have of you.
I am sure I never gave you cause to have other.
How now Sirs? What would you have?
Sir, we come to demand your assistance against a couple of knaves that are here, that this afternoon have cheated us of almost a hundred pounds.
Which be they?
Here is one.
And this is the other.
Have they cheated you, say you?
Yes that they have.
What say you, Gentlemen?
Your Worship (I hope) by experience knows, that such a thing may not be altogether impossible.
Well, Gentlemen will you refer the business to me, upon that condition, that I do please you all?
I, Sir, upon that condition; but we shall not be pleased without our money.
Why, then I order you to give them their money.
But then we shall not be pleased.
Yes, but you shall: for now I am resolved upon a design, which I hope will be as good as building Hospitals.
Gentlemen, by the carriage of this business, I see you have more in you then ever I did take you for to have. And although you have been wild in your time, yet now I believe you would know how to value an estate.
First therefore, as for you Mr. Had- Land, what you have gotten by this device from me, I freely will let you enjoy.
And for these Gentlemen, I will give them that which shall maintain them like themselves without these shifts.
To be short, Gentlemen, I have an Estate and never a child, and if you henceforward do nothing that may displease me more then this your days work hath done, I shall not be wanting in any thing that you may expect from a father. What, doth this please you?
Beyond our expectation.
We, Sir, shall never be able to deserve this.
Come, come, you have deserved it already.
What strange accidents have happened this day!
O I, it is true, I did not think of it.
Mr. Hadland, there is a Supper ready within, which I did cause to be provided as for my Wedding Supper; but since you have got my Bride, you must even take the Supper too.
Gentlemen, will you please to walk?
Then here we do begin the round; tomorrow my daughla and this Gentleman say, you must be at my house.
The next day after I do invite you.
And I the next day after that.
March then in, and as you your Weddings make, In the same order now your places take. 

LEt the world feel thee, and those Demigods,
Proud with the name of Kings, debase themselves
To honour thee; this Crown commands as much
Wherewith I do invest thy happy brow,
Happy indeed, if that succeeding times
Shall set up virtue, so to lessen crimes.
Thus from the ashes of dead Solyman
Is raised another Phoenix, great Corcutus;
Live equally adored: when Princes bend
To better courses, all their subjects mend.
Crowns make not Kings, nor can that glittering show
Perfect thine honour, take another sign
Of thy Imperial dignity, tic thine.
That adds a God-like grace unto thy brow,
This binds due honour, that prostrates every knee
Before thy throne: then live, and may that arm
Secure thy subjects from all foreign harm.
What seasoned knowledge, learnings prudent Queen
Hath blessed thee with, must now initiate thee
In the paths of war. All studied Arts
Are but degrees unto some wished end,
And steps of hope whereby we do ascend
Unto the top, and level of our thoughts.
But Kings then prove most happy when they are
Watchful in peace; and provident in war.
Those are their utmost ends, which that they may
O'retake, Art and the Sword make fairest way.
The Muses nursed thee up, and thou did draw
The pleasant juice of learning from their breasts
In thy first nonage; here then we bestow
The second help, to which good Princes owe
Much of their welfare; Swords are the first ground
Of peace and war; they both defend and wound.
Thus are we vowed to thee, let thy dread fame
Thunder amazement through the spacious world
That when thou lifts thine arm, thy foes may say
Not Jove, but great Corcutus rules the day.
Which that applause hath crowned, and with it
Will ever, spite of traitors, joying sit
As now we do; nor shall my watchful care
Be wanting to you, whilst this subtle ayre
Feeds mine industrious spirits; I shall fill
The good with joy, by cutting off the ill
Corrupted rags of men; Jove let me stand
An object in thine eye, when thy swift hand
Fails in the stroke of Justice: Virtue, return
From thy sad exile, I will purge the walls
From spotted vice, and make this city free
To entertain so fair a Queen as she.
Then (Bassaes) I embrace what you have thrown
Upon me, and these signs of honour thus
We re-bestow; their power still stays with us.
Could this vast body of the Common wealth
Stand fast without a soul, each man should see
I am not greedy of this dignity,
This burdenous weight which some must undergo:
The gods are busied with diviner things,
And put Earths care into the hands of Kings.
And is Bajazet arrived?
So fame reports
Yet how he doth digest Corcutus Reign,
That every Bird sings not; but sure with pain.
A Turkish Bajazet and suffer wrong,
May for a time conceal his grief, not long.
Eagles soar high, and scorn that shorter Plumes
Should reach the clouds, which their proud wings can touch
Corcutus must not reign to keep the right
Due to his father, nor will he if he might:
Hoe's learned, therefore just; Arts not allow
To wear a Crown due to another hrow.
Dare thou oppose his greatness? is not Greece
Already wrecked enough? have thy proud Towers
reared up their lofty spires? which steeped in blood,
threw a reflex of red back to the clouds,
and blushed at their owe ruins? are thy crude wounds
already stopped, and is that day forgot,
in which the Turkish Mavors Ottoman,
wielded a sword of death within thy Walls?
Charon grew weary with hurrying souls to hell,
when threescore thousand Greeks in one day fell.
We know their force, and sad experience says,
Move not again. Greece welters still in blood,
and every crackling thunder of the heavens
speaks the shrill echo of the Turkish drums.
Then are we drawn by you, so let it be,
about these great affairs as you decree.
This phrase becomes the Greeks, submissive states
must bend, the Conqueror must rule the fates.
And such are you, our vanquished hearts must bend,
but bad beginnings have a fatal end.
Me thinks I see great Bajazet in arms,
spreading his fearful Ensigns in the ayre,
like some prodigious Comet: we may fear
speedy revenge, unless some quick advice
works a prevention of his future hate.
Tic he must sway the Sceptre, or we shall hear
a dreadful defiance rattled in our ear:
hoe's strong in friends, and power; we must descend
to our just duty, or our latest end.
Renowned Vice-roy, thy persuading thoughts
Have predivin'd most truly these effects,
and we applaud thy Counsel: let us three
join our best strength, that these ensuing jars
may be composed without the stroke of wars:
Corcute is wise, and mild, and being so,
he hates the rumour of a public foe.
Nobly resolved (Greece sings) if the event
Pr???ve but so happy, as honest the intent.
Am I not Emperor? he that breaths a no,
damnes in that negative syllable his soul,
durst any god gain-say it, he should feel
the strength of fiercest Giants in mine arms,
mine angers at the highest, and I could shake
the firm foundation of the earthly Globe:
Could I but grasp the Poles in these two hands,
Il'd pluck the world asunder; drop thou bright Sun,
from thy transparent Sphere, thy course is done,
great Bajazet is wronged, nor shall thine eye
be witness to my hateful misery.
Madness and anger makes my tongue betray
the Chaos of my thoughts: under this breast
an heap of indigested cares are pressed.
What is it that I doubt! through every joint
dances a trembling ague, this dull blood,
that courses through my veins, divines no good.
Ha, shouts of joy, at dead men's obsequies?
I'm in a maze of woes: what thou wilt throw
on me, Jove, let it come. Isle stand thy blow.
Live happy Bajazet.
Happy in my fear!
that word sounds sweet in my distracted ear.
Happy in what?
In thy friends,
that grieve to see thy wrongs.
My wrongs!
there sticks the string my thoughts did harp upon.
But who hath wronged me in this high content?
the fates do sometime frown, yet bless the event
and sequel of our woes; it cannot be,
I should de thwarted in my jollity.
But if I can unfold it???for the more
I know them not, the greater is my sore.
In that read all thy woes, take there a brief
Contract of all thine ills, sad lines of grief.
Contract of all thine ills, sad lines of grief.
How's this? my youngest son advanced to my seat?
Corcutus Imperator! sure I dream:
These are but empty apparitions
Feigned by the god of sleep to vex my soul:
Were they not so???ere this black night
Had thrown her fable mantle ore the heavens
To hide me from my shame-but is it so?
I do but flatter up my self, they are true
And real griefs, my Passion says they are.
Isaac, Achmetes, are they not?
Too true
Great Bajazet:
Corcutus Imperator!
Would I had seen thy name writ in the book
Of dark damnation, rather then these lines.
Cracked not mine eye-strings when I viewed this text?
See how each letter spreads abroad in pomp,
As if they scorned my tears! how I could dwell
On these two words, Corcutus Imperator!
Hither repair, the watchful paper-wormes
That scan old records over to a line:
Here in two words imprinted shall you see,
The model of a doleful history;
Virtue dishonoured, breach of filial love,
Right shouldered out by wrong; nor can you fine,
A crime, which these two words do not contain.
But now I rail, not grieve: O nimble ayre,
Let my plaints vanish as they spoken are.
Off with this womanish mildness, I will find
A shorter trick then this to ease my mind.
Pluto beware, I come to reign in hell,
Fates bid me rule, and birth-right to excel.
Stay Bajazet, that arm can break a path
Unto thy earthly monarch, ere thou come
To bless the banks of sweet Elysium
With thy wished presence: Mahomet forefend
That thou should seal a Kingdom to thy son;
By this untimely death Corcutus reigns.
But at thy better pleasure, when he shall hear
Thou art arrived, then he will twixt joy and grief
Start from his throne, and nimbly run to meet
Thy pomp, and throw his Sceptre at thy feet:
If he but slack that duty, here are by,
Achmetes strong and bold, Isaac and I,
Devoted to your service. Yet the world stands,
On wavering doubts, ready to clap their hands.
My desires are crowned,
And from the gate of Limbo, where I sate,
I feel my spirits knock against the heavens.
Achmetes? In that name I hear an ease
Of all my griefs pronounced; he shall suffice
To banish usurpation from my throne:
Did furies guard it round, hoe's able well
To reach my Kingdoms from the gripes of hell.
My sword &amp; life, both which are vowed to thee
Are still at thy command: walk but along,
Corcutus shall resign, thou have no wrong.
Death, &amp; the furies plunge the obsequious slaves,
Would he have joined with us? we would have kept
Corcutus high, and honoured, where he sits
In spite of a whole boast of Bajazets.
Me thinks your power might have bin greater sarre
Over Achmetes, one adict to you
By no less bond of duty, then the son
Is to the father:
Mustapha, Isle tell you,
Had not my daughter been espoused to him,
I had named his death, and by some plot
worked him a quick destruction long ever this.
Now let us temporise with Bajazet;
yet keep thy nature ever, and be true
to thine own profit; Fortune may advance
some other Prince, worth both thy love and mine.
Weel stay her leisure.
See more Harpies gathered to catch a Crown,
O tic a charming bait!
Me thinks these City walls smile on our entrance,
as if they knew great Bajazets three sons
were come to grace their beauty.
But We should frown
on them which harbour such black treasons. Well,
were I great Bajazet, I'd ring a noise
of spiteful horror, that should make the ground
tremble beneath their weight at such a sound;
A younger son enthroned an Emperor!
Brother, contain your self, come lets away,
to see the end that waits on this sad day.
What Mahomet?
And Trizham? here's a sight
of one mans issue, Noble Bajazet:
brothers we have jumped together.
All save one,
and hes a great deal better so alone.
Corcutus it is you mean, who though he reign
above us now, yet must fall back again
into our rank; it is Bajazet must rise,
and he descend, such a report there flies.
Did not he frown, and storm?
It moved him much,
and wrought strange passions in him, when he read
your name, and found your name so entitled.
Cling to my temples thou blessed ornament,
be ever unremoved, though all the gods
chide me in thunder for this insolence.
Am I in heaven, in state, placed on the sphere
of eminence, but barely to appear
with faint and borrowed luster, then descend,
ranked with the vulgar? heads first let me feel
the Titian vulture, or Ixions wheel,
and the worst torture hell it self can bring,
to scourge my soul: ?? let me die a King.
But stay, I must bethink me at what rate
I purchase these fair trappings: ha? the curse
of him that got me! start my daunted spirits,
shall I usurp a throne and sit above
my father, whilst the gaping pit of hell,
with wide stretched jaws, yawns for my fall; O I
am struck with horror, and the slaves of Styx
already sting my wounded soul.
Will you fair Prince reject all future hopes
of just succession, and afflict your Sire,
by your unjust detainment of his Crown?
I am distracted, and me thinks I burn
under these robes of State, a boiling heat
runs from them through my veins, Joves hardy son,
when he bewrapt himself in Nessus shirt,
felt not more bitter agonies, then I,
clothed in the trappings of my majesty.
I am resolved; Bassaes, go meet our father,
allure him home with this: I am begun
to be no King, but a repentant son.
Pallas, I ask thy pardon, I have strayed
A graceless truant from thy happy schools,
Whither Isle now return; there's not a rank,
Place, or degree, can sort us out true bliss
Without thy temple, there my dwelling is:
Amongst the sacred monuments of wit,
Which Classique authors carefully have writ
For our instruction, I will wast my time;
So to wash out the spots of this sad crime.
Court honours, and you shadows of true joy
That shine like stars, till but a greater light
Drown your weak luster, I adjure your sight
Even from my meditations, and my thoughts
I banish your enticing vanities,
And closely kept within my study walls,
As from a cave of rest henceforth Isle see,
And smile, but never taste your misery.
I but as yet am floating on the waves
Of stormy danger, nor am sure to scope
The violent blast of angry Bajazet.
Blow fair my hopes, and when I touch the shore,
Isle venture forth on this rough surge no more.
See where he comes, oh how my guilty blood
Starts to my face, and proves my cause not good!
Our duty to our father,
Ours to the Emperor.
Why kneels great Bajazet? I am thy son
Thy slave; and if thy wrath but frown, undone.
Why kneels great Bajazet? heavens hide thy face
From these proposterous doings.
What, not ashamed
To circle in thybrow with that bright crown,
Yet blush to see me kneel? though filial rites,
And moral precepts say, the son must bend
Before the Father, yet your high degree
and power bids you rise, commands my knee.
These ornaments be thine. Here Bajazet,
I Crown thee Monarch of the spacious West,
Asia, and Africa: if ought be mine,
greater then these, I here proclaim it thine.
Live Bajazet our mighty Prince,
live, rule, and flourish.
Is this your zeal? is it? Did every voice
breath out a willing suffrage? I am crowned,
my joys are fully perfect, and I feel
my lightened spirits caper in my breast.
Rise thou starre-bright mirror of thine age,
by thee our iron days prove full as good,
as when old Saturn thundered in the clouds.
Be an example to succeeding times,
how sons should use their Parents: and I vow
(when I shall fail) this honour to thy brow.
Attend us Bassaes, Isle lead on to joy,
never was Father blessed with such a boy.
Freed from a princely burden, I possess
A Kingly liberty, and am no less
Princely; observance waite on him, on me
thoughts undisturbed, I shall then happy be.
Scarce had I set my foot within these walls
in expectation of a solemn hearse,
due to the wandering Ghost of Mahomet;
but loud alarmus of abundant joy
ring in mine ears, and every servile groom
Congratulates the coronation
of Bajazet: hark how they roar it out.
A cold disturbance like a gelid frost
settles my blood withinme, and I hate
his cheerful triumphs, more then mine own fate.
It is true, indeed, I proved not the first fruits,
an elder off-spring of my Fathers breed,
yet was it so that Bajazet and I
both tumbled in one womb; perhaps the Queen
of women's labours doted at our birth,
and sent him first abroad, or else I slept,
and he before me stole into the world;
must I then lose my glory, and be hurled
A slave beneath his feet? no, I must be
An Emperor as full, as great as he.
Divorced my Daughter? fond and insolent man
Isle crush thee into nothing: if I can
endure the noise of my disgrace, I know
how to return it; I am a flame of fire,
a chafing heat distempers all my blood.
Achmetes, thou must cool it, when thy limbs
are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
and thy stained blood enchanted from thy veins,
then shall I be appeased, mean while I live
thy mortal foe: But stay, let me contain
mine anger undiscovered. Friend, how is it?
Know you not Isaac?
What?
The flight of Zemes hence to Armenia?
Of Zemes?
Yes, he walked about the City disguised, and unseen till his escape.
It is strange and full of fear.
We meet him frequent in the vulgar mouth.
Zemes is valiant, and Armenia strong,
here's Bajazet, he must beware the wrong.
What is it thou murmurest? Bajazet &amp; wronged!
something it is thou know concerning us:
Take thee fair leave and speak it.
Yes, I know
matters of weight, such as concern thy life.
Such as concern my life! Speak out thy tale,
we are so fleshed in joy, bad news proves strange,
and touch my sense too harshly.
But you must hear.
Your brother Zemes, when swift winged Fame
told him your father Mahomet was dead,
flew quickly hither, first to celebrate
his funeral pomp; then to assume his State,
his Crown, and Sceptre: which he rightly knew,
unto your hand, and head both to be due.
But when applausive joy, and peals of mirth
sounded loud Music in his troubled ears,
of you enthroned; then he began too late
to brawl at heaven, and wrangle with his Fate.
So he went hence and cried, revenge be mine:
quake thou great City of proud Constantine
at my fierce anger: when I next return
with clouds of misty powder, I shall choke
thy breath, and dull thy beauty with it's smoke.
Thus posted he hence to Ammoniac King,
there to implore his aid, which he will bring
to front thy power: nor doth he yet despair,
to dispossess, and fright thee from thy chair.
First from my body shall he fright my soul,
and push me into dust.
make hast
to muster up our forces, strike up our drums???
let them proclaim destruction through the world.
Clear up your dusty armour, let it cast
such an amazing lustre on the Foe,
as if Belbona danced on every crest.
The bright sun of my glory is eclipsed,
till Zemes be extinct: he must not shine
to dull my beams, since the whole heaven is mine.
Call forth Achmetes, his unconquered arm
shall keep us safe from this intended harm.
My Liege, you have forgot Achmetes oath,
in which he vowed never to draw his sword
in your defence.
I had forgot it,
but now I remember, such was the vain
heat of my youth: but I recall again
what ever I protested, tell him so.
Rash words must be dispensed with.
Then Isle go.
My Father once in ordering of a Camp,
preferred me to be Captain of a wing,
so when the battles joined, and life and death
where struggling who should win power of our breath,
our Armies proved the stronger; only my guide
failed, and a base repulse fell on my side;
at which my Father stormed, and in my place
seated Achmetes, for which black disgrace,
I vowed a swift revenge, even by his shame
that wore mine honour, to redeem my fame;
which when Achmetes heard, he deeply swore,
never with wit and strength to guide me more.
But now he must, see where he comes, and armed.
What strange device is plotting in his brain?
Honoured Achmetes.
Royal Emperor.
Thine arm must then uphold my Royalty.
Why lies thy valour prostrate at our feet,
when like fierce lightnings it should run and meet
my harms, and like a rock unmoved, oppose
the course, and headlong torrent of my foes?
I am a man of peace; mistake me not.
I made a vow, nor can it be forgot,
till you revoke your oath.
Which here I do,
great Mahomet be witness, that I mean
sincerely what I speak, Achmetes now
we're friends, and thus, I nullify my vow;
heavens on this concord lend a gracious smile.
Achmetes I have placed thee in my bosom,
gave thee an honoured title in my love;
and of as lasting constancy, as is
the sun, which looks so cheerfully on us.
Go fit the Janissaries to the wars,
kindle new fire of valour in their breasts,
Thou art their Genius, even the breath they draw;
Raise then thy plumes, and keep thy foes in awe.
Sood there a Pluto at thy city walls,
and with a band of furies had besieged
thy people; I would conjure them away,
and send them back to hell: so thou shalt stand
as fast as in the skies, under mine hand.
I am Crowned in thee, nor can I fall,
whilst such a valour breaths within our wall.
Zemes depose me! he must be more strong
then Mars, that can do Bajazet that wrong.
We hate thy brother, therefore lend thee aide,
it is not our duty to expostulate
thy right unto the Crown: on to your wars,
thrive in your projects; I shall joy to see,
a quarrel fought twixt Bajazet and me.
Isle second thy encounters, and we two
like the two Roman thunder-bolts of war,
will with the flashes of our fiery swords
keep their composed ranks, that they shall stand
aghast, to see two Scipioes in one band.
Thanks great Armenian King, and when I am
wheeled to that height, which now my brother holds,
I shall requite these benefits, and vow
that kindness, which I can but promise now.
Come let's away, our armies are well set,
ready to march: now tremble Bajazet.
Caigubus, public dangers call me forth,
and I must leave thee now unto thy self.
My son, thou see unto what height of fame
we are ascended, yet the sun shines clear,
and not one dusky cloud of discontent
dimms the unspotted brightness of our joys:
Not Bajazet is more beloved than I.
Such strict observance is there showed to me
by all that know my worth, and hear me named,
as if I grasp't Joves thunder in mine hands.
By all my hopes I fear some tragic scene
will trouble our calm fortune. Son beware:
The top of honour is a narrow plot
of ground, whither we have already got:
It is brittle and uncertain, if thou tread
one careless step aside, thou fall down dead;
the shute from thence is deep, and underneath,
ruin gapes wide, thy body to receive.
Stand firm Caigubus: though thou start'st not away,
yet blasts of envy often force aside
the weariest footstep: these, where ever they shall
blow strong, will make them stagger if not fall.
I shall forget to sleep, to breath, to live,
sooner than these thy precepts: they are fixed,
and printed in my thoughts.
Enough, no more
That Isaac Bassa, trust him not too much:
I have divorced his daughter from my bed,
for her adulterate looseness, hence he hides
a mass of fretting rancor in his breast,
which he hath varnished yet, &amp; gilded o'er
with coloured shows of love; but he is false,
and subtle as a Serpent, that will wind
into thy breast, stinging thee ere thou find
or once suspect his hatred: I must away,
hasty alarms call me hence, thus, farewell,
envy grows greater, as our states excel.
Father, adieu.
Already marched so near! Zemes makes hast
to death, as if he longed our wrath to taste.
Trizham &amp; Mahomet, it concerns you now,
to fly hence nimbly to your Provinces:
Zemes is come too near us to escape,
he cannot fly the ground whereon he treads,
but through your countries: hast then, if the wars
crack not his thread of life, his flight will be
when you may intercept it; if we presume
only one bold Achmetes, and our selves
in beds of down supinely sleep at home;
Zemes may scope the tempest of our wrath.
Then we hope best, when each event we see
thwarted with their preventing policy.
Doubt not our hast and truth, he shall as soon
break through the fiery fabric of the skies,
as through my Provinces.
Through hell as soon as mine.
Go, I have done my part; Mars and my fate
give fair success to my designed plot;
and Zemes is entrapped, already dead,
that hand secures me that strikes off his head.
The battle will prove great and dangerous:
but were their number double more then ours,
the justice of our cause bids us go on,
and like a cheerful drum, strikes painting fear
from every breast. Father, lead you the vangard,
the rearward be your charge, the right wing yours,
my self will guide the left: this day shall crown
your valour in full pride, Zemes must down.
Time hath out-stript our hast, our foes do stand,
waving their golden plumes, as if the gods
were come to meet great Zemes in the field;
their armie's planted, and a distilling cloud
hovers about their heads, as if it wept
at their approaching fate. Armenia's King
lead you the vanguard; under your command
the reareward shall march on: the Phalance be
your care, brave Captains: as we are informed,
Achmetes rules the left wing of our foe,
Isle rule the right wing of ours: so when I meet
him in his pride, Isle prostrate at his feet.
Our men are ordered, Zemes lead the way,
the skies look dusky black on this sad day.
Great Queen of chance; but do I call on this
inconstant Stepdame? be thou propitious Mars,
rough god of war: steel up this weary arm,
and put a ten fold vigour in my bones;
what shall Achmetes fall, and in his loss,
great Bajazet be wronged! it cannot be.
Death comes to wound thee Zemes, I am he!
Zemes!
Achmetes! Opportunely met,
here staggers all the fortune of the field;
this hour must bless me, and a single fight
purchase thee honour, and to me my right:
honour to thee, to die by Zemes hand,
my right to me, an Empire to command.
Brave Prince, I more lament thy case then can thy self
that run with such madness on the edge
of desperate ruin: thou art but young &amp; weak,
manhoods soft blossoms are not fully spread
upon thy downy chin; but riper years
have settled the compacture of my joints,
and they are strongly knit: twill vex my soul
in the clear morn of thy up-rising hopes,
to wrap thee in a fatal could of death.
Submit thee to thy brother, thou shalt find
me thy true friend, him merciful and kind.
Submit! had I a right to Joves high Throne,
and stood in opposition of his power;
should all the gods advise me to submit,
I would reject their counsel: much more thine.
Guard thee, Achmetes, I thy stroke abide,
I cannot gore thy Prince but through thy side.
The day be thine, and Zemes stand thy Fate;
strike home, I've lost the day: and life I hate.
Have at thee then.
not stir! Now by my sword
thou shalt have fairer play before thy death:
take back thy sword, in that I recommit
my forfeit to thy charge, thy life with it.
Oh! hold thy conquering hand, and give my soul
a quiet passage to her rest; my blood
begins to wast, and a benumbing cold
freezes my vital spirits: Achmetes go,
tell Bajazet that thou hast slain his foe.
Farewell brave son of Mars, thy fame shall stay
with us, although thy soul flit hence away.
I have not lied, Achmetes thou hast slain
my hopes, and therefore me; my wounds are shallow,
but my state desperate: Ha! what shall I do?
Armenia's King is fled back to his home,
cold entertainment will attend me there;
the field is empty, every man retired,
only a few dead carcasses, and I;
then whither shall I bend my steps? to Rome!
To Rome then let it be: Bishop, I come;
you are a religious thing, and I will trust
my life to one so innocently just.
Indeed we may be thought upon in time:
when there be countries more then there be men
we may get some preferment; sit at home
and prove good boys and please our father well.
My thoughts are too unbridled,
I neither can nor will endure thy curb;
my comprest valour like the strangled fire
breaks out in violent flames and I must rule.
Trizham and Mahomet are slipped in hast
each to their several province, we must stay,
that are their Elders, for another day:
this Court will prove our scaffold, where we stand
placed in the eye of angry Bajazet;
who thwarts him in his fury is but dead,
and in that passions heat off goes his head.
I must not live thus.
I could be content.
He fears not death whose thoughts are innocent.
I thank you brother; then belike some crimes
lie heavy on my conscience, and I fear,
unless I shift my station, twill be known.
You think well of me kind Mahomates.
As well as of a brother I can think:
if by a rash applying to your self,
my words have been distasteful, blame not me.
Can I apply them then unto my self?
am I so loose in manners? By heaven and earth
thou shalt repent this deeply.
Stop that oath,
brothers agree, or walk hence but along
into my garden, where each springing herb
smiles on my fair content, there you shall see,
how flowers of one stock, so twisted are,
one in the others twinings, that they show,
one stands by the others help, both jointly grow;
these shall suffice your quarrels to remove,
and dumb examples teach a lively love.
Come let us go.
Straight I will follow you.
Away fond wretches, ?? that every breast
were of so dull a temper as you two.
But who comes here?
Brother Corcutus, whither are you bent?
what from the court so soon?
My father bids,
I go to undertake the charge his love
hath thrown upon me. That's rich Ionia.
You go to rule there?
Yes:
Heavens speed you well.
Dear Selymus adieu.
Brother farewell.
Revenge and you, three furious twins of night,
ascend up to our theater of ill,
plunge my black soul twice in your Stygian flood,
that by it's virtue it may be congealed,
and hardened against remorse: Pluto enrich
my breast, with a diviner policy
then every trifling brain can reach unto;
Isle fill the world with treasons, and my wit
shall put new tracts to death: Charon shall see,
his waftage still in use, by company
sent thither by my care: ?? twill do well,
to blast the earth with want, and furnish hell.
Tush, virtue makes men fools, Isaac be wise,
shake off the tender fetters of remorse:
and hug that chance, that opens thee the way
to ruinate Achmetes. Did he stand
on terms of conscience, neighbourhood or love,
when he cashiered my daughter from my house,
and to the worlds broad eye, opened her crime?
No he was swift and bitter in his hate,
and so will I: he is but now returned
in triumph from the field, as full of pride
as I of envy: hence Isle ground my hate.
When fierce Bellona smiled on Bajazet,
amidst the fiery tumults of the war,
she offered Zemes to Achmetes hand,
they fought, Achmetes conquered, at his foot
fell the proud rebel, wounded but not slain;
there might Achmetes with a blow of death
cut off our fears, continued in his breath:
this shall incense the angry Emperor:
and crush Achmates in his fairest hopes.
True politicians work by others hands,
so I will by the Prince: my plot stands firm;
see where he comes, now sly Mercurius, whet
my tongue, to kindle hate in Bajazet.
Isaac, how thrived Achmetes in his wars?
Fame is of late grown dumb of his renown:
surely unwelcome news clogs her swift wings,
else had she now bin frequent in our Court;
and we had fully known the chance of all.
We had: yet could not the event,
lie so concealed, but Isaac found it out;
which when I first discovered, straight it wrought
tempests of passions in me, joy and grief
reigned at one instant in the self same breast.
As how?
As thus. I joyed that Zemes fell,
was sorry he escaped.
Fell, and yet escaped!
Beneath Achmetes feet the traitor fell.
And yet escaped! good Jove how may this be!
Thus it might be, and was so: when sad death
was glutted with the ruin of each side,
when slaughtering Mars had stained the field with blood
and cast a purple colour o'er the earth
at length some milder providence desired;
an end of those hot tumults that were seen,
to last in Zemes breath; so that their fire
would be extinct, when Zemes should expire:
then from the middle skirmish forth were brought
he and Achmetes; being met they fought;
Zemes was vanquished by a violent blow
which struck him trembling lower then his knees:
now whether flattering, or present gifts
redeemed him from his fate, I cannot show;
something they plotted, what, none yet can know.
Can thou advise me (Isaac) how to sound
the depth of all his mischief?
Thus you may,
He being come from Zemes overthrow,
and yet luke-warme in blood and full of joy,
you may in way of honour and free mind
call him this night to banquet: Then being set
when the hot spirits of caroused healths
have spoiled his wit of smooth and painted tales,
and wine unlocked the passage for the truth,
bid him relate the manner of his war,
the chances and events; then when he comes
to Zemes, if he err about his flight,
his ends are bad, his bosom black as night.
Thou art my good Angel, Isack, I applaud
thy faithful plot. Achmetes, were thy soul
as dark as hell and thy enclosed thoughts
as subtle as a winding Labyrinth,
by such a guide as can remove each doubt,
and by a clue of thread I'd track them out.
But Isack; if we trap him in his wiles
how shall we kill the traitor? we have a trick,
already strange to catch him in the nick.
Easily, thus. Our laws allow a custom:
not used of late, yet firm still in effect
and thus it is: When there doth breath a man
direfully hated of the Emperor,
and he in strict severity of right
cannot proceed against him, then he may
orewhelme him in a robe of mourning black,
which we have called deaths mantle: that thing done,
the man thus used, is forfeited to fate,
and a devoted sacrifice to him
whom he had er'st offended, neither can
strength or entreaty, wrest him from his death,
both which are treason and inexpiable.
Thus then you may proceed, when banquets done.
and all their comic merriment run on
to the last scene, and every man expects
a solemn gift, due to Achmetes worth,
call for a robe therewith to deck your friend
and perfect all his glory, let that be
this robe of fate, in which ready at hand,
you may entomb the traitor and bewrap
his pampered body in a veil of death;
so let him die, dream not on the event,
vice is rewarded in it's punishment.
I will be fierce and sudden, Isaac invite
Achmetes to a feast; he dies this night.
I shall. Would not a private warning serve,
but open penance must correct my child,
and a severe divorcement quite degrade
her of her honoured matrimonial rights?
Were he as strong, as steel-like jointed Mars,
as much applauded through our popular streets,
as erst Dictator Fabius was in Rome,
or geat Augustus: yet the slave should feel
the wrath of an inflamed father light
heavy upon his soul: &amp; that ever the next sun
appear, Achmetes all thy glorie's done.
I feared your safety and devoutly prayed
the sword of justice, which your hand did sway
might be of conquering force.
Thy prayers were heard
and I am here as safe as I went forth,
untouched by the rough hands of desperate war.
Nor did I once spy danger in the field;
but when I fronted Zemes, then there met
two streams of valour, sith on us was set
the chance of the whole combat, others stood
expecting which of us should lose his blood:
but heaven was just, and to compose the strife,
this sword at one sad blow took thence his life.
The heavens were just indeed, but who coms here,
Isaac, Mesithes, and Bajazets three sons.
They come to gratulate my late success,
I see their errand folded in their smiles,
how cheerfully they look upon my joys!
All happiness attend Achmetes.
Thanks Noble friends. How fares the Emperor?
Well by your guard; and he hath sent us now,
all to invite your presence to a feast,
we must be frolic, and this following night,
shall Crown your joy with revels and delight;
or else deprive thy soul of that good light.
We must be frolic Captains, think not then
on my loud drums, and staring trumpeters,
such whose strong lungs roar out a bellowing voice
would make a man dance Antic in the fire:
weel have a choicer music, and my feet
shall tread a neater march, then such harsh strains
can teach them: with more pleasure and less pains,
since it hath pleased the Emperor to grace
our slender merits thus: we shall be there,
to taste his bounty.
Weal lead on before.
Isle follow you.
Ne'er to return more.
I am happy above envy, and my state,
not to be thwarted with injurious fate,
I could disburden all my jealous thoughts,
and shake that currish vice suspicion, off
from my sincere affection: I have worng'd
sure I have wronged thee Isack, thy chaste love
cloaks not intended mischief; black deceit
cannot lie hid under so pure a white,
but it would cast a coloured shadow out
through such a slender vail; thy generous thoughts
nourish no base detraction; thy free love
thy professed actions say, it were no just fate
that good men's deeds should die by ill men's hate.
Pray heaven they do not.
Fear not, I am guest
to Bajazet, expected at the feast.
The day's far spent, is not Achmetes come?
Not yet, great Emperor.
Vice-roy of Greece, say now there were a man
whom my mind honoured; and I should command
to cloth his body in a suite of gold,
studded with gems, worth all the Indian shore,
durst any tongue gainsay it?
Surely no.
What if I hated him, and should command
to wrap him in a sable coloured black:
and sentence him to death?
Then he must die.
My thoughts are troubled.
What should these questions mean,
abrupt demands, one to confound the other?
My liege your guests are come.
Blessed be the hour in which I see Achmetes safe returned,
Bring in our banquet, soldiers: boys kneel round.
A ring of braver lads ne'er blessed the ground:
supply us here with Nectar, give it me,
Achmetes, noble warrior, here's to thee,
a health to thy blessed fortunes, it shall run
a complete circle ere the course be done.
My duty bids me pledge it. I return
good health to Isaac, and in this we'll drowned
all concealed enmities
Jove split me with his thunder, if my breast
harbour one bad thought when this draught is past.
and so I greet thy son: Health to Caigubus.
Mahomates the turn lights next on you.
Isle pledge it freely, Viceroy her's to you.
Achomates, to you I must come
the welfare of Achmetes in this cup.
To you Mesithes thus I prove my love.
Young Prince, I do commit this health to you.
I am the last be prodigal in wine,
fill up my bowl with Nectar let it rise
above the goblets side, and may it like
a swelling Ocean flow above the banks,
I will exhaust it greedily, it is my due.
We'll drink with Bacchus and his roaring crew.
Already done, so quickly run about,
one health to me: faith, sith you are set to it,
here's a carouse to all.
we'll pledge it round.
It is the last draught to some, or I shall fail
in mine intendments. Let a foe escape
when he was trampled down beneath his feet!
There must be treason in it: How my blood
boils in my breast with anger! not the wine
could work such strong effect: my soul is vexed.
A chafing heat distempers all my blood;
Achmetes, thou must cool it: when thy limbs
are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
and thy stained blood unchannel'd from thy veins;
then shall I be secure; a quiet rest
shall rock my soul asleep; it is thy last hour
must set a period to my restless fears.
What, are you merry friends? drink on your course,
then all arise: and now to consummate
our happy meeting, And shut up our joys,
discourse Achmetes of your finished wars;
After an age of woes, it proves at last
A sweet content to tell of dangers past.
Let's know your whole events.
Great Emperor,
Scarce had the rosie day-star from the East
displayed her silver colours through the heaven,
but all the watchful Soldiers ready armed
dim'd her pale cheeks with their transparent steel,
and added lustre to the dull-sight morn;
so stood we in full pride till the bright Sun
climbing the glassy pavement of the skies;
roused the slow spirits of the backward foe,
and urged them to the field; at length stepped forth
Zemes, in all the trappings of his state;
And like a well-taught Hector ranged his troops
into their several orders; all prepared,
Tiran being fearful, stepped behind a cloud,
lest when he saw our limbs bathed all in blood,
and purple streams gush't from our wounded breasts
like water from their springs, he in fear
should be eclipsed, or startle from his sphere.
The air was thick and dim; our armies joined,
the skirmishes grew hot; and angry Mars
enthroned upon the battlements of heaven,
left either side to tug with their own strength
till their oppressing multitude bore down
the justice of our cause; and our whole side
not daring to withstand, scorning to fly,
stood trembling on the utmost brink of hope;
then the propitious Gods singled me out
Zemes??? the life and spirit of our foes.
We met and fought: Such was my happy fate,
that at the first encounter Zemes fell,
and I disarmed him; when in proud contempt
he spit defiance in the face of death,
opened his breast, and dared me to the stroke,
whereby I might have sent him hence to hell:
But I, in admiration of his worth,
armed his right hand once more and bad him fight.
Chance did direct my sword upon his head:
he fell before me, and cried, Achmetes hold,
I'm wounded to the death; and Captain, go
tell Bajazet that thou hast slain his foe.
I left the dying Prince; our wars were done
and ceased with him by whom they were begun.
The plot has took.
Treason, by Mahomet:
I left the dying Prince!
Pursue the project.
Worthy Achmetes,
well we may give, but not reward by gifts;
and thank, but not requite thee. I would hate
that liberality which would abate
the worth of the receiver: thy true fame
out-strips the length of titles; and a name
of weighty honour is a slender price
to grace thy merits with: as for a voice
to crown thee after death, thou art the choice
of everliving glory: on thy crest
is her abode; and when the latest rest
of nature hath betrayed thee to thy grave,
then shall she print in characters of gold
how brave a man thou wast, how great, how bold:
though we be dumb, yet shall the world uplift
thy name, and thou shalt live without our gift:
Yet thy blessed fates have not created thee
so clearly God-like, but some other chance
may cross thy greatness, and thy high renown
the envy of some God may shoulder down:
then thus we'll make thee happy; future events
ne'er shall oppress thy worth; nor envious chance
blot thy ensuing fame. Achmetes know,
death, an immortal gift, we thus bestow.
Treason, treason, O my Father, treason:
Help Janissaries.
Stop the furious youth.
Bring in an Heads-man. Traitor, Zemes dead!
He lives to see this hand untwine thy thread.
What means this outrage?
1. Cruel homicide.
2. Ungrateful wretch.
3. Tyrant.
4. Meet hilts in's guts.
5. First let his own hands take that Mantle off. 
Help! Treason, I am slain!
Help? why? From whom?
Is not thy Guard about thee?
Hemn'd in with death! my friends beset me round,
not to preserve my life, but murder me!
Blush you pale heavens at this abhorred fact,
that they may see their crimes, and be ashamed
of this unheard offence: Valiant Janissaries,
sheat up these weapons of rebellion;
print not that ugly sin upon your brow;
let my free pardon woe you to submit.
Keep your allegiance firm.
Ha, ha, ha, ha!
One word more damns thee.
How prettily he began to talk
Of sin and pardon! Bajazet, behold
here stands a man mild, honoured, gracious,
valiant and faithful, gentle in command,
at home beloved, and feared amongst our foes;
yet hath thy hand of cruelty assayed
the hated murder of so dear a friend:
Blush, you pale heavens, at this abhorred fact,
that he may see his crimes, and be ashamed
of this new bloudinesse. Wicked Bajazet,
these admonitions fit the teacher well.
But hear me speak.
First set Achmetes free, then speak thy fill.
What, shall I be compelled?
And quickly too.
We cannot brook to see him stand thus clothed.
Your anger will have way: Achmetes go:
there take him: They have saved thee from this woe.
Pernicious villains, they have crossed my plot;
it was intercepted even in the last deed.
What should Achmetes mean thus to engross
The best affections of my Janissaries?
Will he defraud me of my Crown and life?
My life I weigh not: but to lose my Crown,
were to be sentenced to a hell of woes.
I am full stuffed with choler. Slavish Peasants,
held I a sword of power in mine hand,
I would disjoint them peece-meale; can I not?
Am I not Emperor? men call me so:
A reverend title, empty attributes,
and a long page of words follow my name,
but no substantial true prerogative. 
Good health to Bajazet.
Indeed that's nothing, since your council failed.
Use your best patience, it may be regained.
Affection in your stubborn multitude
is a proud torrent not to be withstood.
Were you as sacred as their household gods,
Yet when you thwart the current of their will,
they'll break the bands of duty, and profane
that holiness to which they bound their thoughts.
Mine eyes are witness with what lively joy
They bore him through the streets upon their necks,
Offering the use of their best strength.
No more.
I am already gone. Why did not then
his proud ambitious tongue bid them go fetch
My Crown, and with quick speed disrobe a wretch?
't was in his power: we are distracted Isaac,
lend us thy wholesome counsel to prevent
my ruin, and their dangerous intent.
Mine is a blunt advice, and deep in blood,
to cut off those base Peasants that withstood
the force of your decree.
To cut them off?
Me thinks I see my self yet circled in
with their revengeful swords. Ha? cut them off
Could I but curse the Traitors from the earth,
or were my doom pronounced but of effect,
I'd rattle such new torments in their ears
should stagger their high courage; but my fears
strangle my furies; and my envious fate
forces my tongue to flatter where I hate.
Here lies the safest course to rid these griefs;
Give out you'll go to war, so to enlarge
your territories: and to this end fetch home
those warlike Soldiers placed in Garrison;
let them remain without the walls: at last,
when things shall fit your purpose, lead them all
by night into the City, and in one stroke
strike off so many thousand perjured heads
as shall amaze posterity to hear
how many lives redeemed thee from thy fear.
The weight of all mine honour leans on thee:
that or some nearer course shall quell the pride
of strong Achmetes, and confound his side.
If your intents be virtuous, and desire
of eminent place quite banished from your thoughts,
my house shall be your Castle: that I deny
my men and Arms to aid you in your broils,
think it kind usage: Should my Holiness
feed your ambition, and make strong your hand
against your brother? it were too light a brand
of flaming hot dissention, and to set
the world in a combustion: all would then
quarrel by my example. No, sweet Prince,
Romes holy Bishop must not so transgress.
If you will dwell within my sacred roof,
settle irregular passions, and begin
a quiet life: repentance wipes out sin.
My waxen wings are melted: I will soar
against the Sun through such thick clouds no more;
the middle Region shall contain my flight;
your counsel sways my wishes; my late deeds
were full of sin: now let my brother know
Zemes repents; (and that's the greatest woe.) 
To mans aspiring thoughts, how sweet is hope
which makes them (like Chameleons) live on air,
and hug their slender plots; till cool despair
doth so benum his thoughts, that he falls dead
from his sublime height; and his lofty head
which levelled at the skies, doth drop below
his humble feet! this hath experience taught
in that mans head-long ruin, whose proud thoughts
aimed at the Turkish Diadem: but now cross fates
have forced his stubborn heart to bow.
What speaks your entrance?
Health to Romes Bishop,
and peace from Bajazet, who commends his love
with this his Letter, and expects from you
a gracious answer.
"Let Zemes die by an untimely death,
"else for our love you shall provoke our hate:
"Hoe's not our brother, but our hated foe;
"and in his death you shall prevent our wo.
Return our service back: tell Bajazet
what he hath given in charge, shall by my hand
be carefully dispatcht.
Good peace attend you.
Imperious Turk,
Am I not Gods Vice-gerent here on earth?
and dare thou send thy letters of command?
or speak to me in threatening menaces?
It grates my patience to obey this monster,
yet must I murder Z???mes, what doe I know
whether my fathers soul did transmigrate
into his breast or no? be dumb remorse,
the Turk is great and powerful, if I win
his love by this, t'will prove a happy sin. 
Am I so poor in worth? still kept so low?
Was I begot only to live and dye,
to fill a place, move idly to and fro
like other naturals? unmanly life,
the world shall take more notice of my fame,
else will I with the venomed sting of war
deface the beauty, of the universo.
Posterity shall know, once there did breath
a Selymus, a mortal deity,
a man at whose blessed birth the planets smiled;
and spent their influence to create a boy
as brave as Greece ever hatched, or Rome, or Troy.
Here's Isaac Bassa, hoe's already mine,
he courts my father, but intends for me,
and furthers all my counsels; Noble friend,
how stand our hopes?
Great Sir, most happily:
the Bassaes murmur at Achmetes wrong:
seize on their wavering love, their breasts are op
to him that first will enter ther's free scope;
drop dowre thy frank affection in their hands,
to bribe is lawful: and it is strongly proved
by good examples: Otho ne'er was loved,
till he had bought the soldiers, that once done,
Galba grew out of fashion; so must wee
addict them to us by a gainful fee:
Give freely, and speak fairly. I'll be gone,
stay here, the Bassaes will be here anon. 
I shall observe thy precepts. Mesithes! welcome,
How fare you in these days of discontent?
my duty bids me ask, and wish you well;
I have been long a barren debtor to you,
At length I may prove thankful: wear my love,
it is yours without refusal, a slight gift, 
Yet your looks tel me twill help out my drift.
This curtsy exceeds my weak deserts,
sweet Prince; but when occasion calls me forth
to help you, I'm devoted to your worth.
Your kind acceptance of that recompense,
Binds me more strictly to you.
Sir, farewell, 
So one hath took; see where another comes:
all health to Mustapha. Musta. Thanks gracious Prince,
your gentle pardon for my boldness, Sir.
Command my pardon, and commend my love
to thy bright daughter: tell her; I admire
her virtuous perfection; let that chain
make me remembered often in her mind.
When my weak strength, or wealth shall stretch so far,
as to continue ???
No Cynic complement, good Mustapha.
Then I return you thanks 
Health follow you,
and Honour me. Here is a third at hand.
Continuance to your health Sir.
Thanks gentle Prince.
Please you to use my service?
Yes, thus far.
Spend me that purse of gold. 
What means your Highness?
But to deserve your kindness, and avoid
the hated censure of ingratitude.
This is your liberal virtue, not my deeds;
but you shall find me thankful. 
So I hope;
three steps are trod already to a Throne,
and I am rich in friends; these proffered gifts
conjure observance from their servile breasts.
Oh powerful gold, whose influence doth win
men, with desire for to engender sin!
Isaac Bassa?
Even the man you wished:
What, did the golden lure work good effect,
and make the Bassaes stoop unto your mind?
Words are but empty shadows, but if deeds
answer their words, we cannot doubt their faith:
they stoop beneath my feet; I seem to be
as true as Jove, but sly as Mercury.
Here comes Mesithes muttering back again;
but step aside, and we shall know his mind.
But he is cruel, bloody, and his pride
unsufferable great. ???
Ha!
Proud Bajazet,
Thou hast usurped a title thy descent
could never reach unto; thou wrongst the world
since thou detain'st the Crown, which heavens decree
due to a better brow: thou art defamed
with Tyranny and wrong; but Selymus
is void of blemishes, as truth of lies:
bad stocks must be cut down, the good must rise.
He daunted me at first, but now I find
the golds bright lustre made his judgment blind.
Mustapha comes. 
Fortune hath wheeled me up above the stars,
under a Monarch; I'll not sell my hopes.
Bold Selymus, I'll second thy designs;
and thou shalt Queen my daughter; that being done,
with mine own splendour I'll eclipse the Sun.
Is it so? a while I'll feed thy airy hopes,
then dash thee into nothing.
Here's a third. 
A purse of gold! I can untie the knot:
the close enigma says, I would be King.
Brave Selymus, I like thy mounting thoughts;
work out thy projects; thou can never need
or ask my help, but thou art sure to speed. 
What we resolved, stands firm, but the event
be scened when leisure serves: we'll now prevent
my brothers hopes, and by a sudden fate
unto their lives and days give equal date
to compass a blessed end: now we begin
(Jove hath offended, if it be a sin)
to throw a father down. Saturn did dwell
once in the heavens, Jove threw him down to hell.
But stay: Achmetes, and our fathers friends?
Achmetes, I have injured thy deserts,
suborned accusers, wronged my credulous ears,
and my rash censure undervalued much
thy noble spirits, when it first condemned
them of intended treason, rense thy soul
in the dull river of oblivion.
we halt beneath the burden of thy hate,
think my moved anger made me hot and wild,
I cannot sleep till we be reconciled.
The gods neglect my welfare here on earth,
and when I shall put off this mortal load,
let me be out-law'd from the Court of heaven,
if in this bosom there lye hid one thought
that doth not honour Bajazet.
Wee know???
thy virtues make us happy: valiant Sir,
thy feet once more must tread a warlike march
under our fearful banner, thou shalt pace
even to the walls of Rome, there dwells our foe;
where our half Moon, reared in the middle camp,
like a distempred Meteor in the ayre,
shall strike amazement in the cloistred monks,
and shake the Prelates Meter from his head,
till he yield Zemes up alive or dead.
When we have moved thee from thy Janissaries,
thou shalt not travel far. 
A subtle trick,
and well pretended, I admire thy wit. 
Let me march hence, and Bajazet shall know,
how little I befriend my Princes foe.
Isle cast a ring of soldiers round about
The walls of Rome, if Zemes scope thence out,
cut of my breath: he that's deep in blame,
Must hazard boldly to regain his fame.
What means our father, noble Bajazet,
to work untimely horrors through the world:
desolate ruin, public discontent
have printed deep impressions in our path,
danger and fear scarce emptied from our town,
the shaken members of our common wealth
yet stagger with their wounds; when discord shall
make but a second breach, they faint and fall,
Short peace hath charmed your subjects all a???sleep,
and thrown a quiet slumber ore their eyes,
whilst with a sweet restorative she heales
their Martyred joints, and wipes out their scars
writ on their bosoms by the hand of wars.
Zemes is safely cloystred up at Rome,
the Prelate dares not aid him, all the gods
smile on the entrance of triumphant peace,
war lies fast bound, nor can she work our pains,
unless we loose the fury from her chains.
Our sons instruct us! must your pregnant wits
cross my command! Bassaes prepare for war;
and since your grave discourse argues a will
to stay at home, you shall; weal lay you up,
where no loud echoing drums shall break your sleep,
even in the bowels of your mother earth
I will entomb you: Put them both to death.
What means great Bajazet?
To murder you, unless you strangle them.
But hear us speak.
Stop up the damned passage of their throat,
Or you are all but ghosts. What! stare you friends?
Isaac and Selymus, a garter;
twist me that fatal string about his neck,
and either pull an end, 
Mesithes come,
join force with me, by heaven y' were best make hast,
Or thou art shorter lived then is that bratt.
Tug strongly at it. 
So; let the bastard drop,
we have outlived our tutors: dunghill slaves,
durst they breath out their Stoic sentences
in opposition of our strict command?
So: things run well along, and now I find
Jove hears my prayers, and the gods grow kind.
Did not I send these to their Provinces
to hinder Zemes flight? and did not they
dejected bastards, give him open way?
Mine anger hath been just.
None doth deny it;
you may proceed in your edict for wars,
and make Achmetes General of the camp.
It is enough: Achmetes go to hell, 
the devils have rung out thy passing bell,
and look for thine arrival.
Shined me slaves. 
They fly before my breath like mists of air,
and are of less resistance; I'll pursue. 
Oh I am slain! Tyrant, thy violent hand
hath done me pleasure, though against thy will:
had I as many lives as drops of blood,
I'd not outlive this hour: fly hence vain soul,
climb yonder sacred mount, strive upwards there,
there where a guard of stars shall hem thee round,
build thee a safe tribunal ??? I am gone.???
Oh tragic cruelty! ??? behold ??? the end
of two right Noble sons???one faithful friend. 
Have all forsaken me? and am I left
a prey unto my self? did all their breath
pass through his organs? and in his sad death
have I abruptly cracked the vital thread
of all my Bassaes?
Ha! where am I now?
In some Gebenna, or some hollow vault,
where dead men's ghosts sigh out their heavy groans?
Resolve me, Mahomet, and rid me hence,
or I will spoil the fabric of thy tomb,
and beat away the title of a God.
Dost thou not move? a trunk? a stock? to die
is to put on your nature, so will I.
Hold, hold, and live.
How come these bodies dead?
Father, it was your self.
Let me revoke
my wandering sense: Oh what a stream of blood
hath purged me of my black suspicion!
two sons, one valiant Captain hence are wrought
by mine own hand, to cure one jealous thought.
As it is, they are the happier; I out-live
them whom I wished to fall: only to grave
bear forth their bodies. 
We were cursed in this,
and shall entomb with them much of our bliss:
indeed we had resolved to spend this day
in things of more solemnity, less wo.
Now our most wished council shall begin,
and bitter deeds weigh up the scales of sin.
Amasia is a province rich and strong,
Mahomates??? it is thine, keep it as long
as I have power to give it; go, provide
for thy conveyance at the next fair tide.
Farewell dear father.
Worthy son, adieu;
the love my dead sons wanted falls to you
as an hereditary good.
Then we 
may vail our heads in black, no mourners be.
Achomates, thy worth
deserves some trophies of our love,
which to let slip unmentioned, were to add
to this black day a fourth offence as bad.
Govern Manesia, now the people stand
dishfurnisht of an head; let thy command
be great amongst them, so; make speedy hast.
Honour stays for thee.
Now the storms are past.
Father adieu; 
Achomates, farewell.
Now to my lot, I thought it would ne'er a fell.
Now Selymus, wee know thy hopes are great,
and thine ambition gapes with open jaws
to swallow a whole Dukedom; but young Sir,
we dare not trust the rains of government
into the hands of Phaeton. Desire,
rashly fullfild, may set the world on fire;
Greene youth, and raw experience are not fit
to shoulder up a Kingdoms heavy weight;
mix wit with stayed discretion, and spend
wild years in study, then we doe intend
to settle more preferment on thy head
then thou can hope for.
Wilt thou envious dotard
Strangle my greatness in a meshing hole?
the world's my study, Bajazet, my name
Shall fill each angle of this round-built frame. 
I know he grumbled at it; it is good
To calm the rebel heat of youthful blood
with sharpe rebukes. 
Health to the Emperor.
What will your message?
Duty first from Rome,
commended by the Bishop to your service,
with a firm promise to dispatch your will
what ever it implied, and would but stay
till Times swift circle should bring forth a day
secure for the performance. 
It is enough.
Thanks for your care. This was to murder Zemes.
War with the Bishop! 'thad been pretty sport,
I knew my powerful word was strong enough
to make him do my pleasure: simple Priest!
only I used it as a trick to send
Achmetes from the City and his friends;
but Fate so smiled upon me, that I found
a shorter means, his life and hopes to wound
with my sententious sons, that when my foe
fled through their Province, finely let him go;
which being wholly finished, strait to please
my friends, I played a raging Hercules;
then to shut up the Scene, neatly put on
a passionate humour, and the worst was done.
But who comes here? 
I like not this, Mahomates beloved
so dearly of the Comminalty: ha!
Hoe's wise, fair-spoken, gently qualified,
powerful of tongue; why hoe's the better son,
not to supplant his Father. I mislike
the prodigal affection thrown on him
by all my subjects. I belied my hopes
when I presumed this day had freely rid
me of my worst vexation: I was born
to be a jade to Fate, and fortunes scoff,
my cares grow double-great my cutting off. 
If ever man loved sorrow, wished to grieve,
Father I do for thee. Could I deprive
my senses of each object, but thy death,
then should I joy to sigh away my breath:
be Godhood to my grief: then shall these eyes
with tributary tears bedeck thy shrine:
and thus I do invoke the: nimble Ghost
what ever or be of Heaven, what ever coast
affords thee present mansion, quickly thence
flit hither, and present unto my sense
thy self a feeling substance: let me see,
acknowledge and admire thy majesty.
Put off that airy thinness which denies
me to behold thee with these duller eyes,
then shall they, sending down a powerful flood,
rinse thy cold members from each drop of blood;
and so return thee back, that thou mai'st soar
up to the skies, much purer then before.
Had the just course of nature wrought thee hence,
I would have made the gods know their offence,
and back restore thy soul; but thou art dead,
and it was a fiercer hand that clipped thy thread,
fiercer and boulder, which did ever thrive
by mischief, and once coffind thee alive
up in deaths mantle, but then would not use
such open violence, nor durst abuse
one of such sacred worth, till fury struck
his reason dead, and made his treacherous hand
creepingly stab thee, both unseen and foul,
as if he would have stolen away thy soul.
But oh!
But oh indeed.
Why, what?
As bad
a stroke attends thee as thy Father had:
Princes suspicion is a flame of fire,
exhaled first from our manners, and by desire
of rule is nourished, fed, and rores about
till the whole matter dye, and then goes out?
Unfold a scene of murders: Fates work on
we'll make a path to Heaven: and being gon,
Down from the lofty towers of the skies
throw thunder at the Tyrant; will he press
the earth with weight of slaughtered carcasses?
Let him grow up in mischief, still shall her womb,
gaping, reserve for him an empty tomb.
We do but tread his path; and Bassa, since
it stands upon thee now to cure thy prince
of his distempered lunacy, go fetch
the instrument of death, whilst I a wretch
expect thy sad return.
I go; and could
it stand with mine allegiance, sure I should
imply my service to a better end,
then to disrobe the Court of such a friend. 
He that is judged down from a steepy hill
to drop unto his death, and trembling still
expects one thence to push him, such a slave
doth not deserve to live, nor's worth a grave
Then Lachesis, thou that divid'st the thread
of breath, since this days Sun must see me dead;
thus Isle prevent thy pain, thus Isle out-run
my fate; and in this stroke thy work is done.
Eternal mover, thou that whirlst about
the skies in circular motion, hear me out
what I command, see that without control
thou make Heaven clear, to entertain my soul,
and let the nimble spirits of the ayre
Print me a passage hence up to thy chair,
there will I sit, and from the Azure sky,
laugh at obsequious base mortality.
Vanish my soul, enjoy, embrace thy fate
thus, thus thou mount'st above a Tyrates hate.
We are prevented; see the fates command
false deeds must dye, though by the Actors hand.
Return to Bajazet, and bear that corps. 
So now I am alone, nor need I fear
to breath my thoughts out to the silent ayre;
my conscience will not hear me, that being deaf
I may joy freely. First thy hated breath
Achmetes vanished, next Caigubus fell,
thus we clime Throans, whilst they drop down to hell.
The glorious eye of the all-seeing sun,
shall not behold (when all our plots are done)
a greater Prince then Selymus; it is he
must share with Jove an equal Majesty.
But for my self his Engineer, I'll stand
above mortality, and with a hand
of power dash all beneath me into dust,
if they but cross the currant of my lust.
What I but speak, it is Oracle and Law,
thus I will rule and keep the world in awe.
Noble assistant. 
Happy Selymus.
It is thou must make me so, for should I stay
waiting my Fathers pleasure, I might stand
gazing with envy at my Brothers pride,
my self lying prostrate even beneath their feet.
Towns, Cities, Countries, and what else soever
can give high thoughts content, are freely theirs,
???, only like a spend-thrift of my years,
Idle my time away, as if some god
had razed my name out of the role of Kings,
which if he have, then Isaac be thy hand
???s great as his, to print it in again,
though Bajaz???t say nay.
No more: I will;
an Empire be our hopes; that to obtain
we'll watch, plot, fight, sweat, and be cold again. 
Cannot my words add solace to your thoughts?
oh! you are gulft too deep in a desire
of sovereign pomp, and your high thoughts aspire.
All the unshadowed plainness of my life
doth but contract thick wrinkles of mislike
in your Majestic brow, and you distaste
moral receipts, which I have ministered
To cool Ambitions Fever.
Pardon Sir,
your holiness mistakes my malady,
another sickness grates my tender breast,
and I am ill at heart: alas I stand
an abject now as well in Natures eye,
as erst I did in Fortunes: is my health
fled with mine honour? and the common rest
of man grown stranger to me in my grief?
some unknown cause hath bred through all my blood
a colder operation, then the juice
of Hemlock can produce: O wretched man!
look down propitious Godheads on my woes.
Phoebus infuse into me the sweet breath
of cheerful health, or else infectious death.
If there an Angel be whom I have crossed
in my tormented boldness, and these griefs
are expiatory punishments of sin?
now, now repentance strike quite through my heart
enough of pains, enough of bitter smart
have tied me to it. I have already bin
bolted from joy, content can enter in,
not at the open passage of my heart,
I neither hear, nor see, nor feel, nor touch
with pleasure; my vexation is so much,
my grave can only quit me of annoy;
that prevents mischief, which can bring no joy.
Now I could curse what mine own hand hath don,
and wish that he would vomit out the draught
of direful poison, which infects his blood.
Ambitious fire! why it is as clean extinct,
as if his heart were set beneath his feet,
grief hath boiled out the humours of vain pride,
and he was mere contrition. 
What's the news?
Zemes, as now he left you pale and wan,
dragging his weak legs after him, did fall
dead on the stony pavement of the Hall,
not by unhappy chance, but as he walked,
folding his arms up in a pensive knot,
and railing at his Fate, as if he staged
the wounded Priam, or some falling King,
so he, oft lifting up his closing eye,
sunk faintly down, groaned out, I dye, I dye.
It grieves my soul: let Bajazet know this;
could our own shortened life, but lengthen his,
by often sighs I would transfuse my breath
into his breast, and call him back from death. 
Let not my absence steal away my love,
or local distance weaken the respect
which you have ever born me; I must fly
to shake the yoke of bondage from my neck:
my Fathers eyes shall not scan out my life
in every action; then when I am gone,
our love like precious mettle shall not crack
in the protraction, but be gently framed
into a subtler thinness, which shall reach
from either part, not crazed by any breach.
Return with ruin painted in thy brow,
pale death triumphant in thy horrid crest,
danger limned out upon thy threatening sword,
the Turkish thraldom portrayed on thy shield,
weel meet thee in thy horror, and unfold
our arms as wide as heaven to take thee in.
We trust you: if there lie unspoken love
hid in your bosoms, we must bury it
in silent farwells.
Noble Prince adieu,
since thy frank deeds have printed in our hearts
so true a pattern of thee, we will feed
our contemplation with thy memory.
When thou art really departed thus,
a better part of thee shall stay with us. 
So the swift wings of flight shall mount me up
above these walls into the open air,
and I will tower above thee Bajazet.
Farewell soft Court; I have been kept too long
within thy narrow walls, and am new born
to golden liberty; now stretch out you heavens,
spread forth the dewy mantle of the clouds
thou powerful Sun of Saturn, and remove
the terminating Poles of the fixed earth,
to entertain me in my second birth.
Not yet rid from our walls! Fair Prince take heed,
treason's a Race that must be run with speed.
Aeolus beckons, and the flattering winds.
join all to help our project: quickly hence:
ell's full of danger. Did your Father know
He would stop your flight and breath at one deaths blow.
Friend I am gone: thou hoary God of Seas,
smooth the rough bosom of thy wrinkled tide,
that my winged Boat may gently on it glide.
How the obsequious duty of the world
hangs shivering on the skirts of Majesty,
and smells out all her footsteps! I could yet
never steal leisure to reform my thoughts,
since my pale brow was first hooped in with gold,
till this blessed hour: and now great Bajazet
empty thy breast of her imprisoned joys,
which, like the smothering winds, could with a blast
rip up a passage. I am crowned in bliss,
placed on the rocks of strong security,
without the reach of Fate??? Envy shall gnash
and pine at my full pleasures; the soft feet
of labouring ambition shall quite tire,
ere touch the starry-height on which I stand.
Achmetes and his son with my two boys
are fallen, to clear the sun-shine of my joys,
Achomates I fear not, Selymus
lives caged within the compass of mine eye,
all that I doubt is of Mahomates,
that blazing star once darkened, I will throw
the luster of my pomp from me, as clear
as if three Suns were orbed all in one Sphere.
What news brings Isaac?
Unwelcome news.
Be quick in the delivery.
Then thus.
Young Selymus is fled.
Fled!
Fled this night to the Tartarian King.
Would he had sunk
to the Tartarian deep. Isaac, you are false,
and every hair dependant from thy head
is a twined serpent. Isaac, I say you are false,
I read it in thy brow.
By heaven I am not.
Come; answer my demands, first, at what time
left he the Court?
I know not.
Know he is fled,
and know not when he fled! how can this be!
After our strict enquiry, it was our chance
to lite on one that saw him take a ship,
at the next haven.
On one; bring forth that one, 
i'll sound the depth of these villainies.
What's here?
a barrel reared on end upon two feet?
Sirrah, you guts and garbage???did you see
Selymus leave the Court?
So please it your???
Please it! thou monster, are you now so pleasing.
My Liege hold in your fury: spend not one drop
of your fierce anger, on so base a worm,
keep it entire and whole, within your breast,
that with it's vigour it may crush the bulk
of him whose treasons move it.
So it shall,
Neptune reine back thy swelling Ocean,
invert the current of thy guilty streams
which further treacherous plots, mild Aeolus,
(that when a peevish goodness did entreat,
scattredst a Trojan Navy through the seas:)
now Bajazet a Turkish Emperor,
bids thee send forth thy jarring prisoners
into the seas deep bowels: let them raise
tempests shall dash against the firmament
of the vast heavens, and in their stormy rage,
either confound, or force the vessel back,
in which the traitor sails; now, now begin
or I shall think thee conscious of this sin.
What would this Monk? 
Only your blessed alms.
I'm in a liberal vain???
Traitor I'm slain!
I feel the bullet run quite through my sides.
Great Mahomet hath kept you safe from harm:
it never touched you.
Oh???I am slain!
open the gates of sweet Elysium,
take in my wounded soul: Bring forth that Monk
isle make him my souls harbinger, he shall
fore-run my coming and provide a place
amongst the gloomy banks of Acheron,
then shall he dwell with me in those black shades,
and it shall be my bliss to torture him.
Hoe's gone already, I have sent him hence.
Fly then my soul, and nimbly follow him,
he must not scope my vengeance: Charon stay,
one waftage will serve both, I come away.
Let not conceit thus steal away your life.
Me thinks I feel no blood ebb from my heart,
my spirits faint but slowly.
Hear me Sir,
You are not wounded.
Ha! not wounded!
Untouched as yet:
His quaking hand deceived him of his aim,
and he quite mist your body: here behold
the bullet yet unstained with blood.
Now I believe thee: oh the baleful fate
of Princes, and each eminent estate!
How every precious jewel in a Crown,
charms mad ambition, and makes envy dote
on the bewitching beauty of it's shine!
Indeed proud Majesty is ushered in
by superstitious awful reverence;
but cursed mischiefs follow; and those are
treasons in peace, black stratagems in war.
But wher's the dwarf? Isaac, go send him in;
bid bold Mesithes, and sage Mustapha
quickly attend us. Go. 
I shall.
This hour,
hath hatched a richer project in my brain,
whose wished event shall strangle envies breath,
and strike ambition dead in every breast.
Sirrha, draw hence the body to the ditch,
whither the filth of the whole City runs,
there overwhelm't in blood; go, quickly do it:
What dost thou grin, thou visage of an ape?
Isle rather hang my self then endure this.
Nay, come; be patient and Isle use thee well:
why???it was a Sceptre struck thee, and twill work
diviner operation in thy blood
then thou can dream of.
I'd rather be struck cross the teeth with a pudding
then cross the back with a Sceptre.
A man would guess so, that over-views the dimen???sions.
But to thy business.
Bassaes stand ye round,
Stay: who comes here? sure I should know that stature,
observe him nearly. 
Tic no Courtier.
Mahomates it is time to look about,
Selymus fled! Achomates adored!
My name scarce heard of through the popular streets!
had that unhappy arm of that damned Monk,
not staggerd from the mark at which he aimed,
who ever sent him hither, I had leapt.
into the empty throne, and cropped the fruit
budding from treasons root; but Isle return
back to my Province, this unknown disguise,
shall search my Fathers closest policies. 
Mahomates disguised!
By heaven it was he.
He pries into my counsels: let it be.
We'll forward in our business, which being done,
weel cool the hot ambition of each son,
as mine already is, quick moving time
hath cast a snowy whiteness on my hairs,
and frosty age hath quel'd the heat of youth;
mine intellectual eyes, which ever yet
gazed on the worlds rich gilded vanities,
are now turned inward, and behold within,
dismal confusion of unpardoned sin.
Ever since I first was settled on this Throne,
my cares have clogged the swiftness of the hours,
and wrought a tedious irksomenesse of life,
murders have masked the forehead of the Sun
with purple-coloured clouds, and he hath blushed
at the blood-sucking cruelty of state.
There's not one little angle of this Court,
whose guilty walls have not concealed a knot
of traitors, squaring out some hideous plot
against my safety; now at last I spy
the dangers of perplexed Majesty.
And were it not for a religious fear
of after-harms, which wretchedly might tear,
and spoil the body of this Monarchy,
here at this instant would I strike the sail,
and proud top-gallant of mine eminence,
hurl up my sceptre, dis-inthrone my self,
and let the green heads scramble for the Crown.
Age hath taught me a staider providence
then my rash youth could reach to; I intend
to place this glittering babble, on the head
of some successor, ever I yet am dead,
So give it out; thereby Isle try the love
and favour of the people: whom they seem
most to affect I'll raise to that esteem.
How do you like the counsel?
As we could like
a voice of health sent from the careful gods.
This news will lay the fury of your sons,
and breed low duty in them all, in hope
of the reward proposed.
Awake preventions eyes, we must not sleep
if we would see proud Bajazet displaced,
and Selymus elated to his height.
Name him the people favours! ??? he affects
Achomates: and knows, the multitude
wrapped with his heavenly wisdom, cry for him,
we must be quick and wary, here are keys
left, and laid up by Selymus, that store
shall visit empty, purses and enchant
the needy sort of men, that the ones wealth,
shall weigh up t'others wisdom in the scale
of their light judgment; lend your best endeavours,
we'll cross thee Bajazet, and thy hopes shall dye
by thine own ill-contrived policy. 
Leave us; we would be private with our friend,
it is thou must do it sweet Asmehemedes:
Mahomates and thou art two near friends;
he will suspect in others close deceit;
thee, for thy generous virtues he will stand
with obvious embraces to receive
into his bosom; whither when thou art
wound in, be sure to strike him through the heart.
I am offended, it is just piety
to sacrifice his body at the shrine
of my displeasure: do it, I am thine.
Were he as dear to me, as the half part
of mine own body, as the breath I draw;
I'd do this charge: we mortals must obey
when gods command, and Emperors are they. 
So willing to be damned! had I adjoined
some virtuous office, surely he would then
have said, that good deeds are not deeds of men.
But let them go; Mahomates must dye,
and for my other boy fierce Selymus,
the boisterous hand of war must snatch him hence,
my other Son Corcutus lives immured
within Minerua's cloister, thus I clear,
a path through which Achomates shall run
up to my throne when all their hopes are done. 
The promise was direct and absolute,
to bless my Temples with a sacred Crown,
with protestations of a quick dispatch,
ere his own right were cancelled by fate;
so to cut off all rivals in my joys.
What intercedent chance hath made his care
so slack in the performance? by heaven, I fear,
delays will prove delusions of my hopes,
and that home-bred Mercurian Selymus
will split the expectation of my bliss:
forefend it Mahomet, or I shall be
a sad revenger of indignity.
How now! What speaks this bold intrusion?
Health to Achomates from Bajazet.
From Bajazet! unfold thy welcome news:
How fares our Noble Father?
In full health:
and wills you thus by me, to muster up
your surest forces: and with moderate hast,
repair unto the Court, where you shall find
employments worthy of a valorous mind.
To muster arms! can thou surmise the cause?
With confidence I dare not; but tic said,
against that haughty Noble Selymus,
who of the Tartar King implored aid,
to an uncertain end: himself gives out
to fight with Hungary, and stretch the bounds
of the old Turkish regiment: But fame
with panting voice bids Bajazet beware,
and whispers in his ear, he is the foe,
Proud Selymus intends to overthrow.
Enough, regreet our Father with our love;
tell him we shall not sleep to his command;
Fly nimbly back. Dares the audacious boy
trouble the world with his tempestuous arms?
Isle chastise him with iron whips of war,
if either strength or stratagems will serve
to spoil the gaudy plumes of his high crest,
Il'e use the strongest violence of both;
I am swollen big with hate, and I could break
untimely passage with a wholesome stab
to vent the monster strangled in my womb.
Father I come, he that detains a Crown
bequeathed to me, must thunder-strike me down.
Buzzing reports have pierced my study walls,
and clogged my meditations airy wings,
by which I mount above the moving spheres
and search the hidden closets of the heaven,
I cannot live retired, but I must hear
mine own wrongs sounded in my troubled ear:
What! will my father falsify that oath;
In which he vowed successions right to me?
When I resigned my honours up to him,
he deeply swore, when the usurping Sun
of his bright-shining royalty had run
It's complete course through the whole heaven of state,
and fainting dropped into the Western lapse;
my brightness next should throw it's golden beams,
upon the worlds wide face, and over-peer
the dusky clouds of hidden privacy:
and shall Achomates succeed! Shall he
shine in the spangled robes of Majesty?
then Bajazet is false, let it be so
I am secured from a huge mass of woe.
Yet Isle to the Court, that when Achomates
shall spy me, and remember but my due,
twill stain his lustre with a blushing hue.
My cares are grown too great to be comprised
within the narrow compass of my breast,
Vice-roy of Greece, Isle power into thy heart
part of my secrets; which being entered in,
locke them as close up, as thou would a sin
committed, yet not known: I must impart
things worth thy faithful silence.
Worthy Sir,
by the enclosure of my soul I swear???
Isle not hear out thine oath, in brief, it is thus,
the Bassaes are all false, and love not us;
Nor doth my brain-sicke fury prompt me thus,
I read it in their gestures, conventicles,
actions, and counsels, my suspicious eye
hath found a great breach in their loyalty.
Surely this cannot bee.
By ??? it is true,
each man that guards mine honour is my foe,
Isle shake these splendent robes of Majesty
from my ore-burden'd shoulders, and to ease
my self, bequeath them to Achomates.
Achomates?
Even he, unless the voice
Of the whole City interdict my choice.
Here comes the Bassaes,
sure I see bad news
portrayed on the Index of their fronts.
Bad news? We have outlived good days too long,
we can expect no other: come, unclasp
volumes of misciefes, and make deaf my ears
with an infused multitude of cares.
Young Selymus hath crossed Danubius flood
and seized upon the Provinces of Thrice,
and with a Navy ploughed the Euxine Sea,
Peace bellowing night-ravens; with how cheerful noise
their puffing lungs croak out the baleful note?
Are these the wars against Hungary? You powers
of heaven, brush off your cloddy patience;
If you but wink at these notorious crimes,
I'll say you dare not check our stubborn times.
Well, as yet I'll make use of his pretence.
Vize-roy of Greece, bear you this Embassy
to that suspected Traitor Selymus;
Tell him, the wars against the Hungarian foe
are full of dangers, and approved harms;
never attempted by our Ancestors,
without repulse or damage; bid him dismiss
his rough Tartarian youths: then if he stand
Unmoved and stiff, feign vengeance is at hand:
make thy best speed.
I shall. Twill be well done
to reconcile a Father and a Son, 
Thought he tumultuous uprores could deserve
the favours of his Prince? he has trod awry,
and mist the path that leads to Majesty.
These bright Imperious ornaments shall grace
no rebell-monster, nor base runne-away;
my resolution's firm, it shall not be.
Bassaes, this day an Herald shall proclaim
in the worlds ear, my great successors name,
are you content?
We are.
Call forth an Herald.
As our allegiance binds us we'll obey.
But what we grant, the Soldiers will gainsay. 
Thou shalt not thrive in this, I dare be bold,
my golden hooks hove taken a faster hold.
Herald,
be my loud Echo, ratify my deed,
and say Achomates shall next succeed.
Bajazet the second by the appointment of our great Prophet Mahomet, the only Monarch of the World, a mighty God on earth, an invincible Cae???sar, King of all Kings, from the East unto the West, Governor of Greece, Sultan of Babylon, Sovereign of Persia and Armenia, triumphant Tutor of Jerusa???lem, Lord possessor of the Sepulchre of the Crucified God, subverter and sworn enemy of the Chri???stians, and of all that call upon Christ, proclaims Achomates his second son next and immediate success???sour. 
None but Bajazet, none but Bajazet.
By heaven, they are corrupted: none but I?
It is no love borne to me that moves this cry.
Great Bajazet, the cause why they deny
this just proposal, rises from an use
and customary licence long observed;
to wit, when their crowned Emperor is dead,
the interposed vacation is a time
of lawless freedom: then they dare to spoil
the Jewish Merchants of their traffic wares,
and prey upon all strangers: so that should
your Honour be conferred upon your son
Whilst you your self yet breath, then should they lose
their long expected gains; therefore refuse
what you proposed.
If that be all the cause,
we'll give them such a Kingly donative
as doubly shall buy out those ill-got spoils:
five hundred thousand Ducats, if they please
with my free choice to crown Achomates,
Proclaimed to be their due. 
Bajazet the second, by the appointment of our great Prophet Mahomet, &amp;c. proclaims, that he will attribute five hundred thousand Ducats, if you yield allegiance to Achomates his successor.
None but Bajazet, none but Bajazet.
Achomates I sent for, how he will digest
these gross illusions, I may justly fear:
by this I had discouraged Selymus,
and killed his hopes; by this I had cut off
the growth of hate, and choked discords seed. 
Bear this to Selymus with thy best care.
And this. 
And this: fly, let thy winged speed
return a sudden answer, else we bleed.
Go on brave Prince; Lead on thy marshaled troops,
degrade the Turkish Monarch, let him faint
at the deep wounds which thy revengeful hand
shall print upon the bosom of his land.
Go on; Me thinks I see Victoria sit
triumphant on thy steely Burganet.
Farewell: now I will meet thee Bajazet,
with a career as free as if Heavens Jove
had bid me go: Bespeak the stoutest gods
to take thy part; tell them that thou must meet
a Selymus, who when the wars are done,
will scale the Forts and Castles of the Sun,
break up the brazen gates of Acheron,
and bury Nature with the world together.
Captains lead on; Now shall the sword and fire
by public ruins crown my just desire.
Sleep Hungary, I'll not break off thy rest
with the unwelcome Music of my Drums;
I'll turn the edge of my revengeful sword
upon the bosom of my native soil;
There dwells the motive of my Tragic wars,
whose ruthless sad Catastrophe shall wound
posterity in us: Infants shall morn
over their Fathers tombs as yet unborn.
But who comes here? I'll meet him.
Noble Vize-roy. 
Peace and health to Selymus.
Health, but not peace, whilst yonder light can see
mortals, whom Turkish force could ne'er subdue.
Yet what if Bajazet, our honoured Lord,
bid you roll up those flaxen signs of war,
and sheath the sword drawn forth against his foe?
when duty says obey, what shall say no?
My courage, and a proud contempt of all
corrival Nations, could send back a no,
able to fright a Parliament of gods;
It could so: but if Bajazet gainsay,
my plumy valour flags, my thoughts give way.
Then thus; he wills you to discard your force,
and send the black Tartarians to their home;
withal averring, the Hungarian foe
(against whose power you have summoned Arms)
is full of strength and power, ne'er opposed
without the bitter downfall of our side.
Nor would the worlds great Monarch Bajazet,
impair his fame so much, as to be said,
he tamed a Foe by Tartars borrowed aid.
Ha! I am vilely non-plust. Courteous Vize-roy,
return our duty back to Bajazet,
even in the humblest terms wit can invent;
tell him, he hath a son of that high spirit,
as doth detest a cowardly retreat.
Were all the dead Heroes of our foes,
All that are now, and all that are to come
met in one age, I'd face them drum to drum.
Bid our dear Father be secure of me
and my proceedings: then true valour shines
most bright, when busied in the greatest designs.
Is not this answer fair?
Most true: and yet
twill prove distasteful.
No, it cannot be:
If there be too much valour in this breast,
blame him that placed it there, even Bajazet.
My virtues and my blood are both derived
from his first influence, and I must either hate
disgraceful column's, or degenerate.
All this I'll tell your Father; yet he will rest
as much unsatisfied as at the first,
he will expect the head-strong pride of youth
should strike low sail to his grave providence.
And so it shall: say Vize-roy, I obey,
and reverence his counsel more, then fear
an host of armed foes: tell him I'll come
to his Court gates with neither man nor drum.
Cherseo. I'll tell it him with joy, which when he hears,
he will be disburdened of a thousand fears. 
Remember my just duty: it is no matter,
I will retain that till I come my self.
I am not out-reach'd yet by all these tricks;
my hopes are farther strong, I'll to the Court
with a close march, in no submissive sort,
and steal upon them: Instantly I go
to meet my Father, but a subtle foe.
Good health to Selymus.
Good health! From whom?
Isaac, Mesithes, Mustapha salute you.
Those good Trium-virj, what is it they speak?
[To feede on hopes is but a slender dyet.]
It is short, but full of weight: To feed on hope
is but a slender diet! Let it be. 
I'll mend my table, though no feast with me.
[Faire opportunity is bald behind.]
It is true indeed, Mesithes. Never fear,
I'll twist my fingers in her golden hair.
What speaks the third? 'This writes more at large,
and comments on the prefixed principalls.
[Your Father did proclaim who should succeed;
Publique denialls nullified his deede;
Your hast will be convenient; things concurre
to blesse your hopes. Fate bids you not demur.]
Yours Isaac Bassa
Isaac, I am thine,
and come to finish up our great design. 
Unquiet anguishments and jealous fear
fly from my thoughts, like night before the Sun:
I'm lifted to the highest Sphere of joy,
My top enveloped in the azure cloud,
and starry rich habiliments: my feet
set rampant on the face of Natures pride;
The rarest work weaved by her handmaid Art
clothes my soft pleasures; I'm as great as Jove,
Only I rule below, he reigns above.
Oh! the unspoken beauty of a Crown,
whose empty speculation mounts my soul
up to an heavenly Paradise of toughts!
Father, I come, that thou may crown my head,
whilst apprehensive reason stands amazed,
amidst the blissful shades of sweet conceit.
Then I'll call back my wandering intellect
from dreams, and those imaginary joys;
I'll teach my soul to twine about a Crown,
to sweat in raptures, to fill up a Throne
with the bigge-swelling looks of Majesty;
I'll amble through a pleasures Labyrinth,
and wander in the path of happiness,
as the true object of that faculty.
Great Bajazet, I come. Thou must descend
from Honours high Throne, and put off thy right
to build me up an heaven of choice delight. 
The Emperor begins to smell deceit;
I know by his ill looks and sparkling eye
that he affects us not.
I doubt as much.
Young Selymus he's wronged our loyalty
in his so slack proceedings; we were rash
and indiscreetly-forward in consent,
when we joined on to raise his government.
Peace, it is too late to chide at what is done,
we have so deeply waded in the streams
of those procellous plots, nor can revoke
repentant footsteps, or securely creep
back to the Throne of safety: it is now good
to venture on, and swim quite through the flood.
Here comes the Emperor. 
Attend us Bassaes.
Ar't sure hoe's dead?
Mahometes is dead.
There's nothing moving of him but his soul,
and that robbed of his body by this hand.
Enough. That soul revives to see him dead
that wronged the body; Oh! my bloody heart,
Must in his frenzy act an horrid part.
Follow thy Prince to hell. 
To death! Oh devilish ingratitude:
I'm slain. I dye. 
And justly: would each foe
and Traitor to my state were thwarted so.
Bassaes, convey this hated body hence,
the sight of that damned villain moves offence:
Now pause a while my soul, and reckon up
what obstacles are yet to be removed.
Achomates must stay the peoples leisure.
Corcutus dally with Minervaes Nymphs.
The last and worst, proud Selymus shall dye.
Thus I le compose a firm security.
Arrived already, noble Cherseogles?
You're careful in our cause: but speak the news
from our pert Soldier. What means Selymus!
To track the path backward from whence he came,
to strip himself of martial ornaments,
and to fill up the duty of a Son,
come visit you in low submission.
These are too fairly promised, to be meant,
ambition hath already chained his soul
too surely in the captive bonds of pride,
then that he now should cloth his stately hopes
in the plain sordid weeds of penitence;
He doth but varnish o'er some treacherous plot
in this smooth answer: come, we'll lead along
to our Imperial seat of Constantine,
that's strongly fortified, we need not fear
the weak attempts an home-bred foe can dare.
Ha! we are sweetly plunged, if cold despair
benumme his youthful courage, and he faint.
Would I were fairly rid of all these cares.
Dejected Cowards: are you not ashamed
thus to give up the goal of dignity
to heartless fear? Here comes the Messenger.
What news from Selymus?
Even nothing certain:
ambiguously he promised to be here
as soon as I.
I'st even so?
We are quite dished ??? undone.
Lift up your downe-cast spirits. Who comes here?
Who? Selymus?
Where? sweet Isaac, doe not tell him,
that we were sending forth faith's latest breath.
Enough, I will not. Happy Selymus.
Long live great Selymus.
We thank you friends:
Your care hath fostered up our infant hopes
beyond the pitch of expectation.
We hear that Bajazet is going now
from hence to Constantinople; my men
lie closely ambushed in the middle way,
close by a ruinous city, there expect
a sudden on-set; but till then farewell,
When we meet next, our ensigns wav'd on high,
shall shine like Meteors blazing in the sky. 
Fortunes best care go with thee.
Brave boy, y'faith.
I shall adore him whilst I breath for this.
Again in heart?
Let's follow Bajazet, come lads, away,
the sun of all his glory sets this day. 
Come on, the honoured youth of Tartary,
my brothers, and joint sharers of my woe,
draw forth the weapons of inflamed revenge
against this horrid monsters Tyranny;
I seem like Romes great Caesar, when, oppressed
with Pompeys grating malice, he led forth
his noble French-men through the snowy Alps.
I have my Curio Isaac in the Court,
and Cherseogles, like grim Catoes ghost,
soothes the rough humour of fierce Bajazet.
These men's examples, were we faint and loath,
would set sharpe spurs unto our slow paced wrath,
and whet our dull-edg'd anger: but I see
in your smooth brow perfect alacrity.
We stand to thwart the passage of a fiend,
through whose wide yawning throat hath coasted down
the blood of Princes, in continual streams;
he's fed and pampered up his appetite
with the abhorred destruction of his own,
and glutted on the blood of innocents.
Stood wee like marble statues in his way,
and had no use of policy and wit,
our Ireful Prophet Mahomet would send
sense, life, and valour through our stony joints,
that we might ruinate this ghastly bore,
made by some hellish fury to confound
the order of this wondered Universe.
Isle grapple with the monster, hoe's at hand;
If you stand firm, the Common Wealth may bee
a slave to Bajazet; but Isle live free.
No Drum nor Trumpet hath disturbed the ayre,
within the reach of mine attention.
And I admire it; it were a miracle
if that ambitious boy intend no harm.
What noise is that?
Help Bajazet, the vauntgard's almost slain;
the Tartars lay in ambush.
What? so near?
Set up our standard, Isle give battle here;
hang out defiance, scorn, and proud contempt
write in the blood-red colours of your plumes:
summon our Army 
from these skirmishes,
speak out the traitors doom in thine alarms.
Thought he to daunt our courage?
Valiant soldiers,
when I behold the manner of this war,
when treason copes with awful Majesty,
a graceless son, with his own aged Sire,
me thinks to bid you fight, were full as vain
as to bid heavy clouds fall down in rain:
but when I view the Chaos of the field,
and wild confusion striking valour dead,
I called you, not (as Captains doe to boys)
to read a lecture of encouragement;
but that your ancient virtue may be shown
in this my last defence: I wish to dye
revenged, that death sorts best with Majesty.
Selymus?
Bajazet?
Jove lend me but a minutes patience.
Unnatural son!
Uncharitable Father!
Father? My sword shall hew that title off;
and cut in twain kindreds continued line,
by which thou can derive thy blood from mine.
Abortive monster???thou first breath of sin,
we had but slender shadows of offence,
till thou creptst forth to the offended light,
the very mass, and stock of villainy.
Crimes in all others, are but thy influence.
Nature he's planted viprous cruelty
In thy dark breast, the scandal of her works,
her error, and extract perfection
of vices; the first well-head of bad things
from whence the world of ills draw their weak springs.
Then hear me speak too: you have bin to me
no Father, but a sour Pedantic wretch;
one that with frosty precepts strived to kill
the flaming heate of my ambitious youth,
as vainly as to strangle fire with straw:
you sit so daily hovering on your Throne,
as if youl'd hatch new Monarchies to feed
the hungry gulf of your unbridled pride;
You've surfeited on titles, you've engrossed
honour, you are the moth of eminence,
and liberal fortunes answered your desires;
You had deflow'rd th'infinitie of Crowns
With your adulterate ambition;
You're Sovereignties horse-leach, and have spilled
the blood of State, to have your own veins filled.
Hold, hold thy venomed tongue, if there be hid
more of this kind un-uttred; Isle rip up
thy full fraught bosom; and to save mine ear,
mine eyes shall overview what I'll not hear.
Dare thou fight, Traitor?
Dare I be called a King?
Dare I unsheathe my sword, or gather might?
If I dare ought of these, I dare to fight.
Guard thee, I'd not omit the sweet desire
and pleasure of revenge, were heaven my hire.
The slave has escaped the power of my wrath;
midst the dissever'd troops of scattered foes
I lost him in a smoky cloud of dust,
so thick as if the tender Queen of Love,
had wrapped her brat Aeneas from my sight.
Joy to my Liege, of his last victory.
The bold Tartarians flew like fearful Harts
before the hunters rage.
So let them fly;
heaven rain down vengeance on their cursed heads;
it is our honour that the frighted slaves
owe their lives dearest safeties to their heals.
How now, whence come you?
From yonder hay-ricke, Sir.
Did thou see Selymus when he fled the field?
No indeed, I was two far crept in.
O you are brave attendants.
Let's forward in our journey; these affairs
Achomates must know; his golden wish
the people have delayed; perhaps heel frown,
and trample filial duty under feet
as this hath done: but let them storm their fill
Virtue's not shipwrecked in a sea of ill.
An honoured Legate, an Ambassador!
as if that title, like Medaeas charm,
could stay the untamed spirit of my wrath!
Had he bin sent a messenger from heaven,
and spoke in thunder to the slavish world;
If he had roared one voice, one syllable
cross to my humour, I'd a searched the depth
of his unhallowed bosom, and turned out
his heart, the profane seat of saucy pride.
Slain an Ambassador! no less! it is done,
and it was a noble slaughter, I conceive
a joy ineffable to see my sword
bathed in a blood so rare, so precious
as an Ambassadors: must we be told
of times delays, and opportunities?
that the base soldier hath gaine-sayd our bliss?
Thought Bajazet his son so cold, so dull,
so innocently blockish, as to hear
an Embassy most harsh and grossly bad?
the people to deny me! We contemn
with strange defiance Bajazet, and them.
Mischief on mischief, all our hopes are dead,
slain in the haplesse fall of Selymus.
I think the devils fought for Bajazet,
and all the infernal hags; how could he else
with a confused army, and half slain,
break the well-ordered ranks of a strong foe?
And unexpected too? ??? Now Isaacke! what!
Sadly repenting for thy last misdeeds!
Plots and conspiracies against thy Prince!
Faith we must hang together ???
Good Mesithes,
it is nothing so: they say, Achomates,
disdaining to be mocked out of his hopes,
and most desired possession of the Crown,
he's in contempt of Bajazet and all,
slain the Ambassador, and vows revenge
on every guilty agent in his wrong.
I looked for that, and therefore first shranke back,
when Bajazet made choice of one to send
on such a thankless errand as that was.
Grant the report be true: what's that to us?
Fame in mine ear ne'er blabbed a sweeter tale;
this shall redeem our low dejected hopes
to their full height. No more; be it my charge,
to chose out the event???Whats this comes here?
Upon my life, the body of the slain
Ambassador.
It is so.
We greet you friends,
and your sad spectacle.
Tic sad enough
to banish peace and patience from each breast
that owes true loyalty to Bajazet.
And so it shall; lay down the injured corps.
Achomates he's wronged his Fathers love
too grossly, in the murder even of him
that bore his sacred person, and should stand
inviolably honoured by the law
of men and nations.
But here comes Bajazet.
A tragic spectacle! Whose trunk is this?
The body of your slain Ambassador.
Slain! by what cursed violence? what ?????????
durst touch the man that represented me?
Achomates.
Achomates!
The same:
Highly displeased with the unexpected news
of a denial from the peoples mouth,
his reason slipped in fury and contempt,
hath thus abused your gracious Majesty.
Withal, he threatened to maintain this sin
with force of arms, and so resolved to win
your Crown, without such tarriance???
Oh! no more,
I am unfortunate in all my blood.
Hath he thus guerdon'd my fair promises,
my daily sweat and care to further him,
and fix him in the Paradise of joy?
Nations cry out for vengeance of this fact,
I'll scourge this black impiety to hell.
Muster our forces to the utmost man;
once more I'll bury this my aged corps
in steely armour, and my coloured crest
like a bright star shall sparkle out revenge
before the rebels faint amazed eyes.
Lose not a minute; Bassaes hence, be gone,
muster our men, stay not; that from the tide
of our fierce wrath, no drop may ebb away
by causeless lingering.
Whom speak you, General?
Whom but my self? whom doth the cause concern
more nearly then my self?
My honoured Liege,
bear your best care about you; it is a time
of double danger; but remove the one,
the other straight called forward: Selymus,
great in the favour of Tartaria's King,
is manned afresh with soldiers; his assault
threatnes as much as fierce Achomates,
and must be born off with your ablest forces;
then if you leave the City to subdue
one of these two, expect ever you return,
tother possessed and seated on your throne.
Distraction rends my soul: what shall I do?
Force out one nayl with tother of these two,
choose him you most affect, and best dare trust,
allure him fairly home, wink at his crimes,
and then create him your high General,
to lead against his brother: since your self
cannot at once oppress two foes so stout,
try if one heate can drive another out.
Isaac, we like thy counsel: but of these,
which can we pardon? either so deboist,
so guilty of rebellion, so divorced
from pious loyalty, that my soul even both
with bitter hatred equally may loath.
First weigh their faults, the one a brain-sick youth,
endeavoured to supplant your Majesty;
the other in defiance and contempt
of God and man, profaned the holy rites
of an Ambassador.
For which dire fact,
should it slip up unpunished, the name,
the fearful name of Bajazet would prove
the subject of each libel, and the scoff
of petty Princes.
Enough; we have decreed
Achomates shall quake beneath the stroke
of our fierce anger. Isaac, speed away
to Selymus, he shall confront the slave,
the best of two so bad; go,???stay,???yet go,
it is hard when we beg succour of a foe:
Beg! stay again???first will I drop before
the sword of proud Achomates;???go???tell him,
upon his low submission we will deign
to make him Champion to his Sovereign.
My dear Corcutus welcome.
Royal Father. 
Arise thou only solace of mine age:
it was a night of harmless innocence,
of peace and rest, in which kind nature laid
thee in thy mothers womb: Right virtuous boy,
how hast thou lived untainted with the breath
of that infectious vice, Rebellion!
Right noble Father, it is a faithful rule
in moral rites, that who desires a good,
and most suspects his right to it, is bold
and turbulent, and eager in pursuit;
whereas the man to whom this good is due,
rests happily contented, till time fit
Crown him in the possession of his wish.
Well moralised: I understand thee, Boy,
my grant shall melt thy prayers in full joy.
Once more (in hope to gain, and fear to lose
a Crown and Kingdom) we have marched thus near
the seat of a dread Emperor, to try
the chance of war, or resolutely die.
Fear no cross blow, for with this hand I move
the wheel of Fate: and each success shall run
even with our pleasures, till our hopes are spun
up to their full perfection: this days light
that looks so cheerfully, shall see as bright
as it, my crown and glory. 
What stranger's this? my blessed Genius haunts me.
Isaac! I take thee in with open love.
What speaks thy Presence?
Good news to Selymus.
From whom?
From Bajazet.
It is strange, if good.
And full as good as strange. March quickly hence,
I'll tell you as we walk; if constant Chance
smile on our project. ever this Sun go down,
we may salute you with a glorious Crown.
I follow even to death. Grand Mars to thee
I'll build an Altar, if thou prosper me. 
Revenge my black impiety; each brow
seems with a scornful laughter to deride
those empty Menaces of Bajazet.
And Bajazet is not our Father now,
sith he hath wronged the duty of a Son;
but a scorned Enemy, whose prostrate soul
shall make a step by which I will ascend
up to the radiant throne of heavenly State,
if you but lend your help and free consent.
Lead us along the misty banks of hell,
through Seas of danger, and the house of death,
we are resolved to follow, one by one
to second each step of Achomates.
This resolution is as great as just,
continue it brave spirits: he's a slave,
that having sinned, dares not defend his sin.
The world shall know I dare: For though our cause
be wrong, yet we'll make good the breach of laws.
Would I had slept with Trizham, and that hand
that strangled Mahomet had stopped my breath,
rather then live to see my self thus wronged.
Despair not sweet Corcutus, what I promised,
I'll keep most true, and here again I vow
when I am dead, this honour to thy brow.
I have called home that rebel Selymus,
only to tame a Traitor: And that done,
we have no other heir, no other son
beside Corcutus, to whose free command
we do bequeath the duty of this land.
Is Isaac not returned?
My Liege, he is.
And Selymus with him.
Let them approach.
Let your high spirit shrink below it self
in a dissembled show of penitence.
Tush, I can bow, as if my joints were oyld,
and tumble at his feet.
Practise your skill.
Less show, and more good meaning, Selymus,
Arise: these crouching feats, give slender proofs
of inward loyalty.
Right noble Father,
mine expedition to avenge your cause
upon the head of proud Achomates,
be my just trial.
Hast then: May thy arm
by breathless treason raise up a full joy,
and turn that monster back unto the earth
from whence it leapt. A most prodigious birth!
We fly to the performance; who both dare
and will correct his boldness: now we tread
the path to honour, and methinks I hear
the peoples Vivat Echo in mine ear.
New insolence: The Bassaes slipped away!
How the obsequious villains honour him,
as if he were their Godhood!
I suspect
some plotted mischief, else they durst not leave
your person thus unguarded.
Plot and hang.
We weigh not all their treasons at a straw,
one must not rule too long, it is subjects law.
Hell and the furies vex their damned souls.
What people? Ha! what Nation is it we live in?
Is it our State and Monarchy? Good gods,
two Emperors at once! Live Selymus?
Can slavish vassals thus supplant their Prince?
What's this enshrines my head? a type for fools
to flear at, a divided ornament!
Fail not my sense and courage, let me live
to find my self again. Vize-roy of Greece,
did thou not see a Bajazet withdraw
and vanish hence? tell thou most faithful man,
what is become of that forgetful name?
or who hath stole it from me? Selymus!
Oh that damned viliaine with his treacherous plot,
hath robed me of that glory, Death of sense:
I have a soul of Adamant or Steel,
else had that hated noise reft it in twain.
What art thou? or whence come thou?
From a Prince.
Yet I believe thee.
From thine enemy.
Yet I believe thee.
From the Emperor.
And I believe thee still; yet slave, thou least,
these p???rts must know no Emperor but me,
unless base usurpation hath stepped up
unto my chair of honour. Right, it is so:
it is so indeed. Well then, what will your Emperor?
That by my hand you yield him up his crown.
Traitor, his crown? so: now I am resolved.
I have forgone my self, else had this hand
tore out thy spottedheart, and that one word
of yielding, had been cause enough to spoil
thee and thy generation. Heartless slave,
why sneak'st thou from our presence? stay, behold,
here??? commend this gorgeous ornament,
these trappings to thy Emperor, as full
bestead with curses as my heart with woes,
that it my clog his ears, and vex his head
with daily terrors. Hence thy prince is sped.
Vize-roy of Greece, to thee our last farewell,
thou worthiest, truest, best deserving man
that ever made us happy: if thy faith
respect me, not my fortune, do this charge,
fly to Achomates, and rather aide
him then this faithless Bastard Selymus,
the scandal of our race, the mark for heaven
to shoot revenge. But all in vain,
I strive to word away my inward pain.
Nor this, nor that I'll favour; may I speed,
Bajazet shall live to see both bleed. 
Mask up thy brighthesse Phoebus; lovely night,
hurl thy thick mantle over all the heavens,
let this black day for ever be forgot
in the eternal registers of time:
which of you sacred powers are not ashamed
to see a Prince so sinfully abused
by his own issue, and unrevenged?
But stand we, who comes here? a face of brass,
else would it blush: now, thou Saturnine Jove,
thou God of great men, thunder, that the world
drenched all in sin, may shake and fear that noise,
that horrid scourge of villainies.
Father!
Slave,
avaunt: I feel a strong Antipathy
t'wixt thee and me; thy sight makes my dead heart
distill fresh drops of blood, and work new smart.
What, furious Bajazet, and raging hot?
I hug the amorous pleasure that I feel
creep through my joints. Observe our Father,
else by some wilful murder he will prevent
my purposed project; I'd not lose the guilt
of his destruction for a crown: heaven knows
I love him better then to let him dig
himself a grave, whilst I may take the pains.
Now mount my soul, and let my soaring plumes
brush the smooth surface of the Azure sky.
With this I charm obeisance from the world:
thou golden counterfeit of all the heavens;
see how the shining stars in careless ranks
grace the composure; and the beauteous Moon
holds her irregular motion at the height
of the four poles; this is a complete heaven,
and thus I wear it. But, methinks, it is fixed
but weakly on my brow, whilst there yet breath
any whose envy once reflect on it;
and those are three: the angry Bajazet,
puling Corcutus, proud Achomates:
One of these three is cared for, that's Corcutus,
who, ere the blushing morn salutes the Sun,
shall be dispatcht by two most hideous slaves,
whom I have bred a purpose to the fact.
The other rival, wise Achomates,
I'll bear a side by force of men and arms,
which ready Mustered, but attend the stroke:
Then attend our Fathers. 
Here's one deals for him,
shall send him quick to hell. It is decreed,
he that makes lesser greatness soon shall bleed.
Hamon draw near, most welcome, my dear Hamon,
what guess you of your patient Bajazet?
Is he all healthful?
No, my gracious prince:
Neither his body nor his mind is free
from miserable anguish.
A sad case.
Hamon I love him, &amp; would rid him from it,
were I so skilled in naturals as you.
All that my art can work to cure his grief
shall be applied.
Unapprehending fool:
I must speak broader. Hamon, is he ill
in mind and body both?
Exceeding ill.
Then should I think him happier in his death,
then in so hateful life and so weak breath.
And that's the readier way to cure his ill.
(He has found me now.) But Hamon, can thy Art
reach to the cure?
With easy diligence.
Then let it.
I'm yours. 
Walk, and thy pains
shall be rewarded highly, with the like
as thou bestow on Bajazet: the Court
makes it a fashion now, first to bring the event
about, and then hang up the instrument.
Thus Cherseogles hast thou wound thy self
out of thy self, to act some fearful plot,
by which the Authors of this public woe
shall skip into their graves. It is confirmed
a deed of lawful valour, to defeat
those of their lives, that robed the world of peace.
On this side the false hearted Selymus
with his confederate Bassaes lie encamped,
just opposite the proud Achomates;
The Sun now sunk into the Western lap,
bids either part unlace their warlike helmes
until to morrow light, where both intend
the hazard of a battle: but you powers,
that with propitious cares tender the world,
and us frail mortals, help me to prevent
a general ruin by the fall of some;
assist my spirits in a deed of blood,
cruel, yet honest and austerely good.
Who? Selymus? as I expected. 
What?
A soldier thus licentious in his walks?
a stranger? Ha! What art thou?
A sworn friend, a servant to thy greatness.
Then return
back into thy ranks and orders, no edict
from me hath ratified this liberty,
to scout at random from the standing camp.
It is true, my honoured Lord, nor have I dared
for some poor trivial prey thus to remove
my self, but for a cause of greater weight,
the ruin of our enemies.
How's that?
The ruin of our enemies!
No less;
The quick fall of great Achomates
can work it.
Soldier, as thou hop'st to live,
mock not my thoughts with false and painted tales
of a supposed stratagem.
I swear???
What wilt thou swear?
By all the heavenly powers
I speak the truth, and if I fail in ought,
grind mine accursed body into dust.
Enough, unfold the meaning and the way
by which this happy project must be wrought.
It is thus; at the 12th hour of this black night,
Achomates I have induced to walk
forth to this valley weapon'd, but unmand,
in expectation of your presence there;
where being met, he will urge a single fight
twixt you and him: after a stroke or two,
I have engaged my self closely to start
from ambush, and against you take his part.
Then thou art a traitor.
Worse then a devil, should my heart
have made that promise with my tongue;
but heaven bear witness, that my inward thoughts
labour his welfare only, whom you powers
have proved most worthy, therefore only yours.
Meet but this foe, whom I have flattered thus,
to his destruction; and great Selymus
shall see my strength employed to offend
Achomates, and stand thy faithful friend.
Oh were thou faithful???
If I shrink in ought
that I profess, death shall strike me to the grave:
so thrive all falsehood, and each perjured slave.
You have won our credit, bear a noble mind
about thee, then to find me forward trust;
this night when sleep triumphant hath subdued
her wakeful subjects, and the mid-night clock
sounded full twelve, in this appointed place,
expect my presence, and till then adieu,
our next shall be a tragic interview.
The first is cared for???here a second comes.
Assist me thou quick issue of Joves brain,
and this one night shall make their labours vain.
It shall be so, my fears are too to great,
to join all in one on-set: a strong band
shall with a circle hem the traitor round,
and intercept the passage of their flight;
How now? from whence come thou? what art thou?
A Liege-man to Achomates.
To me?
Yes noble Prince, and one whose life is vowed
to further your desert, and therefore yours.
We thank you, and pray you leave us.
I can unfold an easy stratagem,
would crown the hopes of great Achomates.
What means the fellow?
to secure your state
by Selymus his fall.
What i'st thou breath?
speak it again, for many careful thoughts
possess my Soul, that every blessed voice
steals in the passage twixt my ear and haste.
By Selymus his fall, to secure my state?
I can.
Achom. Delude me not, and I will rain
such an unmeasured plenty in thy lap,
heap such continual honours on thy head
that thou shalt shrink, and stagger with the weight.
Judge of the means: This night I have induced
young Selymus to walk forth in this grove,
at the twelfth hour, in hope to meet you here;
where having urged a combat and both met
in eager conflict, I have pawned my vow
to rush from yonder thicket, and with him
join against you.
Villain!
And Devil, had
my heart made promise with my tongue;
but heaven bears witness that my soul affects
none but Achomates. Try but my faith,
and meet this foe, whom I have baited thus
with golden hopes, and you will find my deed
(in your defence) all promise shall exceed.
I'm resolved, soldier; when day is past
and the full fancies of mortality
busy in dreams and playing visions,
at the sad melancholy hour of twelve,
Isle meet thee in this plain.
And you shall find
me here before you.
Be so; who denies
to strike in time, can seldom hope to rise. 
These two will meet, and I must take doth parts,
Now for a trick to send them both to hell
in the full growth of expectation;
Heavens know they have deserved it; then it would be
an happy murder: and behold the men 
whom I have decreed should do it. Once again
I must betake me to my former note;
Health to the friends of our great Emperor,
the three strong pillars that uphold true worth.
Sir, your intrusion is unseasonable.
And your salute, impardonably bold.
Perhaps the news I bring, may frame excuse
for both these faults.
Speak out thy mind in brief.
Then thus: to night here present on this plain,
you may encounter two fierce enemies,
Achomates, and Cherseogles both
at the full stroke of twelve.
How (Mesithes) we're blessed!
This night at twelve of the clock?
Upon my life???
What shall we do?
But meet me on this plain
at the appointed hour, and I will place
you three aside, from whence you shall oppress
your foes at unawares.
Is it a match?
It is done, at twelve a clock.
See thou prove faithful.
If I shrink in ought
that I profess, death strike me to the grave:
So thrive all falsehood &amp; each perjured slave.
How easily base minds are drawn to strike
their foes at least advantage!???Beauteous moon,
pale witness to a thousand deeds of sin,
vail up thy light, that darkness may help on
these black stratagems, and unhallowed hands
strike in mistaken bodies, even the soul
themselves adore, and cheerfully defend.
But time grows fast upon me, hit all right,
two Princes, and three Bassaes dye this night.
Heaven, whither run these projects? is the thought
of man so senseless, void of wit, yet fraught
with threatening ambition? to what end
doth this distempered madness headlong bend?
Bless me, my Genius, from these hated toils
of murdering warfare, and these sweating broils
of watchful policy; Phoebus, let it be
that I may know no other god but thee.
Learned experience says, ambiguous fates
vex eminent fortunes, and he only stands
without the beams of envy, whom the hands
of some propitious power hath ranked below
those short delights that troubled thoughts do know:
A Crown's a golden mark, which being hit,
falls not alone, but oft the head with it:
honours are smoky nothings; then let the Queen
of learning, great Minerva, and the nine
chaste sisters, that adorn the Grecian hill
devote me to themselves; but let me still
within Apollos sacred Temple sit,
and spend my body to increase my wit;
Reign Selymus, for I shall ne'er thee hate,
thy supreme power, nor envy thy state:
Corcutus stands divorced from a life
engaged to vain ambition, factious strife,
and empty power of Kings. Hoe's great in fame,
not who seeks after, but neglects the same.
Since thou hast grieved me Phoebus, free my wit,
that I may ease my grief by speaking it;
if thou deny, fond god, twill be in vain,
sorrow can sing, though thou not tune the strain.
Then thou sweet Muse, from whence there flows
words able to express our ill,
Teach me to warble out my woes,
and with a sigh each accent fill:
Infuse my breast with doleful strains,
Whose heavy note may speak my pains.
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night deprives my woes with sleep.
The pleasing murmurs of the ayre,
that gently fan each moving thing,
I having heard, straight do repair,
and bear a burden, whilst I sing
An heavy burden, doleful song,
The fathers grief, the subjects wrong.
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
The grieved Flora hangs the head
of every youthful plant and tree,
And flowery pleasures are stark dead
at my lamenting melody;
Then all you Muses help my strain,
To reach the depth of bitter pain.
Oh let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
Me thinks I hear the singing spheres
tune their melodious strains to mine,
The dewy clouds dissolve in tears,
as if they grieved to see me pine;
Thus each thing joins to see my moan,
Thus seldom come true sighs alone.
Then let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguile my woes with sleep.
A dark and heavy night, as if the gods
winckt at our projects, and had clad the heavens
in a propitious black, to bless my plot!
Revenge, to thee I dedicate this work;
and I will pamper thy wild appetite
with blood and murder, thy dull, slow-pac't feet
shall caper to behold our fearful scenes
drenched in a scarlet Ocean.
Tic full twelve???
I hear a quiet foot-pace, and it beats
directly towards. It is Selymus,
joy of expectation. 
Thou Queen of shades,
bright Cynthia, and you starry lamps of heaven,
what sphere hath told you? oh you're envious all,
and therefore hate to grace the time, in which
I ruinate my latest foe: this is the sand
on which I am to wrestle for a Crown,
and I am entered full of greedy lust,
to meet my adverse champion; here's my god
whom I adore with greater confidence
then all those beauties, Sun, or Moon, or Stars,
that with malicious absence have disrobed
this gracious hour of i'ts due respect.
Oh thou the silent darkness of the night,
arm me with desperate courage and contempt
of gods-lov'd men: now I applaud the guile
of our brave roarers, which select this time
to drink and swagger, and spurn at all the powers
of either world. Blessed mortals, had that mother
strangled her other infant, white faced day,
and brought forth only night! my limbs are stiff,
and I must bath them in my brothers blood;
Isle steep this grass in a red purple gore,
scatter the carcass piecemeal, and that done,
Isle rear a lasting monument, Isle sign
a trophy, which inscribed, shall speak my deeds
to after ages, that's my chief intent:
Hoe's coldly praised that's written innocent.
Whose there? my soldier?
Soldier and slave, great Prince at your command.
I will ennoble thee, place thee my second self
in all my power for thy rare faith.
Whore's our Achomates?
I heard one softly track full hitherwards,
and think tic he; it is needful that I meet him,
and give some proof that I continue his,
else jealous of my faith, he will return,
and we be both deluded; when you're met,
parley before you fight, till I prepare
my self to run upon him unaware.
Mean while Isle go to meet him. 
Go make hast.
But if this base raskal should deceive
my trust! a trifle???my nerves are plumped up,
and filed with vigour, strong enough to fright
a million of such big backed, drowsy slaves;
I hear them both approach.
See where he stands, I shall not be slow
to second your encounter; being met,
parley before you fight, till I prepare
my self to run upon him unaware,
mean while I'll withdraw???now for my Bassaes.
A time of dismal blackness, and my soul
is dull and heavy, as if envious night
strived to subdue my fatal watchfulness.
But I have rushed upon my foe: whose there?
Answer thy Prince first; I say, what art thou?
He that usurp's, hath title of a villain.
But he that wears it is a Saint, and such am I.
You are a treacherous slave.
Achomates thou lie, this night shall prove
I shrink not to unmask what I have done.
Oh heavens, so impudently bad!
Good brother, we know your virtues, one that
gains country, gods, and men;
slew an Ambassador, which here we must revenge.
Hark in thine ear,
Isle whisper forth thy mischiefs, lest the heavens
should tear and snatch them hence from my revenge,
in greediness of wrath??? 
See where they stand.
Achomates and Cherseogles?
Both:
They are two; we sour lets run upon them;
It is very dark, be certain in your aim,
and all strike home.
A match.
Isaac and I will take the nearest.
And we the other.
Strike home, and sure, and here's at them.
I have the Crown, and I will,???Oh, oh, oh!
Oh, ?? ??, O villain, I am slain. 
It is not Cherseogles we have slain.
Not Cherseogles, villain! whom then? speak.
Achomates and Selymus.
Ha!
None other.
Hast thou betrayed us so?
Be silent, hear me.
There lie the Captains of both Armies dead,
breathless: and you so stupid to neglect
the use of opportunities!
What use?
Are you not rich, wealthy in powerful gold?
go whilst the Soldiers lye thus destitute
of any Leader, frankly bribe both parts,
buy their unsettled love at any rate,
and creep into their bosom; then in this
dead want and dearth of Princes, they will cleave
to Isaac, and at length salute???
Me Emperor?
You apprehend it right.
What blessed angel art thou?
It is no time for idle complements.
Thy counsel's good.
I would not let slip this sweet occasion,
for all the precious plenty of the world.
come let's away.
First make some quick dispatch with these now rivals.
True, they'll not endure my Sovereignty.
Hast no sudden wits how to remove them both?
No wile but strength; are not we two?
They are no more; we must encounter them, it is man to man:
the match no whit unequal.
I am thine:
I hate to have co-partners in my state:
There shall not breath a man whose envious eye
dares look a squint on my dread Majesty.
They that bring news first, are still most welcome.
Experience speaks it true.
Let us hast. Now Selymus, we come to gratulate.
Stay???
Stand.
How?
What means this?
Fate to your lives.
Sweet doings!
It is no less Sir, witness this,
traitor I'm slain. 
Cross fortune, wicked chance:
but I must make the best of it. Is he dead?
Villain he is, and thy bad turn is next:
what devil did incite thee, to incite
Isaac against friends? Injurious slave.
Urge him to no confession till the rack
force from his closest thought unwilling truth,
He shall be doomed for this notorious fact
unto continual pains,
hunger, oppression, want and slavery.
That struck me full. ??? Have at thee:
hold thou art victor I have met the price
of treason, death; and as I hoped to rise
by blood, I fall, so have I mist my scope,
delusion is the end of lawless hope. 
Mesithes stay one moment, art thou gone?
I am not far behind I feel the blood
by slow degrees ebb from my fainting breast,
I am heart struck, and wounded even to death,
a Scene of slaughter this!??? O just heavens!
still I plighted faith to each of these,
I wished that if I failed in one, I vowed
death should thus strike me. I have gained my wish,
Then you imperial Fates that intercept
the brittle courses of frail mortality,
continue this firm justice, and enact
a constant law that all false meaning hearts
that think of oaths as of a puff of wind,
may as I do, thus sink into the grave,
my dying wish, so thrive each perjured knave.
The night overblown, and five a clock!
I wonder at their absence; what are these?
our Generals murdered, our dear Selymus,
with his three Bassaes, and Achomates!
Whose bloody hand is guilty of this fact?
A trembling shakes me, it was some power
that frowned at our proceedings.
Bajazet is new borne to his Sovereignty.
Let's take their bodies, bear them hence in
unto their greatness, and advise the foe
of their slain General, sterne Achomates:
sound peaceful rumours; we must resubmit.
to Bajazet, so heaven hath thought it fit. 
Set down the book and candle, go and provide
the Potion to prevent my Feaver-fit,
till when I mean to study: go make hast.
Fortune, I thank thee, you're a gracious Whore,
thy happy anger hath immured a prince
within the walls of base security.
Farewell thou swelling sea of Government,
on whose bright crystal bosom floats along
the gravelled vessel of proud Majesty.
Ambition empty all thy bag of breath,
send forth thy blast among the quiet waves,
and work huge tempests to confound the Art
of the usurping Pilot Selymus.
Treason and envy like two bickering winds,
shake the unsettled fabric of his State,
that from my study windows I may laugh,
to see his broken fortune swallowed up
in the quick-sands of danger, and the sail
puffed with the calm breath of a flattering chance,
by furious whirl-winds rended into rags,
and peece-meal scattered through the Ocean:
But peace my chiding spirit; come thou man
of rare instinct, blessed Author of a book
worthy the studies of a reading God:
thou dost present before my wearied eyes,
Tiberius sweating in his policies,
dull Claudius gaged by dull flattery,
Narrow unbowelling Nobility,
Galba undone by servants hardly good,
Otho o're-whelmd in love, and drenched in blood,
Vitellius sleeping in the chair of State,
Vespatian called to government by Fate:
still as my Muse doth travel o'er their age,
a Princes care is writ in every Page.
Thus I unfold the volume of thy writ,
the chiefest solace of my moving wit,
Caedes eo fuit nobilior, queen filius
Patrem interfecit. Tacit. Hist. lib. 20.
Avaunt thou damned wizard, did thy god
Apollo teach thee to divine my fall?
What hath thy cursed Genius tract my steps
through the Meanders of dark privacy?
and will he dwell with me in these close shades
to vex my banished soul, banished from joy,
removed from the worlds eye? I am accursed,
and hated by the Synod of the gods,
a knot of envious deceits: the day will be
when they shall smart for this indignity.
Triumph my Plantiffes, Nemesis your Queen
is pierced quite through with your continual groans.
See, see, the prostrate body of a King,
clad in the weeds of pining discontent,
lies open to your wrath, and doleful hate:
But I conjure you not to touch his skin,
nor hurt his sacred person, those three Fates
(those frightful sisters) told me they decree
for Bajazet another destiny:
But vex his soul with your deluding blows,
and let him dream of direful anguishments,
each in the proper order of his Fate,
vent the comprest confusion of his hate
Awake, awake thou tortured Emperor,
look with the eye of fury on the heavens,
threaten a downfall to this mortal stage,
and let it crack with thee; thy life is run
to the last Scene, thy Tragic part is done. 
You meager devils, and infernal hags,
where are you? Ha! what, vanished? am I found?
Did I not feel them tear and rack my flesh,
and scramble it amongst them? Heaven and earth,
I am deluded; what thin airy shapes
durst fright my soul? I'll hunt about the world,
search the remotest angles of the earth,
till I've found out the climate holds these fiends,
or build a bridge by Geometric skill,
whom lineal extension shall reach forth
to the declining borders of the sky,
on which I'll lead mortality along,
and break a passage through the brazen walls,
from whence Jove triumphs o'er this lower world:
then having got beyond the utmost sphere,
besiege the concave of this universe,
and hunger-starve the gods till they confess
what furies did my sleeping soul oppress.
Ha! did it lighten? or what nimble flame
he's crept into my blood? me thinks it steals
through my distempered joints, as if it feared
to urge me to impatience.
Hamon, accursed Hamon; stand my soul
above the power of these envenomed drugs:
Am I in hell alive? the Stygian flames
could not produce an heat so violent
as burns within my body: Oh I feel
my heart drop into cinders, I am dust;
Jove, for thine own sake Jove, confine my soul
within these walls of earth: for in the sky
when I am there, none shall be Jove but I.
Still, still I boyle, and the continued flames
are aggravated: He is done, subdued
(by the base Art of a damned Empiric)
whose empty name sent terror through the world:
Is not the heaven bespangl'd all with stars,
and blazing Meteors, whose bright glimmering flames,
like ceremonial Tapers should adorn
my solemn Hearse? what, doth the golden Sun
ride with it's wonted motion? are the waves
bridled within their narrow Continent?
No deluge? not an earthquake? shall a Prince,
an Emperor, a Bajazet decease
and make no breach in nature? fright the world
with no prodigious birth? Are you asleep,
you thundering Beggards that so awe the world?
I'll hasten to revenge this strong neglect
of my deceasing spirits: mount my soul,
brush off this cloddy heavy element:
So Jove I come, excorporate, divine,
immortal as thy self, I must contest
with thee, proud god, with thee to arm my mind,
only my soul ascends, earth stays behind. 
Is Selymus deceased?
He is my Lord.
Who Selymus? what Fate durst be so bold:
Oh, I could act an holy frenzy now.
Selymus deceased? What did not Atlus tremble
at such a burden? Can he support the Orb
that holds up Selymus? is not yet the Pole
cracked with his weight? do not the heavens prepare
his funeral Exequies? Jove, I invoke thee now,
command the heavens that the prone Chandler shops
command that idle Phoebus, that he exhale
matter from earth to make thy Funeral Tapers:
Or I'll make Torches of the universe
in stead of Comets; flaming Countries, Cities
shall be thy ceremonial Tapers:
Or if not this; I'll ransack Christendom,
Kings Daughters I'll disembowel for a Sacrifice,
their fat with vestal fire will I refine,
and offer virgins wax unto thy shrine.
Start back bright Phoebus, let thy fiery Steeds
keep Holiday for Selymus. Tell thy host,
proud Neptune now expects another deluge,
that all the earth may weep for Selymus.
What do you smile, you heavens? are ye conscious,
and guilty of this execrable treason?
What, dare the fields to laugh to when I do mourn?
I'll dye your motley coloured weeds in scarlet,
and cloth the world in black destruction.
Nemesis, I'll nayl thee to my greedy sword,
destruction shall serve under me a Prentiship.
Courage brave Selymus, with thy Princely boat
through Styx even all mortality shall float;
I'll levy Soldiers through the Universe,
with which thou shalt begirt Elizeum;
Thus barren Nature shall repent thy fall,
grieving that she did not the event fore-stall.
Death, I will hate thee: the world shall wear
thy sable livery embroidered with fear:
Thy Trophies every where the world shall gaze on:
Thy Arms in sable and in gulls I'll blazon.
My Lord, this Crown entreats, you leave off these
ground-creeping meditations, and to think
of Majesty; wherefore we invest your brow
with this rich robe of glory, and do vow
to it our due allegiance: thus you shall
mount up aloft above your Fathers fall.
Thus our dear Father, those bright robes of state
for which so lately thou hast sweat in blood,
thou wear upon my shoulders in thy stead:
thus are we crowned, and thus our labours be
made gainful unto thine, though not to thee.
Live then, and reign, most mighty Emperor,
whilst that our care and watchful providence
shall fence thy safety, and keep Sentinel
over thy sacred person; were black treasons
hatched in the Center of the darkest earth,
the massy element should be prospective
for all our piercing eyes; should Pluto send
his black Apparator to summon thee
to appear before him, by that Mahomet,
we would confront him boldly, and excuse
thy absence unto Pluto, by our presence;
death, we will disarm thee, if thou dare arrest
thy fury on our Solymon; or we will bale his person
with our imprisonment.
By our death thou shalt live; our City walls???
may with warlike ruin be battered,
but our allegiance, that European Bull
shall ne'er push from us with his golden horns;
nor shall his gilded showers quench our loves:
no golden Engineer shall undermine
the Castles of our faith, nor blow them up
with blasts of hoped preferment: were thy walls
but paper, were they made of brittle glass,
our faiths should make them marble, and as firm
as Adamant: Not walls, but subjects love,
do to a Prince the strongest Castle prove.
Behold great Prince, allegiance mixed with love
locked in our breasts: thou art the living key
to shut, and to unlock them at thy pleasure:
no golden pick-lock shall ever scrue it self
into these faithful locks, whose only springs
can be no other then our own heart strings.
Our greedy swords, which erst embrued in blood,
did seem to blush at their own Masters acts,
and us upbraid with our most bloody facts,
though peace hath now condemned to pleasing rust,
yet at thy beck we will sheath them in the breast
of daring Christians: thus in war we will fight
for thee, whilst thou dost strive for victory.
Here to describe such Princely virtues, which
should more adorn thy Crown then Orient pearls,
were but to show a glass, and to commend
thy self unto thy self. Be gracious,
magnificent, courageous, or mild,
or more compendiously, be more thy self,
reign then, and Mahomet grant that thou may pass
Nestor in years, as much as now thou dost
in wisdom and in valour; Herald proclaim
to the world his title, and let swift-winged Fame
second thy trumpet. Her. Long live Solymon, &amp;c.
We thank you friendly Actors of our bliss,
our patience hath at length tired out the gods;
our Empire hath been racked enough with treasons,
and black seditions, as if no Christians
were left to conquer; we weeld our Turkish blades
against our selves, embowelling the State
with bloody discord, by our strength we fall
a scorn to Christians, with our hands we shed
that blood which might have conquered Christendom;
thus while we hate our selves, we love our enemies,
and heal them with our sores, whilst we lye weltering
in bloody peace: the die of the public safety
hath been already cast by th'hand of war,
treasons have made a blot, which may provoke
the enemy to enter, and bear our men
to dark Avernus. Envy might have blushed,
though always pale, at all our projects: now
this bloody deluge is quite past, return
sweet peace with th'Olive branch, enough of wars,
it is thou must pour oil into our scars.
Fly hence Hereditary hate, discords dead,
let not succeeding enmities and hatred live,
let none presume to cover private sores
with public ruins, nor let black discord
make an Anatomy of our too lean
Empire, let it wax fat again; when peace
hath knit herknots, then shall the wanton sounds
of bells give place to thundering Bombards,
and blood wash out the smoothing oil of peace;
every Soldier I'll ordain a Priest
to ring a fatal knell to Christians,
and every minute unto earths wide womb
shall sacrifice a Christians Hecatomb:
Then shall we make a league with Aeolus,
the winds shall strive to further our proceedings,
then will we load the seas, and fetter Neptune
with chains that hold our Anchors; he shall quake,
lest he to Pan resign his watery Empire,
and three fork'd-mace unto my awful Sceptre;
The Whales and Dolphins shall amazed stand,
that they shall yield their place to Bears and Lions,
Sylla shall howl for fear, when she shall see
the Sea become a Forest, and her self
mountainy; then let Sirens quake
for fear of Satyrs, then let the Christians think,
not that our Navy, but the Country it self
is come to move them from the growing earth;
Comets, fiery swords shall be my Heralds,
threatening to th'world sudden combustion:
Let our arms be steely bows, our arrows
thunderbolts, and in stead of warlike Drums,
thunder shall proclaim black destruction;
Vulcan I'll tax thee, exercise thy Forge,
prepare to me for all the world a scourge,
the Fates to me their powers shall resign,
which with this hand will rend the strongest twine
of humane breath. First for the Isle of Rhodes,
destruction there shall keep his mournful Stage:
Th'inhabitants shall act a bloody Tragedy,
and personate themselves; Then for Nayos Isle,
death there shall keep her Court: then I will make
Vienna all a Shambles: yea gaping Famine
ever devouring, always wanting food,
shall gnaw their bowels, and shall leave them nothing,
besides themselves to feed on; their dead corps
shall be entombed in their neighbours bellies.
There, every one shall be a living Sepulchre,
an unhallowed Church-yard; famine shall feed it self.
Then shall they envy beasts, and wish to be
our Jades, our Mules; Matrons shall strive to bring
into the hateful light abortive Brats;
the Infants shall return, and the lean womb
shall be unto the babes a sudden tomb.
Then shall they hoard up carcasses, and strive
only to be rich in Funerals; I'd rejoice
to see them stand like Screech-Owles, gaping when
their Parents should expire, and bequeath
to hell their wretched souls, to them their death.
Long live great Solymon our noble Emperor.
All this, and more then this I'll doe, when peace
hath glutted our new greedy appetites,
when it hath filled the veins of the Empire full
with vigour; then, lest too much blood should cause
Armies of vices, not of men to kill us,
and strength breed weakness in our too great Empire,
then, then, and only then we shall think good,
with war to let the body politic blood.
Mean time we will think on our Fathers Funeral:
Oh, I could be an holy Epicure,
in tears, and pleasing sighs, Oh I could now
refresh my self with sorrow, I could embalm
thy corps with holy groans from putrefaction:
Oh, I could powder up thy thirsty corps
with brinish tears, and wipe them off with kisses:
and that I might more freely speak my grief,
these eyes should be still silent Orators,
till blindness shuts them up, were I a woman:
But I am Solymon, Emperor, the Turk,
blood shall be my tears, I'll think thee slain
amongst the Christians, and translate my grief
to fury; every member of my body
shall execute the office of a weeping son.
Thus in my tears an Argus will I bee,
my head, heart, hands, and all shall weep for thee.
Oh that the cruel Fates were half so mild
as to drive streams of tears from forth the springs,
great sorrows have no leisure to complain;
Least ills vent forth; great griefs within remain:
See Selymus, sometimes a four-string'd instrument
feeding his Soldiers with sweet Harmony,
doth now tune nought to us but Lachryme.
Could n' Aeschulapi??s be found to tune
his disagreeing elements? treasons cracked
the string; which else an head-ach would untune.
Every disease is a ragged fort
to wear these strings asunder; treason did lend
death, which both age, and sickness did intend;
What then remains, but that his Funeral rites
with our Grand fathers, Uncles be solemnised,
that so black discord may be with them buried?
But noble Selymus, what Tomb shall I prepare
for thy memorial? shall a heavy stone
press thy innocent ashes? Shall I confine
thy wandering ghost in some high marble prison?
Or shall I hither fetch the flying Tomb
of proud Mausolus the rich Carian King?
No; Religion shall cloak no such injury;
no hired Rhetoric shall adorn thy coarse,
no prattling stone shall trumpet forth thy praise;
the world's thy tomb, thy Epitaph I'll carve
in Funerals; destruction is the book
in which we will write thy annals, blood's the Ink,
our sword the Pen. A Tragedy I intend,
Which with a Plangity, no Plaudity shall end???

