THe writer of this Play who ever uses
To usher with his modesty the Muses
Unto the Stage, He that scarce ever durst
Of Poets rank himself above the worst,
Though most that he has writ has past the rest,
And found good approbation of the best;
He as he never knew to bow, he says,
As little fears the fortune of his Plays:
He yields their right to us, and we submit
All that they are in learning or in wit
To your fair censure. All is then but thus,
As you approve they are good or bad to us;
And all by way of favour we can crave,
Is that you not destroy where you may save.
SInce it has pleased the highest
Power to place me
His substitute in Regal Sovereignty,
Over this Kingdom, by the general vote
Of you my loyal Lords, and loving Subjects,
Though grounded on my right of due Succession;
Being immediate heir, and only child
Of your late much deplored King my Father.
I am in a most reverend duty bound
Unto that Power above me, and a wel-
Befitting care towards you my faithful people,
To rule and govern so (at least so near
As by all possibility I may)
That I may shun Heavens anger, and your grief.
Which that I may, at our last consultation
The better to pass through my weighty charge,
I gave you to consider of the Proposition
Is made to me by the Northumbrian King
Of marriage, not only to enable me
In my government, but thereby to streng∣then
This Kingdom in succeeding times, by a line
Of lawful Successors. I gave you all
My strong &amp; most unanswerable reasons:
To which you seemed contented, all but one,
Who with the rest by this I hope is satis∣tisfied.
It is you, Lord Segebert, you it is I mean▪
Does it appear to you yet reasonable,
That I be matched to the Northumbrian King?
I have with patience waited a whole month
For you to rectify your scrupulous judgement,
Whereby it might comply with these, no way
Inferior to your self, but are your Peers,
As well in their kown wisdom, as my favour.
Thus low unto your sacred Majesty
I here devote my self; and thus I meet
With equal love, the embraces of these Lords.
Isle join &amp; grow one body, and one voice
With them, in all may add unto your Honour,
And your dear Kingdoms good. But pardon me
My sovereign Queen, and I beseech you my Lords,
To weigh with your known wisdom the great danger
This match may bring unto the Crown and Country.
Tic true, the King Osriick as well in person.
As in his dignity, may be thought fit
To be endowed with all you seem to yield him.
But what becomes of all the wholesome Laws,
Customs, and all the nerves of Govern∣meant
Your no less prudent than Majestic Fa∣there
With power &amp; policy enriched this Land with;
And made the Saxons happy, and your self
A Queen of so great eminence. Must all,
With so much Majesty and matchless beauty,
Be now subjected to a strangers foot;
And trod into disorder? All your wealth,
Your state, your laws, your subjects, and the hope
Of flourishing future fortunes, which your Father
By his continual care, and tedious study
Gave as a Legacy unto this Kingdom:
Must all be altered, or quite subverted,
And all by a wilful gift unto a stranger:
Peace: stop his mouth. Unrea∣warrant old man,
How dare thou thus oppose thy Sove∣reigns will,
So well approvd by all thy fellow Peers;
Of which the meanest equals thee in judgement?
Do you approve their judgments, Madam, which
Are grounded on your will? I may not do it.
Only I pray, that you may understand,
(But not unto your loss) the difference
Betwixt smooth flattery, and honest judgements.
Do you hear this, my Lords?
My Lord Segebert,
Though you except against this King,
He may hereafter thank you in your kind.
Mean time I thank you for your prophecy.
You cannot but allow succession is
The life of Kingdoms; &amp; if so, you cannot
But wish the Queen (which Heaven grant speedily)
An happy husband.
I thank you, good my Lord.
And if an husband, why not him she affects?
Can it befit a Subject to control
The affection of his Princess? Heaven forbid.
This is ear taking Music.
Or suppose,
You might control it; whom in your great wisdom
Would you allot the Queen?
I see your aim;
And know, when I have said all that I dare,
What censure I must undergo. And thus
Isle meet it boldly: you are sycophants all,
And doe provide but for your selves, though all.
The Kingdom perish for it. May the justice▪
That follows flattery overtake you for it.
Take hence the mad man.
We are sorry for you.
And wish the troublesome spirit were out of you,
That so distracts your reason.
We have known you
Speak and answer to the purpose.
Your question to no purpose, Sir, was this:
Whom my great wisdom would allot the Queen?
You are not worth my answer. But my Sovereign,
I do implore your gracious attention
To these few words.
Less sense.
No mattet.
Silence.
Speak your few words, the Queen can give you hearing.
I wish your Highness would com∣mand your women,
That know their qualities to take up your Beagles.
Their Petulances sort not with this place
Nor the more serious matter of my speech.
Speak, I can hear you though. Forbear him Lords.
The King your Father, and my ne'er to be
Forgotten Master, (please you to re∣member.)
Although his memory be lost with these,
Who ne'er had grace to know him right∣lie, gave me
Before his death strictly this charge; and in
Your presence too, charging your self withal
To give it due obedience: That you should
Before all men's advice take mine for marriage,
And that especially I should take care
Against Innovation. That the laws he left
Established with such care for good of the Kingdom
Might be maintained by whomsoere you matched with.
I know, and you, if you knew any thing,
Might know the difference twixt the Northumbrian laws
And ours: And sooner will their King pervert
Your Privileges and your Government,
Then reduce his to yours: pure com∣mon sense,
Even you me thinks, my Lords, may foretell that
You have said enough.
I doe beseech your Highness
But for this little more.
Isle hear no more.
Pray hear his little more al∣though you send him
Out of your hearing then for evermore.
Your Father added this to his command,
That rather then by marriage you should bring
Your Subjects to such thraldom, and that if
No Prince whose laws cohered with yours did seek you
(As some there are, and nearer then th'Northumbrian)
That he would have you from some no∣ble Stock
To take a Subject in your own Domini∣on.
Traitor!
To urge your Fathers Testament?
But did the King your ne'er for∣gotten Master
Bequeath her an affection to such blood?
Forbear. Now he's not worth your speaking to.
Now she'll ha'me I hope. What a foul beast
Was I to undervalue subjects blood?
I have forborne you long, for the old love
My Father in his life conferred upon you
And still I yield to it so much as saves
Your head, bold talking fellow. But Sir hear
Your doom. Since the Kings love hath puffed your dotage
With swollen conceit (for what can it be less
That you are now my King (for sure you think so)
I'll try my Title with you. Hence you Exile:
Go in perpetual banishment from this Kingdom.
Speak not a word for him.
Insooth we meant it not.
But may it please your Majesty, you mentioned
His head erewhile. Now if I might ad∣vise—
A way, you'll be too cruel.
Another hope lost.
His lands and goods, Madam, would be thought on.
No, he has children.
I'll take his daughter with all faults, and half his lands.
Why are ye not gone?
I have not much to say.
Out with it then, and then out with your self.
In the large History of your Fa∣theirs life
You find but one example for this doom
Of Banishment. And that was of Albert five years ••nce,
For wronging me unto his Highness, when
He stood in competition with me for
The Honour in the State the King then gave me.
And what of this?
But thus. I stood by then, and then all knowing Heaven
Saw that though he for wronging me was Banished,
I was right sorry, and much pleaded for him.
It follows now that you would have these Lords,
Whom you have so abused, to plead for you.
Quite contrary, for they are my Abusers;
Yet I do grieve for them, but more for you.
To think on all your sorrows, when too late
You'll wish for me to steer the State.
Pray if you meet that good old Lord Alberto,
Now in your exile, send him home to us;
I'll promise him your Honour in the State.
Ha, ha, ha.
Go from my sight, and if after three days
Thou art seen in my Dominion, I will give
A thousand crowns to him that brings thy head.
See Proclamation sent to that effect.
I will, and as many Informers after
The Proclamation, as there be crowns in it.
Come we have spoken for you all that we can.
The Queen's implacable.
Be gone I say, why dost thou stay?
But to applaud your Mercy and Bounty,
In that you post me from a world of care
And give me the wide world for my share.
Your Majesty has performed a point of justice
Mingled with clemency beyond all pre∣sident.
Enough to give a warning to all such
As dare oppose their Princes purposes;
Conduct in now the Ambassador of Nor∣thumbria.
Whilst I review his Masters brighter Figure 
As ardently, (but with more pure affe∣ction)
As ere did Cynthia her Endimion.
My Lord, you have attended long, but now
I shall return that answer to your King,
That if his love be as you have pretended
May well excuse your stay. Tell him this story,
A King sent forth a General to besiege
A never conquered City. The siege was long,
And no report came back unto the King,
How well or ill his Expedition thrived;
Until his doubtful thoughts had given lost,
His hope of the City, and his Army both.
When he being full of this despair, arrived
Of the suddam his brave General with Victory;
Which made his thanks, as was his con∣quest double.
You may interpret me my Lord.
If so,
I am to tell the King he has won your love.
A blush may be excused in the confession:
It is my first answer to the question: Yes.
So from the doubtful darkness of the night,
The blushing morn Ushers the cheerful Sun,
To give new light and life unto the World:
I shall revive my King with these glad tidings.
You have said well,
Let us inform you better,
I can but think what old Sege∣bert said
Concerning Laws, Customs and Prive∣ledges.
And how this match will change the Government.
I fear, how ever the Laws may go, our Customs will
Be lost; for he me thinks out-flatters us already.
He's the Kings Favourite; and has wood so well
For him, that we may fear he'll wrigle in
Twixt him and us, the prime man in her favour.
Let it be so. The tenth of the next month
I'll be prepared to entertain his Highness:
First to confirm a contract; then as soon
As he shall please to consummate our marriage.
In the mean time this Figure, which you say
Resembles him, as Painters skill affords:
Indeed it is a sweet one. Shall be daily 
My deer companion most unseparably;
And when I sleep it shall partake my Pillow.
Does he love mine as well do ye think my Lord?
Just with the same devotion; If I durst
I would say more.
Nay, speak my Lord, pray speak.
He do's allow't a Table, Waiters and Officers
That eat the meat.
Indeed.
O horrible.
Nay, We shall ne'er come near him.
And at night
He lodges it perpetually on his bosom.
We are dunces to him.
Here, just here;
And't please your Majesty of the hearts side.
Indeed I am pleased. I'll stay you but to night,
To morrow you shall hasten towards the King.
And for your speed wear this.
Most gracious Queen
It is the Queens pleasure children;
I must bear it.
To Banishment, good heaven for∣bid. And Heaven
I hope will not yet suffer it.
Whilst we expect the best from Heavens high will,
It suffers Princes to reward us ill.
Yet can I think it shakes an angry hand
Over my head, for some misdeed of mine,
Which I have unrepented let go by.
It must be something sure was pleasure to me.
What in the World has most delighted me?
To love my King and Country, Neigh∣bours, Friends,
And sometimes Enemies. (I'll pass o'er that)
I have done well (though I do not to boast it)
To succour and relieve all kind of wret∣ches;
Poor souls that have half deafened me with Prayers,
Loud Prayers. They'll miss me now; and I
Shall have a miss of them too. (Let that pass)
What have I done at home, since my Wife died?
No Turtle ever kept a widowhood,
More strict then I have done. Then for my Children,
Come you hither.
My Lord Father.
He might have called me first, I am the Eldest.
I am sure thou'lt answer in behal∣or one.
Have I not loved thee always?
O dear Sir,
I am all unworthy to acknowledge half,
Half of your pious bounties on a Son,
A wretch so ill deserving as my self;
Your hand has evermore been open to me,
Your' blessings still more readily have showered
Upon my head, then I had grace to ask them.
(For to my knowledge I ne'er asked blessing yet
With a good will in all my life; some would
Do Penance in the Church with less perplexity.)
I, thou wast ever an obedient child,
Next, you my Daughter.
Then I must be last.
How have you found my love?
Sir, far above my duty.
Do not weep, but speak good child.
I have not long to stay with ye; my three days
Will scarce afford this hour to bide with you.
Had I no tears nor sobs to in∣terrupt
My flattering Tongue, but had speech as free
As the best Orator that speaks for fee
Could, or durst I attempt to express your goodness,
More then to say, it is more then I can say.
It is a good maid; O Queen thou art too cruel!
But honoured Father, grant me yet one Bone.
What's that my Girl?
You shall know presently 
Pray give me leave to kneel unto the Queen
To try what I can do for your repeal.
It were shame we should sit down and lose you thus.
The Queen affects me well. You know she loves me.
And promised once she would deny me nothing.
For this thou shalt not trouble her: besides
You put me well in mind to charge you Daughter,
Upon my Blessing, go no more to Court.
Shun it I charge thee as thou would my curse.
If you have lovers there whom they call Servants,
Do as neat Surgeons do when they have touched
Loathsome or pestilent Sores; wash clean your hands
Of all of 'em, that are far more infectious.
And hear me daughter Mildred, I am told
The Northumbrian Ambassador now at Court,
The great Kings greater Favourite made hot love to you.
And that he obtained your Picture which he wears,
More proud of't then his undeserved Honours.
Let me now charge you further, and observe it,
Shake off all thoughts of him. Upon the match now
He and whole Shoal of upstart Brave∣ries,
Must hither needs attend their King. But if
Thou marry with him, or any amongst them,
Though the greatest subject that his Master has,
Thou art divorcd for ever of my blessing.
I will in all obey you.
I shall look to that Sir.
Enough. Anthynus.
At last, yet I am thought on.
Now there rests
Of all my children but you to resolve me,
How you have found my love?
You ask me last
Sir I presume, cause you have had me longest,
To crown their testimony.
Yet you seem
Anthinus, by your leave, the least to know me,
But like a stranger look upon me when
These give me due respect.
Less then due
I dare not give you; and more were to abuse you.
Though I do not applaud, I must approve
You are a right good father.
Umh.
Yet you speak in this but coldly.
No, no, it sounds not well. But you are wise.
I have observed, but specially at Court,
Where flattery is too frequent, the great scorn
You have ever cast upon it, and do fear
To come within such danger of reproof.
Knowing your reason may as well detest it
In your own house, as in Kings Palaces.
And when I hear another (my dear Sister,
Heaven know I mean not you)
Speak like a flatterer, I hold my peace,
And so come short of doing what I would,
For fear of over-doing. But honoured Sir,
When a Son can be found that dares do more
For's Fathers life or honour then my self,
I'll forfeit mine inheritance and your blessing;
So much your love engages me.
If this were hearty now, not hollow.
No more,
Time calls away apace, and I am satisfied
Since I must undergo the Queens hard censure,
That it falls not upon me like a curse,
For wronging Crown or Country, Neighbours, Friends,
Or you my dearer children. I will take it
Not as a punishment but blessing rather.
To be removed from miseries
Are like to fall on this unhappy King∣doom.
And I will think the Queen has done me favour
To ease me of my cares a thousand ways,
To make my rest of life all holidays.
Now take my last directions. Son An∣thynus.
Son! It is holiday with me to. It is
The first time he called me Son these three years.
Though you are eldest, and my lawful heir,
And must be Lord at my decease of all
My large Possessions. Yet it is my will
That till my death my Off have the sway
And government of all, allowing you
That yearly stipen formerly I gave you.
Let me not hear of any grudge betwixt you.
And be you both respectful of your Sister,
And you of them good Girl. It is decreed
That I shall never see you more.
Ay me.
Go get thee in I prithe Mildred,
Go in I say, thy brothers shall a little
Show me my way. Go in, I shall not speak else,
And I have more to say to them. Good now go.
O, O, O.
You will not disobey me? Hey∣ven bless my Girl (go and come again)
But must I never see you more?
Yes child in Heaven; and then for evermore.
To wait your coming thither I'll before.
Thither shall be my first journey.
But after you shall still hear from me where ever I wander.
Not I Sir, by your favour.
Why I pray?
I must be nearer you. I kneel for it Sir,
And humbly pray I may not be denied
To wait on you in Exile. Take me with you.
Do you not find him?
This is but your stoutness
(Though you seem humble unto me) against
Your brother, because I leave the rule to him.
Far be it from my thoughts dear Sir, consider
He has had that rule already divers years
Ere since my mother die, and been your darling
Heaven knows without my grudge, while you were pleased.
Heaven knows his thoughts the while alack a day.
I never envied him, though I have found
You have severely over looked my Actions,
When you have smiled on his, though but the same.
I have been still content while I have found my duty firm.
You shall along.
You have new begotten me.
Sir.
Peace, I know thy fear my dearest Boy.
Does not your blood begin to i will within you?
Great heirs are overhasty Sir,
And think their Fathers live too long. Pray Sir
Take heed of him. Though he should act the
Parricide abroad, our laws acquit him.
I'll give my self to Heaven, quit thou thy fear.
I am not worth a life. I'll take him hence
That thou may be secure from bloody spite.
I fear him not, mischief has spent her self
And left her sting within me for a charm
That quit me from the fear of further harm.
Go get thee home, my blessing and fare∣well.
Pray Sir excuse me, I cannot speak for laughing.
And farewell Country, shed not a tear for me;
I go to be dissolved in tears for thee.
Let your dispatches instantly be sent
Through all the Kingdom to incite the people
(As many as are mine, or would be thought so)
To express with me their joy, for the enjoying
Of the so long desired happiness,
In this our beauteous and magnificent Queen.
See that through all the Cities, Towns and Villages,
With solemn Feasts, and public sign of joy
They celebrate a day for these glad Tidings.
Post every way, that the third day from this
The general joy may sound and shine through all
The Kingdom.
That's with Bells and Bone∣fires.
Go.
And now my Lords, I must re∣quire your care
To set down a fit order for our journey
Unto this Queen, to perfect my worlds bliss.
I would not fail in the least Article
Of state or decency in this Affair.
Provide so that we may in all appear
Worthy the Achievement of our fair am∣bition.
And let our followers be chosen such
Whose inward worth no less then out∣ward show
May make us glorious in this expedition.
Do speedily and effectually good my Lords,
The time hastes on.
Our duty shall prevent it.
Methinks the silent Picture seems to say,
It is fit I should anticipate a day, 
Rather then lose one minute from that light
Whose very shadow is so Angel bright.
But when your Highness shall behold, nay more
Shall touch, nay more and nearer shall embrace,
Nay more and nearer yet, enfold and handle,
Nay more and nearest of all, enjoy
The lively (that's too little) heavenly substance
Of this poor imaginary, which is as short,
As far inferior to the life,
As a weak star-light to the mid day Sun.
O do not ravish me with expo∣ctation.
This is a way to make each hour until
I shall enjoy my bliss, a tedious night;
Each night a death: Yet can I not de∣sire
To shift the Argument off our discourse.
Did she appear so fair, so lovely?
Sir,
Suppose you see a glorious Firmament,
Bedek'd with heavenly Stars; so shines her Court
With Ladies might be thought of match∣less beauty,
Striking mere humane sight with admi∣ration.
Imagine now you see break through a Vail
Amidst those Stars, though heavenly lesser beauties
The bright Cynthia in her full of Lustre.
So this no less to be compared Queen,
Shines above beauty to an humane eye
That is not mixed with powerful Ma∣iesty.
You may behold her your Divinity,
My King may comprehend what can befit
Me only to confess, I do admire.
O thou art mine. In such a Queen
And such a Servant nev'r was King so blessed.
But are there in her Court (although in∣feriour
To her more Excellent) such special Beauties,
And in my Theodricks apprehension?
You have made choice of one then?
I have seen
One so agreeable to my affection
Above all the rest, I cannot but confess
I strove to be her Servant.
Doubtless then
She was a fair one. Theodrick, never fear.
She is thine own, my self will be thy Spokesman
If she be worthy of thee.
For fair Virtue
With all the graces which adorn the mind,
In best opinion she's unparalleled
By any Subject, Lady, (I must ever
Allow Supremacy unto the Queen)
And for her Person, it appears in all
Most answerable to her face. Of which here is
The exactest Copy that I could get drawn,
And without flattery by the Queens own Lymner.
Pray let me see it. Indeed it is a sweet one.
Did he that drew this of the Queen, draw that?
With the same hand.
But not with the same colours.
Trust me they're much unlike,
He wrongs the Queen
And merits her displeasure even to death,
T'advance a Servants beauty 'bove her own.
What says your Majesty?
Keep off a little,
You stand just in my light. And so he does,
Twixt me and the prime beauty of the world.
But I'll be even with him, and cause my Picturer
To set this Crown upon this head, and then—
Fie, what a fancie's this? He will per∣ceive me.
But now I note this Forehead, and this Brow,
This Eye, this Lip.—
You have let fall the Queen. Sir.
I cry her mercy. What a shame it is
That I should fall in his discovery?
Are Courts so fraught with fraud and flattery?
And can a King that governs such pro∣fessors
No whit dissemble to obscure his passi∣once?
I must, and thus begin to practice it.
Theodrick, did thou note my contem∣plation
Over these Pictures?
I could but perceive
Your Highness viewing them well. And I have learned
To make no search into my Sovereigns thoughts.
Thou art ever modest. Thus it was Theodrick.
(Protest it raped me bove the pitch of Mortals)
First to consider what an absolute beauty
This Queen has in herself; but then to gather
The circumstances, many such as this
(As thou affirmst) inferior lights to her,
That shine about her, rendering her more glorious.
Lights her above affection, to an height
That claims her adoration. Then marvel not
That now when this but in Effigy
Was but placed by her. By which her Majesty
So much the more appeared, I could not hold
This Figure of that all to be comman∣ding beauty
When my high thoughts were fled up to her presence.
Now take thy piece of craftsmanship again,
Which trust me is a pretty one; whilst I
Devote my service to this Deity.
Sir, you have given me the Queens Picture.
Ha!
What a mistake was here? But thou art honest,
And covet but thy own; Take it Theodrick.
Now tell me of what house er Parentage
Your Mistress is.
I told you first her Virtues,
Her person next, and by this her beauty,
Which you are pleased to deem not much amiss.
It is such Theodrick that had I not seen
This so much above it (pardon my hy∣pocrisie)
I should have envied any man but thee
In such a choice. But speak her parentage.
That's all her blemish.
Is she of tainted blood?
You search with Kingly wise∣doom. She is daughter
To that hold obstinate Baron I informed you of,
Whom the Queen in her just displeasure banished.
Thy love to her may hereafter plead for him.
But soft, I am not well.
Heaven bless the King.
Who waits within there?
Tarry, let me see
That Picture once again. It wants ex∣ceedingly
Of this in many things.
I should want judgement
Not to grant that.
Here it wants palpably
The drooping of the brow; and here again
The dullness of the Eye, which here shows deadly
But for a little squint it has. Good Queen
You look a squint. Then look you Sir, yours wants.
You shall not hear me neither, cause I will not
Spoil your conceit of it. Your Lady wants
The furious sharpness of the nose, which here
My Queen has very shrewly. And again,
You have not the hanging of the nether lip,
Which the best Phisiognomists do tell us
Shows women apt to lust, and strong in∣continence.
Phew, This is all too sweet for mortal sense,
Here, take it again, and keep mine for me with it.
Lay'em together, th'one may mend the tother.
I have known women oft marry one another.
Their Pictures may perhaps have greater virtue.
I am not well, what kind of Changeling am I?
A wild confusion rumbles in my brain,
My thoughts are all at strife.
How fares your Highness?
Sick, sick, Theodrick.
Retire Sir to your Couch.
Where is my Lord the King.
Here yet my Lords.
The King's not well.
We have provided for your Highness journey,
In such a sort as never King went forth.
Whither, to Heaven my Lords?
Yes, to the Queen.
Lovers count marriage Heaven before they wed,
But afterwards I know what some have said.
Oh this is your honey moon.
Yes, yes, you shall to Heaven, your Hey∣ven as you call it,
In such a royal manner. See the Order.
Pray peace.
You do not well to vex the King
You see he's sick.
Sick? marry Heaven forbid.
Sick of the Wife before he has her.
Come, a very trothplight qualm, into your Chamber,
And at we find you we will our selves bestir.
Who waits within there? call the Kings Physicians.
AND what's the reason of all this merry glee?
The King, the King man must be married.
And must he have a Wife?
A Wife? a Queen man, and all the Wives in her Dominion
Must be his Commonwealth, and under us.
O brave.
And we must son and daughter it upon their Nation.
That will be brave indeed.
O but where is Jeffrey, jolly Jeffrey now? the prick and praise,
The very prick and praise, and prime Spark of our Parish, to set our Bonfires and our
Mirth a blazing.
The Bells a ringing, and the Bowls a trowling, the Fiddlers fumbling &amp;
Tumbling. O Jeffrey, where art thou Jeffrey?
He's at hand I warrant you, he went but to Church
Even now.
What, to pray at such a time as this?
No but to help to rear the Tennor, and will come
Presently.
That's to be born withal. It is in∣deed a devilish
Lopheavy Bell. I would the Church∣warden that
Should have mended it when he robbed the poor, were
Hng'd in's place.
There said you well. The Curate could say almost as much
When it was. But it makes no matter what he says, I see
Little amended.
Whoop, here comes Jeffrey sweating in these affairs.
The great Bells of our Town, they tingle they tangle,
They jingle they jangle, the Tenner of them goes merrily.
O Jeff ey, welcome Jeffrey.
And shall we have a Queen?
So▪ they say Jeffrey. O the bravest Woman!
Take heed o'that, woman did you say? Take heed, I
Give you warning. No man must know she is a woman
But the King himself. But a brave Queen she is they say,
And loves a man with all her heart.
Where art O Queen? we will make thee
Such an holy day, as shall
Justly all the working days out of our Almanac. It
Shall be said that we will work no more till thy
Seventh Son, O Queen, who must be born a Prophet, shall
Foretell, the Age to come shall not have a true labourer
Or honest workman in it.
So we may make a long holiday indeed.
Let work no more be thought on, we will revel it out
Of remembrance, we will not cease our joy to sleep, for
Fear we dream of work again. Down with your profane
Tools, and Implements of Husbandry, the very sight of 'em
Dishonours our new holy day.
But Jeffrey, our Masters grudge to give us wood
Enough to make a booking Bonefire▪
How?
They say it is waste.
Not wood to make a Bonefire?
Your Sheeplocks, Flails, Spades,
Shovels, Rakes and Pitchforks, shall all be made a Bonefire.
And so we may be sure to make holy day till
We get new ones.
The maids shall bring their Rocks, their Wheels and Reels, their Tubs, their Pales &amp; Buttocks.
Buckets thou would say.
Where was my mind?
Their Buckets shall they bring, Wash∣bowls and Butter-churns,
Their Buckingtubs, Baskets and Battle∣doors;
And all be made a Bonefire for the Queen.
My mother will not let her house∣holdstuff go so.
We will burn her for a witch then with all her trash,
And her thatched mansion too about her Ears,
But we will show our zeal unto the Queen
In fire sufficient.
Ah good Boy.
Sfoot, if our Masters do rebel against us
Now Majesty's on our side, and not give fuel,
When we mean to give fire, as duty binds
We will have their Carts by the arses, Har∣dles, Wheelbarrows,
The Ploughs and Harrows, and the Whips;
Because the Beasts shall play too; only we will spare
Their Racks and Mangers. All that's made of wood
Belonging to our work besides, shall perish,
Shall perish, I have said it. Not the Politic
Molecatchers staff shall scope the flame.
Not low us wood? we will drink up all the drink to the Queens health
And burn the Hogsheads, Barrels, Kill∣darkens,
Firkins and Rundlets, all to the wooden dish
Shall smoke for it in our bonefire for the Queen.
Good boy again.
But where shall we make this
Hog and monstrious Bonefire?
Here, here, just here, in this very place, I come to mark
The ground, here it shall blaze up to the Heavens, and
We will roast our Town Bull at it, with a thousand
Puddings in his belly.
Ah good Jeffrey still.
Nothing too dear to signify our loves to the
King and Queen, let us bestir us there∣fore,
And enact this as a law amongst us, That
He that does not gall his hands to day with
Ringing, shall be hanged up in the bell∣rope;
And he that is not soundly liquored by night shall
Be made fuel for our Bonefire; such dry Rascals
Will burn better then Heretics.
And last of all, he that does not keep his wench
Waking in the way that we wot of till to morrow milking time, shall either be
Gilt, or else led through the Town by that which
Shall be nameless in a cleft stick. And so God save
The Queen.
And the King to.
The King we make no doubt of, we have prayed
For him these seven years.
A Jeffrey, a Jeffrey.
Whither away my friends?
To make the bravest bonefire that ever blazed since
Troy, or that which the Tyrant Emperor warmed
His hands at.
You must forbear.
We must forbear, what Hebrew's that?
We understand not what must forbear means.
You must forbear to make your Bonefire.
Must? that word had nev'r been named had all been Jeffrey;
We must forbear to set our loves on fire
Unto the King, Dost thou not feel thy self
O man what ever thou art, becoming a Traitor?
Know thou the words thou speak against the King?
I know what I do speak, and what I am.
It is the Constable.
I know my Office too, by virtue whereof
I charge you in the Kings name, lay by
Your sports and pastimes, I'll lay you by the heels else.
Will you Sir know a reason? the King is sick.
Then let us drink his health.
He is sick exceedingly.
Then let us drink exceedingly.
He's sick even unto death.
Then let us ring our Bells for that, and make a Funeral Bonefire.
I say no drinking at all, no Bells, nor no Bonfires,
It is his Majesties command.
I say his Majesties first word shall stand for Bells and Bonfires,
Though we set the Town a fire, and ring the Bells backwards.
Ye will not be all hanged will ye? see
Here's a Gentleman and a Courtier, that so signifies his Majesties pleasure.
A Gentleman and a Courtier, where be they?
I see but one.
Sir I am both.
What monsters are bred in Offer∣ca? I take you but
For one at most; well, for the Gentle∣man that you
Are, thus I salute you; Now for the Courtier that
Is within you, I must wait upon it here; this posterior posture did
I learn of a Spaniel whose name was Courtier.
Now let me tell you Master Gentleman and Courtier, that we are
Sorry that sickness should make our King and Master
So fickle headed as to cross our sports thus, that we
Meant to have made him such an holy∣day as might
Have proved more worth to him than a Wife and
Twenty sicknesses besides: Yet can we not be so sorry for his sickness as that it
Was his mishap to play mock holiday with us.
The King shall know your loves, and for your part Master
Speaker.
Your Friend and Jeffrey.
Then Jeffrey be it, I'll promise you preferment, if
You will up to Court with me.
Up to the Gallows shall I not?
My life for thine. And thou shalt not deny me,
Here's Gold in earnest, take it. The Kings disease
Is melancholy, and thou may do him more good
Then a whole College of Physicians.
He takes me for a fool, I'll make a venture on it,
The best is, many a Fool has thrived at Court; and
The worst is, I am not the first that has forsaken
His Country. I'll along with you Sir, and if I rise
By you, I shall quickly learn Courtship enough
To forget to thank you: And for your parts my
Old Friends, what need soever you may have of
Me, you must be sure I'll be a stranger to you.
Wilt thou forsake us Jeffrey? then who shall dance
The hobby horse at our next Revel rout?
The hobby horse of preferment gallops me from you;
If you chance to see me in my rohes hereafter
When I come to be the Fool Royal, you may admire my
Garments, and whisper to your acquain∣tance very softly,
That you knew me once, But on your Allegiance look
Not that I should know you then.
Nay, we are not such Clowns but we have heard that
Courtiers in favour will know no body.
It is true, for when they are in disgrace the silliest
Clown will not know them.
You were best look to your fast footing then when
You are high in favour.
High in fooling thou would say silly Constable; yet there's no
Great danger. One fool may outstand six favourites.
Away then as thou art.
I Sir, I'll take no shift with me, I shall shift
The better when I come there.
Well, farewell Jeffrey, thy like will nev'r come here.
Commend me to all the Lasses, and let not them, nor
Do not you grieve for my departure, nor for
The holiday that here is lost; instead of which, that
You may have a new one, I wish that one of you, even he
That loves me best, as speedily as may be would deserve
Hanging, that the rest may make holiday for him.
Sic valet valetote.
Now the Dee'l burst crag of him.
He's a right Courtier already.
I'm glad he used us no better, If he had
I should have cried out mine eyes for him.
It was a miraculus escape. Good Heaven
Is with me still. I have not heard
That any of these native Salvages,
These home-bred monsters in humanity,
These out-laws, these-detested Thieves and Robbers,
Have enterprised a villainy like this,
To set with such a violence on men
Of our weak seeming, poor and needy Pilgrims,
When I did offer them to shun their blows,
All that we had even to our bare apparel
It seems their aim was at our blood, not means.
And doubtless they were some that knew our persons
Through our disguises, and pursued us hither
With an inveterate malice to destroy us
In this wild Desert.
Was it not enough
Thou impious Queen▪ and more unna∣tural unna∣tural,
To banish me unjustly? but thou must
Pursue my life by treacherous cruelty?
Art thou not hurt at all my Son?
Not touched,
To the least danger of one drop of blood
They are three sturdy Knaves and strongly weapon'd.
Had they been forty Sir, while I was armed
By your white Innccence and holy Prayers,
Heavens justice lent me hands to beat them off.
Yet give me leave dear Sir, to ask you now
Why you have bent your Pilgrimage this way?
Leading into a country of more danger
Unto your life and safety, then your own
Nerhtumberland, whose King cannot but rage
In greater heat against you then the Queen,
That so unjustly banished you; you may fall
(Though you escape the danger of this Forest)
Into the reach of his revengeful fury.
It was and is my purpose to appear
In person to that King at my lifes price,
Which I am no more fond of then my Country
Is of my truth. And when I have made known
The unfitness of the match, by the dis∣honour
He'll run into if he proceed in it;
If then he take my life, I am at home,
Eternally at home.
But made you none
Acquainted that you meant to travel this way?
None
But my dear son Off.
Then sure the Queen
Sent her Blood-hounds after you; I perceive
They could not be mere Thieves.
Good Angels guard us;
They have made head again in greater numbers.
Take greater courage then.
Faint hearted slaves
Must I give hire and do the talk my self?
It is not amiss to help for expedition.
Upon 'em all at once.
They fight. Anthynus knock down 1. Outlaw. Off wounds Segebert in the head, he sincks.
Anthynus disarms Off. Off runs off, whilst Anthynus speaks.
This sword thou never handle more. Take you it and fresh cou∣rage Sir. 
May you not cease your flight till you reach Hell,
That bred ye villans; to pursue ye further
Were to neglect a nearer duty.
Dear honoured Sir, look up;
Father, how do you?
Even almost well I hope.
He means with death▪
Alas he's deeply wounded and bleeds much.
But what do I in this? I have not tears
Enough to wash these wounds, although some linen
To bind them up. But merely to bewail him
With looks and lamentations is as fruitless
As here to leave him languishing to death,
And run in pursuit of his enemies
To work revenge, Neither of these bring ease.
Mount up my thoughts to Heaven then for a blessing
Upon my ready industry, and let each faculty
Of mine as prompt to works and pray∣ers be.
How is it now Sir? do I not bind it too hard?
Pray Sir speak to me.
Off, oh son Off!
Off is not here Sir, it is I, your son Anthynus.
Why look you on that sword so?
O son Off!
Pray Sir look on me, I fear his memory fails him.
And as his mind was ever on Off
Before unfortunate me; so now he gives
The merit that belongs (if any be)
Due to the duty of a son in this
From me to him. But envy be thou from me.
Why look you on that sword, and not on me?
It was I that won it for you.
O Anthynus!
That's well said Sir, speak though but faintly to me,
I had rather hear your groans then find you speechless,
Better will come I hope.
Help me to rise.
That's comfortably spoken; so, well done
Like a strong man again.
O I am weak.
Rest upon me, my strength, my all is yours.
Aeneas that true Trojan son, whose fame
For piety ever crowns his name
Had not a will (although my means be poor)
Exceeding mine to answer nature more,
Well said, that step became you, we shall on
I see apace, give me your sword, it trow∣bless you.
No, not this sword.
That's the best sign of all.
Keep it and hold it fast Sir, we will back
A little to the Spring we came by, where
I'll somewhat more accommodate your wounds.
Heaven, which men's honest pains doth ever bless,
Will when we least can hope afford redress.
Oh, oh, some help, oh.
Hark, did thou not hear a cry?
Of nothing but
My guts that cry within me Sir for meat.
I hear no other cry, nor have not done.
Oh.
Almost these 5. years.
Peace thou belly-god, it was there again.
It is a belly-divel rather, that has tormented me
Ever since I served you under ground hereby. No man
Above ground could have fasted like me.
Hast thou not daily food thou Caterpillar?
Yes, such as Caterpillars eat;
Blossoms and Buds, many green grow∣ing things,
Such as you make your medicines of, and Roots, would I could get
Some of the Caterpillars. A dish of Ca∣terpillers fried,
Let me see in what? in Usurers grease, if one
Knew where to get it, might serve to feast an Emperor.
But we live out of the world by Prayer and Fasting.
Thou sarest as I fare, feed as oct as I.
But Sir, there's difference in our exercises. If I
Could spend my time, whole days in prayer, as
You do, this kind of fare or fasting
Rather, would not be so bitter to me.
Oh.
Did thou not hear it now?
Yes, something like the croaking of a Frog me thought. If it
Were one, I would wade up to the waste for it
For my supper. Here, here Sir, here it is, here's more
Work for you. Once a week we are com∣monly troubled
Either to cure or bury one or other, thank the
Outlaws, they make us work for no∣thing here, as if we dwelt
Here for the purpose, nor do I know other indeed.
Look up man, can thou speak?
O no.
There's great hope of recovery, you hear he
Says he cannot speak.
Can thou hold up thy hands, and lift up thine eyes?
He does, he does; hanged he'll do well enough.
Help up his body, then down into my Cave.
And to morrow up with him again, and then down
Into a grave. Better let him lie now Sir,
You'll ne'er do good on him I doubt; He looks
So damnably as if the Devil were at my elbow
For him.
Peace knave, in charity I'll do my best.
Heaven hitherto my labours well has blessed.
Nay, had I his weight in Veni∣son so near killed, and might be allowed to
Eat it; I would ask no more flesh while I lived.
Can no release be had? is this the place,
That cursed piece of ground which Na∣ture meant
Should be called Hell on Earth? where outrage reigns,
Murder and cruelty beyond it; deep despair
To a poor remnant of distressed life
Of al reviving comforts, food, or medicine?
Oh set me down.
And must we needs be set
By the malicious ignorance of Fortune
On this internal way?
Patience good Son.
Where ill abounds, and every good is wanting,
Was it not enough that so much blood was spilt
From this white reverend head, from which hath flowed
Counsels that have preserved the blood of Nations?
And fitter now to wear a Diadem
It self, then thus be stained with his own wrong.
Had it not been enough to have left him so,
Thou Tyrant Fortune, but to take away
All means of Succour? no relief? no comfort?
Good Son, be not impatient.
And see, see,
Accursed Fate! he bleeds a fresh again,
As if his blood I now but washed away
Cried for the rest to follow it.
Indeed,
Son, this impatience hurts thy self and me.
Better let me bleed still (bleeding's an easy death)
Then thou displease the awful power of Heaven,
By chiding at the feigned ones, good take heed.
Me you have justly chidden, and I beg
Pardon of Heaven and you, and now me∣thinks
I am inspired unto a further duty
Of seeking remedy. I'll leave no way un∣tried
To find it, if I may. And though my absence
Will sore perplex me; I will with your grief
Leave you a while to forage for relief.
But first pray let me change a sword with you Sir;
Not that I think yours better, but because
I fear some▪ charm is in it, or secret ill
Against you, you sigh so when you view it still
Good Son, forbear't, and me unto my thoughts,
Till thou returnst. Heavens &amp; my blessing with thee.
So strengthened I shall sure find remedy
To raise you out of this calamity.
This sword Anthynus? no, should rho but know
This sword as I do, it would raise thy Fury
Unto an execution of that horror
Would shake me in my grave: this sword
Which now I cannot but with tears re∣member,
Was once mine own. I gave it to thy Brother,
(I will not call him so) but to my Son,
(Why should I call him so?) but to Off,
And so I fear I name my murderer.
For when I gave it him, I charged him never
To part with it; he firmly vowed the same,
And that whilst I or he should live, no man
Should ever give it motion but himself.
Were it thou so greedy of my life, my Off,
To snatch it from me thus? when as the wounds
Thy Parricidial hands has given me,
Are not so bitter as the wronged thoughts,
Though they are deep and overflow their btinks;
I have two wounds within me that are deeper,
Which have discovered in my heart and bowels
A trebbled Spring of dearer blood then this.
One pricks me with compassion for thee,
My good, my charitable, pious Son.
All blessing due to sanctimonious virtue
Be ever thy companion, till thou art crowned
Amongst Sons of men the pattern of true Piety.
What foul mistrusts? puddles of jealousy
Were lodged in this dark bosom against thee?
And of affection what a pure stream did run
By a false Current to my second Son?
Who by thy truth appears not now thine own.
Which makes my other wound, in that so long
I cherished him by doing of thee wrong.
Now from my heart issue two streams of blood,
One thick and clotty, the other clean Vetmilion.
In the gross blood I vent the wrong conceit
I swallowed against thee my good Anthynus.
And in the clear I see Offa's falsehood may
In both my blood runs forth apace. O
My thick blood Anthynu be forgiven by thee.
And the clear cleanse my Offa's treachery
Oh—
Did thou not heat a groan? a dying groan?
Not I Sir, I heard nothing.
Hark, look about; I am sure I heard a groan
Here Sir, here's something that per∣haps has groaned.
But it's out of hearing now.
And so is pity amongst men. Ay me▪ an old man
Murdered! A seeming simple innocent old man,
And yet he holds a sword.
So, more work still.
Whilst we are gathering Simples to cure one,
Here's another John Simple laid in our way to bury.
He is yet warm.
I, but he has no breath, not so much I'll undertake as a
Scolding wife that has been 9. days in the grave.
Alas, he's gone indeed; What ruthless villains
Could have done this on such an aged man,
In this so harmless habit?
Good master, let it warn you; though we have hitherto
Passed by these man-Tygers, these wol∣vish Outlaws safely, early and late, as not
Worth their malice. Yet pray Sir now since they
Begin to kill men of this coat, and these years, let us
Forsake this Salvage habitation, and live
In the world of meat again.
How ill are these white hairs bestain'd with red?
Methinks I should have known this face. Nothing to wipe
The blood off? come, help away with him.
He's help away, and made away enough already methinks.
Why dost not lift?
Sure they have blown their sins into him that killed him,
He's so heavy, he's deadly heavy. Pray Sir let me
Fetch my gtave instruments &amp; your book and bestow him here.
You will not bury him in your Cave I'm sure.
I say I'll have him down; perhaps the wounded
Man that's there may know him.
I would I had but this Fellows weight in buttock Beef.
I come my Father, chide not now my stay;
In which I was more tardy I confess,
Then ever I was in duty. I have brought you—
Where are you Sir? Ha! this was sure the place,
And this the very Oak at which I left him;
I marked it carefully, and took due heed
Even to the number of my steps in my
Departure, how to make my back return,
Nor was my tarriance such, that in that space
He could recover strength to shift his ground.
I wish it were so well with him. My Lord,
My father, what a mist of doubts stand I
Amazed in? and my unspeakable amaze∣meant
Is such, that I begin to call my sight
And memory in question, whither this place?
Or whither he? or I? or any thing
Be, or be not; good senses do not leave me,
My search will be in vain if you forsake me.
Father, my Lord! where are you? how? or where?
Here.
That was well said, speak on.
Now where?
Now here.
Now here? where is that here?
Here.
I hear and follow, but I know not where.
Here.
At the same place again?
If there be place, or I know any thing,
How is my willingness in search delve∣ded?
It is the Wood that rings with my com∣plaint,
And mocking Echo makes her merry with it.
Cursed be thy babbling, and may thou become
A sport for wanton boys in thy fond answers,
Or stay, perhaps it was some gentle Spirit
Hovering in the Air, that saw his flight to Heaven,
And would direct me thither after him.
Good reason, leave me not, but give me leave
A little to consider nearer home;
Say his diviner part be taken up
To those celestial joys, where blessed ones
Find their inheritance of immortality.
I cannot think his earthly properties
So soon could find the passage to that height.
His body would be here, poor martyred body,
That though it yet did live, could not part hence
Without the help of others legs &amp; hands.
And here haunt none, but such whose Cruelty
Would toss him into further misery.
Wild Beasts, if here were any half so ra∣venous
As those inhumane mankind monsters were,
(That drew his blood and these unusual tears)
Could not devour him all, some particle,
Some remnant would be left to bless a Son with.
But here is none but that too sure a sign
For me to know the place by, where I left him.
Part of the blood I saw run ftom him. O
Dear hallowed blood inspire me with this kiss
To find the fountain whence this stream did flow.
I will not eat, nor sleep until I know.
No? can thou tell me nothing? Then I'll take
A Sample of the precious store was spilt,
To keep me still in memory of the guilt:
And of my vow▪ never to feed or rest,
Until I find him here, or with the blessed.
I have not known, nor read, nor heard since I
Was of discretion to know any thing
Worthy a mans capacity of the like.
You are well met my Lord.
And you as welcome to the Court my Lord, although a sad one.
Came you now from the King my Lord.
Even now.
How left you him good my Lord?
As the Physicians
I fear must shortly do, not knowing what
To say to him.
Heaven bless the King, is he
So dangerously sick?
He's sick enough
To be prayed for my Lord:
Although I cannot properly call it
A sickness: I am sure it is a disease
Both to himself and all that come about him.
I fear he's brain-crack'd, lunatic and Frantic, mad;
And all the Doctors almost as mad as he,
Because they cannot find the cause: something
They guess afflicts his mind, but of what nature
It is, or how the strong conceit may grow
They can by no means win or wrest from him.
Such is the obstinacy of his disease.
Where is Theodrick then, his by∣some Friend,
His special Favourite? He methinks might gain
The knowledge of his inmost thoughts.
It is thought
He put these wild tormenting thoughts into him.
For which the King has banished him the Court
And with a guard upon his person sent him
To live confined at his house. My self and all,
The faithful body of the State have moved
The King for his repeal again to favour.
Even we that for these two years space have wished him
For good State-reasons, favourlesse and headless,
Have begged for his enlargement that the King
Might vent his troubled thoughts into his Breast,
And so find way to ease: but all in vain,
He will not hear of him.
You tell me wonders.
But good my Lord, how takes the King his rest?
Troth as mad mortals do; we cannot tell
Whether he sleeps at all or not. Some∣times
He seems to sleep, but then his troubled thoughts
Express themselves in sighs, in sudden starts,
In groans, and sometimes speech of od confused
And indigested matter; then he leaps
From off his bed, calls for his horse and Armour,
Swords, Spears and Battelaxes. But anon
Bids all be let alone; and calls for books,
Shoffels Divinity and Poetry,
Philosophy &amp; Historical together, sports,
And throws all by. Then calls for merry
Which ever they be presented, he forbids,
With strong rebukes to all that spend their time
In any exercise but contemplation
In solitary places; then walks forth
Into the Groves and Thickets, charging those
That follow him (nor dare they disobey)
To keep aloof at such proportioned di∣stance
As he unheard by all may vent his passi∣once
Unto the Air, the Woods, the Rocks, the Springs.
And twice in these Retirements have we lost him
In those obscure Meanders which his melancholy
Has led him to; and when much industry
And care had found him out, it was double trouble
To wind him and his fancies home again
It is most pitiful.
Now, how does the King?
Full now my Lord of a new fancy. He
Is now becoming Pilgrim.
A Pilgrim, why?
I know not why, nor to what shrine, nor do
I hold it fit to ask him; but to give
Free way unto his fancy yet a while,
In all to please and play with his infer∣mity.
It is our best way to cool Phrenetique humours
Before we kill 'em Sir.
His Pilgrimage shall not be far, though he pretends a long one.
He has on his weeds already.
And who associates him?
Only my self, and his new fool he says.
Good, a fool and a Physician.
A Physician and a fool you would say. The Physician ever
Before the fool, my Lord.
And why the fool before my Lord, I pray?
Your Lordships pardon, we must have no Lord
Along with us; though I was sent to enquire
If you Lord Ethelswick were come to Court?
Whom the King sent for.
Sent the King for you,
After your long retirement in the Country?
He did indeed my Lord.
There's something in it then
That savours not of madness altogether.
That having put by your Antagonist,
The trouble of the Court, his favourite,
He sends for you immediately upon it. 
Here comes our Pilgrim King.
Stand all apart.
To be completely armed from head to foot,
Cannot advance the spirit of a King
Above the power of love, nor to be clad
In poorest habit of humility
Can mortify the least of the desires
That love inflames man with. No out∣ward dress
Can change or make affection more or less.
I have tried all the ways I can to con∣quer
Or to humiliate my raging passion,
Which still grows more predominant ore my reason.
I find it in my self, and know my error,
Though no means to correct it. I do know
It is foully done to slight the Queen that loves me.
And it was an act no less unprincely
To cast into suspense my friendly servant
For what transgression was it in him to love
One fairer then my choice? before he knew
My wavering inconstancy. I know
Withal my punishment is just, how ever
My sufferings make me wish it less severe.
For my unjust removing of Theodrick,
I lose all helpful counsel, all relief,
That my oreburdend breaking heart cries out for.
Into his breast I could unload my grief,
Were it composed of ought but his abuse
I must not, dare not trust him with this story,
Lest for redress I meet revenge. Who's there?
My Lord the King.
O you are welcome Ethelswick, I am now
To trust you in a serious affair.
My duty binds me to your High∣ness service.
We will walk forth together Ethelswick.
Let none presume to follow. Not a man
Give the least motion this way on your lives.
not I, name King? wilt thou not take me with thee?
Pull the fool off me.
O but they shall not name, it is more then they
Can do.
No Sir, we will try.
Again, I charge you all that none presume
To follow us.
All? wilt thou leave all thy fools behind thee name?
All fools, Sir, shall be whipped.
And where will you find wise men to whip 'em all?
We shall make whipping one another shortly.
Trust me a trim Court-complement. I am advanced
To high promotion, am I not? to wear long coats again,
And feed on whipping cheer? but hark you
Cousin Lord, do you reward fools at Court?
Yes fool, if they deserve it.
And is desert rewarded here too?
Yes.
Then it is desert gets whipping, and Fooling gets reward.
I'll not forsake the Court for that yet, where I hope to
Get enough to raise half my Country.
By what project I pray thee?
By begging a monopoly, Cousin Lord. You know fools will
Always be begging, they are naturally inclined to it,
Else none would be Courtiers.
And what is your monopoly?
I hope the King will give it me, if the Lord that
Walked with him bring him in again as wise as
He went out.
What is it thou would beg?
It is a monopoly of fools my Lords. That the King
Would carry no fools with him but of my election, and
By my allowance, and that when he comes
Back into his own Country, he bring no new
Ones from thence, but by the same Authority.
And what price or fee will you set upon a fools head
For his admittance?
According to the degree, or estate, or quality of the fool,
Cousin Lord.
This is a covetous and a poli∣tique fool.
Not so politic Cousin Lord, as a Statesman that paid his
Head for his learning, nor so covetous as a Churchwarden
May be, when I am dead and gone. But as I was
A saying, I'll use my fools according to their quality
Or breed. If he be a poor fool, I'll make him pay the more
For it. If he be rich, I may be beholding to him another way.
If he be a fool natural and poorly born, he's
Sure to pay enough for it. But if he have more breeding
Then Capacity, and be a nobly descend fool, I'll use him
The better for your sakes Cousin Lords, and the rather because
I hope you will further my suit to the King. And so
I'll wait his coming in at the back Stairs.
This is a precious Fool.
The King (would his infirmity give leave)
Would be delighted in him.
I am glad
The King has chosen one yet to impart
(I hope) his grief unto.
But is it true,
The King sent for Lord Ethelswick to Court?
Now in his melancholy, and so presently
On the removing of his loved Theodrick.
It is most true, in which we may observe
A turn of State. Good Ethelswick was dear,
Dearly beloved indeed by our late King,
And worthily deserved his royal Favour.
But with his son, our sovereign Lord that is,
Youthful Theodrick was prime man in grace,
And quickly shouldered Ethelswick from Court.
Theodrick's absence now resigns new place
For Ethelswick to resume the grace.
Thus the Court-wheel goes round like Fortunes ball,
One Statesman rising on another fall.
Let's wait the coming of the King my Lord.
We are for the Woods to make a flight or two
At the Pheasant Edelberts.
Alfred agreed.
To fast and watch is duty, and no Penance,
When such affairs as mine are in pursuit.
How dare I think of meat or sleep, which are
Such hen drances to a devotion
Whose least neglect would pull down Thunder on me;
And to take sense of weariness were a sin
Unpardonable. But to have lost 3. days
And tedious nights in painful diligence,
In such a search as this, for such a father;
And now to lose the hope of finding him
Is torment unexpressible. Where? which way
Shall I make further inquisition?
Yes, I will on to the Northumbrian Court,
And make my griefs appear unto the King.
My wandering steps have almost lead me now
Unto his Court; where if I may find grace,
Nay but humanity, I shall prevail
To have these woods, the dens of barb∣rous Outlaws,
In which I lost my Father, strictly searched. 
Ha! do I hear or dream? is this a sound,
Or is it but my fancy? it is the music,
The music of the Spheres that do ap∣plaud
My purpose of proceeding to the King.
I'll on; but stay; how? what a strange benummednesse
Assails and seizes my exterior parts?
And what a Chaos of confused thoughts
Does my imagination labour with?
Till all have wrought themselves into a lump
Of heaviness, that falls upon mine eyes
So ponderously that it bows down my head,
Begins to curb the motion of my tongue,
And lays such weight of dullness on my Senses,
That my weak knees are doubling un∣der me.
There is some charm upon me. Come thou forth
Thou sacred Relic! suddenly dissolve it.
I sleep with deathless; for if thus I fall,
My vow falls on me, and smites me into Ruin.
But who can stand against the power of Fate?
Though we foreknow repentance comes too late
Am I among the dead? or in what Region
Either of Earth or Air? Heaven? Hell? or whither?
Or into what am I translated? Am I
Alive, or dead, awake, asleep, a man,
Or airy ghost? or did I see or dream?
If now I be awake, and am Anthynus,
That grieved Anthynus who has lost a
Then did I see in apparition
The ghosts of our 6. last West Saxon Father, Kings,
As each succeeded other now passed by me.
Of which the last Kenwalcus our late King,
And father to the Tyranness that ba∣niched
Mine, seemed to take me up to his suc∣cession;
It were more idle then a dream can be,
For me awake to think it possible
I should become a King, and of that land
From which my father was exiled; it must
Be then a dream. As I have heard of men
That sleeping stand, nay walk and talk as I do,
At least as I suppose. Now if I sleep
Not having seen my father, I have broke
My vow; I'll rather think me dead; then why
Was I not blessed with my dead Fathers sight?
Why was not he with King Kenwalcus now
That living loved him so? O my wild thoughts!
You are become a whirlwind in my brain
Lifting me up to hurl me down again
Go, carry home your Hawks; they are as good
As ever made flight.
I would the King had seen
(His melancholy set apart) our princely sport.
I hope my good Lord Ethelswick by this time
Has tan the burden of his discontent
(The cause of his strong malady) from his mind.
I rather think the King has lost him too
Among the bushes, as he did us last night
It is a strange humour in a King; and as
Unheard of a disease that works it in him
To hide himself in by-Walks, Caves, and Thickets.
We shall search hollow Trees, and Crows nests shortly
For him, if these fits hold him.
Bless us? look here,
Is not this he? a witch could not guess righter
Then thou hast done. Old Ethelswick has lost him;
And here's the King asleep.
This is the habit,
The Pilgrims weed he went in; has he not
Ended his Pilgrimage here? is he not dead?
No, he is warm; and breathes like health it self.
It is so, my Lord, I vow he sleeps as if
All the seven sleepers had tan up their lodging
In his fantastic brain-pan.
He has not slept
We know these four nights.
Hear you, my Lord the King.
I think he sleeps for them 4, and 4. more.
I'll undertake a drum, or a whole kennel
Of scolds cannot wake him.
It is the better for us.
I do conceive you; for we will take him home,
And have him put in bed before he wakes
If it be possible. (up with him) And there
When he has slept it out, he will perhaps
Be cured, and give us answerable thanks:
If not, and that he be offended for
The breach of his command, in coming near him;
He shall ne'er know who did it.
Be it so.
Away then, softly, softly, so so, softly.
Now my good Ethelswick, I have told thee all,
By which I find much ease, and hope to sleep:
But not to take a thought unto my fancy
By my soft dreams, but of my beauteous Mildred.
Nor will I in sleep or waking think of any
Other adventure, till I do attain
The sight of her, and prithe Ethelswick
Help me, and suddenly, in my device
How to contrive a journey secretly
Not with above one or two trusty ser∣vents
To make this blisseful visit.
There are ways
Enough considerable, by which your Highness
May pass, and be received there undis∣covered.
Seeming a private Gentleman, or a Pilgrim;
But here will rise the difficulty, how
The miss of you at home will be re∣ceiv'd
By your Nobility and doubtful People;
Who cannot long, not knowing where you are,
But rage in high desire to see your Ma∣jesty.
For that I'll give command be∣fore I go,
That no affairs of State or otherwise,
No not my diet nor Attendants
Shall pass to me but by your hands; pretending
For twenty days a studious privacy,
To which your self shall only have ad∣mittance,
And take for all that come my Answers, which
Frame you as you think fit; and who shall dare
To think me from my Closet or my Bed,
When you avouch me there?
As for example, we are now in private,
Answer you all comers,
I am busy, or asleep; see how they'll take it.
That trial is soon made; there's one already;
Who's there? what's your business?
Within. My business is to wait upon the King;
My Lord, you know me, I am Theodwald
My Lord, the King is private, and desires to be so;
And needs now no attendance but mine own.
How fares his Majesty?
Reasonable well.
That's well, he was unreaso∣noble well to day.
Good night my Lord; Let the King know I pray
I gave attendance. You understand Court-service
Is it be not in the eye, it is half lost.
Your service my Lord, though the King take it not in
At the eye, shall have entrance at the next
Door, the ear; I'll make it known to him.
Good night.
You see how easily he's answered now;
So will the rest hereafter when they find
It is my pleasure to be thus retired.
Who are you?
One that must have entrance; the Physician;
One that brings the King a Preparative to sleep.
What is it composed of Prayers and meditations?
My books yield no such reading.
Nor your Coat any such practice.
I come not to be mocked, but as you tender
His Highness rest, let me approach him presently.
Good Sir, the King's at rest al∣ready.
Not asleep?
Fast, fast, and welcome Mr. Doctor.
My Lord, you'll let him know my care I hope.
I'll wake him with it when he has slept enough.
Believe it my Lord, it was my care that charmed him.
He had not slept this fortnight else I warrant.
Pray let him know so much.
Ha, ha, they all desire to have their care considered,
Although in real act they merit nothing.
How now? what saucy Knave is that?
You are cozened Cousin Lord, it is the Fool, Cousin;
How does my name, the King?
Go Fool, follow the Physician, he can tell you.
I asked my Cousin Doctor already, and he says,
My name King's asleep.
And would not you be whipped to come to trouble him then?
No Cousin Lord, I come to sing him a lullaby
Out of the dream of the Devil and Dives, shall
Make him sleep till he wakes again, and't be this month.
Away you Fool, I'll set you a going.
O Lord, O Cousin Lord, I cannot go for running.
This will become a business.
But Ethelswick, when I have declared my pleasure,
As I'll appear, and publicly to morrow,
To give command that none upon their lives
Shall give you less respect in this behalf
Then I my self might claim, it will be easy.
Again?
Where are you, my Lord E∣thelswick?
Your pleasure my Lord Eaufrid.
May I not see the King?
If you dare take my word, the King commands
The contrary to all men but my self
For this night; to morrow you may know
His highness further pleasure.
May you enjoy
This night the greatness of your Office;
To morrow if I have a King, I'll see and speak with him.
Not if he sleep my Lord.
You say he sleeps,
Go to, sleep (quoth a!) yes, perhaps he sleeps,
It is with his Ancestors I fear.
What shall I say my Lord?
I say, you do not well, my Lord, to keep
Our duties back from his Majesty, that have
As well been trusted—I will keep the rest:
But it is not well.
I say, that you do worse,
Officiously to interrupt his rest.
I wish his rest as well as you, my Lord,
Nay more: But I will keep the rest till morning,
And so joy to the greatness of your Office.
How thinks your Majesty of this? How will
Such as he is be satisfied in your ab∣sense?
I'll school 'em all.
Yet more?
My Lord, my Lord.
What would you have?
Open the door, and quickly.
I may not.
But you must; it is for the King.
How's that?
Delay not, as you'll answer't;
The King's here.
Is the King there? what traitors voice is that?
Let 'em appear;  ha! who made you King-makers?
God save the King, and bless us all from witchcraft.
We durst have sworn we had had him fast enough here.
How?
Fast asleep Sir, asleep Sir, look you here.
Let's see your may-game.
Look you my Lord, and judge.
Or if your Majesty will know your self,
(A lesson which a King should not dis∣dain
To learn) look here, and read the diffe∣rinse,
If you can find it.
Is he so like me to your ap∣prehension?
I am amazed to see it; your own eyes, Sir,
Cannot in likeness answer each the other,
More then this Face doth yours; his hands, his legs,
All his dimensions bear the same pro∣portion
To outward seeming as your Royal Per∣son.
Nature herself were she now to behold
Her work on both of you, could scarce distinguish
By an exterior view, a difference.
Where did you find this sleeper?
Peace, no more, ne'er question that; Cupped has heard my prayers.
Who saw you take him up?
None but our servants,
Whom we dismised in the same saith that we
Were of our selves, that it was your Ma∣jesty;
And as we passed the Court none saw our carriage,
Which we brought thus obscured that none might take
Notice of your infirmity.
It was well done;
Be secret still; nay, I must charge you strongly;
And if my power be not a spell sufficient
To work your secrecy, I'll take your heads
To mine own custody.
Sir.
Nay, I must trust ye; hark you Ethelswick.
I understand your course.
Come, into our bed with him; gently, so:
Nay Sir, you shall have Noble Kingly usage;
Never had stranger entertainment like him.
I'll give him all I have during his stay.
Exchange my self with him, and be be∣holding
To him besides for the use I'll make of him.
I'll tell you all within: Love, that has sent
This blessing in my way, when I was in
So great a straight (I cannot think enough on it)
To bring new life unto my fainting hopes,
If now I serve thee not with strength and skill,
Remove me as a Rebel to thy will.
YOu are sure they both are dead?
Both dead and buried;
The Mould is not more dead from which
The gold was tan, which we attend for,
Then are their corps.
Nor is the Mine so deep,
As we laid them in grave; not out
Of charity, but for our own security▪
That none might find or know them.
That was well; but are they dead indeed?
You saw the old one dead before your sword
Failed you, and you gave ground.
When a mans sword is tan away, it fails him,
And when he runs away, he gives ground in our
Language.
Then we being two against one, we soon dispatched him.
Alas he was even spent before, you saw
The worst of him.
But he's dead to you're sure?
Dead? sblood, I have told you threescore times
They are both dead; so is our fellow too, poor Rogue:
He bid us take his share betwixt us, and drink it
To the health of all the Furies in hell, to use
Him the more kindly. Will you discharge us Sir? we have
Waited for our hire, while we have lost another bargain
Of blood worth two on it.
They are both dead you say?
Give us our money Sir, and find 'em you alive, we will kill
'Em again for nothing; and you or any friend of yours into
The bargain if you please.
Stay▪ let me think.
What's the matter? your conscience sure is crop-sick.
My conscience tells me it was a bloody business, and that
To pay the price of their dear blood were to
Augment my sin.
Is it come to this?—draw.
Nay here's your money Gentle∣men, but you must stoop for it:
I dare not look upon the giving of it.
If that be all, the sight of it shall never trouble you-oh. they sink.
Ha, ha, ha. You have made my conscience whole
Again with laughing. Why took ye not your money with ye to
Drink among the Furies? Ha, ha, ha. Do ye hear my friends?
Pray stay, take your money; are you so
Quickly out of hearing? What shallow Rogues were
These till now? now they are deep enough, men of
Profound understanding; this Gem∣crash I devised for
Their entertainment; where you shall fast and welcome
Gentlemen, till you have tried the con∣clusion, whether Famine
Can break stone walls; I am sure they are thick enough
To drown your cries, though they be louder then the
Voice of vengeance. So ends their Scene. Some conscience now
Would ask me, why hast thou
Dispatched thy Father and thy Brother thus?
But mine informs me, I did very well.
Your reason Sir, replies the scrupulous conscience?
Mine roundly answers that my brother was
Elder then I, and by right to inherit
My Fathers fair possessions, of which
I have so sweetly tasted. But your Father
By a most dear and supernatural love
Gave you the greater blessing; &amp; in time
Might have conferred all on you by your policy.
To this again I answer, that my Father,
Whose dotage merely &amp; not my deserts
Made him so good to me, might in my absence
Have idly grown as fond on tother side.
For to speak truth, and not to wrong the dead,
My brother was religious, pious, honest▪
And was endued with all these un∣known gifts
Which holy men call virtues; which in the end
If they be suffered to run on will find
Double reward, they say. His could not be
Found here, but in my loss, and by my Father.
Now if they may be had in the tother world,
I am so far from being their hinderance,
That I have sent them both the nighest way.
Many good reasons more I could deliver,
But that I am prevented.
Odds my pity,
Be comforted good Madam, can you think
By casting down your self to raise them up
From death again? what? you have yet a Brother
May stead you for a Father, Husband,
Friend, or what you will.
Gentle Nurse, forbear me.
Go prate among the servants.
I have a mind to watch you though a little.
You've heard the news, and mourn for it I perceive,
Of the unfortunate ends of our dear Father,
And our beloved brother.
Even drowned in grief too Brother.
Troth I was
Sunk over head and ears; but am •ept out
Of sorrows lake even dropping dry, as they say;
And have done what I can to shake it off.
And would now counsel thee, my beau∣teous Sister,
To clear those looks again, that only can
Revive my drooping heart, we only are
Left now to be each others comforter.
I have made known my love to you.
O my brother,
That knowledge is a grief of no less horror,
Then was the bloody news that pierced my heart.
Mention that love no more, nor call it love,
Which is but foul desire.
Peace, hear but this,
Do you think it is not love? would I de∣sire
You in that nearest kind, if I not loved you?
What? love a Sister so? are you a man?
Sure I do hope so, and that you shall find it.
Can you unto your shame seek my dishonour?
To damn us both, in that abhorred way
Which by avoiding, man is best destine∣guish'd
From the most brutish beasts.
Peace again.
I cannot, may not peace, nor suffer word
Importing such a purpose pierce mine ears.
Twice have I beaten back your mon∣strous lust,
(Could I but call it lust, it were too much
Though in a Monarch to my Virgin honour;
But in you beastly Incest) and before
I'll live in danger of one offer more,
I'll die by mine own hand.
You shall not rob
Me so of my revenge, if you deny me.
And it is another argument of my love,
If it please you to collect it, that you have lived
Till now, still obstinate. But be you warned
And take withal to your consideration
Your provident Father, and your valiant Brother,
(Whom you so prized above me) are not now
To oversee or side you.
He indeed
Was a most virtuous Brother.
Therefore take
This for your latest warning;
This night to meet me in my full desires,
In your as free embraces, or pale death.
Go clear your eyes, and think on it; but be sure
You think to do withal as I command you.
I'll pitch thee headlong into Hell else. Come,
I know thou wilt affect me; can there be
A nearer or more requisite love indeed
Then the sweet mixture of a Brother and Sister?
Well said, there was a blushing smile, that gave me
Thy full consent; O thou wilt ravish me.
Pray, let me think a little.
Prithe do.
He has taught me to dissemble; Heaven that knows
My thoughts are chaste and pure, will pardon me
I hope, if to preserve my life and him
From greater sin, I use a little of
The art too too much practiced among women,
Of smooth hypocrisy. I know his heart is bloody;
And he may be too sudden, if I win not
Time on him, by some subtiler shift to wave
His foul attempts, until I get free
Out of this gripe to use my liberty.
What says my Sister now?
My Lord and brother.
I marry, this begins well.
That I love
Your noble person, nay am taken with it,
With more then sisterly affection, is
A truth no way to be dissembled; you
Already like a well read scholar find it,
In Cupids love-letters my friend, my maiden blushes.
This has some sound in it.
But when I consider,
What scandal, or what too near Affinity
In noble blood, and the Nobility of our house,
(Unfit to fall within the centre of the Law,
Or the constructions of men's ruder manners)
May cast upon us.
Stay my lovely Mildred;
What? or whose eye, or thought, shall glance at us?
Whilst we in safest privacy enjoy
The bliss of mutual pleasure.
It is yet
Too intricate a doubt for me to find
A resolution in. But my sweet Lord,
(Oh that I could not call you Brother) then
I would be nearer to you then a Sister.
So eager and so equal is my love
With yours; if you please but to give me time,
But one weeks liberty, to frame my self
Obedient to your will in all, I now
Will give you a faithful pledge to render
The satisfaction you demand.
A week; what pledge?
A loving kiss.
You could not name a better,
Short of the further happiness I covet.
Give me't.
But you shall swear by it that you will not
A bridge my liberty, nor urge your suit
Further these seven days.
By this kiss I swear.
My patience never bought a kiss so dear.
But keep your vow.
Well, well, I'll do my best.
He's not yet perfect, you must strive my love,
To curb your hot desires, as I do mine.
I could my self dwell ever on your lips,
Never outgo the circle of your arms.
Could I but hope to be your wife. But O,
What I have promised you, I must allow
At the time limited; till then urge it not.
For take my vow with yours, if you dare break it,
I dare to kill my self; and by that time,
If I not yield my self unto your will,
My life is yours either to save or kill.
Go, you are a noble wench, enjoy thy liberty.
I have enough, listening is good sometimes.
Good Heaven! who would have thought it? stay,
Let me not be too hasty.
Yet I fear,
I shall hardly hold out a week;
It is a great while believe it in such a case
As this, for one to forbear his own Sister,
That has so good a mind to it. And per∣haps
This may be cunning in her to delude me.
Were not I better take her by surprise,
In a soft sleep to night? sure I shall keep her
From killing of her self, till I be satisfied.
And then if she be weary of her life,
I may be kind enough to help her out on it;
Because she says she loves me. Out you Beldam,
How in the name of Lucifer came thou hither?
O my good Lord, I do beseech your Honour,
Forbear your fury; I have such a business.
To eavesdrop have you not? I am not safe,
Unless I kill this Witch.
My Lord, my Lord,
You are the Lord that I do look to live by.
And if I die my Lord, you lose the knowledge
Of such a secret.
Pox upon your secret.
It is such a privity.
Hell take your privity.
You will repent in Hell my Lord, if you or I
Should leave the world before you know the thing
That I can open to you; which when I have unfolded,
Kill me if you please. I did but watch occasion
To find you private to reveal it to you.
Will you be brief then?
Thus it is my Lord,
My Lord, your Father's dead.
And what of that?
So is your elder Brother.
So they say forsooth.
But are you sure they are dead?
I fear this jade
Has overheard me.
For do ye see my Lord,
I would not in their life time have dis∣closed
This hidden matter for a whole worlds good.
And thus it is, your Father and your Brother
Being dead, Heaven rest their souls.
Whats that to me?
Nothing my Lord, but now comes that concerns you;
Your Father and your Brother being gone,
(Heaven rest their souls) there I begin.
You began there before, if that be the beginning,
Your for ever world without end
We shall never come at it.
Now that concerns you;
You think you have a Sister.
Do I but think so?
No truly my good Lord, you do but think so.
Is Mildred dead? has she de∣stroy'd herself?
Now since she left me here, to spite my love.
You hear me not say so, I saw her not
Since I left both of you together here.
Unfold your riddle Sphinx, I'll dig it else
Out of your rotten belly. What's your meaning?
Mildred is not your Sister.
How? not my Sister?
Not your own natural Sister.
Because she is unnatural; did thou but know
What a poor easy request she denied me
Thou would say she were unnatutal indeed.
I mean, she was not born of the same mother,
Nor got by the same father that you were.
Speak that again; make but that good, I'll Saint thee.
My Lord, I can and will maintain it, I,
Not only for some wrong she did me lately,
Nor for the good my Lord that you may do me,
Though all the estates your own when she's discarded;
But to let truth appear, which has been long
A burden, and an heavy burden, though I say it;
And so will any woman say, it is to keep council
So many years together as I have done,
I had much a doe to keep it in, I wis,
In my good old Lords days. Lord how he loved her!
But few men know their children, that's the truth on it;
And let that go.
I, quickly to the point.
The point is this, I loved my old Lord well;
Therefore was loath to grieve him; and I loved
My good old Lady better; therefore I kept
Her council to this hour: You now are all
That's left of'em; and whom should I love now
But your sweet self my Lord? I'll tell you all:
This Mildred, whom you so long called Sister,
Was not your Fathers, nor your Mothers child;
But in the absence of your Father, when
Sixteen years since he was sent by the King
Upon an embassy, your mother then with child,
By sad mischance brought forth a still born babe;
At the same time a Lady nobly born
Whose husband was in Exile, brought forth this,
This Lady Mildred.
Then she is nobly born?
Yes, and by women's slight, of which this is
Not first example, the Infants were ex∣changed;
Because your loving father might find joy
In a fair daughter at his home-return.
Can thou prove this?
If in three days I do not
Make it appear most plain to you, multi∣ply
Your wrath upon me.
Do so; and dost hear?
I'll never call old woman witch hereafter
What ever I think. We may be married now,
And Mildreds love may freely answer mine.
We now may safely mix, and to it again,
Strange strong events are labouring in my brain.
Come you with me.
What fury has possessed 'em? all our art,
And the Kings policy will be prevented,
By the brain-giddiness of these wilful Lords.
We have no way my Lord, but to give way
Unto theit violent rage, &amp; quit the Court.
And since we can make good our place no longer,
Post after our King Master, &amp; leave them
With their new King at home here, that's as mad
As they.
And madder too; I cannot wonder
More what he is, then at the fate that sent him.
My Lord, both in the King and States behalf,
In which you may excuse us.
Sh't, sh't, let▪him take it
How he or will or dare, we have agreed.
The body of the Council have decreed it
You must depart the Court.
Must?
Must and shall,
You and your trim confederate; you have had
The rule here over your Ruler, till you have made him
Wild, frantic, mad, and us too; God forgive me
For saying so, almost as mad as he;
I hope it is no treason.
No, cause you said almost;
But had you said you had been full as mad,
You had passed a Subjects boldness.
Take 'em hence;
Thrust 'em out of the Court.
Nay, without violence.
Well my Lord, when we see the King in's wits,
We will tell him of our usage, that he may thank you.
In the mean time go travel on adventures,
Whilst we do our endeavour to amend
What you have marred by screwing the Kings brain
Into the nick of Order once again. 
See, see, my Lord, how they have kept him dark,
Manacled and bound on's bed? was ever King
Used thus? for pities sake unbind him quickly.
What Fiends or Fairies are ye?
Let his passion
A little vent it self, ever you unbind him.
What? new tormentors? or into what way
Of further mischief do ye mean to throw me?
We come to bring your High∣ness comfort.
Highness?
Have you that mockery for me too? I told
The rest that slaved me with that attri∣bute,
From whence I came, who, what I was, and all
The story of my fathers wrongs, and mine
(Too many ever to have been, but heaven
Marked 'em out for us) and I told 'em too
What I had undertone by Watching, Fasting,
Prayers too (unfit to boast of) with the Industry
I practiced to have found my wounded Father.
For which (as though I durst have faith in merits)
They mocked me with the title of a King,
And bound me here as they thought to believe it.
It is a new way of punishment; and were due
To one that thought his duty merito∣rios.
But I will break these Gives, and with my teeth
Tear off these manacles.
O do not strive my Liege.
Thy Liege, Dog-leech? are you at that garb too?
I wish I had one finger loose to fillip out
Thy brains and skill together for the Ratcatchers.
He thinks my skull's made but of urinal metal.
Be patient Sir.
Sir, yet may be endured.
Have but a little patience, we will unloose you.
A grave persuasion to a man that's tied to it.
Humb, humb, humb.
Beshrew their herds that used him thus to vex him.
How do you like him Doctor?
Did you mark
His talk of wrongs, and of a wounded Father?
And how he will not hear of being a King?
I, all, all, I know all; such fan∣cies fall
Naturally into this disease, which now
Is almost a wild Frenzy, that will sell∣dome
Suffer the Patient think himself to be
The person that he is; nor oftentimes the Creature,
But some four-footed Beast, or feathered Fowl:
But could I fasten but a slumber on him,
Which must be the first entrance to my work.
Have you concluded yet your barbarous council?
If not, take my advice with ye: call the King,
The King with whose authority you scorn me;
Let him but hear (for you will never tell him)
From my own lips how willingly I'll give
My voice unto his marriage; and I'm sure
He'll set me free; at least by death.
Alas,
What King? what freedom would you have?
You are our King, and shall command your freedom,
And all our lives, would you but sleep a while.
Sleep? make no doubt of that; look, I can sleep,
With as much ease as one bound in a Cart,
Driving to execution. But do you hear?
My vow was not to sleep nor eat until
I had performed a work, which I shall never,
Never accomplish, now my vow is bro∣ken.
For they by witchcraft charmed me into sleep,
And tempted me with meat atunawares,
Before my sleep-drown'd senses were collected;
And put me on these unknown gar∣mints here,
With an hail Master; so betrayed me into
This irksome folly, or this foolish thral∣dome.
It was a rash vow, and so well broke; you now
Shall be released: unbind him at my peril.
These rigorous courses have done hurt upon him;
We have provided otherwise to please you;
For we have called Theodrick home again
Your Favourite, whose absence was a grief to you;
Nay more, because it is thought your lan∣gushing love
Bred your distemper, we have taken care
For hastening of your marriage; your fair Queen
Is sent for, and at hand to ease your sor∣row.
My Favourite, and my Queen! leave these abuses;
My hands and feet are now at liberty
So is our duty, and if your Ma∣jesty
Will tread cur due allegiance into dust,
We are prepared to suffer.
Would to heaven,
I could unfold this mystery.
See my Lord,
Theodrick is come.
Most gracious Sir,
That I have suffered under your displea∣sure,
In being barred your presence, which no less
Then the all cheering Sun gave life to me,
Was not so much my grief, as not to know
What my transgression was; and let me now
Implore your mercy so far as to name it;
Which if I cannot clear me of, I'll lose my life, and willingly.
If I could think this serious, it were enough
Almost to turn my sorrows into laugh∣la.
O turn not from me royal Sir, to augment
Your Highness displeasure; but in case you will not
Be pleased to name my trespass, give me leave
To speak what I suppose has troubled you,
And cause me causelessly to be suspen∣ded.
I feel a secret instigation in me,
I hope by some good Angel that inclines me,
At last to yield a little to these men.
What would thou say?
My Lords, and all forbear
The presence; never fear, all shall be well.
Heaven grant it.
Was not this my policy,
To send for him? more, was it not my wit
To fashion letters as wed's own hand
To fetch the Queen? you'll see more at her coming.
May it please you now but to review these Pictures.
Good memory help me; this is of the Queen,
The cruel Queen that banished my good Father;
And this the lively Image of my Sister.
Now may it please your grace to recollect,
How when I told you this was my fair Mistress,
Your passion first seized on you; and pardon Royal Sir,
If I have since conjectured my transgress∣zion
Was merely this, that I loved one so fair,
I dare not yet say fairer then your choice.
But freely thus, to expiate my trespass,
As I resign the Picture, I give up
All interest in her person, never more
Beyond your free consent to see that Beauty.
I have found all the error, and am taught
By hidden inspiration to make use on it. 
Give me fresh raiment, I'll take all upon me
(Their Crown if they will give it) yet me thinks
This is so like a dream—where else can be
King Osriick all this while, that he comes not
To throw me out of this usurped right?
Strange and new thoughts possess me. 
Now I call
To mind the vision that I had of being
Called to the Throne of the west Saxons Kings.
It must be by this Queen, whom how to love
I cannot find. My Genius promps me, yes
I hear it now, as by an Angel spoke.
And that my vow was rashly made, well broke;
I am confirmed, &amp; come she I am for her. 
Well said Theodrick; (Theodrick is his name?)
How do I look Theodrick?
I can find
But little change, which I allow to sick∣ness.
Well said, thou never flatter.
News, name King, news, news;
News that will make thee well, be thou never so sick.
News that be thou never so well, will make thee sick.
News that will make thee mad, be thou never so tame.
News that be thou never so mad, will make thee tame.
What's thy news?
A wife, a wife, a wife can do all this.
The Queen is come, and all my Cousin Lords
Are gone to fetch her in in pomp: Oh ho,
Knight me, oh Knight me quickly for my news.
Away you fool.
Away you Favourite.
Hinder me not unless I prophecy,
Kings, Fools and Favourites never shall agree.
And many years after we are in our graves,
Fools shall be Knights, and Favourites shall be—known
From black Sheep, I prophecy.
Oh ho, she comes, she comes; now name King,
Bear up stiff before and meet her. Here's a day,
And a night towards indeed. Oh ho, the house
Begins to reel already, and all our brains turn
Round; oh ho.
Oh what a night will here be? what a night will here be?
What a beast am I? that I have not at least half (Lasses with child now,
A score of my wholesome Country
That forty weeks hence the Queen might have her
Choice of Nurses; there had been a thriving way to raise
My fortunes indeed. Oh what a night will here be!
HElp, help, oh help.
Your cries will be in vain.
It is not in the power of any flesh but yours,
To allay, or to prevent my heat of blood.
O you diviner powers that or∣deigned chastity
To be a virtue, lend your strength to guard it.
Thy cries shall be as fruitless as thy life
If thou offend me with 'em; hear but this
Impertinently peevish maid, and tremble
But to conceive a disobedient thought
Against my will. Can thou without my favour,
Be better then a beggar?
Yet a beggar
Is better then a Whore.
How can thou judge
That know not what is either? let a wench
That knows what's what, or has been both, maintain it;
But this is from the purpose; I am so far
From casting of thee off to be a beggar,
As I intend to make thee my rich equal,
And not a Whore, but wife; you know your Nurse
Has undertaken to find it lawful for us
To marry; and can thou with modesty
Deny me present pleasure, that within these three days
Shall confer honour on thee for thy life?
Would you first spoil my honour to repair it?
It is mine when I contract for it.
Not before
Our Covenant is passed; that is, the Priest
Has joined our hearts and hands.
By this account,
A man backs not his Horse before he's paid for it;
Nor puts his nose into a house before
He buys the Lease on it; leave your precise folly,
Madam formality; force me not to force thee,
Yield with that very breath thou now draw in,
Or it returns thy last.
My Lord, my Lord.
This Witch or Devil haunts me.
O my Lord,
I told you late a wonder; I bring now
A miracle, a miracle.
What with a mischief?
Your Brother is survived from death again;
My Lord Anthynus is come home and safe▪
The Heavens be praised.
O grant that it be true.
Out Hag.
Nay, run me in as far as you can if I lie;
Up to the Hilts if I lie.
What can thou mean by this?
Nay, what he means I knew not, for he denies his name,
Says he is not Anthynus, but a Northum∣brian Gentleman;
And desires conference with my Lady Mildred
From the fine Lord was here (what call you him?)
The Kings great Favourite; But if I am I,
If you are you, if any thing be any thing,
It is Anthynus.
Go you to your Chamber,
And be not seen I charge you. Let him enter,
But first send in my servants.
I did mistrust he lived; O those false Villains,
That faced me down they killed him, may they be
A year a famishing. Have you tricks An∣thynus?
How can he think, though he disguised his name
Or Country, that we should not know his person?
What should his aim or drift be? stay, perhaps
He does suspect I was in the action
Against my fathers life and his, &amp; thinks him dead,
So steals upon me thus as his own ghost,
To terrify my conscience, shallow, shall∣low;
But I'll so fit him; It is most evidently he.
My Lord, how ever
Some of your servants are pleased to make themselves
Merry with a pretended knowledge of me,
I do presume your honour cannot know me.
From one so false never came clearer truth.
What means your hono•r?
It is true, my honour
Cannot, nay, dares not know thee for a Brother,
Although mine eyes through tears of grief and anger,
Discern the monster I have often called so.
This is most strange.
Look that he come not near me;
Perfidious Parricide, hast thou killed my Father?
Destroyed the life that gave thee life? and now
Seek by surprise to take mine too?
Pray hear me.
Upon him all at once, hew him in pieces;
I'll bear you out in it; he has killed your Lord.
Forbear your outrage.
Give us leave to speak.
Villains, are they to be obeyed or I?
My Lord, your judgement is too rash upon them.
Fellows forbear, and forbear you my Lord,
You shall not so heap blood upon your head;
I loved my Lord your father, and do prize
His blood and memory, as becomes a Servant
Of the best rank: And if at most and worst
My Lord Anthynus here stand guilty of
His fathers death, you must not be his Judge,
Nor we his Executioners.
Are you
Become my master, you old Ruffian?
No,
Your Servant Sir, but subject to the Law;
The Law that must determine this mans cause,
Not you, nor we, what ever he deserves.
And till he shall be censured by that law
We will find a Prison for him.
I, to Prison with him.
Will you but hear yet how you are mistaken?
Pray heaven we be, as you may clear your self;
That's all the harm we wish you; this must be
Your course my Lord; would you heap blood upon you?
Let me but speak a word.
As we go twenty.
Away with 'em. 
I could have liked the other shorter way
Much better; but my knaves will have it thus,
Yet not to wrong 'em, simple honesty
May be in such sometimes as well as me.
Prithee tread softly yet a little further,
And we are safe.
Hark, heard ye nothing? whist.
I never knew Thieves so time∣rous as you are.
Can we expect a booty without bold∣ness?
Besides, have we not shapes if we were spied,
Able to fright better Believers then
My politic Lord of the house here.
Hark prithee.
Ell's sure I warrant thee.
I pray it prove so.
Pray on I prithee; prayers be∣come this coat,
Like swearing in a Surplice; tush, they are all,
All the whole house asleep, and I heard nothing
As we passed through it, but usual sleepy sounds,
Puffing and blowing, snorting farting and such like.
Yes, I cry mercy, as we passed by the Butlers chamber,
I heard his bed crackle shrewdly, and I doubt,
The Dary-maid and he were jumbling of
A Posit together. Come, now we are safely arrived at the
Fountain of our hopes, the well of com∣fort. Smith, lay
Down your Picklocks, they have done well their office in our passage hither. Mason,
Advance your Pickax, whilst the Car∣penter squares out
Our new work; now for the honour of Artificers; here, here,
Here is the Trap-door, the mouth of the rich mine, which
We will make bold to open. And let men of our Occupations
Learn the way that many grow rich by, and
No body knows how they come by their wealth. That
Is, when they make such concavities as these, for
Rich men to hide their treasure in, that they
Make also a privy way for themselves to come and
Take a share on it.
This covetous Lord by this time has laid in
An unknown deal of wealth, I warrant you.
But we will not take away too much at once.
No, we will but piddle; we will not take above
A thousand pounds to night.  So, I'll go down;
And when I shake the rope, then crane me up again; give me one of
The Lanterns: So, so, so, let me down handsomely;
I'll warrant you money, the Devil and all before day yet.
Nay, if we get off clear but with a thousand pound
Amongst us, it will serve for drinking
Money till we come for more.
This money will come luckily for a better purpose.
I have three bastards at nurse and a fourth in the Paniers.
The rope stirs; pull lustily, this pull for a
Thousand pound.
I fear it is light gold, methinks he does not weigh
So heavy as he went down. Comrade, what hast thou
Brought? what ail'st thou? can not speak? I hope thou
Were not frighted.
O help! where am I? drawn from one hell into another? ha!
Come, leave your fooling, what money have you?
Had I the price of Kingdoms I'd give all
But for one bit of meat; but I have none.
Slid, he would cousin us; how do you look when you lie?
Oh me!
What ail thou?
This is not he; it is a ghastly spirit.
What? are you men?
Yes, but we have played the Devils, till we have
Got a spirit betwixt us.
If you be men, help me to food, a little food.
What art thou that can look thus Piepeckt, Crowtrod, or Sparrow-blasted? ha!
O, I am pined with hunger.
Here, stay thy stomach; there's a crust I brought
To stop the open mouth of the Mastiff, if he had flown at us.
O pull, pull away.
There he is now I am sure.
I shall be devoured else.
Whats the matter Fellow?
Take his teeth out of me, I can∣not tell you else.
O Cannibal! wilt thou eat a Carpenter?
O meat, meat, if you be men.
No, we are Devils; but here's another crust for thee
What ever thou art; we have played the Thieves to
Very good purpose.
He has gnawed a piece of my Flank out wed's teeth;
And missed very narrowly certain mem∣bers of more moment,
They'd have gone down glib with him; now in the
Devils name, what are ye?
Until their crusts be done they cannot tell us.
Come, I do suspect the subtlety of this cruel politic
Lord; would we were well out on's house. No noise my
Masters, and we will bring you to meat enough; and then
We will hear your story, and tell our own; a word more
Here, may cost all our lives.
Take up your tools and lead the way.
Come, softly, softly then.
I will away this night.
Peace, hark.
But Madam.
Had you the only Tongue of all persuasion,
So much I prize my life, &amp; honour more,
I would not miss this opportunity
For all that you could say.
Are not these Sprites?
No evil ones I'll warraut, they are so white;
Hark a little more.
To night he's troubled about An∣thynus coming,
So that he will not think of lust or wan∣tonnes.
That trouble keeps him waking; and I fear
Will rather spur him forwards then withhold him.
They talk methinks; but I cannot hear what
For shaking.
Take heed thou dost not jingle thy Picklocks,; slid,
They'll ring up the house like a larum bell.
Well, since you are so resolute, would we were out of the
House once, if we be taken, it is not the price of
A million of Maiden-heads, as the market goes, can save
Our lives.
Good, I have found what sprites they be. They
Must needs be the wenches that I suspe∣cted were in
The Butlers chamber, and made the stiff standing bedstead that
I set up but last week, crack like a wicker chair.
Ah Rogues! I heard ye.
Oh me! we are undone and taken.
I'm glad it is no worse.
Peace, if you have a mind to scope out of the house alive.
Come Nurse, my fear is over, if they be
Men, and bring us out of the house,
They cannot be so dangerous as he I escaped.
Did he so put thee to it, my little Bustlepate? what a stout blade's this Butler?
These are good Fellows Nurse.
Yes faith, and fear you nothing for all our devilish
Outsides; if we scope out of the house, you scope, and
If we fail, our necks are sure to hang by it; and so
On there before once more in the name of darkness.
If my attempt now fail, may my repulse
Strike lust for ever out of countenance. 
It is decreed she sleeps with me or death
S'death, it is he.
Let us fall to and beat him.
As you can hope for meat again, or life,
Look big, and use no words; and so glide by.
The night, the place, her fate, and my desire,
Do all conspire unto my wished advan∣tage.
And so I come coy Damosel. 
Ha? how? why? where? who? or what can you or I be?
They are all gone, and I am tottering left
Upon an Earthquake; gentle, holla, holla,
Set not too hard old Ops, thou'lt shake thy rider,
Through thy chinky wrinkles into Limb∣by.
I shall sink piecemeal if thou trot so hard.
So, so, so, Holla, holla, gentle earth.
Open not here, not near that part of thee
That has but now disgorged those fa∣meshed ghosts,
That with the Furies would have beck∣ned me
Along to hell with'em; so, let me down,
I must not follow yet, but sleep and think upon it.
I will come time enough you need not fear.
But first creep back to bed, as nothing were.
You have told me wonders, which have pierced my soul
With horror and amazement; yet I must confess,
In all that I am like to suffer, heaven is just,
Whilst wrath my wilfulness has pulled upon me;
Yet pardon, since thou give me that affection
That wandered with me in this oblique course,
This unquoth way, with which I have not strayed
Further then love might lead an humane frailty.
You do consider well, my Lord, and we
Beseech you strive to counter-check these crosses
Still with your Kingly reason.
Yes, and fall upon our present business; there you find me
Out of a spacious Kingdom of mine own,
Shut in a narrow Prison; whilst the bro∣there
Of her, whose love I came to seek, has married
The Queen I might have had; before I have seen
His Sister; there was a quick expedition.
My Lord, for that before you left the Court
In your supposed distraction; the ore∣busy Lords
Eaufride and Theodwald, out of strong conceit
The sight of her would cure you, feigned your letters
Which fetched the Queen; then banished us the Court,
Before we could take notice; we had been
Strong Traitors else to let that match go forwards.
Nor heard we of it until now the Post
That brings the news of the Kings and Queens approach
Arrived here in the City.
All think him then their King still?
Yes, yes, and though he told us who he was;
The overwise Lords imputed that to his madness.
It seems he was not so mad, but he could take
The Queen into my bed.
Where she liked him so well
That she now brings him home unto her own.
Still thinking him your person.
Whilst I lie here for his,
Accused of Parricide; but I will not
Reveal my self till trial. 
Now all my sufferings are turned into delightful recreations.
Fairest of Virgins welcome; marvel not
That at first sight I knew you, when my heart
Wears the Impression of your Portray∣ture;
And all my intellectual faculties
Bow to no other object but your beauty.
O Sir, lay by this high dissimu∣lotion;
For though I find you now are not my brother.
Lo ye, she knows I am not An∣thynus.
Her virtue like the Sun will clear the mist
Of error we were lost in.
Not Anthynus?
Yes, the bright Sun discovers not a truth
More evident then that you are Anthynus
Nor ever shined on man I loved so well,
Or hoped to marry, since you are not my brother.
I understand not this.
Indeed I came
To tell you so, and could you clear your hand
Of the foul stain of blood you are ac∣cussed of,
Were I sole monarchs of all this Island,
I'd kneel to beg a brides place in your bed.
If I can clear my self?
Nay, mark me further;
If you clear not your self, I'll not outlive you,
To call to mind the man that I so loved
Butchered his Father; though he w•• not mine,
I loved him as a father; oh good heaven!
How good? how reverend a man was he?
Weep not, but hear me; or hear me though you weep;
I am not Anthynus.
I may say as well,
I do not love you.
I never had an hand
In blood of any man.
Prove that, I am yours.
Fetch me a Priest.
I saw one in the next room
Drinking and singing catches with some Prisoners.
Withhold your hands, Anthynus now again,
Fair Lady, is your brother.
Why did you mock me then?
To save you from your brother Offa's lust,
I feigned that you were not his Sister; that
In hope to marry you, he might forbear
His devilish purpose.
Now I am lost for ever,
In being the Daughter of a murdered Father,
And made incapable of you in marriage.
Yet hear me, and be comforted.
O me!
Hark my Lord Anthynus.
I do not know that name.
Go to, go to; nor you do not re∣member
How I behaved my self upon the eating of Spurging
Comfects, that your Brother Off gave me,
And laid the fault on you; pray Jove, I say, this murder
Be no more his fault then yours.
Hark, the wide world abroad is filled with joy,
And must we only be shut from it? now.
My Lord Anthynus.
Still must I be Anthynus?
You are called unto your Trial.
Who are my Judges?
Those that are bribe-free I dare warrant 'em.
It may perhaps go somewhat the harder with you;
For nothing but white innocence can quit you,
Pray heaven you hav't about you; even the King
And Queen, the Queen and King I should have said,
For she's our Sovereign, it is her Law must do it.
What King do you mean then?
King Osriick; you know nothing.
Yes, I know him as well as he knows himself.
Take heed Sir what you say.
I fear him not,
But am as good as he; now carry me for something.
O pray take heed.
How?
Peace, he did not say so.
Slid, he's as mad as his brother Off.
Is Off mad?
O quite besides himself, and talks the strangliest
Of his fathers murder, your running away
And the desire he has to hang his bro∣there here;
And then he is haunted with sprites too, they say;
You will know all anon; will you go my Lord?
Yes, will you be so kind as to see my Trial?
Indeed I must not leave you.
It is a kind part indeed, and may become
A Sister; like the wife that would not leave
Her husband till she saw him totter.
Set the best foot forward, and the best face
You can, my Lord, upon the business. 
Hoboys.
Long live King Osriick and Queen Birth.
I join with ye in your wishes for the Queen;
And wish well to King Osriick as a stranger.
How's this?
But will no longer personate him;
For now be it known to you that I am no Osriick;
But he that warns you call me so no more.
What means my love?
Nay, Madam, it is most serious.
Elkw. Bless us!
He's madder now then ever he was.
I am at my wits end too; if marriage
Will not tame him, I know not what to say to it.
I have told you truth, and your fair grace can witness
How violently I was thrown upon the fortune,
I thank those provident Lords, against my vow.
I take it as the providence of Heaven;
And from the Son of that most injured Father,
Whom now in my joys strength I could shed tears for.
I yield you are my head, and I your handmaid.
So, so, a few nights trial has got her liking
For ever fast enough; what notable old Cockscombs
Have we been made? nay, made our selves indeed.
Now further know, my Lords, I am Anthynus,
The Son of that old honest Lord, against whom
Your sulphurous malice kindled the Queens anger.
Who'l have an head now for an half penny?
And for tother two Tokens mine into the Bargain.
Make way there for the Prisoner.
See King Osriick.
I, this is our King indeed.
O let me wash your feet Sir with my tears.
Thy trespass is thine honour my Theodrick▪
And I must thank your care my Lords, as it deserves,
Your over-reaching care to give my Dignity
As much as in you lay unto another.
And for your Letters counterfeit in my name,
By which the Queen is mocked into a marriage.
That was your policy, your wit, my Lord.
A shame on it. would I were hanged, that I
Might hear no more on it.
Fair Sir, the Queen is pleased, and hopes you are
In her that's so much fairer in your thoughts.
My Sister Mildred.
Yes, my noble Brother,
She stands in fortune equal with your self,
In being mine.
But not great Sir, until
You are acquitted of my fathers murder.
I am clear of that, as I am not An∣thynus.
Anthynus is accused, not Osriick Sir,
Your father is required at your hands.
Ha!
But his accuser reads another lesson
Now Madam.
Whither do you hurry me?
If I must answer't, give me yet some time,
To make provision of befitting Presents,
To supply the hard hands of my stern Judges,
Into a tender feeling of my cause:
I know what Oecus loves, what Mines likes,
And what will make grave Radamanthus run.
He is distracted.
Yes, and speaks heinous things
Against himself, both of my Lords mur∣der,
And an intended rare against his Sister.
Incestuous monster!
Hark, how the Devil lies;
I have no Sister.
How he's possessed
Of that strnge error; I must satisfy you?
That was merely feigned by me to save her honour
From his outrageous lust.
But here comes that
Clears all at once.
Welcome my honoured Lords.
A boon, a boon, my gracious Liege.
Hold your peace fool.
My Son Anthynus living?
You are my Father in your Daughters right.
My blessing on my Girl.
But see Anthynus at a greater height.
My Father.
And my Father noble Sir.
Your pardon, and for ever welcome.
If this were real now, and not a Dream!
Come, leave your fooling, hear a wise man speak:
Great King according unto thy behest
With Knights adventurers I went in quest,
Through the Woods and Forests wild
To scour the Dens of Outlaws wild;
Whence these old men, this Knave I bring
Together with this Starveling;
Whom I present not dead, but quick
Unto thy grace King Osriick.
Look this way fool,
This is King Osriick man.
Whose fool am I then?
Mine.
And mine.
Mine.
And mine.
Whoop, hold a little, best let me be every bodies fool
Round about the house.
But amongst you all, let me not lose re∣ward;
I must not fool for nought; the times are hard.
Still the fool's covetous.
I ow thee a just reward, for I proclaimed
To him that brought this man alive or dead
A thousand crowns; but since thou art so fortunate
To bring him home alive and well re∣covered
Out of such danger—
I shall have nothing shall I?
I'll double thy reward, give thee two thousand crows.
It is enough in conscience; who bids more?
For till you are out-bidden, I'll be your fool.
But can you tell whose Favourite you are then?
Where I was first, I'll ever wish to be.
And I'll be thine Theodrick; for thou in this
Hast above favour shown me unto bliss.
I have performed your Majesties command,
Though not in sending, yet in bringing home
My banished friend, Lord Alberto, the preserver
Of my now happy life.
It shall be to his honour; well∣come Alberto.
Oh what an heavenly smell of meat is here!
All the unhappiness I now can see
Is but an argument of tears for thee,
In whom I'm justly punished.
Take him hence
From my grieved fathers sight.
And pray let care
Be had for his recovery; his senses may
Bring a new soul into him, for which I pray.
What am I freed?
Yes, yes, my Lord, ell's well.
I knew my bribes would do it.
I'll off with him, for it is unknown to you
What good a fool may on a mad man do.
This sword was evidence enough against him;
But here's one of the Outlaws that con∣fess'd it;
For whom, since he is penitent, I beg pardon.
The other two his fellows are both extant:
For whom together with three thievish workmen
That were strong instruments in my de∣livery,
Let me beg mercy.
I have heard of them that robbed my brothers Jewel-house.
It is a day of grace,
And we are taught by heavens abundant mercy
Shown upon us beyond our expectation,
To imitate that goodness.
I forgive
All on my part.
I pardon all on mine.
And now right royal Sir, let me entreat
For former love, to make our last com∣pleat,
You will be pleased a month with us to stay
In triumphs to commemorate this day.
Next to my sum of happiness my Bride,
I should have sought that honour, royal Sister.
Thus through tempestuous sighs and showers of tears
Joy at the last more cheerfully appears.

THe City reekes with the warm blood of murdered Christians whose avarice hath made them &amp; their wealth our prey. Sword! thou hast shed much blood, and of the first and noblest: not added by this arm; for thou to it lentst vigour: a virtue thou retainst, since Melcoshus my great and royal Master buckled thee on my thigh, for which so unaccustomed favour and many other, when I forget still to adore him equal to our Prophet, may my death quickly follow; now if any thing
like dan∣gear's left, that dare appear, Isle meet it.
Villain hold off thy hands, shoe's my prize; what though thou first seizedst on her, is she a prey for so base a slave?
How, slave! Isle prove my self thy better.
Unhappy maid, must I become the cause of bloodshed, tho even of Tartars our Enemies, heavens forbid; hear me, you wrathful men, by your great Pro∣phets name, I charge you: we Christians pacify our rage for our dear Masters; sake make a division of me and of my clothes, he to whose lot I fall, Isle be his faith∣full slave.
I am content; so I who am a Janisarie may have the better share of her person.
No, Isle have that, take thou her clothes and Jewels.
Then Isle have all.
Alas, why strive you for this worthless per∣son, so far as lies in my ability isle serve you both.
A good kind wench.
I am agreed; so I may first lie with her, to share her clothes and jewels.
How, lie with me?
We'll cast lots.
Agreed.
Divinity assist me, what mean these men? went I about to save their lives for this?
I am first.
You lie, shoe's mine.
Oh I fear! Would that sword that pierced my Noble Fathers heart, had cut me from the world, ever this unhappy hour of my dishonour.
Leave her or thy life.
Thus Soldiers, though cold hunger, and all impediments of war seem to block up our way, we have made passage by our unwearied valour: the gods were forced to give us victory, and such a victory as makes your King an Emperor, and you in honour and
riches equal to Kings, I mean our Chams; each pri∣vate soldiers wealth equals some Christian Lords.
Our riches, lives, and honour we hold from our magnificent Emperor great Melco••us, and as his slaves, thus low prostrate, we kiss his happy feet.
You see, dogs, it is not with us, as with your ruined Moister; who when he pleaded with his best aloe∣quince, as I have heard, to make his greedy Subjects open their Confers for their own safety, could not prevail with them: for they both base and foolish, rather chose to perish with their Idols, than to relieve the general noses∣city, and so have hazarded saving both life and honour, which makes me not restrain the Soldiers from any insolence, though I know a city taken by assault to be the only stage, where rape, murder, and sacrilege is acted to the life.
Melcoshus is godlike-wise in all; those who forget their Emperor under whom they live, deserve no pity from a conquering Enemy; our prophet hath appointed you his scourge; mercy unto his Enemies were cruelty to him.
Holy, doe not incite to blood, he is nearest faultiness that way of any: should he grow thirsty by custom, we have not Christians enough always ready to quench that thirst; or, glutted with these, our own blood may be found perchance more sweet, if we grow rich or popular.
Captain, it is true; the fox would rather strive to abate than increase the Lyons fierceness, since forced to obey and serve him.
Honest Odmer, thou careful servant of thy Masters honour and safety, their taxes shall be lessened, though their revolt cannot fright us: let all the Greek Prisoners of note be at our banquet that
we may glory in our triumph over them; some of their deaths we'll honour with our presence.
These are base traitorus, betrayers of their country, selfe-murtherers by their own avarice, away with them, and let the Soldier exercise his rage upon them.
We are justly punished.
Dread Lord, behold a present which the mea∣nest of your slaves intends to make you.
First a boy or a woman, unveil and show me?
Sir, a while your pardon, until I let you know that ignorantly I part not with this jewel, for I so well do understand the value, that were the citty-spoiles laid in one balance, the Empire too, and but this in the other, nay an assurance of a happy reign added to that, and on the other side but to enjoy this creature (to whom no attribute of excellence can be given high e∣nough) one year, here were my choice.
Osmond, tho I have loved thee of a child, yet doe not tempt that frown that's death: think not that state that I am now possessed of, admits any comparison of happiness, yet not content with this thou dost con∣temne my fortune; show me that argument of thy pre∣sumption, though excellent, but if not worthy our longing expectation, perhaps the cause of thy destructi∣on: Majesty delights not to be plaid with.
Pardon, dread sir, that man who shall affirm he hath an humbler soul towards great Melcoshus then Osmond, I dare him to the trial with this sword or faithfuller, which makes me sir assure you, you are in danger of your liberty, see not her face, for it is a woman so far Isle warn you, a weeping one, until you doe withal consider shoe's your slaves slave, I mean my prisoner: were she less worthy; she had been my Mistress, but being thus excellent who can deserve to look on her but you, let her be covered still, for if I draw this veil, you then must yield, the thought of all your glo∣ries
laid asside, and in her heavenly eyes read your aptivity.
Osmond, I see thou doatest thy self, and think we must doe so: delay no longer.
Prepare then for a bondage which will bring delight above all freedom.
More, more, by all my glories, than was delive∣red! Osmond so well I like, cover her
face lest I doe surfeit with beholding, nor must the vulgar equal me in such a happiness, my envy makes me find a torture for my self. Off with that vail, the meanest of creatures may behold the Sun: and as his beams in showry April breaks through the clouds, so does the lightening of her glorious eyes break through their watery circle, and grow more powerful by that opposition; so powerful, that a con∣quering Prince descends his throne and begs that hee may hear you, whom fortune hath made his slave, yet to command both him and fortune; for sure your tongue cannot be less powerful then your eyes.
Ah me unhappy Despina.
Divinest creature! rise and know thy happiness, thou shalt command Melcoshus, King of the Tartars, who not content with that, intends to make all Asia the subject of his victories.
Sir, fear and amazement have not yet forsook her, let her be kept by your Eunuchs, till time and they make her more capable of your desires.
Thou counsellest well, see it performed: but let entertainment be such as may most delight, and so∣nest free her from her grief, I shall but languish till I may enjoy her.
Lady, you may boldly promise to your self all joy the earth affords.
The Gods reward your piety in saving of my life and honour; but joy be ever far from me.
Tell me thou noble youth, how did thou find this glorious creature, and what her name is?
She calls her self Despin. I found her so near being unworthy of me to give, or you to accept, that being saved it does increase her value; Two Soldiers being fired with lust, strove which should first enjoy her, but seeing her a creature of such excellence, I thought my sovereign only worthy her embraces, and she a fit present for me to offer, which made me to oppose them both; and my intention being nobler gave victory to my weak arm, aided by this your gift.
Had they not perished so, they should have found a death with studied torments; name some Province thy reward.
Other reward then your acceptance would mark me for the server of your pleasure, an Eunuchs office, and soil my act of duty: when I shall overthrow an enemy in field, or in some doubtful battle guard your sacred person then Sir, advance me to some honour if you please, for so I shall become the powerfuller to serve you; but for Despina think not of any recom∣pence to me, for, by the Gods, the Empire were too lit∣tle, did not my love and adoration of your sacred per∣son force me to think she was created for You, not for a subject.
This freedom in any other had bin death, in thee it but augments our love, be near Us.
From whence?
From your Son Orcanes who is arrived.
We have already appointed Callibeus for his host, to morrow he shall kiss Our hand.
Our Great Cham out of his love appoints his son Orcanes to be my guest; this were an honour I confess
to one that were not old and had a beauteous wife, such as my Ozaca is: but when the Prince shall view her, and she him, their very eyes shall speak to my dishonour, &amp; conclude me a Cuckold in their desires, though they should ne'er converse. Isle let her know his coming hither, and from her behaviour gather how she approves of it: Ozaca.
Your will.
Ozaca, the Prince Orcanes will strait bee here, he for whose sake it is thought nature will turn a bankrupt, she hath in every part of him so plaid the prodigal; his face such as might make you take him for the beau∣tifullest of women; yet through that beauty shines his fathers spirit Great Melcoshus [how her blood boyles!] a personage equal to that; but then so courteous, though a Prince &amp; eloquent with all, that every woman that but hears him speak, modestly thrown by, woes him to acts of love, in which he far outgoes belief [by all my hopes my feares are true, I see a lustfull languishing in her eyes] speak Ozaca, could you not be content (I being absent) to pass an hour in conference upon your couch with this young Prince, speak, could you not, ha?
Oh sir, your needless jealousies doe make me mi∣serable, but your self more.
I see thy heart, strumpet, and it writes a resolve∣tion to dishonour me, and so revenge that which thou call a needless jealousy in me, but, by our sacred Pro∣phet, if thou shalt see this Prince except by chance, Isle pull thy eyes out; if converse with him, thy tongue; or write, thy hand is forfeit;
I find I am a woman, I long extremely,
they say indeed hoe's wondrous handsome, and I have heard, seeing by chance my picture, he did not contemn my beauty.
It shall be so▪ go walk in the back garden I
charge you, till I send for you. I would not have him see her, nor she him, no not at a window: it may bee the Emperor will send him away ere long, but should he see Ozaca, I fear he would never leave my house: about this hour I expect him.
My Lord, you see this back way, you are free from the multitude of people, by whom I would not have you seen, till you appear to morrow like your self; I have sent to advertise your host Callibeus, that you are entered this way by the back-garden.
Tic well; they say this Cham is most extremely jealous of his wife, we shall not see her sure.
Shoe's wondrous handsome, he hath reason—
O that I might but see this Prince.
Whose's that, sure it is the Lady of the house.
My wish—it is certainly the Prince, Isle seem to go away.
Nay, fly not Lady:
If you're the Prince Orcanes which I believe, my duty is a warrant for my stay.
Lady, I am Orcanes who come to be your guest.
Sir, that assurance warrants me this further ex∣pression of my duty.
The Painter was a niggard of his skill, or gross∣lie ignorant that drew your picture, but Art must ever yield to Nature in a peace so excellent, and come far short, since it is but imitation. Rise beauteous Lady, my father would not suffer this.
Hell and confusion, what's this I see; peace, hoe's thy Sovereign's.
My husband.
Behold your humble servant, who yields up the
power both of himself and all that's his to your com∣mand.
Thanks, Callibeus.
I am sorry your Highness came the worst way into the house.
I did it to avoid the press of people, but trust me I found the passage very pleasant.
He means his kissing you, but, whore, thou hast a life to lose.
I never saw a Garden where I received greater content, the Roses and the Lilies are so finely mixed, that I could stand a year only to gaze on them.
By Mahomet, he means the beauty of my wife, which is my curse, Oh that she were a Negro.
What's that you say, a Negro.
I say my Lord, those flowers you like were planted by a Negro, a skilful Gardiner.
There are some other rarities, that I would praise, but that I want words to express them, they are so excellent, I wish I did possess some such.
Palpable, by all my fears! she conceives his mea∣ning too, and with the joy of it, I see her lustful heart leap in her bosom, but hush: will it please your high∣ness enter the house.
The superstitious More, Callibeus, does not be∣hold the rising sun with greater reverence, than I his setting in a bright evening like to this: who knows when we shall have the comfort of his glorious beams again? either some envious clouds may interpose them∣selves betwixt us; that bright planet, jealous that we are not enough thankful may withdraw his com∣fortable heat, without which I would not wish to live.
It is true indeed, the Sun gives life to all and the most witty and industrious men make great profit by him; those who prepare the soil, &amp; apt it for his beams receive greatest increase. Your highness, I fear, takes
occasion by the Evenings brightness to excuse your entering under so mean a roof; but since the great Cham appointed you my guest to honour me; go Ozaca, and let the diligence of Servants strive to supply every de∣fact, Isle send way the Sun he means.
Nay, Callibeus, I would not have you think that we misdoubted your lodging or entertainment, we'll enter when you please, there is a cloud ready to oppose it self betwixt the Sun and us.
The Prince in his discourse makes the Sun his bawd, his father I think did intend to torture me, no house but mine, you must be walking, whore, and en∣tertaine the Prince, but by our prophet thou shalt see no Sun.
What shall I say, I find I am a weak inconstant woman, sure I have lost my self, at least my grief; how pleasure and greatness gains upon our natures! I who wept at first each time their Eunuchs did me reverence, thinking they mocked me, now take a great delight in their observance: sent you for Osmond?
He waits without to know your pleasure, tho seldom hath been permitted by the great Cham that any should enter here, but he intends not to deny you any thing.
Bring him in and leave us.
Thus low as to my Princes Mistress! what was it you intended?
That which civility tied me to, the offer of my lips, and not my robe to kiss, you saved my honour,
a modest kiss to you could not impair it then.
Should I have kissed you &amp; been seen, death was my sure reward, nor had the purchase been too dear, if so I had not been a traitor to my self and virtue in my disloyalty unto my prince.
Think it no immodesty in me but ignorance of your strict customs: a salutation amongst Christians breeds no suspicion of ill.
Did ever any under the degree of a prince re∣ceave that honour?
They have if you call that an honour.
Then it cannot bee in me presumption to kiss your hand, yet I in this too far doe stretch my duty.
You Tartars bear a greater reverence to your earthly Lords then Christians, though you neglect him that should bee most honoured; but this is from the cause I sent for you: In all that you have done or said that did concern me▪ if I be not an ill observer of mans pas∣zion you have expressed a love not to be equalled, withal so great a spirit, that even in midst of all my griefs your merits found a passage to my heart, and tho I see I shall be able to command Melcoshus, and in him the world, yet if you dare apply your courage to the per∣formance of what I shall offer, and that effected become a Christian, I shall think my self happy, to be again wholly at your disposing, as I was when you did un∣kindly to your self and me, bestow me on another.
The Great Cham.
Despina, accuse thy own excellence that makes me interrupt thy privacies, rather then me; for I so wholly am become thine, that but to live a minute from thee is a torment; Say beauty abstract, shall this day be more favourable then many that are past, may he who can command all, yet hope to obtain his suite?
Could you command all, you would command that passion in your self, which makes you strive to ruin my honour.
Can it be ruin to your honour, to set you on the highest point of honour, to make you the possessor and disposer of all that your imagination can propose.
How can this be, when I cannot dispose of my poor unworthy self; give me my liberty.
You should have liberty, were you what you allege, unworthy; but it is your inestimable value, makes you a prisoner; what all Poets have feigned sweet or lovely in other women, is truth in you; these doe so tie you to my heart, that should I grant you li∣bertie, you would bear it a long, so all the empire should be governed by a heartless man: yet bribe me with one loving kiss and try. With how much scorn you turn away. I wrong that power that's given me from above, it was ordained I should command, not sue to any. Woman, beauteous woman, for more thou art not, what ere my dotage makes thee think thy self, con∣cider I who may command, entreat, but if refused the violence of my affection will compel me to use force.
I know you will not, you have too much praised Osmond for relieving me from rape, your self now to perform it; tho you now seem cruel, yet doe I hope you are just, for I have heard the world esteem you so.
The act will not be wholly mine; your not to be-resisted beauty first made a rape on me, enforcing me to love you; that love made me desire to enjoy the hap∣pines of your embraces, which you denying reason steps into right my wronged affection, and bids me force you, assuring me, that nature who does nought in vain, had never taken such pains in framing you so sweet and lovely, but that she meant some one or o∣there should enjoy that sweetness; and shall I so far yield to any others merit, or wrong my fortune which
bestowed you on me, as not to think I am the happy man appointed by wise nature to enjoy you; the Gods cannot in justice, after so great victories, appoint Mel∣coshus the office of a slave to be the keeper of such dain∣tie fruit for any other man, and hee him∣self
not taste it; no I have lost too many hours of pleasure, and will no longer suffer my self to bee tormented more then Tantalus, for he was forced to fast, but foolishly I starve having my hands at liberty, and in my power that which will satisfy beyond ex∣pression.
Oh Sir, consider ever you go about a deed of so much baseness, how will this rank amongst your noble acts to be a murderer, for doe not think I will out live my fame; for your own sake be wise then, if you love me, and do not rob your self of the content you may hereafter find, if you take noble ways and make my heart yours, then you may have a lasting pleasure
now the deed once done will bring repentance ever.
Who would not threaten rape to hear such pretty arguments against it. No Despina I have no fa∣cultie which is not more obedient to thy will then to my own, each threatening word I uttered was to my self a torment: dry those bright eyes that never shall have use of tears again, if not for their own cruelty a∣against Melchoshus; consider but my power, and thy own beauty which would inflame old age, and from thy justice my temperance must needs find some re∣ward.
If thus you woe me, I dare not say but time and women's weakness may make me love you, and for your this days temperance, this kiss be your reward.
I am transported, force can bring no such plea∣sure, kiss me again and by our Prophet, it shall seal, your honours freedom by an oath: my blood is fired, one
such kiss more would make me break that promise, for making which this kiss was given me.
Oh Sir.
But fear not, base passion shall not overthrow my wise and nobler resolutions, for since I love you as you are altogether excellent, I must enjoy Despina, not Despina's person only that's not half your self; I will not look on you, your eyes tho chaste may more increase my lust, which my minds pure love makes me now know to be a crime;
And hold our Prophet Mahomet unjust,
That made no laws against a Princes lust.
Hose: is Callibeas gone to court?
Hee is my Lord.
Is there no means think thou to see his wife?
It is impossible, his jealousy makes him set spies in every corner.
I see thou art not read in tricks of love, I have made use of all that art and nature hath bestowed upon me; youth and beauty what woman can resist? or were these wanting, yet a Princes name is a powerful advocate, I never yet laid siege to any female Fort, but either by assault or policy I found a way to conquest yet am I careful of their honours I enjoy, and so dissem∣ble my affection, that each Lady thinks I only am her servant; would my youth and beauty ever last, I would not wish to change the life I lead now, to en∣joy the Kingdom; although my father possess the greatest beauty of the world, yet is it not by stealth: security takes from the pleasure it is dull so to enjoy a beauty.
You'll find your present task full of difficulty if you delight in that, I do not think you'll ever see her more, Callibeus having taken notice of your love.
He sees, but will not say he sees, being my father's
slave, he dares not find the least fault: me thinks she should corrupt some Eunuch that attends her, or from her window drop a letter to express the love I am sure she bears me.
How are you sure she loves you?
Sure she loves me, as sure as if she had told me so, nay, surer; her eyes spoke plainly, which I will trust in women more then their tongue: but I am so experienced, I cannot well miss in either.
My Lady doth entreat your Highness, not to walk before her window for, if my Lord return, and see you, he'll be with her offended.
Return, and tell your Lady, I shall be ready to obey any command of hers, though to my own tor∣meant.
I shall.
Sir, it appears, she loves you
not by this, else she would take de∣light to look on you.
This letter lay not here, last turn we made; before I open it, to let thee see, I am the Master of my Art, though here's no superscription, I now tell you, this Letter is to me, and from Ozaca, full of affection too.
I shall another time believe you, if it be; retire your self here out of sight, and read it.
The Sun, though clouded by jealousy,
will shine again, not only to warm, but inflame, if it have power, those who seem to take com∣fort in his beams. If a reciprocal fire be kindled ex∣press it not in words— Here's wit, Hose, besides beauty. No fair Ozaca, not in word, but thus I do ex∣press my zeal. Hose, shoe's at the window, but dares not open it, for the Eunuch. I have a plot, which thou
must needs assist me in, and then shoe's mine, spite of her husbands jealousy.
How in silence he wooed her, and thanks was given for her Letter, as he thought. Was it not a good device in me, to be assured of his intentions; he shall break through forty doors, ere he plant here. Now to Ozaca, which I removed into another Chamber, whilst I supplied her place.
It was a happy fate, that brought the Empe∣roar so to cross my yielding; how could I have re∣sisted such a motion, coming from her that I adore. Let me consider, become a Christian, fly, and marry me: What a temptation's this? I gave this Beauty to Melcoshus, and shall I childishly recall my gift, nay, basely steal the jewel of his life, in whom the King∣domes weal consists? it were unexampled treason. Hence thou enticing charm, whose witchcraft almost does enforce me, to forsake my faith and virtue. Stay, be∣come a Christian, that's but to be as she is; and can the heavens be cruel to such, such, sweetness? shall not their providence preserve what they have framed so excellent, and me, for serving her? Say I forsake our Prophet, and trust upon that Power which she adores, then must I basely fly, forsake Melcoshus my dread Lord; and what can recompense that loss, or seem a plausible excuse for such a falsehood? Oh yes, to marry fair Despina, which she offers, is to be happy in so high a nature, that it would stop the mouth of chur∣lish censure; all would excuse a fault, that brought so great contentment to the guilty, as her embraces must be.
Osmond, thou hast undone me in thy rich gift.
How, Sir?
She does, and may, so justly glory in her own purity, that she disdains to mix in love with me; and yet, till her denial taught me to know I was defe∣ctive, my very thoughts, much more desires, did never meet a check: Whose wife or daughter that I should covet, would not the husband or glad father bring me? or, if their honour mastered their love or duty, what could resist my power?
Nought, but such another excellent creature as Despina, she can oppose your will against your power, and make, both wait her pleasure.
Oh Osmond! could she be equalled, my love and admiration would grow less; but as it is, I lan∣guish in desire, and must do ever: Should I use force, my royal word were broke to her, whose good open∣neon I strive more to gain, than all the world's; and by those Christian virtues that she proposes too, Faith and Temperance.
Sir, since you find so much affliction, would I had never presented her.
Osmond, thou art a traitor in thy wish, and nothing could preserve thee from my rage, but that thou did what now thou wished thou had not; should my beloved son Orcanes but say, he wished, that I had never seen Despina, by Mahomet, his life were forfeit: For, though I for the present find some torment in her denials, yet, by one smile, she may advance me to a happiness, above all earthly Mo∣narchs; what will her kisses do then, I mean, when she shall give them freely, uncompelled, transport me from my self, the mere imagination does almost per∣form it; and see, amazement leave me, that I may ex∣press
some part of the content I feel, in viewing this deer object, thus to approach me, smiling, nay, as if she meant to make me happy, by commanding some∣thing.
I am indeed a suitor, but cannot hope I shall prevail yet, piety commands me to make trial, since it is for some of my religion, and your enemies.
Though they had plotted against my life, I freely pardon them; you cannot ask me that I will not grant you; and in your servant, all that's mortal shall obey you; nay, Mahomet himself shall cease to be adored, if he be not assistant to your wishes.
I have no further suit, only let Osmond see performed, what I shall now direct him.
On thy allegiance, Osmond, that, and all she shall command thee else: with greater care, and more devotion, I should perform it than ere I offered yet at Mecha.
The Emperor speaks, dear Osmond, as if he knew what I intend to command you.
Divinest Lady, what's the occasion, wherein your trembling Vassal may express his care and duty.
Dear Osmond, look not pale, nor shake so, but mark those few words, which this short time will suf∣fer me to speak. I so much love thee, that again I offer to fly, now when opportunity presents it self: For, my suit unto Melcoshus, which you must see performed, is, to set free a Christian Merchant, with his ship and men, with whom, we being both disguised, may escape away; or should we be discovered, to die would not much grieve me. Your answer in a word.
Could paradise be gained by crooked paths, I
would not tread them. I grant, to be your husband, were to enjoy a heaven upon earth; for the danger in attaining that, would but add unto the happiness. I should a thousand times repent me of my gift, did not he prise you to your value, if it be possible; but since he does, and only can continue you in your full lustre, making you shine a wonder to the world, far be it from the thought of Osmond, to yield so far to passion, as to destroy his Masters happiness, and his own faith. For you, if you shall but in thought continue this de∣sign, the Gods will punish you, for offering to oppose their sixth decrees, since it is apparent by your equal merits, you only were appointed for Melcoshus, and he for you.
Do you refuse me then?
Ha〈…〉 dares Osmond expect to live, after refu∣sing what she shall command.
I do not wish it, Sir.
My passion made me to forget, Sir. Osmond is the noblest of your servants, and ready to obey me.
To show the power you have o'er me, I freely pardon him, nor shall your commendations light in vain on any much less on Osmond; I here create thee Bash of Aleppo.
Sir, you will but in this, forestall my future ser∣vices, and rob me of desert to climb by a way I rather should have wished to tread. But when I do consider, Madam, it is your praise, no other women's, that ad∣vances me, it shows, my merit was not small, since I attained your good opinion, which fully satisfies.
It is nobly said of Osmond; yet, since his de∣nyall, I look on him with other eyes. Melcoshus great∣ness, and his love exceeding that, makes some impres∣zion in me.
Say thou bright Angel is there ought wherein Melcoshus may express his love.
Your humble vassail's too much honoured, who rather does deserve your frown for her pre∣sumption.
There are some sports, which you perchance have heretofore deigned to behold.
You see the Emperor throws by all care of Subjects, addicting himself wholly to pleasure; days, weeks, and months he spends with Despina, that pain∣ted Sorceress; and when he hears of any revolted Province, or of preparing enemies, he asks, how fair Despina slept that night, affirming, that in her alone, was loss or victory. Revolt of subjects! I oft have heard him wish, that all his subjects love were turned to hate, so that his goddess would but favour him: Was it not a Kingly wish?
It is strange, our Emperor should thus dote upon a captive, a Christian too.
Aye, fellow soldiers; but consider to what a pass we now are grown, to be thus governed; we, who have power to make the world ours, all Kings obey us, thus to be led to ruin, nay, to a ruin that we see apparent: I dare not say, but I could wish, that we did not quite forget the power of Soldiers. We had power, when it was to raise Melcoshus for his virtues.
It is true, his virtues made him Emperor (ra∣there his seeming virtues, more they were not) and they being counterfeit, if we be firm to him that's fallen in∣to vice and imbecility, we forsake virtue and our own strength: Some in the Camp equal his former worth, then far outgo his present.
Odmer, and some other of the Captains, will straight be here.
It is well, I know you are friends to those that love the Soldier; for my part, I will not promise much, yet, if the gods shall breed a change, and think me worcester∣thy of advancement, virtue shall steer me wholly.
We know it shall, most noble Holy; and when the time grows ripe, expect our utmost aid.
We'll not be found here, lest Odmer should suspect our friendship to you; we'll rather seem to come by accident, hearing of his being here.
You shall do well: By seeming virtuous, I have the faith corrupted of many others in the Army; but these, though they perceive that I aspire, yet for their own ends, they'll assist my plots, pretending, as if
we believed each other virtuous. Love to our Country moves us; yes, as much as it does the Croco∣dile, that laments that creature, which she means to make her prey. How ever, Melcoshus is careful of the soul∣diers good, and most ambitious of their love. I have so wrought upon them by flattery, that he not once suspects, how they distaste his easy pleasant life, their bane; nor shall he know it, until the error ruin him, in all opinion, and make me powerful. I will observe and flatter him in smallest things, all must run smooth and even; he shall not see, at least not hear, a discon∣tented man, yet underhand, by injuries, I'll make the greatest so; then by my instruments so work them, that they shall fix their eyes on me as their sole reme∣die, being the only man that loves his Country. True, the masque of virtue I put on, must be worn cunningly indeed. Odmer, that Fox too I must ruin, by his own honesty and faith unto his Prince; I cannot be secure of any plot whilst he hath breath; and here he comes.
According to your desire I am come and pray Mahomet our present meeting may produce some happy issue for the good of our Sovereign.
Amen, good Odmer, sit, sit, most noble friends, you the Pillars of the Empire, upon which the huge Colossus of our Princes same was raised: here is not at this Table (I to my comfort speak it to be so honoured) a man that does not merit to lead him∣self an Army, I being exempted. What victory did our Melcho•hus get, that some brave Arm here did not act wonders, I dare not say equal to what he did? yet to continue doing bravely still, is fair for Souldi∣ers: for Kings sometimes slack in their worth. But Ours you'll say is gracious, careful of the State and soldiers.
I know not what they'll say, but I must say so, and withal add if you think not so too, you are a flat∣terer: for have not I heard Holy with fair words smooth o'er the errors of the King small in them∣selves at first, but by your conformation still con∣tinued not amended, as not thought wrongful act∣once.
I grant good Odmer when I have seen the Emperor enraged not to be contradicted but with dan∣ger, I have applied my self to serve his humour for the present, hoping my reason afterwards might bet∣la overthrow his error, when it should be forsaken by his passion, nor failed I of't; but were it not madness in any that should tell him, that this his dotage on Despina makes him neglect his office? how all the Soul∣diers that have any spirit or sense of their vast wrongs talk of electing them another Emperor who better shall distinguish betwixt their honoured scars, and upstart Ignorants, who ne'er shed drop of Enemies
blood, or had their own spilt to advance his glory? would you have me tell him this, though all yet know, this is truth.
Though I know this is false, how ever opinion sway the envious and ignorant; yet did you think it true; were you true subjects you would tell it him: but he that fears his loss of life more then his loss of faith and honour, thinks no reward can equal such a hazard.
Then Odmer, yo'u would seem as if your faith and love so far transport you, bove your reason that you durst tell the Emperor this.
No Odmer, twere' folly.
Holy, to you it may appear so; but may Odmer be as cold in duty as you, and find what it deserves, some heavy punishment: if he do not make known ever long, unto his Sovereign how he daily loses his Soldiers love, for that I grant is truth though unde∣served from him; for he hath still desired to give them all their dues, nay bin more liberal then his Ancestors how ere false servants and corrupted ministers have deceived his trust: the sweetest and most plenteous springs passing through noisome and straight passages may lose their comfortable qualities; even you my Lord (I must be plain) have wrought your self to such a power by the advantage of your birth and his employing you that all depend on you more then on him: all that you think will please the Soldiers you make your Act, the Emperor by you induced to it, and by you performed; but what may give them cause of mur∣mur or discontent, that you give out that you persuade him from: thus doe you rob him of his greatest wealth the Soldiers love, and in the stead of it procure their hatred for him, which justly you deserve. But would that tyrant, Love, release him, that he might show him∣self again in Arms, and look about him, he soon
would know, that Holy his most trusted councellor hath abused his trust, whilst he hath bin fast lulled asleep with pleasure.
Zealous Odmer, what you have spoke might seem an injury not to be borne, to those that did not know us both: who would think I could suffer in my own house my loyalty thus to be called in question nay condemned? for you have spoke no less then what might brand me for a Traitor. But know good Odmer your zeal thrice heated by your envy, to see me greater then your self not only in my place but in the soul∣diers love, can no way singe my reputation, or make my faith mistrusted by my Prince; and since I know you cannot hurt, my own power guarding me, but most that innocence which I have ever borne as the best shield a∣against all slanders; I am so far from being angry, that I profess I love you, and will advise you for your honours sake, which else might suffer since you are ho∣nest Odmer To tell the Emperor all things are amiss; the greatest danger that can arise to you, he being of a gentle nature, will be but strangling; or, may be, for the kind office you shall take upon you to be his tutor, (for it was never known that any yet counselled him unasked) his fashion may be employed that he may view your brains who would be wiser then your Lord.
Faith Odmer, tell him: my Lord counsel's well.
First let him know (my faults) if you intend I should be punished; you'll have no time when you have told him (his.)
Holy, you speak to me in scorn; but I perchance shall doe that which would fright thee even to death only to think on it.
Odmer, your blood is stirred and you are angry.
If thou had given me any real cause, this
place, nor these, should not protect thee; but since I know thy plotting brain to be thy only weapon, thou can not move me, and so I leave you.
My Lord, will you endure this?
Let him alone, the honest fool is running to his ruin.
As how, what danger?
Danger enough, Melcoshus frown, for he'll in∣form him what he hath promised.
By Mahomet, he dares not.
He will, I know his humour best, or if you please to call it simple honesty, you may, which I have wrought upon by opposing; so shall his faith serve my aspiring ends.
Odmer once sacrificed for truth, who'l be Melco∣shus's friends?
It is strange, my Father should so dote. I thought in time, the force of his affection would have abated; but on the contrary, his love increa∣ses, never was such a change. What poor things are we, when our lust hath once overthrown our rea∣son! that any man of spirit should so far yield to pas∣zion, as to become his captives captive! and all this coil only for obtaining that, which in the enjoy∣ing does not yield a minutes pleasure: How happy am I, that have no such desires.
Oh hypocrite!
Have you done what I bad you?
Yes, you shall see the effects on it immedi∣italy.
The truth is; our Laws gives us too great a liberty that way; how much better were it, might eve∣rye
man only enjoy one woman? for, lust doth both corrupt the bodies and the souls of men.
What means this seeming sanctity? it does in∣deed my Lord, it is a most ugly vice, though to the great ones tolerated.
I do protest, my Father's error doth so much lessen him from what he was, that I'll forswear the very company of women; bewitching Sirens, that con∣founds our judgments.
Fire, fire, fire.
What noise is that, ha, fire!
My Lord, I'll to the Court this morning. Finis Actus secundi.
SIr, I beseech you think not meanly of me; for having won me thus, thus without parley, I free∣lie must confess, the force you used did not displease me, whatsoever I seemed; for, I did something love you, before mine eyes were blessed with viewing your perfections; yet, modesty or fear to be contemned, would have for ever closed my lips.
Why, fair Ozaca, did not you by a Letter dropped from your window one day make me know my happiness, in your requital of affection, in the same phrase, to that I spoke at first in, to let you know, I was your servant, though your husband then were pre∣sent, I doubting a second opportunity.
Alas, my Lord, I did not know your meaning, if you spoke to that effect; but it may be, my husband prompted by a just fear, did understand you; for you
are made up of sweetness, that might tempt an angel.
My behaviour gave him no cause of suspicion sure.
His jealousy proceeding from his excess of love to me, made him believe, it seems, I was an obe∣jest worthy of your eye, when indeed the god of love pitying my silent languishing, did rather wound you, to show his power, than that my beauty could command affection from one, so far in all respects above me: And if you did receive any Letter to that effect, he writ it as from me, none else durst have presumed.
It is certain, and he himself hath been the un∣happy happy instrument, to make me now enjoy the miracle of nature; for, had I not been so encouraged by that Letter, I should not have thus ventured on this rash attempt, of firing the house.
Sweet Prince, I fear some jealous pang may take my husband, and he return before the fire be quenched, and find you; at least the Eunuch may.
Shall I then so soon leave you?
Oh yes, you must; yet do not, except you every day could set a Garden-house on fire; for, without some such extraordinary means, we hardly shall again enjoy each others company, which how sweet it is to me, let this kiss witness, being more then ever yet I offered to my husband.
Let us not part, what danger can be equal to this happiness? By Mahomet, I ne'er till now did find content with any woman. Why should a subject be thus blessed. Let this make all my other conquests be forgot∣ten, over other women; for I am now what I have often seemed, but never was in earnest, in Love, nay taken after the enjoying.
Oh me, we are undone, one knocks, I fear my husband's Confusion on them.
Ho Ozaca, Ho Ozaca.
It is he: what will become of me?
Spare those tears, or rather let them fall to save your honour, by seeming, as if I had used vio∣lence. To say, that I at all have not injured you, were to no purpose, he'll ne'er believe it: Put your self in such a posture, as may beget belief. My birth shall save me from all danger; or should I perish, so I save your honour, it matters not.
What, asleep Ozaca, and such a fire. I'll use my private key. The Prince! now, all the furies, had the house been burnt, ay, all the house, nay, all that's in it, my self, I had been far less miserable. For ever let all comfort cease, Ozaca is a strumpet, I am dishonoured, the boys will hoot at me as I pass the street. Sensibly I feel my self transformed from man to beast.
You're too much honoured slave: that I should take so much pains, and only once enjoy that, which thou moist possess at ease, and often! For her, she is so far from being a strumpet, that shoe's chaster in thought then thou could wish her, how ever her per∣son suffered violence. Behold an object, if any thing could move me to repent so soon of that, wherein I lately took such pleasure, those lovely cheeks bathed in her tears, my friends it seems, who by their queen∣tity, would wash from off her face those bloody stains, the witnesses of my rude act.
Hence from me, Serpent.
Oh, leave my house, lest I forget you are Mel∣coshus son: but for thee, strumpet.
Build not on my ill laid foundation, make not the rape I have committed, the cause of any future in∣juries to her, for so you shall on me lay greater weights of sin, which I'll revenge on thee. And Lady, though I know I do appear to you a devil, nay worse;
yet, when you shall consider your own beauty, you'll excuse me something.— What, spit at me
being your Prince; nay, then I know my crime was heinous; your eyes too, that may give life to others, like to the Basilisks, do strike me dead. Remember Callibeus.
Abused and threatened! I am too tame, I'll af∣la him; rather, revenge me on this whore that did al∣lure him.
Do, you cannot add unto my misery: I am already made unworthy of your bed, dishonoured, ravished; and you that should revenge the wrong, are cold in taking vengeance, though in hot blood: You that could let him part, having a sword so near your hand, and such a cause to use it in, will shortly bring me to him, nay, be assistant, whilst he ravished me again; but you would rather use it against me than him: if so, behold this breast, sometime the subject of your praise; employ it then, and take away the cause of your dishonour; No? give it me
 then, and you shall see—
Hold▪ what would thou do?
Free my self from misery, since you refuse to do it.
Ozaca, I confess I was too cold in my re∣avenge; indeed I doubted, whether thou had yielded willingly or not; but now that I do know thy ver∣tu, and am my self collected by my reason, I find in∣deed, there was no cause of jealousy in thee at all, how ever my extreme love made me suspicious: I shall forgive the offence, I hope, nay, it was none, since it was against thy will; and after some small time, receive thee to my bed: For my revenge I have a way, that with∣out blood I'll find my satisfaction.
For that, Sir, as you please; but never will I come within your bed, I am not worthy: as a soiled
garment, throw me by, seeing another man hath used me.
Not for the world, my Ozaca, thou art still worthy.
Too worthy, since Orcanes loves, to be enjoy∣ed by thee.
Oh my dear Osmond, grant me but one re∣quest.
you may command, Sir.
Become my partner in the Empire, for thou hast given me more then the whole, in my most kind Despina: for shoe's no longer cruel, I have enjoyed her freely, by her own consent, which does express more happiness, then all the tongues of men can utter.
You owe me nought for this. When I pre∣scented her, then she was coy and cruel; if by your no∣ble usage you have won her to crown your wishes, the debt was due unto your sufferings, and you now are paid, which I rejoice in.
The joy, my Osmond, is so great, that if I do not by communicating delay it something, it will be dangerous.
Sir, I believe there is none living, that sooner could conceive your happiness than I, since none doth more admire and reverence Despina· For, were a love from me to her as warrantable, as it is from me to you, grounded on virtue, I sure should equal, if not ex∣ceed you in affection; nay, could she love again, be happier: for all the love that she can render you, is to your merits and your fortunes due; But if she that's above me shall descend, my happiness beyond yours must extend. This, Sir, I speak only, to let you know, I see the way, which the gods by chance had left open, to
my happiness in Despina; but knowing that it was by chance, and that they did not intend to any subject such a beauty, I forbore, nay thought my self most happy in that they chose me for their instrument to salve the error by presenting you with what they had provided for you, and which it seems they meant to crown your conquests with.
Osmond, in all thy words and actions thou are perfect: next her that now appears, I do esteem thee, for if there be one corner in my heart, that is not filled with her, thou dost possess it, nay thou art mingled with each loving thought of her. Oh my Despina, how glorious thou appear'st! the Sun is but a cold and obscure lamp compared with thy two heavenly eyes, from whose sparkling fires all that behold except my self must perish, but I by their more gentle influence breath-in a temperate pleasant ayre, or should I be con∣summed with others, yet it is permitted me to kiss these lips which might restore me but should this more en∣flame me, which is possible, yet would those eyes pro∣duce such pearly drops for their own cruelty in have∣ing so consumed their faithfullest adorer, that it would quench even their own fire, and so preserve me still the happiest of men.
May I prove worthy of your favours, and in my future love and service make satisfaction for the time of ignorance, and disobedience that's past; my present happiness, best makes me see my error.
No more, least I do surfeit: had you killed my father, nay reveled our Prophet the highest crime, this were too much.
Our Prophet should have appeared unjust, if he had made Melcoshus so far in worth above all other men, &amp; not rewarded that unequalled merit: which what
could so well do as this rare creature? The Prince Or∣canes.
Now my son Orcanes, are all things ready for our sports?
Sir, all attend you.
Orcanes, tell me had thou a beauty like to this, would thou go hunt and leave her tho but for an hour, could all variety of pleasures else be joined, and in one minutes time their quintessential part enjoyed, I would not lose her company that minute: nor would thou, had thou once tasted my delights; but as it is, hunt, my Orcanes, and in that enjoy the greatest de∣light of mortals: but for me, I have pleasure in my di∣vine Despina, far above sense, tho sense convaie it to my understanding, and am immortalizd by my vast joys?
Was ever such dotage, is this a man to govern us? no, fellow soldiers, no.
Hee must not long, if we be men, and have but sense to see our miseries in him, and what a hap∣pie people we should be under some other.
Farewell most trusty friends.
We shall rule the world, we that are sol∣diers.
Who can tell, Holy being advanced may grow as lazy.
Then down with him, and choose another.
Is that the friendship you bear him?
My profit and my pleasure are those with whom I only keep friendship, nor have you, on my knowledge, any other resolution; each man pursues his own desires, there's no such thing as faith left in the world but amongst our Mufti.
Are they there?
Yes, in their books, and now and then up∣on occasion we hear on it.
Doe they no more? we speak of virtue too, and seem to show our love too't, our present designs are to be sheltered under a pretence of love to our coun∣try.
And so tic, man: come near, examine these things. Holy hath power and will advance us with him∣self, let that satisfy: The Emperor and Callibeus: stand close, we may perhaunce hear some thing that will avail us the Emperor trusts him much.
Now, Callibeus, what's the important cause that you thus press upon my privacies, have you re∣ceav'd intelligence of any foreign Enemy, or that our person here at home's in danger; say, if not so, you have presumed tho we esteem you much, to rob us of Despinaes company a minute.
Dread Sir, your pardon then, I come for justice.
Justice Callibeus? to whom is it denied within our kingdom?
The person against whom I must complain, Sir, is exempted from all punishment, excepting, that which your self shall lay upon him.
Name him.
The act, Sir, is so foul that I dare name him, it is your son Orcanes whom I accuse as a guilty per∣son, I beseech you look on him, and do me justice; my wife by him is ravished, dishonoured: the laws of hospitality were of no other then only to perform his wickedness: oh Sir, consider that you lodged him in my house and if you punish not, you shall appear an accessory.
What proof of this?
Oh Sir, too much, I took him all most in the violent act; besides he glories in it too.
Degenerate bastard, for could a son of mine
commit so base an act; had I used force, where had my joys in Despina bin? but yet I must not seem as if did intend to punish, for the injurer is my son, the injured but my slave.
Oh justice, Sir.
Why Callibeus, art not thou my slave, and if my son have forced thy wife, is she not more my slave whom thou command; it was disobedience, either in h•r, or thee, that did not offer, what hee was pleased to like: he too much honoured thee, and like a common guest fed of the same dish with thee; go, be gone, and hold thy self happy, that I do not inflict a punishment upon thee, both for the evil thou wished upon my son, and for thy present troubling.
You Gods! is this Melcoshus justice, for which he hath bin so renowned? but his fond love hath ruined all his virtue: farewell all faith and duty which hither∣to hath bin by me inviolately kept.
Lose not this opportunity, hoe's disconten∣ted, let's strive to make him ours; my Lord, by ass∣dent we overheard your injuries, and grieve so much that we will assist you to redress them, you know wee still have honoured you.
I know you are my friends, tic true that I am injurd, past sufferance.
We will give you ease.
I Was too scrupulous, my duty did not bind: me to give that to another without the which I could not live my self; it was against reason &amp; I was drunk with zeal, else I had never done it: I with the danger of my life did purchase her, and heaven did ratify, it seemed, the conquest, since they made, her love equally: she is not wanting in affection, yet, for ought I know, she now sent for me to tell me; although her per∣son be the Emperors yet her heart is mine, nay both by stealth this, this corrupt flesh &amp; blood would basely have me think, but virtue &amp; honour which must rule my soul tells me these are ignoble thoughts, and ill befit the faith of Osmond, who always hath applied himself to virtue, how ever weak in his performances; nay something noble bids me arm my self so strongly in my virtue, that tho she should become a suitor, yet not to grant and, by our Prophet if my flesh against my faith rebel and she consent, He free my nobler soul, and send this trunk to hell—but all these fears are needles for so much goodness shines in her face that sure her heart is far from being empty rather a magazine from whose abundance all that do want, might be supplied could they be sensible of their poverty: According to your command, behold your slave.
Osmond how ere the Emperor, in my command ore him, makes all the empire subject to my will, yet if you kneel I must not be exempt: for well you know I love you.
I fear.
Yet not so as heretofore, tic now a sisterly affection.
Thanks heaven.
Which that I may witness more then in words accept this from me, not as they in themselves are rich, but as they are made so to you in being my gift; and let them tell you when you look on them, that there is nothing in Despinas power, her faith kept sacred to Melcoshus, whom now I in my soul adore, but that you may command as freely, as you might a sister that entirely loves you.
Virtue I see is ne'er without reward: how far I am exalted in this joy above what sin could have produced: your pardon, madam, though my thanks come slow, yet they are sure, I am overjoyed and want words to express my self, not in the riches of what you have given but in your protestation that you love me so, as my own soul desired.
The emperor knows I love you more then any, and is pleased it should be so, nor need you keep that distance that all others doe, but freely visit me. I have a suit concerning the releasing some poor pri∣sonars for which you from the Emperor must receive order, who strait will visit me.
I am too happy to continue long so.
Did not my love unto your sacred self make me prefer duty before danger, I should as others do in silence only mourn, the ruins of your state and murderd honour.
Ha.
But though I know that he which thus under∣mines you, hath power to give me death with studied torments, by turning that which loyalty makes me utter, to rash presumption in your acceptance, yet i'll become a zealous priest and sacrifice my self to show your danger; what though your passion will not
let you read a faithful warning writ in my bloody entrails, and so you'll think the sacrificer mad, I from the Gods shall find a recompense; having discharged a faithful Subjects part to heaven and you, th'end of my creation.
Odmer, thou still hast found belief, nor have thy fears at any time bin idle: name what thou mean.
First draw your sword, then promise you will hear me out ere you make use of it, for I shall move you highly; the sore I come to launch is too much festerd to be cured with flattery.
Ti's strange, I promise thee, how? is my honour tainted, or my state in danger?
I should not need to let you see the peril and dishonour that attends your too much Love (I dare not call it dotage) on Despina, if your own judgment were at liberty that better could inform you.
Traitor thou can not speak eternally, then I shall be revenged for blasphemy and break no oath: Can love to her be dotage?
Consider, Sir, what you have lost by loving her, oh could you see, but you are hood winck'd by your lust, from what a pitch of honour you are fallen, you would find that word too little to express it; consider what you were at taking of the city, to you accursed though gotten by a glorious victory; all neighbour Princes feared you so as does the lesser hawk the King∣lie Eagle when he takes his flight no one durst keep the skies to search a prey, but glad to flag their fearful wings, and seek the obscure earth for safety: for your own subjects they so honoured you that daily they committed blasphemy, making you, equal to our Pro∣phet in all that could immortalise a man; now each Prince seems to scorn you and your power, knowing your noble faculties are asleep nay murdered by your lustful passion. What need they care to do you injuries
that cannot leave your Mistress to revenge them; your Soldiers that from your examples had their valours steeled against their enemies only seeing you under∣mine your self and them in your ill government, turn likewise traitors to themselves and you, swearing a captive shall not govern them, they must have one to lead them forth to war; nor is this only the common Soldier's saying, apt after ease to mutiny, but even the greatest Captains hold this resolution.
Peace, No more.
If not for shame yet for the dangers sake bethink your self; in you the kingdom suffers; strug∣glee a little but for liberty; our Prayers shall untwist your bands; and, once free, your virtues soon will shine again; so shall you make the world believe it was no fault of yours, rather the envy of the gods that kept you in obscurity so long; for had your virtues not bin thus eclipsed, you might have dark∣ned theirs: Now Sir if you mistrust the truth of what I have delivered, or that my zeal hath made me to deliver truth unreverently, behold my heart which may for both or either satisfy; and if you search each corner you shall find that envy moves me not, nor fear to lose my power by her engrossing all your favours: no my soul bears witness with me, your safety and the general good did only prompt my tongue, in what I uttered.
Odmer, thou hast presumed above that free∣dome that even dull Christians doe allow their ser∣vents, but thou borne my slave thus presumptuously to enter into my greatest secrets, to rip up my faults before my face, and as it were by force pull from out my arms my dearest Despina, what can thou hope for but death by some unheard of torments?
Sir if you intend still to pursue your pleasure selling your honour and the kingdoms safety for a
few wanton kisses, I can expect no less; but if the spirit of great Melchoshus, strangled by sloth and wantonness, again respire by a true servant's zealous conjurations making his body move to noble deeds such as may even out shine his bravest ancestors, then I may chance to die a gentler death, a nobler can I no∣ver. I rather would be sacrificed for truth and loyalty, then be rewarded for base flattery.
Because thou were brought up with me a child, and many ways approv'dst thy self faithful; I pardon thee this presumption, and ere long thou and those of thy opinion shall know that I am able to govern my passion, perhaps, to their amazement.
So soon returned from hunting Sir.
What comfort can it be for me to follow beasts, having such a beauty in pursuit, for know, my friend, that my affection is more violent than it was before I did enjoy her. In that I imitate my father who now dotes more upon Despina than ever. But, know you, what the Bash hath complained unto my father, that I have forced his wife; we so well did dissemble; but such an answer did my father give him, that thou shalt see he will bring Ozaca to me, nay be content to hold the door, whilst I again enjoy her.
But do you think my Lord he will endure it, will he not by some private means seek a re∣avenge.
He dares not, he is too tame: but stood my Father as strictly on the point of justice, as heretofore, ere love had softened him, I should fear his frown, but feeling daily the force of beauty in Despina, he will look upon my act with favourable eyes.
My Lord the Emperor seeing you return desires your company.
Isle waite upon him, Hose, this night I have contrived a way, if 't be possible, at least to see Ozaca.
My valour, vigilance, and justice made me Commander over this numerous people, with when I have acquired an Empire, and made the neighbour world stand amazed fearing my fierce invasion; but by my slothful life I am become hated; nay worse, con∣temn'd by my own subjects, as thought unfit to go∣verne, but since by the goodness of our blessed Pro∣phet my eyes are opened, and I see my error, Isle tread those virtuous paths again that did advance me, and the first act that must incite to look with favourable eyes on my proceedings, shall be the justice Isle perform on my degenerate Son Orcanes. What though he were, next my Despina the comfort of my life, I can know no partiality to him, nor to my self, in prejudice of justice; yet it may falsely brand me with the name of cruel and unnatural. My Son Orcanes, I hear you have a Mistress, fair I confess and chaste most certain∣lie: for you did gain her by a boisterous way.
Sir it were in vain for me to deny it, since Callibeus hath informed you, Sir it is true her beauty did compel me.
It was impossible thou should believe O∣zaca to be more beautiful then Despina in my tempe∣rance, then although my cause of passion far outwent thine, behold how far thou art from being the son of my virtues, to show thy baseness I extol my self. I being a Monarch free from the check of any but our
divinest Prophet, having a made within my power, a captive maid, whose only friend or aid was her own innocence, no husband to complain or seek redress of any, she being wholly mine, given to me for my plea∣sure too, yet all these motives could not so far pre∣veil as once to make me offer brutish violence, though even from her refusals my desires increased: but thou whose base desires hath killed all thoughts of virtue or humanity, imployedst that force lent thee for nobler ends against a silly woman: and when thou had en∣joyed what could thou boast, but tasting of a fruit, wherewith her husband often had bin cloyed?
Sir, as affection cannot be created where we list, it cannot be removed where it is formed: having at first sight tan possession of the heart, I did yet, faintly I confess, check my fond passion, it being unlawful to love another wife; but alas her eyes were much too powerful to be so resisted; besides imbred corruption in my self told me, it was nothing to enjoy her, were she free, and at her own disposing, but having such a watch∣full dragon to orelook her as her jealous husband, his care made me believe the treasure was more rich, so better worth the stealing.
It was to him indeed a treasure that possessed it lawfully, though being gained by thee, it makes thee poor, to the condition of a slave: his honour suffers through thy violence, nay bleeds until my justice makes thee bleed to cure it.
I hope you will not be so cruel for an offence like this, committed through the heat of youth, since you your self even at these years add to Love's tri∣umphs.
Degenerate bastard, can thou hope that an excuse like this, will pass with me for currant, who still hath bin a severe punisher of unjust acts? it seldom hath bin known that such a wrong was ever appeased
but with the offenders blood, or else the partial judge within whose power it was to punish, he hath paid for it; or if they could escape the hands of men, yet sure the gods will find them out, and I that doe intend to be a punisher even of my self, for my least follies, dare not suffer, lest I offend against heaven thy heinous crimes to pass unscourg'd; and therefore mark thy sentence.
O Sir, Remember who I am.
Whilst thou wast what thou oughtst to be thou need not bid me to remember that thou were my son, but since thou art become a stranger to that nobleness that should accompany thy birth, like a corrupted branch Isle cut thee from the stock, lest I for my injustice by the justice of the heavens should perish with thee, nor shall my subjects be a loser in it, one of more virtue shall succeed me, that will not ravish women.
Sir, I am miserable, and must implore your mercy; for in your eyes I read my death or something near it, oh speak then, your tongue can∣not pronounce like cruelty.
I find I am a father, and if I hear him long∣er, pity will overthrow my justice, and therefore I pronounce.
Oh hold, what Sir, my death or banishment I have bin all my life until this present hour your hopeful son, for so you oft have called me, your heir, and shall I now inherit nought but death or else a thousand deaths, in being banished from your presence: which of the two to wish, I know not.
Oh that I might lay by the office of a judge, or else put off the nature of a father: for I in this di∣straction suffer more then he can doe in death; even injured Callibeus self would be content with a less punishment, and the severest powers of heaven will call me cruel in execution of what I intend, rather then partial, since he is my son.
Oh speak not Sir, if you intend my death; rather by signs make me know
my doom, twill be less cruel
In this behold it then.
Nay then Ozaca, either thy honour or my life is forfeit, these tongue-lesse men do yet pronounce my death certain as fate: I see my end, Sir, but what the passage to it is I know not.
A dark passage trust me thou must have, but longer much then thou expect, thou shalt not die.
Not die, her honor's safe, prison or banish∣meant I will endure.
These eyes the causes of thy ill, least they again betray thee shall for ever loose their light.
Is that your mercy? rather take my life.
If thou had bin a private man, thou should have died, but being a Prince and my son, this is more just, and natural, however for the present thou think is greater cruelty, for thou shalt live by sor∣row to appease our Prophet.
Oh Sir your mercy reaches to the highest point of cruelty, it were better not to be at all, then not have the comfort of the light: what can life profit me a Prince, if made incapable of government?
Dispatch, it is decreed.
Hold, hear me sir, I have endured enough to show, I prise Ozaca's honour, one eye is lost. Sir I have belied my self; for know, Ozaca was more willing to meet my wished embraces, then I to offer them.
Now I repent my pity, thou wretch made up of baseness would thou to save that other wicked eye increase the villainies thou did commit against
Ozaca: thou only did before defile her person, now thou dost murder her, and her husband, both alive but I in their behalf and justice pronounce thy death for should thou live, thou would infect the world with baseness yet unheard of: bear him from my sight and strangle him, lest as I am a Father, Pity confound my Justice.
By Mahomet, Sir, father hear me.
Away with him, the fear of death would make him heap more perjuries upon his soul.
A Prince that for the loss of sight dares lie.
Deserves death here, hereafter infamy.
ODmer, you that have all the favours of the time can surely tell, if you will honour us so much, for what great cause it is, that we, and all the Captains are commanded to assemble here.
Great Holy, who thinks all not done by him ill done, and who envies the smallest grace that any other shall receive, though their deserts perhaps may equal his, can even as well inform himself he thinks as Odmer can, and out of scorn does only ask the question, but know, my Politician, that ere long you'll find some alteration that you dream not of.
Odmer, is this your change you talk of?
Why, Holy, in his eyes you may read some∣thing
if you'll observe not usual, I have not seen him look like himself since he forsook Mars to become the slave of Venus.
I hear that there are some amongst you that dare take upon them to malign my pleasures, and tax me for my easy life, alleging that I have forgot the duty of the gods, paying all my devotions to this Saint; nay some have gone so far as to affirm, I have given ore to be a King, making my self my captives slave, and so deserve no longer to bear Rule. Although I need not make Apologies (for none can call me to account but heaven) yet Isle so far descend from that high pitch of Majesty whereon I am seated, as in fami∣liar terms to question with you, and by the honour of a King, which I have yet kept pure from stain, how∣ever some have by their devilish cunning striven to blot it, Isle give you liberty to answer, in what I shall ask you, with as much freedom as if you were all Kings, or I your fellow subject.
What can this mean?
I know not what will follow, but well I understand what's past, and will prevent him since he hath found me out, I shall be caught in mine own snare else.
Tell me and tell me truly, which of you that had a beauty like to this, but sometimes would to en∣joy her company neglect our greatest business, view her well for Isle make no description; only let me ad∣vise you fix not your eyes at first upon her eyes if it be possible, least their brightness should strike you blind before you had observed her other beauties, and when you have beheld her outward form, know that her mind as far exceeds that, as the soul is more worthy then the body, which does indeed admit of no com∣parison.
She is more excellent then can be spoke, and
all that should but tax you, if you should even adore her, deserve death for their gross ignorance.
Holy hath spoke what all confess, and we have too unjustly murmured at your pleasures.
No man could go abroad to War, that might enjoy such happiness in peace.
Who would not for her sake neglect even hey∣ven it self?
Unto her excellence add the consideration of the difficulty I had in obtaining her, which ties mans nature faster to the object.
We all acknowledge that your joys are infinite in her, and that it lies not in the power of man to quit such happiness.
To make you know the difference then twixt you and me, and that I value the good of you my sub∣jests and my honour far above fading pleasures, be this my witness, thus cut I from my self such a content, that Mortals ne'er enjoyed.
Oh me, my fault lay in my blood, let that ex∣piate my sin against heaven, mercy, mercy.
Oh cruelty.
An act noble above example yet it moves my pity, this was no end of mine, heaven knows.
Now by this act judge whether your Em∣perour be able to govern his passions or no, when they oppose themselves against his honour, and that you may know that pleasure hath not changed my nature, prepare for war, and what the neighbour Princes whilst we slept by stealth obtained.
By force which interest back shall be regained.
See the body nobly entombed, I dare not view it
Now Holy was not this unlooked for?
Yes Odmer, on the first opportunity we are lost else.
It must be so, this act will gain the people.
It must be so.
What meant the Emperor to send me from this meeting on such a sleevless errand: ha what blue∣die object is this, I hope I dream, if not, may I be blind for ever, it is she: which of the gods fearing to be transplanted by her greater excellence hath done this? no mortal man durst, or could have the heart to execute such mischief: lay down the sacred load and let me know the bloody villain; art thou gon? say whose hand was it, that let out her pure soul at these grim wounds, and in the bloody act parted more excellence, then ere shall meet again.
One that dares justify it.
Villain thou least hee dares not, though thou and all thy generation should assist him who wast?
I am a soldier, take your lie again, for know it was Melcoshus.
Slave, dost thou mock my griefs?
Hold, noble Osmond, and know we manifest our love unto your virtues in forbearing to cut you all in pieces for daring to offer this violence: for by the honour of soldiers he tells you truth, the Empe∣roar with his own hands here performed it, before all chief commanders with an intent I think to get again the soldiers love, which he had lost by her.
I do confess my rashness, let my cause of rage ex∣cuse it: the Emperor do it, say you? it is impossible▪ now, by Mahomet, you are all traitors, and by some bloody statesmen are subornd to do this wickedness, and being found to save your guilty selves from justice, you lay it on the Emperor, you might as well make me believe that he had pulled his eyes out, or his heart, for she was far more dear, and therefore He defer re∣avenge no longer.
Wound him, not only defend your selves, hes mad with passion.
Hold noble friend, what means this?
These villains here have killed the Emperors Mistress and would escape by laying it on him; when he, when he shall know it once, will wish no longer life.
Pacify your rage and hear me by Mahomet, what you have heard is truth, and never was there act gained more applause amongst the old soldiers, whose loss of blood hath quite extinguished the desire of wo∣men: but for my part me thought, though it be brave in the consideration▪ yet it was a horrid spectacle to see.
First even so? then had he tan a surfeit by being too happy?
No sure he loved her, when he killed her.
Shall I die with thee, my deer sister, for so it was thy will I should esteem thee: oh look upon this face and tell me, if there remained the least spark of hue∣manity in him, that could but once have said, that she should thus be murderd; what was he then that could himself perform it! horrid, horrid deed: she in whose arms he slept the night before, and had no doubt more joys then tounges can utter: but if there be those Gods, which punish villainies, he may hereafter pay for it.
Osmond, this ill becomes your duty, which hitherto hath led the way even to the forwardest in zeal.
Why friend, I speak not of Melcoshus, he could not do it, some fury entered him.
Sir I love you: so well, that I dare not stay to hear you: bear off the body.
Oh stay, good soldiers, let me take my last leave: what shall I say, she cannot answer, it may be her fair Soul hovers about to see how they will use
her dear Companion: if so, oh let it hear my vow by Mahomet and all the powers of heaven I swear with speed to be revenged upon thy cruel murderer, all his brave former acts are by thy innocent blood washed from my remembrance: for his love to me and payment of my duty they in it are cancelld, I was not more his slave then he was thine; confirmed with many thousand oaths, and most unjustly he hath not only broke those bands, but with thy dear blood died his villainy in grain, so that they cannot change their horrid colour in my memory, till I take equal vengeance, but I must needs come short both that I am by his example taught, and that I shall but kill a murderer when thou died innocent.
Wee in this stay, hazard our lives.
I have done, now let me after death do that which love and duty to Melcoshus, whilst she lived, would never suffer me: these pale cold lips have yet the power to make me burn in revenge, and these dear eyes sometimes the moister piece of nature can yet command me to extinguish their extinguisher. Now soldiers take her hence, and I will bear you company to see her buried, the passion I have showed, you may ex∣cuse, since all know I did first present her to Melcoshus; for which of you, that had but given a horse or dog, excellent in their kind, and seeing it at first as it de∣served loved and cherished by him that did receive it, and after thus used without a cause, but would grieve something; deal freely, would it not move you, ha, if so, then think what I now suffer, who heaven knows did love this Lady, as my sister.
Sir we grieve with you, and wish the Em∣perour had not bin so cruel.
Thanks soldiers, but where wishes fail, we must apply our reason to ease our grief.
My ease alone consists in shedding his heart blood.
That gained, and then destroyed, earths chiefest good.
Shall I rejoice, or shall I grieve my present for∣tune? rejoice most certainly, though all difficulty and danger attend my love; for my Orcanes is a Prince so excellent in all, that though I ne'ere again enjoy him, yet am 〈◊〉 happy: but his affection sure which seemed to equal mine will make him study some way how we a∣gain may meet, but soft here comes my husband with a joyful Countenance.
My dear Ozaca, I bring ease to thy vexed soul, I had bin here long since, but that the Emperors ex∣press command upon affairs with held me, and far too happy was the news for any other but my self to bring: kneel down with me and pray the Gods to pros∣per long Melco•hus.
Why Sir, what's the occasion? speak I pray you.
I knew his justice could not slack what ever he emd.
What justice? speak, oh my fears!
The Prince.
Speak, what of him?
The lustful Prince, my dear Ozaca, hath by his blood washed clean thy stain.
Ha.
Ozaca, my Ozaca, oh speak; the joy of her re∣avenge overcomes her know my deer wife the Prince Orcanes for his foul rape on thee is by his noble father justly put to death: oh praise Melcoshus in thy soul, who would not be unjust to save his son being a villain.
Is the Prince dead then?
I, my best love to my great comfort, now I
may kiss thee joyfully, the wound thy honour did re∣ceive is cured.
Forbear, I must not kiss you, till I know by whom the cure was wrought, if any other then your self informed against O•canes, and so provoked the father to kill his son; nay, if you did not extol ju∣stice, and cry down mercy quite, though it be the gre∣test attribute belonging to the gods, hope not that I should ever look on you with love, or come within your bed.
Thinks my Ozaca, I so little love her, that I did sleep in my revenge: How often did I urge unto Melcoshus all arguments, that might incense him a∣against his son, nay, told him, as I well might do, O•ca∣nes could not be his Offspring that had so basely given himself to vice: However, I alleged in putting him to death, he should perform a justice, that would make him famous through the world, since natural affecti∣on, the gods appointing him to hold the balance, could not yet weigh down justice.
Did you allege all this, and did this move him to put the Prince to death?
It did. Me thinks thou look not kindly on me for all this.
And shall I live after Orcanes? No.
What says Ozaca?
Nothing, but is he dead, dead certainly, and by your means?
He is.
Umh, umh, gone, for ever gone.
Ozaca, speak to me.
He died to save my honour, and shall I live be∣hind him, and live with him too, that triumphs in his death? It must not, it shall not be; I am too far in∣debted, I'll first make even with some. Oh husband, if you had killed Orcanes your self, then the revenge
had stood more noble. You should
have struck him thus and thus.
Ozaca.
And then your self to escape shameful death.
What can this cruelty in thee, Ozaca, mean?
Know, thou dull beast, I was so far from being forced, that I did burn in a more ardent flame then he: Yet, had thy jealous brain not taught thee, to frame that Letter for thine own dishonour, I had been inno∣cent in act perhaps, how ere my will had horned thee. But having once enjoyed a Prince so perfect, I never would admit thy loathed embraces, and so have rather chose death, with revenge on thee too boot, who were the cause Orcanes suffered death. Being thus di∣vorc'd from thee, I hope I in Elizeum shall enjoy him
Help ho, help ho, I find that this is truth, my wounds are witness, and that there is no trusting wo∣men's tears I durst have sworn thee more innocent, than now I see thee wicked; yet, however live, and repent thy sins, for I can forgive thee, nay, perchance never cease to love thee.
D•ll fool, can thou believe my resolutions are so weak, as for the fear and pain of death, to give them over, less for the love of thee; were it thou the Monarch of the whole world, I would not live after Orcanes, to be the partner of thy glories; but as it is, this knife is far more welcome to me; than thy sight▪ fly, my soul, fly, and leave this loathed prison to meet Orcanes. So, so, let this witness, I for thee die, Orca∣nes, and hope I have revenged thee. 
My wound is far more dangerous than I thought, and I, for ought I know, may bear thee com∣pany; but we shall soon part ways, if there be any ju∣stice in the gods. I would live, bear me to my chamber;
and for that wicked woman, one my wife, let her be buried honourably.
Night, dark thoughts, and justly so, since by my cruelties, obscured that light, which was my only comfort. Oh Despina, pardon me most penitent and now no more afflict me in my dreams; if thou be merciful. I will erect an Altar in this obscure Walk, and in the dead of night offer thee sacrifice; nay, even at noon day would I perform it, and in the sight of all, but that I know it must appear too plainly, that I to thee performed all rites with greater reverence, than to our sacred prophet and so the people might rebel, for fear of which, and loss of my neere-fading honour, I did become thy cruel butcher. Bear me, cold earth, till I have some way reconciled my self to my dear saint.
Are they come over?
They are. How are we sure hoe's here now?
It is not so dark, but we shall find him; stand close a little, perchance he's not come down yet.
You just powers, be this night auspicious in aiding my revenge; guide you this instrument as right unto his tyrant heart, as I will give it strength to pierce it: but soft, by the Moons light, I see some men before me, what can it mean? it is death for any but Melcoshus to enter here. It would grieve my soul to die, and miss revenge too. Behind this bush unseen, I shall observe.
Oh my Despina.
Hoe's in the Arbour, I heard him groan; let's lose no time, but strike him dead, before he draw his sword, or call for help; if he see to morrow's Sun he'll
know too much of our designs ere night, for us to see it set Odmer suspects our conspiracy shrewdly, and suddenly will find the truth.
Delay no time then.
What's this I hear, how ere in me it is but ju∣stice to take Melcoshus life in them it is damned treason, which I'll prevent; nor shall they frustrate me of my revenge their hands are far too base.
Draw, and dispatch him.
Sink down to hell, Holy, thou root of treason, with these thy cursed branches.
Osmond, let me embrace thee in these wounded arms, I fear, to death. Thou were ordained to be the lasting pattern of love and duty.
Forbear this kindness, for know, how e'rel did preserve you from their swords, I come my self to kill you for Despina's sake, her innocent blood cries for revenge; and by those powers I am ordained to see their j•stice satisfied, by taking life from him, who cruelly extinguished that pure light, which for a long time they intended should have been a comfort to the world, and a great witness of their power.
Nay, if my Osmond be a traitor but in thought once, he shall not need to use his sword, I would not wish to live beyond his faith; for, can there be a love or truth left in a subject, when it is not to be found in him. Now I perceive the murder I committed was most horrid, since he that loved me more then her, she she being alive, would now rob me of life to revenge her.
Know, Tyrant, I loved thee once, when thou were worthy to be my Prince and Master, more than my self: But thou, when thou had satisfied thy beast∣lie lust, to please the ignorant multitude, thou made a sacrifice of her to them, to whom thou rather should have made them offer sacrifice, on peril of their lives.
Osmond, thou art here more cruel in thy ac∣cusation, then in thy intent to kill me: For, from the danger of thy sword, there's a divinity that waits up∣on the person of a Prince, that would pro∣tect me; but against the thoughts of thy unexpected treason, there is no armour; for thy unkindness so in∣vades my soul, that all that blood that should supply these nerves, flies to my heart to tell it, Osmond no longer does wish to have a being there, if so, to split it will be kindness,
Me thinks I find my resolution of revenge begin to bate its force.
If the consideration of your faith and love to me, so far prevail above your own affection, that you dispensed with it to make me happy; believe likewise, from the consideration of that care a King should have over his subjects, which wholly was, and ever should have been whilst she did live by me, neglected, I rather killed her, than that my love was ought diminished; for had I loved her less, she might have lived; but I believing her to be so excellent, could think of nothing whilst she lived, but her embraces.
And therefore would you make her suffer for your salt, was that the justice of Melcoshus? Your Son offended, and you punished him; but here you spa∣red your self, striking an innocent.
It is true, I struck her being innocent, yet did not injure her or any, but my self: I broke no Laws of Gods nor men: to prove which, I ask no more of heaven, but that the taper of my life, which now grows dim, may burn some minutes longer; then shall I show my Osmond, by their light of reason, that my unhappy Stars are rather guilty of Despina's death, than I; she was a Captive, and a Christian, which by our Laws, we freely may dispose of as we please; her death then, had I been but a subject, was no breach of them.
She was a creature, for whose sake you would have once have broken all Laws.
I could break none, my power being uncon∣fined. But interrupt me not, lest I do faint, ere I can make an end. The Soldiers were so far from being displeased, that they acknowledged her death a Jubilee. Our prophet Mahomet might most rejoice to see her breathless, whose perfections, being a Christian, so far out-went all those that honoured him, that some in time might justly doubt our God to be less powerful than theirs, and so the reverence we now pay, grow cold.
All this I grant; but for your injuries to her, what art can salve them?
She was the advocate of all those of her faith, and at my hands procured much mercy for them. The perfect Christian is so proud of nought as Martyrdom, and the more innocent from crime, the greater joy they take in death. Although Despina was not marty∣red for her faith, I grant, but by the force of her un∣quelled beauty, made a sacrifice to save my honour; yet amongst those of her sect, she cannot miss the ado∣ration of a Saint: And so I only sent her to a greater happiness. You may allege it was a happiness.
Oh divine Despina.
She did not yet desire, to die but rather wished to live with me, she loved. To this again I answered, that I so much did dote upon her excellence, that I should have forgot to rule; and she must then have lived, to see me miserably deprived of state and honour. Yet, as it now falls out, my fortune then had been more favourable; for, then had Osmond's love been left a pattern to posterity, and I should sure have found the comfort of his faith, when all men else were traitors. But now—
He hath delivered this Apology with so much grief, majesty, and love, that my own reason
makes me know it is truth, and bids me justly turn that hatred, which I hither brought against him, upon my guilty self, for I have been a heinous traitor. Oh dread Sir, your pardon. But why should I once hope, I that have stood so strictly on my faith, and by a thousand obligations, been fast tied in bands of duty, yet thus to break without a just cause, just cause, as if there could be any pretence for treason: Shall injuries make men cease to be virtuous?
Let my soul part with joy, since Osmond sees his error; thy love to me, to virtue, and Despina, have fought so nobly, that it still overcomes; which was most virtuous? thy love made thee present her to me, thy faith made thee refuse to take again what thou had given, when she did offer it; and when thou thought, that cruelly and most unjustly I had killed Despina, thy noble anger made thee pursue revenge; but now, that thou dost find that anger was unjust, thy faith overthrows it, nay, turns it on thy self, since it was my fate, not I, was guilty of her death, which let my pardon mitigate, so at my death thou shalt express obedience, for now I feel his messenger approach; nor does it grieve me now so much to die, as to have lived, and thou been false. If Lovers meet in Elizium, and enjoy each other, there will thy ver∣tues gain Despina from me.
Stay, hoe's gone, and shall I live, he and Des∣pine dead? it were madness; for what is in the world left that's worthy; or, if there be two such, it is not like, that I shall love the one, and serve the other. The fates ordained me only for this end, he nursed and bred me, to wait upon him here, and in the other world. But should I stay, until the Soldiers know hoe's dead, some one of greater faith and courage may, by a volun∣tarry death, seek to prevent me; besides, Despina, and the expiation of my intended treason, urges me to die
Come my dear friend, perform thy latest service, in sending me thy Master to Elizium. So, me thinks I see Despina stand ready to embrace me, but for Melco•hus sake, even there again I will refuse her. Here at his ho∣noured feet I'll lay me down. You gods, let not the noble affection of our soul change after death, let us remain all three so linked together in affection, as we were before this bloody separation.
Be favourable, you gods, and grant, that the clashing of swords we heard within Melcoshus's pri∣vate walk, have not prevented us; my heart misgives me that we come too late: Treason is swift in execute∣on, the devil thrusting on to mischief; and see a blue∣die witness, that my fears are true, it is Holy. Maho∣met, defend the Emperor.
See, here are others dead, the Emperor I think.
Ha! what say thou, screetch Owl?
Alas, and noble Osmond too.
Cold as earth. You gods, was this your ju∣stice? could you suffer this royal building, which you had raised unto a glorious height, to show your power on mortals, to fall to earth again in such obscurity, as none could be witness of his ruin. But pardon me, you powers, I have profaned▪ we may conclude from these witnesses, he nobly fell, and died not un∣revenged. He ever walked alone, how then comes Os∣monte here; one to suspect him for a traitor, were a sin against Virtue, his very posture witnesses his love, kissing his Masters feet, but more his faithful hand as∣sures me, that his wounds are from himself, as score∣ning the world, since it no longer did contain Mel∣coshus, who gave it lustre. And shall so young years show the way of love and duty, yet old Odmer fear to
follow him? No, Boy, thou shalt not so outstrip me.
Hold, noble Odmer, will you forsake us too? then must the Tartar cease to be a people: Who shall command us? all will run to ruin. Accept the Empire rather.
Hail Odmer, King of the Tartars.
Tempt not my faith so: shall hope of honours make me live after Melcoshus? Be this my witness to the contrary.
Odmer till now did never show, he was a greater lover of himself than virtue; he would sleep quiet in his grave, rather than by a little trouble in the world, preserve us all from ruin. But in the name of Mahomet, I charge you forsake death, and accept the Empire.
Grant, that Melcoshus's son, the dead Orcanes brother, when hoe's of age, may take my place, and I'll obey the gods, in yielding to your desires.
Long live Odmer, King of the Tartars.
By whom you were inspired to teach me this more reasonable way of duty, take up this noble Coarse; for which I will erect a Tomb, shall make his name live to eternity, in which the faith and love of Osmond shall not be forgotten.

CAN the Prince Philanthus, my co∣sen, look so far beneath himself, as on my servant.
Madam, believe me, he makes love to her daily, and now they are together in the Garden.
If this be true, as I begin to fear, for I have heard him make some desperate protestations; yet, by the stronger Magic of this brow, I'll break those Spells that hold him; these Eyes, which have to all that sued •even clad in frowns, shall, for his sake, receive all the ••ditions, that a women's art can give, to make them •ictors. He shall not cast away himself, nor spend a
sigh more, for so mean a person. For sure, when I shall cousin him, making him think, that I will deign to love, he will hate himself, and fly so mean a Mistress. I'll see, if they be still together.
I see the Princess coming.
The better. Injure not so much your own merit,
To misdoubt the truth of what I say; and if you fear
A change, I'll call the gods to witness.
Good my young Lord, spare your rash in∣considerate oaths,
Which you would be content to buy again at any rate,
Within this month.
Crafty Wench, she sees us.
You must not think, that I will lay my self
Open to your courtship thus alone, it was
By accident you met me, pray let go.
Will you then leave me?
How now, Cousin, making love to Miranthe?
Madam, I should be glad to gain her good opinion.
Cousin, I hope the Court has not infected you as yet. Will you dissemble with me your friend, or no, if I should seriously ask you a question?
Madam, if I already know that vic•••… name,
My I or No, will be but small assurance.
yet I dare trust you. Love you Miran earnest?
Why do I ask? I do not think you yet know love means.
Not what it is, I would I did not.
I see you do, that sigh approves it.
And, Miranthe, you love entirely.
Admit I grant.
Leave us a little. Then you must grant withal,
That you much injure your self; for you are equal
To the greatest in your blood; to say, your mind
Or person's lovely, is a truth, befits some other
Better then my self to speak. Yet friendship,
And pity of your youth, to see you ignorantly offer your devotions
To so poor a Saint, whose influence, though ne'er so fa∣vourable,
Cannot protect you from a general scorn forces me
To tell you, you will be counted of a low spirit,
Or wondrous ignorant, in loving Miranthe,
Your birth being so far above hers.
Madam, it is true, that being descended from your house,
I should have as just reason to be proud in that respect, as any:
But, being otherwise defective in those things,
Which I could not receive from Ancestors, my mind and manners;
Wonder not, that like a bastard Eaglet, I refuse to look upon
The Sun-bright Beauties of the Court. Yet, Madam,
You must think, in her I lord there's something,
Though perhaps not obvious to your eyes,
That to me renders her lovely.
It is true, shoe's a good Wench, perhaps her virtue takes you.
Madam, I know you do not slight that in others,
••…ough in her you do; shoe's your servant and you say,
••…e's my Mistress, and Virtue should be Mistress to us all.
Give me leave so far, to justify her and my self
as to say, If she be more virtuous then the fairest
Lady living, I ought to love her best.
Yes, if you could be married to her virtues, not to her person;
For fix pence I'll buy a Book, shall more instruct you in that way.
But think you, Cousin, Virtue and Beauty may not dwell together.
I am accounted fair, wherein have I appeared to you
Less virtuous than Miranthe?
In nothing, Madam, rather the wonder of your sex.
Cousin, believe me, there are many in the Court, that exceed
Me in both. Let me persuade you leave Miranthe rather
for your Man to woe, and dedicate your worthier services
to some of those that I shall name you.
Madam, you persuade strongly, for I rely upon your counsel
As an Oracle But think you, I have handsomess o wit,
To make me acceptable to a fair Lady?
Yes doubtless.
I fear you say it only, to draw me from my Mistress.
But swear, you think me worthy.
As I live I do.
Well, Madam, you have persuaded me to be inconstant;
If there be a punishment, may it light on you:
Or, if I fail to gain a Mistress, you must promise
To instruct me; for, whom you'll please to name
As worthy, I'll make love to tell you all my discourse,
And show you all my Letters.
Must you needs be in Love, it seems you he
been much given to read love Books; when I know your study, I shall fit you with a Mistress.
Faith, Madam, they live such pleasant lives in those books,
Kissing their Mistresses hands, and looking on their fair eyes,
That I have envied them.
Your imagination's very strong, you begin with me.
I must provide a Mistress for you very shortly,
I shall be troubled with you else my self.
Trust to my skill thus far, I have wrought him handsomely
My part is only, to be ready to entertain you.
No more
Fare-well then.
Fare-well. Let me alone to fit him here in the Country to the business, th'ass is rich, his father more fool then he, doting upon his sons believed perfections—Here comes the old fool.
Good-morrow Mr. Courtier, you're late a rising; you should have seen my son, your scholar, break half a dozen staves else, as graciously, as ere a poor mans son in Milain, and for Cut, black Cut.
Indeed hoe's a good sober beast.
Very quick, he starts before you can tell twenty; first does he trot, but then stand; I have the barrier thus with my whip alost, and when he comes, flash quoth I, away goes Cut so fast, you cannot see him move, then does he stop most willingly.
He does indeed.
And turns about with great liberation and 'gillity, but old Roan what say you to him, there a hot Jade indeed, as like my son as can be, fiery and full of mettle, and here comes the grace of our Country, though I say 't.
Lucky, poulcroone, look to my Roa• Janet, let him allay his fury in thy hand, before he fet his hoof within the stable, and should thou let him drink, thou die as I am generous.
Saving your young worships pleasure; he had more need be set up, and have a peck of grains, heel ne'er be able to plow to morrow else.
Peasant, I say let him allay his heat, and for the plow thou talk on, I will have thee know this mornings service hath manumiz'd him from such ba•• employments.
How Son, whats that?
I must speak plain to his dull understand∣ing, oh torment! let it suffice that Roan is free from service of the plow or harrow.
I your worship I am sure hath harrowed all the flesh off his back, a little rest and meat will do well, Sir.
Another word, and as I hope to be a Gen∣tleman, Isle make him feed on thee.
Good your worship.
Nay worse, thou shalt not wait upon m• to our Court of Milan.
It is his care, Son you must forgive him
Live then; and thank this aged Nobleman
Oh hopeful boy, hee may be one indeed Sir may he not.
Yes yes?
It is no matter though I be a yeoman still.
No no, there will be no great indecorum in it.
I, as you say it were well I were a'the coram, and so I will when my son's a Lord.
How my clothes not made yet! let me pe∣rich, if I do not revenge the blood of all the innocent lice, since the first Taylor.
I beseech your worship, you know I wanted, and you promised to let me have some money before hand.
How Taylor! money before hand? dost thou not know I am to be a Courtier, thou ignorant Coun∣try vermin, can there be hope to prosper in a suite paid thee for, before hand.
No tic unpossible you would appear a prodigy
A prodigy; thats fine in faith, nay I will pay aforehand then, and be a prodigy; if that be all my man to, he shall be a prodigy.
I thank your worship.
Master of the Dance and Fence you have been long a coming.
Your worship knows tic two long mile and I came but softly, I must be more careful of my legs then another man.
Why so man, thou make new ones every day.
I Sir but I make them with my legs, and every trades man will preserve his tools.
Or else his wife will Chide him when he comes home.
Ha, ha, ha, him sol, sol fa, fa.
I am glad to hear your worship so careful of my documents, use a voice, and have a voice.
Come come shall we to it?
Sir it were best to day you only used your martial
exercises, you have rid, and fencing will be enough.
You say true, first I will learn to fight, and then to make my approaches to the Ladies: if they re∣fuse to yield to my Courtship,
Isle compel them by force of Arms.
How ravish them, prove a Tarquine?
I, ten Tarquines, what shall they contend with me?
By my faith, I will take your worships part.
She that shall oppose me had better come on Master of the Noble science, behold thy scholar does thus confront thee.
Stay Sir you are too furious, first you must mark your distance.
I but son, you lost your opportunity; I have seen the time I would not have failed to paid him o'er the nodal, at such a vantage.
How take upon you to teach me, go to, you're an old busy fool, but, lets see what you can doe, come on your ways.
Alas son, I am old, threescore.
I know you might have been my father, but I have seen a wiser at thirty, come on Sir.
Nay Son.
Take 'em, I charge you as you expect my favour, Isle let you see the fence is altered since your sword and buckler time.
I have an itching to him.
Sir your Father's old, you'll kill him.
It is no matter, I shall not be ashamed o• him when I am a Lord.
Faith Sir, play with your Tailor, hoe's a great mind too't.
Has he, come on Sir shred, dare you adven∣la, the third part of a man to encounter; dost thou know what thou dost, I am a prodigy.
I Sir, but I must help to make you so: one bout sir, and it were at Cudgels, I durst venture the making of your worships clothes.
Oh base Cudgels, I will kill that louse that sits upon thy ninth button.
Well sir.
Oh Rogue do you offer to strike, and then to thrust against the Order of fence, this it is to play with ignorance.
It is true sir, I wonder you would do it.
I know the blow could not be great, alas I am but a louse, a shred at the most, Sir, but the third part of a man.
Away, you are saucy.
Will please your worship to let me have some∣thing before hand.
A pox on thee, thou hast given me too much.
Truly sir, it was against my will, I did not think it possible I could have hit your skilful worship, wilt please your worship try another bout?
No prithee.
A pox a these Marshall Exercises,
Lets to the City, Dance, Drink, Whore, and Dice,
These are the virtues, fighting is a vice.
Oh inconstant Aurelia, but women must be women still,
Changing though for the worst: for wherein can Phi∣lanthus be justly prised before me; hoe's young
And unexperienced, so cannot serve her with that wa∣ryness
He ought considering her Birth, sure she cannot love him, oh yes she does, she does, it is apparent.
They are still together and see, good manners pard me.
Isle mark their actions, tho I cannot hear.
Madam do not refuse to instruct me yo•• scholar.
But hear in what language I am able to deliver
My affection in, and give such an answer as you think
Adrastus sister will do, whom you have
appointed me to make love to.
I will,
Fair Aurclia.
Her name's Lucinda.
Madam you know that all one, but 〈◊〉 th'at-tribute of Fair sufficient.
Tic old and foolish either to say, fair or virtue• 〈◊〉
Or madam, mistress, or goddess, or Divine Lady
Sweet Creature, or abstract, or indeed
Any thing that way.
Then thus, If the respect I bear your had bee• less,
Or that after the tender of my loyal heart,
And your refusal of it, I could have lived,
To enjoy your sight I had long ere this
Made my love known, but since the
Manifestation of your disdain and my death are
Inseparable accidents, wonder not that I
Have lost so many opportunities to tell you.
For all Creatures have a desire to preserve life:
And now I see my last period approaching.
For in your heavenly eyes I read the sentence of my death,
As plain as if the book of fate lay open to me.
You're are the book of fate in two respects,
To all that see and know you as I do.
For if they love you, they justly perish by your scorn.
If they love you not, their ignorance transforms
Them into beasts, a worse Condition for a man
Then not to be at all hope cannot fool me further,
Then only make me to believe, that since
I have some interest in your blood you'll shed a tear,
To witness that you greeve my ruin.
May I perish, if you have not delivered this with as much passion.
As if Lucinda for whom this speech was framed,
Had been before you, but how shall she conceive
That where you speak of interest in her blood?
Are you akin to her?
When you have answered in her person; for that, I shall resolve You.
Well if your affection were thus violent as you pretend,
I cannot but acknowledge that the consideration of it
Were sufficient to move pity in any woman,
That did allow the follies of protesting lovers.
But for my part I have ever laughed at those,
Who hoped to gain love by the manifestation
Of their sufferings, and therefore had you professed less
Till you had made your merits appear greater,
It would have moved me more: when I shall see
That in you which I as much covet to enjoy,
As it seems you do now something in me.
Then which an equality of affection we shall
Meet without all these sophisticated protestations,
And not before: for as you pursue that which you think
Would be your happiness; so do I mine.
Which I am sure consists in my freedom
From the follies of Love.
Tic even so, you have delivered nothing but what I expected.
The greatest merit I shall ere attain to,
Is quickly to remove out of the world.
One whom you so much contemn.
Philanthus, would you take this way
To assure your mistress of your affection?
No other ways then by my death after the issue∣rance of her disdain.
P'shew, you must not despair for the first denial.
Our hearts and tongues do not always agree.
And because I am to instruct you to gain your mistress,
Isle discover some part of women's disposition, to you;
Tho it be to our disadvantage.
Madam you shall infinitely oblige me.
First there's few of us what ere we seem,
But are content to be beloved by all that see us.
And those who are of birth may express love,
In their actions without offence, tho ne'er so many.
But he that comes to tell his mistress in words he loves, her,
Had need be first assured that she believes
That he hath worth enough to gain a mistress
Equal to her self in merits, should he make
Tender of his love else where: for when an other
Would receive that which is offered it does approve
The value of the gift, and sets the giver
Free from scorn.
Madam for this I thank you, but more I be∣seech you.
I will, it may be you believe you could not more•
Oblige your mistress to respect you then by giving
Her assurance of many oaths that you can never love
Any other Lady, tho she should much neglect you.
Madam, I do.
I thought so, mark a general error: whatso∣ere,
We are sure is ours, the worth of it doth lessen
In opinion, for we are still in pursuit
Of new and difficult things to attain: yet it is
As great a grief to us if our prisoners.
Should undo their chains as it is contentment
To enthral a new one and make another.
Women's servant ours, pleases above thought,
Because it is a testimony of our great virtue
And merit that drew him.
The Change may grow as well from his incon∣stance,
As Judgement in discerning the worthier.
At least he will add one to the number, and multiplying
Is the art most women study that are fair.
Are all so? Madam; are you so?
I did not tel you I would give you my particular
Character, it was the general I spake.
Madam, I take it for granted, you are not such.
For these you name, are faculty in their humours.
And therefore you being singular deserve more love,
Which trust me madam I must pay to You.
Not to Lucinda what ere I have seemed.
Nor ever loved I Miranthe.
How Philanthus?
Madam, tic true by all that can be sworn by.
That I only love Aurelia now, but how long.
It will continue, if she neglect me, that I cannot tell.
This is fine Juggling, do you make me disco∣ver
The weakness of our sex, and then assault my self.
I hate you, hence from my sight.
Madam, I do not believe you, you told me your self.
That women's hearts and tongues do not always agree.
But I told you withal I spoke not of my self.
And you granted too, I was not like other women.
Which you then made the argument of your love.
Therefore you must believe me when I say I hate you.
Yes when 'I do believe that, I deserve it.
You swore you thought me worthy when you went a∣bout
To persuade me from Miranthe, which assurance you
Said was necessary before the verbal protestation
Of affection, and fear not that you shall be too assured
That I esteem you, for I, according to your own rule
Will cease to love you when you use me ill.
Of which assure your self, for you have offended me much.
I much above expression, pray leave me to my self.
Madam I will, but for my own advantage.
For when I am gon, you cannot choose but consider,
That my merit to your words is equal to the best.
Deserver, henceforth I will not wo in words but action.
And if you love, each thought is of my faction.
Blessed opportunity.
It is well, this troubles me; yet sure it cannot much displease me.
For who in Philanthus can find the least defect?
When I persuaded him not to love Miranthe,
And thought it was a friendly care, I was deceived.
Sure then I loved, it could not grow thus in an instant.
How in an instant, do I love him then? no no.
I do not; yet it would trouble me to see him love ano∣there
I shall be troubled then.
Madam excuse me that I interrupt your pri∣vacie
Forced by the violence of my passion, for when I shall be once.
Certain of that which I strongly suspect,
There shall be nothing able to keep me
From sudden death; not your command,
Adrastus, what first troubles you?
First possible that you can ask me?
You see I do.
Madam, you know how entirely I gave my self,
Reserving no faculty of mind or body, to be employed
Other ways then by your Discretions, nor dare I say
I yet repent, tho I see another ready to reap
The fruit of my labours, it is Philanthus happy Philan∣thus
Whoe's the more fortunate in that hes not above me in merit,
In affection far beneath me, nor should I greeve,
To see him happy, were he not raised upon my ruins.
But I must say to hope to see him one day forsaken
Like my self: oh no I dare not, sure this change pro∣ceeds
From some defect in me which you believe
You have found, and not from your inconstancy.
Adrastus, the knowledge which I have had of your actions towards me,
And my own beauty, assured me that your loved.
But that my Curtsy had bred a belief in you,
That I desired you should do so, till now, I knew not of
Henceforward I shall set a remedy to that: For Philan∣thus
Being raised upon your ruins, tic a building of your fancy only.
But trust me tic strange you should be Jealous of what your ne'er
Possessed: but you believed you did, that was sufficient.
From this time know to value me and your self.
In so doing, you may regain that good opinion
I held of your judgment, which by this rash•… you have lost.
Lost, even so I am contemned, is this the ward
Of all my services, all my fair hopes
Thus blasted? This Philanthus was born to ruin 〈◊〉
In all attempts of war and peace, he robs me of prize,
What ere she seemed, till Philanthus supplanted me
My services were most acceptable.
I had not else forsook Miranthe for her, and well
I know, shoe's even with me already,
Furthering Philanthus, my Rival, in his affection.
Now I must look
For nought but scorns from Aurelia. Could I 〈◊〉 Philanthus
Yet with my self, it were some content; umh,
The way to do it, is, to continue the seeming friendsh•…
Which I bear him, so shall my plot be carried free
From suspicion: Hoe's of an open heart,
And such natures are easy to work on.
The Politician, when he hugs, does strike:
Rivals in Love and State, will do alike.
SIr, you have bound me to you by so many vours,
That you do give me cause to hope, that this
Discovery is not displeasing to you.
Come, leave this ceremony, it does not fit our loves.
If you do love my sister, the friendship I have vowed,
Ties me to aid you, although I know it may much
Prejudice me in my Father's love, should he know it;
For he so dotes upon my sister, that he believes
None but a god is worthy of her.
It is true, shoe's full of all that can be excellent
In women, yet so far do I prize you above mine own desires or hopes,
That could your sister recompense me with a love equal to mine,
And yet that love, purchased by you, prove prejudicial to you
I rather would give o'er the thought of love for ever,
At least in silence rather pine and die.
No, far be it from my friendship, to build my happiness,
Though ne'er so great, upon your smallest discontent.
You wrong my love in this, and undervalue me;
For, you do seem to say, I fear to hazard my fathers frown,
Though I could purchase for you what you so desire:
Now, by the gods, it was a most unkind thought;
Nay, from a man less honest, it would appear
Hypocrisy; or, do you think my youth hath not yet taught me,
What it is to be a friend? Know, Philanthus,
The few years I have past, have been employed,
To make me something capable of those parts,
Which most ennobles us; and I have found
Friendship to be the soul and essence of a man.
Therefore, believe me, since for your merits I have chose you
For a friend, your discontents, dangers, and happiness,
Are all mine; no, friend, I say, your growing love
Can plead for you, not without success.
She loves, but would not have you too assured on it,
Lest it should make you less esteem the purchase.
Sir, you, in this assurance of your friendship,
And her love, transport me with a double joy,
Not to be expressed in words. I should fall down,
And worship such a god-like friend, that thus
Bestows his favours on a desertlesse person,
Made only worthy by his love.
Still you forget our friendship, heaping your thanks
And praise on me, a burden my weak deserving
Cannot bear without much shame; let it suffice,
My love makes me a servant to your wishes;
If they do take effect, it is your own merits,
Whom the gods cannot refuse, that's the cause of it.
My friendship only a willing instrument,
Strives to bring their divine wills to pass.
But Oh! friend.
Why sigh you, Sir?
I have long liked, and now I fear I love,
And therefore think, friendship obliges me
To tell you, yet with the reservation of her name:
For shoe's so cruel, so proud, if it be no sacrilege
In me a Lover, to give that attribute.
I say, shoe's so disdainful, and there's so little hope,
Nay rather such a certain impossibility,
That she will never love me, that I am ashamed
To name the Tiger, that will in time, I know,
Consume my heart.
Tell me her name, and send me to her, and I shall quickly
Make her know, shoe's cruel to her self.
Oh friend, I do not wish to lose you,
It were the ready way to make you false; such a faith as yours
Perhaps, for once, might bring you off, free and un∣touched;
But should you often see her, and converse, you'd soon
Break faith with me and all the world, to gain
One smile from her; yet, even that smile were death,
Except you might enjoy them often: the deprivation
Of a good possessed, being our greatest misery.
Sir, may I not know this wonder, for such I must believe her,
From your love; but more, that you believe she could
Taint my faith. Venture to name her.
If you urge it as a duty, belonging to our friend∣ship,
I must tell you; otherways I would for some
Respects conceal it.
Except you mean to employ me to serve you,
Twill be to no advantage.
If you will, I'll tell you.
Faith, Sir, I shall not take it ill, if you conceal her;
May be, it is her will, because her cruel usage
Of you, if known, would be thought folly.
It is her will indeed; yet, friend, she hath more wit then all her sex.
Sir, were I not a Lover too, I should believe you.
I dare not let you see her, so to approve it;
She'll quickly find your worth to exceed mine.
Now is my friendship from least taint most free:
If she knew both, there might grow jealousy.
Pass not beyond this score, I charge thee, Father, upon thy allegiance; we are now within the verge of the Court. Away, make haste, to turn those dirty acres into crowns, to buy the place you wot of.
Well son, even god be with thee.
Weep not, I say, but get you home, and re∣member my blessing to the old woman, your wife; bid her not be proud of me, though she have reason: Many a sweet-fac'd youth, like my self, hath miscarried at Court, coming to be a Favourite; but I'll buy't, and make sure work, I.
Well, well.
What, not gone yet, I think I shall be trow∣bled with you. Sure I was a bastard, I could not be his son, hoe's such a coxcomb.
Like enough.
There have been Courtiers in our town, I and my mother was worth the whistling after, I can tell ye
I doubt it not.
But come, how do you like me?
Believe me, Sir, yee'r wondrous well accountred.
Well accoutred, is that a courtly phrase?
Yes.
I have heard some word near it in the Country. And how do you like my vassal?
Very proper.
Is he not well accoutred? What's he, what's he, Sir?
Some poor slight fellow, you must be surly to such, and look big.
Nay, Sir, I can look big, I learnt that of my father's Bull,
He comes towards me.
Noble Sir, I shall be wondrous proud of your acquaintance.
Then you shall never have it.
Why, Sir?
Pride is a deadly virtue, humility a sin, that will better become your clothes. Look I not big? Ha! stay, what's he, what's he.
Some great man, by those that sue to him: you must abase your garb, and with an obsequious look salute him.
Sir, I profess my self the vassal to your Dog; if you keep none, I am a most devout and obsequious servant to your Cat.
I shall desire to have the providing of her Mice.
Sir, I am full of employments, excuse me, I must suddenly give his Grace an account.
A great man certainly, it is well if I can come to speak with him this two hours.
Sir, may I entreat to know, what place you hold in Court? this Gentleman, I can assure you, is worthy your acquaintance.
No, no, Sir; alas, I'm an ignorant, and know nothing, wondrous simple, believe it; a week hence will be fair, I'll wait your leisure. But what's your place, Sir, I beseech you honour me, Sir.
Pray, Sir, satisfy him.
Sir, I'm a favourite to his Grace.
What luck have you, Sir.
I, is it not good luck? Why, Sir, I come to buy a Favourites place, and think I am as fit for it as ano∣there man, and will give as much money too.
Believe it, Sir, you must pay well for it, it is a place of great advantage.
I know it, Sir, but one may have it for money, I am assured on it.
Yes, you shall have mine on good conditions.
Good or ill conditions, I care not, that's all one, I'll have it.
Sir, you know not yet the duties, nor the privy∣ledges of the place.
That's true, pray what are they?
First, you may be always next the Duke, and so advance, or else keep back suites, as you favour or dis∣like the person.
Nay, I'll dislike all suites, that are not like mine own.
or mine.
I, or thine.
The great men will give thee the first good-mor∣row, perhaps show more respect, they are very courteous in this age: The Ladies, thei'I observe ye too, it may be, more then their husbands.
That's brave in faith.
Sir, hark ye, you must not seem so desirous of it. Let me alone to talk with him, and make the bargain; let's go to the next Tavern.
Sir, I do not greatly care for this Favourites place of yours, I hear, a man shall never live in peace, my ears will always be glowing; they'I do nothing but talk of me, and they'I be hanged before they speak any good.
Though you deserve ne'er so much. Come, let's go.
Nay, that's certain, they'I misinterpret every action, if it prosper not; their faith in that is like to Turks.
Sir, I would have you know, I care not ijd. for your place; but if you'I go to the next Tavern, he shall agree with you for it.
Fie, Sir, you'I spoil all.
But is there nothing the Duke may except against, in your friend?
Except against me? it is impossible, he ne'er saw me in's life: why should he except against me then, am not I as fit for a favourite, as another man?
It is but a needful objection.
Except against me?
Pacify your self.
I tell you Sir, if he should but think of excepting against me, I would return into the Country presently, as wise as I came.
Nay, good Sir, it is impossible.
And he were ten Dukes, I'd send him to seek a Favourite, I warrant you. Except against me? what me?
Nay, Sir.
I tell you, Sir, should the Duke use me so,
His Dukeship does not a right Gudgen know.
Believe me, noble Philanthus, there's nothing
That in the passages of life hath more contented me,
Then the happiness of your friendship. The advantages of which,
You have now had, at this and all other exercises,
In the person of any other, would have given me cause
Of grief and envy; but since it was my beloved
Philanthus, that robed me of the glory,
The theft was so far from displeasing,
That with the prise you won my heart too.
Your friendship, Sir, does make you attribute
To merit, that which was due unto my fortune only,
Or rather to your policy, who by permitting
Me to win this prize, thinks to encourage me
Against some others, weaker then your self;
And when I am grown something rich, by little vi∣ctories o'er them,
You'I show, you only let me grow to this,
That with more ease at once, you might increase your store.
In this you overcome me too, but sure in love
You cannot; I think, were I still certain to enjoy
Your friendship, I ne'er should think of marriage:
For to say true, how can there be, in vain
Fantastic women, half that contentment found,
That's in a perfect friend.
It is certain, in vain Fantastic women, there no content.
But, Sir, excuse me, if I say, you're in an error,
If you hold all women so.
This moves him, I'll try him farther. Are you infected with that error,
To think, there can be any other good in women,
Than only, that they do increase mankind?
Certainly they are good for something else.
Yes, to set debate twixt the dearest friends,
To ruin husbands in their states and honours,
Nay, Kingdoms, Empires; in a word, for certain,
As they bring men into the world, so certain
Do they ruin all our joys.
You speak from malice, friend, I fear, not from judgment;
For you must give your opinion the lie, when you con∣cider,
That our Prince that governs us had a mother,
Who, whilst she lived, did govern him.
It works. She was a Queen ordained by hey∣ven and so
Indeed, that she partaks none of her sexe's
Ill, nor weaknesses. Name another.
Shoe's easily seen, did not your malice blind you;
The Princess Aurelia.
As shoe's a part of her divine Mother, I grant her excellent;
But that laid by, shoe's but a woman.
But a woman, would you have her a monster, would ye?
I must close with him, I am satisfied.
How his blood stirs at naming her.
Sir, I'll admit those two to have some worth.
You had a mother Sir, and you have now a sister,
Most perfect as I hear; will you bar them
From all that's worthy?
The Duke calls for you, he thinks your Lord∣ships well
On your journey by this time.
Pray let him know no other.
Dear friend, your pardon.
I do not like this carriage of Adrastus,
He makes a greater show of love to me
Then usual, pretending a strange hatred
Against the nobler sex of women; noble, because
Dearest Aurelia's one. How blessed am I,
Though I dare only whisper to my self, I am beloved by her.
My plot was prosperous, &amp; she one of my best assistants,
To whose dear care I owe my happiness,
For by thy means, I did receive the first hope,
That I was beloved above what she made show of.
And from me you must receive assurance of the contrary.
Ha! that Aurelia loves me not.
Shoe's so far from loving you now, that she Doth hate her self, that ever she did
Oh! I am wretched, from what a pitch of hap∣pines
Thou hast thrown me in an instant, it was unkindly done; yet,
So soon to let me see thou hast abused me
By thy flatteries, in this thou hast disturbed,
More then informed my judgment.
How?
For, what care I for knowledge of that truth,
That brings a certain ruin?
She did love you, and may again; crosses in love are ordinary.
She'll hear me speak, that I may know the cause,
At least, of her displeasure.
I know she will not, her heart's so swollen with some offences.
I have no other comfort left me but my inno∣cence
Each accident doth cross me. Tomorrow I must
Leave the Court, to wait upon the Prince;
How shall I get an opportunity to speak to her,
The loss of time will ruin me, I must
By Letters make her know my innocence.
When you are gone, if I can learn the cause
Of her displeasure, l'le write.
Thou art all my comfort.
See, Linda, what I found too in my Cabinet,
Looking indeed for one of my dear brother,
Kind Adrastus Letters.
Believe me, Madam, the language of this Letter,
Considering the sweetness of the youth that sent it,
Would have moved pity, if not procured love,
From any other, but your cruel self.
Alas, good wench, I see thou hast a tender heart;
In truth I would it had been writ to thee.
Well, Madam, you think none worthy but your brother Adrastus.
I do indeed believe so; who equals him in worth?
And till I find one something near him, I shall not
Think of Marriage, I assure thee; for, my beauty,
Which gives place to none, will not permit me
To accept a servant, that is not equal to the best de∣server.
Madam, though natural affection stop your ears,
Against all reports, that do not sound Adrastus praise;
Yet, I by others hear, Philanthus and the young Prince,
In all respects far praised above him.
Philanthus!
Why, Madam, speak you with so much scorn, hoe's now
Accounted the glory of the Court, a man framed
Both for Love and Arms.
Pish.
You never saw him.
Nor ne'er desire.
Well, Madam, you are strangely averse, take heed
Love do not lay some punishment upon you,
Equal to your contempt of his great deity.
Contempt of his great deity, had he a temple
Standing near, dedicated to him, and to his
Mother both, I would go in and yerk his little worship:
Or should she say, I were not fairer then her self,
And more to be adored, I'd break her Statue,
And those, whom by my beauty are captive made,
Should in th'stead of it, erect my Picture, frowning too,
That any should presume to love me; yet in those
Clouds, more powerful to draw men's hearts to my devotion,
Then she, with all her wanton blandish∣mints.
Daughter, me thinks you're sad, is it for your
Brothers absence,—hoe's now upon return.
I am not sad, Sir, it is but your conjecture.
Adrastus, are there no sports, no pleasures to delight her?
None, Sir, the Court is clouded in the absence• of the Prince.
What means this Trumpet? one go see.
A stranger Knight, Sir, one that desires to be admitted to your presence.
We'll hear what he demands: What would ye?
Great Duke, know, that this Knight is hither come,
To repair himself by Arms, of an injury
He hath received; nor can he fear, so just a Prince
As your self, will break an honourable custom,
That hath been so long used amongst your Ancestors.
It cannot, nor it shall not be refused.
Is Adrastus in this company?
Yes, I am the man.
Then, Sir, my Master will maintain with his life,
That you have belied a Knight, equal to your self
In merit, in whose behalf hoe's come to prove,
That you have wickedly invented that,
Which you have said of him.
Though I do not know your Master, which might excuse
A man of my birth; yet, confident in mine own innocence,
As having wronged no man, I do accept the Combat.
Get me my Armour, nor shall it longer be deferred,
There cannot be more noble witness.
Adrastus, I prise you too much, to suffer it.
How, Sir? then may my arms rot off, if ever I
Lift them in your service; and yet my heart
Misgives me in this occasion, more
Then ever. Push is it not before divinest,
Aurelia? I shall do wonders.
What can this stranger be? or what can
Be the wrong, he now seeks right of from Adrastus,
Whose valour makes him famous through the world?
Save your refulgent grace.
How now, who are you?
A poor favourite of you graces, that desires to be better acquainted.
A favourite of mine, how came you so?
Knowing my self fitly qualified, and well ac∣coutred, as they say, I made bold to venture a sum of money.
Is this he?
Yes, Sir.
I am bound to you, it seems you love me well, that would buy my service, venturing in it my refusal of ye too.
Yes, in good faith, I love ye very well; I have heard in the Country a good report of you; besides, you're bound to love me too, by my place.
Who swore you, your own imagination?
Swore me, why, do you misdoubt me? I war∣rant ye, Sir, I'll execute it rarely.—Stand by there, the Duke is busy, another time he will hear you.
We shall be troubled with this Ass.
Take away this fellow, you hear what the Duke says,
Take him away, this is not a time for fooling, I am serious.
Your grace is wise, it is true indeed. See the Councill-Chamber made ready, it is a business of great importance, worthy your fear. I would my old father were here, we two would advise you rarely i faith.
A way, coxcomb.
He has a villainous head of his own, he will tell you how many acres of land are in your Dukedom, and never measure it.
How?
Another shall measure it for him.
Away with this fool.
Slight! what do you use a young Gentleman and a favourite thus, that comes out of his mere love to Court?
Hoe's quite discouraged, that rude fellow hath spoiled all.
Not a whit, if I do not raise him to a belief above what he had, ne'er trust my skill.
It was you Sir, that made me believe, I should rise at Court.
Why, so you do; but you are no ordinary Fa∣vourite, they rise first, and fall after commonly; but you shall rise after your fall.
It is not without example.
Are the Knights ready?
Yes, Sir, see where they enter.
Then let the justice of the injured's cause pro∣tect them
Was ever seen a braver Combat?
It were pity to lose such Knights, perhaps their quarrel,
Truly understood, may not be great.
The stranger does appear the braver.
I fear Adrastus. Sweet daughter, make trial of your power,
To stay the Combat, it is an an office will become you.
Most willingly. Sir, I beseech you hold.
Traitor, this baseness will express thee.
Hold, Sir, I adjure you by her whom you
Best love, give me his life.
Let him confess the wrong he has basely
Done to me, and her whom you adjure me
By; and he shall live by your command,
Though far unworthy to be so obliged.
I am dead else, I do, or any thing.
Live then, to be more miserable then death could make thee.
Be careful of Adrastus, but see this stranger
Receive no injury, from any of Adrastus friends.
Though ye have fought with one that we love dearly,
Yet, I so much admire your curtsy
And valour, that I should think my Court
Much honoured by your stay.
Friends, if you love me or my fortunes, re∣avenge me,
The way I leave to your discretion.
Enough, we'll die or doot',
Notwithstanding the Dukes command.
LIghted that armed Knight that rid fast by, at that little house?
Hee did Madam, this fine day hath tempt you
To walk further then you think: they say there's often
Robberies done in this wood.
Alas poor wench art afraid.
What are these that make this haste.
Oh Madam, thieves I fear.
Saw you a Knight ride by here, dear Lady first you
Well met sir, yes I saw him, how does my bro∣there?
Oh speak, I long to know, I dreamt of him to night.
Madam I fear your brother is no more.
Ha? dead? Oh speak it not, for I shall bear him company.
Rather show us which way that Knight went, the Author of his death.
That so we may revenge his murder.
Oh heavens, murdered? yet you are just ye powers
That makes me thus the instrument of his revenge.
I will not wash this hand kercher in womanish tears,
But first in the murderers blood, then cleanse it again
With tears for my dear Brother.
But Madam, which way went he?
Isle bring you where you cannot miss him, tic
Not long since I saw him enter a little house.
As we came walking hither.
Now his wounds are dressed, hee sleeps soundly.
Alas good gentleman, he takes our poor entertainment kindly.
He said at first he would come hither when he went to fight.
I wonder his man that dressed him, stays so long.
It is not far to the next Town.
What are these? thieves?
Stop their mouths, he sleeps, shall I strike him dead?
No let me see the Murderer first, sure he looks ugly.
You need not kill him, let the law seize on him.
Madam I would not have him wake, hoe's stout.
'Twil not be in our powers to compel him.
By all the gods, it is Philanthus, but he shall die.
Stay—it must be by my hand, no other.
I am most injured, and so most interested in the re∣avenge.
Alas you are not able.
Leave it to me, or else by all that's sacred:
Isle lay you open to the Law give me your Dagger:
Retire and leave me.
Alas Madam you.
Are you such fools, not to be content
To have a dangerous enterprise effected, and your selves
Freed from danger of the Law, none will supect me.
Madam, if he should wake.
Stay you without, and if you hear me call
For help: come in, not, otherwise.
We dare not disobey you, her own great spirit
And the much love she bears her brother, makes her,
Forget her sex.
But we shall lose your thanks, since she performs it.
Not a whit, he shall not know it for us, how ere
Shoe's a witness of our zeal to do it; and we are free
From danger of the Law, if ever the deed be known.
It is done, away, he welters in his blood, leave all to me.
But what for these?
Fie, no, it is unnecessary, by giving Gold,
Isle make them speechless ever, but now I better
Think, bear them into some wood and bind them
But hurt them not.
Madam, it is possible, your brother may not yet b• dead.
How ere this act will please him much.
Not dead? this may be malice, then if it be known,
I'll Justify the Act, if not the thanks and recompense
Be you from him. Isle send, and know the truth of all.
Oh Madam I never thought you could have done a wickedness like this.
The wounds which you have given will strike
Your own soul deep one day.
Oh fool the wounds I have received are far more dangerous,
Then those that I have given.
Madam your own hand's cut.
It is so, all the blood thou see came only from thence.
Let me with better leisure look on what I have preserved.
His travel makes him sleep sound.
Madam, how blessed were you to change your cruel resolution.
Some Angel prompted you to save him from those
Murderers, by seeming, as if you did your self intend to be one.
There was no other way; but the good angel
That prompted me, was Love; it was strange I should
Be taken by a sleeping man, that have from all eyes
That have seen me, almost banished sleep,
To think upon my beauty, which must be now
My part for him; for, I have lost my self
By saving him, since I am sister to his enemy.
Yet, he may love like me, when he intends revenge:
But shall I be so lovely when I sleep, and he behold
Some stand ready to murder me, so making
Pity usher love into his heart, as into mine?
For all ways else have been before attempted
To make me amorous, none prevailed: Oh no,
It cannot be, he stirs, away.
I must do something,
What, I cannot tell:
Who loves, and dares not say, he lives in hell.
Miranthe, have you known valour, and so little curtsy,
meet in the person of one man so fully,
As in this Knight that overcame Adrastus?
Madam, his valour did appear to all,
But wherein he behaved himself discourteously,
I am yet to learn.
What Knight but he, would have refused to stay
Their Combat, when I, a Princess,
Not to be contemned, besought him?
Oh, Madam, how unjust you are, since you accuse him
In that, wherein you ought to thank him?
You saw, when through your fear you fell, he turned
To take you up, by which he did receive
A wound, I feat too mortal, by that most base
Adrastus; and if he had given o'er the Combat
Afterword, when you desired, his enterprise
Had been most vain from the beginning:
Adrastus had not then confessed, that you or any
Might have heard, the lies he had invented.
But Philanthus is most unfortunate, to have
His best deservings still misinterpreted.
How! was it Philanthus that fought? me thought indeed,
The voice was his▪ but he being thought so far off,
Kept me from being certain.
It escaped my tongue before I was aware,
Now I must make it good. Yes, Madam, it was Phi∣lanthus,
To whom I did give notice in a Letter,
How much Adrastus injured you and him,
By saying, Philanthus boasted of the great love
You bare him, in every place, and that you partly did
Believe, he spake but truth, which was the cause
Of your displeasure.
Is it then Philanthus hath done me this displea∣sure?
Durst he put my honour on the hazard of fortune?
Durst he capitulate and make conditions,
When I did beg Adrastus life? am I so miserable,
That I was gladder to receive, then he to give
What I did ask?
Oh poor Philanthus, how happy art thou, if the wound
Thou did receive, helping her up, have freed
Thee from those greater torments, which her cruelty
Prepares, in recompense of all thy faithful services.
But, Madam when I think on it, did not you say,
He was to right himself with his sword, if he knew
No other remedy; and with more secrecy, or more
Discretion, it was to bar the action, all
Thinking Philanthus to be far hence,
Even when he drew their eyes to wonder at his valour.
Peace, no more of him, you praise him with∣out cause.
Without cause?
When as his death, cause by your cruelty,
More then his wounds, shall make the world know,
It was he that overcame Adrastus, and for your sake,
As well as for his own. How will the virtuous
People tax you, of your great injustice?
I must confess, I should be very sorry his death
Should give the world a knowledge of my follies.
Be not you cruel to him, and prevent it.
Nay, let him love himself, and save me a labour.
Madam, he cannot love that, which he thinks you hate.
Hoe's neither worthy of my hate nor love.
Madam, it is impossible there should be that in∣difference
Towards Philanthes, whom you must either love,
Or hate extremely.
Well then, I do not hate him, my brother; upon your life
Let him not know, that I do know the stranger was
Philanthus. Miranthe, seek not to excuse him, hoe's a most
Discourteous Knight, and I do hate him deadly.
Who's that she speaks of?
The stranger-Knight.
Believe me, fester, you had no reason.
Well, Sir, I know mine own reasons best.
But, sister, when you hear mine, which are stron∣ger,
You'll be of another mind.
You may as soon persuade the fixed Stars
To move, as me from my opinion. It was sure
Some enchantment that overcame Adrastus.
Then you'll abandon reason quite, this truly shows,
You women think your foes your friends, your friends your foes.
Villains, for what respect is it, that you do pre∣serve
Me longer, to torment me? why did you not rather
Kill me, when you found me sleeping first?
It was not in our commission, you are reserved to feel
A thousand torments, to which death is a pleasure.
From what person living have I deserved such usage?
I'll let you know your misery, the more to tor∣meant you.
Know, that we are servants to a Lady, the most mali∣tious
And deformed, that ever lived; so great
An enemy to virtue, that it is her only study
To destroy those men in whom it doth inhabit.
Her vigilance for mischief is ever busy.
It seems she hath found you out to wreak her spite upon,
Intending here to keep you ever, except she shall
Prove merciful, and kill you.
If her hate to me only proceed from a belief,
That I am virtuous, it seems she knows me not,
I am not such. But if thou be a gentle villain,
Tell me, where I am.
Far from the house, in which we found you slay∣ding,
And now in the most loathed Prison, that ever eyes
Beheld, if eyes can be of use in so much darkness;
Your chiefest companions must be Toads, Snakes,
And Frogs, except two villains sometimes, as now, ready stand,
To inflict torments, that cannot be expressed.
Oh that I could but see, and were unloosed, that with my fist
I might reward thee for this kind relation.
Screech Owls and Ravens, shall fill thy ears continually
With dismal sounds. Hark.
Sure some power, pitying the misery that I must suffer,
Gives me this farewell to all happiness.
Now begins your torments, but that they may be more
Sensible, let him see him his misery.
Amazement seizes me, is this a loathed Prison?
Or this the harsh and dismal notes of wicked birds?
Or look these men as they would stab, rather adore me.
What do I fool my self, this is a dream.
I am sure asleep.
Propose your wishes, and we are ready to effect them,
As far as lies in human power.
This is no dream, I am awake, this is my hand,
And these my hairs, I feel pain, now I pull them.
Sure it is a vision, or worse enchantment; the wicked Mistress
Of this house, to all her other ills, is certainly a witch.
I am confirmed it is so, for here she comes,
Changed in a form equal to Aurelia, and far more
Gently does she look upon me, than she did at our parting.
Sir, you are welcome, if there be defect in any thing,
It comes from negligence of servants, not from my will.
A valiant Knight, and fly thus from a Lady!
What should I fear, she cannot hurt my mind
With all her art, how ere she may my person.
Besides, she'll change her form, and look before she do me ill.
This shape can nought produce, that can offend.
Pray you sir, sit.
I will.
Not so far off, if you please.
You think I fear.
No, Sir; but I perceive, you are not confident of what you see.
Sir, recollect your self; for what you heard
Before from these, was but what I directed,
With an intent indeed, to set off, as with a foil,
This mean but hearty entertainment.
I dare not trust you, you speak too well,
To mean well, since I am a stranger,
And no way have deserved these favours.
My Lady, Sir, hath told you truth.
Save your pains, leave us, I'll clear his under∣standing.
The danger now approaches, if she be a witch.
Wickedness desires no witness.
Sir, if ere you loved, which yet I wish you had not,
Then the discourse I am to make, will with more ease
Approach your understanding, and soon gain belief.
I am a Lady as you see, not much deformed;
The Servants and the stuff here are not borrowed,
Nor will it hurt my state thus daily to entertain
Such, as I make my friends; and such my birth is,
As bids me live thus without tax of pride.
I am mine own disposer, no Parents to blame
My disobedience, though my choice should only
Please my self: They live not, or if they did,
My fortune was not wholly left by them.
You are in a happy state, since you have power
To make some noble spirit fortunate, and you in him.
Sure she is really what she relates.
I might have been most happy, if my unlucky Stars
Had not in one particular crossed me.
Your curtsy obliges me, to ask you wherein?
I vow she weeps, the tears, like Oriental Pearls,
Drop from her eyes making a path down
Her most lovely cheeks, that may direct the looker on,
If lost in wonder, as I am, to find the way
Back to those heavenly springs, from whence all treasure
Flows, rich above Tagus, or what poets ever feigned.
Speak, gentle Lady, why this sorrow?
They are not tears of sorrow, but of anger,
To see my liberty thus lost, that liberty,
Which I have so much prised, as some have thought
There was just cause to think me proud, and then to lay
My self and all my fortunes, even at mine enemies feet.
Oh misery, have I not cause, think you, to weep,
And curse my cruel Stars, that force me to do this?
I must confess, it is a hard fate for to be sub∣jest
To ones enemy: But sure your merits have the power to turn
That enmity to friendship, if you please.
Be plain, and let me know your meaning;
And, with the hazard of my life, I'll serve you.
Then thus: I hated you above all creature living,
The cause seek not to know, for it is impossible; nay came
With an intent to see you murdered; but when I saw you
Though you then slept, the graces all, me-thought,
Dwelt in you face, and so protected you from harm;
That I that came with all that malice, became
Your sole preserver, and not content with that, straight way
I made you absolute commander of me and mine.
You amaze me.
But not intending that you ever should know me,
Nor the place of my abode, if you returned not love,
I made my servants bring you thus blind fold
Hither, lest you might boast my love hereafter.
Madam, it is a most strange discourse that you have made,
And yet you so deliver it, that I must think it
Truth; but what to answer, I am ignorant.
It is best I should be plain, since you desire to be so.
Then must you know, that my unhappy Stars
Make me incapable to receive the unequal treasure,
Which you offer in your rich self. A Lady, like your self,
To say more fair, were false, hath long since robed
Me of the power, to be my own disposer.
I feared indeed, that so much worth as you are Master of,
Could not be indisposed of, since whore's that woman
Would not use her utmost art, to gain a servant,
That she might so justly glory in. I desire to know
Her name yet, that I may pay her beauty and her wis∣dome,
That respect it merits, for loving you.
Madam, I must not; but, trust me, shoe's too wise to love
Me still, for she hath found me now of late, much 'much
Defective; but I do hope, my constancy will
Make supply; for, I vow, my affection and my life have
But one date.
Say you so, this protestation hath much les∣sened
The opinion I held of your worth: Perhaps you say
This, to avoid my importunity, which I do too much
Apprehend. I am no ravisher; may be, when you shall see
Some greedily pursue what you do, with such scorn, refuse,
And those perhaps your equals, you'll find too late,
You fondly have pursued your misery, and fled
From a great happiness, and begin to make you
Feel your folly▪ I'll tie you to this hard condition,
As I believe you will account it.
What is it, Lady? there's but one women's threatening,
That can affright me.
Say you so, I'll try that; tell me that women's name,
The place of her abode, or by my hopes of happiness,
I'll make you the most miserable man alive;
For, you shall never see again, what you so cove•• enjoy.
You are witty in your anger, this is no of•••… of that great love,
That you professed; it may be, time will make me
Better know your worth. Me-thinks you look m•… lovely
Then you did, though at the first fair.
Oh Sir, do you begin to flatter: Her name, name,
And with it, liberty; if you deny, to prison.
No other way.
None, as I live; can you expect from me, the injured,
Any favour? Could I invent a way more to afflict y••
You should be sure to feel it.
What shall I do? the choice is hard:
How can this any way advantage you?
If she be more deserving than my self,
I shall not then rapine to be refused; if less,
Contemn you for your folly; and do not fear,
That I will make another partner of
The secret, which may be troubles you.
If I have not lost it, I am happy; read the di∣reaction of this Letter.
Let's see it.
Aurelia made me so direct my Letters, so••… deceive,
If any by misfortune should be seen.
To the fair hands of the most admired Lucinda.
How's this? he must not see my blushing, this cannot be.
It may; How? I am transported betwixt joy and fear?
Swear by the gods, Lucinda is the creature you most affect.
There's no help, shoe's too wise to be deceived.
Come, swear.
By Aurelia's self, the greatest oath, I lvoe no other then Aurelia.
All my hopes thus again vanished. You are free,
And I the most unfortunate. Sir, you must be con∣tented,
They bear you back as you came hither; and think,
What you have seen or heard, was but a dream.
Thus I refuse, cruel Aurelia, for thy sake,
A beauty, that the powerful gods might rivals make.
Sir, we must bear you many leagues hence.
Even where you please.
He's stark mad, with the conceit of his Favourites place.
You'll ne'er make him know himself.
The better: you see, he makes good sport at Court.
Take heed, it may be there are some that do be∣lieve, you brought him to mock them.
If there be any there so simple to believe that, then I have personated those I know not of, &amp; I am glad on it
I, but to touch upon the name or actions of a Fa∣vourit, may bear equal danger with those of Princes.
If this fool Favourite of ours do trouble any other, tell them, that Jewels receive their lustre from a foil; if then not satisfied, they're near a kin to him in judge∣meant, and envious to me; yet, I forgive them, know∣ing their malice cannot hurt my innocence, who ra∣there wish to receive an injury my self, then touch at any, whose fooling is not their greatest merit; I mean,
their only hope of rising. Here comes our Gallant.
Tell my Lords man, I am wondrous busy, and cannot speak with him these two hours.
I will, an't please your honour. He's stark mad, but I must humour him.
What Lord's man?
There's none to speak with him, it is his fancy.
In good faith, Sir, I cannot do it for you.
I am very sorry for it.
I must not waste my stock of favour, on so un∣reasonable businesses. Greater profit. I, ye say true; I know it will be the greater profit: But, Sir, twill like∣wise raise much envy against me, and I am not very well settled; the great men apprehend the danger of my rising, and study how to give a stop to all my hopes.
Very like, Sir.
Oh, Sir, assure your self, in any other thing I shall be ready to serve you. Farewell, noble Sir.
Now I must go.
Pox o'this coxcomb, why does he trouble me? Yet, it is good policy to speak him fair to his face, I may have use of him. Please your grace, this is a friend of mine, a deserving man.
Alas, Sir.
I humbly thank your grace. Your suit is gran∣ted.
Is it?
But with great difficulty. Sir, this mans suit is most impertinent, himself an idle, ill natured, and se∣ditious fellow; I have known him long. Away, you're saucy. Madam, your husband shall have the place, I vow it is for your sake only. Command you? no, Madam: I'll wait on you at your lodging, sweet Ma∣dam.
Gentlemen, you must pardon me, I cannot hear you now, you see his grace hath sent for me in haste, pray tell him that I come. You are importunate, Get the Coach there hoe.
Yes, Sir.
This is direct madness, and yet he speaks more sense, than ere he did in his life, but that he speaks to no body.
Nay, th'Ass is strangely mixed; sometimes he will have starts of wit, that would almost cousin a man.
He would pass for a very accomplished Gentle∣man amongst some women; but that his hoping to be a Favourite discovers him.
Slave, not my Coach ready?
What, the scene's changed now, the Lady is Sprat again.
My Coach, thou cur.
How many horses, Sir?
Six, thou peasant.
An't please your honour, will not Cut, and your father's dung-Cart serve to day, I'll be the Coachman.
Be dumb, thou traitor, dost thou not know, Obedience, not advice, belongs to servants; but I will teach thee how to be malapert, thou Broke.
Nay, Sir, for this time let me beg his pardon; be∣sides, Sir, spend not your rage so poorly. Hark you, Sir.
How?
It must be so, your reputation is in danger else; a Favourite must be noble, of a great spirit, careless of danger.
Why, Sir, then I am right; I care so little for
danger, I would ne'er come near it; and if danger ap∣proach me, it had better keep farther off, it shall be sure of cold entertainment.
You are wise, Sir, I believe it.
Wise, I would have you know,
Ere all be done, the world shall think me so.
I, Sir, we find the weight of it.
HOW strange a fortune have I run, since I did leave
The Court; but it most vexes me, to be ungrateful to
Her, that saved my life, though not by love; yet there
Might be some other way to serve her, did I know
Her name. Why, sure me thinks I'm free, since it is her will,
That bars me from the means, to know her. I have
No comfort left, but in the faithful friendship of the Prince.
His Sister is become cruel, I fear inconstant.
Adrastus, how will he entertain me?
Ha, is it his ghost, or he himself? he lives I my hopes are vain.
What means he, he cannot suspect it was I that overcame him.
I must dissemble. My dearest friend, where have you been
These many days? How it joys me to have you in these arms?
A Serpent or a Fury had been more welcome.
The Court, Sir, languishes in your absence, and reason,
Wanting you, the lustre of it.
Rather in your sickness, Sir; Now you are well, it will recover quickly.
You have heard, it seems, of my disaster.
I heard, Fortune envying your worth, became your enemy.
But, was the Combat equal, had he no odds in Horse nor Arms?
Something there was in that, but my respect to the Princess
Was most prejudicial to me; yet since, she hath
Requited me, with so much love and care of my health,
That I esteem my self most happy to have received those wounds
And with them, such assurance of her affection.
How's this?
I'll vex his soul with jealousy?
It cannot be.
If he accuse me for these words, I'll combat him,
And so recover my honour lost, or lose my life.
It was fortune, not his valour, that of raceme me.
Oh woman, woman, what art thou?
Philanthus, what is it that troubles you? if any secret grief,
Discover it to me, whom you may boldly trust;
For I have told you, what to no other creature
Living I would discover, though wracked.
I am wracked indeed.
Come, speak man, be free, my friendship to you does command it.
I am of a sudden sick.
And that's my case: How I could hug my self for this?
Your pardon, Sir, I am not very well, I'll to my Chamber.
Shall I wait on you?
By no means.
A fine excuse, alas poor shallow lover.
Fortune, why dost thou thus assist an ignorant
Against me? Why should she love him, and neglect me
Thus, that am so much in Art his Master? he has a smoother face,
And more youth about him; th'Adamants,
That draw a giddy Lady. I see him coming back,
I do not like it; I'll make as if I did not see him.
Friend. He goes away. Adrastus.
I cannot hear.
He will not hear. How base a wretched thing
Is a dissembler of which Adrastus is the chief.
With what a show of love he entertained me,
As if his soul were joyed at sight of me;
When by the lie he did invent of me, and of the Prin∣cesse,
I know he hates me: What a madness is it then in me,
To believe that, which he spoke of her love to him;
He's sure too cunning to discover it, if it were true,
To me especially. Child that I was, I now find out his plot,
Suffering my passion to give him an assurance
Of my affection to Aurelia, which before
He only could suspect.—See the sweet Prince.
Thou partner of my soul, where hast thou been?
Oh Sir, the strangest fortune hath befallen me, since
I received your Letter, that ever man encountered,
Too long to be told you now. But how go matters at Court?
What say they of the stranger, I mean, of me?
My sister most unjustly hates you, and no persuasions
Can as yet alter her, as you're a stranger too.
I left her with a Gypsy and his daughter, who tells
The strangest things that ever were heard; indeed he tells
You almost what you can desire to know, men's for∣tunes past,
And, I think, that which is to come too, if he please:
Sure hoe's really a Conjurer,
I long to see and talk with this rare man,
But more your beauteous sister, if she will dain
To cast her heavenly eyes on so despised a subject.
Come, fear it not, time will pacify that unjust anger,
That she conceived against you.
I fear she is inconstant.
If she love any other, nay, if she love not Phi∣lanthus,
She's no more my sister, but in name; a stranger
To my blood and my affection.
I do fear, if there be any body by, they'll discover
By my distemper, the affection, which except to your dearselfe,
I have from all concealed.
It shall be as you desire it. Come, leave these down-cast looks;
I could complain of my hard fate in love;
Here's a greater witness of my Mistress scorn than ever,
She almost swears here never to love me;
There was some hope before, but I forget.
Each one in his own cause is tedious,
Taxes an other that's guilty in the same.
Come, Sir, what can you say to this hand?
You have been much in love, and there was cause
You should be so, your servant was most worthy.
But you of late have been unkind, perhaps
You love another; I can, but will not tell you at this time.
This is partly truth. Show him your hand.
I defy him to tell any thing of me.
You're a good dull soul, you neither think of love nor hate;
To wait upon your Lady is all your pleasure.
In troth it is true.
Pray, Sir, look on mine.
You're wondrous amorous, and have already changed
Three Servants, the better for the worse still.
Upon my knowledge, Sir, you have told most certain truth.
'Save ye, sister. Can this man tell any thing?
Sir, show your skill on me, but to my self;
I would not have them hear what you conjecture:
More I know you cannot of no mans fortune.
You'll straight believe the contrary, your hand's
So easy, that I could almost tell every particular
Of your whole life; at least, your passages
Of love, which is the skill that I profess.
Let's hear.
Adrastus, hath he seen your hand yet?
No, Madam, it is to no purpose, he can tell no∣thing.
I am not of your mind. It seems my brother
Will not have us know his fortune.
You were in love at seven years old, as much as that age
Could admit, and have continued the most constant living,
Upon the smallest hopes; and it is not long since
You received a great discouragment, yet still you love,
And much I fear in vain.
It is true, this makes me admire your skill.
You are as true a friend, as you're a lover too,
And you in that will be unfortunate.
It is impossible.
I may fail, but I speak according to my art.
What think you of him?
I think him a rare man.
I'll see if he can make me think him so.
Now, Sir, shall I entreat you to show your skill.
You will not have me speak aloud.
Why not aloud?
I will not; you have been a lover more then once, and still
Unfortunate; first, by your own inconstancy, your quarrels
Too, have been no advancement to your reputation lately;
And more disgraces shall light on you, till you return
Unto your first affection: the gods are much displeased.
Be good, and reconcile your self to heaven.
A strange fellow, but I'll seem to contemn him.
The most ignorant might have told what he tells me,
Of which number I believe him one.
Say you so, pray let me see your hand once more.
Well, Sir.
Your own arm being too weak to defend you against your enemy,
I find, you basely have employed the arms of others.
Ha!
I find something like a murder written in this Line.
This fellow is a devil; besides, I see my fall∣shoot does not thrive.
What says he to you?
He is indeed a rare man, and I recant,
And much esteem him and his skill.
I see he has told you things that please you.
He has so.
Sister, if you love me.
Well, you know I can deny you nothing; I would not see him else.
How I long to speak with him, yet I'll torment him too.
It troubles me to think, my brother divides
The channel of his love, which else would wholly
Run in one continued stream to me.
I esteem you learned above all those I ever saw or heard of.
This evening, Sir, we'll talk at better leisure.
Now I desire all to retire and leave me.
Now, brother, where is Philanthus?
Friend.
How I tremble: Were I to enter Combat against a Lion,
Nay, against an Host of men, me-thinks I should not
Be thus fearful. I know, it is not my part
To play the passionate Lover, she'll laugh at me.
But I have lost that power I had over my passion,
By her unkindness, nor can I hide the sorrows of my heart.
Whither, sister, did not you promise to hear him?
Whom?
Philanthus.
Yes, but I see nothing but a statue, there's neither
Sound nor motion comes from that.
It is your cruelty that hath transformed me then.
Dear Madam, tell me, from what can grow this alto∣ration?
If any false report have done it, it is great injustice
To believe an enemy wronging a friend, and not
To hear that friend first answer for himself.
Philanthus, I do not complain at all, why do you go about
To justify your self, before you be accused?
Madam, why am I then banished from
Your presence, and your favour?
It was your occasion drew you from the Court,
For ought I know; and for my favour, I never
Doted on you, nor do I hate you now.
Yet, sister, this cold answer does not become
That love, which you, on my knowledge, desired,
That he should think you bear him.
Brother, I must acknowledge, that I love and honour Philanthus merits;
But yet, I take it, I never so far did engage my self,
As not to be my own disposer; and you too far
Interest your self, in being more a friend to him than me.
As how?
You blind my judgment, which should wholly direct me in my choice:
For he whom you commend of reasonable parts,
Must from me gain respect above the best deserver.
And much I wonder, that Philanthus will call in que∣stion
His own merits, for so he does in my opinion, to use you,
As a secondary means, since if he be a man deserves my love,
I hope he thinks, that I have wit to know it.
Madam, it were ignorance in me, or any other, to plead other
Desert, than readiness to obey; and fortune enviously
To me, hath still denied such an occasion, as might let you see,
The greatest danger should to me seem none,
Where I might hope to do you any service.
Your promises are large, and I may perhaps
Meet with employment.
Madam, if so, I shall believe my self most happy.
Well, dear sister, use him kindly.
Brother, you did desire, that I should give him hearing,
None by but you: I will exceed that favour,
And wish to enjoy his company alone; pray leave us.
Most willingly.
You may stay, Sir, if you please, except you fear
To be alone with me.
Madam, why fear, what danger?
More then you think, I must impart a busi∣ness to you
In which I shall make trial of
The great love that you profess.
I am blessed, if you be serious; though I should
Perish in what you employ me, I must
Account my end most fortunate.
You must swear to perform what I enjoin you,
According to your power.
Madam, I vow't, if it be not against mine honour.
I value you above my life, but less then that.
Well.
One exception more, and then be what it will.
What's that?
Not to command me to cease to love you.
Oh! fear it not; and yet I will not promise to love you,
Not when you have performed, what I shall now en∣join;
Yet, I confess, the service will be most acceptable:
Nor must you make my Brother, though your dearest friend,
Partaker of the secret.
That's worst of all.
Swear.
I do.
Then know, that I do hate that Knight, that overcame Adrastus,
More then I love my beauty or my health.
How?
This cannot choose but pinch him. And do en∣join you
By your oath, to find him out, and so deliver him in∣to my hands,
That I may have still power to punish him as I think fit.
And, Madam, wherefore do you hate him? I heard,
His actions did not deserve it.
For his discourtesy, and neglect of me.
Know you of what Country he is?
No.
Oh, Madam, I find your plot, you know you shall
Still be importuned by my love, which will
Not give me leave, to let you live in peace;
And therefore you have set me on this useless task.
You are witty in your cruelty.
Not only so, for I desire to be revenged upon that Knight.
Will it content you if I kill him?
No, his punishment I reserve unto my self,
The way to bring him hither, to your own dis∣creation;
By force, or by entreaty, as you please. And so I leave you.
Think on your oath, remember too I promise no re∣ward.
Nor may I hope one neither.
You are your own disposer.
At least allow me this encouragement.
Why should I strive to please this scornful she, that hates me;
Nay, hates me, when I do deserve all love?
The beauteous Lady of the Castle did not so.
Am I not by the gods thus punished, for my ingratitude to her? yes.
Certainly, she saved my life: Her beauty is not much inferior,
Her wit seems equal; how ever, she ought
To be esteemed by me much more. But whore's she,
Or what is she, I know not, only
I feel her growing here, here, in my heart.
This custom shall no longer be of use;
The last Combat was granted, it seems,
Hath drawn on this.
Your Court will be dishonoured by the re∣fusall.
Shall it be said, You protect those, who do wrong
To others, when the guilt perhaps makes them
Too feeble to defend themselves.
Well be it as you will, I am innocent
Of any blood, that shall this day be shed.
Let the Knight enter.
How, Gudgen my favourite? nay, then there's no great danger: Meant you it was he? Which of the women will he challenge?
Nay rather, how many men at all these wea∣pons.
Speak your prose first, and see you be not our before you begin your legs.
No, I warrant you, Sir, I'll make my 〈…〉∣rinses very sweetly.
Something long a beginning.
Take heed your tongue do not discover you.
No, nor my tail neither, I warrant you, as 〈◊〉 tell it.
Remember, born a great way off.
I, I, and not christened; for you are a T••… you know.
Now he begins.
Most doughty Duke. Master, what must I call you?
Coxcomb.
Oh!
Should not name me.
Most doughty Duke, my Master Coxcomb whom you see.
Oh slave.
Is come to Court, to show his chivalry a∣against.
Speak softly.
Against speak-softly, servant to your grace.
Bernardo, servant to your grace, you fool.
Bernardo, servant to your grace, you fool whom if he be within this dismal place, I him defy throwing the monstrous lie into his ugly throat.
Good poetry.
And should he come, I would not be ins coat:
For sure my Master, who is come thus far,
Will kill him dead before he be aware.
I am his mouth, and I do tell you from him,
My Master, if he come, will soundly bum him.
Wool a?
And therefore keep away, if you be wise,
Till I my Trumpet have forth-sounded thrice.
Me-thinks the Knight should speak for him∣self.
I do not understand a word of your language.
Hard luck, how far was your Knight born?
Be sure you say far enough, they 'I know me else.
I warrant ye. Beyond the worlds end.
How many miles may that be?
Forty good miles, and more. His Father?
Peace, sound again, I am in some fear.
He will learn to speak anon.
It seems the enemy dares not approach; if he do, I'll send him after those ten Knights that I killed in Thrice, singly, man after man, though they assaulted me all at once.
That's strange.
I, at one blow, with this rusty sword, rusty with being continually imbrued in blood of brutish beasts,
Indeed he killed a mad Bullock once.
Clove to the teeth a monstrous high and migh∣tie mastiff Dog, of a Leminian Lion's hide.
A Cow's perhaps, his father was a Butcher.
Sound the third time. Not yet, how base is he, that dares do injury, but much more base, that dares not justify his wickedness. Not yet?
Now he speaks plain.
I with this Gun have killed a monstrous Wren.
He come! Hang him coward.
Oh that he durst, then would I. What noise is that?
Nothing.
I thirst for blood, if there be any here.
To drink, would he have it?
That dare according to ancient books, main∣tain the beauty of his Lady against mine. Since the e∣nemy dare not appear, I must be in action.
Whore's yours?
My squire here shall be she, my valour shall supply that which wants in beauty.
None dares. I am weary of this fool.
Dare none encounter me, march quite away?
He's come, but it is too late, I scorn to stay.
What did you come for?
I will tell you the secret, I did come hitherto no end,
And I do mean to depart to as little purpose.
Therefore like other Knights, that make a show
In glittering Armour, as I came I go.
Call him back again, hoe's a rank coward.
No, let him alone, I'm weary; besides the day is far spent,
And we do lose much better sport; nor were it well
To have him so discouraged.
Pray, Sir, let me enjoy your friend Gudgen's company sometimes.
Madam, I'll fit him the best I can to make you sport.
If Philanthus conceal from Agenor
What I enjoined, he loves me more then him,
Which I shall much rejoice in.
Is this your friendship?
Do not accuse me, where I am not guilty.
The secret is not mine, that's trusted by another to me:
And when it does concern them more then me,
Yet so much I am touched, that I do burst
With a desire to tell you.
Why do you not?
She bound me by an oath to the contrary, most cunningly;
For else, she knew I would have told it, you.
Philanthus, I see she hath wholly won you from me,
And I am glad you need not use my friendship fur∣there.
Which of you two to accuse of most unkindness,
I know not well. For me, I should not have entertained
The knowledge of a secret, on a condition so preju∣diciall
To our friendship.
'T were great injustice in you, if it should.
A perjured man would ill become your friendship.
You tell it to no man in telling me.
Had not her tongue, her action did enjoin me to keep it from your
Knowledge of all men; you saw, she did desire your absence.
Perhaps she feared to speak before me, that which yet she would
Be well content, that I should know from you.
If I have friendship, the knowledge of it, if you love me,
Would more afflict you, than my denials does.
Such an excuse does worst of all: farewell.
Sure Aurelia so much hates me, that she envies me
That happiness of her brothers friendship, and only
Did invent this plot to break it. Stay, Sir, I'll give you proof
That I dare trust you with a secret, and you will
Say, a strange one though not this.
Well, what is it?
I do not love your sister.
How!
No otherwise then as she is your sister.
This makes me more suspect your friendship.
Why should you think I love her, since she hates me,
And lays plots to deprive me of your friendship,
Which, by the gods, I prise above what happiness
Women can bring me.
This protestation makes me think, you do not love indeed.
Be not mistaken, I do love.
Whom?
Remember my past fortune with the beauteous Lady
Of the Castle, and you will find, that I have cause
To be a Lover, if only out of gratitude.
Your sister's cruelty hath made my reason
Once more Master of my will; and being so;
I cannot choose, but see my former folly,
In hoping to enjoy so absolute a creature
As Aurelia is, whom heaven ordains
For one of greater merits; the gods had been
Indeed unjust, to make unworthy me the centre,
Where so much worthy loves should meet, the least
Of which, is sure to make the best deserver happy.
Philanthus, my friendship's of that nature, that it does
Glow me unto your designs; and since I see
My sister hath given over to deserve your love,
I must confess, I think you could not place it with more reason,
Than on this Lady. It is true, that I would have thee still a Lover
Like my self, for so you'll hear me, and not laugh,
When I deplore my misery in love; and I do glory,
To be found more constant than you are. The scorns
Of my Mistress have not altered me; I think
It vice to change, how ere she uses me.
Rather it is vice not to change, when reason does command it.
Reason can never be your warrant to be false.
I had been false to reason and my self both,
To love where I should find neglect yet,
Where I love, it is with much passion, but
Not your blind-fold constant way.
Nor would I that you should. I shall be happy
In your happiness, or you in mine, if either
Of our different ways do prosper. But you
Now love you know not whom, nor know you where to find her.
Pardon me, the skilful Moor, late come to Court,
Assures me, that he will let me see again
That Lady by his art.
When this?
This morning I sent my man before to tell him,
I am coming; his house is here hard by.
May I not see her too?
Perhaps, if you disguise you like my servant.
I will.
Let's go then, I know he does expect me.
Sir, my Master will straight be here.
Sir, I am ready.
Great Master of your art, good-morrow.
Good-morrow, noble Sir.
I hardly yet believe it possible,
You should perform what you have undertaken.
More, Sir, if I please: I am in substance
What others seem; nor shall you stay
The making of a Circle. But who's this with you?
A servant, Sir, that I dare trust.
Pardon me, Sir, I have reason to be wary.
This art is no ways lawful; for telling fortunes,
That I count nothing. Is there nought else that you desire?
Nothing.
Stand by then. By that great power that's given me,
I charge thee, the form of that Lady, to
Appear, that this Prince desires, so habitat,
As when he saw her last.
Oh ye powers, it is she. I must confess, your art
Is inimitable, it is the same form; me-thinks
It looks so like the life, that it would speak,
If I should question it: no beauty can be greater.
Shoe's gone, can you not once more show her.
Yes, and much more, if I were pleased.
What?
What? sit down and you shall see. Return thou beauteous shadow.
She's by much fairer then Aurelia; I was a fool
To pursue what's fled, and to refuse a blessing
Offered like this; she smiles, as if she understood me,
And confirmed my saying.
Although I burst, I'll see the end.
When first I saw what's here presented, I
could not think she was the thing she seemed,
And now I cannot think she is a shadow,
But a substance,—That sigh assures me,
That shoe's flesh and blood; and yet a Daemon
May possess a body, making it move by its own Or∣gins.
A dead Body, not a living body: pardon, if shadow,
Or if substance, this bold touch; it is not profane,
Since it proceeds from an affection, equal
To what a mortal ere could boast of, in so short a time.
This soft and warm hand does assure me, you are
That noble Lady, to whose curtsy I owe
My life, and now again it is within your power
To see me die. But if you shall once more, make me a tender
Of that love, which at your Castle I refused,
As being then a prisoner to another beauty.
Assure your self, I shall redeem that error,
With an affection equal to your merits, paying the debt
Of two lives that I owe you, and this of love the greater.
Oh false friend.
She answers not. I fear I all this while, tran∣sported
By my passion, have spoken to a shadow.
Rather I fear your protestations will prove such.
It is she, and I am miserable.
Oh my joy. No, Madam, they are as firm as are the Poles,
That prop up heaven; and can I doubt? the proofs
That you have given me of your love, are infinite,
In that you thus disguise your self thus once more
T'ingage me in an infinite affection, which I desire to seal thus.
Will you not think you, recall your vows,
When you shall know my name.
Cruel woman, thou need not tell him, he too well knows
Thou art Lucinda; the unkind Mistress of his
Too kind, and much wronged friend Agenor.
Lucinda, Oh my cross fortune, I am false and knew it not.
Excuse it not, but justify thy self,
That I may kill thee without ripening.
You know I never saw saw her.
True. But was it possible thou could believe,
That I could be transported with that passion
For any other beauty, then for that thou see in her?
How often, ravished with admiration, did I describe
Her face, and thought by love, like the must cunning Painter,
To draw her very feature to thy un∣derstanding,
As they do to the sight; so much at least,
As if thou had but been that friend,
Which I did hope, it would have prompted thee to fear
No other but Lucinda could have been so fair.
You're passionate without all reason, and
Forget friendship. Hear me.
No, I am too tame, suffering thee, that hast
Nothing, but the empty name of friendship,
Thus to abuse me and shall that be a sufficient
Bridle to hold back my revenge? Draw thy sword.
Why, you are mad.
I fear some ill event.
Why smile you? Think you, because my valour is not like to yours,
The subject of each tongue, my maiden-sword,
Never unsheathed till now, that I do fear
In a just cause to use it? Provide your best defence.
Defence, hear me.
Come, draw, and do not dally. Your guilt hath
Made you weaker then you think, you are not
What you were, when you were faithful.
If I have any power, let me conjure you.
You have none.
Hear me.—How do you noble Sir: Oh for a Surgeon
Ha! what have I done?
It is in vain, I am well, well as I could have wished
I am removed from being a hinderance to
My friend in his affection. You perceive
How much he loves you, since it did force him
To make a sacrifice of me, me, his better half.
Sir, give me your hand; it was my fortune, not my will,
That crossed you in this Ladies love. And, Madam,
Remember, that my last breath is employed,
To assure you, that I shall never rest
In peace, if any other shall possess that place,
Which you thought me worthy to hold, in your affection,
Then this Prince, who only does deserve it;
To whom, I hope, my weak defence, may justify my innocence.
Thou cruel murderer of thy friend, who ra∣there than
Endanger thee, would not defend himself. Thou crew∣ell Butcher.
I fear I have been too rash.
He no way did employ his sword.
Oh cruel fate. Gon, he's gone for ever.
He's quite dead, and you are hurt too, I think. Ha!
A scratch.
He did employ his last breath to gain my love,
From you too; did he not?
He did, but it is in vain, for I shall hate thee more then a Serpent.
Yet less then I shall do my cursed self,
The vildest monster of ingratitude,
That the earth ever bore: I wonder why
It does not gape, and swallow me alive.
It is mockery to believe the gods are just,
After this sufferance: Here, if you have any mercy, kill me.
Not I.
I'll do it my self then.
Hold, Sir, for heavens sake.
Thou ignorant, it was to please heaven I would have done it.
You are deceived, they want not proper in∣struments;
If it were their divine pleasure to shed your blood,
To show their justice: No they delight in mercy more.
But not so far as to confound their justice,
I am no subject for it.
Madam, your help, to save another mischief.
Only that thought makes you unfit, you're pe∣nitent already;
And that I may remove from you this black despair,
That darkens thus your understanding, know,
For your friends dear sake, if ever I love again,
It shall be you, except his memory.
Fain I would die, yet fain I would believe her.
Oh love! what power thou hast, that thus can change
My just revenge; although I know this protestation
Grows from a fear to offend his ghost, and not
From love to me, for that's impossible:
Yet, I will live, to inflict such punishment
Upon my self, that you shall give me leave to die,
To end my misery. The Tomb I will erect
For this dear Coarse, shall well express my love,
However, my unfortunate hand did shed his blood.
Let your care be bestowed upon the body,
Till I dispose of it; I shall reward your pain.
My Lord, I will.
Heaven affects. Why do I live, and see him thus,
And I the Author? Madam, what is your pleasure?
Will you remove unknown, or shall I wait
Upon you to your brother?
Sir, I beseech you, give me leave to be my own disposer.
Obedience is my sacrifice.
But how, or where, is yet unknown to me,
Uncertain fate, yet certain misery.
WHat, are our Comedians ready?
Yes, yes.
That's well; the Princess does walk presently, and coming in unlooked for, 't will please her the bet∣la. It's fine Poetry, is it not?
Only faulty, if not foolish enough; a quarter of an hours work, when it was done; and yet I have stu∣died a long time; and can find nothing more ridicu∣lous,
Is there no prologue?
No, there's too few Actors.—Here's the Princess.
They have their one, they'll enter sure.
How now, what strange hob-goblin's this?
Love, that intoxicates the brains of mortals, where there is any,
Here inhabits none to be intoxicated, it is well known.
Not Sisiphus, that restless rolls the stone still,
Takes more delight, then I do in my own fill.
My Phillida, lo where she does appear,
More humble then a Peacock, or his peer,
The Turkey, who with her bristling plumes,
Confounds my sense, and my poor heart consumes.
Oh gods▪ Oh most glittering Wight,
Thou workst upon me, I had need go write.
My passion, it is not a stumbling tongue,
That can express the love I bear thy bung.
Kiss where thou love, I thee pray, even here;
Nothing I have too precious for my dear.
But you do fool me, I and frump me; you,
I Venus fair or chaste; go too, go too.
Is Venus like to thee, thou dirty sow?
No, thou art like unto our branded Cow:
But yet I fear she will prove wilder far,
Thou art incensed, thy goblin eyes make war.
Puh let me go, these come not from your heart;
Too late I find you play the Courtiers part.
May all the joys of earth confound me, I,
Have dyed thy love, and live I will party.
Oh perjured man, see where she comes you wot of,
Betwixt you surely I am made a sot of.
Sir, I am come to visit you, and your fair Mistress.
Most odoriferous Lady, you are offensibly well∣come; for you have done me a most desperate and in∣tolerable favour; my Mistress does with me, I know, congratulate the mischief.
Sir, I am a simple wench, that understand no∣thing beyond sense.
I am sorry for it, yet I will descend to your understanding, and speak none; or very little, hereafter.
It will become your person.
Hark how she woes my dear: Oh, I am lost I fear.
Lady, you are sad, and much I wonder, being so happy in your servant.
Damsel, you are unkind, your scorns are scurvy, and become you not.
Oh thou art such a pretty wench, I could wish my self a gibe Cat, and we two together in the dark.
Ah me! he's lost. Sir, you forget me, your Phillida.
Thee? I do contemn the thought of such a dowdy.
Ah me, then let me die; thou constant wretch, moist thou sink down to bliss; but shall I curse, whom I have loved more, then my best Cow M•ll: Oh no. Come death and end my woe. But what shall finish my unhappy days? this knife, this shall afford me passage to the shades below, where I will try by dying thus my love to show, and fill his hard heartfull of dismal wo.
Alas good fool.
Will you not save her?
Now I am dead, dost thou not grieve, thou cruel else,
If I had known, I had not killed my self.
Now I am stark dead, pray tell him so.
Would thou were buried, thou'lt ne'er leave talking else.
Miranthe, this is so woeful a story, I'll hear no more, make my excuse to the dead Lady, when she revives.
Master, Master, rise, rise.
That's not my cue, he's out.
The Princess is gone.
Gone is not my cue neither.
The play is done.
Thou lie, I must be kissed first; I will I not open mine eyes till I be kissed.
What a coile's here, I could find in my heart, now his eyes are shut, to undo my points, and give him his cue. Sir, Master. I think hoe's a verier ass then my self, there let him lie, for me, I'll follow for a re∣ward.
Is he gone, had I no place about me worthy his kiss?
Then let me wake from death. Why this it is,
Since when I courted him, he would not come,
My Ghost shall haunt him, till he kiss my hum, hum.
This is the day, and this the place, that Phi∣lanthus
Intends to present himself as the stranger Knight,
To receive what punishment I shall inflict,
Where I will make him jealous of himself.
Why will you so torment him, since you con∣fesse you love him.
Still to draw greater proofs of his affection, in which I glory.
Take heed, whilst that you use him thus, you do not
Lessen what you would make greater, his love.
Were I man and in his place, I should have hated
You, for you in reason have appeared unworthy,
And inconstant, which how his generous spirit
May brook, who knows.
Púh these are needless fears, see where he comes,
The same arms he wore, when he o'er came Adrastus;
A coldness strikes my heart at sight of him.
If you be the Princess Aurelia, I was enjoined
Thus low to bend my knee, lower my heart,
In my submission to your offended deity.
Yes, Sir, I am, and you I take to be the most
Discourteous Knight alive.
Madam, I have already paid for that offence,
The forfeit of my honour, if not to be recovered,
By faithfully performing what I was enjoined,
Rather commanded, by your Philanthus, for such
How ever you prise him, he desires to be esteemed.
How well he counterfeits another voice.
By a strange accident he met me, and when
Persuasion would not move me, for I had a desire
Another way, he did employ his not to be resisted va∣lore,
Compelling me to swear, for safeguard of my life,
Here to present my self, and willingly receive
What punishment your rigour can inflict.
What censure do you expect?
Death, for I do believe you the most cruel Lady living.
Why do you think so?
Your rigour to Philanthns, who partly made
Me know his story, made me suspect; yet still
He loves you, more then his own soul. But your
Unjust hatred against me, gives me assurance,
Of your cruel nature.
Perhaps I did but seem to hate you, you feel am unarmed
For punishment, none but my self, and one weak woman more.
But you are bound by oath to endure what ere
I shall inflict; I'll try him fully.
I am, and wish to know my sentence.
With you own sword I will perform it.
Alas, you have not strength to take my life, were I unarmed.
Rather no will, you are not noble that would thus,
To the danger of your life, perform your promise.
Receive your sword, and know, I am so far
From hate, that I did love you, for the great respect
You showed me, though I seemed otherwise.
But you retiring, and to me unknown,
Bared me from means to thank you, or let you know,
How much I liked your valour, which sure by Phi∣lanthus
Could not be exceeded; I rather take it as a courteous act
From you to him, he hoping the performance
Of the task enjoined, might reconcile him to my love,
Which is now impossible; yet, I did much affect him,
Till his boasting did beget my hatred.
But trust me, in his sending you, how ever,
I thank him, he hath much prejudiced himself.
There is no honour that this Court can do you,
Which boldly you may not promise to your self.
Nor would I have you think I am inconstant,
For I have still professed to love, where I did find
Most worth, until I were confined by Marriage.
Madam, however some will censure this your humour,
To me it does appear the best. I honour you,
And shall believe my self the happiest creature
Living, in this your good opinion.
Longer, Sir, I will not hold you, but when you please
To visit me at Court, theres no assurance
Of my affection, that I shall refuse,
Which honour will permit me to bestow.
I, make me in my own opinion the mark of envy,
To the most happy living. Besides, thus on your hand,
I seal my lasting service.
Madam, what's your design in this, to give Philanthus,
As a stranger, so large assurances of your affection,
And yet make him think, you hate him as he is himself.
Ah! Madam, the most unfortunate accident.
How! what? thou frightest me, speak.
The Prince your brother.
What of him?
Hath killed his dearest friend, noble Philanthus.
It is impossible, I know the contrary.
Oh, Madam, it is too true, your brothers sorrow is a witness of it;
The Court is drowned in tears, and justly,
It never felt a greater loss.
I have abused my self then, made vows and protestations
To I know not whom; the voice indeed was different.
But is this certain truth? were ye a witness?
But how, or why, or when? I am amazed
With wonder and sorrow. Speak.
It is so certain, that your brother would have killed himself,
Had he not been prevented.
He had done well, it is fit we all should die;
For who would live after Philanthus.
You Gods, was it not sufficient misery for me
To love a man, whom I had never seen before?
His heart given to another, or ere he knew me?
But that you afterwards must raise me to the happiness
Of his affection, and then thus violently pull
Him from me. Why should you thus oppose your strongest powers
Against a silly woman. But, love, I know it is thy malice,
That did invite the cruel destinies to cut
The fine spun thread of dear Philanthus, and cruelly
Lengthen mine. You powers, it is enough; for you have humbled
My proud heart low as the earth. Seek out some other,
That hath not felt your scourges, I confess
Your power, and am obedient too. But why should I
Begin to flatter unjust heaven, within whose power
It does not lie to pleasure me. Philanthus gone,
Whose name I'll reverence more in their despite,
Then all the envious deities, that took him from me.
Impious, cruel, and forgetful woman, thy sa∣crilegious
Thoughts and words, I see, have been the causes,
That have stopped my passage to the Elizium fields,
Forcing me thus wandering to stay above the earth,
To feel torments above neglect in love;
Nay, equal to those hellish pangs, bred from the thoughts
Of a much loved inconstant Mistress. But I'll revenge
My self, by haunting thee perpetually.
Oh thou dear ghost, such a revenge were sweet,
I should desire to look upon thee ever.
After I had thee, thou were soon lost, I was not satisfied.
Let me if possible embrace thee, at least
Converse with thee for ever thus.
I see you have forgot my last request.
Think on the Prince, in whom I live; this way ye cross
The ordinance of heaven, who never fails
To punish disobedience, from me. If you
Be slack in loving him, my ghost shall never rest
In peace; and when I next appear, a thousand furies
Will come along, and in your sight torment me,
Past what a mortal can imagine, if not for love
Of him, for love of me. Be pitiful, and free me
From an endless misery. Go to my Tomb,
Where daily you shall find him weeping:
There make an offer of your self, in recompense
Of all his sufferings; this done, you may be happy.
But if refused, the height of misery will fall upon you,
To me, perpetual torment; remember,
On me perpetual torment.
Stay, stay, and hear me.
My time is past, remember lasting torment.
It is vanished, cruel ghost, that dost conjure me,
Thus unkindly to forsake my first love, inconstancy's avice,
They do not love at all, that can love twice.
It is to me impossible, which if I do it not, I shall be miserable.
And in doing it, I shall be so too then it is indifferent:
Oh no, I shall release from misery,
And happy make the ghost of Philanthus;
That thought alone o'recomes me.
Strange friendship when the ghost of him that's dead,
Shall for the living with such reason's plead.
Where is the Prince? is he yet so transported with sorrow?
I ne'er saw man so torment himself. It is true; Philanthus
Deserved to have as many tears shed for him,
As any Prince that lived, but yet, that being past,
And sorrow fruitless, me-thinks the sorrow should grow less.
If it be possible, it does receive increase.
Some say, the Princess Aurelia bears a part too.
Wheres the old Duke? followed his children to the Tomb
Of Philanthus: Never such a sorrow seen in Millain.
In duty we are bound to wait upon them,
Both with our persons and our sorrow.
Me-thinks this sacred ground, that does contain
The body of my friend, should open it self,
And give me leave once more to embrace him,
If his dear ghost be' concil'd; and if it hate me,
Why should not then the earth, in friendship
To its now inhabitants, gape wide and swallow me
Alive, for my base act? How often have the gods
Made even the insensible elements, the executioners
Of their justice, against a murderer, and a more
Hateful one was never performed: murdered my friend,
Oh base! and such a friend, that even in death
Expressed himself above my malice. The wound
This sword hath made in his noble &amp; undefenc'd breast
Was only like a vent to a full vessel,
That so the stream of his unequal love might find
The freeer passage. Why should I live then, to be the hateful,
And contemned example of ingratitude, to all posterity?
And I will daily sacrifice my sorrows and my tears
Upon his Tomb, twill not serve. Were I a woman,
Water might wash my guilt off; but as I am a man,
A manly sacrifice must expiate my fault.
Blood must be satisfied with blood. Philanthus,
Receive this sacrifice, I will revenge the murder.
Deer my Lord, what would ye do?
Nothing, why do ye hinder?
Who made you my controulers?
Heaven forbid, that we should suffer you.
For friendship sake, give me my sword, why should you
Keep me hereto torment me? in death I should find ease.
If any of you had a mind to die, and knew it would be for your content,
Think you I would be so discourteous to disturb you?
You need not hold me, you may give me freedom,
Now I have no weapon, you cannot hinder me to weep
These cursed eyes out; by whose false lights,
false to my soul, came in that beauty of Lucinda,
Whose violence working by jealousy, forced me
To murder my dearest dearest friend. Pardon love,
I have blasphemed against thy deity, for which I know,
His Ghost will hate me more then for his wounds.
Hence hypocrite, dost thou not fear his wounds
Should op themselves, and blead his searcloath through,
At thy approach.
Sister, you cannot pronounce words half so harsh
As I deserve, nor tax me with a guilt so great,
But I'll acknowledge more, but not the same
Which you accuse me of: For, were the sorrow
Of the world joined in one for Philanthus,
Mine might be thought a worthy rival,
Nay, exceed that far.
Oh Philanthus.
But sister, you, why you, why do you seem to grieve
Thus, that in his life showed such contempt?
Oh brother, brother, seeking to deceive and blind the world,
I have ruined and undone my self, the heavens
A• witnesses, that Philanthus to me was more
Then father, you, and all the world. Then give me
Leave alone to grieve, since all griefs else are
but like drops to the vast Ocean.
Sister, the Ocean hath his bounds, though large,
But my sorrow, like to his love, for whom I grieve,
Must be beyond all limits, but his desert,
The cause of my affliction.
Philanthus, Philanthus. But what are words, or fighes, or tears,
But weak expressions? let a dead silence rather show,
They grieve not much, that can express their woe.
Sir, your father.
Here, here.
Madam, the Duke.
Loved Philanthus, I know he did, and so did I,
Though I dissembled, dearly I loved him; if there be charity
In you, open his tomb, that I may make his body know,
By kissing his pale lips, that I did love him,
More then he did me; his spirit's already
Satisfied, I know, else it would haunt me.
You twins of sorrow, that strive with eagerness,
Which should be thought the truest mourner, make room
For one, whose actions have in point of love,
Outgone your airy words.
I know that voice, Lucinda.
For which of you, after the killing of a much loved brother,
For then I thought Adrastus dead, became
Enamoured of his murderer, as I did of Philanthus?
Or which of you forsook your honours, or your state,
Becoming like to me, a straggling Gypsy,
Forced to it, by a greater feeling of his merit,
Than ever touched your heart, pursuing him
In that disguise, even when to hope the least requital
Had been madness? and yet I must give proof
Beyond all these, when I have offered some
Few tears upon his Tomb.
Lucinda, for such I know your name is, how would it vex me,
To hear you boast your love thus of Philanthus,
Were he alive; and yet I should have gloried much,
To be by him preferred before so excellent a Lady
As your self: But since unkind brother,
But worse friend, hath by his rash hand, enriched
The Tomb, with what we both should strive for, let' join
In sorrow, and from our moumfull eyes by turns,
Drop tears, till by continual motion, this hard
And unkind Marble, may yield us passage to him,
Which it now denies.
And so at last we by our tears shall gain,
What now by prayers we cannot obtain.
My dear children, why do you yield to sor∣row thus
Where there's no hope of remedy? I am a partner
In your grief; you know that Philanthus was as
Dear to me as any; but since I know I cannot
Raise him to life by weeping, why should I
Show my self a child, and mourn in vain?
How, my Sister here, and mourning o'er the Tomb
Of Philanthus, it is impossible, she never saw him.
You are deceived, Sir, be your own witness.
It is she. Degenerate from my blood, weep for mine
Enemy. Save you, Lady.
Brother, I know you wonder much to see me here;
But more, that I lament thus for a man,
Which you believe I knew not.
I do, I see the great love that you professed to me,
Was wholly counterfeit.
Rather your virtues, brother, are not what I thought'm•…
But love however's my excuse.
Oh Philanthus!
Ha! me-thought the spirit of Philanthus spoke from his Tomb.
Chiding my slackness in performing his will; did it not, Sir?
Not that I heard.
His ghost appeared to me in dead of night,
And cruelly commanded me thus to present my self
Before his Tomb, a gift unto the Prince Agenor,
From his dead friend.
How! do you mock me?
Which, though unwillingly, I here perform,
Much more to satisfy my promise to his ghost,
Than to requite your love; and yet, noble
Sorrow may be accounted merit.
Strange ghost!
How?
Madam, till now, my thoughts were in the grave with Philanthus,
His spirit it seems, knowing my hearty sorrow and repentance
Laboured to make me happy in your love:
And I receive you with a joy above
What any tongue is able to express.
This makes for my advantage, and is it possible,
Aurelia may return to love me, Philanthus
Being dead. Who's here, the Knight that fought with me?
These Arms are ominous.
Come from the Tomb, Agenor, leave this sor∣row.
Sir, I'll obey you for this time; but after, daily offer up
Tears of joy and sorrow, in which Scene I still
Must be an actor.
Aurelia, be not wilful.
Thus all forsake me, no companions in my sor∣row left,
And I do glory in it.
Sir, by your gracious favour: Lady, why weep you thus?
Ha! what are you so ignorant, that does not know the cause?
Do you know me then, the large expression that
You made me of your respects, I might say love,
Made me believe, I should not be so soon forgot.
Pardon me, Sir, I took you for this Knight then, for whom I now
Weep, whose body lies here in this Tomb, from whence
I do not mean to part; pray leave me, Sir. How got
This Knight these Arms, they are the same Philan∣thus wore.
Lady, you grieve for one, does not deserve this sorrow;
Behold in me a worthier servant, who now am come to claim
Performance of your so large promises. Point not to that,
I beat him whilst he lived, and from him took these Arms.
Traitor Knight, thou least; no, thou did rather
Play the thief, and steal them, which I will
Make thee confess, else offer thee a
Sacrifice upon his Tomb.
In these Arms I overcame Adrastus.
Thou least, and shalt not live to injure thus
The dead; know, it was Philanthus by all the gods,
And this is.
Philanthus, your servant.
Ha! is it possible.
Be not amazed, but trust your eyes.
How can this be?
You being wilful and enraged, I rather
Ventured to receive one wound, and so seem slain,
Than in your death to lose a friend, a Mistress,
And my own life too; but life would have bin hateful
After your loss, if I could have preserved it.
But mark his love, while his wounds yet bled;
(For to my charge, you know, you did commit
The body) He studied to make you happy
In my Laddie's love, which was effected, by playing
His own ghost, whilst I did in his Arms,
With you supply his place; how easy it was
To cousin you, and those you sent, by filling
The Coffin with some trash, having my brother
To assist me in it, the dullest may conceive.
For my part, I was glad to raise my Mistress to a gre∣la
At least, if not a better fortune in
The Princes love.
Madam, I hope you will not make his labour fruitless.
It were in vain to cross the will of heaven, which seems
To have ordained Philanthus for your worthier sister.
It lay not in my power till now, by reason of my wounds,
To keep my promise truly; but now, behold
Me ready to receive.
Me, as a recompense for all your sufferings; no other punishment.
Sir, we are joined, and do mean to grow toge∣there,
If you do not severe us.
Enjoy your wishes both. Adrastus,
For your sisters sake I wish your friendship.
Pardon the faults that grew from love to Aure∣lia,
And I shall study your advancement.
Brother, be better then you have been.
Which to begin, I give my self again
A servant to fair Miranthe, whose love, I know,
Not malice, crossed me in my love to Aurelia.
I'll none, I thank you;
You that forsook me, aiming at a greater
Now offered I refuse, hoping a better.
Old man, I say to thee, be proud, and eke rejoice, to see thy hopeful son salute the Duke in triumph, and by him resaluted like to an Emperator.
Away rididulous ass.
Did not I tell you?
Get you into the Country to your sheep and
oxen, those, you feed well, will like your company, here your Favouritship is grown stale; the Court is not so barren, but it brings forth daily some new hue∣more, which at first is pleasant, but after, like to yours, grows tedious.
Why, son, is this your gracing?
The envy of some Politic hath done this.
See all things straight prepared to solemnise
The happy marriages of these, in whom,
Friendship and love strove for a name;
In you love, in you friendship overcame.
Come, son, come, after the loss of all our money, let's even go home, and be wiser once, never too old to learn.
I, Father, but I am too young yet. Well, I will be a favourite for all this; I, so it shall be. Gentlemen, I mean to make a petition to the Duke, which I must entreat you to set your hand to, being the best judges of my ability; and thus it is:
That since to be a worthy minion I'm not fit,
Yet I may be the chief fool-Favourit.

We'll hear no more in his de∣fence:
Did not our cousin's spy∣die
flight upon
His banishment, confirm
both guilty?
Your pardon, I have done.
Yet (gracious Sir)—
Sister, desist from the renovation of
our vain petition, formerly denied,
or many weighty reasons, still retaining
Their necessary virtue; and employ
Your urgent prayers for somewhat, that may
win
Our free consent, yet not detract from justice:
And, what our power can give, be confident
You may command. But, for Pausanio's doom,
It was decreed irrevocable; then
Press not our resolution for remission.
But with his punishment, behold his crime,
And you will find Justice, when't sentenced
him,
Was more then merciful, our stricter Laws
Exacting life, whose rigour we appeased
With gentler banishment. Let it suffice,
That your quotidian intercession hath
Moved us to such a mercy, as the most
Will rather censure partiality,
(His ill is known so well). And by your fair
Persuasions, do not seek in the worlds eye,
To make us impious. Our transmarine friends,
(The still admirers of our purer Laws,)
Do not more seek for peace, then desire us
A precedent for their perverted justice,
Whose bright sword w'have so continued from
The infectious rust of innovation; and must do so.
Therefore (virtuous sister)
Press it no farther. Fate, in its decree,
Is not more fixed, more resolute than we.
I have taught my busy tongue an obedi∣ent
silence;
Yet, were your eyes spectators of those tears,
Those tear-begetting tears, my sad-sweet friend
Hourly pays her fathers memory,
'T would mollify your heart, (thought
on it doth mine)
Were your kind ears the attentive auditors
Of her faint sighs, and you not echo them,
Your heart were heartless rock. Oh Sir, vouch∣safe
Her grief but hearing, and her sweet-tongu'd sorrow,
Will charm your restrained pity.
What, statuiz'd Hippolyto?
No, royal Sir, a little womanised,
I sucked it from my mother, and twill out.
We are not made of marble, but are men.
And, but I know your zeal to sacred Justice,
I should (with hope to obtain) presume to beg
Compassion, with her Highness, from your Ma∣jestie,
For the late exiled father, of that yet sorrowing
Lady.—
But—
But what, Hippolito? Recollect thy self;
Pausanio was thine enemy.
But how deserved, omniscient heaven
can witness,
Best knowing the religious sympathy
• have with his sad sufferings.
Spend not the least of thy too precious
thoughts
On such a worthless subject. Let him suffer,
And unpi•tied. His mere ingratitude to thee,
Setting aside his great offence,
Is offence great enough to pull down an afflict∣on
Boo• nd infliction: he suffers worthily.
No more of him.—Yet, sister—
Ha! surely his resolution cannot so soon
stagger:
Pray heaven it prove so, or all my plots miscarry,
And I am miserable.
I use my possibility; but alas,
To one, whose griefs distract her, comfort is,
As Physic to the dead, effectless:
Who by sage counsel, would suppress her sor∣row,
Are heard, but not regarded. Fruitless are
The hours spent in persuasion. But who sooths
Her melancholy with fair hopes, that time
May repossess her Father, with his yet lost ho∣nurse,
Not, alone, attracts her eye and ear,
But gains her heart.
Oh blessed intelligence!
Trust me, I pity the poor Lady, and
wish,
Her lavish fathers prodigality,
T'enrich her brother, and her fair self with ver∣tu,
Had not forced him turn bankrupt.
Her then needless sighs,
Had not raised up such floods of cruel tears,
To drown her joys. We wore him in our breast,
Whilst loyal; but, when he left his virtue,
We cast him off, dreading a further danger.
But for those pair of spotless innocents,
His children, they still survive, receiving
Warmth from the sun-shine of our favour,
Which they enjoy deservedly: Martiano
Hath a spirit, as bold,
As temperately resolute, which we must cherish;
And his sisters; souls,
(Like a huge Diamond in a mount of Ore)
As rich in virtue, as her exterior parts in pull∣chritudes
perfection.
Though't be pure truth, from him I
like it not.
Pray let her have all due respect from you,
As she shall have from us.
Her merits challenge more, then my per∣formance
Can pay her virtue, though my endeavour's aim
Be wholly for her grieved hearts tranquillity.
When next you see this sorrow-clouded
Beauty,
Let her sweet sadness know, our self in person,
Before expected, will persuasions bring,
To alienate her griefs.
Gracious Sir, I shall.
Come my Hippolito.
Laughed at'm?
Oh sir, extremely—she laughed until
she leaked, she wept with laughing.
It could not be, at them; they were too
serious; upon mine honour, I ne'er composed a
copy of more pure poetry, and dressed in such rich
language; in my opinion, they were exquisite
No doubt, Sir, and yet she might laugh
at'em. Our women of this age are grown so
wise, that what we think meritorious, they be∣lieve
ridiculous; and sometimes it falls out so,
they err not ever.
Pooh! the style was too lofty, and the
conceit tickelish and profound; her weak capacity
could not reach the meaning.
It may be so: What was the subject?
Her self the general, and every part par∣ticulariz'd.
Why there's it; will you tickle a women's
profundity with a lofty style, and she not laugh
at the conceit? it is impossible.
Well, I do hope to nose Vatimius yet,
and marry fair Rosania my self.
And leave the Lady Dianetta to wear the
willow?
No, I'll court her for a Mistress, the
other for a Wife• it is providently usual—
Who's that knocks?
Some needy Tailor in his
Apprentices thread-bare cloak; or Seamster, in
pitiful foul linen, is come (with lamentation)
to woo for money.
Signior, your Shoo-maker, very im∣portunate,
desires some short conference with
you.
Say •'me abroad.
Sir, it boots not, he knows your constant
hour too well; says, you are ne'er caparisoned
till twelve.
Tell him, he's a rogue, and he lies.
Not I, Sir, twill bear an action; call a
man a rogue for telling truth! If you have not
what he comes for, money, at least give him
good words.
I never shall endure his importunity.
I have a present means to
give him sudden motion.—
What dost mean?
So now, be angry, that the straitness of
your boot, forced you to cut it, or you could
not have worn 'em: and seem
impatient.
Let me alone.
Good-morrow to your Worship.
In good time, Sir. What? you come for
money, but are like to go without. Pox on your
neat work; I must cut new boots, or cannot
wear 'em; besides, incur my Lord's displeasure;
who very now in great haste sent for me. Another
would return 'em on your hands, but I am mer∣cifull,
and you know it well enough, therefore
presume: but have a care, for if this trade hold,
you'll quickly break.
I am afraid so.
Sir, I desire your pardon for these, your
next shall make amends.
They shall? and when?
By tomorrow this time.
Go to, fail not, if you fail me, I'll fail
you.
Nay, that's sure enough.
Thou necessary villain; let me hug thee.
Peugh, this is nothing, I have seen a hun∣dred
of these tricks in Town. Now must you
make a virtue of necessity, and neatly tie it up
with this new fashioned Ribbon; and, ere tomorrow
at night, twill prove a fashion.
Excellent Carlo! Again? who's
there now? But it is no matter, now
I know the trick on it, I shall be even
with some more of ye.
The Lord Hipolito hath sent for you.
I attend.
Tax not my courage (dearest friend) I
dare
As much, as man; when warranted by virtue.
The day's not more antipathetical
To night, then my bold Soul to coward Fear.
But oft we see temerity o'rethrow,
What wise delay might have prevented.
Protraction is not ever dangerous,
But sometimes advantageous; nor is
My sure revenge remitted, because deferred:
No, no, it vegetates, and when mature,
With ease, I'll shake the vengeful fruit, that bears
A certain ruin with it, upon the heads
Of the conspirators, and all at once
Crush them to dust. But my design, as yet, is
green.
I not suspect your courage, Martiano,
But tardity• for, though our Proverb saith,
He that goes slow goes sure; yet, he that hastes,
Hath first his ends. I can but counsel you,
And proffer my assistance.
Both which, Ausonius, I accept with
gratitude:
I may have just occasion to put
Your noble friendship to a trial:
Till when, I ever shall acknowledge
The great engagement my demerit hath
Unto your goodness.
Do, put me to the proof;
Then shall my actions speak my real heart
Better, then my harsh tongue, unpractique in
The ceremonious falsities of France,
(So much in fashion with our antic age.)
My All is thine, and when I prove perfidious,
Kill me; till then, trust me.
Thou art all constant goodness, and my
Friend.
In that poor Monosyllable, th'inestimable riches
Of our love, lies thesauriz'd.
Importunate affairs which envy me
The pleasure of thy company, exact
Me, for some few hours.
Be circumspect, and underneath your thoughts,
Your secretest thoughts, let our discourse lie
couched;
There's danger in the appearance. Passion
Too often drives man beyond his reason;
And a rash tongue betrays a resolved heart.
Good counsel's ever seasonable. Be wise.
And diffident. Hippolitus feigned friendship
Portends no good, his aime's beyond your reach.
Be confident, your fathers enemy
Can never be your real friend, his tongue
And heart must needs be dissonant.
Credit not his soft language; for most sweet
The Sirens sing, when they intend to slay.
Be firm in your revenge, th'injurious wrongs
Of good Pausanio cry loud for it; let him have it.
Could I conceive his injuries grew from
that root of
Malice, I would—
You are not ignorant, it is more then
whispered
Were he the man, though skulked in
some obscure
And unknown cavern, in the remotest part
Of the wide Universe, my impetuous rage,
More swift and terrible than lightning,
Soon would find him out;
And soon as found, dissect him into Atoms,
Which my just hand should dissipate about
His silent Mansion, that the guiltless earth
(Abhorring such commixture) might entreat
The furious justice of some stormy gust,
To snatch his ashes from her purer dust.
And hurry them to hell.
Passion transports him.—Resume
your reason,
And once again be vigilant.
My thoughts afflict me, sure it cannot
be,
Hippolito should wear so smooth a brow•
And have a craggy heart; experience
Yet often proves the contrary. The Sea,
But now calm as a standing Lake, flattering
The secure Mariner, in few minutes space,
Furrows his front, and threatens him with
wrack.
And among a thousand seeming friends, it is rare
To find one pair, whose meaning's their ex∣pression,
Among formal friends; then what can I expect
From a known enemy? Ha!—•tic doubtful—
But my revenge must not be idly grounded,
Upon slight thought, but fundamental truth.
I would not for the world, blur my pure soul
With any black mistake;—yet •'le suspect
what may be,
And it is wisdom; hasty fools
Build on the •ottile-sand of self-opinion,
Whilst the patient prudent laugh at their sad
ruin.
I must make farther trial, then if I find
Him guilty, I'll soon ease my troubled mind.
I'm now securely fixed in the Duke's
bosom,
My power equals his; his greater title
Only distinguishes. So politic Syres,
T'advance their sons low fortunes, by a Match
Deserving better, let them bear the name
And glorious sound of Land lord, when th'en∣trado
Runs th'old course into their Coffers.
It is my command that executes, the Duke
But countenanceth the act. Petitions flock to me,
And, as my pleasure shall decree, are granted or
opposed.
I've dressed my self in such humility,
That all men's hearts are mine. Our neighbour
Cardinal,
(That favoured Prelate) from the oppressed people,
Hath not more hourly imprecations,
Than I prayers, smiles, and obsequious cringes
What content, to perfect my beatitude, affords
The world that's yet deficient,
But beauteous Lucebella? the rich crown
Of all my joys, for whose unvalued love
My honour lies at stake, nay, my dear life,
Were I discovered: whose wilful Father
Despised my humble suites, and with denial
(Cold as a Northern congelation)
Nipped my then germinating hopes; besides,
When but a Neophyte in our Masters favour,
Maliciously he sought to eclipse my glory
With a cloud of ruin; which to retaliate,
My timely plots have sent him far enough;
Yet knows he not who hurt him. So wise men
Vengeance take, whilst th'inconsiderate fool
Threatens, and fails. Pausanio I am now
Above thy malice, and resolved to win
Thy peerless daughter, or grow old
in sin.
Summoned by your command, (my ho∣nour'd
Lord)
My ever-ready duty brought me, to wait upon
you pleasure.
Fumante, thus in short•
I have perceived, and oft, your jealous eye
Hath glanced at Dianetta more of late,
Than any other Lady of the Court.
My Lord!—
And she deserves respect, she's fair; be∣sides,
You have enjoyed with freedom a vouchsafty,
That others dare not hope for, many hours
Of sweet discourse with her, a certain symptom
Of mutual affection—You are happy,
Whilst I—
My Lord, I've many Mistresses;
But, who's most courteous, she predominates.
No jealously, Fumante,
I know the boundless love you bear her, and
The power you have with her; how that your
absence
Doth not more torture her afflicted soul,
Than presence hilarate her heart. Therefore
I sent for thee, on whom my hopes depend:
For now's the time wherein thou moist express
Thy gratitude, for all my liberal favours,
Profusely showered on thee: Nay more, endear
Me to thy love, and our two souls unite,
For perpetuity.
(I scent the project, he would
inoculate.
Now must I turn pimp,—hum—well:
Would I were the first had undergone,
That now much practised function for a Patron.
It is a familiar age
For you, (my gracious Lord) to whose great
bounty
I owe more, than the too-short remnant of my
life
I wish to live, that my whole care and study,
Employed for your contentment may effect it.
Grateful Fumante! Oh—my troubled
breast,
Doth nourish flaming sulphur.
Wee•l have it quenched, and speedily.
Her quick rolling eyes are characters of kindness.
The other day, (speaking of my Verses) she said,
My words were charms, and that the Lady must
be
Insensible,—of stone,—that could withstand
my method—
I'll put her to the proof—Courage my Lord!
The Lady's yours
Mercy pronounced to the Delinquent,
bears
Nothing so sweet a sound,—I am all joy—
Dearest Fumante!—imagination
Of what's to come, transports me—prithee
how,
How, my Fumante? inform me of the way.
With admiration, often I have heard
Her speak your merit, and affirm, the Duke
Looked with her eyes, when his election made
Your worthy self the object of his favours.
On!—prithee on!
The Court (not without cause) might
boast of you;
For Florence, nor the world, could ever produce
Your Honour's parallel.
My hopes best comfort! On.
Added t'your gifts of nature, goodl•
feature,
Were those of the mind, sound judgment, tem¦per'd
valour,
Relieving bounty, and humility,
Attracting hearts: in fine all graces, which
Required are, to make a man complete,
Unanimousl• flocked into your breast,
As to th•ir proper center, and there fixed, dwell.
Oh! I shall surfeit with excess of joy.
Were it possible, her willing tongue could
stretch
A praise beyond deserving, you should hav't;
Which is a proof sufficient she affects you.
N•w it were a necessary policy, my Lord,
To tickle her in th'ear with th'like report,
From you, concerning her, it cannot choose but
take:
And if that fail her mean condition,
Being far beneath your honours;
Large promises, (lusts sugared bait) and some
•erformance,
(The life of expectation) will forcibly prevail.
Despair not, for the stuff we have to work on, is
Malleable—My Lord, she is a woman.
Whom means Fumante?
Fair Dianetta.
Dianetta?
Yes: was it not she your honour spake of?
Erroneous apprehension, dull Fumante,
Thy jealousy, and my credulity,
Equally fool us. My now present griefs,
Exceed my late imaginary joys—
Why did my rage procure the Generall's ba∣nishment?
Was it not for beauteous Luc•bella's love?
Your Lordships word obliged me to be∣lieve
so.
It is a pure truth, then turn not an A∣postate:
For my sublime soul fixed in the pure heaven
Of her transcendent beauty, (where doth shine
The glory of perfection) disdains
Inferior community.
Your naming Dianetta, made me
Suppose the contrary. For, we of the Court
Are rarely bondslaves into constancy.
It is a confessed fault, would it were a∣mended.
But now take my intentionst
My virtuous fair, with much impatience,
Brooks her loved father's absence, and admits
Of no society, but sadness, whilst
My grief-swoln heart doth languish.
Now to avoid suspicion (for I doubt
Martiano's haughty spirit) and to confirm
Me in her good opinion, with haste,
Repair to Dianetta, that she, through you—
Now I conceive: may give intelligence
To Lucibella, of the constant faith
You have vowed unto her goodness—
Right—and withal,
(For this point is the soul of my design)
How my assiduous supplication is,
To impetrate the Dukes remission for Pausanio.
Let her speak comfort plentifully, for
Thus assure her, I'll never cease my suit,
Till I obtain his gracious grant. Do this, and—
And more, (my Lord)
Be confidently cheerful, and expect,
Ere long, a prosperous issue.
Go, and kind fate wait on thee, if she
prove
Kind, I am too great, ever to know remove
Love hath a strange consu∣ming
faculty,
Wastes not alone the spirits, but
the purse.
Variety of change, will shortly make me
Change variety. It hath cost me, since that I
First made love unto Rosania, at least
Two thousand pistols in very clothes; and
Yet she cannot fancy me; it is strange—I
I wear 'em well enough—ha!
Yes, Sir;
(For I can get none of'em till they be
Past wearing.
And
My judicious Tailor tells me, I become my
cloths.
I'm open to thy view, deliver thy opinion.
Faith, Sir, your cloths become you.
Your clothes become you,
villain.
He swears, that the compaction of my body is
beyond
Compare, and takes delight to look upon my
waste.
(I cannot blame him, he lives by
your great waste.)
And yet, your clothes become you!
Your Pardon, Sir; the phrase is usual.
Use it no more, because it is so: When
any thing is
Common, it is worthless.
That's a Court Maxim.
Go, Sir, discharge the Taylor
presently
• will not, as most Gallants do, still spend,
Whilst I have where with all, but pay,
That when I want to spend, then spend I may.
Per-lady, no small policy.
This suites the forward issue of a new
fashion; yet, am I almost confident, she'll make it
elder by a month, then that I gave my man a
year since. Well, I must humour her; but if she
continue thus, when we are married, we must
wear my woods upon our backs, or (like th∣Tortoise)
carry our houses about us. It is rue
mored, I shall have her, which I've confirmed,
although she never made me any promise, and I
strongly believe 't; for I am termed the object of
the Ladies, and the exact Courtier: Should it go
otherwise, I should be bravely laughed at. But I'll
to her, and know a certainty, for I can scarcely
hold out any longer.
Vatinus, well met• So early ready? and
so quaintly dressed? Trust me, this is not ordinary,
but I suppose, the Dukes intended visit to Luci∣bella,
with the Princess, with whom Rosania
goes, occasioned this unaccustomed expedition.
I do confess ingenuously, it did!
But I must wait. My Lord, your humble ser∣vant.
That such a solid judgment, and sweet
beauty,
Should rashly throw the treasure of her love
On a mere glorious outside, troubles me past
wonder.
Imperious love! placest thou charms in clothes?
Are gay apparel, and a rich-loind purse,
Such powerful attractions? Yes, it is plain:
Whilst the reward of virtue's cold disdain.
When I discovered my religious flame,
With an unfeigned passion, and my soul
Almost expiring with each heartless sigh;
What answer, but, she pitied me: whilst he
Must quaff the Cordial, that should comfort me.
Women, your love admits no other Laws,
But this, ye love not therefore,
but because
By this, my Lord the Duke is on the way,
To pay his promised visit to your sister.
She'll take your personal information,
for an honour.
It is the least service I can pay her
merit.
There goes an honest Lord; and, but
Ausonius,
There's scarce another in the Court.
Where might a man turn his eye to find a
third?
Torment unto my blood, Hipolito.
(His rising must prevent my
fall• he shall
Be General—hal it is concluded: and see a
Most opportune recountre.)
What, wedded still to sadness, Martiano; ever
alone?
Better alone, then ill accompanied.
How's this?
My honest thoughts are constant sub∣jests to
My upright soul; Treason and Adulation
Were ne'er known to them. You'll say, it is strange,
But it is a simple truth. Now should I slack
The awful reins, and let 'm rove, they might
Rebel, having so great a precedent (my Lord.)
Is this disjointed talk to us? know
you; who we are•?
Disjointed talk to us? know you, who
we are?
Yes: I do know, Hipolito: our names have b•t
an equal sound.
However, more manners and less fa∣miliarity.
Would well become you; else you will grow
contemptible.
More manners less familiarity; con∣temptible?
My potent arm (where in the purple blood,
Of wronged Pausanio lively flows)
Shall chastise thy mad folly, and maintain
My fathers Son the Nobler—now's the time
for trial.
Who (though unjustly exiled) hath a breast
Harbouring more real worth then the carved
Monuments of all thy decease'd Ancestors
Can brag off—heaven he weeps!
This may be but delusion—on!
What though you be our Masters Minion?
That doth not lend addition to your blood,
It is Virtue that ennobles; every way
I am at worst, your equal; which denied.
Let our impartial swords the cause d•cid.
What means Hipolito?
I never hear your banished Father na∣med,
But grief through my kind eyes, evaporates,
The sad mist from my kinder heart, and leaves
It obvious.
This cannot be dissembling—
My Lord your pardon! my rash credulity,
And filial love to parent,
Enforced my heart to a foul misconstruction,
How that your power which the Duke con∣triv'd
My fathers sad remove; the reason, this:
Because you held him for an Enemy;
And in a supposed just revenge, I thought
To kill you; yet not ignobly.
Adulterated age! Monstrous ingrate∣tude!
Is my so noble friendship, pious sorrow,
Incessant mediation, all my services,
Both to, and for your father, thus rewarded?
Arm! for I'll teach thy rage a better temper—
Was it for this? my long continued prayers,
For your advance (yet until now effectless)
At length, have won the yielding Duke to
make
Your worthlesse-selfe his general? nay brought
His Royal person to confirm it on you,
Brought him an honour to your habitation,
For this?—but I trifle—betake you
to your
Guard• Why do you not put forward?
Doth abject fear restrain your fury?
No it is a thing I hate, as I do love
True valour• the late War proclaimed it: nor
Because you're f•vourit to the Duke for could,
It enter in my thought, you wronged my father?
Were you Jove's Ganymed? my noble anger
Would force mere attempt high-heav'ns in∣vision,
And from the O•ympicke thunders riffled arms
Throw headlong my revenge to •artarus.
O•—thou'st damned spirit
T• prosecute sweet vengeance,
I could do things, me thinks impossible:
B•••u••less be that hand, usurps a sword;
A•ainst a friend! now I am calm, and beg,
What must not be denied, your goodness par∣d•n;
And, henceforth, I vow to wear you next my
soul.
First—Nay, pray receive my
sword!
And if you doubt of my reality?
Rip up my breast, where you shall find a heart
Worthy your friendship.
Kind Sir, enough: I am all faith—The
Princess.
Martiano, the Duke, within
expects you.
Madam, I attend.
The Lord Hipolito will deserve your
love,
Whose faithful mediation hath accompanied
Our long important suit, for the old General.
As sent from heaven.
This confirms all the rest:
What devil suggested me to this mistake?
Once more, Sir, your forgiveness?
Martiano, take it, and a friend! but hence
Let reason rule, and not be ruled by sense
WHat think ye, Gentlemen of Lu∣cibella.
She spake sweetly and wisely.
Well, she's the glory of her sex.
I never heard a suite of such importance,
Urged which like modesty •t'was strange the duke
(After to powerful apple) could still,
Remain inexorable.
Sir, nothing less: justice best speaks a
Prince,
When mercy yokes his great Prerogative
With vulgar censure: should he, now, reverse
(At a fair Ladies prayers) his former doom,
And call Pausanio home, which all the Lords
Entreaty, could not win him to, do ye think
The busy-Commons gravitated heads,
(Which generally, from nothing, coin con∣ceits)
Would not bring forth foul whispers, since they
know.
Him for a Traitor.
I've heard a Tenant (besides that of his
sanctity)
How that a Princes great Prerogative,
Maintains him not-erronious (the truth
Of either, I dispute not, since authouriz'd)
Which believed, the people dare not murmur.
However, mercy no less becomes a Prince.
Faith Sir, their insolence, here of late,
Is grown to such a height, that Majesty
Lies trampled on; they dare doe any thing.
It is too true.
And more then time their great impiety,
Were by a stricter hand suppressed
Here are a pair of States-men, such ano∣there
Not to be called out of Christendom, to over
throw it,
One a fool, •' other a flatterer, I must not
Leave them, for my mirth;
But hark ye Gentlemen! it is more then
thought.
That the the old General, is grossly injured
Fools are of that opinion.
Yes, yes, fools; none, but fools.
I am of that opinion; am I a fool?
You a fool, my Lord?
I doe protest I hold Pausanio noble.
Come, come, my Lord, it is unsafe
To harbour such opinions, when the laws
Have proved him guilty of foul treason.
Hum—are you of that faction?
I shall observe you more hereafter.
I only speak to ye, my grave judicious friends,
But no more of that.
What think ye of the great honour, late conferred
On Martiano? he's now created General;
And hath a haughty spirit.
Spirit too much, I fear; but yet the
duke.
Was ill-advised, until a farther proof,
So great an honour, rashly, to bestow,
Took from a Traitor, on the Traitors son,
Right: who (for ought we know) may
be a Traitor?
The Duke was much too blame, and without
question,
The whole Court are of our opinion.
Yes, yes, fools; none, but fools.
How's this?
Now I hope you will not question me, for
my opinion;
I am even with ye.
Wee? not wee, my Lord; we are your
friends.
Nay now ye
dare not
And I am glad on it
See the ladies.
Such seemed the beauteous Goddess, when she
got.
The golden ball, on happy Eta's top;
Else had the Trojan-youth bestowed the prize
On Juno, or the Martiall-maid.
Rosania, well; how ever you slight my love,
My captived soul will your true martyr prove.
I've not neglected the performance of
All your desires.
You much oblige me.
Enough, enough, I doe not like the
subject.
That's but an evasion, because she would
not have
Her love to me discovered: how shall I be blessed,
with wit, and beauty?
Your serious thoughts (my
Lord) are taken up
With business for the state; you have left cour∣ting.
Lady, I was projecting—
Oh purge your brain of projects, I ad∣vise
you.
They breed contagion, that infects the state;
And will, or make you deadly sick, or kill you.
But mine is lawful.
Law it selfe's unsound.
Yet, Lady, mine is just and honest.
That would be rare and strange: what
i'st?—
She fi•s him every way and
she hath ashrew'd wit,
And I shall love her the better for it:
even thus.
Will she cross me, to exercise her Genius—
You love a Lady, and would have her
give you the
Monopoly of her heart; and, for the obtaining
Of the Patent, give her yours.
I would: Is it not fair, and equal?
Is it may fall out: yet you may pay too
dear;—
But it concerns not me.
She's yet immovable: hard-hearted
fair!—
Signior Fumante, I had your amorous verses.
He send her verses?—
But the exuberance of your praise, was
only due
To Venus self; and (if my memory fail me
not)
The Author so intended them, in the last Court-Masque.
The Author Madame?
How, hath she found out that?—
Yes Sir! the major part of them I'm
sure were none.
Of yours: but blush not! you're not the first, by
Multitudes, guilty of this felonious fault,
it is common.
Yet ne'er the less absurd.
By Phoebus self, I swear!
The invention genuinely was my own.
I not deny, but mine might simulize
The others learned-straine.
Yea; good wits will jump.
For now the sterile soil of forced
invention.
Is over-wrought, therefore not, so productive
Of variety: what theme can you propose.
That largely hath not bin discussed on?
Scarce any: therefore your excuse is the
more passable.
The duke—
Madame you have exceeded in our
entertainment.
Which you may judge ill recompensed, having
denied.
Your only suite: but consolate
Your grieved heart, which better hopes: for
when.
Your Presence, shall, an honour bring, with it,
Unto our Court, our gratitude shall give
Your bounty a just proof, that we deserve it.
What means the duke?—
Till when-I think 't an age-your
leave—
The Arabian gales breath not so sweet a scent
On blushing Roses.
Your Grace leaves too much honour
which your handmaid.
Fairest—farewell!
The duke depar∣ted
strangely.
Some thing hath
crept into,
His noble breast, that troubles him,
What ere it be?
I partly guess the cause.
Pray heaven no want in us, or misper∣formance.
In his entertainment, hath wrought this altar∣tion!
Be fearless!
No; rather your abundance: in plainer
terms,
•adame, I think your beauty hath subjected
His stouter heart, and doubting, now your loves
Reciprocation, since his great opposing.
Your sad petition, his obduracy
Feeling the heat of Cupids flames become
More flexible: witness his kind invitall
To the Court, his grateful promises of all
Due performance, and his encouragement
To lively consolation; but most,
His Heart-betraying salutation
Just at parting: through which I well per∣ceiv'd,
(As if his breast had bin transparent crystal)
The rankling relic Loves kind cruelty
Had left behind—nay (Madam) we can judge
Propitious be thy divination!
I would not for the world.
Why? coldest not love him?
Yes, before any He living:
Nay set aside the attraction of his person
Which, though external, is most powerful;
With all the internal virtues, that enrich
His nobler mind: as he is your brother
He might share bliss with me: but as he is
A tyrant to my virgin tears effus'd
In such abundance, me•kely at his feet.
Whereby to expiate my fathers guilt
From his too strict remembrance and reduce
him to his native home, that so mine eyes
(Happy in their aspect) might strain the rest
through my excess of joy; as he is thus
Merciless to deny me this I could be pity l•s,—
Sweetest shake off this misbecoming
sorrow•
And these sad weeds, that shrow'd it for, than
now,
Never more cause of gladness: tier thy sell•e
Like to thy self! and help revive the Court
(Grown dull through thy long absence)
With thy presence!
(Dear Madam) do! for if the Duke
be taken?
As certainly he is (or I have no inspection)
Believe your father now at home! for that must
follow.
He never can expect love from you,
'Till he have made him recompense.
Very true: therefore pray be advised!
Good Madam!
Nay come, you shall be ruled, and go to
Court.
Chiefly, to give a demonstration
Of my obedience to the Duke his summons;
Next to pleasure ye; and last (if possible)
Too lose part of my grief, which heaven
knows
Is in supportable• I will waite on you—But
by our sacred friendship!
To me no exorcisms.
Then Question not your brothers pas∣zion!
I shall observe—
Come gentle boy, thy untouched heart is
light,
Thou can express another sadness in
A pleasing tone, and yet remain unmoved:
Sing me the melancholy ditty, which thou
said
Would please me.
weep on, sad Soul! and may thy tears
make thee memorative of hers!
y•t notxs to grieve thee;
For though thy disrespective beams
caroused, unsatissi'd, those streams
her goodness may relieve thee:
Th'obdurate stone,
By oft distilling drops, is wrought upon:
Sigh on! until thy frozen breast,
be with dissolving—warmth possessed!
then weep again!
Till thy repentant sorrow show
each tear, and sigh, from her did flow
hath bin repaid with ten;
and then she must.
Or love again, or lived esteemed unjust.
Tic well: leave us!
What a combustion rages in my breast!
And how small hope to quench it! righteous
fate!
What horrid sin, unknown to my clear soul,
Have I committed, meriting so great
A punishment? than which, none—temporal
More cruel: to love and be disdained!
Is there prevention? she, whose sea of tears
(That might have melted Rocks) the abyssus of
My greedy rigour hath caroused without
Sense of satiety; can she have left
One drop to pity me?—
She whose sad sweet complaints, could not but
charm
The bloody Moore, and teach his fierceness,
mildness;
I've heard neglectingly: can she retain
Compassion, for one hath bin so cruel?
Superfluous question!—but stay better
reason:
Say I call home her father—if at length,
After whole years, great pains, large sums,
consumed
In the delaying law, we but recover
The desperate principal! travel nor charge
Is thought on, we're contented: why maint
she
(Forgetting her past griefs) be satisfied?
I am resolved—but then whore's Justice—
oh!—
No matter•—ye celestial dwellers,
In Capital Letters, register this truth!
I fall to frailety, but by a temptation
That your divinities, if upon earth, could not
withstand:
Which seen I may find pardon
There is no safety can asso∣ciate sin;
Some thing must be donne.
Hipol to discoursing to himself?
Thus obscured, I may o'er hear him.
The Duke is strangely
changed: his wonted mirth
Forsakes him; and his mind-disclosing-speech
Speaks him all sadness: his dejected looks,
Soft lingering pace, and solitary loneness,
Faint-heartless-sighs, and jealous apprehen∣sions.
Are the true badges of a deepe-struck-Amorist.
There you rubbed my wound.
Hum—it troubles me extremely,
To know the certain cause of his distemper.
Kind Hipolito, thy whole care's for us,
Whereas we're grown quite careless of ourselfe,
May be the peerless Lucebella.
What of her?
(The splendour of whose eye might
infuse warmth
In the half frozen Cossack, and enforce
Him throw away his friendly furs) hath caught.
H•s yielding soul—I would not
for a world—
Why? I can hold no longer.
Ha?—how easily might my secure
thoughts
Have bin surprised?
Be not amazed! but fearless! we have
heard.
Thy kind expressions tending to our welfare;
My dear Hipolito, what recompense,
For thy continual care, can there be, worth
Thy acceptance? when as my dukedom is
Too poor a restitution.
Gracious Sir, all I can doe's but duty,
Therefore too well rewarded by your royal
notice.
Thou art all virtue. But when you pro∣nounc'd
The very cause of my sick hearts disease,
Naming fair Lucebella, why stopped you?
Then with a faint conclusion (I would not for a
world)
Blast my hopes?
I'm put to it; but am armed—
Say (my H•polito)—wrack not
my expectation!
Dost thou suspect her virtue?
What, If I confirmed her vicious? it
would work•
But oh that were a sin, for which damnation
Would seem a punishment too easy—I have it
Why muttu•'st, to thy self?
And leave our demand unsatisfied?
Sir, your pardon!
My anxious thoughts, with which my brest's re∣plete;
Cause this neglect of duty.
Then answer us: dost thou believe her
such
As the best female, through temptation, may be,
Frail?
Chaste and religious, as the virgin
Nun,
For ought I know.
She is, she is; my soul for hers, she is:
With haste, dispeed our letters to Pausanio,
Entreat him home, wo him to pardon our
Not pardoning him! tell him we are his friend,
Intend to call him father; restitute
Him any thing—all things—Jam 'ore
joyd.
But what? dost thou rapine at our felicity?
No: but, rather, pray for its increase.
What then, writes discontentment, on
thy brow?
Wee doe command your nearest thoughts.
(Great Sir) you know my home-bred na∣ture,
blunt
As simple, not inured to sooth error
With flattery, so heap sin on sin; but prone
T'extirpate vice, and cherish virtue: then
Shall I behold, with violating hands,
Your self, that should maintain justice, usurp
Her sacred-sword, and, with the desperate point,
Wilfully vulnerate your precious soul,
When as you may prevent it? and not be truly
greev'd?
Oh no! these tears (the intrusive witnesses
Of the fixed love I bear him) doe lament
Pausanio's absence: yet my pious heart,
Limits my ready wishes, for a squared rock,
Of perfect Adamant, I'd not have him here,
And the impardonable sin upon
Your tortured conscience, with the living scan∣dall.
Devouring your noble name, and Ancestors;
When as Posterity
Viewing the annals of your happy reign,
Among your better deeds, there registered,
Shall find this matchless piece of partial justice;
And, in the ears of your surviving off-spring,
Read, Here have we the else good Cosmo,
For a Precedent of ill: will they not curse you?
Oh—
But my too-forward tongue willing to
express.
My zeal to goodness, hath transgressed; and now
I have discharged my duty, if you please?
Cut off my head!—
Rise, my divided soul! would the great
trains,
That throng the Courts of Princes, were like
thee!
But, now, what means to keep me from thy•
guilt,
And yet be happy? my Hipolito.
This only: of late young Martiano,
With great entreaty oft hath urged
Me to desire your Majesties consent,
That he might visit his long absent father:
Now, give him your grant! and for the rest
Let me alone: his fair sister
Affects your Grace, suffice it, that I know it:
But her brother opposes all that bashful virgins—
Wee understand thee: and thy words
bring comfort;
Tell him he hath our leave, with power to use
Our Galleys, when, and where, he please:
We long to hear of his departure.
I'll hasten it: Sir, be you but cheerful,
For if I fail? hate me!
Be prosperous!—
So: now to Martiano, then the games
on foot;
I must not trust his friendship, but at distance.
Had not the good evil spirit furnished
My great necessity? from what a precipice
Had I fallen head-long to perdition?
I'm deeply in, then on! if I must fall?
Better for treason, then things trivial.—
To be married to Vatinius? this false
report
Puts me besides my patience: the very man I
•oath above all the imitating A•es in the
Court:
It is true, he and Fumante both, have oft with
Oaths, professed they loved me; which I ever
slighted,
And plainly told them, that I could fancy nei∣there.
I wonder upon what ground it is fabrick'd!—
Upon my life, merely his own report; no
Otherwise; but I shall fit him; this comes of
Public Courtship: it is well it is no worse.
I would not have it reach the ears of the Prin∣cesse
For any good—. Honorio, I am now resolved
to
Make amends, for my long past unkindness,
Thy constancy doth challenge it.
Hell to my soul?—whore my Sister?
Let reason cool your boiling blood;
lest that
Impatience rob you of sweet revenge.
It cannot:
My virtue's proof against all opposition:
Bring him before my rage, though payled round,
With a••ed millions, •agree their resistance,
I'll hew him peace-meale, then to ravenous
Kites
Throw his luxurious Carcase—wast for this
His Siren tongue invited her to Court,
To strumpet her?—bett his lust had
chose
His only sister to make black with guilt.
Or mounted his own mother—who r my
sister?
These the promised hopes of consolation?—
Dishonour Lucibella?
For heavens sake moderate your fury?
Or, we both are lost.
Perish the whole world with us, ra∣there
than
One grain of our dear honour! fiery flames
Run through my frighted veins, and consume
me,
Before I shall doe justice; patience
But a little; I'll instantly return,
And bring the libidinous heart of this moecha∣tour
A present for you, pointed on my Steel.
First you must cut your passage through
me?
This is childish rashness; and not the fruit
Your vows to patience, and secrecy,
So fairly promised: had I known your temper
To be thus volatile? no torment should
Have forced persuasion, or the name of friend
Have wrought this secret from me: gived me
back?
Or I will ransack all your In•rals for it.
Why I am your friend, and (but for
you) had lived
In ignorance, whilst the lascivious Duke
Might have brought black dishonour on our
house,
And I lost my revenge, but, to your love,
I owe more then a thousand lives; for now
I know his dark intentions, and can
Prevent th'm, by killing them in the bud.
Perform then your free proffer, join with
me!
Remember it alike concerns you—you
He would have made his cursed instrument,
The damned Bawd to his soul lust (my Lord)
You—oh heavens!—the good Hippo∣lito.
Can you hear this, yet not be moved?
I can seem so, and compass my revenge
With greater safety; when you rashly run
Your neck into the nuze; and not alone,
Your own; but seek to ruin him, that was
And would be, your best friend. It is unsafe
To play with the awful Lyons curled maine,
When waking; but a sleep, your pleasnre may
Command his very heart.
I am to blame: Forgive me; Sir,! the
cause
Must needs distemper the most able brain:
You were about to counsel me, pray on!
You said the course was sure, and might be sud∣deign:
I vow all patient observance.
Then thus.
Some twelve Moons since, you may remember
The solemn vow Sicanio freely made
Unto your father, whose supply preserved
His person, people, galleys, from the yoke
Of Turkish bondage; when Rio•bbassa
That proud commander, with his whole Armado
Set on his weaker power, which (by multitude)
'Ore Mastered, after a cruel fight,
Sicanio, and the Sicilian Cavaliers
Ready to yield themselves unto their mercy,
Pausanio, and his power were descried
A aloof, making from Malta; when the wind
Favouring their course, ere a full watch was
out,
Brought them inken of the Turks; your father
by
Their flags, knew them for foes, and freshly char∣ges
Upon their Admiral (till then victorious)
Who (after many) by one dangerous shot.
Received 't waxed wind, and water, quickly sunk.
The rest (disabled by the former: and
More weakened by the latter fight) revenge,
Not valour animated on; and now
A bloody fight begins; but seven short hours
Declares your father Victor: for the Turk
Beat out by new supply, clapps on all sail,
And flies; leaving their intended prize unto
Your father: who (proud that it was his fate,
To serve the Prince) makes himself known,
Supplies what war had made d•ficient,
And takes leave to whom Sicanio, thus:
Valiant Pausanio, our great Preserver,
May heaven be just in sending thee like streit•
Not that we wish thee ill; but that we may
Express our gratitude, for this deliverance,
And your great love:
For all our lives, and force of Sicily,
Are tied to your disposal: So, parted.
Now, Martiano, haste you thither, and make
known
To him your griefs; and if that he be noble,
Now's the time to show it.
But if in case, alleging he is friend
To Florence, he deny me his assistance!
'T were sin to doubt his Princely word
—how here,
Upon your first advise of ill success,
I'll have the duke dispatched; and't will be safe.
For, in your absence, what suspicion can
Move any to think you interested therein;—ha?
Rare, above thought 〈◊〉 my constant
letters
Shall acquaint you withal passages:
I will away to night; the wind sits fair.
Indeed your business doth require wings.
Success waite on you?—
This better change, will much rejoice
your
Brother; who, 'bove his own, preferrs your
welfare.
May it prove wroth his joy; I rather
fear.
My griefs increase, than their redress—I go
Unwillingly—and yet I know not why—
But 'cis the Princess sways me.
See Martiano's come to
waite upon you thither.
To Court! rather to a Bordello—
Sister,
This bravery becomes you well—yea and a∣broad—
But best at home: let not my plainness cause
Your amazement! the duke hath undermined you,
And wants but putting to the burning match,
Of blowing up your honour:
Anon you shall know more; I must this night
For Sicily; my dear Ausonius
Will supply my room, till my return, whom I
(By letters) will inform of all proceedings—
away.
Is this the joy! will unkind fate for e∣ver
Lowr'e! is there no mitigation•
Be wisely patient! or you be•ray
My else-sure revenge.
Now thou speak like my friend.
But I lose precious •ime:
In, and know all: oh gods, be now but just!
Then shall this lustful flame burn him to dust.
LAdy your seeming cruelty, hath
much.
Afflicted me, but your now real promise
Of mutual amity, and protestation
That it was but for aitrial of my faith,
Dissolves my frozen hopes to melting joy: and
heart
I do present you with the constant'st heart.
That purest vows, ever plighted to a Maid—
Salute.
It is but exchanged for one, whose as
firm faith
Resolves the chastest love, that virgin—blushes
Ever betrayed to Man.
May permanent felicity crown both,
Our resolutions! Madam, your persuasive rea∣sons.
Command me patience till the Princess leave,
And your then ready love, shall perfect this
Our begun happiness: in the interim,
I will endeavour some quaint stratagem.
To shame my brace of boasters, whose jactations,
Have, with your modesty, abused my passion.
The very project my slight vengeance
aimed at:
Would it were affected!
Oh doubt it not! their policy's not so
preventive,
But we may easily compass it:
Only, thus far, be pleased to be assistant;
When that Vatinius courts you, let your praise
Be of Fumante, and his Poetry:
And when Fumante, Vatinius in your eyes
A complete Courtier, and becomes his clothes
Be best in Florence: and for the rest, let me alone:
I shall observe: and so I take—
my leave.
All joys waite on you: now
for my mimique gallants.
And luckily hears one, fretting, as if
some busy
Wasp, had with her stinging tail, offended his
Worshipps nose; unseen, I will obe∣serve
him.
It can not bee.
It is credibly so reported Sir.
Vatinius marry her?
What, in the name of merit, can her eye
Discover in that indigested lump,
Worthy so sweet a purchase? but uncase
His disseas'd body, and the dullest eye
Will soon perceive what a Consumption
Intemperance hath bred there: out of boots,
His legs are, but a booty for a Buzzard.
And, but take off his artificial lockes
The french men (that first wanted) first invented;
And against the sun perspicuously you may
See, what a plenteous lack of brains,
His noddl's stored with; which causes him con∣ceit
himself a complete gentleman.
How right his malice hath described em
both!
What imperfections gay apparel covers?
True: whilst deserving virtue, unre∣guarded,
Walks in a thread bare vestment.
This is observable: it is not the goodly
out-side speaks a man.
But I have heard, Sir, that he's possessed
with a very great.
Estate; and who hath wealth hath all things: he
Shall be reputed virtuous, valiant, noble, wise,
What not? and questionless it is that she aims
at: as for
His defects, she may (as other Ladies) supply them
in
A proper, able, well limbed, gentileusher, who
with
Alacrity and fidelity shall discharge his office,
to
The no small contentment of his Madam; yet
Seemingly-be-check'd, and railed on in his feel∣lows
Presence, for now performance of his duty.
A bitter knave.
But are there, who do so?
Are there? why where will you find a
Lady that doth
Nor so? (I mean, I Florence) nay worse in sport
With their Marmosets, and smooth skinned dogs,
A beastly, quality for a Lady: though the now
frequent
Custom of it; lessons the crime.
Well, it vexes me beyond all patience,
to be
Thus affronted, by such a worthless Widgeon;
Would I durst fight with him!
'T would prove a foul Combat; a
woodcock with
A widgeon.
Why sir, what should cause your fear?
upon my
Knowledge, the fight of a drawn sword will make
him swooned.
I will not trust him: nor is it good
jesting with
Edged tools.
Yet have I seen you quarrel; and on the
Piazza,
Draw upon a gentle man, for smiling (as you
thought)
At your new fashioned ha•t, or spur leather:
and with
Vociferous language, threaten inevitable slaugh∣la.
'Thats been, when some have held me,
them?
Thats very true—and he without
a sword too
Nay I dare quarrel with the best; and
with uncivil
Language abuse any man; nay I dare yet go
Farther (rather then be thought a coward) send
A challenge; but under hand, take up the quarrel,
Though at the expense of a Collation of ten
Pistoletts. I can't endure these dangerous passa∣do'•.
But if, with honour the affronted can∣not
put it
Up but you must fight, or be esteemed pusill any∣mous,
How then?
Then I acquit him with the severe law's
against
Duels, and what great want of judgement it is
to
Undertake them, when for a slight word-reputa∣tion,
We commit a murder, yet not obtain our ven∣geance
Without loss of our own lives, which mere
temerity
Forfeits unto the Law; requesting him to enter∣taine
The Noblest thoughts of me, I am a Gentleman,
Ready to give best satisfaction when but called
in
Question, on any ground, but Tuscany; where the
too
Rigorous laws makes it unsafe to combat, &amp;c.
This may prevail with some: but say
he be implacable?
I how then?
Why then, with politic patience, I re∣solve
rather
To suffer a dry private beating, which breaks no
bones;
Than •un the arischa of my life, with dangerous
poking.
I shall try your temper.
Then y' are resolved to let him have
your Mistress?
No Isle forbid the baines.
Not so: but, first, I'll hear this news
confirmed,
And then I may doe something: mean time you
Must give out that Lucebelia's desperately sick.
It is the Lord Hipolito's Com∣mand:
their's a reward—
Fumante, met as wished!
What is Honorio's pleasure?
To pleasure you, my friendship hitherto
hath still confirmed it.
Which ever l've acknowledged, and
for which
I place you next my heart.
And theirs a peace of service now in my
power,
Will deserve that place; if you dare venture on it,
But I err to Question, knowing your courage,
and
Impavid spirit; when honour bids you On.
I both have propenfitude to dare, and
power to do.
Say! what first!
Vatinius, whom fame gives out for truth
Shall wed Rosania, conceives that you
Have grossly injured him; sor it appears
She now begins, to slight him, of which neglect
He judges you the Author; because
Flouting him to his face; for the bad wearing
Of his good clothes, she emulates your garb;
Vituperating his dull courtship, applauds
Your fluent vein; reputes him worthless, and
Your self deserving; and upon this ground's
Resolved to challenge you to single Combat.
Now if my friendly counsel (only tending
To your dear credit, and future good) may
Be prevalent; it were not amiss you did prevent
His peremptory challenge with another;
Which greatly must disanimate him; denoting
You are truly sensible of the wrong he hath
done you,
In basely skandalizing your merit to your Mi∣stress.
—Oh! oche torto?—which he
Hath often in my hearing done: so shall
You justly chastise vice, and re-obtaine
Rosania's favour.
But there is danger in it.
No more then in beating an English
Spannel, which
Will love you the better ever after for it. Vatini∣us
is
A true bred Courtier; and had rather see an
evil
Spirit, then an unsheathed Spado—however,
let
Me know your place of meeting, and I'll see
there
Shall be no bloud-shed: for a wholesome beat∣ing
Will doe him most good, nor would I have you
Purple your bright sword, in blood of a poor
Coward
It were dishonour.
I am resolved.
The time, and place?
Six in the Evening, in the grove behind
the palace.
You'll not fail to meet!
Fail!—I swear I would not miss
the sport
For any good—yet use him gently—for
I pity him.
Only it is against my honest nature to hear my
Friend abused, and see so sweet a beauty subject
Her self to such a glorious nothing—when
Suggested to it, only, by fraudulent information.
I'll inform him, and reform him too,
It would prove an easier tasque to
teach an english.
Bear speak French—you say you think she
loves you!
Think!
And hath bestowed upon you many fa∣vours!
As leave to kiss her hand—
Her hand!
Yes! that's a favour: but I understand
you—you
Have been more familiar, you are happy!—
And she hath graced your many presents with
Her kind acceptance!
She hath
And all this Vatinius contradicts—oh
lying Racial!
I'll contradict him, and presently about
it—
You will not fail to meet?
Doubt it not!—but
when you have greatest need—
Be confident I'll prove a broken
reed.—
You could have loved him then!
Before he fell from virtue, as my self
Divided, might affect the other half.
But since stained with corruption,
His memorie's most loathsome.
Whence then proceeds this strong oppug∣nonce
to
My fair proposition• efflagitation? if from your
hate?
Be, what your angel-form doth seem to speak
You, merciful• and with one stroke dispatch
Me, and my griefs! but say, I cannot love
you;
And that subverting blast, shall (in a trice)
Shake my hie flaming heart to frigid earth
So ease me: whereas merciless delay
But torment adds unto affliction:
Say (Lady) doe you hate me!
That were to make me worse then in∣grateful,
No (my Lord) I cannot be so irreligious, as
To hate the man that loves me; I do honour
Your great virtue, and with a perfect zeal
Respect your worth: be then but confident
Of your own merit, you may be assured
You have an equal interest in my heart,
With any he that breathes: but for reply
To your great suite, thus.
By that firm love, your seeming pious vows
Induced me to believe most real, and
By what's more dear to you; urge it no further
For I've no power to grant, what you request.
Madam you much amaze me.
I've vowed virginity (my Lord) till it
shall please
Hard fate to be more gentle, and exchange
My injured father's infortunity,
For's former dignities; it misbecomes
My sad condition to entertain, till then,
Least hope of joy: therefore (good Sir,)
Desist! my faithful vow is fled beyond recall
Not the least word falls from that pow∣earful
tongue
But doth predominate o'er my strongest passi∣on,
Teaching it subjection—Madam,
I am all patience and obedience.
Yet give me leave to hope!
My Lord, I would not be so sinful, as
To counsel to despair.
Then, till another meeting shall revive
me, divinest fairest,
Permit my loyal lip, on your pure hand,
T'inscribe the figure of my perfect love,
Obvious to none but you, that when those eyes,
(For this hands sake) do glance upon the print,
You may remember, reading there your ser∣vant—
As for the rest, I'll follow your ad∣vice.
The dukes unbridled lust rages beyond.
Suppression, and (but for this brave Lord)
Had driven him hither, to my honours ruin:
Bad age! what dare not sinful man attempt?
I must admit no visits, his report
Hath made me dangerously sick; which may
Work with his wilde distemper, and preserve
My honour free from blemish; if that fail?
Here is a noble hand that will—
prevail.
Lady, you brother, with first favourable
wind,
Will reach our Port; here's letters which advise
Of all occurrents, please you retier, and peruse
them.
Your brothers letters have informed your father,
Of this design, who connote long be absent.
I must, with speed, dispatch one to Legorne,
Unto my Substitute, to render up
The Fort to Martiano: '•is of great importance:
The Prince, in person, to express his zeal
To your deserving father, with great power,
Accompanies my friend, and vows redress.
Heaven thou hast heard my—
prayers.
Immediately I follow.
Martiano, thou 'rt hicher to successful;
Nor would I have thy rash credulity
O'rethrow this great design, and so betray,
Thy weakness to eternal shame:
Which to prevent I must detain these letters
Directed to Hipolito; it is unsafe.
To trust his smoothness: if he be our friend?
We nobly shall embrace him, in—
the end?
How look•d she on thee? Iacamo.
As a fleet street-Barber, on a twopenny
Customer;
Or a Clyent-cloid Lawyer, on a half fee: bad
me
Tell you, she scorned your glorious jewel, and
inglorious
self; only this short precept, relished of kindness,
if not of love.
What was it?
Marry to follow the example of Fumante;
he's
A complete Gentleman, and (in her eye)
The most deserving man in Italy.
Shame, and fear possess him!—
here—
Deliver this unto his proper hands.
It would be strange, if this should
prove a Challenge.
It is as Honoria told me—well I
have followed.
His advice, upon his faithful promise of assistance,
But if he fail?—Fumante will perform—
I shall be sure to have it how ever—would,
It were to doe again!—but her's Honoria.—
It is done my Lord.
Spoke like a Conqueror.
But.—
But what man?
Nay, do not think I fear him!
Pooh• let Cowards fear!
I so they doe—
And such, whose smutty souls the wild∣fire
of
Foul guilt corrodes! (as it doth his) best inno∣cence
is guard against all danger.
Yet I could wish—Hono What?
I were more valiant—
But it is no matter—I am resolved.—
Y' have past your word to bear me out?—
I have; and will perform.
Faith—I have no stomach to it.
Even as you please: the shame will be
your own;
Yea; and the loss too: the loss of such a one,
As not the Court can parallel—udds foot,
You'll make your self the common laughing
stock
To all the Pages, Lackeys—nay the Grooms
When they want matter to stir up their mirth,
Will teihie out your name.
Pages, Lackeys, and the Grooms—
hum—
But, above all, Fumante.
(Whose heart's no bigger then a small pin's head)
From this your fear, will collect courage, and
Every minute publicly affront you;
Whereas your letter will make him look
Far paler then the paper, seconded
By an undaunted-Spirit.
I marry—there's it.
Sufficiently I've truly told you what he
is,
A mere man of March-peine; if you dare ven∣ture
On him? so: if not? and he deceive you of your
Mistress,
It concerns not me: I have discharged the office
Of a friend; think on it! farewell!
Nay Sir—I will meet him!
I'll not be beat, and laughed at too.
I'll want my will then—
Yet he was a Commander, in the last
employment.
Why so might you, or any man had
money:
Desert not ever wears the Plume: he knew
There was no danger in 't, yet certain pay:
Such wars would make every faint heart
Turn soldier. Well prepare! the time draw•s
on.
You'll meet at Six? I build upon your
promise.
If I fail, flea me! Coraggio—
Are you blind, you Buzzard?
Are you blind you Buzzard?
Is your Master at home?
Is your Master at home?
I have business with him.
I have business with him.
Do you mock me? ha?
Do you mock me? ha?
Yes, my Master is at home.
Yes, and my Master is at home.
Y' are very pleasant, but I'll change
your note.
Say you so? then have
with you.
What uncivil broil is this! for shame
put
Up your swords! the street's no place to quarrel
in.
How fell ye out? (my honest friends)
An't please your honour, I have a letter
to deliver to Vatinius, whom this man serves;
and fairly asking him Whether his Master were
at home, or not? he echoed still my words: I
loved not to be jeered, and thus it grew.
And I have another letter for F•mante,
whom that man serves. I questioned him a like,
but jeered him not: yet I could do no less then
to defend my self.
A more fit occasion, I could not hope
for—
That two such noble spirits, as your selves,
Should serve such worthless Patrones•—
Heir's a reward—I love to cher∣rich
virtue.
We are your humble vassalls.
Come, come, join hands! your busi∣nos
to each.
Others Master cause this mistake: be friends!
Now we perceive it did.
And now I have a undertaking for ye,
which performed, Isle make what I have given ye
fifty pistols.
Do but command? it is done.
Well; first perform your Patrones
charge! it is duty: then dress your wounds;
which are not many, nor yet mortal: and two
hours hence, down in the walks, behind the
grand palazza, meet me! where I'll instruct ye.
We shall attend your Lordship.
Be firm, and private!
As your own thoughts, Sir—
Jacamo, I cry thee mercy: w'are good
friends again, I'll stay for thee at Catarina's, where
I'll spend my crown, for confirmation of our af∣la
friendship.
And I'll not fail to meet thee instantly—
I much rejoice to see this long• wished
alteration in your Lady: may heaven, by a con∣tinuall
addition of new comforts, confirm her
joy.
I, with my soul, desire the same•
poor Lady she doth need it.
'T was much beyond my expectation
(hearing the late report) to see so many decent
smiles dimple her cheeks; and hear such plea∣sant
accents flow from her long greefe-ty'd
tongue.
Indeed the change was sudden, yet for
some private end, known only to her self; she de∣sires
a confirmation rather than contradiction,
of this report.
I cannot keep so great a comfort from
the Princess; but they're one soul.
How bears the duke his passion? they
say he's near distraction.
So please you walk, I'll tell you my open∣neon:
We must not miss the Combat, and the houre's
at hand.
What stare ye at? do ye make us your
wonder?
Begone•
So please your Grace.—
Yes, it doth please us, leave us!
Wee obey—
I guess the cause of this distraction,
But must keep sealed my lips, until his passion
Vent somewhat that may warrant my expression:
Wherefore, thus obscured, I will observe him—
Can the virgins, and their goodness
great protectess,
(Sacred Diana,) suffer foul disease,
(That fatal Minister of certain death)
T'enthrone himself, in the Majesticke-seat
Of my faire's rosie-excellence, and there
(With a tyrannicke-quatefaction) threat
The sudden dissolution of so pure,
A vivid temple, where her honoured name
Lives with a reverential fear, yet not
Be moved to pity? such an omission,
Forbid perfection! whore's your wonted power
For your own glory, make it manifest!
Lest your bare Altars know no Votary.
If the least trespass done to majesty
Be treason, Hippolito's a Traitor in the high∣est.
But oh—my praye'r is sin: All pow∣earful
love,
It is your divinity Mortality
Thus Rivals, death's an inamorat turned
And wo's, to's chill embraces, a beauty
Far fairer than thy Mother, quick let fly
A leaden headed shaft procuring hate
In his cold breast! lest his, more ready, should
Prevent thy veng'ance, and deprive thee of
The sweetest sacrifice that ever enriched
Thy hallowed shrine—see where the ghastly
fiend
Sits proudly on her couch, and uncontrolled
Saucily courts her—(may contagion
Be thy companion! and the horrid grave
Your place to couple in!) whilst the afflicted
Shrinks at his grim aspect, and turns away
From his frozen-salutations—now he's
moved
And levels at her heart—divinest Love!
Cease his destroying dart! and in its room
Place thine of Gold, then wound him with his
own,
Even to destruction! so shalt thou prove
A glorious victor, I, she, live and love.
It is, as my prophetic soul informed
me,
And now for my discovery
How durst thou interrupt our pri∣vice?
Have we no power?
But calm that stormy brow• your
grace forthwith
Shall feel the ease I bring you.
Dost thou mean to kill me?
Perish my soul! rather then prove a
harbour
For such Rebellious thoughts.
Nay I believe thee loyal; but alas
My griefs are at that height, that nought but
death
Can slack them.
If thou bring comfort? (good Honorio)
My needy soul lies open to receive it. Prithee
speak!
I know your griefs; and therefore
come to tell you
You are abused, and nourish in your breast
Infection that will kill you.
Leave this abstruseness, and be plain!
'Twil startle you, but your comment's
my warrant.
Hippolito's a Traitor, and doth wrong
The royal trust your goodness hath repo•'d
In him.
How's this! no more: you're not a wea∣rye
of
Your burdenous breath, that you thus wake our
anger
Sir, what I've spoke, to the last warm
drop within me
I'll boldly justify: nor i'st opinion,
Fond supposition, or regardless malice,
Poorer revenge, or hope of airy honour,
That thus imbold'ns me, but a religious care
My pious duty hath for your Highness safety,
That it is truth; but honour my advice with your
acceptance.
I will inform your Majesty a way
Shall make your eyes, and ears my
witnesses.
Thou should be honest!
When I prove otherwise, may my perfi∣dious
trunk
On the disgraceful tree, feed carrion!
I am resolved! waite us within; but
take heed!
My All lies on it—
Honorio, so intimate! I like it not
If he prove false, there is no faith in
man;
Religion is but form, and prayer hypocrifie
I can't expect the fruit of my laborious
plots until
I h've made sure Martiano; which now I will en∣devour.
So please your Grace I have some words to speak
Will—
Trouble us: our thoughts are taken
up—
Is it even so?—then—how am
I changed
Timorous flesh—why shake thou!—
conscience,
I know thee too—too soon—I'll after
And submit to gentle mercy—but
My proud spirit rebels, and whispers me
You're safe!—Fear; thus I cast thee off;
My soul hath but one partner in her secrets
And he's a tried honest knave—I'm yet se∣cure;
Heaven how this bug-bear conscience did af∣fright
me
Fumante, saw you the Duke!
He, and Honorio, are now in private con∣ference.
Let your intelligence be ubiquitary!
There may be something now compounding,
that
We shall not relish: I like not this Honorio—
Have you heard nought fall from him might
concern
The prejudice of our affairs!
But what I told your honour touching
Pausanio.
Better he had bin tongue-tied!
Pray let your care be waking! the time requires
it—
Fear not! my gracious Lord!
What from Vatinius!
If our proverb be true; that saith,
there is no smoke but where ther's some fire, you
should be valiant; for your denomination as
well as action, denotes you to be vapour; conse∣quently
full of choler: Whether that be, or no
valour! I dispute not: our Sudden trial will
prove the better Touch-stone. That you have af∣fronted
me, and grossly, is, and that I will be re∣venged
for the affront, shall be, most certain:
therefore at six in the evening, in the grove of
Sicamores, expect such fury, as provoked justice
can inflict on so notorious an offender! which
is (at least) death, by the hand of the injured and
therefore enraged
I cannot doubt Honioro's friendship,
I will meet him, and the hour's at hand
From this balcone, we shall behold all
passages.
Pray heavens they doe no harm!
Hang 'hem painted parrots! they'll but
prate.
But who be these?
Why this is all.
For both are so hen hearted—
That I much doubt if one dare look on the other.
I'll swear for one, is to other doe but
frown?
And I as much for to other.
Ther's it: then but consider the insup∣portable
abuse.
They've put upon the Lady, and my self;
Ye must confess, yet truly, my revenge
Is too—too—merciful.
In truth, and so it is.
Nor shall ye pleasure me alone, but both
your Patrons: when each (like a good servant)
shall beat his Master's Enemy; which themselves,
will be afraid to doe: besides revenge the hurts
you have received; through their occasion.
It will be rare.
But then we lose our service.
Leave that to me! for there's the trophy
of my revenge.
I'll make 'em thank ye too—
That would be fine in faith?
I'll do it—but I hear footing.
That hedge will keep you secret
This is the place; but no Fumante
come:
If it were but possible he were more fearful
Than my self, and stay away—what honour,
I might win.
I'll spoil your growing hopes, hum,
hum, hum.
But oh vain hope!—that was his
voice.
How the wretch trembles!
My Executioner is come—
But no Honoria to reprieve me To him Fumante.
He's come indeed!
Would I were well at home! but ther's
no flinching.
He's yonder, and descries me: ther's
no retiring,
Now should Honorio fail? I'm lost.
I must set a face 'ont:—Sir, you
keep touch.
I'm not behind the hour you prefixed.
Nor would I mispend time, now you
are come,
You cannot but imagine the cause of this our
meeting.
Not on your part: but I come to re∣ceave.
Strict satisfaction, for disgraces, which
Your forward tongue, in the hearing of my Mis∣tress,
(The fair Rosania) most unworthily.
Have put upon me.
He means to sight—
Can you as well acquit your self, of the igno∣ble
wrongs committed by your self, unworthy∣lie,
against me? as I of what you charge me with;
this meeting, rather will confirm our former
friendship, then breed farther difference.
I'm glad it is come to this—
I'll break that union.
As I'm a Gentleman!—
Oh fearful protestation!
I ever honoured you; wherefore could
not detract.
From your desert: then but relinquish claim
Unto Rosania (for I have her promise)
Oh shameless impudence!
And l'le remain your servant.
The first I cred it, but the latter hon∣our
forbids.
Then let our swords decide it—
oh for Honoria!
Stay!—a pox on my credulity!
this is no Coward.
I hate these idle quarrels touching women.
I hope he will compound—
Not that I doubt the justness of my
cause,
Or fear your naked steel: the world knows me.
Yes, for a fearful Coxcomb.
But that I would not kill a friend for
such a trifle.
Yet give I up no interest; but if
You'll be content with her own verdict? we will
Refer our selves to her, yet save our honours.
It is not unreasonable; agreed.—
On! spare um not—
Jaca. Ye must not part so calmly.
We are betrayed; the Guard.
This is Honorio's falsehood.
Will not you yield your sword then?
Yes, yes most willingly: oh, oh,
Ye must be fighting?—ye shall have
fighting.
Not wee! oh—I protest not we!
—oh
Nay (good Sirs) it is sufficient!
Not yet—not yet.
Oh, oh, oh—mercy Gentlemen!
My toes are wearied.
So are my arms.
I'm sure my back parts are—
Wee yet dare hardly trust ye in one
room;
Ye must be severally imprisoned.
Imprisoned?
Yes: know ye not, that it is against law
to fight a duel?
Oh my good lord, unless you now be∣friend
us,
We must to prison.
Then ye have fought?
Not we.
Yet have bin soundly beaten.
Trust me, I could come no sooner, but for
a small
Matter I'll undertake to free ye from these Catch∣dolts.
We'll give any reasonable considerate∣on.
Yea, and thank 'em too; so we escape.
In motion 't to 'em: they are of my ac∣quaintance.
Dianetta, let us descend! and laugh at
'em.
My Lord you may command us.
I must acknowledge it a Courtesy.
I have prevailed; for too double pistols, ye are
free:
But you must take it for a favour too.
Oh by all means.
There's, Gentlemen, for each •o good
quadruples,
With many thanks—
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
The Lady's—oh for a charitable
halter!
Now could I wish my self, any thing
but my self
Nay, never hang the head! your inso∣lence
hath
Well deserved it: and now my verdict:
I hate ye both, as do the Scot a py'd-Pro∣timyst;
And this is my election—
Is it even so? then hang the head indeed!
Why we are both deceived.
What think you now of kissing her
white hand?
You more then think she loves you.
Ha, ha, ha ha,
No more my Lord; I pity the poor
Gentlemen.
She should be free, because pitti∣full.—
I'll try her constitution.
I should have done my self, what
these t•ll.
Men have performed for me; but I knew they
Would use ye more gently—know ye your
tormentors?
Carlo?
Iacamo?
The very same:
Oh our shame!
I see you are truly penitent; if now,
Ye but assent to what I shall propound,
We'll hide your equal shames in privacy.
As you are noble?
Upon my honour.
Be it what it will we both consent.
Receive then into grace again your ser∣vents!
They are stout fellows, and what each hath done,
Hath bin but for his Patron.
Wee humbly thank your Lord∣ship.
We pardon both; and beg the like
of ye.
Ye have it; and hereafter be more care∣full
Of your honour! then y' are well.
And pray remember that it still hath bin
An approved Maxim, shame will foal∣low
sin.
THis seeming-sanctity cozens the
world
As did the soft words that (with power) fell
From the smooth tongue of that false Traitor,
Me.
I walk invisible to any's knowledge,
And (through Honorio's counsel) have discovered
Treasons, which my too charitable faith
Could never have received for truth; if not
My self confirmed the certain witness?
Ingratefully-presumptious-Man,
If thy sublime thoughts throw thee from that
hight
Where my deceived love placed thee? may thy
fall
Live a preventive-patt'rne with thy folly
For the age to come! thou art
worth no mans pity.
What mean these loud, and
sudden acclamations?
Martiano, and the heir of Sicily,
With hostile troupes, invaded have the town;
The castle's, by Ausonius, yielded up
To farther their de•igne: with them take part,
The inconstant Citizens, whose forward faith,
Ruled by their strong persuasions, much doth
doubt
The justness of Pausanio's banishment,
And have resolved remission of his doom:
Disorder throngs the streets; yet no bold-hand,
Managing the rude sword, dare disobey
Its brave Commanders noble charge, but all
Enjoy their own with quiet: the soatious Court,
With every narrow-cantone, only is
Examined for your person, by the General;
Who greeves for your escape: Hipolito.
(The chiefest Agent in this proud attempt)
Is of their bosom counsel, and (I fear)
Intends a farther mischief—what's to be done?
My joys are yet above my griefs; and I
Bless gracious heaven (zealous of its own glory)
That destined thee the pious instrument
To guard me from their malice: it is apparent
The Gods take part with us, whose purer wills
Abhor the opposition of humane
Policy: wherefore, in this disguise,
I'll live obscured, until that Industry
Have satisfied my curiosity, in all particulars.
It cannot but be safe.
What? Lucebella takes me for no other,
Then Padre Stephano, my reverend Confessor?
She, and your Princely sister, still re∣maine
In that desired error.
It is well: hath she not yet seen her re∣bilious
brother?
Not yet.
It is fit that we be present at their meet∣ing.—
Silence the noise of that disturbing∣drum!
And not a soldier, upon pain of death,
Exceed our given Commission! we intend
No less then honour warrants.—
It is noble as your self.
Having, by Martiano, understood
The real cause of our just undertaking;
It must appear impertinent, to trouble
Your Wise ears, with needless repetition:
Wherefore (assured of your full satisfaction)
Each may depart, unto his peaceful home,
And there, (without the least suspicious thought)
Possess what fate hath given him.
Long live Sicanio!
Grave Citizens, and loving Coun∣trimen,
We seek not furtive spoil, or thirst for blood;
Nor shall the ill tutored soldier,'f•re your faces,
Force your dear wives; but each enjoy his spouse
As he was wont: the untouched virgin may
Yet sleep securely, and not fear a rape;
For not the meanest man, among these many,
But values honour above sinful gain;
Rest satisfied with this, and all retire
Unto your proper dwellings! but, withal,
Pray be retentive of those burd'nous wrongs
Your good old General (who hath hugged dan∣ger,
To purchase your dear sa•etys) now's oppressed
with•
And if our mildness, with your justice meet,
The Wars are ended, and ye most •••create.
Martiano, shall have justice, Mar∣tiano
shall have justice.
To each my equal thanks.
See friend, the Princess.
and your Sister
Should my discourte∣os
fate deny my heart
Admittance, yet my dazzled eyes have leave
Freely to wonder, though my profane thoughts
Cannot conceive the excellence dwells there.
Surely divinity hath chose residence
With frail mortality, for all the virtues
Po•ts have stellifi'd, at once, shine there:
She approaches—Martiano, have you the
Honour to call this beauteous Lady, Sister?
Royal Sir, I have.
I swear you're happy! happy be∣yond
expression!
I'm lost in midst of conquest—
A goodly Gentleman!—
First (fair•• sweetness) let my rude
Salute
Express the fervent zeal I had to serve you;
Lest you, with thanks anticipate, what was but
duty.
The Phoenix boils with Wormwood—all
Odours
Aromaticall breathe there.
Sir, the Princess.
Madam, if that my misplaced salutation∣once
have
Deserved your hard construction? think upon
Your equal glories! and the thought thereof
Will reconcile the error to your favour.
Great Sir, it was but justice; therefore
needs no Apology:
If that my jealous fears prove true? her eyes
Already have exhaled his melting heart,
And, left behind, my ruin.
Father, at more convenience,
We shall desire farther conference;
Till when, let the pure truth, I've uttered win
A creditable room in your opinion.
For by my fixed hope of future bliss!
My thoughts were all innocuous.
Enough; and so were his. I kept the Key,
That opened, to my view, the treasury
Of his rich soul; have searched the intrinsik'st
part thereof,
But never found a sin so damnable, lodged there:
You'll find he is abused.
This Friar may work much mischief,
If not timely prevented!
Royal Sir,
The high summed
debt, due to your
noble goodness,
Greatly exceeds all language, or acquittance;
All I can pay your bounty, is true thanks,
Sent from an humble heart devoted to
Your Princely virtue, those I'll bring you daily•
Nor shall I doubt of your fair acceptance,
Since the pleased gods expect no other off∣ring
For the large-all-they lends us.
It is the voice of some sweet tongued
Cherubin
My sense is blessed with!—Gracious Ma∣dam,
deign
Me but the glorious title of your servant
And the reward's past merit.
I shall be proud to be your highness
hand-maid
Oh, who would not!
I feel the pangs of tyrant love already.
And (beauteous madam) though we
came with power
(Expecting opposition) threatening ruin;
Banish all thought of fear! for the sharpe
points
Of our yet peaceful swords, shall vulnerate
Each one his owners breast, before disturb
Your quiet; we brought with us, love linked with
Resolution; and were your brother here?
He were as freely safe from outward harm,
As where he is; though placed within the Altar.
He hath a noble soul.
Your power is great indeed: but if you
bring
Love to associate it? I find no cause
Why I should doubt or fear.
My jealousy emboldened me beyond civility—
But it hath eased my heart.
It is the Dukes character and
Signet how came you by it?
Himself, it seems, did on set purpose
leave it
Upon my study table, when he came
Last to confession.
Gentlemen, examine it no farther! but
elect
Among ye one more sit! it is too great
An undertaking, for so weak a man
As my unable self: alas (my lords)
My humble thoughts, accompanied with quiet,
Doe trembling-look at sovereignty, nor would
They be intreig'd it'h great affairs of state:
But in the private contentation they
Doe now enjoy, would period their date
Uds will, don't refuse it! would
it were proffered me!
Martiano, Ausonius, Honorio, none butt's
more fit
Then I.
The Dukes command must be
obeyed.
Will no persuasions take place?
Bear witness heaven, with what unwillingness
I doe receive this enforced honour!
Finely dissembled—•
Long live Hippolito—
My thanks to all: and since it is my fate
To undergo this glorious yoke, I shall
Endeavour by the purchase of your loves,
To maked seem light. What's now amisse'ere
long
Shall have redress.
Mean while, let our best entertainment speak
This royal strangers welcome.
Your nobleness en∣deers
us.
As Misers in a phantasm, enjoy
A mass of goodly treasure, upon which
Their fond imaginations do feed, until
The sleepy God (disposed to mock their
hopes)
Unlock their abus'd-senses; when awaked
And missing their suppos'd-possession, they
Do greeving-wish that their deluded fan∣cies
Ne'er had fabrick'd so brave a guilded-Nothing
So thy short dream of dignity expired
(Vain glorious man) thou'lt repent the suscep∣tion;
When thou, too late, shalt wish thy winged
thoughts
Had flown at lower distance, and not dared
A fight so near the beams of Majesty.
This condescended power, can't but prove
The temper of his mind; and if I find
His inclination close with my great doubt,
I must appear my self, and root him
out—
A reasonable man, would think I had bin
beaten sufficiently, to make my rampant flesh lie
couchant: I'll be sworn there's scarce room
left for a single sold, about my body, of its na∣tive
hew, but ell's soffisticated by the abusive
cudgel, and yet all will not doe—I have
an extreme itching to be mounting some
Court Madam, and (above the rest) Dianetta,
whose late compassion promised very fairly,
were it but effected; were quit with my po∣attic
rival, I have resolved to try the encoun∣la,
and first, I'll prove her temper with rich pre∣scents;
which graced by her reception, access
must follow—however, it is but disgesting
of a denial—or (at worst) another beating;
which, when a man's once used to, seems nothing:
and see where luckily she comes oh for this win∣ning
language.
Lady if my request come not unseasonable,
I shall importune your seeming hast to afford
Me some few minutes conference.
For present, pray excuse me my affairs
are now important.
I shall await your leisure,
Mean time, so please your goodness to enrich
This poor gem, by your wearing; the dona∣tour
Will hold himself much honoured, and remain
The humblest of your Creatures.
It were discourtesy (kind Sir) to slight
So free a proffer; and although I hold
My self incapable of merit; yet
I Question not the worth of you the giver,
But shall retain it till convenience shall
Acquaint me with your further pleasure—
She must be mine! though gon, I feel
her coming
The abundant joys my almost sated
breast
Conceives for this unlooked for greatness, swells
My jocund heart to such a boundless height
That the stretched strings would crack, if it were
not for
This private vent? Courteous stars I thank ye!
Nor will I easily part with your free gift,
No, no, it is of too great a price: what can
Be more contentive then supremacy?
To have such numerous pairs of servile eyes
Attend our nod! as many pliant knees,
Bow at our beck! officious feet to move
With swiftest pace to execute our will!
And the whole court, in competition, for
Our coveted regard! ha? first not brave?
I faith it is! once more (kind stars) I thank ye!
And then to steer •he helm of the great state,
What course we shall think fit, or throw down
Or raise, when, whom we please can there be bliss
On earth exceeds this? Liberal Fate,
Still I must thank thy bounty—Now the way
To keep in this blessed state—(for it is esteemed.
No less policy to preserve then purchase)
Must be the Dukes remove; which might be done
With safety, and facility, could I learn
Out his abode? which promises may win
From his late confessor (for ther's hypocrisy
Even in sanctity) whom I must employ
In other weighty matters, which if fate
Prosper for heaven, I scarce would change estate
However, her profession, hitherto,
Speaks her so much your friend, that I believe
When she shall know, by me,it is in her power
To further this your love; her gratitude
(Consulting with her noblest thoughts) will
counsel
Her brave soul, rather to dye Loves Martyr,
Then live esteemed ungrateful.
That were a cruel kindness—Reve∣rend
Sir,
Be but memorative of what I've told you!
And it is sufficient—
Poor Iulia! we're allied by 'our hard
fortunes
Well as blood; nor doe the causes differ, you
Pursuing, with a furious love, my rival
And I yours• yet neither's zeal respected.
Ther's yet away to prevent all—the Prince—
Will not your grace acquaint me with
your grief?
It is not impossible, but I may ease you.
Thou mighst do much i•deed!
Why? doe you doubt my faith?
Then I conjure you, by those many vows
So freely made to me of constant friendship, to
disclose
Your troubled thoughts! left I justly suspicious
That my best deeds have found no credit with
you;
Do, with this desperate point, rip up my breast
For you to find the error.
It shall not need; I know it full of
worth;
But oh—thy Sister—thy Sister, Martiano—
What of her?
I love thy beauteous Sister; whose e∣lection
• fear hath promised future happiness
To some one more deserving.
Your equal breathes not.
Yes.
Who?
Hipolito: and now you know the ve∣rye
cause, assist
Me with your powerful intercession•
I cannot doubt success.
Sir, she's at her own disposal; nor am I
Versed in the soft way of amorous courtship,
A sword, and horse have ever bin my minions:
Yet what the privilege of a brother, joined
With honest plainness, way persuade her to,
Be full ass•red; shall not be wanting• So
I humbly take my leave
If she consent?—
She doubly sins.
Against whom? and how?
Heaven and her friends.
Be charitable (holy father) and
Delay not your resolves!
Divinity not curiosity,
Made me partakers of your privacy
Whereby I h've heard your real tongue confirm
What I fore knew a truth, your ardent love
To the fair Lucebella—but alas
My pious plainness (should I utter what
Religion prompts me to) could not but meet
(So fragil's wilful man) contempt and malice.
Wherefore the breath I'd thought to have em∣ployed
In satisfying your demand, I'll spend
In prayers to heaven, that you may shun the mis∣chief
Unlawful love suggests you to, and place
Your purged affection on the glorious object
Fate hath provided for you.
Oh leave me not unsatisfied! to doubt,
Will more afflict my troubled soul, than all
That you can utter: and (grave Sir) so much
Am I an enemy to those twined sins you men∣tion'd,
That what ever falls from your lips
I shall believe oraculous: be free,
In your expression! whilst I give your words,
A willing, faithful hearing.
They will concern your souls eternal
quiet;
For he that seeks to separate those hearts
Heaven hath united, sins beyond all hope
Of sweet remission. Noble Sir, call back
Your fruitless, cause misplaced, affection!
Forth' absent Duke, and Lucebella have
Exchanged mutual vows, (which live recorded
Above the clouds) and fix your deserved love
On her, that mourns for you to the prejudice,
Of expetible health! who, prized below
Her worth, is still her rivals equal—it is—
Though I have no Commission (but what
Our holy order bound to further good,
Doth warrant) to disclose this secret,
The incomparable Princess Julia—
But you seem troubled?
Where ther's no power to help, respon∣sive
grief,
Shows friendly:—But, reverend Man,
your charity
Deludeth your too facile-faith, the Duke
Loved her ignobly, which provoak'd her brother
(Tender of her dear honour) to a rage
His fathers sufferings could not tempt him to;
And drew from her an everlasting hate:
Iv'e heard their tongues confirm it.
But that religion bounds my ready
lips,
A killing curse would issue forth, and cease
Upon the cause of this foul scandal—Sir,
The Duke made me familiar with his thoughts,
The thoughts most dear to him believe'• he is
abused;
I know it.
I nor condemn nor justify; yet shall
(Upon your affirmation) repute
The duke still truly noble: for the rest,
I shall with more deliberate thoughts consider,
What may be most expedient; affairs
Of so great consequence, ask not a sudden,
But well weighed resolve• Father farewell!—
Holy Angels guard you!
How is the goodness of a gracious Prince
Abused through easy-confidence? those men
Our favours most reflect on, are the first.
Revolt from their profession, and rebel
Against their second makers: faithless Age!
Direct me heaven in the best course, whereby,
I may repair my bleeding honour, and
O'er my detractors get the upper hand—
I tell thee seriously his importunity
Did almost weary me; and, but to promise
Success to his desires, I'd no way left
To shake him off.
In faith, it may impair your credit;
For he will brage ont'.
He shall have no such cause, as I intend
to handle him: and see, he keeps as con∣stant
to me as my shadow.
Well, I'll leave you—
Lady, why do you seek to starve my
hungry hopes.
By cruel tardity? mine is no suite in law
(Though't hath dependence in the Common
Pleas)
Brookes not protraction; my desire hath
A greedy-stomack; and the quick performance
Of your past promise, only can afford
Satiety: speak then some comfort (dearest)
Ah—but my honour.
An aerie word, quite out of fashion
But then ye men are so inconstant—
Contract all hearts together, and you
shall.
Find, in this one, the quintessence extracted,
Which I thus sacrifice unto your beauty—
Speak then, Lady; oh when? and where? the
happy time? the blessed place? when, Lady? oh
when? and where?
This Evening; my lodging.
Confirm it with a kiss!—
But you'll be talking on it, to you Com∣pinions?
Let me be gilded then! In such a case,
I would not trust my Confessor.
Well, at the hour convenient, I'll send
you notice
By a trusty Messenger: till when, farewell!
Since the engagement of your noble
word.
I can not doubt performance: Lady, your hoping
servant.
Madame, should I deny what you have
urged!
My guilty tongue would speak a falsehood,
that
My purer heart abhors: I must confess,
I love Sicanio; but not beyond
Those limits, which strict modesty allows
Severest Maids, or holy writ doth warrant.
They're too too large.
I apprehend your fears: Madame, be
pleased
To entertain this serious truth with joy!
Although the Prince be full of merit, and
The man, to whose free goodness all our house,
So deeply stands engaged; though gratitude,
And the daily mediation of a brother,
With the authorised love to my own good,
Strive to persuade my yet unwilling heart
To meet his noble flame: the constant zeal
I've vowed to your sweet friendship reprehends
My too forgetful thoughts, and challenges
A duty from me linked with detriment,
Which, thus, I pay your virtue: I've resolved
(And to that purpose have returned him answer)
Rather to purchase, with my death, your peace;
Then live a Princess, to disturb your quiet.
Thy unexampled goodness, Lucebella,
Strikes me with admiration: yet begets
A thought-distracting doubt that makes me poor
For all the wealth of thy so precious love.
If you suspect my true sincerity!
I will confirm it with a righteous oath,
Oh wrong not my belief? alas despair,
Of making thee amends, it is true, obliges me—
But the duke my brother must do that office for
me.
There you make me sad—but—
and yet I should
Be glad to see him: do you think the duke is well?
His Confessor hath so assured me; who
alone,
Knows of his residence: besides,
•a yes he will shortly come, and cl•are himself
Of the dishonour put upon him, touching thee.
Pray heaven he may! however I forgive
him
There goes the fair occasion of my
soul's grief:
Poor Bankrupt Nature, woe that large expense,
Of thy rich store to prove more pitiful!
If not for mine, yet for thine own sake beg
That thy impoverished stock may be supplied
Again, from her, with plenty; lest after-births,
Produce deformity;
And Cytherea (thou whose tender heart
Hath sadly sobbed as mine, when a like touched
By cold disdain) entreat thy tyrant son
To show to me such mercy, as thy self,
In the like necessity, expected! so
Shall thy sacred Altars smoke with incense,
Myrrh mixed with Myrtle berries, and the choice
Of whitest Turtles: where as Mortals wounded,
And not regarded, grown to despair, neglect,
Your ceremonious-rites, pull down, and trample
On your holy Altars—
Y• had a foul soul indeed.
But son, Beware that your repentance be
More then formal; for it is no dallying with
Just heaven; whose searching eye discovers all
The hidden secrets of mans heart: you may de∣ceave
The blinded world, and your dear soul, but oh
The irrecoverable loss is yours.
Therefore be sure y' are serious! fate's decree
Can't be deluded by hypocrisy
I cannot blame your diffidence, my life•
Hath bin so sinful: but your doctrine of
Sure mercy, upon true contrition, hath
Wrought from my softened heart a pious grief
Will purge it from pollution-holy man,—
These are no feigned drops, but real tears—
I've bin exceeding sinful, and they must
Fall faster yet.
My foolish pity, should I stay, would
tempt.
My justice to forgive him—
Son, this sorrow doth rejoice me; yea, and
heaven.
Who's pleased with your conversion: I must at∣tend.
The Vespers, but my prayers shall still waite on
you.
Son be constant—
Else may I fail of mercy!
Away dissembled grief, I must forget you!
This Fryer's no other then his habit speaks him,
Religious. I've sounded his deep thoughts,
And find his faith firm to his Master: heaven,
That I could say so of my self!—but it is too
late.
No matter—and though't be death.
To him shall blab the secrets of confession,
I was too rash in my communication;
A smooth insinuating tale may cut,
My secure throat, when I least dream of danger:
Which to prevent, because, he's fit for heaven,
I'll find him out the nearest way—the means,
Fumante.—so the rigour of the law,
Sends him the other way; and I rest safe:
It is a good plot! and a bad Age to trust
One's life, and honour in another keeping;
And my hand in I'll thorough-stitch with the rest
My maine Projection prospers not: her heart,
Continew's told as glaciated snow
On the bleak Euxine Promounts: nor can I
Perceive a sign of change; my rivals are
Too powerful—I must forget her too—but not
revenge—
My love of late is grown ambitious,
And aims at the fair Princess—ha?—that
done,
(And I despair not but it shall) I were,
Beyond the reach of malice, free from fear
A message unto me requiring hasty an∣swer?
My fair threescore and twelve what i'st?
Fair an't shall like you, but not yet full
threescore till come the day of innocents, when I,
and my late dead husband (peace be with his
bones!) were borne: he prized this face indeed
and termed it fair, and oft (full of desire) with
speaking touches, would bewray his fondness—
thus; then in my bosom, and, ne'er was well but
when a piddling with—my double chin:
a kind poor fool it was! and then his lips
(wearied in my due praise) would crave refresh∣meant
on the red velvet pallet of my soft cheeks,
which I (kind as himself) must give him thus—
and thus—which he received 
with such voracity, that in the end it killed him.
Another will kill me—she hath a breath
loathsomely-strong as the corrupted ••ncke of a
dead horse-fed-hound— 
but to the matter!
A lass extremes in any thing are hurt∣full:
yet (as they say) though he is not, my
widowhood hath youthful friends; such as not
think my, yet passable face, and years con∣temptible—
A Fort, cause ancient, •s not to be
forsook; whilst stored with munition—I'm able
yet for service.
Pike-proofe I'll warrant thee:
I mean thy hide—
Yea, and chaine-shot proof too—and
may
Content a reasonable man.
I shall make trial of thee: but to the
point.
Shall you? you'll find• me mettle to the
back: and though my eyes be no twinn'd-suns, as
be young Dianetta's; you may see babies there,
that (as they say) may take you.
This pals•'d tongue will ne'er lin shake∣ing.
And I dare wage the profit of my present
Employment, that when, you have tried us both,
Your self shall say I've pleased the better.
A bawd I think.
My able fair one do you belong to Dianetta?
I am the private entry through which
you safely may walk unto your desires; indeed
the very key that opens to success.
I apprehend you, and will be your
friend:
Hears an earnest of it.
The first I do accept: nor will
I refuse.
The last coming from you:—well, it is,
The prettiest bashful babble, as ever man
Played with: she'll show you sport in faith: al∣though
At first (as Maidens should) she seemed unwilling;
Nor need I tell you how she dotes on you, this
Nigh• will give you a full satisfaction.
But how, and where?
Your way must be through me—I'll be
Your Convoy.
With all my heart: lead on?
But use, the youngling gently! or you
may spoil her gate: which will give wild in∣dition
to some about the Court, as wanton as
your self, and then you know her honour.—
It shall not loose a grain: come let's
go.
They say, the quickly hot, are quickly
cooled:—
But come—you are even such another—
Well, have a little patience, anon—
Well, I conceive—but look you do.
I warrant you.
THe dearest thought within me will
not dare.
To attempt a farther satisfaction—
Now (my too credulous fair•) I hope you see,
What a Commanding power you have o'er me—
Had I bin sinful? then—
Good Sir, no more.
This iteration but aggravates
My sorrow; heaven, for black iniquity,
Expects but true compunction: which pad,
It's justice is appeased: then be not you
Less merciful, neglecting these my tears,
Shed for my misbeleefe! indeed I'm now
All confidence, if you dare credit me?
Before an Oracle!
Then spend not so profusely those rich drops!
The least of which is treasure to redeem
A captived king.
Yet all too little to call home again a
banished father.
Oh be more pitiful! and not torment
My penitent remembrance! you have read,
The inside of my soul, could you believe
The character? and know my new intone••
With the same strength of faith you
have of me, I do.
Enough: I am confirmed.
Life of my joy, for a too long short season,
I must entreat your pardon; you know the occa∣zion.
You cannot be too quick in your dis∣patch.
Nor yet too careful of your person, for
The• villain's made of mischief,
I'm much indebted to your careful love
You'll not forget Sir, what I urged for
my—
I guess your doubt: no,
I'll look upon thy brother, as a brother;
As part of thee,—part of my better self;
He may have ground for his bold act; for s••ce
Hipolito's found false in one, I must suspect his
faith,
In all things—your leave
I'm yet but language, therefore can but seem
Cleared of what charged with; but when next
we meet
My accuser shall acquit me, and you see it—
But Sir, the man that's rational must
know
Advisednesse to be a friend unto
A great design, and patience the maine help,
Either resolve to stay her father's answer,
Embrace the princes love (by far the fitter)
Or else hoist •ail homeward.
Your advice comes now unseasonable •
I've eat Lotus, and cannot live but here;
Nor love, but her.
Yet wisely moderate these extremes!
You perceive distemper gives occasion
Of too much liberty to the neglectful soldier,
Which breeds in the army inconvenience!
You came with resolution to serve
A brave deserving friend, then doe not let
A thought for your own private end, detract
From your intended nobleness! but arm
Your royal self with commendable patience
until desired success crown your endeavours?
'T will ad unto your virtue.
Nor can it but be sudden, hourly
Pausanio is expected, whose arrive
Will make you happy: nor have you least cause
Thus to afflict your self, she never yet
Having returned denial.
But as a sweet example of obedience,
Judgement, and modesty humbly crave respit
Till her absent father (at whose dispose she is)
Came, and consented. Good my Lord be cheer∣full!
This unnecessary sadness makes us all droop.
Though't be against my humour
(Leontinus)
You shall sway me, I know you wise, and faith∣full.
I would be both—but look, your
friends—
Martiano, those unaccustomed frowns
Speak discontent—the matter?
His father's slow pac'd-haste (my gre∣tious
Lord.)
Deceiving his too early expectation,
Makes him much doubt his welfare.
Come, come, be fearless• Fate will
be more just,
Having prepared him so great happiness,
Than't keep the enjoyment from him.
It is my chief hope; and yet it trow∣bless
me.
For should the Duke (and it is no idle fear)
Obtain from Genoua, or Naples power,
And steal upon our weakened forces (of late
Grown careless) want of his supply would
strike
A gash in our design, and shrewdly puzzel us
Not a whit: come be your self a∣gen!
We're strong enough: yet see the idle Soldiers
Exercised daily to prevent emansions,
And keep our scouts abroad continually.
Martiano, away with all sad thoughts,
And let's enjoy our selves:
Your highness mirthful inclinati∣on
Must make the saddest here rejoice
It is manly and becomes him.
Oh—that it were not forced!
We're all the invited guest of Lord Hipolito,
Let's thither and quaff a lusty draught unto
what first a match!
Most willingly.
Hear in this quiet grove, I did ap∣point
Honorio to meet me: till his approach,
Upon this flowery bank; I will repose my
self.
I've tract the Friar hither, and have
sworn
To kill him; but were he not a churchman,
I should not undertake him—and yet I've
heard
Of some that have bin dangerous—and see
how
Handsomely he's laid for my black purpose—
So lie's the harmless issue of the ewe
A prey for the voracious woolfe.
I could not take him better prepared then pray∣ing
But stay! he stirs.
If that my sense deceived me not, I
heard
One speak? or it was the voice the wind gave to
the leaves.
Honorio?
Di' you expect com∣pany? then I must be brief.
You may tell tales in the other
world, not here.
You are deceived: I'll be as brief as
you
Oh—I am slain.
Not yet I hope; but yet be sure you
shall be!
You cannot be so cruel!
Can thou expect the contrary after so
great
A Villainy!
Your pious form speaks you religious,
And that is shown in nothing more then mercy.
Then by that saving mercy you im∣plore;
And the hope you have to obtain it; let your
breath;
(Your now expiring-breath) aid your faint
tongue
In the delivery of an honest truth
May merit my forgiveness, and please heaven;
Whither y' are going, if the devil doe
Not tempt you the wrong way?
Oh—
What hideous groan was that?
Honorio? then am I safe—
My Lord y' are opportunely come to
be
A witness to the true confession of
This desperate sinner, whose sick soul o'er∣charged
With hellish mischief thought to vent it here.
He would have murdered me.
Unheard of insolence!
Lessen your admiration! I'll answer the
attempt.
Speak soulelesse villain; who set you on
work!
Or if you have a soul, I'll kill that too.
Father, forbear!
Leave it to me, Sir, I know a better way—
The thought of death will fright him:
I fear your wound is mortal.
See how his frighted blood flies from his face,
And leaves behind it paleness! let's remove
Him to my neighbouring lodgings, where he
shall
Want nothing that may make for his recovery.
The ayre, so late, is hurtful: Father your hand•.
He bleeds a fresh, and fast: let us dispatch—
So—So.
I doe begin to saint: charitable Sir, for∣give
me!
I do, and shall with my best prayers
invoke
The gods forgiveness for you
It shall be given out, y' have slain the
Fryer,
And mark the sequel—
I was never so abused
since I was swaddled, have I lived
to the eye of the world thus
long unspotted? and now (through my own
folly) must appear thus besmeared? did I'scape go∣ing
to the grave my last rash undertaking, to be
sent up in the ayre, like a cased bladder; and let
fall again that my posteriors rebounded? then
footed too, by half a dozen hard toe'd Rascals
that had no more mercy then the clowns hob∣nailed
Shun have of a foot ball, when they play
a match? to be tossed (like an unhappy Cat) in a
foul monstrous blanket wool'd with fleas, which
the wise mother of the Maids, thirty years since,
for her two fold accommodation, placed in the
garret to purify the gilded brimms of the close
stool pan, and keep smalecole in, to kindle the
Ladies fire with: was that your glorious cover∣lid
to entertain me? curse on the curtsy; I
have had but a cold entertainment—but an ill
welcome.
I think you will not brag o•t.
Then—which is worse—I fear they'll
turn me out of doors, thus—as I am—like one
of Vulcans limping priests (for I am lamed) and
not suffer me to enjoy the private privileges of
this cool yard, so shame me to eternity—hum
—twould be but harsh dealing.
Yet short of your deserving
But not to be avoided, were they re∣solved?
I now begin to see my error, and find
that shame still follows sin; my unfeigned sor∣row
shall implore her pardon, for my presume∣tuous
insolence, which obtained, I have done
courting.
Think what we will of women, this I find
They may be truly virtuous, yet seem kind—
They may, Vatinius: and I am glad
of your conversion.
Dianetta hath o••e heard your penitential la∣mentation,
and is content not only to forgive,
but to forget what ever's past—provided, you
be serious, and not fall again to your abusive
trade against Ladies.
I've had too much of it Lady.
Let my now real grief, with your forgiveness
Gain your more charitable opinion.
For when I prove other than the admirer
Of your chaste self, and all your virtuous sex,
May my disgrace be published and I
Live and dye scorned.
Sir, I freely do forgive you,
Here take again your charmelesse Jewels and
hereafter•
Be more careful of your own, and others
honour!
Nay, since you've wrought so great a
cure they are
Well deserved.
Pray keep 'em, as the sacrifice of my
conversion!
Their worth my thanks, Sir,
In the next Room a Fire waits on you—
I must remain your humble Con∣vert.
And now I doe believe there are some
Honest women
Not go to the banquet, dearest friend,
the cause?
There is a sadness hath usurped my
breast
That mirth can ne'er remove: I am unfit
For company, nor would I see the Prince.
I know the motive of this melan∣choly,
And now will give you speedy remedy;
If that the sad remembrance of your late
voluntary kindness, thus afflict you?
Take back again your killing curtsy!
Pursue with an unenvi'd freedom.
Your begun love! I did but try thy friendship;
Nor would I buy the greatest terrestrial com∣fort
At the dear rate of thy thoughts least distur∣bans.
No, Lucebella, live and love the Prince!
And may the powers divine perpetuate
Each others loves reciprocation,
Till arm in arm, ye soar up unto heaven,
And, there, fix glorious stars! If angry death,
(For that I robed him of a greater purchase)
To cross your happiness, send you the sad news
Of my cold stay with him; bring, to my grave
One friendly sigh, and a religious drop,
And, on it, they'll create aspiring perfumes, which
Will usher me the readiest way unto Elizium—
Thy hand—and now farewell!
Stay, thou sweet miracle of perfect
friendship!
And may divinity whisper unto thy soul
What I shall speak is truth!
If penitence for the resignation of
Sicanio's love to you, or the least thought
Of him, doth greeve me? may eternal shame
Blast all my better hopes!
What infidel, but would believe thee?
It will alike perturb your breast, when
you
Shall hear the story, which I'm engaged to taci∣it is.
For a set season; but ever long (with safety) I may
give you satisfaction mean time I'll wait upon
you to the Lord Hipolito's; and promise to be
merry.
Y' have made me sad too;
But we'll endeavour to overcome it—
I'm sorry for the untimely death of
the good fryer, and for the villains flight, that
flew him, whom my impartial justice should
have made a terrible example for prevention of
like impiety.
He worthily deserved it—
Sir, there's your seat.
Come Gentlemen (t'a void superfluous Cere∣money)
Each place himself!
It is a commendable freedom, I hate
this idle complement.
But yone's the glory of the Banquet.
Lady's ye greatly honour me; and bring.
The best sweets with ye—please ye
sit?—
Were the duke here, the table were complete?
At naming of the duke, how her glad
blood
Sprang in her cheeks, and there imprinted,
left.
Her hearts true meaning visible—she loves
him.
Your Grace is—
sad ont'h sudden.
Give me a boule of wine! and see it go round—
Ist't done as we comman∣ded?—
It is my Lord; and tempered hand∣somely.
Unto the Princes health, and hers
whom most
His royal thoughts
now honour.
—Heir's that will expel sad∣nos:
—fill to the Prince!
Madame to you—
To Iulia.
Sir I freely pledge you.
Hold, noble Sir, here can be nought
but treason.
How knows he that—
The duke—what devil brought
him hither?
My royal Master—how am I blessed?—
I now was wishing for you, and good heaven.
Hath heard my prayers, and sent you: oh let me
kiss
That royal hand.
A way impostor! Hono∣rio,
do your office!
Hipolito, I do arrest you
for high treason.
I obey; and do desire no other session•
Then this brave assembly.
It is granted.
Now—who be my Accusers?
Padre Stephano; to whom you did con∣fess
The wrongs your mischief plotted against Pau∣sanio.
His mouth was timely stopped he'll blab
no more
And more—by gifts, and pro∣mises
you thought,
To tempt his loyalty to reveal the place
Of my abode, with full intent so murder me,
And to usurp the dukedom, then marry Lucebella:
Can you acquit your self?
Yes, of all he can accuse me with.
Summon the fryer to appear!
I fear him not till domesday—
Sir, I'm now too full of thoughts
To express your deserved better welcome, or
Apollogize to this my abused justice injured,
Ever long shall I do both; in the interim
I do entreat your patience to hear
This accused man acquit himself: for me,
I dare not stay the trial, I once loved him,
And yet retain much softness—
Wee all rejoice for your so safe return.
I ever told you what 't would come
to.
Well, be not yet too confident!
'T was only that, by all our friendship!
I heard
The friar was dead.
I am satisfied.
My Lord, the hope I have of your in∣tegrity.
Forbids me sorrow, till I see just cause:
It is no scandal to be charged with treason,
But to be proved a Traitor.
I not expect least favour, but refer
My cause to righteous heaven: if I be found
Guilty of what charged with; let justice
Spare no punishment, I've merited
The lawe's extremest rigour
The friar is come,
Death to my soul! first possible? Few∣mante
too?
Then I am lost.
It was reported you were slain, and by
Fumante.
That rebel to religion so decreed it,
But heavens preventing hand put by the blow.
And we both live to witness against him.
And I.
Still mischief upon mischief: how
the devil—
When most we need him, falters with us.
Nay't shall out, my conscience
torments me.
This purse of gold hired me to a treason.
Will strike your souls with terror, when ye
heare't. All but the Princess, and himself, (had
not the Duke Inspired from heaven come in) I
should have sent, To death's cold tenements,
with a draught of wine, commix'd with a strange
drug would not have wrought
In eight days after, that the blinded world,
Might have imputed your untimely ends,
To excess of wine.
Horrid, and damnable!
I doe confess it was I that wronged Pau∣sanio,
That would have slain the duke, betrayed your
plot,
Poisoned the Prince, you, your sister, and the rest,
And all for Lucebella's scorn, nor do I greeve.
For ought but that I cannot have revenge upon
Those villains have betrayed me unto shame.
Insolent devil, wee'I have thee fleaed alive
I must not die alone• the law condemns
The body of that father to the fire,
That shall divulge the secrets of confession;
And I glory in my revenge.
My heart bleeds for the good old man.
Sir, spare that needless sorrow!
For now I see the mischievous intents
Of that blood thirsty-sinner, know it is I
(Through the means of that good Lord) am your
preserver.
My royal Brother.
Earth open me a living-grave may hide
Me, and my guilt! else my high swollen heart
Break op'e my breast, and find one!
Your expectation's frustrated: I am no
friar.
It is vain to hope for mercy,
Pinion him fast! and locke him up in
darkness!
His execution we defer until
Pausanio be arrived, in hope that heaven
Will give him yet repentance
Beyond my hopes—
Fumante, as for your ignorant attempt
against us,
We reconfirme our promised pardon: but,
For your perjured testimony against
The most abused of men the old General,
Condemn you the just sum• of fifty thousand
dukets.
To be paid Pausanio: Hipolito's estate
Shall make the satisfaction more complete;
And during life confine you to your living in the
Country.
Your gracious roy all Sir, as just—
And for that you consented to this mis∣chief,
We banish you the Court; and give• your hier
To make a holy Chalice—
for the Altar,
Nor doubt we of your pardon since it lies
Within our power to make ye (To Mar and Luc.
fair amends.
For you (brave Sir) your great engagement
to
Pausanio, and the justice of his cause.
Pleads your excuse for breach of Covenant,
Y' are still a friend to Florence: nor repent
That I'm acquainted with your breast, we will
Continue friendly rivals, only pass
Our Princely words to stand to what her father
Shall freely give consent to.
I agree—and yet that Lady—
But love's deaf, well as blind.
To arms (great Sir) not sarre off we
descry.
Bright shining-troupes, bravely marching for∣ward.
More discontent?
Soldier, ther's a reward—It is my
father.
Be not dejected, Sir! oh sister now our joys are
ripe
I'll forth, and meet him.
We will along—
with you.
Whilst we prepare
to give him royal welcome•
Oh Lucebell•, let not thy remembrance.
Look back at what is part! for then—
Ell's buried in oblivion.
Confirm it with the seal of mercy• a
kind kiss!
The gods had their Nepenthe from these lips.
Sister I am familiar with your fears,
But know Sicanio's full of worth: forget 'em!
Since you are safe, and my friend once
more happy,
I cannot fear.
Nor shall you have least cause: I know
the worst
And am resolved to embrace it.
Thou art all virtue
Beat a soft March within, then enter
Pausanio, Sebastiano-disguiz'd, and
Company of Soldiers, and pass over the
Stage.
Y' are fairly caught.
What treachery is this?
No treachery, but a tolerable trick
Allowed in war; ye must along with us.
Cowards, and villains.
This rage will do no good
March continues, Pansanio
And his company re-enter.
Sound a Parley!
Ho? from the Walls?
Whom doth my glad eyes look upon—
Father.
I am that wronged Pausanio, whose
soft heart
(Joyful to see my persecutor) melts
It self to womanish profuseness.
We'll haste to thy embraces—
Dear father make me happy in your
blessing?
Best comfort to my age, arise! and hey∣ven
Look favourably on thee! thou retai•'st
(My Girl) thy wonted sweetness
In despite of grief.
Next to good heaven,
The thanks belong unto the Princess.
Oh let me kiss that bounteous hand!
my heart
Was never proud• but when it did you service
My nature's not to do thus, but in an∣swer
Of such deserving drops, mine eyes rain tears—
Oh my Pausanio, be kind, and pardon
The error of my blinded justice; heaven
Can witness with me, that my will's un∣tainted
I must believe it; I had a legal try∣all,
And by suborned witness, was condemned
To undeserved death; but then your mercy
Stepped between, and saved me: whereas (had
you
Desired my end) I had unjustly died
And yet 'it had appeared justice—I am
still
Your loyal humble subject—
Rather the better half of my dear
soul! rise!
But whore's our loving kinsman? he is wrong∣ed
too?
I left him here; since, have not heard
of him
Nor have I brought this power to increase
But to suppress rebellion—
Where is that enemy to virtue? I dare not
Call him, Son.
The Prince, and he went
both to meet you.
Heere's our best booty
Sir,
Free um!
In you (Royal young Man) 't was nobleness
To attempt your injured friend's releasement;
For which my grateful soul shall daily pay
Your virtue tributary-thanks. In him
It was monstrous impiety: thy rebellious
blood
Never had birth from these pure veins. I do
Disclaim all interest in thee; and beg
The sentence of the Law may pass on him.
Oh that were too unnatural: con∣cider
It was his filial love to your wronged self
Provoke'd him to it.
The natural love of father never
should
Make him forget the pious zeal he owes
His lawful Prince; obedience, loyalty
Are the sweet perfumes penetrate the sky:
Like it, no sacrifice such welcome finds
Among the celestial dwellers; nor than mu∣tiny
And stiffe-neck'd disobedience, any crime
More strictly punished: what though in∣jury
Plotted my banishment? (patience virt∣ue!)
He knew my spotless faith was purely free
From foul contaminating treachery,
And should with equal patience have smiled
On my sad sufferings, interested in
My harmless innocence succeeding time
(The aged sire of venerable Truth)
Had then on the swift wings of loud tongued
fame,
Hurried his worth through the wide world; no
mouth
Have mentioned his bare name, but with a
kind
Of reverence, due to such a son, and subject
Whereas now (fallen from the virtue he pro∣fess'd
He lives (in spite of death) a cankered
stain
To all posterity. Those numerous tongues,
That might, in emulation of his merit,
Have truly bin employed, will now as justly
Brand him with name of Traitor—Ba∣stard
O my blond
Sir.
Bends thy disloyal knee in hope of
pardon?
Can such impiety meet with mild mercy, or
in
Earth, or heaven? no, no the gods are just
And thou hast lost thy hope of both.
Of neither, Sir:
The Duke is made of gentle pity, and
Upon my true contrition, hath forgiven
The error of my supposed duty, for which
grace
Prostrated thus—I humbly kiss his
feet!—
And for my foul fault in the eye of heaven,
My penitential tears will purge all guilt
And make me a pure sacrifice for their
Sweet mercy.
Martiano, rise! you have our favour•
Be worthy of it! your youth hath had its
swinge
But your now-better'd-judgement I hope
will counsel
Your stout heart to execute, only, what's
noble.
My honest actions shall hereafter
speak
My soul's intentions.
Well, the gods forgive thee• and now
I turn
Petitioner, and must not be denied.
Command our Dukedom!
I only ask the life of my accuser;
that he may have
A longer time to make his peace with hey∣v'n.
Go call him forth!—
Pausanio, you must resolve one
doubt:
The Duke, and I are rivals in our love
To your fair daughter, yet are both engaged
To stand to your election.
Then I bestow her here: I've heard
the Duke
Loved her ignobly (though I know the con∣trary)
And twill but take the scandal from her virtue—
To make her this amends.—
The which I do most willingly: and in
my prayers—
I'll hourly bless the gods for this—
My so great happiness—
I hear the Princess loves you, who
deserves
A greater fortune then the earth affords;
Cherish it, worthy Sir.
I see y' are full of thoughts: here—I
resign my right in Lucebella; not that I am wea∣rye
of my happiness, but choose, rather, to suffer
nobly; then have loved Chronicles report I used
a stranger prince discourteously. Take her!
Heaven put better thoughts—
in him.
I may receive with honour, now;
what I before rofus'd. I thankfully accept her—
but, as freely, do
Return her—and may peace,
Waite on your blessed Conjunction!—heere's
my choice,
If, Madam, you consent?—
Her blushes do confirm, what her too∣modest
Tongue is loath to utter.—
The Gods shower down their choicest
Blessings on ye!
Iulia. Wee thank ye.
Her dowery shall be answerable to her
descent—
Since things go thus success full, Ma∣dam
I hope
We also have your leave? here comes my choice.
Ye have, and joy between ye •
Rosa. We humbly thank your Grace.
Lady, wee 're glad y' have chose so
w sly.
Hipolito's late honours we—
confer on you!
You must be dear to us 't was he that brought
These obscured truths to light.
Honorio, you were ever an honest
real friend.
And so will dye.
If a black soul, purged from its sin∣full
filth
By penitential sorrow, more then hopes
For glorious Paradise? I'll not despair,
Of your forgiveness.
The pardon I would ask heaven for
my self
I wish to you, and heartily forgive you.
So we do all, and joy in your contrition,
Your honours are bestowed, but we'll
provide for you.
He's only truly happy who is good,
Not who is great: goodness, and greatness like
known enemies, do rarely meet:
In the humble valley, better be a shrub
With secure peace, then, on the aspiring top
Of a proud hill, a Cedar, still exposed
To certain danger. Beauty, honour, wealth,
My quondam friends, whilst I affected folly,
For ever I renounce ye: pious virtue,
(Who, whilst I knew ye, was a stranger to me)
Since hath taught me, that y' are (at best) but
air
Vanished, before enjoyed: the foul corrupt∣on,
My unstay'd youth sucked in at Court, prayers
And sad tears distilled from true repentance,
Shall wash a way: the remnant of my span
I'll spend religiously; my hourly votes,
For your prosperities, I'll daily, duly—pay
To gracious heaven: this habit
shall invest me
One poor petition,
Though undeserved, vouch safe to grant, the last
I mean to beg: my new borne virtue give
life to, through your remembrance! former
ills
Bury in kind oblivion! that my name
May live unblemmish'd, in despite of—
shame.
I doubt not but his fall
Hath raised his soul to heaven.
Be sure ye be
in readiness!—
You've almost made a fair conclusion,
Yet I have power to change the
the Scene.—
Were I revengeful?
What means this progedie?
Read in this
face!—
So many months together yet not
know
The friendly part'n•r in my sufferings?
Worthy Sir, pardon my ignorance!
Our noble kinsman?
That late dispis'd-Sebastian—
but no more;
Hipolito's confession hath cleared all doubts.
This act was only to express my loyalty:
Had I bin thirsty for your blood, or state,
To make me great, and Lucebella mine?
This minute might effect it—but, thus
low
Humbled, I do confess my self your highness
zealous
Subject.
Our happiness is now complete—
Let me engrafft thee on my
soul!—
But Cousin how joined you with Pausanio,
Yet he unknown to you, until this instant!
I heard of his abode at Naples,
whether
(When I had news of his bold sonne's re∣volt)
I went to get you aid, and from the king
Obtained it: Pausanio (desirous
To manifest his faith unto your Majesty.
In this intended service against his son)
Sought for Command: I (knowing his intents
Well as his valour after conference)
Gave him the Gennerall's place (although my
beck
Commanded the whole army) yet kept my self
Secret in this disguise, till I should see
The final end, with which I'm now made happy.
And may your now rising joys never know Set!
Amen to that! once again,
My noble Cousin, forgive my rash belief!
Great ones, by this example, plain may see
There can no safety come of flattery.
Now haste we to the consummation of
Our Nuptial rites!
Those joys, culled out of danger, are most sweet,
Let us bless heaven they thus concent'rd-meet.

A Mask? at a minutes warning? the Scene un∣designed,
the Speakers imperfect, the Masquers
unready, the Dancers disordered, the Songs un∣set,
the Music uncertain, the house full, the
Poets head empty. Invention under-foot, and
Expectation on tiptoe? All these linked toge∣there
make up a chain of rare impossibilities, or a large Bill of
impossible Items, whose sum total amounts to—
Gentlemen, you have all lost your labours, and I am sorry
they could make choice of no other emissary but my self to
administer to you this empty entertainment, especial since I
see such a firmament of bright Ladies like to lose their long∣ings.
But the grand occasion of this confusion issues from
the motley humours of the Masquers, and their dissenting in
Fancy; one forsooth would have a Masque of Satyrs, ano∣there
a dance of Devils, a third something in honour of City∣zens,
a fourth a Scene of Soldiers; this would have fools,
〈◊〉 would have mad-men; one doth purpose to have no
speeches, another speeches to no purpose; And in the middle
of this Medley, after Invitation had made a progress to all
their acquaintance, and Honour would not admit of a retreat,
they expose the whole model of it to my design, and at such
a barren season when I am not furnished with Invention
enough for the post of a Ring, or a verse for the Bell-man:
This impossibility premised, I must humbly desire you to fa∣four
the fault; convert your expectation to patience and at
your own leisure depart, and devote your selves to some Re∣creations
of more certainty:
When all is fit, we will make you recompense,
Which will be (let me see) some six weeks hence.
Why how now Poetry? whither go you?
Your name is Verity I think?
Tic true.
The Queen of Truth, I wonder to see you
On Earth again, and in this City too:
Why came you from Parnassus?
To scope harms,
They say that Ignorance hat took up Arms
Against the Muses.
But what make you here.
I'm studying of a Mask.
Let me appear
In your design, I shall enrich your Rhymes,
Tic royal to speak truth.
Not at all times:
They say Truth seeks no corners, but be it known,
If I should speak it, I must find out one.
What do they speak of me?
They say your rules
Are only fit for Children and for fools.
Say you so too?
Not for the world; to me
You are the only precious Deity;
But in a Mask (alas) we shall but abuse ye,
It were fit some holier place would oftner use ye,
Tic shrewdly feared in many a sacred seat,
That your white hand is only counterfeit.
Then I'll desist, for I shall but disease you,
Here comes a Lady that will better please you.
Tic Madam Fancy, in a luckier time
Thou could ne'er come, since Reason mixed with Rhyme;
Great with Invention as I live; let me
Dear Fancy but express my Midwifery.
Twil be abortive.
Hast thou pangs? that smile
Presages well, prithee sit down a while,
Thou can not want a help in such a case,
Since there's so many Ladies here in place;
Good Verity come hold her back.
I find
When Fence's working, Truth must come behind.
Like a good moral Madam.
All you do
Will come to nothing.
Fancy! help me now,
Or I shall lose my Name, my Fame, my Honour,
She laughs our-right, her throws come thick upon her.
Let the Spheres sing some Dialogue-like Song,
That may fit Fancy, and do Truth no wrong.
Fancy tell me, can thy youth
Any way compare with Truth?
No, but I would have you know it,
Fancy best becomes the Poet.
Verity doth brightest move,
In Religion, or in Love.
Can a Stage the Truth secure,
When the Pulpit is impure?
Is it not fit that Truth should spring,
And grow up in every thing?
Truth may move in every part,
But a Politians heart.
Ha, ha, ha.
Her very torments tickle her, this throw
Delivers her, it is done; what is it trow?
What hath Fate sent us here, let me peruse?
Ribons, Bells, baubles, Masks, and dancing shoes?
Here are two papers too, this is the Plot,
And this the language. it is but small God wot;
A hasty labour, and, I fear, will be
Only a tittle 'bove a Timpani;
We will tak't as it is, and so must you,—begin,
Stay, I'll have my Scoene first now I am in.
With all my heart.
Though pride and envy scoff,
I'll bring you on.
Agreed, I'll bring you off.
Thus I charm the Scoene, appear
Great and lovely, chaste and clear;
In this Cabinet there dwells,
That which all the world excels.
From this Royal Throne doth come
The great Lights of Christendom;
Nations renowned in Peace, and famed in Wars,
Good Poetry give them their Characters:
What must I do it without premeditation?
Yes, yes, you know Extempore's in fashion.
The first of these that enters in the Van,
Should (by his posture) be an Englishman,
A noble Islander, and one whose parts
Are filled with Love and Honour, Arms and Arts;
Much blessed with plenty, if the peevish Elf,
Could but forbear to quarrel with himself.
What is the next that enters in my view,
The bonny Scot, whose Bonnet is true blew?
Good mawraw for aday, a hardy Nation,
Although it seems (by some men's approbation,
Whose judgements are much above mine advanced)
Of late, he had better have sate still then danced.
What have we here? the Frenchman? it is he sure,
He looks so brisk, Tres humble Serviture,
A witty Nation, that hath gained applause,
Not only for delights, but wholesome Laws,
And bears so many pretty toys about him,
The English cannot dress themselves without him.
What Melancholy persons this, whose motion
Declares him dedicate to Loves devotion?
It is the Italian, he that disputes
Abroad with Turks, at home with Love and Lutes;
Who though by Cupped in this posture hurled,
His Vocal Music vies with all the World.
Oh hone! Oh hone! poor Shone lost all his houses,
Here's Cork and Tallow in a pair of Trowses,
The Idle Irishman, who avoids harms,
Much better by his legs, then by his Arms;
For he doth fly (as by his feet you'll find)
Like Mountain Snow blown by the Northern wind.
What Goblin have we here, whose belly struts,
As if he had a Navy in his guts?
It is not the Dutchman; yes, tic he I see,
That stagger clears the dubiosity;
Ha lust•ck! he is come too, to delight ye,
From Poor distressed unto High and Mighty.
Here comes the haughty Spaniard, now give way,
Room for the Infantry, he must display
His footing too, He is a Nation which,
Is Constant, Learned, Valiant, and Rich,
Who now the better to delight his friends,
Hath brought his Fiddles at his singers ends.
How like you this?
Not much amiss.
What now?
I have a handsome fancy in my brow,
Which if it take effect, and all hit right,
Shall fit your Genius with a new delight.
Go on, and as your faculty affords
Projections, mine shall put them into words;
In the mean time I hope these persons will,
Connive at our deficiencies of skill,
And cast their bright indulgent eyes upon.
The errors of our Recreation.
Hark in your ear.
No, I know what you mean.
Advance your Music, and obscure the Scene.
Why how now Power? why art so discontent?
I am in study how to circumvent
Thee prattling Policy; you that only are
Valiant in Logic: Death! a man of War
Is nothing now; Our Swords ye say make Schisms,
Tic you must rule all with your Sillogismes,
And your dogmatic dog-tricks.
Prithee peace.
I won't, I hate the name on it.
Let's increase
Our amity, the time will come when we,
May jointly use both Power and Policy.
But in the mean time where shall I get the gilt,
Or can I feed upon my Basket-hilt
Stewed in a Head-piece? Will a Musquet-bullet
(Swallowed) appease the fury of my gullet?
Will Match make Sausages? or (if burning hot)
At a Cooks shop, will it discharge my shot?
Can my kind Colours cover my cold back,
When the spruce Drapers man cries What do ye lack,
And gives me nothing? Must my Martial Powers
Fight Cowards quarrels? or guard Suburb whores?
Why you are very witty.
Like enough,
Would you had the same cause; what if my Buff
Were cut in double Tripes?
Prithee be quiet.
I would fain think upon some sort of diet,
Till the time come ye talk on, I would gnaw,
Hunger is fiercer far then Martial Law.
Prithee be patient.
Pish!
Give me thy hand,
Without us two the plentifullest Land
Is liable to loss; How can it be
Safe, if it have not Power and Policy?
It is right; but when the Power shall only lie
Contracted in the breast of Policy;
When Sophistry breaks Swords, and Warlike projects
Shall be destroyed by Rhetoric and Logicks;
When Aristotle and his musty Tribe,
Shall cause the valiant Man of Mars subscribe,
To live on Turnip tops, and cloth his back
With Sackcloth, when his belly should have Sack,
When we have only power to help, not hurt ye,
Where is our strength? where is the Martial virtue?
You miss your mark, your passion runs too quick,
We are members of one body Politic;
Indulgent Nature our Mysterious Mother,
Hath made us mutually to serve each other;
And as the members of one body be
Reciprocal, so Power and Policy;
My feet are fitted to march on, or fly,
Eyes guide my hand, my hands do guard my eye,
My judgement regulates.
I know all these,
And we must only sight when Scholars please,
Till you direct we must be standers by,
You are the eyes; A pox of Books cry I,
They do no good, nor those that do invent um,
I'll prove it.
Come, Negatur Argumentum.
Tic done, do you chop Logic, and I'll draw.
Good Man of war, consider we have Law.
I there's the Devil on it, I must submit.
Rule without Reason's like War without wit.
But why when ell's in peace are we neglected?
Would you in time of war be so rejected?
Nor is it fit; our labours never cease,
We aid your war more then you help our peace.
We guard ye then.
Ye do, from foreign showers.
Within Power is with us, without it is yours.
I do remember once upon a wall,
I saw a poor, but witty Soldier, scroll
This Verse, which though it was in Charcole hue,
And wildly writ, I'm sure the sense is true.
God and the Soldier men alike adore,
Just at the brink of danger, not before;
Wars being done, both are alike requited,
God is forgotten, and the Soldier slighted.
We all are liable to the same harms,
Some sorts of peace slight Arts as well as Arms,
Tic happier sometimes with him that delves,
Scholars quote Authors that can't cloak themselves:
But hark, what sound is this?
A Drum?
A Lute.
A Fiddle.
Come sit down &amp; let's be mute.
Woeful War I do abhor thee.
Puling peace I care not for thoe,
When the bright Bellona thunders.
I do fill the world with wonders.
Yes, and all the Camp with plunders.
Wanton Peace then yield to me,
And resign the victory.
What doth Peace produce but pride?
And a thousand sius beside.
Who but is in love with peace,
She doth make all sorrow cease,
And sweet Amity increase.
I execute Joves Justice.
I his love.
Then let us both in our own channels move,
And quench the strife which now so fierely burns,
Since Fate will have us rule the world by turns.
Alas poor Gown-man, now coms on thy dolor!
I can turn Soldier, thou can ne'er make Scholar.
Madam?
Sir, what are you?
Do you not know me?
Even so fair Mistress Friendly.
Fair and Friendly are two good Epithets.
Better then foul and froward; I am one of those
that had rather embrace lovely levity, then divine defor∣mity;
a tractable vice prevails with me more then a tyrant∣nical
virtue; I do not much affect the grim goodness of ho∣nasty,
when it looks ugly.
You want no words to express your wantonness.
Nor deeds to direct my devotion to so sweet a Saint
as thou art.
You breath nothing but Musk and Amber, these
are fine Civit sentences.
Such Altars as this (my dear) must not want Incense.
Especially when honour is the Sacrifice, but I must
leave ye.
I'd rather you would love me.
So I do.
How shall I know that?
You must make it the object of your faith, for
your reason will never reach it.
No matter if my sense can.
What sense?
Such a sense as cannot miss your apprehension.
I shall easier understand you, then answer you:
Love you! that have as many Mistresses as there be minutes in
a month, that hath vowed affection to all gradations, from
the lofty Lady to the limber Laundress, from Cloth of Bod∣kin
to Lindsey-woolsey, from the Court Courtesan to the
Sun-burnt Suburban? and from 16. to 60. as they press
Soldiers in Scotland?
Do you know what you say?
Some are of opinion, that the exact Catalogue of
thy Mistresses, would supernumerate the Common-Place
Books of a Registers Office.
You are invective.
Tic verily believed, that thou hast undone three
poor Parishes with Cradles, Milk and Swadling-clouts.
How many Servants have you had pray?
Some two or three whining fellows which were
quickly mortified with my answers.
They speak modestly that say betwixt the ages of 15.
and one and twenty you have had •now to people a Plant∣tion;
but others who would bring these lesser I•ms to a
sum total, believe you have had as many received Suitors as
would raise a Royal Army against the Grand Siegnior, and
leave a close Siege about Constantinople.
That's a lye beyond all limitation.
That Mescaline the Roman Empress will be esteemed
a Virgin, when you appear in the balance of comparison.
Fie, fie.
To conclude your commendations, they say the four
quarters of the world are but your Diocese, and all the Na∣tions
which divided at the fall of Babel, have attempted
to reunite themselves in you affection.
How many Ladies have you inveigled with this
kind of Courtship.
Not enough to vie numbers with the Common-place
Books of a Registers Office.
Nor to serve your Constantinople Leaguer with
Laundresses, my memory shall record your expressions, when
it may be you would be glad to sue for composition, and
give all the Coin in your Counting-house for an Act of obe∣livion.
So fare ye well Sir.
No, no, you are not gone yet, for although I can∣not
stop the volubility of your tongue, I can stay the cele∣rity
of your heels.
But not the activity of my hands, if you abuse me
thus.
You will not sight.
I cannot promise you, it is not the rude Repute∣tion
you have amongst your fellow Hectors, your Seas of
Sink-mee's, nor Artillery of Dam-mee's can defend you from
my fury, when you provoke me thus in point of Honour.
Prithee good Frank put thy patience in practice, and
let me kiss thee into composition▪ for all my expressions, I
know thou art as virtuous as the Queen of beauty, lovely as
Lais, and as chaste as Phryue.
Thank ye, one was a whore in Petty-france, and
the other two Pick-pockets in Bloomesbury.
Oh fie on thee, they were all Princes, and died 1000.
years ago.
The matter is not great, I shall rather accept of
your single assertion, then tire my head to turn over your
lascivious library, to find the truth on it; therefore pray re∣lease
my hand, and give my feet their freedom.
To do what?
To leave the vanity of your company, and pur∣sue my occasion.
Whither?
You shall not be my Secretary in that.
But I will before you or your secrets go out of my
handling.
You will not be rude.
Whither do you go?
I will not tell you.
Then you shall go with me to a place where welcome
shall present it self to you in comely company, divers dishes,
brisk wine, melodious Music, sprightly Songs, dapper at∣tendance,
no Reckoning, and where all your senses shall be
feasted if they could multiply from 5. to 50. where sensua∣lity
is sublimate, Liberty dances a Lavalto, and Concupi∣sconce
cuts cross-capers.
In what part of the world is this Pagan Paradise?
I'll tell thee the occasion, you know Jack Chowse?
He whom the Hectors fight Duels about?
The same; This is his birth-day, this very minute
he writes twenty one, and is of age to challenge the valiant
Inheritance of three thousand pounds per annum; he begins
his reign to night, therefore cancel all your occasions, and
go with me to the Coronation: Such a Tavern-Jubilee you
shall not see again these 50. years.
Whose with you?
Only some of his Nobility Phil Frantic, Jack
Rant, Tom Terrible, and I.
What women have you?
None, that I know, thou shalt be Queen of the Fe∣stivals,
and I'll be Lord of Misrule.
I cannot go, but hark you.
Will you be sure?
How often have I failed you.
 A Health, a health, a health, a health.
No, no, I'll have a Song, I'll have a Song.
As I live they are at it.
By and by, by and by, anon, anon Sir.
A quart of Claret in the Coxcomb, score.
When Coxcombs come of Age the Taverns roar.
DRink your wine away,
It is a jovial day,
let our Cups and Cash be free,
Beer and Ale are both
But the sons of sloth,
let us then in wine agree,
To taste a quart
Of every sort,
the thinner and the thicker,
That spite of chance
We may advance
the nobler and the quicker,
Who shall by vote
Of every throat,
be crowned the King of Liquor.
Muscatel, avaunt,
Bloody Elegant,
shall have no free vote of mine.
Claret is a Prince,
And he did long since,
In the royal order shine,
His face is spread
With sprightly red,
and so he loves to see men,
Where he bears sway,
His subjects they
shall be as good as Freemen.
But here's the blot,
Almost forgot,
He's too much burned by women.
By the River Rhyne,
Is a valiant Vine,
that can all our veins replenish,
Let us then consent,
To the Government,
and the Royal Rule of Rhenish,
The German Wine,
Will warm the Chine,
and frisk in every veyn,
Twill make the Bride,
Forbear to chide,
and call him to it again;
But that's not all,
He's much too small,
to be our Sovereign.
We shall never think
Of a nobler Drink
then with votes advanced high,
Let us all proclaim
Good Canary's name,
Heaven bless his Majesty,
He is a King
In every thing,
whose nature doth renownce ill,
He'll make us skip,
And nimbly trip,
from the seeling to the Groundcill,
Especially
When Poets be
Lords of the Privy Council.
But a Vintner he
Will his Taster be,
there is no man that can him let,
And a Drawer that
Hath a good Palate,
shall be made Squire of the Gimlet.
The Barr-boyes shall,
Be Pages all,
a Tavern well prepared,
In jovial sort
Shall be his Court,
where nothing may be spared;
Wine-Porters shall,
With shoulders tall,
be Yeomen of the Guard.
If a Cooper we
With a Red-nose see,
but in any part of the T ow
That same Cooper shall,
With his Adds Royal,
be the Keeper of the Crown,
Young wits that wash
Away their Cash
in wine and Recreation,
That bate dull Beer,
Are welcome here,
to give their approbation,
So shall all you,
That will allow
Canary's Coronation.
She's come, she's come, now I love thee.
You will, when you know what I have done to
advance your jollity.
Prithee what?
I'll tell you, Madam Fancy lay in lately, and I
very abruptly came just now from the Gossips feast, there is
Mrs. Obscene the Midwife, Mrs. Luscious the Confectioners
wife, Mrs. Light the Feathermakers, and Mrs. Prattle the Law∣years,
not a man amongst them, they are now in the height of
protesting, the Midwife hath almost got a rattle already, and
talks at such a rate it would make thee blush to hear her.
And that's much you'll say.
They are come from home to con•lude in the
Tavern, ther's but this wainscot partition betwixt you, which
being dexterously removed (by a pair of drawers) the Scene
will be discovered, and you may join companies.
Agreed, agreed.
Here's to you Gossip.
Thank ye good Gossip.
Mother my service to you.
Thank you good daughter.
Pray wind up your bottom.
A Diamond of that bigness: whore's Mrs. Friendly▪
Hark, de' ye hear um, I'll be gone, they call for
me, remember my instructions.
I warrant ye.
COme let us be merry,
Till wine make us weary,
Twill fright away Sullens and Chollicks,
Let Husbands rake Riches,
We will reach at their Breeches,
And spend an odd remnant in frolics.
While we bear chink about,
Lively let's drink about,
And be as jocund as may be,
Let men wast wealth about,
We will drink this Health about,
To the good wife and her Baby.
Let's drink our Sack away,
Some say twill take away
Every cold swelling and tumor,
If my feet fail,
And my Husband do rail,
Isle tell him Tom-fool it is my humour.
Let's prittle and prattle,
We will twittle and twattle,
This glass of Canary we will toss up,
Let none of us spill it,
But drink as we fill it,
For it is a good Health to my Gossip.
As I live pure company, Ladies shall we prevail with
you to mix societies?
I have acquainted these Ladies with your desires,
and they are well contented to mingle in a Dance with you.
Come Gentlemen, sit your selves, here am I.
Faith Mr. Frolic I see what you drive at.
Well, well, no more, we will talk the rest in private.
Why how now Sleep, what dost thou mean to stretch?
Open thine eyes, it is I, my name is Watch.
Prithee disturb me not, thou know I am
As far from hurt, as truth is free from blame.
I think so too, prithee hold up thy eyes,
I'll tell thee of a thousand rarities.
Good Watch depart, keep company with those
Whose evil actions make all men their foes;
Fly to forlorn hopes, seek out the Cell
Of vigilant Revenge, or go and dwell
With Husbands jealousies, or Rebels fears;
Oh▪ for a nap of sixteen hundred years.
Thou shalt not sleep a minute by this light,
The Prince of darkness and the Queen of Night,
Intend to revel, betwixt twelve and one,
This night they keep their Coronation,
And you must needs be there.
Did ever see
Sleep at a Masque, or tricks of jollity?
I shall spoil all; what spirits can I raise?
Sleep goes to Sermons oftner then to Plays.
The Queen will have it so.
So let it be.
I hope she'll send her Coach to carry me,
For if I walk, I shall be out of breath;
Who will be there?
Your elder brother Death,
And his great opposite the Queen of Life.
Where ever they meet there must needs be strife,
And I abhor contention, I'll not go,
I must seek out a place where pleasures flow,
Where plenty strews the room with wine and diet,
Where cares are banished by the Queen of quiet,
Where health and wealth, prosperity and ease,
Are in contention only how to please;
Where Amity is thought the best defence,
And Conscience hath no crime, or else no sense,
Where war and Law, and Faction are unknown,
Where Lovers sing, and Organs play alone,
Where all things are presented to the eyes,
Beyond what man can wish for, or devise.
Where will you find all this?
Far from your knowing,
Where I keep Court these joys are ever flowing;
The showers of April, and Apollo's beams,
Shall not produce such plenty as my Dreams;
Nor can the liquid lips of the South wind,
Send such sweet succour as in Sleep we find;
The Lover (though his Lady prove extreme)
Spite of her pride, enjoys her in a Dream.
The Beggar when by Sleep stowed under hatches,
May tell more pieces then his coat hath patches;
The Turkey-Captive in a slumber laid,
Is safe at home, and all his Ransom paid:
The hungry Laser, in a Dream, is able
To sit in plenty at a Princes table.
How long shall they this Paradise partake?
For everlasting, if they never wake.
If this be all your drowsy power can do,
Beggars and slaves are only fit for you;
Give me the watchful eye, the active hand,
The copious Intellect that can command
Mysterious designs, and all that are
Conservative in Peace, and used in War.
Prithee be quiet, what a noise you keep,
I'll tell thee what I am.
Do, and I'll sleep.
I am the prop of prayer, life of devotion,
By my assistance men command the Ocean,
I guide all Ships that every billow bears.
Pillow bears?
I teach them in a storm to work out fears,
Without my aid the Spaniards, Turks, nor Russians,
Could sail against the foaming repercussions.
Cushions, I can sleep without Cushion, if you
would but leave your bawling.
I make the Student wake, I watch the Sentry,
That doth expect each minute the foes entry:
I keep the Camp in war, the Court in peace,
By me the Ploughmen sows and reaps increase;
No cunning consultation could be held
Without my help, in City or in Field;
If I do not assist, nothing can be
Secure, that tends to Power or Policy;
Where I am wanting all things must miscarry,
That are Divine, Moral, or Military;
I watch with them that laugh, and them that weep,
Indeed what is that I do not?
Sleep.
It is true, that's thy dominion; where were thou,
When fruitful Albians Alabaster brow,
In the warm blood of Civil War was dyed?
I was amongst them too on the Kings side.
Your faculty and theirs did well agree.
Yes faith, I took a nap, and that took me.
Sleep is the sluggards joy, the Drunkards diet,
The Freemans fetters.
It is the Plowmans quiet.
The Soldiers ruin.
But the poor mans wealth.
The Magistrates disease.
The sick mans health.
The dull mans bed-fellow.
The Lovers balm.
The Statesmans Lethargy.
The Seamans calm.
Whilst watching either suits with him that grieves,
Or else with Renters, Rebels, Whores and Thieves.
A very comely Character, but come,
Lift up your eye-lids, or I'll beat a Drum
About your ears.
What would you have me do?
Attend the Festivals.
Come then let's go;
But I shall ne'er hold out.
We two must lead
The King and Queen, when they their measures tread.
A match, a match, that Dance must needs be taking,
Which is performed between sleeping and waking.
WElcome you whose love and leisures,
do design you for delight,
Freely come and taste the pleasures,
which attend the Queen of Night;
Here you may securely prove.
All the liberty of Love.
Here no Spy doth lurk in bushes,
to betray you to the light,
Virgins may secure their blushes,
underneath the vayl of Night.
In this Court such pleasures be,
As the Sun did never see.
You that rob and kill for treasure,
get ye hence and come not near,
It is the Prince of Darkness pleasure,
no such person shall appear.
They do banish all from hence,
But true Love and Innocence.
Great Prince of Darkness welcome to my Court.
We thank you Princess for this Royal sport,
Which is so innocent, the eye of day,
Could she look on us, need not turn away;
All the transactions of this short nights story,
The Sun might see in his Meridian Glory.
Whore's Watch?
At hand my Liege.
Go still the Ocean,
And bid the Spheres make Music to our motion.
MAids that are well and young,
List to the Bell-mans Song,
Cupped hath tidings to tell ye,
He will not spare his Darts,
Therefore prepare your hearts,
you shall have Love by the b•lly.
Do not retire in snuff,
There will be fire enough,
when ye have quenched all in the household,
Though you have hinder locks,
Love and his Tinder-box,
will be let in a Moushole.
Men that have Ware enough,
And well may spare enough,
force not your wives to go borrow,
Mind what I speak I pray,
Always at break of day
bid your fair Ladies good morrow.
What noise is that.
An outcry in the City.
Go seek out Watch, I told ye I would fit ye,
I have given them their dose, how the fools snort,
If they should sleep till noon it would be rare sport;
But here comes Watch, there lie your wise Projectors.
How now what news?
A nest of whors &amp; Hectors.
Un charm the watch.
Ho Sirs, what guard d'e keep
Murder abroad, &amp; all the watch asleep?
Come before the Constable, knock um
down; take away their weapons.
The morning star appears.
Come let's to bed.
We vanish when Aurora's curtain's spread.
Hail fair Aurora.
Poetry good morrow.
Why art thou up so soon?
I come to borrow
Light from your lustre Madam, your bright eyes
Discover Natures vast varieties;
You and Apollo have the keys of health,
Whose treasury discloses wit and wealth;
You are the Students Queen, the wanderers guide,
The Springs Imperial Crown, the Summers pride;
Flora that drinks her mornings draught in dew,
Could never spread her mantle but for you.
Though Phebe shine refulgent in her sphere,
She shows but sickly when your beams appear,
You are fair Fancies Midwife, all the worth
She labours with all night, your hands bring forth;
To tell how bright, how sweet, how rich, how ruddy
Aurora is, would ask a twelve-months study.
Leave off, you'll make me blush else I protest.
Tic my intent, a blushing morning's best.
When saw you Madam Fancy.
Never since
I did employ her to present the Prince
Of darkness with some Revels, which were done
To celebrate his Coronation.
That was but lately, they are newly gon,
The Queen and he went off as I came on.
You never move together.
Never since
We parted from the Chaos, when the Prince
Of all the world divided us.
Who's here?
Tic Madam Fancy sure.
Well met my dear.
Your servant virtuous Madam.
welcome from
The Court of Darkness.
I am glad you are come,
For without thy assistance there's no hope
Of a conclusion.
What must be the scope
Of this design?
Something that may appear
For a grand Masque.
A Dance? what if it were
Performed by the 9. Worthies.
That's too common.
Or the 9. Muses?
There's too much of woman
To express footing well.
Then ye shall have
The 7. Sciences.
They are too grave.
The 7. deadly sins.
They are too rude.
The 7. Champions.
They are too proud.
The 4. Complexions.
No, they are not new.
The 4. patts of the world.
They are too few.
Five Senses with a Devil and a Zany.
Preposterous.
12 Sibils.
They are too many.
You're hard to please.
I would have something come,
As from the banks of blessed Elizium,
Where Immortality doth lead the Spirits
Of Heroes, lately stellified for merits,
Where the white souls of those bright Lovers move,
Who made their lives a sacrifice to Love,
And in deep Melancholy dyed to please,
The cruel coyness of their Mistresses,
Where those triumphant Worthies are, whose blood
By war was wasted for their Countries good;
Where pious Priests and Princes resume
The heads and Crowns they lost in Martyrdom,
Where Poetry is mounted above chance,
And the poor power of Pride and Ignorance;
Where the Fields bloom with everlasting Summers,
And Sufferers are only Overcommers.
Shall this be your device?
I think twill be
The best design for a Catastrophe.
Why then it shall be so, I like the story,
That which begins with Truth, should end with Glory.
Tic very proper.
Go about it then.
would Madam Verity were here again,
Where shall I look for her?
I know not where.
I'll search the City.
She is seldom there.
Look in the Camp, for they pretend to good.
Twill be in vain, she never deals in blood.
Isle seek for her at Court.
That were mere dotage,
You'll sooner find her in some poor mans Cottage,
Whose low-pric'd labour hardly will sustain
His house with bread, and free his bed from rain.
Are those her Rendezvous?
See, she is come.
Whence came you Madam?
From Elizium.
And in a happy minute; it is from thence
At this time we attend Intelligence.
What is your wish?
That you would pleas to grace
Us with a glimpse of that eternal place.
It is a great request, no carnal eye
Can view the splendors of Eternity.
Not by reflection?
Yes, if you can get
An Optic from Fidelia's Cabinet,
The Queen of Faith, thorough that Glass I'll show,
What all the world without it cannot know.
It will not fit this place.
Why then go on.
By Fancy, and I'll give direction.
Content.
I must depart, I see the Sun
Begins to mount to the Meridian;
My Regency declines.
See us begin it,
We shall not much exceed the twentieth minute;
Advance your concord, let the Spheres proclaim,
Chromatic welcomes in Aurora's name.
COme ye happy Souls that be
Clad with Immortality,
Ascend your Thrones,
Though the World did use ye hard,
Here ye shall have full reward,
For all your groans.
Here the Lover never wears,
Willow-Garlands, sighs nor tears.
You that have by cruel War,
Been reduced to what you are,
with many a wound
For your conscience, here you may
Enter into Royal pay,
And all be crowned;
They that so are forced to yield.
Win an everlasting Field.
You who have without vain glories,
Been fair Truth's dispensatories,
And firmly stood,
In this place shall surely know,
Prophets may to Heaven flow,
In their own Blood.
Bare pretenders never come
Into our Elizium,
Therefore let each active spirit,
Show the joy he doth inherit.
TRuth is departed, Fancy fled, and I
Am only left to the Artillery
Of all your censures; in your power it lies,
To make our hopes prove heaps of Batteries,
But that we are better confirmed you mean,
Rather to succour then besiege the Scene;
We have opinions that you do not come
To dam us in our own Elizium,
To rowt us from our Revels, and advance
Your valour against a Fiddle and a Dance;
Then you'll destroy us, for (alas!) we are
But slenderly provided for a war,
A Brest-work of bright Ladies makes us bow,
One Eye will charge a Masquer through and through;
Do but consider this, as yet our trust is,
That your bright Mercy will outshine your Justice,
And that you will look thorough these Inventions,
To the civilities of our Intentions:
We could be careless, and (as some have done)
Forbear to court your Approbation,
Upon considerations that the tasks
Of our endeavours, live not upon Masks;
But we shall not with such rough tempers ceize ye,
Since our desires are every way to please ye.

OUr Muse describes no Lovers passion,
No wretched Father, no unthrifty Son:
No craving subtle Whore, or shameless Bawd,
Nor stubborn Clown, or daring Parasite,
No lying Servant, or bold Sycophant.
We are not wanton, or Satirical.
These have their time and places fit, but we
Sad hours, and serious studies, to reprive,
Have taught severe Philosophy to smile.
The Senses rash contentions we compose,
And give displeased ambitious TONGUE her due:
Here's all Judicious friends; accept what is not ill,
Who are not such, let them do what they will.
NAy good Auditus do but hear me speak.
Lingo thou strik'st too much upon one string,
Thy tedious plain-song grates my tender ears.
It is plain indeed, for Truth no descant needs,
Ʋna's her name, she cannot be divided.
O but the ground it self is nought, from whence
Thou can not relish out a good division:
Therefore at length surcease, prove not stark mad,
Hopeless to prosecute a haplesse suit:
For though (perchance) thy first strains pleasing are,
I dare engage mine ears, the close will jar.
If then your confidence esteem my cause,
To be so frivolous and weakly wrought:
Why do you daily subtle plots devise,
To stop me from the ears of common Sense,
Whom since our great Queen Psyche hath ordained,
For his sound wisdom, our Vice-governour,
To him, and to his two so wise assistants,
Nimble Fantastic, and firm Memory:
My self and cause, I humbly do commit,
Let them but hear and judge, I wish no more,
Should they but know thy rash presumption,
They would correct it in the sharpest sort:
Good Jove what Sense hast thou to be a Sense;
Since from the first foundation of the world,
We never were accounted more then five;
Yet you forsooth, an idle prating Dame,
Would fain increase the number, and up-start
To our high seats, decking your babbling self
With usurped Titles of our dignity.
An idle prating dame: know fond Auditus,
Records affirm my title full as good,
As his amongst the five is counted best.
Lingo confess the truth, you are wont to lie,
I say so too, therefore I do not lye,
But now spite of you all I speak the truth.
You five among us subjects tyrannise,
Making the sacred name of common Sense,
A cloak to cover your enormities:
Hee bears the rule, hoe's judge, but judges still,
As hoe's informed by your false evidence:
So that a plaintiff cannot have access,
But through your gates he hears but what, nought else
But that thy crafty ears to him conveys,
And all he sees is by proud Visus showed him:
And what he touches is by Tactus hand,
And smells I know but through Olfactus nose,
Gustus begins to him what ere he tastes:
By these quaint tricks free passage hath been barred
That I could never equally be heard.
But well, it is well.
Lingo thy feeble sex,
Hath hitherto with-held my ready hands
That longed to pluck that nimble instrument.
O horrible ingratitude? that thou
That thou of all the rest should threaten me:
Who by my means conceiv'st as many tongues,
As Neptune closes Lands betwixt his arms:
The ancient Hebrew clad with mysteres,
The learned Greek rich in fit Epithets,
Blessed in the lovely marriage of pure words,
The Child Wise, the Arabian Physical,
The Roman Eloquent, the Tuscane Grave,
The Braving Spanish, and the smooth tong'd French,
These precious Jewels that adorn thine ears,
All from my mouths rich Cabinet are stolen,
How oft hast thou been chained unto my tongue,
Hanged at my lips and ravished with my words,
So that a speech fair fether'd could not fly:
But thy ears pit-fall caught it instantly,
But now O Heavens!
O Heavens, thou wrong'st me much,
Thou wrong'st me much thus falsely to upbraid me:
Had not I granted thee the use of hearing,
That sharp edged tongue whetted against her master,
Those puffing lungs, those teeth, those dropsy lips,
That scalding throat, those nostrils full of ire:
Thy palate proper instruments of speech,
Like to the winged chanters of the wood,
Uttering nought else but idle stiflements,
Tunes without sense, words inarticulate:
Had ne'er been able to have abused me thus.
Words are thy Children, but of my begetting.
Perfidious Liar, how can I endure thee?
Call my unspotted chastity in Question:
O could I use the Breath mine anger spends,
I'd make thee know.
Heaven look on my distress,
Defend me from this railing viperesse:
For if I stay her words, sharp vinegar
Will fret me through, Lingo I must be gone:
I hear one call me more then earnestly. 
Nay the loud cannoning of thunder-bolts,
Screeking of Wolves, howling of tortured Ghosts,
Pursue thee still, and fill thy amazed ears
With cold astonishment and horrid fears:
O how these senses muffle common sense:
And more, and more with pleasing objects strive,
To dull his judgement, and pervert his will
To their be-hests, who were he not so wrapped
In the dusky clouds of their dark policies,
Would never suffer right to suffer wrong:
Fie Lingo wilt thou now degenerate?
Art not a woman, dost not love revenge?
Delightful speeches, sweet persuasions
I have this long time used to get my right,
My right that is to make the Senses six;
And have both name and power with the rest.
Oft have I seasoned savoury periods,
With sugared words, to delude Gustus taste,
And oft embellished my entreative phrase
With smelling flowers of vernant Rhetoric,
Lemming and flashing it with various Dyes,
To draw proud Visus to me by the eyes:
And oft perfumed my petitory style,
With Civet-speech, to entrap Olfactus Nose,
And clad my self in Silken Eloquence,
To allure the nicer touch of Tactus hand,
But ell's become lost labour, and my cause
Is still procrastinated; therefore now,
Hence ye base off-spring of a broken mind,
Supple entreaties and smooth flatteries:
Go kiss the love-sick lips of puling Gulls,
That still their Brain to quench their loves disdain;
Go guild the tongues of Bawds and Parasites,
Come not within my thoughts; But thou Deceit,
Break up the pleasure of my Brim-full breast,
Enrich my mind with subtle policies.
Well then Isle go, whither? nay, what know I?
And do, in faith I will, the devil knows what,
What if I set them all at variance,
And so obtain to speak, it must be so.
It must be so, but how? there lies the point:
How? thus t tut this device will never prove,
Augment it so, twill be too soon descried,
Or so, nor so it is too too dangerous.
Pish, none of these, what if I take this course? ha?
Why there it goes, good, good, most excellent.
He that will catch Eels must disturb the flood,
The Chicken's hatched i'faith; for they are proud,
And soon will take a cause of disagreement.
I see the heavens nurse my new-born device,
For lo my Page Mendacio comes already,
To file and burnish that I hammered out,
Never in better time Mendacio,
What? hast thou done?
Done, yes long ago.
Is it possible? thou should dispatch so soon?
Madame, I had no sooner told
Tactus, that Gustus would fain speak with him:
But I spied Visus, Gustus and the rest,
And served them all with sauce of several lies,
Now the last Sense I spake with was Olfactus,
Who having smelt the meaning of my message,
Straight blew his nose, and quickly pust me hither;
But in the whirlwind of his furious blast,
Had not by chance a Cobweb held me fast,
Mendacio had been with you long ere this.
Witness this lye, Mendacio's with me now,
But sir out of jesting will they come?
Yes and it like your Ladyship presently;
Here may you have me pressed to flatter them.
I'll flatter no such proud Companions.
Twill do no good, therefore I am determined
To leave such baseness.
Then shall I turn and bid them stay at home.
No, for their coming hither to this grove,
Shall be a means to further my device;
Therefore I pray thee Mendacio go presently,
Run you vile Ape.
Whither?
What? dost thou stand?
Till I know what to doe.
S. precious it is true,
So might thou finely out-run thine errand.
Hast to my Chest.
I, I.
There shalt thou find,
A gorgeous Robe, and golden Coronet,
Convey them hither nimbly, let none see them.
Madam, I fly, I fly.
But here you sir?
Lock up your fellow Servant, Veritas.
I warrant you,
You need not fear, so long as I am with you.
What colour is the Robe?
There is but one.
The Key Madam, the Key.
By Juno how forgetful is sudden speed.
Here take it, Run.
Isle be here instantly.
Meanwhile this Crown and gorgeous orna∣meant,
Were the great prize, for which five Orators,
With the sharp weapons of their tongues contended:
But all their speeches were so equal wrought,
And alike gracious, that if his were witty
His was as wise; the thirds fair eloquence
Did parallel the fourths firm gravity,
The lasts good gesture kept the Balance even
With all the rest, so that the sharpest eye,
And most judicious censor could not judge
To whom the hanging victory should fall,
Therefore with one consent they all agreed,
To offer up both Crown and Robe to me,
As the chief patronise of their profession,
Which heretofore I holily have kept,
Like to a misers gold, to look on only.
But now Isle put them to a better use,
And venture both in hope to—
Have not I hied me Madam? look you here,
What shall be done with these temptations?
They say a golden Ball,
Bred enmity betwixt three Goddesses,
So shall this Crown be author of debate,
Betwixt five Senses.
Where shall it be laid?
There, there, there, it is well, so, so, so.
A Crown's a pleasing bait to look upon,
The craftiest Fox will hardly scope this trap.
Come let us away, &amp; leave it to the chance.
Nay rather let me stand close here-abouts,
And see the event.
Do so, and if they doubt
How it came there, fain them some pretty fable,
How that some God—
Tut, tut, tut, let me alone,
I that have fained so many hundred Gods,
Can easily forge some fable for the turn:
Whist Madame, away, away, you fright the Fowl,
Tactus comes hard by, look you,
Is it he for certain?
Yes, yes, yes, it is he.
It is he indeed
Now chaste Diana grant my Nets to hold!
The blasting Childhood of the cheerful morn
Is almost grown a youth and over-climbes
Yonder gilt Eastern hills, about which time,
Gustus most earnestly importuned me,
To meet him here abouts, what cause I know not.
You shall do shortly to your cost I hope.
Sure by the Sun it should be Nine a clock.
What a Star-gazer, will you ne'er look down?
Clear is the Sun and blew the Firmament,
Me thinks the Heavens do smile.
At thy mishap.
To look so high and stumble in a trap.
High thoughts have slippry feet, I had well no fallen.
Well doth he fall that rises with a fall.
What's this!
O are you taken, it is in vain to strive.
How now!
You'll be so entangled straight.
A Crown!
That it will be heard.
And a Robe!
To lose your self.
A Crown and a Robe.
It had been fitter for you, to have found a Fools Coat and a Babble, hey, hey.
Jupiter, Jupiter how came this here?
O Sir Jupiter is making Thunder, he hears you not, here's one knows better.
It is wondrous rich, ha, but sure it is not so, ho,
Do I not sleep and dream of this good luck, ha?
No I am awake and feel it now
Whose should it be?
Set up a Si quis for it.
Mercury, Ell's mine own, here's none to cry half's mine.
When I am gone.
Tactus thy sneezing somewhat did portend▪
Was ever man so fortunate as I?
To break his shins at such a stumbling Block.
Roses and Bays pack hence: this Crown and Robe,
My Brows and Body circles and invests.
How gallantly it fits me, sure the slave,
Measured my head that wrought this Coronet.
They lie that say Complexions cannot change:
My Blood's ennobled, and I am transformed,
Unto the sacred temper of a King:
Methink I here my noble Parasites
Styling me Caesar, or great Alexander,
Licking my feet, and wondering where I got
This precious ointment: how my pace is mended,
How Princely do I speak, how sharp I threaten:
Peasants Isle curb your head-strong impudence:
And make you tremble when the Lion roars,
Yea earth-bred worms, O for a looking glass:
Poets will write whole Volumes of this Change:
Whore's my attendants? Come hither Sir quickly,
Or by the wings of Harms.—
Ay me Olfactus comes, I called too soon,
He will have half part I fear; what shall I do?
Where shall I run? how shall I shift him off?
This is the time and this the place appointed,
Where Visus promised to confer with me.
I think he's there — No, no, it is Tactus sure.
How now? What makes you sit so nicely?
It's past imagination, it's so indeed.
How fast his deeds are fixed, and how melan∣cholly he looks. Tactus, Tactus.
For this is true Mans life is wondrous brittle.
He's mad I think, he talks so idly, so ho, Tactus.
And many have been metamorphosed,
To stranger matters and more uncouth forms.
I must go nearer him, he doth not hear.
And yet methinks, I speak as I was wont
And—
Tactus, Tactus.
Olfactus as thou love come not near me,
Why? art thou hatching eggs you are feared to break them?
Touch me not lest thou chance to break my life.
What's this under thee?
If thou meddle with me I am utterly undone.
Why man, what ayls thee?
Let me alone and Isle tell thee,
Lately I came from fine Fantastic house.
So I believe for you are very foolish.
No sooner had I parted out of doors,
But up I held my hands before my face:
To shield mine eyes from th'lights piercing beams,
When I protest I saw the Sun as clear,
Through these my palms, as through a prospective:
No marvel, for when I beheld my fingers,
I saw my fingers near transformed to glass,
Opening my Breast, my Breast was like a window,
Through which I plainly did perceive my heart:
In whose two Concaves I discerned my thoughts,
Confus'ly lodged in great multitudes.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, why this is excellent,
Momus himself can find no fault with thee,
Thou'st make a passing live Anatomy.
And decide the Question much disputed,
Betwixt the Galenists and Aristotle.
But when I had arrived and set me down,
Viewing my self, my self ay me was changed.
As thou now see to a perfect Urinal.
T'a perfect Urinal, O monstrous, monstrous, art not mad to think so?
I do not think so, but I say I am so;
Therefore Olfactus come not near I advise you.
See the strange working of dull melancholy;
Whose drossy drying the feeble Brain,
Corrupts the sense, deludes the Intellect.
And in the souls fair table falsely graves,
Whole squadrons of fantastical Chimera's,
And thousand vain imaginations:
Making some think their heads as big as horses,
Some that they are dead, some that they are turned to Wolves:
As now it makes him think himself all glass,
Tactus dissuade thy self, thou dost but think so.
Olfactus if thou love me get thee gone,
I am an Urinal I dare not stir,
For fear of cracking in the Bottom.
Wilt thou sit thus all day?
Unless thou help me.
Bedlam must help thee, what would have me do?
Go to the City make a Case fit for me:
Stuff it with wool, then come again and fetch.
Ha, ha, ha, thou'lt be laughed out of case and countenance.
I care not, so it must be, or I cannot stir.
I had best leave troubling him, he's obstinate, (Urinal I leave you) but above all things take heed Jupiter sees you not, for if he do, he'll ne'er make
water in sive again; thou'lt serve his turn so fit to carry his water unto Aesculapius, Farewell Urinal, Farewell.
Speak not so loud, the sound's enough to crack me, What is he gone? I an Urinal, ha, ha, ha, I protest I might have had my face washed finely, if he had meant to abuse me: I an Urinal, ha, ha, ha, go to, Urinal you have escaped a fair scouring, well Isle away, and get me to mine own house, there Isle lock up my self fast, playing the Chimick, aug∣menting this one Crown to troops of Angels, with which gold-winged messengers, I mean,
To work great wonders, as to build and purchase,
Fare daintily, tie up men's tongues, and loose them,
Command their lives, their goods, their liberties,
And captive all the world with chains of gold:
Hey, hey, tery linkum tinkum.
O Hercules!
Fortune the Queen delights to play with me,
Stopping my passage with the sight of Visus;
But as he makes hither, Isle make hence,
There's more ways to the wood than one.
What more Devils to affright me?
O Diabolo, Gustus comes here to vex me:
So that I poor wretch, am like a Shuttlecock betwixt two Battledoors, If I run there, Visus beats me to Scil∣la, If here, then Gustus blows me to Carybdis.
Neptune hath sworn my hope shall suffer shipwreck..
What shall I say?
Mine Urinal's too thin to bide the fury of such storms as these.
Gustus good day.
I cannot have a bad,
Meeting so fair an omen as your self.
Shall I? wilt prove? ha? well it is best to venture.
Saw you not Tactus, I should speak with him.
Perchance so, a sudden lie hath best luck.
That face is his, or else mine eye's deceived,
Why how now Tactus, what so gorgeous?
Where did thou get these fair habiliments?
Stand back I charge you as you love your lives,
By Styx, the first that touches me shall die.
I can discern no weapons, will he kill us?
Kill you? not I, but come not near me you had best.
Why, art thou mad?
Friends as you love your lives,
Venture not once to come within my reach.
Why dost threaten so?
I do not threaten, but in pure love advise you for the best,
Dare not to touch me, but hence fly apace,
Add wings unto your feet and save your lives.
Why what's the matter Tactus prethe tell me?
If you will needs jeopard your lives so long,
As hear the ground of my amazedness,
Then for your better safety stand aside.
How full of ceremonies, sure he'll conjure,
For such like Robes Magicians use to wear.
Isle see the end, though he should unlock Hell:
And set the infernal hags at liberty.
How rash is man on hidden arms to rush!
It was my chance, O chance most miserable!
To walk that way that to Crumena leads.
You mean Cremona a little Town hard by.
I say Crumena, called Vacua,
A Town which doth, and always hath belonged,
Chiefly to Scholars: from Crumena walls,
I saw a man came stealing craftily,
Apparelled in this vesture which I wear,
But seeing me est-soons, he took his heels,
And threw his garment from him all in hast,
Which I perceiving to be richly wrought,
Took it me up: But good now get you gone,
Warned by my harms, and scope my misery.
I know no danger, leave these circumstances.
No sooner had I put it on my back,
But suddenly mine eyes began to dim,
My joints wax sore, and all my body burn
With most intestine torture, and at length,
It was too evident, I had caught the plague.
The plague, away good Gustus lets be gone,
I doubt it is true, now I remember me,
Crumena Vacua never wants the plague.
Tactus Isle put my self in jeopardy to pleasure thee.
No gentle Gustus, your absence is the only thing I wish,
Lest I infect you with my company.
Farewell. 
I willingly would stay to do thee good.
A thousand thanks, but since I needs must die,
Let it suffice, death only murders me,
Oh it would augment the dolor of my death,
To know my self the most unhappy Bow,
Through which pale death should aim his shafts at you.
Tactus farewell, yet die with this good hope,
Thy corps shall be interred as they ought. 
Go make my Tomb, provide my funerals, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Excellent Asses thus to be deluded,
Bewail his death and cruel destinies,
That lives, and laughs your fooleries to scorn,
But whore's my Crown, oh here: I well deserve,
Thus to be crowned for two great victories, ha, ha, ha,
Visus take care my corps be well interred:
Go make my Tomb, and write upon the Stone;
Here lies the Sense, that lying gul'd them all,
With a false plague, and fained Ʋrinal.
Tactus, Tactus
O Jupiter, it is Auditus, ell's mart, I doubt the sly knave hears so far, but yet Isle grope him: how now Ears, what make you here, ha?
Nay, what make you here, I pray what were you talking even now, of an Ass, and a Crown, and an Urinal, and a plague?
A plague on you, what I?
Oh, what you.
O I had well nigh forgot nothing, but I say—
What?
That if a man (do you mark sir) being sick of the plague (do you see sir) had a, a, a, hem, hem, (this cold troubles me, It makes me cough sometimes extremely,) had a French Crown, (sir you under∣stand me) lying by him, and (come hither, come hither) and would not bestow two pence (do you hear) to buy an Urinal (do you mark me) to carry his water to the Physician, (hem)
What of all this?
I say such a one was a very Ass, this was all I use to speak to my self, when I am alone; but Auditus, when shall we hear a new set of singing
books, or th'viols, or the consort of Instruments.
This was not all, for I heard mention of a Tomb, and an Epitaph.
True, true, I made my self merry with this Epitaph, upon such a fools Tomb thus a, thus, thus, plague brought this man, (foh I have forgot∣ten) O thus, plague brought this man (so, so, so) unto his burial, because, because, because, (hem, hem) because he would not buy an Urinal, come, come Auditus, shall we hear thee play, the Lyroway, or the Lute-way shall we, or the Cornet, or any Music, I am greatly revived when I hear.
Tactus, Tactus, this will not serve, I heard all, you have not found a Crown: you, no, you have not.
Peace, peace, faith peace, come hither, hark thee good now.
I cannot hold I must needs tell.
O do not, do not, do not, come hither, will you be a fool?
Had he not wings upon his feet and should∣ders?
Yes, yes, and a fine wand in his hand,
Coriously wrapped with a pair of snakes.
Will half content you, pish twill ne'er be known.
My life, it was Mercury.
I do not know his name, but this I am sure his hat had wings upon it.
Doubtless it was he, but say my Boy what did he?
First I beheld him hovering in the air,
And then down stooping with a hundred gires:
His feet he fixed on Mount Chephalon,
From whence he flew and lighted on that plain,
And with disdainful steps soon glided thither:
Whither arrived, he suddenly unfolds
A gorgeous Robe, and glittering ornament,
And lays them all, upon that hillock:
This done he wafts his wand, took wing again,
And in a moment vanished out of sight,
With that mine eyes 'gan stare, and heart grew cold,
And all my quivering joints with sweat bedewed:
My heels my thought had wings as well as his,
And so away I run; but by the way,
I met a man as I thought coming thither,
What marks had he?
He had a great—what this is he, this is he:
What Tactus?
This was the plague vexed him so, Tactus your Grave gapes for you, are you ready?
Since you must needs die, do as others do,
Leave all your goods behind you; bequeath the
Crown and Robe to your Executors.
No such matter, I like the Egyptian Knights,
•or the more state, will be buried in them.
Come, come, deliver:
What will you take my purse from me?
No but a Crown, that's just more then your own.
Ha, what's this? it is a very small hand,
What Inscription is this?
He of the five that proves himself the best,
Shall have his Temples with this Coronet blessed.
This Crown is mine, and mine this garment is,
For I have always been accounted best.
Next after me, I as your self at any time: besides I found it first, therefore it is mine.
Neither of yours but mine as much as both.
And mine the most of any of you all.
Give me it or else —
Isle make you late repent it ———
Presumptuous as you are———
Spite of your teeth——
Never till now▪ a ha, it works apace,
Visus I know tic yours, and yet methinks,
Auditus you should have some challenge to it,
But that your title Tactus is so good:
Gustus I would swear the Coronet were yours,
What will you all go brawl about a trifle:
View but the pleasant coast of Microcosm,
First not great pity to be rent with wars,
First not a shame, to stain with brinish tears,
The smiling cheeks of ever-cheerfull peace,
First not far better to live quietly,
Than broil in fury of dissention;
Give me the Crown, ye shall not disagree,
If I can please you; Isle play Paris part,
And most unpartial judge the controversy:
Sauce-box go meddle with your Ladies fan, and prate not here.
I speak not for my self, but for my Countries safe commodity.
Sir be still.
Nay and you be so hot, the devil part you,
Isle to Olfactus and send him amongst you.
O that I were Alecto for your sakes:
How liberally would I bestow my snakes.
Tactus upon thine honour,
I challenge thee to meet me here,
Strong as thou can provide in th'afternoon.
I undertake the Challenge, and here's my hand,
In sign thou shalt be answered.
Tactus Isle join with thee, on this condition,
That if we win, he that fought best of us,
Shall have the Crown, the other wear the Robe.
Give me your hand, I like the motion.
Auditus shall we make our forces double,
Upon the same terms.
Very willingly:
Come lets away, fear not the victory.
Right's more advantage, than an host of soldiers.
I long to see those hot-spur senses at it, they say they have gallant preparations, and not un∣likely, for most of the soldiers are ready in Arms since the last field fought against their yearly enemy Meleager, and his wife Acrasia; that Conquest hath so fleshed them, that no peace can hold them. But had not Meleager been sick, and Acrasia drunk, the senses might have whistled for the victory.
Foh, what a stink of gunpowder is yonder?
Who's this! oh, oh, it is Appetitus, Gustus his hungry Parasite.
I cannot endure the smoking of Guns, the thundering of drums, I had rather hear the merry hacking of pot-herbs, and see the reeking of a hot Capon. If they would use no other Bucklers in war, but shields of Brawn, brandish no swords but sweards of Bacon, trail no spears, but sparribs of Pork, and instead of Harquebuss pieces discharge Hartichock∣pies, toss no pikes but boiled Pickrels, then Appeti∣tus would rouse up his crest, and bear up himself with the proudest.
Ah here's a youth stark nought at a trench but old dog at a trencher, a tall squire at a square table
But now my good masters must pardon me I am not for their service, for their service is without service, and indeed their service is too hoot for my diet. But what, If I be not my self, but only this be my spirit that wanders up and down, and Appetitus be kill• in the Camp, the Devil he is as soon, how's tha• possible? tut, tut, I know I am, I, I am Appetitus, and alive too, by this Infallible token, that I feel my sell• hungry.
Thou might have taken a better token o• thy self, by knowing thou art a fool.
Well then, though I made my fellow soldier• admire the beauty of my back, and wonder at the nimbleness of my heels, yet now will I at safety a• home, tell in what dangers they are abroad, Isle spea• nothing but guns, and gloves, and staves, and pha∣langes, and squadrons, and barracadoes, ambuscadoes, palmedoes blank point dept, counterpoint, counter¦scraf, sallies, and lies, saladoes, tarantantaras, ranta, tara, tara, hey.
I must take the fife out of his mouth, or he'll ne'er atone▪
But above all Isle be sure on my knees to thank the great—
Who am I, who am I, who I?
By the bloud-stain'd fashion of Mauors —I am on your side
Why, who am I?
Are you a soldier?
No.
Then you are master Helluo the Bear-ward,
No, no, he's dead.
Or Gulono the gutty Sergeant, or Delphino the Vintner, or else I know you not, for these are all my acquaintance.
Would I were hanged, if I be any of these,
What Mendacio, by the faith of a Knight thou art welcome, I must borrow thy Whetstone to shar∣pen the edges of my martial complements.
By the faith of a Knight, what a pox, where are thy Spurs?
I need no spurs, I ride like Pegasus on a winged horse, on a swift Gannet, my Boy, called fear.
What should thou fear in the wars? he's not a good soldier that hath not a good stomach.
O, but the stink of powder spoils Appetitus stomach, and then thou know when it is gone, Appe∣titus is dead, therefore I very manfully drew my sword, and flourished it bravely about mine ears, kissed, and finding my self hurt, most manfully run away.
All heart indeed, for thou ran like a Hart out of the field:
It seems then the Senses mean to fight it out.
I, and out-fight themselves I think, and all about a trifle, a paltry babble, found I know not where.
Thou art deceived, they fight for more then
that, a thing called Superiority, of which the Crow• is but an Emblem.
Mendacio hang this Superiority, Crown me no Crown but Bacchus Crown of Roses, give me no Sceptre, but a far (apons leg, to show tha• I am the great King of Hungary, therefore I prethe• talk no more of State-matters, but in brief, tell me my little rascal, how thou hast spent thy time this many a day?
Faith in some credit since thou saw me last▪
How so, where?
Every where; in the Court your Gentle∣women hang me at their Apron strings, and that makes them answer so readily. In the City I am ho∣nour'd like a God, none so well acquainted with your Tradesmen: your Lawyers all the Term time hire me of my Lady, your Gallants if they hear my name abused, they stab for my sake: your Travellers so dote upon me as passes, O they have good reason, for I have carried them to many a good meal, under the Countenance of my familiarity: Nay your States-men have oftentimes closely conveyed me un∣der their tongues, to make their policies more cur∣rant: As for old men they challenge my Company by authority.
I am exceeding glad of your great pro∣motion.
Now when I am disposed, I can Philophy it in the University, with the subtilest of them all.
I cannot be persuaded that you are acquainted with Scholars ever since thou were pressed to death in a Print-house.
No, why I was the first founder of the three sects of Philosophy, except one of the Peripa∣teticks who acknowledge Aristotle (I confess) their great Grand-father.
Thou Boy, how is this possible? thou art but a Child and there were sects of Philosophy before thou were born.
Appetitus, thou mistake me, I tell thee, 3000 years ago was Mendacio born in Greece, nursed in Create, and ever since honoured every where: Isle be sworn I held old Homers pen when he writ his Iliads and his Odysses.
Thou had need, for I hear say he was blind.
I helped Herodotus to pen some part of his Muses, lent Pliny ink to write his History, ron∣ded Rabalais in the ear when he historified Panta∣gruel; as for Lucian, I was his Genius, O those two Books De Vera History, howsoever they go under his Name, Isle be sworn I write them every tittle.
Sure as I am Hungry, thou'st have it for lying. But hast thou rusted this later time for want of exercise?
Nothing less, I must confess I would fain have jogged Stow and great Hollinshead on
their elbows, when they were about their Chro∣nicles, and as I remember Sir John Mandevils Tra∣veals, and a great part of the Decades were of my doing. But for the mirror of Knight-hood, Bevis of Southampton, Palmerin of England, Amadis of Gaul, Huon de Bordeaux, Sir Guy of Warwick, Martin mar-prelate, Robin-hood, Garragantua, Ge∣vilion, and a thousand such exquisite monuments as these, no doubt but they breathe on my breath up and down.
Downwards Isle swear, for there's stinking lies in them.
But what should I light a Candle to the bright Sun shine of my glorious renown, the whole world is full of Mendacios fame.
And so it will be so long as the world is full of fame.
But Sir, how hast thou done this long time?
In as much request as thy self. To begin with the Court, as thou did, I lie with the Ladies all night, and that's the reason they call for Cullies, and Gruellies so early before their prayers, your Gallants never sup, break-fast or beaver without me.
That's false, for I have seen them eat with a full stomach.
True, but because they know a little thing drives me from them, therefore in midst of meat they present me with some sharp sauce or a dish of
delicate Anchovies, or a Caviar, to entice me back again; nay more, your old Sirs that hardly go without a prop, will walk a mile or two every day to renew their acquaintance with me, as for the Academy, it is beholding to me for adding the eighth province unto noble Heptarchy of the liberal sciences.
What's that I prithee.
The most desired and honourable art of Cookery.
Now Sir in the City I am—st, st.
O the body of a Louse.
What art a louse in the City?
Not a word more, for yonder comes Phone∣tastes, and some body else.
What a pox can Fantastic do?
Work a miracle if he would prove wise.
It is he indeed, the vilest nup: yet the fool loves me exceedingly, but I care not for his company, for if he once catch me, I shall never be rid of him.
Sir Boy Heuresis? boy how now biting your nails?
Three things have troubled my brain this ma∣ny a day, and just now, when I was laying hold on the Invention of them, your sudden call, made them like Tantalus apples, fly from my fingers.
Some great matters questionless, what were they?
The quadrature of a circle, the Philosophers stone, and the next way to the Indies.
Thou dost well to meditate on these three things at once, for they'll be found out altogether, ad gre∣cas calendas, but let them pass, and carry the con∣ceit I told you this morning, to the party you wot of. In my imagination it is Capritious, twill take I war∣rant thee.
I will Sir: But what say you to the Gentle∣man that was with you yesterday?
O I think thou meanest him that made nineteen sonnets of his Mistress Busk-point:
The same, the same, Sir: You promised to help him out with the twentieth.
By Jupiters cloven pate it is true; but we witty fellows are so forgetful, but stay, hue, hue, carry him this:
The gordian knot which Alexander great,
Did meanwhile cut with his all conquering sword:
Was nothing like thy Busk-point pretty Peat,
Nor could so fair an augury afford.
Then to conclude let him pervert Catullus his zonam solvit diù ligatam, thus, thus,
Which if I chance to cut or else untie,
Thy little world Isle conquer presently.
It is pretty, pretty, tell him it was extemporal.
Well Sir, but now for Master Inamorato's Love-letter.
Some nettling stuffy faith; let him write thus: Most heart commanding faced Gentlewoman, even as the stone in India called Basiliscus, hurts all that looks on it: and as the Serpent in Arabia called Smaragdus, delights the sight, so does thy cele∣stial orb assimilating eyes, both please, and in plea∣sing wound my Love-darted heart.
But what trick shall I invent for the con∣clusion?
Pish, any thing: Love will minister Ink for the rest:
He that once begun well, hath half done, let him begin again, and there's all.
Master Gullio spoke for a new fashion, What for him?
A fashion for his suit—let him button it down the sleeve with four elbows, and so make it the pure hieroglyphic of a fool.
Nay then let me request one thing of you.
What's that Boy? by this fair hand thou shalt have it.
Mistress Superbia a Gentlewoman of my acquaintance wished me to devise her a new set for her Ruff, and an odd tire, I pray Sir, help me out with it.
Ah Boy in my conceit it's a hard matter to perform, these women have well nigh tired me, with devising tires for them, and set me at a non plus for new sets, their heads are so light, and their eyes so coy, that I know not how to please them.
I pray Sir, she hath a bad face, and fain would have Suitors, Fantastical and odd apparel, would perchance draw some body to look on her.
If her face be nought, in my opinion, the more view it, the worse, bid her wear the multitude of her deformities under a Mask, till my leisure will serve to devise some durable, and unstained blush of painting.
Very good Sir.
Away then, hye thee again, meet me at the Court within this hour at the farthest.
Oh heavens, how have I been troubled these later
times with Women, Fools, Babes, Tailors, Poets, Swaggerers, Gulls, Ballad-makers, they have almost disrobed me of all the toys and trifles I can devise; were it not that I pity the poor multitude of Prin∣ters, these Sonnet-mongers should starve for con∣ceits, for all Fantastic. But these puling Lovers, I cannot but laugh at them and their Encomions of their Mistresses. They make forsooth her hair of Gold, her eyes of Diamond, her cheeks of Roses, her lips of Rubies, her teeth of Pearl, and her whole body of Ivory: and when they have thus Idol'd her like Pigmalion, they fall down and worship her. Psyche, thou hast laid a hard task upon my shoulders, to invent at every ones ask, were it not that I refresh my dullness once a day with my most Angelical pre∣sense, it were unpossible for me to undergo it.
I cannot stay, I tell you it is more then time I were at Court, I know my Sovereign Psyche hath expected me this hour.
In good time, yonder comes Common∣sense,
I imagine it should be he by his voice.
Crave my counsel, tell me what manner of man he is? Can he entertain a man into his house, can he hold his Velvet Cap in one hand, and vale his bonnet with the other? Knows he how to be∣come a Scarlet gown, hath he a pair of fresh posts at his door?
He's about some hasty State-matters, he talks of posts methinks.
Can he part a couple of Dogs brawling in the street? why then choose him Mayor, upon my credit he'll prove a wise Officer.
Save you my Lord, I have attended your leisure this hour.
Fie upon it, what a toil have I had to choose them a Mayor yonder? there's a fusty Currier will have this man: there's a Chandler wipes his nose on his sleeve, and swears it shall not be so. There's a Mustard-maker looks as keen as Vinegar, will have another: O this many headed multitude, it's a hard matter to please them!
Especially where the multitude is so well headed. But I pray you whore's Master Memory? hath he forgotten himself that he is not here?
It is high time he were at Court, I would he would come.
How soon a wise man shall have his wish?
Memory the season of your coming is very ripe.
Had you staid a little longer it would have been stark rotten.
I am glad I saved it from the Swine — Spretious I have forgot something: O my purse, my purse, why Anamnestes? Remembrance where art thou, Anamnestes Remembrance, that wild Boy is al∣ways gadding, I remember he was at my heels, even now, and now the wild Rascal is vanished.
Is he not here? why then in my imagination he's left behind, O la Anamnestes remembrance.
 Anon, anon, sir anon, anon sir, anon, anon sir, anon, anon sir.
Ha sir, what a brawling's here?
I do but give you an answer with anon Sir.
You answer sweetly, I have called you three or four times one after another.
Sir, I hope I answered you three or four times one in the neck of another. But if your good worcester∣ship have lent me any more calls, tell me, and Isle re∣pay them as I am a Gentleman.
Leave your tattle, had you come at first I had not spent so much breath in vain.
The truth is Sir, the first time you called, I heard you not, the second I understood you not, the third I knew not whether it were you or no: the fourth I could not tell where you were, and that's the reason I answered so suddenly.
Go sir, run, seek every where, I have lost my purse somewhere.
I go Sir: Go sir, seek, run, I have lost, bring, here's a Dogs life, with a pox, shall I be always used like a water-Spaniel.
Come good Master Register, I wonder you be so late now adays.
My good Lord, I remember that I knew your Grandfather in this your place, and I remember your Grandfathers great Grandfathers, Grandfathers Fathers, Father, yet in those days I never remember that any of them could say, that Register Memory ever broke one minute of his appointment.
Why good Father, why are you so late now adays?
Thus it is, the most customers I remember my self to have, are (as your Lordship knows) Scho∣lars, and now adays the most of them are become Critics, bringing me home such paltry things to lay up for them, that I can hardly find them again.
Jupiter, Jupiter, I had thought these Flies had bit none but my self, Do Critics tickle you in faith?
Very familiarly: for they must know of me forsooth, how every idle word is written in all the musty moth-eaten Manuscripts, kept in all the old Libraries in every City betwixt England and Peru.
Indeed I have noted these times to affect Antiquities more than is requisite.
I remember in the age of Assaracus and Ninus, and about the wars of Thebes, and the siege of Troy, there was few things committed to my charge, but those that were well worthy the preserving, but now every trifle must be wrapped up in the volume of Eternity. A rich pudding-wife, or a Cobbler cannot die but I must immortalise his Name with an Epitaph: A dog cannot peace in a Nobleman's shoe, but it must be sprinkled into the Chronicles, so that I never could remember my Treasure more full, and never emptier of Honourable, and true Heroical actions.
By your leave Memory, you are not alone troubled, Chronologers many of them are so Phone∣tactic, as when they bring a Captain to the Combat, lifting up his revengeful arm to dis-part the head of
his enemy, they'll hold up his arms so long till they have bestowed three or four pages in describing the gold hilts of his threatening Fashion: So that in my Fancy the Reader may well wonder his adversary stabs him not before he strikes; moreover they are become most palpable flatterers, always begging at my gates for Invention.
This is a great fault in a Chronologer to turn Parasite: An absolute History should be in fear of none, neither should he write any thing more then truth for friendship, or less for hate, but keep him∣self equal and constant in all his discourses, but for us, we must be contented, for as our Honours in∣crease, so must the burden of the cares of our Offices urge us to wax heavy.
But not till our backs break, s'lud there was never any so haunted as I am, this day there comes a Sophister to my house, knocks at my door, his errand being asked forsooth his answer was, to bore∣row a fair suit of conceits out of my wardrobe, to apparel, a show he had in hand, and what think you is the plot?
Nay I know not, for I am little acquainted with such toys.
Mean-while he's somewhat acquainted with you, for he's bold to bring your person upon the Stage.
What me? I cannot remember, that I was ever brought upon the Stage before.
Yes you and you, and my self, with all my Fantastical tricks and humours, but I trow I have fitted him with Fooleries, I trust he'll never trouble me again.
O times! O manners! when Boys dare to traduce men in authority, was ever such an attempt heard!
I remember there was For (to say the truth) at my last being at Athens (It is now, let me see, about 1800 years ago) I was at a Comedy of Aristophanes making, (I shall never forget it) The Arch-governour of Athens took me by the hand and placed me, and there I say, I saw Socrates abused most grossly, himself being then a present spectator: I remember he sate full against me, and did not so much as show the least countenance of discontent.
In those days it was lawful, but now the abuse of such liberty is unsufferable.
Think what you will of it, I think it is done, and I think it is acting by this time; hark, hark, what drumming's yonder, Isle lay my life they are come to present the show I spake of.
It may be so; stay we will see what it is.
Fain thy self in great haste.
I warrant you Madam: I doubt it is in vain to run, by this they are all past overtaking.
Is not this Lingo that is in such hast?
Yes, yes, stand still.
I must speak with him.
With whom?
Assure your self they are all at Court ere this.
Run after them, for unless he know it—
Lingo.
O first your Lordship: I beseech you par∣don me; hast and fear, I protest put out mine eyes: I looked so long for you, that I knew not when I had found you.
In my conceit, that's like the man that enqui∣red, who saw his Ass, when himself rid on him.
O my heart beats so, fie, fie, fie, fie.
I am so weary, foe, foe, foe, foe.
I prithee Lingo make an end.
Let me begin first I beseech you, but if you will needs have the end first, thus it is. The Com∣monwealth of Microsme at this instant suffers the pangs of death, it is gasping for breath. Will you have all? it is poysned.
What Apothecary durst be so bold as make such a confection? ha what poison first?
A golden Crown.
I mistake, or else Galen in his Book De sani∣tate tuenda, commends gold as restorative.
Lingo express your self.
Madam if you want breath, let me help you out.
I prithee do, do.
My Lord, the report is, that Mercury com∣ing late into this Country, in this very place, left a Coronet with this inscription, that the best of the five should have it, which the Senses thinking to be∣long unto them—
Challenge each other, and are now in arms, and 't like your Lordship.
I protest it likes not me.
Their battles are not far hence ready ranged.
O monstrous presumption! what shall we do?
My Lord, in your great Grandfathers time, there was I remember such a breach amongst them, therefore my Counsel is, that after his example, by the strength of your authority you convent them before you.
Lingo go presently, command the Senses upon their allegiance to our dread Sovereign Queen Psyche, to dismiss their companies, and personally to appear before me without any pretence of excuse.
I go my Lord.
But hear you Madam, I pray you let your Page tongue walk with us a little, till you return again.
With all my heart.
Hot youths I protest, saw you those warlike preparations?
Lately my Lords, I spied into the Army,
But oh, it is far beyond my reach of wit.
Or strength of utterance to describe their forces.
Go to, speak what thou can.
Upon the right hand of a spacious Hill,
Proud Visus marshalleth a puissant Army,
Three thousand Eagles strong, whose valiant Captain
Is Joves fwift Thunder-bearer, that same Bird,
That hoist up Ganimede from the Trojan plains:
The vant-gard strengthened with a wondrous flight
Of Falcons, Haggards, Hobbies, Terselets,
Lanards and Goshauks, Sparhauks, and Ravenous Birds.
The rereward granted to Anditus charge.
Is stoutly followed with an impetuous herd
Of stiff-neckt Bulls, and many horn-mad stags,
Of the best head the Forest can afford.
I promise you a fearful troop of Soldiers
Right opposite stands Tactus strongly mand,
With three thousand bristled Urchins for his Pikemen;
Four hundred Tortesses for Elephants.
Besides a monstrous troop of ugly spiders,
Within an ambushment he hath comnanded,
Of their own guts to spin a cordage fine,
Whereof to have framed a net (O wondrous work)
That fastened by the Concave of the Moon,
Spreads down it self to the earths circumference.
It is very strange, I cannot remember the like Engine at any time.
Nay more my Lord, the masks are made so strong,
That I my self upon them scale the heavens,
And boldly walt about the middle region,
Where in the province of the Meteors,
I saw the cloudy shops of Hail and Rain,
Garners of Snow, and Christals full of dew,
Rivers of burning Arrows, Dens of Dragons,
Huge beams of flames, and Spears like fire brands,
Where I beheld hot Mars and Mercury,
With Rackets made of Spears, and Balls of Stars,
Playing at Tennis for a Tun of Nectar.
And that vast gaping of the Firmament,
Under the Southern pole is nothing else
But the great hazard of their Tennis Court,
The Zodiac is the line. The shooting Stars,
Which in an eye bright evening seemed to fall,
Are nothing but the Balls they lose at Bandy.
Thus having took my pleasure with those sights,
By the same net I went up, I descend.
Well Sir to what purpose tends this Stratagem?
None know directly, but I think it is
T'intrap the Eagles, when the Battles join.
Who takes Tactus his part?
Under the standard of thrice hardy Tactus,
Thrice valiant Gustus leads his war-like Forces,
An endless multitude of desperate Apes,
Five hundred Marmosets &amp; long-tail'd Monkees:
All trained to the field, and nimble Gunners.
Imagine there's old moving amongst them; Me thinks a handful of Nuts would turn them out of their Soldiers coats,
Ramparts of Pasty-crust and forts of Pies,
Entrenched with dishes full of Custard stuff,
Hath Gustus made; and planted ordinance,
Strange ordinance: Canons of hollow canes,
Whose powder's Rape seed, charged with Turnip shot.
I remember in the Country of Utopia,
They use no other kind of Artillery.
But what's become of Olfactus?
He politically leans to neither part,
But stands betwixt the camps as at receipt:
Having great wine his Pioners to entrench them.
In my foolish imagination Olfactus is very like the Goddess of victory that never takes any part but the Conquerors.
And in the Woods he placed secretly
Two hundred couple of Hounds and hungry Ma∣stiffs:
And ore his head hover at his command
A cloud of Vultures, which over spread the light,
Making a night before the day be done:
But to what end not known but feared of all.
I conjecture he intends to see them fight, and after the battle to feed his Dogs, Hogs and Vul∣tures upon the murdered carcases.
My L. I think the fury of their anger will not be obedient to the Message of Lingo; for otherwise in my conceit they should have been here ere this: with your L. good liking we will at∣tend upon you to see the field for more certainty. It shall be so; Come Master Register lets walk.
Forsooth Oblivio shut the door upon me, I could come no sooner; ha? is he not there? O excel∣lent! Would I were hanged but I looked for a found rap on the pate, and that made me before hand to lift up this excuse for a Buckler. I know he's not at Court, for here's his purse, without which war∣rant there's no coming thither; wherefore now Anamnestes sport thy self a little, while thou art out of the prison of his company. What shall I do? by my troth anatomize his purse in his ab∣sense. Plutus send there be Jewels in it, that I may finely geld it of the stones— The best sure
lies in the bottom—pox out, here's nothing but a company of worm-eaten papers; what's this? Memorandum that Master Prodigo owes me four thousand pounds, and that his lands are in pawn for it: Memorandum that I owe; that he owes? it is well the old slave hath some care of his credit; to whom owes he I trow this? that I owe Anam∣nests? What me? I never lent him any thing; ha, this is good, there's something coming to me more then I looked for. Come on, what is it? Memorandum that I owe Anamnestes—a breaching; I faith Sir I will ease you of that payment, (He rends the bill) Memorandum that when I was a child, Robusto tripped up my heels at foot-ball: what a revengeful dizard's this?
How now?
Nothing but lay you upon the Cushion Sir, how so?
Nothing but lay the Cushion upon you Sir?
What my little Name? by this foot I am sorry I mistook thee.
What my little Men? by this hand it grieves me I took thee so right. But Sir whither with these Cushions?
To lay them here that the Judges may sit softly, least my Lady Lingua's cause go hard with her.
They should have been wrought with gold, these will do nothing: But what makes thy Lady with the Judges?
Pish, know not? she sues for the title of a Sense, as well as the rest that bear the name of the Pentarchy.
Will Common sense and my Master leave their affairs to determine that Controversy?
Then thou hearst nothing.
What should I hear!
All the Senses fell out about a Crown fallen from Heaven, and pitched a field for it; but Vicegerent Common-sense hearing of it, took upon him to umpire the contention, in which re∣guard he hath appointed them (their arms dis∣missed) to appear before him, charging every one to bring as it were in a show their proper objects, that by them he may determine of their several excellencies.
When is all this?
As soon as they can possibly provide,
But can he tell which deserves best by their objects?
No not only; for every sense must de∣scribe his Instrument, that is his house where he performs his daily duty, so that by the Object and the Instrument, my Lord can with great ease discern their place and dignities.
His Lorship's very wise.
Thou shalt hear all anon, fine Master
Fantastic, and thy Master will be here shortly. But how is it my little Rogue? me thinks thou look lean upon it?
Alas, how should I do otherwise that lie all night with such a Rawboned Skeleton as Me∣mori, and run all day on his Errands! The Churle's grown so old and forgetful, that every hour he's calling Anamnestes remembrance, where art Anamnestes? Then presently something's loft, poor I must run for it; and these words, run Boy, Come Sir quick, quick, quick, are as familiar with him as the Cough, never out on's mouth.
Alack, alack poor Rogue, I see my for∣tunes are better. My Lady loves me exceedingly; she's always kissing me, so that (I tell the Name) Mendacios never from betwixt her lips.
Nor out of Memories mouth; but in a worse sort, always exercising my stumps, and which is more, when he favours best, then I am in the worst taking.
How so?
Thus, when we are friends, then must I come and be dandled upon his Palsie-quaking knees, and he'll tell me a long story of his ac∣quaintance with King Priamus and his family∣rity with Nestor, and how he plaid at blow-point with Jupiter when he was in his side-coats, and how he went to look Birds-nests with Athon, and where he was at Deucalious stood, and twenty such old wives tales.
I wonder he being so old can talk so much.
Nature thou know (knowing what an unruly Engine the tongue is) hath set teeth round about for watchmen; Now Sir my Master's old age hath caught out all his teeth, and that's the cause it runs so much it liberty.
Philosophical!
O but therer's one thing stings me to the very heart, to see an ugly, foul, idle, fat, dusty •log-head, called Oblivio preferred before me; dost know him?
Who I? I▪ But care not for his acquain∣tance, hang him blockhead, I could never abide him. Thou Remembrance art the only friend that the arms of my friendship shall embrace. Thou hast heard Opo•tet mends•m esse memorem. But what of Oblivio?
The very naming of him hath made me forget my self. O, O, O, O, that Rascal is so made of everywhere.
Who Oblivio?
I, for our Courtiers hug him continually in their ungrateful bosoms, and your smooth-belly, fat-backt, barrel-pauncht, tun-gutted drones are never without him; as for Memory he's a false-hearted fellow, he always deceives them; they respect not him except it be to play a game at Chess, Primero, Saun•, Maw, or such like.
I cannot think such fellows have to do
with Oblivio since they never got any thing to forget.
Again, these prodigal swaggerers that are so much bound to their Creditors, if they have but one Cross about them they'll spend it in wine upon Oblivio.
To what purpose I prithee?
Only in hope he'll wash them in the Lethe of their cares.
Why then no man cares for thee!
Yes, a company of studious paper-worms and lean Scholars, and niggardly scraping Usu∣rears, and a troop of heart-eating envious persons, and those cancker-stomackt spiteful creatures, that furnish up common place-books with other men's faults. The time hath been in those golden days, when Saturn reigned, that if a man re∣ceived a benefit of another, I was presently sent for to put him in mind of it; but now in these Iron afternoons, save your friends life, and Oblivio will be more familiar with him then you.
Fantastic not at Court? is it possible? it is the strangest accident that ever was heard off; I had thought the Ladies and Gallants would never lie without him.
Hist, hist, Mendacio, I prithee observe Heu∣resis; it seems he cannot find his Master that's able to find out all things: and art thou now at a fault, can not find out thine own Master? no? Isle try one more way. O yes.
What a Proclamation for him?
I, I, his nimble head is always full of pro∣clamations.
O yes.
But doth he cry him in the wood?
O good Sir, and good reason, for every beast hath Fantasy at his pleasure.
O yes: If any man can tell any tidings of a spruce, neat, apish, nimble, fine, foolish, absurd, humorous, conceited, Fantastic Gallant, with hollow eyes, sharp look, answered complexion, meager face, wearing as many toys in his apparel, as fooleries in his looks and gesture, let him come forth and certify me thereof, and he shall have for his reward—
I can tell you where he is, what shall he have?
A box of the ear sir, 
How now invention, are you so quick fingered? in faith there's your principle sir,  and here's the interest ready in my hand  Yea? have you found out scratching? now I remember me.
Do you bite you Rascal?
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, here's the lively picture of this axiom, A quick Invention and a good Me∣mori
can never agree. Fie, fie, fie Heuresis, beat him when he's down?
Prithee lets alone, proud Jack-an-Apes, Isle▪
What will you do?
Untrusse thy points and whip thee, thou paltry —Let me go Mendacio if thou love me, shall I put up the—
Come, come, come, you shall fight no more in good faith: Heuresis; your Master will catch you anon
My Master, where is he?
Isle bring you to him, come away.
Anamnestes, I scorn that thou should think I go away for fear of any thing thou can do unto me; here's my hand as soon as thou can pick the least occasion, put up thy finger, I am for thee.
When thou dare Heuresis, when thou dare, Isle be as ready as thy self at any time.
This Heuresis, this invention, is the proudest Jack-an-Apes, the pertest self-conceited Boy that ever breathed; because forsooth some odd Poet, or some such Phantastique fellows make much on him, there's no no with him; the vile dandi-prat will ore-look the proudest of his ac∣quaintance: but well I remember me, I learnt a trick t'other day, to bring a Boy ore the thigh finely; if he come, in faith Isle tickle him with it.
As I am a Rascal Name, they are all coming,
I see Master Register trudging hither, as fast as his three feet will carry up his four Ages.
Ah you leaden-heel'd Rascal.
Here it is Sir, I have it, I have it.
Is this all the haste you make?
An't like your worship, your Clog-head Oblivio went before me, and foiled the trail of your foot-steps, that I could hardly undertake the quest of your purse forsooth.
You might have been here long ere this: Come hither sir, come hither, what must you go round about? goodly, goodly, you are full of circumstances.
In truth Sir, I was here before, and missing you, went back into the City, sought you in every Ale-house, Inn, Tavern, Dicing-house, Tennis∣court, Stews, and such like places, likely to find your worship in.
Ha? villain, am I a man likely to be found in such places, ha?
No, no Sir; Sir, but I was told by my Lady Lingua's Page that your Worship was seek∣ing me, therefore I enquired for you in those places where I knew you would ask for me, and it please your worship.
I remember another quarrel sir, but well, well, I have no leisure.
Lingo, the Senses by our appointment anon are to present their objects before us; see∣ing therefore they be not in readiness, we license you in the mean while, either in your own per∣son, or by your Advocate, to speak what you can for your self.
My Lord, if I should bring before your ho∣nor all my friends ready to importune you in my behalf, I should have so many Rhetoricians, Logitians, Lawyers, and which is more, so many women to attend me, that this Grove would hardly contain the company; wherefore to avoid the tediousness, I will lay the whole cause upon the tip of mine own tongue.
Be as brief as the necessity of our short time requires.
My Lord, though the Imbecillitas of my feeble sex, might draw me back from this Tribu∣nal, with the habenis to wit Timoris, and the Ca∣tenis Pudoris; notwithstanding being so fairly led on with the gracious 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 of your justissimae 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, Especially so aspremente spurd' con'gli sproni di necessity mia pungent, I Will without the help of Orators, commit the totom salutem of my
action to the Volutabilitati 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 which (avecuostre bonne playseur) I will finish with more then Laconicâ brevitate.
Whats this? here's a Gallemaufry of speech indeed.
I remember about the year 1602. many used this skew kind of language. Which in my opinion is not much unlike the man Platony the the Son of Lagus, King of Egypt, brought for a spectacle half white half black.
I am persuaded these same language-makers have the very quality of cold in their wit, that freezes all Heterogeneall languages together, congealing English Tynne, Grecian Gold, To∣mane Latin all In a lump.
Or rather in my imagination like you Fan∣tactical Gulls Apparel, wearing a Spanish Felt, a French Doblet, a Granado Stocking, a Dutch Slop, an Italian Cloak, with a Welch frise Jerkin.
Well, leave your toying, we cannot pluck the least feather from the soft wing of time. Therefore Lingo go on, but in a more formal manner; you know an ingenious Oratiō must nei∣there swell above the Banks with insolent words, nor creep too shallow in the ford, with vulgar terms, but run equally, smooth, and cheerful, through the clean current of a pure style.
My Lord, this one thing is sufficient to con∣firm my worth to be equal or better then the sen∣ses, whose best operations are nothing till I polish
them with perfection; for their knowledge is only of things present, quickly sublimed with the deaf file of time, whereas the tongue is able to re∣count things past, and often pronounce things to come, by this means re-edifying such Excellencies as Time and Age do easily depopulate.
But what profitable service do you undertake for our dread Queen Psyche?
O how I am ravished to think how infinite∣lie she hath graced me with her most acceptable service. But above all (which you Master Register may well remember) when her Highness taking my mouth for her instrument, with the Bow of my tongue struck so heavenly a touch upon my teeth, that she charmed the very Tigers asleep, the listening Bears and Lions to couch at her feet, while the Hills leaped, and the Woods danced to the sweet harmony of her most Angelical accents.
I remember it very well. Orpheus played upon the Harp, while she sang, about some four years after the contention betwixt Apollo and Pan, and a little before the excoriation of Marsyas.
By the same token the River Alpheus, at that time pursuing his beloved Arethusa, discha∣nel'd himself of his former course to be partaker of their admirable confort, and the music being ended, thrust himself head long into earth, the next way to follow his amorous Chase; if you go to Arcadia, you shall see his coming up again.
Forward Lingo with your reason.
How oft hath her Excellence imployded me as Ambassador in her most urgent affairs to foreign King and Emperors! I may say to the Gods themselves! How many bloodless Battles have my persuasions attained, when the senses forces have been vanquished. How many Rebels have I reclaimed when her sacred authority was little regarded? her Laws (without exprobation be it spoken) had been altogether unpublished, her will unperformed, her illustrious deeds un∣renowned, had not the silver sound of my trumpet filled the whole circuit of the universe with her deserved fame. Her Cities would dissolve, traffic would decay, friendships be broken, were not my speech the knot. Mercury and Mastique, to bind, defend, and glow them together. What should I say more? I can never speak enough of the un∣speakable praise of speech, wherein I can find no other imperfection at all, but that the most ex∣quisite power and excellence of speech cannot sufficiently express the exquisite power and ex∣cellency of speaking.
Lingo, your service and dignity we confess to be great; nevertheless these reasons prove you not to have the nature of a sense.
By your Lordships favour, I can soon prove that a sense is a faculty, by which our Queen sit∣ting in her privy Chamber hath intelligence of exterior oecurrents. That I am of this nature, I prove thus. The object which I challenge is—
Stay, stay my Lord, defer I beseech, defer the Judgement.
Who's this that boldly interrupts us thus! hum.
My name is Appetitus, Common servant to the Pentarchy of the senses, who understanding that your honour was handling this action of Lingua's, sent me hither thus hastily, most humbly requesting the Bench to consider these Articles they allege against her, before you proceed to judgement.
Hum, here's good stuff, Master Re∣gister read them: Appetitu•, you may depart, and bid your Mistress make convenient speed.
At your Lordships pleasure.
I Remember that I forgot my spectacles, I left them in the 349. page of Hall's Chronicles, where he tells a great wonder of a multitude of Mice which had almost destroyed the Country, but that there resorted a great mighty flight of Owls, that destroyed them: Anamnestes read these Articles distinctly.
1. Are. Imprimis we accuse Lingo of high treason and sacrilege against the most ho∣nourable Common-wealth of letters: for under pretence of profiting the people with translate∣once, she hath most vilely prostituted the hard mist∣ries of unknown Languages to the profane ears of the vulgar.
This is as much as to make a new Hell in the upper world; for in Hell, they say, Alexan∣der is no better then a Cobbler; and now by these translations every Cobbler is as familiar with A∣lexander as he that wrote his life.
2. art. Item that she hath wrongfully im∣prisoned a Lady called Veritas.
3. art. Item that she's a witch, and exercises her tongue in exorcisms.
4. art. Item that she's a common whore, and lets everyone lie with her.
5. art. Item that she rails on men in Ado∣rity, depraving their Honours with bitter Jests and taunts, and that she's a Backbiter setting strife betwixt bosom friends.
6. art. Item that she lends Wives weapons to fight against their Husbands.
7. art. Item that she maintains a train of prating pettifoggers, prouling Sumners, smooth tongued Bawds, artless Empericks, hungry Parasites, News-carriers, Janglers, and such like idle Company∣once, that delude the Commonalty.
8. art. Item that she made Rhetoric wanton, Logic to babble, Astronomy to lye.
9. art. Item that she is an incontinent Tel-tale.
10. art. Item (which is the last and worst) that she's a Woman in every respect, and for these causes not to be admitted to the dignity of a Sense. That these Articles be true we pawn our
honours, and subscribe our names.
1. Visus. 2. Auditus. 3. Gustus. 4. Olfactus. 5. Tactus.
Lingo, these be shrewd allegations, and as I think unanswerable. I will defer the judgement of your cause till I have finished the contention of the Senses.
Your Lordships must be obeyed; but as for them most ungrateful, and perfidious wretches.
Good words become you better; you may depart if you will, till we send for you. A∣namnestes, run, remember Visus, it is time he were ready.
I go,  he stays here expecting your Lordships pleasure.
Lo here the object that delights the sight,
The goodliest objects that mans heart can wish.
For all things that the Orb first moveable
Wraps in the circuit of his large-stretcht arms,
Are subject to the power of Visus eyes.
That you may know what profit light doth bring,
Note Lumens words that speaks next following,
Light the fair Grand-child to the glo∣rios Sun,
Opening the casements of the Rosie morn,
Makes the abashed Heavens soon to shun
The ugly darkness it embraced beforne,
And at his first appearance puts to flight,
The utmost relics of the Hell-born night.
This heavenly shield soon as it is displayed,
Dismays the vices that abhor the light;
To wanderers by Sea and Land gives aid;
Conquers display, recomforteth affright,
Rowseth dull Idleness, and starts soft sleep.
And all the world to daily labour keeps;
This a true Looking-glasse impartial,
Where Beauties self, her self doth beautify
With native hue, not artificial,
Discovering falsehood, opening verity;
The days bright eye, colours distinction,
Just judge of measure and proportion.
The only means by which each mortal eye
Sends messengers to the wide firmament,
That to the longing soul brings presently
High contemplation and deep wonderment.
By which aspirement she her wings displays,
And her self thither whence she came upraised.
What blew thing's that that's dappled so with Stars?
He represents the Heaven.
In my conceit it were pretty if he thundered when he speaks.
Then none could understand him.
Tropic colours, the Equinoctial,
The Zodiac poles, and line Ecliptical,
The Needs, Zenith, and Anomalies,
The Azimeth and Ephemerids,
Stars, Orbs and Planets, with their motions,
The Oriental Regradations,
Excentricks, Epicycles, and—and—and—
How now Visus, is your heaven at a stay?
Or is it his Motus trepidations that makes him stammer?
I pray you Memory set him agate again.
I remember when Jupiter made Amphi∣trio Cuckold, and lay with his wife Alemena, Coelum was in this taking for three days space, and stood still just like him at a non plus.
Leave jesting, you'll put the fresh Actor out of countenance.
Excentricks, Epicycles, and Aspects,
In Sextile, Trine, and Quadrate which effects
Wonders on earth: also the Oblique part
Of signs that make the day both long and short,
The Constellations rising, Cosmical,
Setting of Stars, Chronic, and Heliacal,
In the Orizon or Meridional,
And all the skill in deep Astronomy,
Is to the soul derived by the eye.
Ʋisus, you have made Coelum a heavenly speech, past earthly capacity, it had been as good for him he had thundered. But I pray you, who taught him to speak and use no action; me thinks it had been excellent to have turned round about in his speech.
He hath so many motions he knows not which to begin withal.
Nay rather it seems hoe's of Copernicus opinion, and that makes him stand still.
Lets hear what Terra can say—just nothing.
And't like your Lordship, it were an inde∣corum Terra should speak.
You are deceived, for I remember when Phaeton ruled the Sun, I shall never forget him, he was a very pretty youth, the earth opened her mouth wide, and spoke a very good speech to Jupiter.
By the same token Nilus hid his head then, he could never find it since.
You know Memory, that was an extreme hot day, &amp; it is likely Terra sweat much, and so took cold presently after, that ever since she hath lost her voice.
A Cauton Ermines added to the field, is a sure sign the man that bore these Arms, was to his Prince as a defensive shield, saving him from the force of present Arms.
I know this fellow of old, it is a Herald; many a Centaur, Chimera, Barnacle, Crocodile, Hippotame, &amp; such like toys, hath he stolen out of the shop of my Invention, to shape new coats for his upstart Gentlemen. Either Africa must breed more monsters, or you make fewer Gentlemen M. Herald; for you have spent all my devises al∣ready; but since you are here, let me ask you a question, in your own profession; how comes it to pass that the victorious Arms of England, quartred with the conquered Coat of France, are not placed on the dexter side, but give the flower∣de luce the better hand?
Because that the three Lyons are one coat made of two French Duke-domes, Normandy
and Aquitaine: but I pray you Visus, what lay is that that follows him?
It is Color an object of mine, subject to his commandment.
Why speaks he not?
He is so bashful, he dares not speak for blushing: What thing is that? tel me without delay.
That's nothing of it self, yet every way
As like a Man, as a thing like may be,
And yet so unlike, as clean contrary;
For in one point it every way doth miss;
The right side of it a mans left side is.
Tic lighter then a Feather, and withal
It fills no place, nor room it is so small.
How now Visus, have you brought a boy with a riddle to pose us all?
Pose us all? and I here? that were a jest indeed: My Lord, if he have a Sphinx, I have an Oedipus, assure your self, lets hear it once again.
What thing is that Sir?
This such a knotty Enigma? why my Lord? I think it is a Woman; for first a Woman is nothing of her self, and again she is likest a man of any thing.
But wherein is she unlike?
In every thing, in peevishness, in folly. —'st Boy.
In Pride, Deceit, Prating, Lying,
Cogging, Coins, Spite, Hate, Sir.
And in many more such vices: Now he may well say, the left side a mans right side is; for a cross wife, is always contrary to her hus∣band, ever contradicting what he wishes for, like to the verse in Marshall, Velle tuum.
Velle tuum nolo, Dindime, nolle volo.
Lighter then a feather; doth any man make question of that?
They need not; for I remember I saw a Cardinal weigh them once, and the Woman was found 3. grains lighter.
Tic strange; for I have seen Gen∣tlewomen wear Feathers oftentimes; can they carry heavier things then themselves?
O sir, I remember tic their only de∣light to do so.
But how apply you the last verse, it fills no place Sir?
By my faith, that spoils all the former; for these fardingalls take up all the room now a days; tic not a woman questionless; shall I be put down with a Riddle firrah? Heuresis search the corners of your conceit, and find it me quickly.
Hay 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, I have it, tic a mans face in a Looking Glass.
My Lord, tic so indeed. Sirrah lets see it, for do you see my right eye here?
What of your eye?
O Lord, sir, this kind of frown is ex∣cellent, especially when tic sweetened with such a pleasing smile.
Fantastic.
O Sir, my left eye is my right in the glass do you see? by these lips my garters hang so neatly, my Gloves and shoes become my hands and feet so well: Heuresis, tie my shoes strings with a new knot;—this point was scarce well trust.—so, tic excellent.—Looking-glasses were a passing invention, I protest the fittest books for Ladies to study on—
Take heed that you fall not in love with your self Fantastic, as I remember: A∣namnestes, who wast that died of the looking disease?
Forsooth Narcissus, by the same token he was turned to a Daffodil, and as he died for love of himself, so if you remember there was an old ill-favoured, precious-nosed, babber-lipt, beetle-browed, bleer-eyd, slouch-eard slave that looking himself by chance in a Glass, died for pure hate.
By the lip of my— I could live and die with this face.
Fie fie Fantastic, so effeminate, for shame leave off. Visus, your objects I must needs say are admirable if the house and instru∣meant be answerable, lets hear therefore in brief your description —
Under the fore-head of mount Cephalon,
That over-peers the coast of Microcosm,
All in the shadow of two pleasant groves,
Stand my two mansion houses, both as round,
As the clear heavens, both twins as like each other;
As star to star, which by the vulgar sort,
For their resplendent composition,
Are named the bright eyes of mount Cephalon:
With four fair rooms those lodgings are con∣trivet.
Four goodly rooms in form most spherical,
Closing each other like the heavenly orbs:
The first whereof, of Natures substance wrought,
As a strange moat the other to defend,
Is trained moveable by Art divine,
Stirring the whole compacture of the rest;
The second chamber is most curiously
Composed of burnished, and transparent horn.
That's a matter of nothing, I have known many have such bed-chambers.
It may be so, for I remember being once in the towns Library, I read such a thing, in their great book of monuments called Cornu∣copy, or rather their copia-Cornu.
The third's a lesser room of purest glass;
The ford's smallest, but passes all the former
In worth of matter, built most sumptuously,
With walls transparent of pure Crystalline.
This the souls mirror and the bodies guide,
Loves Cabinet, bright beacons of the Realm,
Casements of light, quiver of Cupids shafts:
Wherein I sit and immediately receive
The species of things corporeal,
Keeping continual watch and sentinel:
Least foreign hurt invade our Microcosm,
And warning give, (if pleasant things approach)
To entertain them from this costly room;
Leads my Lord an entry to your house;
Through which I hourly to your self convey
Matters of wisdom by experience bred:
Arts first invention, pleasant vision,
Deep contemplation, that attires the soul,
In gorgeous robes of flowering literature:
Then if that Visus have deserved best,
Let his victorious brow, with Crown be blessed.
Anamnestes, see who's to come next.
Presently my Lord.
Visus, I wonder that amongst all your objects, you presented us not with Platoes Idea, or the sight of Ninivie, Babylon, London, or some Stir∣bridge fair-monsters; they would have done pas∣sing well, those motions in my imagination are very delightful.
I was loath to trouble your honours with such toys, neither could I provide them in so short a time.
We will consider your worth; mean while we dismiss you.
Hark, hark, hark, hark, peace, peace, O peace; O sweet, admirable, Swanlike hey∣venly! hark, O most mellisluous strain; O what a pleasant close was there; O full, most delicate!
How now Fantastic, is Auditus mad?
Let him alone, his musical head is al∣ways full of od crotchets.
Did you mark the dainty driving of the last point? an excellent maintaining of the song by the choice timpan of mine ear! I never heard a better; hist, st, st; hark, why there's a ca∣dence able to ravish the dullest Stoic.
I know not what to think on him.
There how sweetly the pliane-song was dissolved into descant, and how easily they came off with the last rest! hark, hark, the bitter sweetest Acromatick.
Auditus.
Thanks good Apollo for this timely grace; never could thou in fitter: O more then most musical harmony; O most admirable consort! have you no ears? do you not hear this music?
It may be good, but in my opinion they rest too long in the beginning.
Are you then deaf? do you not yet perceive the wondrous sound the heavenly orbs do make with their continual motion! hark, hark, O honey sweet!
What tune do they play?
Why such a tune as never was, nor never shall be heard; mark now, now mark, now, now.
List, list, list.
Hark, O sweet, sweet, sweet!
List, how my heart envies my happy ears! hisht, by the gold strung Harp of Apollo, I hear the celestial music of the spears, as plainly as ever Pythagoras did; O most excellent deep∣son, good, good, good! It plays Fortune my so eas distinctly as may be.
As the fool thinks, so the Bell clink∣eth; I protest I hear no more then a post.
What, the Lavalta hay? nay, if the heavens fiddle, Fancy must needs dance.
Prithee sit still, thou must dance no∣thing but the passing measures. Memory, do you hear this harmony of the spears?
Not now my Lord, but I remember about some 4000. years ago, when the sky was first made, we heard very perfectly.
By the same token the first tune the Ply∣nets played, I remember Venus the Treble ran sweet division upon Saturn the Base: The first tune they played was Sellengers round, in memory whereof ever since it hath been called the be∣ginning of the world.
How comes it we cannot hear it now?
Our ears are so well acquainted with the sound, that we never mark it. As I remember, the Egyptian Catadupes never heard the roaring of the fall of Nilus, because the noise was so fami∣liar unto them.
Have you no other objects to judge by then these, Auditus?
This is the rarest and most exquisite,
Most spherical, divine, angelical;
But since your duller ears cannot perceive it,
May it please your Lordship to withdraw yourself
Unto this neighbouring Grove, there shall you see
How the sweet Treble of the chirping birds,
And the soft stirring of the moved leaves,
Running delightful descant to the sound
Of the base murmuring of the bubbling brook,
Becomes a consort of good instruments;
While twenty babbling echoes round about,
Out of the stony concave of their mouth,
Restore the vanished music of each close,
And fill your ears full of redoubled pleasure.
I will walk with you very willingly, for I grow weary of sitting. Come Master Re∣gister and Master Fantastic.
Prithee Name be persuaded; is it not better go to a feast then stay here for a fray?
A feast? dost think Auditus will make the Judges a feast?
Faith I, why should he carry them to his house else?
Why sir, to hear a set or two of songs; slid his banquets are nothing but fish, all soll, soll, soll? Isle teach thee wit boy, never go me to a Musicians house for Junkets, unless thy stomach lies in thine ears; for there is nothing but com∣mending this songs delicate air, that motects dainty air; this sonnets sweet air, that madrigals melting air; this dirges mournful air, this Church-air, that Chamber-air; French air, English air, Italian air; why Lad, they be pure Chameleons, they feed only upon the air.
Chameleons? Isle be sworn, some of your Fiddlers be rather Camels, for by their good wills they will never leave eating.
True, and good reason, for they do no∣thing all the day but stretch and grate their small guts: But oh, yonders the Ape Heuresis: let me go I prithee.
Nay, good now stay a little, let's see his humour.
I see no reason to the contrary; for we see the quintessence of Wine will convert Water into Wine; why therefore should not the Elixir of gold turn lead into pure gold?
Ha, ha, ha, ha, he is turned Chemic sir, it seems so by his talk.
But how shall I devise to blow the fire of Beech-coals with a continual and equal blast? ha? I will have my bellows driven with a wheel, which wheel shall be a self mover.
Here's old turning, these Chymicks seeking to turn lead into gold, turn away all their own Silver.
And my wheel shall be Geometrically proportioned into seven or nine concave in∣circled arms, wherein I will put equal poises; hai, hai, hai, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, I have it, I have it, I have it,
Heuresis?
But what's best to contain the Quick-silver? ha?
Do you remember your promise Heuresis?
It must not be Iron, for Quick-silver is the tyrant of metals, and will soon fret it.
Heuresis? Heuresis?
Nor Brass, nor Copper, nor Mastlin, nor Mineral, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, I have it, I have it, it must be
You have indeed sir, and thus much more then you looked for 
You shall not fight, but if you will al∣ways disagree, let us have words and no blows; Houresis, what reason have you to fall out with him?
Because he is always abusing me, and takes the upper hand of me everywhere.
And why not sir? I am thy better in any place.
Have I been the Author of the seven lib∣ral Sciences, and consequently of all learning? have I been the patron of all Mechanical devises, to be thy inferior? I tell thee Anamnestes, thou hast not so much as a point but thou art beholding to me for it.
Good, good, but what had your inven∣tion been, but for my remembrance? I can prove that thou belly-sprung invention art the most improfitable member in the world; for ever since thou were born thou hast been a bloody murthe∣rer, and thus I prove it; In the quiet years of Sa∣turn (I remember Jupiter was then but in his swath-bands) thou rentest the bowels of the earth, and broughtst Gold to light, whose beauty (like Helen) set all the world by the ears; then upon that thou fondest out Iron, and put weapons in their hands; and now in the last populous age, thou taught a scab-shin Friar the hellish invention of powder and Guns.
Call it hellish? thou least, it is the most admirablest invention of all others; for whereas
others imitate nature, this excels nature her self.
True, for a Cannon will kill as many at one shot, as Thunder doth commonly at twenty.
Therefore more murdering art thou then the light bolt.
But to show the strength of my conceit, I have found out a means to withstand the stroke of the most violent culvering: Mendacio, thou saw it when I demonstrated invention.
What some wool-packs, or mudwalls? or such like?
Mendacio, I prithee tell it him, for I love not to be a trumpeter of mine own praises.
I must needs confess this devise to pass all that ever I heard or saw; and thus it was. First, he takes a Falcon and charges it without all deceits, with dry powder well canphred; then did he put in a single bullet, and a great quantity of drop-shot, both round and lachrimal; this done he sets me a boy sixty paces off, just point blank over against the mouth of the piece; now in the very midst of the direct line he fastens a post, upon which he hangs me in a cord, a Siderite of Herculean stone.
Well, well, I know it well; it was found out in Ida, in the year of the world—by one Magnes, whose name it retains, though vulgarly they call it the Adamant.
When he had hanged this Adamant in a
cord, he comes back and gives fire to the touch-hole, now the powder consumed to avoid vacuum.
Which is intolerable in nature; for first shall the whole Machine of the World, Heaven, Earth, Sea and Air, return to the misshapen house of Chaos, then the least vacuum be found in the universe.
The bullet and drop-shot most impetu∣ously from the fiery throat of the Culvering (but oh strange) no sooner came they near the Ada∣mant in the cord, but they were all arrested by the Sergeant of Nature, and hovered in the Air round about it, till they had lost the force of their mo∣tion, clasping themselves close to the stone in most lovely manner, and not any one flew to in danger the mark; so much did they remember their duty to Nature, that they forgot the errand they were sent of.
This is a very artificial lye.
Name, believe it, for I saw it; and which is more, I have practised this devise often: Once when I had a quarrel with one of my Lady Veritas naked knaves, and had pointed him the field, I conveyed into the heart of my Buckler an Ada∣mant, and when we met I drew all the foins of his Rapier whether soever he intended them, or howsoever I guided mine arm, pointed still to the midst of my Buckler, so that by this means I hurt the Knave mortally, and my self came away un∣touched, to the wonder of all the beholders.
Sir you speak Metaphorically, because thy wit Mendacio always draws men's objections to thy fore-thought excuses.
Anamnestes, it is true, and I have an addi∣tion to this, which is to make the bullet shot from the enemy, to return immediately upon the Gunner; but let all this pass, and say the worst thou can against me.
I say Guns were found out for the quick dispatch of mortality; and when thou saw men grow wise, and beget so fair a child as Peace, of so foul and deformed a mother as War, least there should be no murder, thou devisedst poison.
Nay, fie Name, urge him not too far.
And last and worst, thou soundst out cookery, that kills more then weapons, guns, wars or poisons, and would destroy all, but that thou inventedst Physic, that helps to make away some.
But firra, besides all this, I devised Pillo∣ries for such forging villains as thy self.
Call me villain?
You shall not fight as long as I am here; give over I say.
Mendacio, you offer me great wrong to hold me, in good faith I shall fall out with you.
Away, away, away, you are Invention, are you not?
Yes Sir, what then?
And you Remembrance?
Well sir, well.
Then I will be Judicium, the modera∣tor betwixt you, and make you both friends; come, come, shake hands, shake hands.
Well, well, if you will needs have it so;
I am in some sort content.
Why this is as it should be, when Men∣dacio hath Invention on the one hand, and Re∣membrance on the other, as he will be sure never to be found with Truth in his mouth, so he scorns to be taken in a lye; hai, hai, hai, my fine wigs whist?
Whist.
Whist.
They had some reason that held the soul a harmony, for it is greatly delighted with musique; how fast we were tied by the ears to the consort of voices powder; but all is but a little pleasure, what profitable objects hath he?
Your ears will teach you presently, for now he is coming, that fellow in the baize me thinks I should have known him; ô tic Comaedus, tic so, but he is become now a days something humorous, and too too, Satirical, up and down' like his great grand-father Aristophanes.
These two my Lord, Comaedus &amp; Tragedus,
My fellows both, both, twins, but so unlike,
As birth to death, wedding to funeral:
For this that rears himself in buskins quaint,
Is pleasant at the first, proud in the midst,
Stately in all, and bitter death at end.
That in the pumps doth frown at first acquain∣tance,
Trouble the midst, but in the end concludes,
Closing up all with a sweet catastrophe?
This grave and sad disdain with brinish tears,
That light and quick with wrinkled laughter painted;
This deals with Nobles, Kings, and Emperors:
Full of great fears, great hopes, great enterprises;
This other trades with men of mean condition;
His projects small, small hopes and dangers little▪
This gorgeous embroidered with rich sentences:
That fair and purfled round with merriments:
Both vice detect, and virtue beautify,
By being deaths mirror, and lifes looking-glass.
Salutem jam primum a principio propiliam, Mihi atque vobis spectators nuntio.
Pish, pish, this is a speech with no action, lets hear TERENCE, Quid igitur faciam, &amp;c.
Quid igitur faciam? non eam no nuns quidem cum accusor ultro?
Phy, phy, phy, no more action, lend me your bays, do it thus, Quid igitur, &amp;c.
I should judge this action Fantastic, most absurd, unless we should come to a Com∣mody, as Gentlewomen to the Commencement, only to see men speak.
In my imagination it's excellent, for in this kind the hand (you know) is harbinger to the tongue, and provides the words a lodging in the ears of the Auditors.
Auditus, it is now time you make us acquainted with the quality of the house you keep in, for our better help in judgement.
Upon the sides of fair mount Cephalon,
Have I two houses passing humane skill;
Of finest matter by dame nature wrought,
Whose learned singers have adorned the same
With gorgeous porches of so strange a form,
That they command the passengers to stay;
The doors whereof in hospitality,
Nor day, nor night are shut, but open wide,
Gently invite all comers; whereupon
They are named the open ears of Cephalon.
But least some bolder sound should boldly rush,
And break the nice composture of the work,
The skilful builder wisely hath inrang'd
An entry from each port with curious twins,
And crooked Meanders, like the labyrinth
That Dedalus framed to enclose the Minotaur;
At end whereof is placed a costly portal,
Resembling much the figure of a drum,
Granting slow entrance to a private closet;
Where daily with a Mallet in my hand,
I set and frame all words and sounds that come,
Upon an Anvil, and so make them fit
For the perewinckling poor; that winding leads
From my close chamber to your Lordships Cell.
Thither do I chief Justice of all accents,
Psyches next porter, Microcosms front,
Learnings rich treasure, bring discipline,
Reasons discourse, knowledge of foreign states,
Loud fame of great Heroes virtuous deeds,
The marrow of grave speeches, and the flowers
Of quickest Wits, neat Jests, and pure Conceits,
And often times to ease the heavy burden
Of government your Lordships shoulders bear,
I thither do conduce the pleasing Nuptials
Of sweetest instruments with heavenly noise;
If then Auditus have deserved the best,
Let him be dignified before the rest.
Auditus, I am almost a Sceptic in this matter, scarce knowing which way the bal∣lance of the cause will decline; when I have heard the rest, I will dispatch judgement; mean while you may depart.
Your only way to make a good po∣mander, is this, take an ounce of the purest garden mould, cleansed and steeped seven days in change of motherless rose Water, then take the best La∣danum, Benioine, both Storaxes, Ambergreece,
and Civet, and musk, incorporate them together, and work them into what form you please; this if your breath be not too valiant, will make you smell as sweet as my Ladies dog.
This Boy it should seem represent Odor, he is so perfect a perfumer.
I do my Lord, and have at my com∣mand,
The smell of flowers and Odoriferous drugs,
Of ointments sweet, and excellent perfumes,
And Court-like waters, which if once you smell,
You in your heart will wish as I suppose,
That all your Body were transformed to Nose.
Olfactus of all the Senses, your objects have the worst luck, they are always jarring with their contraries; for none can wear Civet, but they are suspected of a proper bad sent: where the Proverb springs, He smells best, that doth of nothing smell.
Foh, foh, what a smell is here? is this one of your delightful objects?
It is your only sent in request Sir.
What fiery fellow is that, which smokes so much in the mouth?
It is the great and puissant god of To∣basso
Ladoch guevarroh pusuer shelvar• baggon, Olfia di quanon, Indi cortilo uraggon.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, this in my opinion is the tongue of the Antipodes.
No I remember it very well, it was the language the Arcadians spake, that lived long be∣fore the Moon.
What signifies it Olfactus?
This is the mighty Emperor Tobacco, King of Trinidado, that in being conquered, conquered all Europe, in making them pay tri∣bute for their smoke.
Erfronge inglues condo hifinge,
Develin floscoth ma pu cocthinge.
Expeller of Catarhes, banisher of all a∣gues, your guts only salve for the green wounds of a non-plus.
Al vuleam vercu, I parda pore si de gre∣tam call famala
Mara, che Bauho respartera, quirara?
Son to the god Vulcun, and Tellus, kin to the father of Mirth, called Bacebus?
Viscard•••k, pillostuphe, par•ano tenor o∣magar,
Page dagon stollif••fe, car•ciba•o scribus.
Genius of all Swaggerers, grossest enemy to Physicians, sweet ointment for sour teeth, firm knot of good fellowship, Adamant of Company, swift wind to spread the wings of Time, hated of none but those that know him not, and of so great deserts, that who so is acquainted with him, can hardly forsake him.
It seems these last words were very sign∣ficant, I promise you a god of great denomina∣tion, he may be my Lord Traps for his large Titles.
But forward Olfactus, as they have done before you, with your description.
Just in the midst of Cephalons round face
As'twere a frontispiece unto the hill,
Olfactus lodging built in figure long,
Doubly dis-parted with two precious vaults,
The roots whereof most richly are enclosed
With Orient Pearls, and sparkling Diamonds:
Beset at the end with Emeralds and Turchois,
And Rubies red and flaming Chrysolits,
At upper end whereof in costly manner,
I lay my head between two spungeous pillows,
Like fair Atones twixt the paps of Venus,
Where I conducting in and out the wind,
Daily examine all the air inspired.
By my pure searching, if it be pure,
And fit to serve the Lungs with lively breath:
Hence do I likewise minister perfume
Unto the neighbour brain, perfumes of force
To cleanse your head, and make your fantasy
To refine wit, and sharp invention,
And strengthen memory, from whence it came,
That old devotion Incense did ordain
To make mans spirit more apt for things divine;
Besides a thousand more commodities,
In lieu whereof your Lordships I request,
Give me the Crown if I deserve it best.
In good time Gustus, have you brought your objects?
My servant Appetitus follows with them.
Come, come Bacchus, you are so fat; enter, enter.
Fie, fie Gustus, this is a great indecorum to
bring Bacchus alone, you should have made Thirst, led him by the hand.
Right Sir, but men now a days drink often when they be not dry; besides I could not get red herings, and neat tongues enough to ap∣parel him in.
What, never a speech of him.
I put an Octave of Jambicks in his mouth, and he hath drunk it down.
Well done, Muscadine and Eggs stand hot; what buttered Claret? go thy way thou had best, for blind men that cannot see how wickedly thou look—how now, what small thin fellow are you here? ha.
Beer forsooth, beer forsooth.
Beer forsooth? get you gone to the but∣tery till I call for you; you are none of Bacchus attendants I am sure, he cannot endure the smell of Malt. Where is Ceres? oh well, well, is the March-pane broken? ill luck, ill luck; come hanged never stand to set it together again; serve out fruit there;  What do you come with rostmeat after Apples? away with it: Digestion, serve out Cheese; what, but a pennyworth? it is just the measure of his nose that sold it; lambs wool? the meekest meat in the world, twill let any man fleece it. Snap-dragon there.
O I remember this dish well, it was
first invented by Pluto, to entertain Proserpina withal.
I think not so Memory; for when Hercules had killed the flaming Dragon of Hesperia, with the Apples of that Orchard he made this fiery meat, in memory whereof he named it Snap-dragon.
Gustus, lets hear your description.
Near to the lowly base of Cephalon
My house is placed, not much unlike a Cave;
Yet arched above by wondrous workmanship,
With hewn stones wrought smoother and more fine
Then Jet or Marble fair from Island brought.
Over the door directly doth incline
A fair Percullis of compacture strong,
To shut out all that may annoy the state
Or health of Microcosm; and within
Is spread a long board like a pliant tongue,
At which I hourly sit, and trial take
Of meats and drinks needful and delectable;
Twice every day do I provision make
For the sumptuous kitchen of the Commonwealth
Which once well boiled is soon distributed
To all the members, well refreshing them
With good supply of strength-renewing food;
Should I neglect this musing diligence,
The body of the Realm would rulnate;
Your self my Lord with all your policies
And wondrous wit, could not preserve your self;
Nor you Fantastic, nor you Memory;
Psyche her self, were it not that I repair
Her crazie house with props of nourishment,
Would soon forsake us; for whose dear sake
Many a grievous pain have I sustained
By bitter pills, and sour purgations,
Which if I had not valiantly abidden,
She had been long ere this departed.
Since the whole Microcosm I maintain,
Let me as Prince above the Senses reign.
The reasons you urge Gustus, breed a new doubt whether it be better to be commode∣os or necessary; the resolution whereof I refer to your judgement, licensing you mean while to de∣part.
Ready anon forsooth? the Devil she will.
Who would be toiled with wenches in a show?
What in such anger Tactus? what's the matter?
My Lord, I had thought as other Senses did,
By sight of objects to have proved my worth;
Wherefore considering that all the things
That please me most, women are counted chief;
I had thought to have represented in my show,
The Queen of pleasure, Venus and her Son,
Leading a Gentleman enamoured,
With his sweet touching of his Mistress lips,
And gentle griping of her tender hands,
And divers pleasant relishes of touch,
Yet all contained in the bounds of chastity.
Tactus, of all I long to see your objects;
How comes it we have lost those pretty sports?
Thus it is, five hours ago I set a dozen maids to attire a boy like a nice Gentlewoman, but there is such doing with their looking-glasses, pinning, unpinning, setting, unseating, formings and conformings, painting blew veins, and cheeks; such stir with Sticks and Combs, Casca∣nets, Dressings, Purls, Falls, Squares, Busks, Bodies, Scarffs, Neck-laces, Carcanets, Rebatoes, Borders, Tires, Fans, Palizadoes, Puffs, Ruffs, Cuffs, Muffs, Puzzles, Fussles, Par•lets, Frislets, Bandlets, Fillets, Croslets, Pendulets, Amulets, Annulets, Bracelets, and so many lets, that yet she is scarce dressed to the girdle; and now there's such calling for Fardingales, Ki•tlets, Busk-points, shoo-ties, &amp;c. that seven Peddlers shops, nay all Sturbridge Fair will scarce furnish her: a ship is sooner rigd by far, then a Gentlewoman made ready.
It is strange, that women being so mute∣ble, will never change in changing their appa∣rell?
Well let them pass; Tactus we are content, To know your dignity by relation.
The instrument of instruments the hand,
Courtesies index, Chamberlain to Nature,
The bodies Soldier, and mouths Caterer,
Pysches great Secretary, the dumbs eloquence;
The blindmans Candle, and his forheads Buckler,
The minister of wrath, and friendships sign,
This is my instrument: nevertheless my power
Extends it self, far as our Queen commands,
Through all the parts and climes of Microcosm.
I am the root of life spreading my virtue
By sinews that extend from head to foot,
To every living part.
For as a subtle Spider closely sitting,
In center of her web that spreddeth round,
If the least Fly but touch the smallest thread,
She feels it instantly; so doth my self,
Casting my slender nerve and sundry nets,
Over every particle of all the body,
By proper skill perceive the difference,
Of several qualities, hot, cold, moist and dry;
Hard, soft, rough, smooth, clammy and slippery.
Sweet pleasure, and sharp pain profitable,
That makes us wounded seek for remedy;
By these means do I teach the Body fly,
From such bad things as may endanger it;
A wall of brass can be no more defence,
Unto a town then I to Microcosm;
Tell me what sense is not beholding to me;
The nose is hot or cold, the eyes do weep;
The ears do feel, the tast's a kind of touching,
That when I please, I can command them all,
And make them tremble when I threaten them:
I am the eldest, and biggest of all the rest,
The chiefest note, and first distinction
Betwixt a living tree and living beast;
For though one hear, and see, and smell, and taste,
If he wants touch, he is counted but a block?
Therefore my Lord grant me the royalty;
Of whom there is such great necessity.
Tactus stand aside; you sir Anamnestes
Tell the Senses we expect their appearance.
At you Lordships pleasure▪
Though you deserve no small punish∣meant for these uproars, yet at the request of these my assistants I remit it, and by the power of Judge∣meant our gracious sovereign Psuche hath given me, Thus I determine of your controversies: hum? By your former objects, instruments and reasons, I conceive the state of Sense to be dive∣ded into two parts, one of commodity, the other
of necessity, both which are either for our Queen or for our country; but as the Soul is more ex∣cellent then the Body, so are the Senses that profit the Soul to be estimated before those that are needful for the Body; Visus and Auditus serve your selves; Master Register, give me the crown; because it is better to be well, then simply to be; therefore I judge the crown by right to belong to you of the Commodities part, and the robe to you of the Necessities side: and since you Visus are the author of invention, and you Auditus of increase and addition to the same; seeing it is more excellent to invent, then to augment; I esta∣blish you Visus the better of the two, and chief of all the rest; in token whereof, I bestow upon you this crown to wear at your liberty.
I most humbly thank your Lordships.
But lest I should seem to neglect you Auditus, I here choose you to be the Lords Intelli∣gencer to Psuche her Majesty, and you Olfactus, we bestow upon you the chief Priesthood of Mi∣crocosme, perpetually to offer incense in her Ma∣jesties temple: As for you Tactus, upon your rea∣sons aleaged, I bestow upon you the robes.
I accept it most gratefully at your just hands, and will wear it in the dear remembrance of your good Lordship.
And lastly, Gustus, we elect you Psuche her only Taster, and great Purveior for all her dominions, both by sea and land, in her realm, of Microcosm.
We thank your Lordship, and rest well content with equal arbitrament.
Now for you Lingo.
I beseech your Honour let me speak, I will neither trouble the company, nor offend your patience.
I cannot stay so long; we have consulted about you, and find your case to stand upon these terms and conditions. The number of the Senses in this little world is answerable to the first by∣dies in the great world: now since there be but five in the Universe, the four elements and the pure substance of the heavens, therefore there can be but five Senses in our Microcosm, correspondent to those, as the sight to the heavens, hearing to the air, touching to the earth, smelling to the fire, tasting to the water; by which five means only the understanding is able to apprehend the know∣ledge of all corporal substances: wherefore we judge you to be no Sense simply; only thus much we from henceforth pronounce, that all women for your sake, shall have six Senses, seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, touching, and the last and fe∣minine sense, the sense of speaking.
I beseech your Lordships and your Assistants, (the only cause of our friendship) to grace my table with your most welcome presence this night at supper.
I am sorry I cannot stay with you, you know we may by no means omit our daily at∣tendance
at the Court, therefore I pray you pardon us.
I hope I shall not have the denial at your hands my Masters, and you my Lady Lingo; come let us drown all our anger in a bowl of Hippocras.
Come Master Register, shall we walk?
I pray you stay a little, let me see; ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
How now Memory, so merry? what do you trouble your self with two palsies at once, shaking and laughing?
It is a strange thing that men will so confidently oppose themselves against Plato's great year.
Why not?
It is a true an opinion as need be; for I remember it very readily now, that this time 49000. years ago all we were in this very place, and your Lordship judged the very same contro∣verse, after the very same manner, in all respects, and circumstances alike.
It is wondrous strange!
By the same token you held your staff in you right hand, just as you do now, and Mr. Fantastic stood wondering at you, gaping as wide as you see him.
I, but I did not give you a box on the ear sir 49000. years ago, did I?
I do not remember that Sir.
This time Plato's twelve month to come, look you save your cheeks better.
But what entertainment had we at Court for our long staying?
Lets go, Isle tell you as we walk.
If I do not seem pranker now, then I did in those days, Isle be hanged.
Why this is good by common Senses means;
Lingo, thou hast framed a perfect comedy,
They are all good friends whom thou made en∣mies,
And I am half a Sense; a sweet piece of service,
I promise you a fair step to preferment.
Was this the care and labour thou hast taken,
To bring thy foes together to a banquet
To lose thy Crown, and be deluded thus?
Well now I see my cause is desperate,
The judgements past, sentence irrevocable;
Therefore Isle be content and clap my hands,
And give a Plaudit to their proceedings:
What shall I leave my hate begun imperfect,
So foully vanquished by the spiteful Senses?
Shall I the Embassadress of gods and men,
That pulled proud Phoebe from her bright some sphere,
And dark'd Apoll•'s countenance with a word,
Raising at pleasure storms, and winds, and earth∣quakes,
Be overcrow'd, and breath without revenge?
Yet they forsooth base slaves must be preferred,
And deck themselves with my right ornaments;
Doth the all knowing Phoebus see this shame
Without redress? will not Heavens help me?
Then shall Hell do it, my enchanting tongue
Can mount the skies, and in a moment fall
From the Pole Arctic, to dark Acheron.
Isle make them know mine anger is not spent,
Lingo hath power to hurt, and will to do it.
Mendacio, come hither quickly sir.
Madam.
Hark hither in thine ear.
Why do you which thus? here's none to hear you.
I dare not trust these secrets to the Earth, ere since she brought forth Reeds, whose babbling noise told all the world of Midas Asses ears,  Dost under∣stand me?
I, I, I,—never fear that—there's a jest in∣deed—pish, pish,—Madam—do you think me so foolish?—tut, tut, doubt not:
Tell her if she do not.
Why do you make any question of it—
what a stir is here—I warrant you—presently?
Well, Isle to supper, and so closely cover
The rusty canker of mine Iron spite,
With golden foil of goodly semblances;
But if I do not trounce them—
My Lady Lingo is just like one of these lean-witted Comedians, who disturbing all to the fifth Act, bring down some Mercuries or Jupi∣la in an Engine, to make all friends: So she, but in a contrary manner, seeing her former plots dispurposed, sends me to an old Witch called Acrasia, to help to wreak her spite upon the Senses; the old hag after many an incricled circumstance, and often naming of the direful Hecate, and Demogorgon, gives me this bottle of Wine mingled with such hellish druggs and forcible words, that whosoever drinks of it shall be presently possessed with an enraged and mad kind of anger.
What's this Crapula beating Appeti∣tus out of doors? ha!
You filthy long Crane, you meager slave, will you kill our guests with blowing con∣tinuall hunger in them? (tiff, toffe, tiff, toffe) the Senses have overcharged their stomachs already, and you Sir serve them up a fresh appetite with every new dish; they had burst their guts if thou had staid but a thought longer? (tiff, toffe, tiff, toffe,) be gon or Isle set thee away; begone ye gnaw-bone, raw-bone rascal.
Then my devise is clean spoiled. Ap∣petitus should have been as the bowl to present this medicine to the Senses, and now Crapula hath beaten him out of doors? what shall I do?
Away Sir, (tiff toff, tiff, &amp;c.
Well Crapula, well, I have deserved better as your hands then so, I was the man you know first brought you into Gustus's service, I lined your guts there, and you use me thus? but grease a fat sow, &amp;c.
Dost thou talk (tiff, toff) hence, hence tiff, tiff, hence avaunt cur, avaunt you dog!
The belching gor-belly hath wel-nigh killed me: I am shut out of doors finely; well this is my comfort, I may walk now in liberty at my own pleasure.
Appetitus, Appetitus!
Ah Mendacio, Mendacio.
Why how now man, how now? how first? can not speak?
Faith I am like a bag-pipe, that never sounds but when the belly is full.
Thou empty, and come from a feast?
From a fray, I tell thee Mendacio. I am now just like the Ewe that gave suck to a Wolfs whelp. I have nursed up my fellow Crapula so long that he's grown strong enough to beat me.
And whether wilt thou go, now thou art banished out of service?
Faith Isle travel to some College or other in an University.
Why so?
Because Appetitus is well beloved amongst Scholars, for there I can dine and sup with them, and rise again as good friends as we sat down, Isle thither questionless.
Hear thou? give me thy hand, by this hand I love thee; go to then, thou shalt not for∣sake thy masters thus, I say thou shalt not.
Alas I am very loath; but how shall I help it?
Why take this bottle of wine, come on,
go thy ways to them again.
Ha, ha, ha, what good will this doe?
This is the Nepenthe that reconciles the Gods: do but let the Senses taste of it, and fear not, they'll love thee as well as ever they did.
I pray thee where had it?
My Lady gave it me to bring her: Mercury stole it from Hell for her: thou know there were some jars betwixt her and thy ma∣sters, and with this drink she would gladly wash out all the relics of their agreement: Now be∣cause I love thee, thou shalt have the grace of pre∣scenting it to them, and so come in favour again.
It smells well, I would fain begin to them.
Nay stay no longer lest they have supped before thou come.
Mendacio, how shall I requite thy infinite courtesy?
Nay, pray thee leave, go catch occasion by the foretop; but hearst thou? as soon as it is presented, round my Lady Lingo in the ear, and tell her of it.
I will, I will, I will; adieu, adieu, adieu,
Why this is better then I could have wished it,
Fortune I think is fallen in love with me,
Answering so right mine expectation:
By this time Appetite is at the Table.
And with a lowly Cringe presents the Wine
To his old Master Gustus; now he takes it,
And drinks perchance to Lingo, she craftily
Kisses the Cup, but lets not down a drop,
And gives it to the rest, it is sweet, the'l swallow it,
But when it is once descended to the stomach,
And sends up noisome vapours to the Brain,
Twill make them swagger gallantly, the'le rage
Most strangely, or Acrasias Art deceives her:
When if my Lady stir her nimble tongue,
And closely sow contentious words amongst them,
O what a stabbing there will be? what bleeding?
What art thou there Mendacio? pret∣tie rascal, Come let me kiss thee for thy good deserts.
Madam dost take? have they all tasted it?
All, all and all are well nigh mad already:
Oh how they stare, and swear, and fume, &amp; brawl!
Wrath gives them weapons; Pots &amp; Candle-sticks,
Joined stools and Trenchers fly about the room,
Like to the bloody banquet of the Centaurs:
But all the sport is to see what several thoughts
The potions work in their imaginations.
For Visus thinks himself; a ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
So-ho Mendacio! so-ho, so-ho!
Madam, I doubt they come, yonder is Appetitus, you had best be gone, least in their out∣rage they should injure you.  How now Hunger? how dost thou my fine May-pole, ha?
I may well be called a May-pole; for the Senses do nothing but dance a morris about me.
Why? what ails them? are they not (as I promised thee) friends with thee?
Friends with me? nay rather frenzy; I never knew them in such a case in all my life.
Sure they drank too much, and are mad for love of thee.
They want common Sense amongst them; there's such a hurly burly, Auditus is stark deaf, and wonders why men speak so softly that he cannot hear them: Visus hath drunk himself stark blind, and therefore imagines himself to be Polyphemus: Tactus is raging mad, and cannot be otherwise persuaded but he is Hercules furens; there's such conceits amongst them.
O that I could but find the villain Outis, Outis the villain that thus blinded me.
Who is this, Visus?
I, I, I, otherwise called Polyphemus.
By heavens bright Sun, the days most glorious eye,
That lightneth all the world but Polypheme,
And by mine eye that once was answerable
Unto that Sun, but now's extinguished.
He can see to swear methinks.
If I but once lay hands upon the slave,
That thus hath robed me of my dearest Jewel,
Isle rend the Miscreant into a thousand pieces,
And gnash his trembling members twixt my teeth,
Drinking his live-warm blood to satisfy
The boiling thirst of pain and furiousness,
That thus exasperates great Polypheme.
'Pray thee Appetitus see how he grasps for that he would be loath to find.
What's that, a stumbling-block?
These hands that meanwhile tore up sturdy Oaks,
And rent the rock that dashed out Acis brains,
Both in the stole bliss of my Galatea,
Serve now (oh misery) to no better use,
But for bad guides to my unskilful feet,
Never accustomed thus to be directed.
As I am a Rogue he wants nothing but a wheel, to make him the true picture of Fortune; how say? what, shall we play at blind-man-buffe with him?
I if thou wilt, but first Isle try whether he can see!
Find me out Outis, search the rocks and woods,
The hills and dales, and all the Coasts adjoining,
That I may have him, and revenge my wrong.
Visus, me thinks your eyes are well enough.
What's he that calls me Visus? dost not know?
To him Mendacio, to him, to him.
There, there Appetitus, he comes, he comes; ware, ware, he comes, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Is this he that thinks himself Hercules?
I, wilt see me out-swagger him?
I do, do, I love not to sport with such mad play-fellows; tickle him Appetitus, tickle him, tickle him.
Have I not here the great and puissant Club,
Wherewith I conquered three-chopt Cerberus?
Have I not here the sharp and warlike teeth,
That at one break-fast quaild thrice three hogs faces?
And are not these Alcides brawny arms,
That rent the Lions jaws, and killed the boar?
And is not this the Stomach that defeated
Nine yards of pudding, and a rank of pies?
Did not I crop the seaven-fold Hydras crest
And with a river cleansed Ages stable?
Did not I crush a seven-fold Custards crust,
And with my tongue swept a well furnished table?
Did not these feet and hands oretake and slay
The nimble Stag, and fierce impetuous bull?
Did not this throat at one good meal de∣four,
That Stags sweet venison, and strong bulls beef?
Shall Hercules be thus disparaged?
Juno! you pouting queen, you lowering trull,
Take heed I take you not, for by Joves thunder
Isle be revenged.
Why Visus, Visus, will you be killed? away, away. 
Who have you here? see, see the Giant Cacus,
Draws an Ox backward to his thievish den,
Hath this devise so long deluded me?
Monster of men, Cacus, restore my cattle,
Or instantly Isle crush thy idle Cox-comb,
And dash thy doltish brains against thy Cave.
Cacus, I Cacus? ha, ha, ha. Tactus, you mistake me. I am yours to command, Appetitus.
Art Appetitus? You are so; run quickly villain, Fetch a whole Ox to satisfy my stomach.
Fetch an •sse to keep you company.
Then down to hell, tell Pluto Prince of Devils
That great Alcides wants a kitchen wench
To turn his spit; command him from my self
To fend up Proserpine, she'll serve the turn.
I must find you meat, and the Devil find you Cooks. Which is the next way?
Follow the beaten path thou can not miss it;
It is a wide Causie that conducted thither,
An easy tract, and down hill all the way;
But if the black Prince will not send her quickly,
But still detain her for his bed-fellow,
Tell him Isle drag him from his iron-chair,
By the steel tresses, and then sow him fast
With the three furies in a leathern bag,
Thus will drown them in the Ocean.
You had better keep him alive to light To∣bacco-pipes, or to sweep chimneys.
Art thou not gone? nay then Isle send thy soul before thee, twill do thy message sooner (tiff, tiff.)
Hercules, Hercules, Hercules; do not you hear Omphale? Hark how she calls you, beark.
It is she indeed, I know her s•gnat voice;
Omphale, dear Commandress of my life
My thoughts repose, sweet Center of my cares
Where all my hopes and best desires take rest.
Lo where the mighty Son of Jupiter
Throws himself captive at your conquering feet,
Do not disdain my voluntary humbleness,
Accept my service, bless me with commanding,
I will perform the hardest imposition,
And run through twelve new labours for thy sake
Omphale, dear commandress of my life.
Do you not see how she beckons to you to follow her? Look how she holds her distaff, look you?
Where is she gone, that I may follow her? Omphale, stay, stay, take thy Hercules?
There, there man, you are right.
What a strange temper are the Senses in?
How come their wits thus topsy turvy turned?
Hercules, Tactus, Visus, Polypheme,
Two goodly surnames have they purchased:
By the race Ambrosian of an Oyster pie;
They have got such proud imaginations,
That I could wish I were mad for company;
But since my fortunes cannot stretch so high,
Isle rest contented with this wise estate.
What, more anger? Auditus got abroad too?
Take this abuse at base Olfactus hands!
What did he challenge me to meet me here
And is not come? well Isle proclaim the slave
The vilest dastard that ere broke his word;
But stay, yonder's Appetitus.
I pray you Auditus what ails you?
Ha, ha!
What ails you?
Ha! what say thou?
Who hath abused you thus?
Why dost thou whisper thus? Can not speak out?
Save me, I had clean forgotten; why are you so angry Auditus?
Bite us, who dares bite us?
I talk of no biting, I say, what's the matter between Olfactus and you?
Will Olfactus bite me? do if he dares, would he would meet me here according to his promise: Mine ears are somewhat thick of late, I pray thee speak out louder.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, this is fine in faith; ha, ha, ha.
Hear you, have you lost your ears at Supper.
Excellent cheer at supper, I confess it:
But when it is sauced with sour contentions,
And breeds such quarrels it is intolerable.
Pish, pish, this is my question. Hath your supper spoiled your hearing?
Hearing at supper, tel not me of hearing:
But if thou saw Olfactus, bring me to him.
I ask you whether you have lost your hearing?
O, dost hear them ring? what a grief is this
Thus to be deaf, and lose such harmony?
Wretched Auditus now shalt thou never hear
The pleasing changes that a well tuned Cord
Of trowling bells will make, when they are rung.
Here's a do indeed, I think he is mad, as well as drunk or deaf.
Ha, what's that?
I say, you have made me hoarse with spea∣king so loud.
Ha, what say thou of a creaking Crowd?
I am hoarse I tell you, and my head aches.
Oh, I understand thee, the first crowd was made of a horse head.
It is true, the finding of a dead horse-head,
Was the first invention of string instruments,
Whence rose the Gittern, Vial, and the Lute:
Though other think the Lute was first devised
In imitation of a Tortes back,
Whose sinews parched by Apollo's beams,
Echoed about the concave of the shell;
And seeing the shortest and smallest gave shrillest sound;
They found out frets whose sweet diversity
(Well couched by the skill-full learned fingers)
Raises so strange a multitude of Cords:
Which their opinion many do confirm,
Because Testudo signifies a Lute.
But if I by no means.—
Nay if you begin to critic once, we shall never have done. 
Somnus, good Somnus, sweet Somnus, come a pace!
Hei-oh, oh, are you sure they be so? oho, ho, oho, hei, waw?
What good can I do? ou, ho, haw.
Why I tell you unless you help
Soft son of night, right heir to Quietness,
Labours repose, lifes best restorative,
Digestions careful Nurse, bloods Comforter,
Wits help, thoughts charm, the stay of Microcosm,
Sweet Somnus chiefest enemy to Care:
My dearest friend, lift up thy lumpish heap,
Op thy dull eyes, shake of this drowsiness;
Rouse up thy self.
O Crapula, how now, how now, oh oh howe, whose there?
Crapula speak quickly, what's the matter?
As I told you, the noble Senses peers of Microcosm,
Will eft-soon fall to ruin perpetual,
Unless your ready helping hand recur them:
Lately they banqueted at Gustus table,
And there fell mad, or drunk, I know not whether,
So that it's doubtful in these outrageous fits,
That the'le murder one another.
Fear it not if they have escaped already,
Bring me to them, or them to me,
Isle quickly make them know the power
Of my large stretched authority.
These cords of sleep wherewith I wont to bind,
The strongest arms that ere resisted me,
Shall be the means, whereby I will correct,
The Senses outrage, and distemperature.
Thanks gentle Somnus, Isle go seek them out,
And bring them to you soon as possible.
Dispatch it quickly, lest I fall a sleep for want of work.
Stand still, stand still? Visus I think comes yonder.
If you think good, begin and bind him first:
For he made fast, the rest will soon be quiet.
Sage Telemus, I now too late admire,
Thy deep fore-sight and skill in Prophecy;
Who meanwhile toldst me, that in time to come
Ʋlysses should deprive me of my fight.
And now the slave that marched in Outis name,
Is proved Ʋlysses; and by this device,
Hath escaped my hands, and fled away by Sea,
Leaving me desolate in eternal night.
Ah wretched Polypheme, whore's all thy hope,
And longing for thy beauteous Galatea?
She scorned thee once, but now she will detest,
And loath to look upon thy darkened face:
Aye me most miserable Polyphemus.
But as for Ʋlisses, heaven and earth
Send vengeance ever on thy damned head
In just revenge of my great injury.
Who is he that dares to touch me? Cyclops come?
Come all ye Cyclop's help to rescue me.
There rest thy self, and and let thy quiet sleep, Restore thy imaginations.
Ha, ha, ha: oh how my spleen is tickled with this sport.
The matting Senses make about the woods,
It cheers my soul and makes my body fat,
To laugh at their mischances, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Heigh ho, the stitch hath caught me, oh my heart!
Would I had one to hold my sides a while,
That I might laugh a fresh: oh how they run,
And chafe, and swear, and threaten one another!
Ay me, out alas, ay me help, help, who's this that binds me?
Help Mendacio, Mendacio help, here's one will ravish me.
Lingo content your self you must be bound.
What a spight's this? are my nails par'd so near? Can I not scratch his eyes out? What have I done? what? do you mean to kill me? murder, murder murder,
Who cries out murder! What a woman slain?
My Lady Lingo dead? oh Heavens in just
Can you behold this fact, this blouby fact!
And shower not fire upon the murderer?
Ah peerless Lingo mistress of heavenly words,
Sweet tongue of eloquence, the life of fame,
Heart's dear enchantress: what disaster fates
Have reft this Jewel from our Commonwealth!
Gustus the ruby that adorns thy ringe,
Lo here defect, how shalt thou lead thy days,
Wanting the sweet Companion of thy life?
But in dark sorrow and dull melancholy.
But stay, whose this? inhumane wretch.
Bloud-thirsty miscreant, is this thy handy work?
To kill a woman, a harmless Lady?
Villain prepare thy self, draw, or Isle sheath my fashion in thy sides.
There take the guerdon fit for murderers.
Heir's such a stir I never knew the Senses in such disorder.
Ha, ha, ha; Mendacio, Mendacio? See how Visus hath broke his fore-head against the oak yonder, ha, ha. ha, ha.
How now? Is not Lingo bound suffi∣ciently? I have more trouble to make one woman sleep, then all the world besides, they be so full of tattle.
Oh mine ears, mine ears, mine ears.
Oh my nose, my nose, my nose.
Leave, leave at length these base con∣tentions, Olfactus let him go?
Let him first loose my nose.
Good Auditus give over.
Isle have his life that sought to kill me.
Come, come, isle end this quarrel, bind him Crapula.
Thanks Deianeira for thy kind remem∣bronco,
Tic a fair shirt, Isle wear it for thy sake.
Somnus here's Tactus worse then all his fellows,
Stay but a while, and you shall see him rage.
What will he doe? see that he scope us not.
Tic a good shirt, it fits me passing well,
Tic very warm indeed, but what's the matter?
Me thinks I am somewhat hotter then I was,
My heart beats faster then it was wont to do.
My brains inflames, my temples ache extremely, oh, oh,
Oh what a wild-fire creeps among my bowels:
Aetna's within my breast, my marrow fries,
And runs about my bones; oh my sides:
My sides, my rains, my head, my rains, my head;
My heart, my heart, my liver, my liver, oh,
I burn, I burn, I burn, oh how I burn,
With scorching heat of implacable fire,
I burn extreme with flames insufferable.
Sure he doth but try how to act Her∣cules.
Is it this shirt that boils me thus? oh heavens
It fires me worse, and heats more furiously
Then Joves dire thunderbolts; oh miserable,
They bide less pain that bathe in Phlegeton.
Could not the triple kingdom of the world,
Heaven, earth, and hell destroy great Hercules?
Could not the damned sprights of hateful Juno,
Nor the great dangers of my labours kill me?
Am I the mighty son of Jupiter?
And shall this poisoned linen thus consume me?
Shall I be burnt? villains fly up to Heaven,
Bid Iris muster up a troop of cloud,
And shower down cataracts of rain to cool me,
Or else Isle break her speckled bow in pieces:
Will she not? no, she hates me like her Mistress:
Why then descend you rogues to the vile deep,
Fetch Neptune hither, charge him bring the Sea
To quench these flames, or else the worlds fair frame
Will be in greater danger to be burnt,
Then when proud Phaeton ruled the Suns rich Chariot.
Isle take that care, the world shall not be burnt:
If Somnus cords can hold you.
What Vulcan's this that offers to in∣chain
A greater soldier then the god of Mars?
He that each night with bloodless bat∣tail conquers
The proudest conqueror that triumphs by wars.
Now Somnus, there's but only one re∣maining that was the Author of these outrages.
Who's that? is he under my command?
Yes, yes, yes, it is Appetitus; if you go that way, and look about those thickets, Isle go hither and search this grove, I doubt not but to find him.
Content.
So now's the time that I would gladly meet
These matting Senses that abused me thus;
What? haunt me like an owl? make an Ifs of me?
No they shall know I scorn to serve such masters
As cannot master their affections,
Their injuries have changed my nature,
Now Isle be no more called hungry parasite;
But henceforth answer to the wrathful name
Of angry Appetite, my choler's up;
Zephirus cool me quickly with thy fan,
Or else Isle cut thy cheeks; why this is brave,
Far better then to faun at Gustus table
For a few scraps; no, no such words as these,
By Pluto stab the villain, kill the slave;
By the infernal hags Isle hough the vogue,
And paunch the rascal that abused me thus,
Such words as these fit angry Appetite.
Somnus, Somnus, come hither, come hi∣there quickly, he's here, he's here.
I marry is he sir, what of that? base miscreant Crapula,
O gentle Appetitus.
You muddy gulch, dare look me in the face while mine eyes sparkle with revengeful fire? (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)
Good Appetitus.
Peace you sat bawson, peace, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)
See not this fatal engine of my wrath?
Villain, Isle maul thee for thine old offences,
And grind thy bones to powder with this pestle:
You when I had no weapons to defend me,
Could beat me out of doors; but now prepare,
Make thy self ready, for thou shalt not escape.
Thus doth the great revengeful Appetite,
Upon his fat foe, wreak his wrathful spite.
Why how now Crapula?
Am I not dead? is not my soul departed?
No, no, see where he lies, that would have hurt thee? fear nothing?
So rest you all in silent quietness,
Let nothing wake you till the power of sleep,
With his sweet dew, cooling your brains inflamed
Hath rectified the vain and idle thoughts,
Bred by your surfeit, and distemperature:
Lo here the Senses late outrageous,
All in a round together sleep like friends,
For ther's no difference twixt the King and Clown,
The poor and rich, the beauteous and deformed,
Wrapped in the vail of night, and bonds of sleep,
Without whose power and sweet dominion,
Our life were Hell, and pleasure painfulness,
The sting of envy, and the dart of love,
Avarice talons, and the fire of hate:
Would poison, wound, distract, and soon consume,
The heart, the liver, life, and mind of man;
The sturdy Mower, that with brawny arms
Wielded the crooked sith, in many a swath,
Cutting the flowery pride on the velvet plain,
Lies down at night, and in the weary folds
Of his wives arms, forgets his labour past.
The painful Mariner, and careful Smith,
The toiling Ploughmen, all Artificers,
Most humbly yield to my dominion,
Without due rest nothing is durable.
Lo thus doth Somnus conquer all the world
With his most awful wand, and half the year
Reigns over the best and proudest Emperors.
Only the nurslings of the Sisters nine,
Rebels against me, scorn my great command:
And when dark night from her bedewy wings
Drops sleepy silence to the eyes of all,
They only wake, and with unwearied toil,
Labour to find the Via last
That leads to the Heaven of immortality;
And by the lofty towering of their mind,
Fledgd with the feathers of a learned muse,
They raise themselves unto the highest pitch,
Marrying base earth and heaven in a thought;
But thus I punish their rebellion,
Their industry was never yet rewarded,
Better to sleep then wake and toil for nothing.
So ho Rocwood, so ho Rocwood, Rose∣wood, your Organ, hay Chanter, Chanter, by Actions hed-tyre it's a very deep mouthed dog, a most admirable cry of hounds; look here again, again, there, there, there, ah ware counter.
Do you see the full Moon yonder, and not the man in it? why methinks it is too, too evident, I see his dog very plain, and look you, just under his tail is a Thorn-bush of Furs.
Twill make a fine tooth-pick: that Larks heel there, O do not burn it.
Boy, Heuresis, what think thou I think when I think nothing?
And it please you Sir, I think you are de∣vising how to answer a man that asks you no∣thing.
Well gest boy, but yet thou mistook'st it,
for I was thinking of the constancy of women.  Beware sir, take heed, I doubt me there's some wild Boar lodges here∣about; how now? methinks these be the Senses, ha? in my conceit the elder brother of death has kissed them.
Oh, oh, oh, I am stabbed, I am stabbed, hold your hand, oh, oh, oh.
How now? do they talk in the sleep? are they not awake Heuresis?
No questionless, they be all fast asleep.
Eat not too many of those Apples, they be very flative?
Foh, foh, beat out this Dog here, foh, was it you Appetitus?
In faith it was most sweetly winded, whosoever it was, the warble is very good, and the horn is excellent.
Put on man, put on, keep your head warm, it is cold.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, st, Heuresis, stir not sir.
Shut the door, the pot runs over; sir Cook, that will be a sweet Pasty if you nibble the venison so?
Say you so, is a Marrow Pie the Helena of meats? give me't, if I play not Paris hang me; Boy, a clean Trencher?
Serve up, serve up; this is a fat Rabbit, would I might have the maiden-head of it; come give me the fish there; who hath meddled with these maids? ha?
Fie, shut your Snuffers closer for shame, it is the worst smell that can be.
O the cramp, the cramp, the cramp, my leg, my leg.
I must abroad presently, reach me my best Necklace presently.
Ah Lingo, are you there?
Here, take this Rope, and Isle help the leader close with the second Bell: Fie, fie, there is a goodly peal clean spoiled.
Isle lay my life that Gentlewoman is painted: well, well, I know it, mark but her nose, do you not see the complexion crack out, I must confess it is a good picture.
Ha, ha, ha, fie, I pray you leave, you tickle me so, oh, ah, ha, ha, take away your hands, I cannot endure, ah, you tickle me, ah, ha, ha, ha, ah.
Hai, rett, rett, rett, now bird now —look about that bush, she trust her thereabout,—here she is, ware wing Cater, ware wing, avaunt.
Mum, mum, mum, mum.
st, sir take heed you wake her not.
I know Sir she's fast asleep, for her mouth is shut.
This it is to venture upon such uncer∣tainties, to lose so rich a Crown to no end, well, well.
Ha, ha, ha, we shall hear anon where she lost her maiden-head, st, boy, my Lord Visage∣rent, and Master Register are hard by, run quickly,
tell them of this accident, wish them come softly.
Mendacio, never talk farther, I doubt it is past recovery, and my Robe likewise, I shall never have them again, well, well.
How? her Crown, and her Robe, never recover them? hum, wast not said to be left by Memory? ha? I conjecture here's some knavery— fast locked with sleep, in good faith. Was that Crown and Garment yours Lingo?
I marry were they, and that some body hath felt, and shall feel more, if I live.
O strange; she answers in her sleep to my question; but how come the Senses to strive for it?
Why, I laid upon purpose in their way, that they might fall together by the ears.
What a strange thing is this?
st, my Lord, softly, softly, here's the no∣tablest piece of treason discovered, how say you Lingo set all the Senses at odds, she hath con∣fest it to me in her sleep.
First possible Master Register! did you ever know any talk in their sleep?
I remember my Lord many have done so very oft, but women are troubled, especially with this talking disease, many of them have I heard answer in their dreams, and tell what they did all day awake.
By the same token, there was a wan∣ton maid, that being asked by her Mother, what such a one did with her so late one night in such a room, she presently said, that—
Peace you wild rake hell, is such a jest fit for this company, no more I say sir.
My Lord will you believe your own ears, you shall hear her answer me, as directly and truly as may be. Lingo, what did you with the Crown and Garments.
Isle tell thee Mendacio.
She thinks Mendacio speaks to her, mark now, mark how truly she will answer: what say you Madam?
I say Fantastic is a foolish transpa∣rent gull: a mere fanatic nupson in my image∣nation not worthy to sit as a Judges assistant.
Ha, ha, ha, how truly and directly she answers.
Few, few, she dreams now, she knows not what she says, Isle try her once again: Madame? what remedy can you have for your great losses?
O are you come Acrasia? welcome, welcome, boy reach a Cushion sit down good A∣crazy: I am so beholding to you, your potion
wrought exceedingly, the senses were so mad, did not you see how they raged about the woods?
Hum, Acrasia? is Acrasia her confe∣derate? my life that Witch hath wrought some villainy, —
How's this? is she a sleep? have you seen one walk thus before?
It is a very common thing, I have seen many sick of a Peripatetic disease.
By the same token my Lord, I knew one that went abroad in his sleep, bent his bow, shot at a Magpie, kilt her, fetched his arrow, came home, locked the doors, and went to bed again.
What should be the reason of it?
I remember Scalliger told me the reason once; as I think thus: The nerves that carry the moving faculty, from the brains, to the thighs, legs, feet, and arms, are wider far then the o∣there nerves; wherefore they are not so easily stopped with the vapours of sleep, but are night and day ready to perform what fancy shall com∣mand them.
It may be so, but Fantastic enquire more of Acrasia.
What did you with with the potion A∣crazy made you.
Gave it to the Senses, and made them as mad as—well, If I cannot recover it — let it go, Isle not leave them thus.
Boy awake the Senses there.
Hoe, hoe, Auditus, up, up, so hoe, Olfactus have at your nose, up Visus, Gustus, Tactus, up: What can you not feel a pinch? have at you with a pin.
Oh, you stab me, oh.
Tactus, know you how you came hither?
No my Lord, not I; this I remember,
We sup't with Gustus, and had wine good store,
Whereof I think I tasted liberally.
Among the rest, we drunk a composition,
Of a most delicate, and pleasant relish,
That made our brains, somewhat irregular.
My Lord, here's a fat rascal was lurking in a bush very suspitiously, his name he says is Crapula.
Sirrah, speak quickly what you know of these troubles.
Nothing my Lord, but that the Senses were mad, and that Somnus at my request laid them a sleep, in hope to recover them.
Why then tic too evident, Acrasia at Lingua's request, bewitched the Senses, wake her quickly Heuresis.
Heigh ho, out alas, aye me, where am I? how came I here? where am I? ah.
Lingo look not so strangely upon the matter, you have confessed in your sleep, that with a Crown, and a Robe, you have disturbed the Senses, using a crafty help to enrage them, can you deny it?
Aye me, most miserable wretch, I be∣seech your Lordship forgive me.
No, no, tic a fault unpardonable.
In my conceit Lingo, you should seal up your lips, when you go to bed, these Feminine tongues be so glib.
Visus, Tactus, and the rest, our for∣mer sentence concerning you, we confirm as irre∣vocable, and establish the Crown to you Visus, and the Robe to you Tactus, but as for you Lingo —
Let me have mine own, howsoever you determine, I beseech you.
That may not be, your goods are fallen into our hands, my sentence cannot be re∣called, you may see, those that seek what is not theirs, oftentimes loose what's their own: There∣fore Lingo granting you your life, I commit you to close Prison, in Gustus his house, and charge
you Gustus, to keep her under the custody of two strong doors, and every day till she come to 80. years of age, see she be well guarded with 30. tall watchmen, without whose license she shall by no means wag abroad; nevertheless use her Lady∣like, according to her estate.
I pray you my Lord ad this to the judgement, that whenever she obtains license to walk abroad, in token the Tongue was the cause of her offence, let her wear a velvet hood, made just in the fashion of a great Tongue, in my conceit it is a very pretty Emblem of a Woman.
My Lord, she hath a wild boy to her Page, a chief agent in this Treason, his name's Mendacio.
Ha? well, I will inflict this punish∣meant on him for this time, let him be soundly whipped, and ever after though he shall strengthen his speeches with the sinews of Truth, yet none shall believe him.
In my imagination my Lord, the Day is dead to the great toe, and in my conceit it grows dark, by which I conjecture it will be cold; and therefore in my fancy, and opinion, it is best to repair to our Lodgings.
What's this? a fellow whispering so closely with the Earth? so ho, so ho: Appetitus? faith now I think Morpheus himself hath been here, up with a pox to you, up you luck, I have such news to tell thee sir: all the Senses are well, and Lingo is proved guilty, up, up, up, I never knew him so fast a sleep in my life.
Nay then have at you a fresh, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)
Jog me once again, and Isle throw this whole mess of pottage in your face, cannot one stand quiet at the dresser for you?
Ha, ha, I think it's impossible for him to sleep longer then he dreams of his victuals. What Appetitus, up quickly, quickly up, Appetitus, quickly sir, (toff, toff, toff, toff.)
Isle come presently, but I hope you'll stay till they be roasted, will you eat them raw?
Roasted? ha, ha, ha, ha, up, up, away.
Reach the sauce quickly, here's no Su∣gar, whew, women, oh, oh, oh, oh.
What never wake? (Tiff, toff, tiff, toff,) wilt never be? Then I must try another way I see.
JƲdicious Friends, it is so late at night,
I cannot waken hungry Appetite:
Then since the close upon his rising stands,
Let me obtain this at your courteous hands,
Try if the friendly opportunity,
Of your good will and gracious Plaudit,
With the thrice welcome murmur it shall keep
Can beg this prisoner from the hands of sleep.

THe Author (as late custom hath thought fit)
Makes me the Prologue to his wandering Wit;
The Gate into his Walks, through which you may
Behold a petty prospect of the Play;
A Play of Walks, or you may please to rank it,
With that which Ladies love, A running Banquet:
And, though the Scoene be Islington, we swear,
We will not blow ye up with Bottle Bear;
Cram ye with Cream and Fools, which sweetly please
Ladies of Fortune and young Prentices,
Who (when the Supervisors come to find um)
Quake like the Custard which they leave behind um.
Yet to exalt your spleen, he hath invented,
Persons that you'll all know when they are presented;
Nay they shall know themselves, and that is more,
It may be then you ever knew before.
We will show you things not taken out of Hist'ries,
A loyal Lover, and a grateful Mistress,
A futile Frenchman (acted to the life)
A jealous husband and a jocund wife,
That kisses, dances, tipples like a Tench,
A Chamber-Gallant and a Kitchin-wench;
A jovial Cobbler (or a Quibler rather)
A Catchpole that arrested his own father;
A crew of Renters to the Gaol committed,
A dead man raised, a Usurer outwitted,
A Prison-Pimp discovered and detected,
The Counter character'd, the Hole dissected.
Here my Commission ends, lest I betray
The Plot, and show the Clock-work of the I lay:
Your liking will (like to the Suns bright rays)
Lighten the Gaol, and plant these Walks with Bays,
Where you will find some Flowers as well as stalks,
Then lend's your hands, we will lead you to the Walks,
BOy Drawer.
Drawer, Sirrah.
By and by, anon, anon Sir.
Why thou Parte-per-villain,
Drawer and Tipster,
Are you so taken up with your Holy∣day Ghosts,
A Gentleman can have no attendance?
Attendance? Yes Sir, What Wine will it please you to drink?
That is, which of three sorts will ye drink, Sack, White, or Claret.
Nay (with your favour Sir) we have more va∣riety then those.
Well then Sir, without farther disputation, bring White Wine, and let it be right.
I shall Sir.
Well Frank, and how doth thy little Mistress?
What little Mistress?
Why she that is the rarest, the fairest that ever was Maid, Jack Trimwel the Surgeons wife.
Mum, not a word, our plots are almost discovered, I have kept some villains company that have betrayed me to the jealous Coxcomb (her husband) she'll be here presently.
Who hast sent?
My old Mercury, Alexander Pimpwel.
Look, you can no sooner talk of Pimpwel,
But the Drawer comes; sirrah, have you any
Whores in the house?
I cannot tell Sir, I'll ask the Fiddlers.
Hark you sirrah, have you any females in the house?
Yes Sir, there's half a score in several rooms.
Why you rogue, do you doubt whether there be
Any whores in the house then?
Why thou rebel to Chastity, dost thou conceive the stock of Females virtue is so extremely wasted, that in so small a number as they are, the most part must be vicious?
I, I vow if there were but two there, though my Mother were one.
And thy Aunt tother.
I mean so, the other should be one of my Aunts.
Little Betty, your humble servant.
But hark you Frank, what Gentlemen are these?
Friends of mine, most dear and intimate, salute them.
Oh, y' are a pretty Gentleman to send for me into company.
Lady your humble servant.
Turn to me honey, and give me a kiss.
Turn to you Sir, which part? my face is to∣wards you already.
By the Cherry-lip of Venus, you are wondrous witty, Lady.
I am glad Sir you so apprehend it.
It is not my apprehension can mend it.
Is she not wondrous fair?
I dare not tell you,
For should I grow so passionate in praise
As her worth merits, I might justly fear
Your fondness of her would suspect my friendship;
For in this age Experience makes it common,
He needs must love that doth but praise a woman.
You wrong my friendship to suppose I doubt you.
It were an injury to her and you;
The base suspect from neither is exempted,
To think that you should tempt, or she be tempted.
You are full of Noble confidence, I think she
Loves you well.
Or she doth well dissemble,
But here's the wo, what bondage is he in,
That lives in love, when all his love is sin?
Gentlemen, doth my coming cause this division among you?
Such separation in so few a number hath been unusual.
Your coming Lady rather makes an unity,
Frank Rivers I'll begin a round to thy Mistress.
Let it come.
I vow I'll pledg't a brimmer:
My Mistress hath a Rosie Check
her eye-brows they are Jetty,
Then drink off a brimmer
to he that doth —
For tic a Health to Betty.
Mr. Flylove is your name I pray Sir.
Yes, so they say Sir.
There's a woman without would speak with you.
Prithee what manner of piece is it?
A good homely creature Sir, some servant I believe,
A Maid-servant I dare swear she is not,
For her nose and belly do almost meet.
A strange creature, either she hath a ve∣rye  long nose, or a terrible great belly, and now I talk of a great belly, I pray Heaven it be not the Kitchin-wench I was dabbling with∣all once, when drink and a foolish humour pos∣sest me (I heard she was with Child) if it be,  I am undone for ever, stay I'll go out to her.
No Sir, she I come in to you.
Prithee honest Drowsy.
Honest Drowsy I, I was honest Drowsy before I knew you.
Nay but prithee Drowsy that was once honest,
Let me speak with thee in private.
No Sir, you have spoken too much in private with me already, Ass sign, and Jle speak to you here Sir; for all your fine Lass there in the silk, I might have been as fine as she, and yaw had kept your word.
How now Stephen, what's the matter?
What's that to yaw sir,
Pray meddle with your own business.
Prithee be gone Jack, it is an honest Lass comes with an errand to me.
An arrant, what arrant am I, I come to speak to you Sir, and to have satisfaction for the wrong you have done me, ye shall ne'er carry it to heaven nor to hell.
What the Devil shall I do, Drawer?
Prithee what hast thou brought me here, a mad wench?
What would you have sirrah?
A pox of your greasy fingers,
An you were not with Child —
— If she be mad, I pray Sir do you tame her.
How now Stephen, what's the business?
What care yaw sir, you may go to your Gentlewo∣man in the long locks again.
What is the woman mad?
Mad! no she's as well in her wits as you are, though she is not so fine forsooth.
Mrs. Trimwell, as I live your Husband's here.
Marry Heaven defend.
He's coming up stairs.
What will become on's.
There's but one way, and thats this, here is a door goes down another pair of stairs, whilst he comes up, do you
run down, you may easily escape unseen by the back-side of Islington. Let me alone here.
I, I, come let's go, I think the devil haunts us to day.
Pray whither go yaw sir,
I have more to say to you then so.
Prithee honest Pimpwel keep this mad wench from me, and do you pay the reckoning, you know our old rendezvous.
Well, well, let me alone.
Keep me back! sirrah Isle set all my fingers in your eyes, if you keep me back, though your name be Pimpw. you shall not keep the door at this time.
How now what's the matter? vanished, ha all vanished, only one rogue and a dirty whore, what are you, what are you, pray turn about?
Dirty whore, you lye like a base rogue, I am as honest a woman as thy wife, what come you for?
As honest as my wife, I, I, it may be so good Pore∣pus, I speak not to you, pray Sir where is all your company gone, whore's my wife.
Your wife Sir.
My wife Sir, I my wife Sir.
Dost thou call me Porpoise, you may be ashamed to liken a woman to a beast, I am as like a Christian as thou art, or any of thy kin, my father was as honest a man as any in Warwickshire, and his daughter shall not be made a fool yet as.
Wher's my wife? what secret holes have you?
What do you ask me for your wife Sir, I know her not, nor you?
Anon, anon Sir, by and by, did you call? how now what's become of the company was here, who pays the Reckoning?
Hey day, what have they left their Reckoning to pay, they were in mighty hast it seems?
Was the woman in the black Guown your woife Sir?
Yes, which way went they?
Marry 3. Gentlemen carried her down them stairs,
You were best make haste after um, or they'll
Make you a Cook old before you come, and then
You'll lose the sport.
He follow presently, I guess where to find them.
If I cannot overtake them.
By the mass Isle follow too, for my Gentleman
Is amongst them; Isle teach him to turn
Up wenches bellies, and give them no sartifaction.
Well you have your reckoning Drawer.
To a farthing Sir, if you'll stay Sir, Isle give
You one pint, because you shall remember the
Saracens head in Islington.
I cannot stay now, I faith sirrah, but next time
I come this way.
Well Sir, you are welcome, by and by, I come, I come.
So, so, a bad shift's better then none; oh the rage his head is filled with for his wife, and the belly full of vex∣tion she has to find Mr. Flylove. Pox of all fools, I wonder what mad folly possessed him to lye with this dirty, greasy kichen-wench, was his appetite so sharp set, that he must needs be lapping in the Dripping-pan? well, Isle follow them; I know their old haunt (the Kings-head at Hogsdown) Jealousy hath many eyes, I must prevent the searcher: If all my plots hit right, Isle make the Cuckolds horns hang in his light.
My fair Splendora, though my fortunes are,
Humble as he that owns them; yet I can
Love thee with holy ardency; devoutly
As zealous men in prayer do their Saints,
Or Votaries their Goddess.
I know you want not wit to coin a passion,
And pray (with all Mercurio) conceive,
I know how many symtoms of true love,
A Parasite (in service to his Mrs.)
Can use to gain his end; it is not a sigh,
Dissembled sorrow in a far strained tear,
The folded Arms; Encomiums composed,
With many interjections, nor the trick,
Of praising what she's pleased with, can move me
To the least faith, he whose slow tongue speaks least,
In Love or sorrow oftentimes means best.
I am sorry you should think I doubt your knowledge
I know you have a soul as full of Rays,
As Delphean Phoebus in oraculous glory;
You have divinity enough to see,
The purest love from nicest flattery,
Or I should ne'er affect you, tic my thought,
That she whom flattery can purchase to me,
By one more subtle may be flattered fro me.
You give a large account of your pure thoughts,
And I believe thee with such confidence,
As to not do it, were heresy; There
Resign thee all the interest I hold dear,
In this weak frame.
That shall contain us both,
Our hearts shall be one individual essence,
To which we will frame like passions, like affections,
By this divinest Metomorphosis,
The Gods (well pleased) shall terminate our lives,
Both at one Expiration in good age,
Seasoned and fit for glory, more Divine,
Where in one or be our unity shall shine.
Who's here (undone) Mercurio and my daughter
Embracing? Changes Kisses? I shall part you.
My Father.
Splendora, your Mother calls you.
I am sorry Sir I have such faulty ears, as not
To hear till your love please to tell me,
I attend her.
Sir tic to you that I direct my speech.
I shall attend Sir what your speech directs.
To this intent I frame it, whats the cause
You make it all the business of your time
In visits to my house? though uninvited,
I do not say you're an unwelcome guest,
But till I know the motive of your coming,
I shall be cautious in your entertainment.
Your words do bear a strange suspect in them,
And this to me, the Son of him that was
Once your best friend; whose love hath made you rich,
The manner's somewhat strange.
I shall be plainer,
I disaffect your nearness with my daughter,
I have beheld loose kisses fond embraces,
Her sighs to echo yours, such wantonness
As may not fit a pair of single creatures,
Much less you two, considering the distance.
Sir to be brief, I do suspect you love her.
Oh ne'er suspect so Sir, you may be sure on it.
Why this is honest truth, fine right down dealing.
And she loves you.
I hope she will in time Sir.
Tic well Sir, lend me your ear.
Your pleasure.
I fear this whispering portends no good,
Here's pen and paper, Isle appoint our meeting,
Though we shall miss that ceremonious way,
Of lovely parting we were wont to have,
Isle find occasion to deliver this.
Nay which is more, you are a riotous man.
My dear Mercurio.
And let me tell you Sir, my Child and wealth,
Shall not be both exposed to your profuseness
Therefore (by my admonishment) pray leave her.
Meet me to morrow.
Sir did you ever love?
Yes.
But did you ever affect a Virgin truly?
As man can do.
When.
To morrow in the afternoon.
When time and love had made me capable
Of woman and her virtues.
In the green long walk by Newington.
Was not her presence all your heaven on earth,
And then her absence brought such sickly thoughts,
No novelty could mitigate.
Very true.
With that affection I esteem your daughter.
Just such a heaven her blessed society,
And such a hell her absence, had we not
By some diviner inspiration,
A little prospect to eternity,
I should believe all joys of soul were her:
The most indulgent Mothers never loved,
Their fair legitimate Babes with such a fondness,
As I do your Splendora.
You are very bountiful in your expression.
Too niggardly, her goodness merits more
Then I have worth to know, or tongue to utter;
I think her virtues all are infinite,
And not to be examined, I have searched,
With most ingenious and industrious boldness,
To take the height of her perfection,
But forced with admiration to retire,
For still as I drew near her soul flew higher.
Your constant heart Splendora.
You have expressed her merit and your love,
And had you an estate equal to either,
With worldly providence and care to use it,
I should esteem your motion, as you are;
Your polyte phrases cannot work on me,
Nor shall they on my daughter, whose obedience
Must be conformable to my dispose.
Did you call Sir.
No,
But since your diligence hath got such wings,
Stay and take leave of your kind visitant,
And be not tedious.
Well Sir.
I have some business may concern your good,
Which you cannot conceive.
I do believe you.
You see my dear Mercurio, how adverse
My Father is, time's short, read that, farewell,
We will meet again.
This parting is my hell.
Sir the French Knight is come,
Wait on him in.
I shall Sir.
Oh, my torment!
Noble Sir Reverence, your humble servant.
Tres humble Serviture Monsieur.
A vostre Serviture Madam.
Sir you too seldom grace us with your visits,
Although our country custom cannot yield,
That fair and ceremonious entertainment
You French men use; believe me you are welcome.
Gramercy Monsieur de mon ceuir,
Vat you name de Madam your daughter a.
We call her Sir Splendora.
Spent whora?
Splen do ra.
Split whore a.
The name is some what hard Sir.
Begar so it is, Split, Split, Split whore a.
Splen.
Splen.
Do.
Do.
ra.
ra.
Splen do ra.
Splen do ra.
Right Sir.
Madam Splen do ra, will you give Sir Reverence, Leave to kiss beshide your sheeke.
Let it be but of one side I beseech you Sir, I have lately been troubled with the Tooth-ake.
Isle leave you sir to opportunity.
Gramercy Monseir, vostre servitor.
At your back Monseir.
Aloe aloe.
I am gon Sir.
Madam your fadra say to me he would have me take you for my wife, my Lady, my Madam, my Madam Lamard;
Did my father bid you put me in hope of these fantastic titles?
Fantasy, begar be brave title to be wife to Sir Reverence Lamard.
To be your wife Sir Reverence?
Awee, and Sir Reverence to be your husband.
I thank you Sir.
I hope that uinon will happy prove;
Where Sir Reverence is the beginning of love,
Begar dat was right, me love you out of all cry, You shall be a Lady, when we have marry, we'll go to Parry, begar was de brave City of the World, me will have you dress like de French Madam, and ride in your Carrosh, begar dis English Dress is noting; it is not a le mode France, den me will show you de brave Palace of de King, you never see such state in your life, Oh brava, brava; and den.
Pray stay there Sir.
I wonder that a Knight of your vast wealth,
In your own Country could not find a fair one,
Worthy to meet your merit; I may doubt
You are not what you would have me conceive,
Or my too credulous father is informed,
And did your judgment, sympathize with mine,
I would not wish you to adventure marriage,
With any Lady of another Nation,
There is a fitness to be found in love,
Which very far transcends wealth wit or beauty,
By him that keeps me for a better end,
I would not be your Mistress, could you give,
All Paris, for Jointure; The truth is I am engaged.
Begar den you shall be no Lady.
I shall be contented with my fortune.
How is it Sir Reverence, what is my daughter pliant,
Begar your dauter say she will no have me, if I Shall give all Pary for a zhoynture.
You must give Virgins license to be Nice,
Things easily purchased are not valuable,
Is it their own worth or their scarcity,
That sets so high a price on Jewels think you.
Begar your dauter be foolish to slight me, She bid me love de french Lady, begar so me can.
I hope she hath not angerd you Sir Reverence.
Begar is will know me can have de brave Lady in France.
I do not question't Sir, she is too peevish.
Begar me have scorn a Countess in France, and
Have had two three love letter from a Doushesse,
Since I came to Englant, your dauter no know
Vat J am, she be fool beggar — Vildfire.
Monsieur.
Donne moi me manteau.
Awy Monsieur vostre service.
I hope you will not leave us so Sir.
Begar me will stay no longer your dauter a scorn my love.
Be not so discontented good Sir Rev. all shall be to your wish, I have prepared a course banquet for you Sir Rev.
She scorn a my love.
This fool it seems is noted to be rich,
What's that to me? In dignity a Knight,
A Knight Sir Reverence, then he is of France,
The only man of fashion (from whose Country
All things are acceptable, no disease excepted)
Let him go seek a choice in his own Nation,
French feats grow stale, I'll have some newer fashion;
I'll learn to love for worth, not one whose flashes
Blaze much, and are at one time flame and ashes,
Give me a man whose love is built upon
Eternal virtue and perfection,
Who loves for mental worth, not outward show,
And such a one is my Mercurio.
Art sure thou saw them go this way?
Sure, yes sure enough, I'm sure they crossed this field, went o'er that stile, and I am much deceived if I did not see Pimpwel peep out of yonder Tavern window.
That's the Kings-head I know it,
Oh for some quaint disguise,
My jealousy hath yet no occular proof,
These two years have I wandered in this maze,
And still been blinded by her sublil sleights?
That Rivers is the man I most suspect,
And yet I dare not think he wrongs my bed,
The very thought bred in a jealous breast,
Is proof enough, and then were he defenced
With Devils I would end him;
Oh! we vain men covet most to see
What we would not, my eyes can take no rest;
How many Moonshine nights and Summer evenings,
In various shapes have I walked out to find her,
But never could?
Would I had never seen the face of Mr. Flylove.
Thou hast even got, thy belly full of mischief too,
But prethe do not cry out in the fields, though I'm
A Surgeon, I shall make but a mad midwife,
Thou had better repare to the City, and quietly,
For a month hire the next Cage is to be let, you
May buy a bed in Smith-feild, they come to Town,
In Cart-loads.
No Sir, I know you'll lend me a room for one month,
I'll enquier for your house when I come to London,
How far do you live from Cuckolds haven.
A pox on you for a whore, you have wit enough to jeer though you had not to keep your Maiden-head.
I pray Sir, is it not your black bird that sings,
J cannot keep my wife at home, my wife at home.
Out you greasy kitchen whore.
Why thou fool, is not better to have such a Greasy piece as I am, then to have a curious fine wife, and cannot come near her.
The whore says true, how now who comes here,
Musicians very good, I have a plot,
Come into my head, which by these fiddlers,
Means I'll put in practise, hark you,
Honest Fiddlers (Musicians I should call you)
I am a little Musical my self, Gentlemen
Whither Crowd you so fast.
Sir we are sent for to play to Mr. Rivers at the Kings-head.
Frank Rivers.
The same Sir.
Who plays the Citterne.
That do I Sir.
Very good, I have a plot that shall get you double the money you expect.
How is that I pray Sir.
Why look, Frank Rivers is my only Companion, I would now steal upon him in the middle of's mirth dis∣guessed like one of you, I have a false beard in my pocket, I'll carry the Base, counterfeit to be blind, and that boy shall lead me, and in the conclusion he shall pay you for the jest.
With all our hearts Sir.
Drowsy what will you do?
Isle even home to London, but if you see Mr. Flyloeve tell him I'll serve him such a trick as he saw in's life time, I'll warrant him.
Farewell good Drowsy. Come Gentlemen let's a∣bout this business; Aha wife, in faith I shall over-reach you now.
I have been a Fiddler these fifteen year,
And never was put in the Stocks before,
If an good fellow will give me some Beer,
I'll Fiddle and fuddle, and ner'e give o'er.
Fair Lady you are welcome, I should salute you by your name if I knew it.
My name is Mary Fair-chaste.
Fair and chaste too, impossible; it is a Paradox to me.
Is it such wonder to be fair and chaste Sir?
No, no, it is no such wonder, A fair Cabinet should contain a fair Jewel; but since we have had poison in guilt bowls, killing Perfumes in rich Gloves, Heresy in religious exact habit, and Treason in the well-seeming gravity of State, we put small trust in form; but what do I trouble you with these things, let's drink, sing, dance, and be merry boys;
We come to be merry, &amp;c. 
Gentlemen, what shall we do for anoyse of Vagrants, I have a dancing desire to exercise my heels.
I have sent for Music, but we want a woman.
Its impossible; Drawer.
Did you call Sir?
Entreat your Mistress hither.
I shall Sir, she prevents my service, she's here already.
How doth my Madonna? my Belladossa? my Ent. Mrs. Summer sinner, the Countess of Hogsdowne.
You give me many stiles Mr. Flylove.
I have come over as many more stiles to behold thee my Queen of the Kings-head. Hark you; what rate holds women's flesh? in brief hast thou ever a peace of Impenitence, that will be sociable, and will desire, only her pleasure for her pains, if she can dance well, we'll bear with any im∣perfection else; thou shalt not lose all; we'll seem to want the knowledge of thy over-reckoning, and pay thee. You know we are no Citizens, that (to ease our bodies and pre∣serve our pockets) keep a due Account of every quart and paper, by unbuttoning our doublets; or doubt our own me∣mories by calling many reckonings at one sitting.
You are very merry Mr. Flylove, but as I am a virtue∣os sinner, you could never have chose a time to have found me so unprovided in a whole summer, there is but one wo∣man in the house, and she is with a French man, yet I believe his greatest business is over, if you will allow of his company you may have hers, nor will he be any interruption to you, for call what you will he'll pay freely, and be as merry as you will give him leave.
Have they paid all?
They are now calling.
Prethe entice them in.
No twill become you better, he may conceive I have some end of mine own in it; your way of invitation will in∣tice him, the society of an English Gentleman, is his only ambition.
Very well; I'll invite him.
Whither go you Stephen?
Sir I'll take my leave of you.
By no means Lady, I'll return presently, aside. Jack Wildblood prithee entertain this Lady in my absence, she's modest, &amp; thou art civil; but if you make your seeming civility a bawd to abuse me, look to your self.
Well, well, pray follow your humour; Lady you are not merry.
Is the Gentleman your friend gone?
Some private occasion, he'll be here suddenly.
I cannot stay Sir.
Mr. Rivers; what is Mr. Flylove gone?
whore's the Music?
I have been as far as Redcrosse-street for them, they were playing to a company of Citizens at the Queens-head, but they told me they would make all the necessary expedi∣tion they could possible, and attend you in Hogsdon here at the Kings-head.
Nay, I'll say that for thee, thou art the happiest Purveyor for Wine, Wenches and Music, that ever was as∣sistant to the increase of sinners.
Who should I meet withal coming from thence, through the Fortune-Playhouse yard, but old Jones the Cobl.
Thou should have brought him hither.
I thought you would have Wished so, and I have brought him.
A Cobbler; what is he?
What is he? why the rarest humorist of a Cobbler, that ever was translated into merry company, his wit is jeering, tart in all such jeasts, nor will he spare the proudest he in plush. And speaking in a most composed strain, with countnance grave, no man can take exceptions, but may sup∣pose it ignorance, not wit; You cannot choose but know him, that is he that owed forty shillings to an Alderman, to pay 12. pence by the week, when he did exact Cobblers law, and made his worshipful creditor give him two pots at every payment.
Yes, yes, I have heard of him.
Then now you shall see him, here comes the man in Person; welcome Mr. Jones.
Thank you good Mr. Alexander, I'll make bold to salute these worthy Gentlemen, noble Mr. Wildblood, I take it.
The very same Mr. Jones, and how did Mr. Alexander, and you meet.
Honest Mr. Pimpwell (here) was walking I believe
about his accasions, I saw 2. or 3. Gentlemen with him, and in truth because I was in my workydaie Clothes, I was ashamed to speak with him, but I thank him good Gen∣tleman, he called me to him, and told me I should see some worthy Gentlemen of my acquaintance.
Here Mr. Jones, I'll drink to you and to your wife, do you remember since you put her in the cage?
I pray Sir how long is it since we •ere merry at the Sargeons head in Islington, where we drank Sack so long till all our money was gone, but in truth I think I brought but a great with me; we came off from the reckoning though pretty handsomely, but good Gentleman you were forced to leave your silver Seal behind, but I think you redeemed it again in a little while.
Ha, ha, ha, there he hath met you Jack.
Gentlemen I presume to invite this worthy Gentle∣man and his Lady, I pray be courteous to them.
Noble Sir, a friend of yours can never come unwel∣come where we are; my service Sir attends you.
Monsieur your tres nmble humble vassale.
Sir according to our downright English Comple∣meant you are welcome.
Awee Monsieur, begar me tank you heartily dere be English Complement for you again, vat velow's dat?
A very honest man Sir, and Beadle of the parish.
A beadle, begar he be no forboon company, my Madam can no endure a beadle.
Alack good Gentlewoman; no Sir, I am no beadle I can assure you, though the Gentleman pleases to jest.
Begar you look as like a rogue as a beadle.
Alack, I believe Monsieur you have heard the ill news lately come forth you are so angry of the sudden.
Begar me have hear no ill news.
then I'll tell you Sir, the sad report goes that most of the English Gentlemen in France must return to England again, I am sorry for it.
Begar was nothing but lies; how how vat is here, Fiddles? Madam sall we dance?
Well done, you are honest Rascals, every man take his stool, strike up courageously, and be sure have a special care he that plays of the base Violin sleep not, we are no colls you know, you must not flame us.
Come Gentlemen shall we try our footing, here am I.
And here am I.
And if this Gentleman please, here I'll be.
Volt all mine heart Monsieur.
I cannot dance believe me Sir.
Nor I, we will only practise.
Excuse me Sir, indeed I cannot dance.
Excuse me Sir, indeed I cannot dance? You shall not dance excuse me then, that Country trip is old, we will have some novelty.
Are you perfect in the tune I gave you last to practise.
Very perfect Sir.
Let me hear it.
Mrs. Trimwel do you observe that old fellow that plays of the Base.
Well, what of that?
By my life it is your Husband.
My Husband?
Take no notice.
Come t'other Change.
Lady my service to you.
Pray let it be your love Sir, Twill make the Health much sweeter.
Thou make me wonder.
As I live it is true.
What? he that plays the Base?
Come to the next.
Here is strange humours in this  Dance, how they drink and whisper, as if they had capering minds as well as bodies; Hey! I how my wife trips it, when she comes home she was with one Aunt or other; She's no Tavern-dan∣cing company, no, no; Oh my blessed disguise.
Oh your Bulls-head, we will take a course to order you, you blind puppy, because you wink you think no by∣die can see you; Come the tother Change, and conclude.
Begar was moss brave, my  Lady dance al lemode like our French Madam.
In truth Mr. Flylove you dance very well, but that you straddle so much, but if you take it in time that may be altered; Oh Mr. Flylove you have a little gone awry, but mum for that.
Well said Mr. Jones, do you remember one night when you cast Anchor in the kennel, and called to the Goldfinder for a Coach, who mounted you in his Chariot, and drew you to the River Acharon at the back-side of Islington.
Oh! Mr. Flylove you are an ingenious Gentleman, I have heard high commendations of you by a Neighbours daughter a friend of mine.
Prithee who's that?
It is a very good natured Lass, if she knew you were here, she would have a quart of Wine at your service.
Do I know her?
Do you know her? Do I know Jon my wife? Do not you know Alice Drowsy?
Pox on you hold your tongue, this dirty whore hints me in a thousand shapes, I must throw her out of my memory. Come Gentlemen shall we have another Dance?
Come Gentlemen t'other Dance.
I come, me like de Dance better den Song.
Hold, hold good Monsieur Minikin, for begar they have dance avay wid my Lads; Rogue, Drawer. Ent. Draw.
Anon, anon Sir.
Fere be de Zhentlemen and de Lads.
They have taken Coach Sir, and are at London by this time.
How? how?
Begar me never saw such a frisk in my life; Was dis de skip de Angleteire?
I was bid to deliver this Note to him that plays on the Base?
To me? give me't.
Yes, they say your ill fiddling made them all dance quite away, they would have staid longer else.
The Devils have unriddled me; what's here?
The Woodcock when his head is hid,
Thinks his body is unspid;
Fool when thou come next to find us,
Bring some better trick to blind us;
Pay the reckoning, or you'll find,
There's a worser plot behind.
What have you there Sir, a Bill of Exchange?
Pox on your Cobbling jeasts,  you quibling Coxcomb I am undone for ever.
Begar de Fiddler be mad, he tear his hair off.
Who's this? My old acquaintance Mr. Trimwel.
Hang up your old acquaintance, do not trouble me, who would have thought that through this disguise their careless eyes should thus discover me, but I'll follow them as close as Death doth sin.
Sir you must pay the Reckoning first.
Shall I.
Before you part, it is your device hath made us lose the best Guests that come to our house.
How much is it?
One pound thirteen and nine pence.
Here's the French Knight, one of their company that called it in, let him discharge it.
Disharge it, begar my Lady  have left me noting to disharge, she got all my money and my Wash.
Gentlemen, I'll go pay my part at the bar.
Your part, what's that?
A three-pence, a good three-pence, a Spanish 3. d. and so farewell to you both good Gent.
Well, there's your money Drawer, I must confess I drank for it.
Who shall pay us Sir?
The Devil pay't, shall I be made a But for every knave to shoot at.
Sir, you are the cause that we have not only lost this money, but our credit with the Gentlemen, if we had known you had been a Trapan, you should ne'er have been admitted into our company; you had other pretences.
Well, since it was my plot, I am like to pay for it, there's a French crown among you, pray get you from me. Sir, you are a stranger, and therefore I  have nothing more to say to you, but to desire your absence.
Me bee glad me come off so, farewell Monsieur Bo-peep.
The just cause of my fears I now perceive,
As evident as day-light; in this Dance
There is composed all that her wanton heart
Can give, or he can covet, I must now
Turn all my love to loathing; Sweet Revenge
I am thy faithful Votary, I will still
Pursue their foot-steps, and with wary eyes,
Watch their Adulterous Conspiracies:
Now I have thought upon it, if they defend
Their persons from this plot I now intend,
I will disband my reason, and resign
My Intellectuals, or what else is mine:
Look to it Gallants, the next time you view me,
I'll make you curse the time that ever you knew me.
Time and our fitter opportunity,
The pleasant entertainment of our love
Hath almost wasted; it is an hour near night,
And we can tread no farther then to'th place
Thy Father hath expelled me, we must part,
But urged to it with much more unwillingness,
Then heat from life, when souls and bodies separate.
Thou shalt not leave me yet, I'll plant my love
Above my fear, it is a nobler passion,
Nor shall my fathers frown have more command
On my affection, then thy brow, made smooth
By thy own love, credit me gentle youth,
Thou hast next rule in this weak mansion
To him that built it.
That's he.
We know him Sir.
Perform your task then.
I'll warrant you.
Begar me have wash him hither, now me sall be revenge.
Stay not for bayl, I'll double your reward.
You are a kind Gentleman: Sir we arrest you by the name of Mercurio.
Arrest me Sir, who hath employed you for this Action? At whose suit is it?
At the Suit of Mr. Nice, a very honest Gentleman I can assure you.
You guess that by his bounty for your baseness: What is the sum?
Twenty pounds upon bond, if you have special Bayl, produce it presently, we cannot stay.
Why is your time so precious that is spent to ruin man-kind, be not pray so hasty, where is the Gentleman?
He is not far Sir.
What is your will with me.
Longer time for payment of your debt.
I may forbear no longer, Sir you know the money hath been due these 14. weeks, it is in vain to think you can urge me to an agreement, but my present sum.
But not, I entreat that mercy Sir.
Fond Girl ask mercy for your disodedience, I have appeared too temperate with you, and shown too much in∣dulgence; it is your cause that makes him suffer.
And it is his abuse
Will make me perish; Oh remember Sir
You had a wife, my Mother, whose dear dust
With low and humble reverence I kiss:
Had you been seized between two Tigers thus,
Would it not have moved her, made her pliant knees
Grow to the dull earth, till the deaf Creditor,
(By importunacy more then compunction)
Had sealed a truce twixt him and's undone Debtor.
Your superstitious knees in vain are bent
For this bad cause, Laws Moral and Divine,
Have still provided that each man shall claim
What is his right, I but exact mine own.
What can you call your own, that you may spare,
Whilst still the cries of widows, injured Orphans
Beat at the ears of pity; had this man
(Trapt in the snares of Cannibals) his own
The fair inheritance his birthright claims,
(Heaven pardon them that have it) I believe
You need not rack his body for your own.
Your zeal makes you forget your self.
My sorrow is too bold indeed, to see
Such pregnant hopes thus blasted in the bloom
Of teeming growth, nipped in the springing bud
Of spreading youth; to see mans span contracted,
Sent to the grave ever yet he can conceive
The end of his Creation, because his Chests
Want coin, not to supply, but cram another:
Joves great impression suffers this decay,
For want of Caesar• Image stamped in Clay.
I'll hear no more.
A little pray Sir,
He that's so indigent to want the means
Of rendering your right, whilst he enjoys
His fair and open freedom; Can you believe,
That being close pent up with Iron bars,
Stone walls and Jailers hearts,
Where every cowardly Creditor treads down,
The o'rethrown Debtor with a doubled sum,
That stands bayl-proof; is that a time to satisfy,
Unless he had the Elixor to convert
The Iron grates to Gold, or (which is best)
To nothing.
Officers what stay you for?
Come will you go Sir.
How diligent in cruelty you are:
Have you the heart to think this good old man
(That knows the scales unto Eternity
Are pity, mercy, love (the best Religion)
Fear of oppression) will commit his youth
To your ungentle usage?
Pray be not moved with us, your father may re∣lease him.
Look Sir, the Officers grow merciful,
And seem to bear no part in his undoing;
Shall men that study nought but cruelty,
Out-doe you in an act of gentleness?
Officers, I'll leave him to your charge, take Bail at your peril.
Sir Reverence, will you be bayl for him, you are good for nothing else.
Begar me be no bayl.
There's a day for thee when no bayl shall be taken; Shall I speak one word with your Prisoner?
Two if you please.
Hark you Mr. Tripes, I shall find you at the Counter gate.
Without fail.
I have another mischievous employment for you.
We shall endeavour to perform it Sir.
Oh Sir, I know you to be deserving men; there's money, enter an Action against Stephen Flylove at the suit of Alice Drowsy in an Action of assault and battery committed upon the belly of the said Alice last May, the Planets being Venus and Mars Rampant, and the Sign Virgo.
I apprehend you Sir.
Apprehend me Sir, for what? you are deceived, you must apprehend Mr. Flylove.
I understand you Sir.
Farewell my understanding Sergeant,
Come we must part.
I'll come and visit thee.
Thy sight in prison is my liberty.
Can you conceit why I have singled you thus from the company.
No, pray instruct me Sir.
The instructions are too easy to be good, since you appear so innocently modest; I'll be your amorous School∣master for once.
You'll teach me no ill Doctrine.
No, no, prithee observe me, be but capable, and I'll warrant thee an apt Scholar.
Well-Sir, so far as I perceive it's good, I'll learn.
I'll show you the Lovers Alphabet, be observant then, and be not squeamish, but do as I direct you; When a Gentle∣man and's Lady do meet, A. the first letter is A salutation.
The word begins with S.
No matter for the word, give me the sense, B. the next letter, lend me your fair hand.
Very good Sir.
It is in a very good hand indeed; nay I'll show you more tricks by and by, it is so very fair that I must kiss it, there's a letter gone that stands for C.I confess C. may stand for another business, and sitter for the letter, but a kiss shall serve at this time.
On I pray Sir.
Nay, I shall come on fast enough, I warrant you. D. shall join both our hands, now do we look as if we were wrestling, which of us both should give the first kiss.
You make your own construction Sir.
I, I, no matter, it's ne'er the worse for that.
Proceed Sir.
Stay, stay, let's pause a little, you'll forget it again else, E. is embrace me, there I have hit you to a letter.
You come near me now Sir.
I shall come nearer yet, for F. I'll stroke your cheek.
F. stands for flattery.
Not at this time fair one, if you will tie me punctu∣ally to a better F. stands for Faith or Friendship.
That is the truest use on it.
Well, it shall go so then. G. is a Gift.
I'll wear it.
Let me see you.
First make an end.
H. stands for Hug me to you.
I have heard of a Wine called by that name Sir.
Were it Nectar it could not be sweeter then this.
It seems your favour and my embrace do want no acceptance.
I. stands for you, and K. standing for kiss, is I kiss you. By the breath of Venus you've a pleasant lip.
I'm glad it pleases you; to the next letter.
L. is another kiss, it stands for Love.
L. may be lust, but it should be Love.
I, I, it may stand for both by fits. M. stands for Mary.
So it may for Marry.
Remember R. stands for repent, but I am far enough off from that. N, is the next letter, N. stands for ne'er be good, you shall learn O. Q. P. V. in private, that is the full prick or conclusion of the Lovers Alphabet.
Take heed, be not too hasty.
Some that would seem more nice then virtuous.
Who use a blush, or modest bashfulness,
To vail their knowledge of ill propositions,
(Such as I'm sure po make, though you've a trick
To smooth it o'er with your methodick wantonness)
Would be ashamed to tell you your ill meaning,
But I will not.
L. in your Alphabet doth stand for lust,
And be not fooled with such a vanity,
To think because you are a handsome man,
Or I so easy won to your society,
That I will do an act may hold proportion
With any baseness; if you can love truly,
Without a glance to any wild respect,
Reveal it, I was never so ill bred
To give discourteous answers.
Love, and love truly, are not you married?
I am not now Sir.
A widow and so cautious, I'll try another ways;
Have I taken up an Angle instead of a Bone Robe?
Yes I can love thee, and can love thee truly, and heartily,
He swear so if thou'lt have me.
Let me but hear you Sir, I'll swear as much.
Wilt thou, faith stay a little.
What do you pause on it Sir?
No, no, I'm ready enough to swear, I am loath to cast away too big an oath, and I'm afraid a small one will not suffice her.
Come I'll propose the Oath.
With all my heart.
By tho•e diviner powers that govern Contracts, Swear to be true to me.
By all those sacred powers I kiss the book, &amp; ever will observe it, come shall we walk a side now: Kisses her. Whose here?
I am glad you are prevented; How vainly men in their rash heat will swear to what they ne'er intend.
How now Stephen, what do you fly from your Colours?
No Sir, I fly to my Colours, red and white, I'm a right English-man▪
Whore's Pimpwel gone?
I sent him for more Money.
But that Heaven ordained al things for a good end, a man might swear that Pimpwel was created for a Pimp: how cunningly he found her husband out, &amp; how suddenly the rogue contrived that quick escape; I will have him put in the Almanac next to the Gunpowder-Treason.
Or Gowries Conspiracy; In what a stammering case now is my French-man; and now I think upon him, I have seen a face as right like that in Parris.
Faith so have I.
Were you ever in France Mr. Rivers?
Yes Sweetheart.
I have had a brother there these 14. years, and have not heard-from him.
What part of France?
Paris.
What was his name?
Brooks.
I never heard of him.
Hast thou brought the money.
Ther's. 5. l.
Go and bespeak supper at the John of Jerusalem.
I fear it's too late.
What's a clock?
Past 9.
No matter; Lady you shall not leave me.
Indeed I cannot stay, to morrow where you please I'll keep an hour with you.
we will drink a pint &amp; talk on it
I'll tell you news, The French Knight's arrested at the suit of Mr. Bonaventure an English Merchant for 6000. pound, is gone to prison, no bayl will be taken.
I'm sorry for it; go, prithee make haste.
I am gone.
Gentlemen, my business is to one Mr. Elylove, Can you direct me to him?
What is your business Porter?
I pray read that Letter Sir, I received it from a young Gentleman.
Gentleman! I hope it is no news from Drowsy. To my friend Stephen Flylove; I'll try what your inside says; Ha, come with all speed, Gentlemen I have sad news for you, Mercurio is arrested.
Arrested!
What devil did the deed?
Nice the rich Merchant, it is but 20. l.
But 20. l. alas poor Gentleman, he can as well discharge 1000.
He hath writ to speak with me, he is not yet in prison.
Where is he?
At the Harrow-Tavern in Little Woodstreet.
Come we will all go, perhaps they'll take our Bayl.
No hang them, these Citizens will take none but Free men; We will make a trial though.
I would Pimywel were here again, I am sorry you appointed a Supper.
No matter, we shall know some end on it suddenly.
Let us defer no time, at the Harrow-Tavern say you.
Sir I must take my leave of you at next turning.
Well, meet me at the Jerusalem-Tavern, but be sure you fail not.
Your injunction shall be observed?
I'll leave a Glove at bar.
Mrs. Hemlock if you and your husband do not assist me in this plot of dexterious mischief (sinister I should call it) I shall be disgraced beyond remedy; I have now met with an opportunity so pleasing, so fit, so apt to entertain my pur∣pose, an hour where only Saturn is predominant, shall so jerk my light-heel'd Gallants, and the politic little Gypsy my wife, Flylove is the pin that must set all the other wheels a going, which pin this honest blade my old acquaintance Tripes shall turn, Mr. Mace I know your part is not the least in this revengeful conspiracy, be sure you use him roughly that it may cause a quarrel, and young Rivers will take fire at the least spark.
If scurvy usage will make them quarrel they shall not want it, I hope Tripes is not to learn to use a man scur∣vilely,
I'm sure I have practised these 20. years, and there's no∣ver a one that ever I arrested yet can give me a good word; The Players brought me of the Stage once I thank them in a Play called the Roaring Girl, or The Catchpole, he was a pret∣tie fellow that acted me, but he came short of the rogueries I have done.
You have sent a Porter.
I saw him deliver the Letter.
It is very well, because this is a large room, you shall retire into a less, I'll show them up stairs, and pretend that Mercurio and the Sergeants are gone into the City to see some friend of his for bayl, and will be here presently, which to countenance you shall leave your pint pot half full of wine, your empty foul pipes and the candle, and when I shall give the watch-word you may enter.
And now you talk of the watch-word, is the Watch set at Cripplegate?
And hath been this half hour.
If there be but the least disturbance, let your boy be ready to call the Watch up; can he frame a lye handsomely before the Justice next morning, I know the Watch will do their parts, only they have one fault, which is to charge every offender with one way of assault, that must be avoided.
I warrant you for the boy Ned.
Anon, anon Sir, Did you call Mr.
Yes Sir.
Is thy name Villainous?
No Sir, it is a nick-name my Mr. hath given me.
But thou must now deserve it, can you if need be, abuse. I mean accuse a Gentleman before a Justice of peace, to do a courtefie for a friend of your Masters?
Of what degree must the fault be?
Of what degree? a learned boy, oh my dainty pick∣pocket, he hath faults it's fingers ends, the devil hath given us such equal gifts; let me hear your degrees my fine villain.
Time runs away, let me hear some of them presently.
Why sir, I can accuse him for picking of your kocket calling you son of a whore Rogue, Knave, Cheat, striking of you with a sword, with a staff, with a pot, a Candlestick, or stabbed you with a Tobacco-pipe, or — are you married?
Yes Sir.
Then if you will Sir, I'll swear I saw him lye with your wife.
No, no, hang you, I'll have thee swear to nothing that appears like truth, you shall find cause enough to swear I'll warrant you, and so we shall have all.
I should know this boy, a pretty ingenious Lad; Dost thou not know me, Jack?
My name's Richard Philpot, I was born in Turnbal-street
It is true, it is true, dost not know me Dick Filpot?
No truly Sir.
How doth thy father, is thy mother living still?
No Sir, she's dead; did you know her Sir?
Did I know her, I a dozen years before I knew thee, why thou art now, let me see, 1641. thou art now some 14. years of age Dick.
I am almost 15. Sir.
I think thou want half a year on it.
No Sir, I want but a quarter.
I, thereabouts, did never hear thy father speak of me Dick.
No indeed Sir.
I am thy Godfather.
Are you Sir?
Am I quoth, who would have thought to have seen this boy here; do thy duty, I shall find something for thee.
Pray Godfather give me your blessing.
Good boy, thou art no Brownest, I see thou can kneel to thy Godfather for a gift, so can some of them too for thy hopes, but y faith boy I cannot part with money at this time, thou shalt have my blessing.
Ha, ha, ha.
A pox of your blessing, I thought how well you were my Godfather; had it not been for the hopes of your money I'll have seen you hanged ever I'll have believed you, I know where my Godfathers are, though I'd have satisfied your humour for your money.
Boy look to your charge, they are come.
By and by, anon, anon Sir.
Go all of you into that room.
The watch-words shall be, I wonder he stays so long.
I would not have you seen.
No, I'll warrant you.
You are very welcome Gent.
Are you the Master of the house?
Yes Sir, for want of a better.
It may be so; what shall I call your name?
My name is Hemlock Sir.
Thou art half hanged, thou hast an ill name Hemlock and a Vintner, bless me from thy wine; did there not a couple of Sergeants bring in a Gentleman even now?
Yes Sir, are you the Gentleman he sent for?
Where is he?
He and the Sergeants are gone into Cheapside to a friend of his that he hopes will bayl him, they'll be here pre∣sently, this is his room.
Why would not that friend come hither?
He was in bed Sir.
A poor excuse, that man will scarce be bayl, that will not have his bed to save his friend.
I hope Sir you will do him some good, he's a pretty Gentleman, it is pity he should suffer.
It is indeed, hath he paid the reckoning.
No Sir.
How long hath he been gone?
Half an hour Sir, I wonder he stays so long.
How now, who are these?
Is your name Mr. Flylove?
Yes Sir.
I arrest you at the suit of Alice Drowsy.
Arrest my friend?
Then let me suffer too.
Murder, murder, murder, go run and call the Watch, my hus∣band's killed.
Beat down their weapons, I charge you in the Kings name to keep his peace.
The Kings peace we will keep.
Or we shall force you.
Did nothing urge me to it but your force, I should not fear to break it.
Sir you have killed the Master of the house.
I'm very sorry for it Sir.
That is no satisfaction.
He is a man I meant no hurt to; Sir do you send for Surgeon to night, I'll send you one to morrow, I guess the danger of the wound; Come Sir, where will you con∣duct us?
To the next prison.
Oh that's the Counter.
Come then we will altogether and make a merry night, no question but we shall come off to morrow; I pray Mr. Constable will you come for us betimes.
You shall have all the favour I can do you, I am sorry for this chance.
Faith so am I.
And I am sorry too but cannot cry,
Now Is my plot made perfect, all the wheels
Are in a general motion, I must follow, I shall
Never think they are in prison, till I see them
Within the Compter-gates.
My singing Gallants your mad misdemeanor,
Shall bring you now to sing the Counter tenor.
Blood of the Rivers, thou beginst to droop,
Thy soul seems not so active as it was:
Where be those capering pieces of pure flash,
That made the genius of the place grow Comic?
By the wanton memory of Chaser I could turn Poet,
And write in as Heathen English; and as bawdy;
I'll not to bed to night.
Nor I by Jove.
By Jupiter nor I, shall we be jovial; why should we not; conceive this place a Tavern, one place may serve for two uses; some conceive it the habitation of the sorrowful, and our free spirits shall convert it to a Paradise of delight; Pray Sir what hour of the night is it.
Past twelve Sir.
It is an age to morning:
prithee cheer up the woman, she droop.
Dost thou want rest?
Yes Sir, far more then sleep.
Thy mind's disquiet then, prithee be cheerful,
Sorrows are momentary as well as joys;
Were I in the bottom of the Ocean,
I'd bear my head up, till my own weight sunk me.
Sir, can we have some Wine.
I'll ring the Bell for you, they are up at the Fea∣thers-Tavern; they lye at a safe Guard, they' I have their money before-hand.
With all my heart, we shall not be mis-reckoned then, here's money for a pottle of Canary, the night is somewhat cold, and Sack is sprightly.
Hugh, Hugh.
What a Hugh and cry you make, I have stayed up these two nights, you are all mad I think, will you not go to bed to night.
Prithee honest Hugh (if thy name be so) fill us one pottle of Canary, let's have clean pipes and Tobacco.
Whore's your money?
At hand, at hand, my midnight Drawer.
Who's that, Mr. Rivers?
I, dost know me?
Do I Sir, I filled you many a gallon of Wine at the Bear upon Fleet-bridge.
Oh, you are an honest blade, I know thee, prithee fill me good Wine.
The best in the Cellar.
Hark you sir, is there not a French knight in the house?
His name is Sir Reverence Lamard, he lies two stories higher to the street.
A lamentable story! can you not invite him down?
I'll try Sir.
You are an honest Keeper.
These Keepers have been rumor'd to be churlish; I like this fellows humour very well.
Oh what a crew of Wine-Leaches shall we have stick upon us to morrow morning for our Garnish, we are of the Master-side, your half-crowns a piece Gentlemen, I know the order, I have commenced in this College before now.
A pottle of Canary in the Counter, s••re.
In the Counter you rogue; Sir can't you show us a better room.
It is too late Sir, pray be civil, and keep your own room:
Is this the end of our travail? Here s a Health to our good deliverance.
By the blood of Bacchus I'll pledge thee.
Come I'll begin a mad Health, and let every man have his fancy.
Here's a cursed to all those
That are Prisoners foes,
And the Coward that goes
To undo men for blows,
Who doth basely expose
Their bodies to throws,
In a Prison where grows
Infection to the nose,
And from top to the toes
Are tormented with woes,
Till, be it spoke under the Rose,
They are meat for the Crows;
Confusion to those
In Meeter and Prose.
Pray drink off your cup, and we will all keep the close, here comes my white Knight in his Lawn sleeves, now if a Quaker saw him he would take his shirt for a Surplice, and condemn it for a Babylonish Garment, or in good sooth and verily a wicked and superstitious remnant of that foul slaps the whore of Babylon.
Begar dat whore of Babylon be one of me Aunts.
Monsieur you see we are come to bear you company, you shall not engross the prison to your self.
Me tank you for noting, you can no give me de sheat now as you have frō (vat do you cal de fader of de pig)
The father of the Pig; a Hog.
Hog, hog, hog, as you gave me de sheat at Hogdown.
Well forget it, there was no hurt meant, on my cre∣dit, there was another cause you must not know.
Begar but me do know already, you carry away de Surzhons vise, begar he be horn-mad.
How came you to know this? would he reveal it?
Yes begar and more to, it was he dat make Drowsy de Kishin-wensh to arrest Monsieur Flylove.
The devil at last is even with us.
Room for my Lord Judge.
How now what's the matter?
This noise is in the Kings Ward; it is termed the Hole.
But are they allowed to be so loud there.
We cannot check a Custom they have used,
Which is when a new Prisoner first comes in,
They have a Scene of mirth, where one is Judge,
And sits a trial upon life and death.
May we not see them Sir.
I have no privilege to open Wards at this late hour of the night, left some combustion happen amongst the prisoners, which my strength will be too weak to pacify.
My life for yours no danger Sir.
Ye appear honest Gentlemen, and I'll trust ye.
Thank you Sir; come Monsieur will you walk down.
Zhentlem me will vait on you to morrow, but me mus com to bed; but me have anoder plot in my head begar.
Well Monsieur good night▪ take rest, and sleep secure.
Awee Monsieur tres humble servitor.
What is your name my friend?
You must tell the Steward your name, you will be the sooner entered a member of the Sheriffs-Basket, there is (my friend) a strange miracle in our living, we never want meat yet keep continual fast; and yet all that fast, you may see by our Clothes we are loose enough; we live in imita∣tion of the Owls, we sleep in the day time, and revel all the night: Some beds we have for Gentlemen of quality, as my self being the Lord, Steward Rentfree, Constable Lazy, and Chamberlain Jaylbird.
Gentlemen, I was a Page to a Knight that was a prisoner in this house Sir Rev. Lamard, my name is Wildfire.
Prithee stand farther off, thou wilt melt me else.
My Lord begins to hiss.
Gentlemen of the Kings Ward let us consult upon the business, it is for the good of the Hole, and of the whole House; let us for once be wiser and honester then ever we have been, there may come much mischief by this Wildfire, if he stay long he will consume us, and every creeping thing a∣bout us, our beds being all straw is very combustible; the very blowing on's nose blows a bed up.
There's a Bug upon your Honours doublet.
Is there but one, give it Wildfire, he is fit for no∣thing but to receive my Moabites in reversion, they may live upon him like so many Salamanders; I will petition to morrow for the discharge of Wildfire, he shall not stay with us, we must have Wildfire put out, it is pity such a spark should be in the Counter.
Stand aside, here comes the Gentlemen Rats, it is most fit I give them the first salutation; Gentlemen you are most un∣happily encountered.
I do most unfortunately thank you Sir, we come to see your Revels, are they ended? are you my Lord?
Yes Sir, he's my Lord.
Well Gentlemen we make bold to visit you, and (to be the better welcome) we have brought with us each man a bottle of Canary; who's that knocks?
It is somebody at the Compter-gate, some more Rats I believe.
Bring them hither of what degree soever.
I, I, Hole um, Hole um; Rat, tat, tat, this is the City-Mous-trap; here do we lye at a sure ward, revel all night, and breath defiance to the Watch and the Constable; we have suffered under the terror of Authority, and now we have got the Law in our own hands.
A Rat, a Rat, a Rat.
What are they, Citizens or Gentlemen?
No, no, they are neither Citizens nor Gentlemen, and yet they are a company for Lords, they are musical Rats, singing Rats, men that are come to keep time in the Counter; they are crowding in, therefore you that mean to express your activity, prepare and be in readiness, a man in prison may easily do his sink-a-pace.
These are the Blades that were with us at Hogsdon; this was some precise Constable, some brother of the Family, that sent the Musicians to prison, or else some jovial Hue∣mourist that had a mind the prisoners should be merry to night; well my Masters, since you are here, strike up cou∣ragiously, here be Gentlemen have a mind to discover their footing, you shall not lose your labour, I'll pay your Fees in the morning.
We thank you noble Mr. Flylove.
Gentlemen, throw of your bottomless pantoffles, and let's to it, here's Sack to cherish us when we have fine∣shed.
Gentlemen, we thank you, when we'r at liberty, we will send you something worth your estimation, in the mean time drink that.
I come, let's go, I do not like the fume of this close room; how fare you Mrs. Trimwel?
Well Sir, but that the scent is somewhat no∣some, the room above, from whence we came, is sweeter.
Come, we will go up again then.
I, I, let's go, god-night good friends.
We thank you Gentlemen, we will drink your healths to morrow morning.
In the morning Music we will keep our words with you, but I shall talk with you for the trick you put upon me at Hogsdon.
It was no fault of ours indeed Mr. Rivers, we will maked appear to morrow.
Well, well, good night.
Good night to you all Gentlemen.
Come my Masters we that were Dancers will make an equal division of the Gentleman's bounty, here is ten shillings, and we are six on's.
12. d. a piece, &amp; the rest in drink among the prisners
I like the motion well my equal Steward, here is some Sack left, that we will drink with the Musicians, and ex∣cuse their Garnish in the morning.
Agreed, agreed.
Let us consult farther in our with-drawing room: How now Chamberlain cannot you leave your old trade? must you be filching? would thou undo a poor Common∣wealth at one pull thou unconscionable thief, but I am too subtle for you sirrah, you can't deceive me; The devil take me if my Angel leave me.
Nobly spoke my Lord; room for my Lord there.
It is very light, begar me sall be discover; now if my string do slip, down goes Sir Reverence upon some Wash-mans head, and begar dat will bewray all; I can see no∣ting but de Fiddles in de Prison; if I sall break my neck in sundry for my liberty, begar my adversary make dice of my bones, but I sall cousin him, for my bone crumble to ashes: So, so, was very fast, and so fast, as me can, me will down; Begar me think it be somewhat strange dat me mus come to be save by de Rope, but if I be taken, for ought I know I sall be hang in de Rope. I care not me sall  ventre for all dat, as good be hang as live in prison: Begar here comes some∣body vith light, me sall be taken, dere  be no vii to scope, and me cannot clime up again: Oh Diabolo vat sall become of me, de vindow be shut, me can no creep into de Tavern, and I sall not be taken for Zhorge a horseback, as me saw once in de Play; begar dis man be drunk, I see by his stagger.
A saucy Constable to question my lodging, can∣not a man go home to his house in peace? Is it not suffice∣ent that I can carry my self to the Counter, but I must be beholding to an enigmatical Constable, and his mischievous
Watch; a man can no sooner come near them, but who goes there? come before the Constable; Come before a Cuckold, Oh such a rogue would be hanged; Let me see, where am I? this is Woodstreet, whereabouts is the Feathers-Tavern.
A pox for you, you be too near de Feder-Tavern already, and begar now I see him, dis fellow be prisoner in de Counter, but I have an invention he sall no spy me, be∣gar me will creep into dis Bush, and ven he be gone me sall go down courageo.
This is the Counter where many a man lies with a heavy heart, I have been a prisoner this two or three years, yet I walk abroad at my leisure, and am as drunk as a devil for my pleasure.
Begar me have extreme need to make vater, I sall pish my breesh, Oh Diabolo I sall be found, begar me can stay no longra, me sall burse.
I will knock up this rogue Hugh at the Feathers; Hugh, Hugh, you rogue rise, my name's Pimpwel, you sleepy rogue rise and let me in, must I wait upon you with a pox to you. Nouns what's that?
Begar now I be undone in a pissing vhile.
You son of a Bachelor, do you throw your Pis∣pots upon my head, if I could find stones I'd break your windows, but since I cannot, I will even make bold to set fire of your Bush, then throw your water and spare not.
Oh Mordieu, me sall be burn in de Bush, or be hang in de Rope, I volt I were in me shamber again.
What's here, a Rope? some pri∣sooner  has made an escape out of the Masters-side; there's money for somebody to pay, I'll in and call the Turn-key, a prisoner escaped, a prisoner, a prisoner.
From whence?
A private chamber in the Masters-side.
A prisoner, a prisoner.
Look, look, here's the Rope.
Run up to the Masters-side, see if the French Knight be in's Chamber, his Action is 6000. l. we are all undone if he escape away.
I, I, we are all undone, if he be gone here's Rope enough for us all.
Pox on you for a drunken rogue, where hast bin?
Drinking wine in bowls boys, I am almost drunk, but what shall we do for the prisoner, shall I run after him?
Which way is he gone?
The Lord knows.
Hallowgh?
What say you?
The French Knight is escaped, you must make swift pursuit, he cannot be gone far.
Pluck up the Rope; look well to the Gate, Pimp∣well run you to Cripplegate, you to some other Watches, and all the way you run, cry out a prisoner.
A prisoner, a prisoner.
Oh the great pox run with you all, vat a fear have they put me in, begar me will not stay, it is very light, I see no passenger, dis was de bravest time: So, now me are down, futra for Keeper; begar me can no shuse but laugh, how they run-away from me to find me; Oh me brave bush! Fish vii sall me take to be safe, me mus come no near Crepe∣plegate, nor Sheapside, I sall take some udder vii, the devil is in me if I come again; Farewell good Counter, I am not loath to part from you: I remember two line of an English∣man dat vent from de Prison, they var des:
Dis House mus be let at a miserable rate,
For I have left my Shambra, any man may have it.
Farewell Comptera.
Can you direct me to the hapless lodging of young
He lies in the Masters-side, he is a Gentleman whose misery works much compassion in each Officer, I would my power could save him.
Thank you Sir?
Such worthy wishes in such men as you,
Who bear a function of that cruel nature,
Being so rare, appears most excellent;
Pray tell me Sir, how doth he take his sufferings?
I think he is in love; he's often heard
To sigh a Ladies name, and sing sad Sonnets
In dissolving passion,
Such as might melt the Tyger-cruelty
Of men turned Tyrants; thus much I observe,
The prison doth not fright him from his rest,
Like his divorce from her whose name he sighs so;
I'll call him if you please, yet it is somewhat early.
Sir, I give thanks
Unto your loving diligence, and with your leave,
I shall conceive it but a friendly Office,
To spare his labour, and walk up to him.
Those stairs direct you, turn on your left hand.
Are you the Keeper Sir?
I turn the key, my Office is as much
To let men out as in; I take no pride,
To stand twixt men and freedom, suck a Keeper
I am, and would be thought.
Heaven be thy Keeper, and grant thy place cor∣rupt thee not; pray Sir, was there not brought in amongst other Gentlemen, a prisoner late last night, called Mr. Flylove?
Yes Lady.
How could I speak a word in private with him? the business which I have concerns his freedom.
I shall be glad to call him, — Mr. Flylove.
Mr. Flylove, Mr. Flylove.
What a noise you make, I'm become a man of cal∣ling now; who is it would speak with me Sir.
Here's a fair Lady, I'll leave you to your oppor∣tunity.
Gramercy honest Keeper: How now, who's this? How my blood startles in me on the sudden?
What, do I fright you Sir? I come to see and com∣fort you with my best love to file your Fetters off.
Such charitable language, and such face
Had beauteous Bellaflora, to whose soul
Mine was contracted, but my breach of vow,
Joined with the infamy of this Ioath'd action,
So lately done, hath sent her far from me;
This is the pleasant widow we met at Hogsdon,
I remember now;
But see how guilt will fool a man, I was
Admiring how you thought to find me here.
Some other time I'll tell you, if I may
(Without the breach of modest manners) ask you
What is the cause of your imprisonment?
What a question's that? I'll lye in the Counter all my life time, ever I make known the cause that laid me here, a toy, a trifle, for nothing but disputing with the Constable, here's Jack, Wildblood and Frank Rivers in the house (three merry boys be we) here's the woman too, will you go see them.
No Sir, but if the cause of your restraint from freedom be of that easy value, you'll be gone within an hour.
I, I, within this hour at the farthest.
Poor man, how thou deceiv'st me and thy self,
I as much blush to let him understand
I know the cause of his affliction,
As he doth to reveal it; if you please
I'll stay till you go off.
You may stay this twelve-month for ought  I know; I must put her off, to say the plain truth Lady I have an Action entered against me since I came in.
You need not let that fright you, I have so much skill, although a very unexperienced woman to tell you, whilst you are under the command of any Justice for the breach of the peace, you are not liable to any Action.
She says true, where the Devil got you so much law?
Come, come, I know the cause that keeps you here.
How! I am sorry for that.
Is it not a women's Action?
A women's Action.
I have hit the mark, and I could name the party.
Lady I'll take my leave, I'm called above.
Indeed you are not Sir, pray stay a little,
I know you think the fact you have committed,
To be of that vile nature, that you blush
To tell or think I know it; you the less
Stand in my condemnation for the ill,
Because it was acted on so much deformity,
It makes me think some Witchcraft, drink, or madness
Possessed you at that time; they being removed,
Your penitence brings back your ravished worth,
And you are man again, but the nice winner
Of every fair one's a judicious sinner,
And in that judgement multiplies each fact,
And finds his Tragedy in the last Act.
This circumstance confirms your knowledge of it, And I am sorry.
That I know it.
Tic true.
But if you please't shall not be the worse for you,
Would I were beautiful enough to please you,
Or had a mind that you might think so fair,
To merit your best wishes in the bliss
Of sacred Wedlock, you should then be sure
To shake this bondage off.
Pray let me pause.
My former rashness may take license for it;
I am in prison, and the Law exacts
My body for a year; I could produce
Such bayl as is sufficient for my freedom,
But I will perish ever I reveal my scandal;
This woman's fair, and hath a face so like
To one, whose memory I owe my being,
I know not what to answer; Then again
It is for my freedom, from a bondage which
May ruin soul and body; I'm resolved,
If Bellaflora knew it, so would she,
And pardon all, which works my Liberty.
You do not ask me this to try me, do you?
No by those joys I wish for.
Nor tell me of my fact, or of your friendship,
At every angry occasion,
Which the best married pair seldom avoid.
May all my life be made of discontents,
And they in old age kill me, if I do:
How near she comes to Bellaflora still,
In all her noble actions; If I could
Believe the Pythagorean axioms true,
Of transmigrated spirits, did the Grave
Contain my Bellaflora, I should think
This frame contained her soul, the Gods would sure
Consume me, if this Contract I now make
And seal, this virtuous woman were not lawful:
By all the joys eternal, by the hopes
I have to live a life that's long and blessed,
To see a numerous issue fairly bred
In all their actions, showing still the minds
Of their long sleeping Ancestors, I'll bee
Thy husband, love, and life, I'll marry thee.
This day.
This very day.
Stephen Flylove, the Constable's come.
Sir, the Constable waits for you.
Delay not, in the mean time I'll bail you here, Remember Sir.
I doe.
Adieu my dear.
W•lcome to liberty my Cavaliers,
The gaudy portalIs of the red-cheekt morn,
Stand wide to entertain you, and delight
Your sickened senses with the bright display
Of glittering Phoebus.
Your genius soars too high, you'll melt his wings.
I am aerie as Philetus when he tripped
Over the ears of Corn, and ne'er bent head;
I could out-run Atlanta.
Atlanta? within these two hours a Cripple could
out-run thee, and give thee five in the fifteen:
But Stephen, why so stupid? rouse thy spirit;
Can Liberty discomfort, or the exchange
Of grates for fragrant fields dismay thee thus.
Faith I am dull, and I have reason for it.
What is the melancholy matter prithee?
That which will move you all when I shall speak; Mercurio's dead.
Dead!
He was well last night.
He died this morning.
Oh my poor lost friend!
His cruel Creditor is paid; Oh my Mercurio!
I knew it would dull you all as well as I,
This day his Funeral is, I hope you'll be
The sad spectators of his Obsequies,
Raynard the Keeper will instruct you when,
And tell you more, pray go and leave me here,
I have a sadness that concerns not you,
I'll put it off and meet ye.
Good morrow Stephen.
Farewell friend.
Good morrow Mr. Flyl.
Your humble servant; Laday what stay you for?
Where would you have me be?
Where you please; I can't command your being.
What means my Love?
Your speech betrays some discontent in you.
Yes, I'm troubled, Oh my sweet Bellaflora!
Who do you sigh for Sir?
A friend, a friend, an honest friend of mine.
This is a time to banish discontents.
No, no, to increase them.
It is an hour was made to consecrate our holy contract
Why I, I told you so.
Will you not marry me.
I will not break my faith to Bellaflora
To gain a Queen, a Goddess.
Then you have plighted faith unto another.
Yes cunning temptress I have.
Why do you blemish my well-meaning heart,
With such a title?
Could your securer subtlety presume
On no deceit but this? Had you proposed
Out of some Magazine of rarities,
Gold, Silver, Jewels, •hough they were as precious
As Erephile's Bracelet (which she sold
Her dear affecting husband for) I had
Esteemed them all as nothing, but weak I
Too fond of (what I now curse) Liberty,
Must sell my peace, my life, and much I fear
My bliss eternal.
Oh you Angels, where
Lives there a faithful man, why did you make
This solemn Contract to me.
It was a bad protestation, and the breach
Is better then performance, yet because
You shall not say I cheated favours from you,
Resign me to my prison, where I'll live,
Only with thinking of my Bellaflora,
Her very name shall purify the ayre,
And make a dungeon grow as fragrant,
As Meadow Flowers in triumphant June.
Thou common man that dost two contracts break,
I have so much to say, I cannot speak.
Like men for Robberies that lose their breath,
I leave the prison to embrace my death.
You are very wanton Frank.
Now I have got thee single, shall we try
An amorous duel for a boy now, I'm all fire,
And could perform an act 'bove Hercules;
Glue thy red lips to mine, and let us prove,
The jocund pleasure of the billing Dove.
Again, once more, you do not do it heartily,
We will make a numeration from a kiss,
Shall pose Arithmetic.
You'll tell of this.
Steal, and reveal; he's a bold thief indeed.
There are too many such.
They cannot have a favour, — such a one.
I, such a one.
As you imagine, but they must reveal it,
As if it were a second sporf to tell it.
They glory in their actions, and would prove
How much they merit by their Ladies love;
This I disdain.
Do ye use to talk in your sleep, you'll tell it to your bed-fellow.
You are too jealous of me.
Come then, I'll try thee; kiss me,
That's the first peal to bed, but I won't trust ye.
Why do you mock me thus?
The cause being so great, I may be doubtful,
You'll have another Love, then out goes all,
But use your will.
To do thy will a pleasure, shall we be private.
As private as you please.
Such privacy best pleases.
Come let's away then.
Stay (upon better thought) I have  No such desire to it.
How?
Prithee be not angry, I am very loath to go to hell so easily.
What pretty change is this?
I would it pleased you, pray satisfy one thought and I am for you.
Willingly.
And truly.
By my life I will.
Did never silken Gallant with quaint words,
A fair proportioned body, and smooth chin,
Such as you women like, tempt you to this,
This feat, before I moved you.
Never.
Never, prithee bethink thy self, you doubt me still.
But you suspect me more, I vow never.
How fain would I believe thee, if thou swear true,
You're fitter far for Heaven then this act,
Which thou shalt ne'er be guilty of for me;
What pity it is to take fair new blancht Lawn,
And sprinkle ink on it; let not your husbands doubts,
Bred by your frequent absence, and such hours
Civility ne'er warranted, urge you
To acts that cause his shame, and your own shame.
Whats' your intent for this.
I'll tel you.
The guilty giddy people, who conceive
All acts more vile then they appear,
Have spread an infamy upon us both,
Which if unquell'd, in time will fix a stain,
(though causeless) which no Rhetoric can charm
To alteration; thus in brief I'll do,
By a most quaint invention I have thought,
I shall return you to your husband, who
Shall with his love, not jealousy, embrace you,
And to the bold ears of the rumorous world,
Declare his error, and your innocence.
A very modest way to do me mischief,
I thank you for your love, your honest love.
That you'll confess hereafter, will you go?
Yes Sir, I'll wait on you;
Am I betrayed by tricks? a Letter op'd,
The secret read, and then sealed up again?
Inquisitive fool, thy dear experience shall
Instruct thee, what a fate he undergoes,
That turns the fierce stream of a women's love:
I could be less impatient had he spoke
From knowledge of my guilt, then know my will,
And afterwards disclose me; well I'll disguise my anger,
And frame a fierce revenge shall make thee tremble,
Women act mischief sure when they dissemble.
Is the French Knight in prison, what is his debt?
Six thousand pound they say Sir.
Tic a great sum I have been wrong informed,
It was credibly reported on the Change,
He had a free estate, his Traffic great,
A most unquestioned credit; and doth all
Conclude in this, they did not mean me well
That tempted my belief thus.
Shall my suit have gracious hearing yet Sir?
What for Mercurio?
Because I was so near to be deceived,
With the feigned riches of a Bankerupt,
Would you betray your self to certain beggary.
Will you be pleased to free him from his bondage?
It is reported he is sick, that place
Will kill him, where is then your satisfaction?
He cannot want a friend for twenty pound,
I will not lose my money, I'll take time,
If he can fit me with security.
Alas he is not able.
What are these; hark you friend, whose body's this?
And whither carry you it?
Here Sir our journey ends,
It is the body of deceased Mercurio,
A prisoner at your suit, who dyed this morning,
And thus according to an ancient custom,
We bear him to you (all that's left)
His bones to make you satisfaction,
Because his poverty enforced him (living)
To keep your right from you; withal, our form
Is to deliver to the Creditor,
At whose peculiar suit the debtor dyes,— A bale of Dice.
Strange custom; Heaven! now it doth amaze me.
I have a little speech that must excuse
The expenses of a bought Oration, which concerns
His miserable end, and cause of it, and I have done.
Oh my Mercurio.
Look to the Lady.
When he came in he wanted all that makes
Man in this Age substantial (Friends and Coin)
Which want was soon attended with these, neglect &amp; hunger
But then the perturbations of his mind,
His sighing silence only could declare,
As if they were too vast for elocution;
Great griefs are tongue-tied, there's no clamour reared,
So deepest waters crawl along unheard.
Most reverend piece of sorrow, whose wet eyes
Drop, as they would command another Spring,
To raise the body from its earthly ruin,
To heat and life again; what friendship had you with him?
Sir, I am one,
That wish I had such nearness to his virtue,
As to his blood; a poor unhappy Kinsman.
There's so much Magic in your sorrow Sir,
All my attentions charmed.
Like men who are near drowning, catch weak hold
On broken boards, on sedge, or any thing
Disastrous chance betrays to the wild waves,
He sends for me that could but grieve his sight,
With the wet sorrow in my eyes for him:
Instead of Chambers hung with Tapestry,
Arras, and Attic pictures, the dark walls
Are easly beautified with Chalk and Cole,
According to the melancholy fancy
Of the sad Prisoners, where the numerous beds
Show like so many Graves in a Churchyard,
With the men rising out: No Canopies
But what the charitable Spider wove,
To save their always watching eyes from danger,
For they are un-us'd to sleep.
Alas poor men.
In such a state as this my kinsman lay,
My poor, poor kinsman.
Thou weep too fast old man, I shall not overtake thee.
I figh'd, sate down by him, and did observe
The manner of his Chamber-mates, and one
Beloved above the rest, as it appeared,
Was cherished with a friend that happy day,
Who said he came to see him, could not stay,
Although some Messenger fix times had been
To fetch him, but in vain, was ne'er within
After he heard the business, though his ear
Was within hearing of the Messenger:
At last he was within, without all doubt,
Because he heard the prisoners going out,
Gives him a shilling, bids him have good cheer,
He was glad to see him, sorry to see him here,
And so he parts, protesting for to come,
He knows not when, this is his wretched doom
Of undone debtors, and my kinsmans Tomb.
Since bleeding cleanses veins, I hope to find
Th'expence of tears will purify the mind:
What is this writing Sir?
It is his own hand,
One hour before his death he writ Epitaph.
With his own hand? pray read it.
I shall Sir.
I which once with life did move,
Here lye Coffined up, to prove
Till death I was Splendora's Love.
I that have with many groans,
And wet eyes washed the prison stones,
For want of Money, pay my bones.
Let none with exclamation call,
Upon my name, and scorn my fall,
I owed but little, and paid all.
Thou hast paid all indeed, thy breath and all,
Is it were no fin I could bestow a wish,
That life would visit these cold corps again.
Where shall we bury him Sir, the custom is
To bury men in debt in the New-Churchyard;
Shall we dispose him there?
No, since he's dead he shall be well interred,
Though half my estate waste for it, I have cause,
He loved Splendora, poor Girl she'll dye too;
To your charge I commit this forty pound,
To provide mourning; I'll have Surgeons strait,
That shall embalm the body.
You show your self a noble Gentleman,
Whose memory we will pray for; here Frank dispatch.
It shall be done.
Sir, here be Gentlemen that loved him, are
Willing to express their loves, they have a Dirge.
They are welcome, I'll attend their ceremony▪
FRom selling, or from mortgaging of Lands,
From turning over goods in others hands,
And from the setting of our marks to bands.
From cruelty that keeps good men in awe,
From Sergeants, and such Griffins of the Law,
And from the chattering of an Yeild-hall Daw.
From living at a miserable rate,
In prison where all people are ingrate;
And from the Porters at the Counter gate.
From being dragged in there with cruel gripes,
By an old cursed Catchpole called Tripes,
From paying for our Candles and our Pipes,
Next from the Stocks, the Hole, and Little-ease,
Sad places, which kind Nature do displease,
And from the rattling of the Keepers Keys,
Is all performed?
To a tittle, here's a discharge from the Office.
Then rise from thy dead sleep thou man of care,
Thy debt is paid, there's joyful news for thee.
Am I deluded,
Not a jot, come old man embrace him for your son,
Though he be poor, he is a Gentleman, and meritorious.
But art thou living?
I, you know it well enough, you shall even go toge∣there for your plots, I have paid my self it seems.
Your Money lies in the Office Sir.
It is very well, who comes here?
Ware ho! here comes a mad man.
Yes, a horn-mad man, Myruon are you there?
And your Sweetheart Rivers, I must part you;
Unhand him impudence.
Sir, if you lay a violent hand on her, I touch your heart.
Gentlemen, Is there law or conscience in this?
To keep a mans wife, as they say, in spite on's teeth.
F. Rivers is more kind then I expected,
Your jealousy hath wrecked her virtuous name,
And by my life she's free from actual ill.
As ever thy mother was.
He'll ne'er believe you,
No, he shall I warrant you,
Ever I commit her to your cursed usage,
I'll see some reformation of your life.
You'll see it.
Yes Sir, I'll see it.
My Mothers daughter shall not be exposed
Unto your giddy humours.
Your Mothers daughter?
Yes Sir, my Sister.
What trick is this?
Pray what may I call your name Sir.
I never feared it, though I have disguised it,
For some ends which best concern my self,
Before I went to France, men that would know
By my own name to call me, called me Brooks.
My brother Frederick?
The same Sister; I must talk with you.
Oh, my shame! Brother I hope you'll forgive me.
This is no time nor place for our contention.
Who comes here?
Either my eyes deceive me, or here comes
The form of Bellaflora.
What do you gaze? Do you not know me Sir?
Yes sure, I know you; Are not you Bellaflora?
That is my name.
I know it is, but were not you disguised, and called Fairchaste?
I remember your amorous Alphabet.
O my strange excellent fortune; can you forgive all?
Yes, and seal my self thy own for ever.
My dear Cousin.
How Sir?
Tic so indeed, the Wildblood's out, this is your cousin Worthlove.
Welcome from France good Cousin.
Fair cousin I thank thee, this unity contents me.
As I live here's Sir R. Lamard that broke the prison, how the devil dares he venture.
Be your leave Zhentelmen, room for Sir Reveren. who be come to claim his Lady, his Madam.
How came you out of prison Sir.
Begar me pay de money, and now me come to your dautera.
Now you have paid away your money, the truth is, Sir she is disposed of to another.
And we will dispose of you that can break prisons.
Begar here be de Keeper, vat fall me do now?
Nay, you're fast enough, we will take an order for your sli∣ding.
Zhentelmen will no man be my bayl?
The sum is too great for me.
Pray Zhentelmen.
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Come Sir, you must to prison again.
Mus, begar me will not.
Then we must force you Sir.
You Pimping rogue, why do you tug me thus?
You know me well enough.
What is your tongue changed, what tricks have you?
I'll speak with Mr. Nice. Pray Sir, peruse that Picture and Letter.
It is my wives picture sure; Splendora, was not this your Mothers picture?
Yes Sir, the very same she gave my brother, when he went to Paris.
And this my hand, the Letter that I sent him.
And I your son, come to crave a blessing.
And with my heart thou hast it.
Will Nice.
Mr. Brooks your servant.
Noble Mr. Nice.
Ho, my politic Stephen.
No, my politic William.
Sir I am yours, and joy to see you in England.
Welcome to London brother, you can court a Lady most exactly in broken French.
I am glad it pleased you sister; Keepers I'll quit you presently, that Action which was entered was a plot of mine, to have my father match this Gentleman with my kind sister; there's no danger in it I can assure you.
Well, I'm contented Sir.
You are wags I see; were you sent seven years ago France, and come again to cozen your friends, but Heaven be your joy. Come, cannot you express a little of your French action with these Ladies, shall we not have a Dance?
And very fit, methinks the time requires it.
With all my heart.
And mine.
Every man take his Lady then.
Gentlemen, you've done exceeding well; if you please to walk in, Dinner at this hour waits for you.
Come my mad merry Mates and fellow-Travellers, let's in and chat the story of our Travels, the tricks of our Disguises, with the quaint and jovial Humours which we have found in the Counter.
To marry and be civil our next care is,
We now have done enough for Youths Figures.
WEll; How is it now? we heard you laugh, but pray.
Was it at us, the Poet, or the Play?
The Poet's full of joy though, to the brim,
And says, he's sure ye do not laugh at him;
Because, he finds you only laugh at that,
Which he desires may be worth laughing at:
And then he heard you Clap; that Verdict stands
In Law, he hath it under all your hands;
Unless when we were freed from Woodstreet Den,
You had a plot to Clap us up again:
But waving all, we (without more suspense)
Accept your Clapping in the better sense.
This is the sum, I have no more to say,
Either for Poet, Actors, or the Play:
If his dull Humours please not, we implore,
That you'll go all to the Counter and see more.

