THis is the place, is it not Lewcippus?
The same, nor will our under-officer delay us long.
If this Goose prove not well featherd, our hopes
Are blown up: our only happiness is, we have our
Limbs to help us, whilst others must halt out their
Wants in a Hospital.
Yes, and have their pensions paid them in rotten
Tobacco, and carved bone-lace sticks for bread.
Thou art in the right, for the better rewards are
Reserved for the deca•ed sons of the shop, or decaled
Placket squires, fellows that dare not not look in a glass•
For fear they they should be frighted with the ruins
Of a nose.
Well, it was our wisdom not to fancy this
Grinning honour, in the mean time I would sell
My forged Commission for a bankrouts bill of exchange.
And I my buff coat for a freeze jerkin, and all
My airy honours for the greasy steam of a Cooks shop.
Here he comes 
Like the captive Knight of the golden Image;
Don dell P•oebo—welcome.
Fie—Fie—A Soldier and tears!
Doest lie—that doest, cham no Zodier,
Cha been better bred then so.
It was thy own proffer friend.
Yes, but when I wonder? when chad took a pot too much at market, and was a little tox•cated.
Thou shalt have a sober time of repentance:
S. death! what's here? 
An Incubus•
Or else a sury frighted out of her wits.
She wants but a periwig of Snakes to lead the dance of Hobgoblin•.
Why Whore, be these Rogues here? I have been
Frighted out of my naked bed to follow them:
What doest thou amongst these Varlets?
Come home—come home you whoreson lout.
Nay wife, good wife, do not anger the worshipful Captains.
Pew, you dotard, doest think I will be frighted out of my Boy, ti• sign thou hast but small share in the begetting of him, that thou can so willingly part with him—
Sergeant away with him, how vermin do ye bark?
To the guard with him, and lay him neck and heels; S. death—affronted!
Captain—I beseech your honourable worship.
What say old Cropshin?
Go hire thy Beldam a house in a Churchyard,
That when she hath bequeathed her garments to a Pape〈…〉
She may walk there to fright Sextons.
Good Sir bear with her, for when she is up she is
A devil in Carrion, but I will disburse here;
Here is v•rty old Angels, and a good vitty fellow
For a supply—
How!—part with thy gold! why the Palsy
hath shook thy wit out at thy nostrils: must Angels fly to fetch him back? Isle do'• without, or Isle scratch their eyes out.
Peace good matron, and go water the furrows of thy cheeks in ••ars, twill look most religiously.
Thou hast been so long hung to roof, th〈…〉
O•herwise thou wilt choke the worms,
And in the next age be sold for mummy.
I took my Mother to be good for nothing.
Old fellow we incline to pity thee, but the supply looks something wretchedly, there must be some additi∣onall advance.
We will not stumble at that.
Did ever handle arms friend? Sergeant, try him.
Chwas ne'er thus hampered before, cham afraid toned come of.
Come, handle your arms.
Each amt well skilled in these guns, i have seen them at Mouster set it a veer with the end of a cord, sure these snip∣per snappers be a new fashion, beant they?
Ne'er fear, there's no hurt. 
Save you Gentlemen;
Lives there one Cosmo Buffonie here?
I am the man you spy for friend, for want of a better.
Look Gudgeon—what spark is that?
I have a letter from the Lord Arratus;
What it concerns, the contents will inform you.
Pray master Captain read it, we beant book learned.
No—whose fault was that you old knave, the Boy had dossety enough and thou would ha put him toot.
He here sends you word how he desires to have his Nephew your Son sent forthwith to Syracuse, for he intend• to adopt him his Heir.
How! why then we are made for ever? Gudgeon thou goosed too.
Croon and Lewcippus, the city cheats. 
But hear, you friends, you first must disengage from us.
How stands he Sir engaged to you?
How—fellow, go meddle with your horse comb saucy groom: Sergeant—away with him.
Nay—worshipful Captain—I will disburse.
For what? keep up your money, who dares touch him?
So bold, my livery creature? Il• make thee know Thou't not in the stable, where thou command ore horse boy•; Unhand him, or by heaven—
What will you do Sir? do' think I fear plundered Coats and big looks? 
Devils and fiends,
Shall I endure this!
Yes, and this too. 
Come, your ransom is paid.
Blessings on your heart, come son Buff.
Heavens crown the actions with success!
My gratitude divides
It self amongst you all, the only mean
Of recompense, until some welcome beam
Of opportunity shall light my wishes
To a requital of your early loves.
But now the minutes languish in sad hast,
And from the sad performance of these duties
To our deceased General we must
Remain griefs debtors, whilst we sati•fie
Importunate revenge. You dismal badges
Of their despair, tell us we have an enemy
Whose resolutions are as high and bloody,
As their condition sad, if they refuse
This last act of an injured Princes mercy.
What means this hasty summons? is your anger
So swift in motion, that it not admits
Due rites unto the dead? The doleful hours
In which we mourned our Fathers funerals
Hath scarce left seals on the records of time.
Yet though the grief sit heavy on our souls,
It's not of kin to fear, we dare to draw
Our swords ere we have wiped our eyes, and in
A peal of Canons, more harmonious then
The solemn Bell, thunder his funeral peal.
Tic pity a resolve thus fortified
With valour, should unravel all its glory
In an unlawful cause. This desperation
Valours blind hieroglyphic, wherein nought
Appears but monsters only, serves to fright
Deluded fancy from supreme commands.
Oh do not then precipitate a family
Which may outlive approaching ruin, to
Stand the supporters of this State, when those
That prop it now, are sunk with weight of age.
Nobility, like heavens bright Planets, waits
Upon the Sun of Majesty, whilst none
But Comets drop from their usurped spears.
Then rectify your reason, and let's now
Conclude this war without a greater flux
Of blood then is already spent, that so
Rebellion may not add more sables to
What mercy yet may pierce.
You might have spared this labour, though we lost
The strongest Citadel of all our hopes
In our dear fathers death, those high resolves▪
He dying left as legacies to us
Are so much cherished, that should I consent
To stifle those brave flames, his angry ghost
Roused from the silence of a dormitory,
Would resume its seat to chide my floath.
I've only with me those few wounded men
Which from the last loud stroke of war escaped
With life, not health, to serve me; yet though their arms
Grown weak with the late frequent loss of blood,
Sell not our lives at honours highest rate,
We will fall no humble sacrifice to death.
I'm sorry Sir,
That my advice, proceeding from the love
I bear your worth, hath mist its wished for ends.
—Farewell—All happiness
But that which waits on victory attend you.
The like to thee brave soul, since part we must;
When next we meet, twill be in blood and dust.
—Oh Madam!—whither will you fly?
The day is lost, your noble brother taken,
Wars furious Godesse, fierce Enyo stands
Over your battered gates, and wheeling round
A dropping pine about her bloody tresses
•ends with its dismal light an entrance to
The ministers of death, the unclasped power
Of the rude Soldier, like a deluge broke
O'er a rich field, the last and fatal blow
Is giving, all our dying hopes. The battlements
Sweat oft in flames, whilst loud confusion fills
The enlightened air with outcries, and our shricks
Choked in the embryo of our prayers can find
No way to angry heaven: the infant dies
Whilst in the po•ch of life, and natures webs
Decayed by age, are rent from out the the looms.
Imaculate Virgins to each touch betrayed
Lie in a tembling agony, their beauties
Like a rich Mine lavished to vulgar hands,
The injured prize of every impious slave.
Weep not my dear companion, thou that hast sha•'d
A like with me in every change of fortune,
If fate ordains this the Catastrophe
Of all those tragic scenes, which these late wars
Made us unwilling, though sad actors in,
To us our virgin innocence shall be
Protection safer then the united swords
Of earths most powerful monarchs.
Oh they are entering, let's fly dear Madam.
Whither? when slaughter runs through all
What place can give protection unto us?
To thy charge, my hurt's but slight.
Yet will deserve your care Sir.
Ho! what place is this!
Hung round with stately pictures, starred with lights!
With what an awful majesty it looks!
—sure it enshrines some deity—what's she?
—with such a face
Troy's tutelary angel looked, when all
Her crown of turrets dropped their flaming heads.
If those blessed spirits, which freed from all the crimes
Cast on them by mortality, and made
Fit for celestial palaces, retain
A thought of us, as else our faith deceives us,
Oh let the white soul of some sainted Virgin
Descend for my protection.
What ere thou art that in this dreadful shape
Come to profane this hallowed place with blood,
If in your breast there dwell a humane thought
Telling you that a woman was your mother,
For her sake pity a distressed Virgin.
Not for my life I beg, but only that
My honour kept unblemished you would ease
Me of that tedious burden.
A chilling frost unnerves my joints, sure this is
Divinity or Magic that hath thus
Deposed my reason to let Rebel passion
Triumph in the injured throne—Rise Lady
—there's a religious ice about my heart
That chains up all my fury—I shall rather
Slight the commands of an injured Prince,
Then violate ought which the dictates of
My soul proclaims for sacred.
Oh lead me then to some polluted place
That's grown drunk with blood, and there let mine
Increase the purple deluge rather then
Let life add yet more burdens to my soul.
—I shall not always be protected by
This places sanctity; or if I were,
Find few of so much virtue to be with
Religious reverence awed.
Do not, dear soul,
Mistrust the gentle smiles of fate, my power
Secures you from all future violence
Which in the loudest storm of fury can
Fall from the steepest precipice of rage.
Oh my dear brother.
Kill—kill the gaudy whore.
Hold—I command you hold:
This is a place too sacred to be made
A scene for such a bloody act, and would
Style what our cause calls justice sacrilege,
Heaven being it self profaned in the abuse
Of what its power for sanctity devotes.
His wounds seem large enough already to
Let life fly out through all the guards of nature;
Or if they are not, to preserve him will
Be but the glimring of a Taper ere
Blown out by the formalities of Law.
—Hear—search his wounds, and let it be your charge
To use all diligence in their recovery.
Sound a retreat, and you, that bear command
See the rude Soldiers violence be drawn
Within the bounds of mercy. Victories stained
With too much blood are blessings but profaned.
Do not my dear too much afflict thy self,
Each tear you shed drops from my heart in blood.
—I'm conquered in this victory, and become
A captive to my prisoner. Come Lady, dare you trust
Your self to my protection, your guardian Angel
Robed in virginity, is not whiter then
Those thoughts which clothe my soul when they reflect
On so much suffering virtue. Were my lust
Hot as the womb of Aetna, yet there lies
A secret magic in this touch to cool
Those most intemperate fires. The morning pearls
Dropped in the Lilies spotless bosom, are
Less chastely cool, ere the meridian Sun
Hath kissed them into heat; yet since the ice
Of Anchorites by religious flames may be
Warmed into holy Calentures, Oh give
My passions leave to move within the orb
Of your Celestial beauty, whilst no line
Tends 〈◊〉 the center of a thought unchaste.
Alas my Lord—this is
No time to play with Love (that child of peace)
When war and death fit by and hold the stakes.
The impious mirth of the bold Atheist, that
Riots at funerals, and undaunted sits
Whilst heaven in plagues drops vengeance round about him,
Unvests his soul of no more modesty
Then such wilde love would mine, whose growth must needs
Be fatal when sown in a field of blood.
—Yet I confess—
If heaven did ever lend balm to cure a grief
So vast as mine, even whilst the orifice
Was warm with blood, this cordial favour would
Perform the cure: but I am lost to all
The future hopes of dull mortality;
The habitation of my soul is grown
Too great a burden, since so often wet
With miseries ere to be born with ease.
If all my service to my Prince hath merited
Ought worth requital, he must show it in
Mercy to you, or by a blacker doom
Shake my obedience off. But only grant
Me thus much satisfaction, that when time
Hath purged your griefs malignity, and for
These thorns strewed the soft roses of content
Within your Virgin bosom, that you would
With pity then on my afflictions look.
I were ungrateful else: Know noble Sir,
I so much prize your virtues, that if ere
My frowning stars smile on my fate again,
Their powerful'st influence shall reflect on you
In so much thankful gratitude, you shall
Acknowledge it the eldest child of love.
My joy grows equal with my wishes; Come Let's in my dear, and see thy wounded brother.
My plot hath thrived thus far, I have discovered
A rival in my love to Theocrine—but such a one
That nature in such haste did huddle up,
She gave him scarce the Characters of man.
How purblind is the world, that such a monster
In a few dirty acres swaddled, must
Be mounted in opinions empty scale,
Above the noblest virtues that adorn•
Souls that make worth their center, and to that
Draw all the lines of action! Worn with age
And wounds to a neglected skeleton
The noble Soldier sits, whilst in his Cell
The Scholar stews his Catholic brains for food.
The Traveller returned, and poor may go
A second pilgrimage to Farmers doors, or end
His journey in a Hospital: few being
So generous to relieve where virtue doth
Necessitate to crave. Harsh poverty,
That moth which frets the sacred robe of wit,
Thousands of noble spirits blunts, that else
Had spun rich threads of fancy from their brain.
But they are souls too much sublimed to thrive
Amongst those crudities of men, that fill
The nauseous stomach of the times with flesh
Unsalted with the active souls of men.
But I'm no Satyr, rather now possessed
With Loves more gentle spirit, which hath charmed
Me into strings attempts; assist me Fate;
Few days will ruin or advance my state. 
Nay, now you are hampered Rogues: disobey au∣thority!
—Oh Gudgeon—they wool dirt our new clothers.
Lie close you vermin. 
I ha not known hop monday at this time of the year.
Stand upon thy guard page. 
Gape Gudgeon—so, now do not talk
Your selves hoarse, this heavy carriage
Shall not trouble you. 
Farewell—farewell—do not defile your lodging. 
—A prize—a prize my lads;
How came you hither Sirrah—ha?
Oh—Oh—Oh!
What can not speak, the rogues are gagged.
Alas poor fellows—help unbind them
Hang them vagabond rogues, they are some rich Bores Isle warrant them, that have abused poor Soldiers:—here puny—change thy hat and thy sword.
These are some relics of their Grand-fathers
Blades that have been tried in the first Punick war;
Here, shalt have mine in exchange—and liberty to boot.
Nay, no hast to be gone Sir, this Coat will sell
To the next Country Landlord—yet again,
These Boots will serve an honester man.
Nay, thou art unmerciful—
Marry gip you milksop fool, thou were best
Go barefoot so thy conscience wear socks; why man,
This is the farmers eldest whelp, coupled with
A carter, they know how to swaddle their legs
In straw—do you not boobies—
Yes—forsooth Mistress.
Nay, I should teach you manners, had I the tutoring of you. 
Do not, Brother, venture too boldly on this piercing air.
It's dangerous; Sir, and may recall your fever.
I thank your care, but owe so much unto
Your art, that my recovered spirits tell me
They are strong enough to struggle with disease,
Yet Isle not long tempt danger, only a while
Sit and behold you greedy flames convert
My Fathers palace to his funeral pile.
—Oh Eurione, 
To what sad period drives our hasty fate!
We—we of all our house remain to be
The mockery of fortune. Poor girl—we must
Ere long be led to grace the triumphs of
A laureled Conqueror, thorough the throng
Of the insulting multitude, whose mirth
Our miseries will be, from thence be hauled
To ignominious death, and far removed
From the famed urns of our dead ancestors,
With thieves and murderers mix our injured dust.
In all their Annals, our wronged names shall be
Branded with ignominious Epithets.
Our guardian Angels vainly did protect us
Beyond the ruins of our family;
That shower of blood dropped precious balm, compared
With those prodigious ills that fall in this.
—Why did I suffer all those channels to
Be stopped that drained the crimson sea of life?
Were not my hands chained in my love to thee,
I would again rend op each orifice
And set those conduits going, which are now
Locked in restrictive medicines.
Do not Brother
Unthrone thy soul with this unmanly passion,
Prop with disdain, that falling pyramid
Which in the lowest ebb of fortune may
Sit high as Sceptred Kings, and by the strength
Of passive fortitude repell the beams
Of our malignant stars, though darted down
With barbed vengeance on us. Those calm souls
Feel not the war of fierce affliction, which
Preserves heavens peace within their quiet breasts.
The bitterest pills earth steeps in gall, are but
That healthful physic, which the sickly mind
Distastes, but languishes without into
A swift consumption of its former virtues.
I know thy breast filled with too great a spirit
To let in such ignoble ghosts as fear.
And shouldest thou nurse a meaner thought of me,
It would strike a blush upon the ashes of
Our noble Mother, which could ne'er conceive
So mean a thing in great Z•ranzas bed.
Now thou art sister to the noblest thoughts
My soul extracts from weak humanity.
—▪This balm hath cured all mine internal wounds.
Then prithee take a care not to offend thy other.
My honoured Guardian—
Brave Zannazarro, I'm glad to see the blood
Sit in such healthful symptoms on thy cheeks,
My Princes mandates now enforcing me
Unto a swift removal—Fair Eurione
I have more offerings here to pay, but yes
Am too unsanctified.
Those vows, my Lord, my death will soon discharge.
I am commanded by a power above me;
But should my victory dip her laurels in
Your bloods, my own should wash the •incture off,
And with your Cypress wreath their withered branches.
But fairer hopes in my thoughts busy wars,
Support the ruins of my falling stars.
S-death! thou look as if thou were newly unfettered Lewcippus, since thou skip'st into this Dancing suit, but me∣thinks thy legs are hardly fine enough for thy profession. Can caper?—Let's see.
As well as thou can toss a pike my
Valiant Hector—thou walk in such state
As if thou come Crowned from Olympus;
Or for a reward of thy va•or were to be
Elected King of the Romans.
No, a Knight of Malta would serve the turn▪
And that if our design prosper, I may bid fair for.
We shall no more need to march in back-lanes to shun Catch-poles—hist—here comes the old Courtier and new Lord—
Save you noble Gallants, and my very Good Friends.
That he never saw before.
Let the word of a Gentleman confirm you welcome.
We had rather have the deeds.
You shall be both respectively entertained.
In your several functions.
For thou my nimble Lad—
We will dance Levalto's lighter then the air
When it cuts capers from the mountains tops.
My Nephew's hours of mirthful recreation
Shall by thy lighter genius be dispo•'d.
But there is valour in the Boy that will
I doubt disdain the sport, I know his humour
If he be of the right blood of the Buffonies,
He will be all for Tournaments, and fighting duels
—I will seem not to like it, but it was my
Own humour when I was young, I believe the
Country hath bestowed education on him in that kind▪
According to his natural worth—
—Wherefore—my noble Corydon—
I am no Shepherd Sir.
I cry thee mercy, my brave Herculean soul,
I mean, what de'e call them▪—the followers of
The •ullen▪ Greek that would not fight for the loss of his wench.
Achilles and his Myrmidons.
Thou hast hit it—thou hast hit it
My single sol'd Rascal, I mean the Myrmidons:
Pox on it! I forget these hard names; truth is,
I hold it beneath a man of quality to spend
His time among moth-eaten books, and leave the
More generous recreation of Dogs and Hawks; some
Shreds of Poetry picked up among the scoundrel
Players are all that I make use of;
Yet I honour men of Art and Gallantry.
Tic not my use to boast my own perfections,
I've seen some petty portions of the world,
Served under Caesar in the British wars,
Assisted Crassus in the Parthian Conquest,
Been with Porsenna at the •jig of Rome,
With Xerxes when his Army swallowed Greece,
And fought for Pomp in Pharsalla's field,
But my last piece of service was to fight
For brave Adrastus in the Theban war.
Now by my soul a noble warrior;
But how met you with this man of art?
In my travels—and I protest stingily;
As I was passing over the Lybian deserts, I lighted upon the Grand Signiors Court, and being invited by him into the Seraglio to see his Concubines, there skipped into this Gentle∣mans acquaintance, he being one of those rare Artists kept to edify the doxies.
Now by my honour a strange encounter:
—What are these—
Your Nephew Sir
And his attendant—
How, are you son to Carlo Buffonie?
I am the young Gentleman Sir, and as simple
As I stand here, chad better clothers
When's come from home.
And how came you to lose them Cousin?
We met with some vermin Zodiars that plundered us▪
Alas poor Cousin! and who furnished you
With these new fashioned Boots?
They are the workmanship of my own hands.
My man Gudgeon is right, a man of knowledge
Nunckell ••e warrant you.
I will serve your worship in the same kind
Upon any occasion, I have not been a servant
To your brother honest Gotfer Carlo so long for nothing.
Thou say well friend, I shall employ thee.
My noble friends, I shall refer my kinsman to
Your care, call for what money you shall see
Occasion of to furnish him with all the gallantry
He is yet capable of; I could wish he had
Been better prepared for tutors so ingenious,
But hope to see the sudden effects of your skill.
Sir, we shall do our best endeavours—
Come my ill clad gallants, we will change your
Rusty Swords for glittering Rapiers,
Your Russets into Scarlet, and feed
Your horses with your boots.
What becomes of our breeches then Gudgeon?
We will send them home to old Master,
They will serve for a change.
How full of fatal changes are our lives!
What is it to be a Monarch, and yet live
Trembling at every blast of passion thus!
When all my thoughts in the fair hopes were calmed
Of Heroine's safe arrival, then
Even then to have them smothered in this cloud
Of cur'st▪ intelligence—Oh Glorianda!
Each star is dropped out of my heaven of joy;
All our intended triumphs must convert
To funeral obsequies, our Laurels be
Wreathed o'er with Cypress, and the Tyrian robe
Strike all its splendour to an Ebon vail.
Your grief is yet but weak suspicions birtch,
And happily may prove abortive, Sir.
Poor girl!
Thou fain would into comfort flatter us,
But the malignity of sorrow can
Admit no cordials, when its meager fist
In all her functions grasps the struggling soul.
Hear him unravel the black clew that led
Me into this dark labyrinth of grief,
And tell me then where I have ever lest
Hopes to escape the Minotaure of pastions.
Shall I my Lord
Burden you with the weight of this sad story.
Your will commands each motion of my soul,
Though to a sad obedience—Know then fair Princess
When first our full spread sails were pregnant grown
With prosperous gales of wind, and all our hopes
Swel'd equal to their full stretched wombs, and we
With joy beheld proud Aetnaes gloomy top
And sleighting Neptune did begin to pray
To our domestic Lars, even then
A spiteful storm strech't on the wings of all
The clamorous winds, proclaims a combat, and
Chooses our latitude the fatal lists.
The Suns fair mirror curls her even brow,
Whilst white armed waves catch at the clouds, and fall
Like liquid Mountains on our sinking Ships,
Our rent sails hang on tops of rocks, our cords
Crack like the fibers of a dying heart,
The frighted Sailor more distracted then
The elements into confusion startles,
The Master vainly calls for help, till by
An angry wave washed off, he loses all
His hopes in the Seas unfathom'd womb. Whilst in
These full mouthed oaths natures intemperate so•
Swore our destruction, a calm gales soft breath
Fans off despair, we now behold none but
Pacific Seas, but in this new born light
No beam of comfort dwelt we by it seeing
Nought but the scattered ruins of our Fleet
Which dressed the flood in funeral pomp, but when〈…〉
Stroke most amaze, that Vessel where we had
Treasured our hopes, the Princess ship was lost.
A sad relation.
Oh but too true, too true my Glorianda,
Dev•uring Seas have cozened our embraces.
—But shall I lose her thus? go gather all
Those Ships that owe obedience to this Isle
And let their squadrons cloud the Sea, until
You find her out, or else, by all that's good,
Thy life, though an unworthy sacrifice,
Shall fall an offering to her fathers loss.
I go—though in despair to speed.
Thus only may your enemies encounter
Those beams of sacred majesty that shine
Through you from the Sicilian diadem.
Rise noble Soldier, high in our love as wonder
—Thus joy encounters grief, but is to weak
For such a foe—are these thy victorious trophies?
There's something in their looks that argues worth,
Were it not clouded in Rebellions mask.
But that's a sin whose black infection strikes
Damps to the heart of Monarchy, and cannot
Be nursed within a States ejecting womb
Without distempering every vital part.
It was thy mercy when the obstructed sword
Like lightning fled, and left their lives untouched,
And now our justice must perfome that task.
I more then doubt poor Zannazarros safety,
Some of loves old ingredients yet remain.
—Why so much woman, Glorianda?
Thou but mispend'st thy pity, foolish girl,
Upon an object, which if not removed
Would soon eclipse the brightness of our stars.
—Go call the Priests of Mars and Pallas hither.
At what wilde fury reaches this discourse?
If at his anger hell lights torches to
Lead them into destruction, there must fall
Some showers of blood to quench them.
Here take the prisoners to your charge, and let
Those ceremonies be performed, by which
The tainted blood of sacrifices are
Made incense for the gods; see them prepared
Ere the next morning gilds the earth, delay
Shall pluck no feathers from the wings of vengeance.
—S-death! what does't curd your bloods? go bear them off,
That brow that dares contract it self into
A frown had better meet a thunderbolt.
O they are lost, for ever lost!
Is it grief, or reverence that unnerves me thus?
—Oh my soul—thou art too weak—too faintly weak
To move beneath the Chaos of these woes!
Now Oroandes I have time to embrace thee,
And hug this cabinet of virtue, which
Contains those jewels by whose sovereign price
Our safety was redeemed. But I have not
In all thy absence let thy goodness drop
Out of my thoughts, witness this Lady, in
Whose virgin breast I've strove to plant thy worth,
Until her sympathising virtue might
Nursed to maturity, which to improve, Isle leave
You to Loves fair Elizium, Privacy.
I am—your vassal Sir, but cannot pay
Oblations due to so immense a love.
Whither starts my degenerate spirits!—I was born
Of Parentage high as Sicilies King;
And though their death made him my Guardian, yet
May be allowed the freedom of my choice.
The conversation of our youth had nursed
A Cupped in each eye, ere Zannazarro
For•'t by a fathers high aspiring pride
Forsook's obedience to the Crown, and then
A mutual love mixed our souls currents in
One silver stream of joy, and shall I now
Buy it with pride, because his dejected state
Unvested of its gaudy honour stands?
—No—let his titles sacrifices fall
Unto his guilt, so I may him in joy.
—She weeps—sure there is more in this
Then yet my thoughts can fathom:
If it be love to Zannazarro, perhaps we may
Prevail by our united prayers—Pardon Lady
My unbecoming rudeness, I have sorrows
That like my evil Genius on my soul,
Sit clothed in sables that obscure the light
Of beauties rays▪
You need no mask to walk ith▪ Moonlight Sir,
But were there flames to quench you, I should shed▪
Tears large enough to quench the rising fire.
We are not like to thrive in love that plant▪
The sprightly fruit in such a watery soil.
Yet our affections are perhaps of kin,
Did we discover their original.
—Let's both disvellop truth my Lord, I blush not
To let you know these tears are only shed
To mollify those stubborn deities
That sway brave Zannazarroes fate—And think
Yours sympathize in a relation near
As is twixt him and fair Eurione.
Oraculous truth!—Dear Lady, let me kiss
This hand the index to so brave a heart,
And on it seal allegiance to your heart.
Our souls could ne'er have met a nearer way▪
But in the rode of wedlock, this hath clasped
All the black lines of our affections in.
One volume, though by natures hand transcribed
In different chara〈…〉 but oh! it lies not
In our united pra〈…〉 for to release
The objects of our love from those strict bands
Our Princes rage •etters their safety in.
All violence would wear the ugly brand▪
Of Sacrilege, else I would try the power
Of all my Kingdom to support their fates.
R•egium holds many active spirits that would
Bear his proud anger with as high a flame,
Should I but stir what now conceals their hate.
—I have an Army too
Not yet disbanded, which would gladly kindle▪
Their discontents at the least beam of mine,
The airy weight of a few would set
The fatal engine going; but my blood
Shrinks to its center at rebellions name,
And as if tainted with the thought from thence
Scatters an ague through my limbs. If all
Our prayers, when mounted on the wings of love,
Cannot prevail, let's mix our blood with theirs,
And Martyrs die to our adored saints.
I shall do something too, something that may
Preserve my name in sanguine characters.
But first let's visit him, perhaps those engines
That batter heaven, may shake his marble breast.
My prayers shall wait on yours; and if denied,
A lover die, not live a regicide.
Come neighbours, shal's crack each one's our Kahn before the Gentleman comes.
Our Kans, hang the muddle horsedrench,
Let's drink each of us our great square off
Brisk sack, this foreign liquor but
Adulterates our bloods.
As many of your wives does your beds.
How this coxcombly boy p〈…〉
Because he hath ne'er a one of his ow〈…〉
We shall shortly have him buy the fee〈…〉
Of a piece of land, that hath been broke
Up to his hand in the Country.
Did your easy entrance inform you,
Your own was such?
Go to Sirrah, you are a saucy boy
To prate thus to ancient men and thy betters.
I tell thee, both my neighbor and
My self are town-born children,
And have born offices,
And before thy head was hot to some of us.
But not before your own was horned Sir.
How you impudent rascal! a little more would make me lay my yard about your ears.
But take heed you do not break him; for I have heard though you are double yarded, your wife wants her full measure.
I protest I will complain to the officer and make him prove it.
Hist—you prating coxcomb—here comes the Gentleman.
God save your good worship.
We are glad to see your worship well.
Come—what have you brought here?—let's see your bills, thou should be a man of might by the largeness of thy weapon, but without help of thy shears I will pare off half—there, nay take it without grudging, and set thy hand to the receipt.
Nay, I beseech your good worship to consider a poor Tradesman, our taxations are heavy.
Tush! you were born to be made slaves off, come, thy hand.
To the whole bill Sir?
S-death! you cross legged c•r, do ye snarl? thou were better eat thy pressing iron then reply another word—come you with the ta••aty face, thy blew apron •its not methodi∣cally friend—I protest thy conscience is made of sarce∣net, pure and tender as thy wives new blancht cheeks—hast thou set thy hand to the bill?—how! my money will not hold out—but I will send anon—that satisfies.
Most abundantly, an't please your worship▪
My jolly C•ispin, thou must grant the same courtesy.
Oh Lord •ir, your worship may command.
Thou deserve to be heir apparent to Sir Hue, and to have thy apron a perpetual winding sheet to his bones; come along with me, and transport your commodities, it is your Indies.
Seignior, you are welcome.
I thank your Lordship—intrude so shall your Nephew be to my house—and to my daughter too—or she
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
and I shall square, but I would fain see the sprightly gal∣lant,—as •am as I am, I have walked thus far on purpose.
He will not long be absent Sir, but is that wild head Vanlore dead?
This Gentleman can best inform you.
It was my fortune to close his dying eyes.
Captain, not a word of our bargain.
Swounds! do ye think my neck itches for a halter?
Poor Vanlore—he was a Gentleman whose memory
My love to worth engages me to honour.
Was this not well dissembled old boy?
Rarely—thou may be secretary to the Devil.
My Nephew—Sir—
God save you noble Sir—you're happily encountered.
Would the old fellow beg something Tutor?
We will give him Gudgeons old clothers, they are better then his.
Not too loud—this must be your father—law.
Nephew, take notice of this Gentleman, you may hereafter call him father.
He should ha better clothers first and I were as my Master—he had as good a father as this at home.
Peace fool and let your Master talk—how lik'st this Cloak—and sword—and boot old boy—ha!
You are too rude—observe his gravity.
Why, no matter as long as I talk loud enough;
Doest keep any dogs old boy? Isle course my fathers
Crop•ar'd bitch with thee for forty great•.
Fie—fie, you must lay no wagers under pounds.
Why then pounds let it be—or we have a▪ forehorse of our own breed shall draw with ere a horse in Syracuse.
Fie, this is discourse too vulgar.
Why, did you not tell me it was Gentleman like
To talk of nothing but Dogs and Horses?
Yes, and Whores too Master.
Thanks good memory—Isle begin.
—Not for a world before your uncle
That is discourse for Taverns—betwixt the drinking scenes,
Whilst men take breath to throw away estates;
There you may vie obscenity, and lard
Your dry discourse with oaths—but must be civil here.
His Tutor's giving him good counsel.
He is a Gentleman I'm wondrous happy in, for wholesome precepts.
Will you not give him leave to visit my poor house?
My Lord—his company will be precious,
Sir I intended he should wait on you home.
Captain it is our pleasure, you attend him.
The Citie's full of swaggerers, and he something rash.
—Nephew—we will leave you to attend this Gentleman;
Bring me wor'd how thou lik'st fair Theocrine.
Come Signior, will you walk?
Nay pray Sir go before.
All yet is silent, dark and secret, as if
The powers of night did favour my intent.
Pardon you Gods that have a residence
Within this sacred roof, if I profane,
You are the authors of it, if you own
Affections clothed in robes immaculate
As martyred Saints embrace their sufferings in,
Such sure are mine, witness that blood—which when
Warmed with the pride of victory did grow
Too cold to hatch the embryos of a sin,
Though there were flame〈…〉 beauty large enough
To thaw an Anchorite. Pity me then, just powers,
And spare your guiltless sacrifice. This hour,
This dismal silent hour, is near the time
In which the Priest, with hidden mysteries
To purge his offering from all the stains
Of secret thoughts, into this Temple comes—I do not know
What earthquakes cold divinity may breed
Within my breast, but sure he must be more
Then man that b〈…〉 her hence, unless he wears
My life upon his sword—But I am vain,
Nought but the Gods armed with destructive thunder
Are guardians of this place, which if this act
Be black and sinful, will, when purpl'd in
The guilt on'〈◊〉 hurl me into hell▪ if not
Protect my bold endeavours—They come
Hail noble Virgin—more to be adored
Then she whom our fond superstition makes
Our Commonwealths Protectress.
What language do I hear?—are you her Priest,
And dare profane your own Miverna thus?
I would not have your judgment Lady look
On us with much deluded eyes, to think
We pay a private adoration to
This gilded marble, only deified
By some imperfect souls unworthy fear
Whose reason darkened, flew to fancy for
Relief, and from those vain idea's framed
Those tutelary powers, which wiser men
Pretend devotion •o, only to awe
Irregular humanity into
A dull obedience to their power, which were
Mad to adore those deities they make.
Oh horrid blasphemy!
Are these the hallowed mysteries you use
To sanctify your offerings with, or is it
Your Cruelty now I am near the steep
And dangerous precipice of death to stagger
A feeble women's faith, that so your mortal
May pass to an eternal punishment?
Had I no drop of blood but what had been
Fi〈…〉d with a fever of hot lusts, the grave〈…〉
Cold damps unfettered by your Princes doom
Had long ere this extinguished them. My soul
The warm embraces of her flesh is now▪
Even now forsaking, this frail body 〈…〉
Like a lost feather fall from off the wing
Of vanity, ere many minutes lie
A lump of loathed corruption, foul enough
Without being with so black a sin deformed.
Deluded innocence! think you that fate should rob
Me of the glorious treasure of your beauty,
Soon as I had enjoyed it? What though you are
With your heroic Brother destined to
Confirm a simple Princes zeal; I know
Ways to evade it that shall make him tremble
To touch this sacred beauty, with a reverence
Holy as that he pays unto the Gods,
Whilst you (though now) ordained to die a Martyr
Shall live a Saint among the sacred number
That in this temple spend their happy hours
In silent close delights, such as do make
The amorous soul spring in the womb of fancy:
Here every hour that links the chain of life
We fill with pleasures, yet ne'er feel their surfeits,
Degenerate to that pale disease of fear
The ignorant world calls Conscience.
How strangely lies the •evil here disguised
Within the masque of age and holiness?
Of age!—look here Eurione,
Is this a face to be despised?—be not amazed,
The holy reverence which the people bear
Unto my office, keeps me so much stranger
Unto their knowledge, that I still may be
Secure within the shade of a disguise,
Pleasing the sprightly Ves•else, which my youth
Knows better how to do then feeble age.
Had not that excellence of beauty which
Appears in you bright as men fancy Angels,
I had not stooped to this discovery, but
With the severity of my office led
You to inevitable death, which now
My love redeems yo〈…〉om, if with a fair
Consent you meet the vigour of my passion.
Witness you Gods that see my soul disvellop•d
From every thought of earth, how much more willingly
I would submit my self to the embraces
Of crawling worms, the cold inhabitants
Of silent dormitories, then to have
My dying hopes warmed into life again
By those wilde fires of thy prodigious lusts.
No impious villain—when ghastly horror makes
A giddy circle round thy death-bed—and
Thy sins like Furies all appear to fright
Thy trembling soul from her last stage of life,
When thou shall curse thy birthday, and implore
Eternal darkness to obscure thee from
Heavens all discerning eye, this sin shall not
Make up a link of•h everlasting chain.
Must I be then denied, fond girl!—thou hast
Precipitated all the hopes of life
By this abortive virtue, unless thou ca•st
Command a guard of those imaginary
And helpless dei•ies to circle thee
In forms more dreadful then the night, or death
Presents them to our sears, no power shall save thee,
Thy prayers are sown on unrelenting rocks
Mixed with a wilderness of air—through which
Thou'lt never find them in their wished effects.
Tush! this weak resistance is in vain
The Virgin Goddess stirs not.
Oh hear—hear me you sacred powers,
And from your thrones look on an injured maid.
Poor fool—they are deaf to thunder.
Some pitying God protect me.
—Hold—hold,
There's thy reward—mist thee!
Sure there's no god protects thee.
—Impious Devil!—
Can thou ere hope to shun me?
Oh gods!—why was I waked to life again
To see the ruin of my honour?
—My Oroandes!—
Or hath some pitying deity
Possessed thy shape to rescue me?
Eurione—my hallowed Eurione,
I'm too profane to touch thee yet, until
Cleansed in this villains scalding blood, which must
Be shed an offering to thy injured virtue.
Oh hold my Oroandes,
o not defile thy hands in humane blood
Before such sacred witnesses as these,
Let his worse punishment be to survive
An act so wicked, till the dictates of
His conscience doth anticipate his hell.
My guilt amazes me, nor do I know.
Whether with greater confidence to beg.
Pardon from heaven, or you; so black, so foul
Are my attempts against both: but if confession
May be the harbinger of penitence
Although deformed with sin, I shall dis•obe
The blackest secrets of my soul, these flames
Of lust, whose dreadful blazes light me to
Future destruction, may perhaps conduct
You to a throne of safety. Hoping to
Obtain my black desires, when fear of death
Should be my moving advocate, I had
Laid counterplots for to prevent the fall
Of the intended stroke. If you make use
Of these contaminated robes, which I
Have more abused, you'll find their operation
In wonders seeming ominous, as those
Which drive men to devotions last retreat.
Not that I wish for life, but fear to die
In the youthful vigour of my sins, before
Repentance hath inseebl'd them, I beg
Life from your mercy, which shall never be
Lavished in pleasures more, removed from all
The noise and business of the world, Isle live
Attended only with my sorrow, where
My private sorrow may no object find
But my own gangrened sins to work upon.
The gods are pitiful, and thou may live to me∣rit life eternally.
Can thou (my dear Eurione) forget thy wrong?
I else should fear to go whore's fate conducting me.
Farewell—may thou acquaint thy soul with heaven.
Come my fair sacrifice, these robes can be
Never profaned, worn to deliver thee.
THou look too sadly Glorianda,
Though funerals do attend the day we're not
To wear the sables of our souls, whilst we
With sacrifices feast the deities.
My sadness is not grief Sir, only fear
How my frill temper may endure a sight
So full of horror—
We will support thee, here now only wants
Sick Oroandes, I hope it is not love that troubles him.
He is too wise Sir, inconsiderate women
Are greatest sufferers in that tyranny.
Yet let it not afflict thee girl,
He will do well again—
My rage begins to melt, I could even wish
They might survive the rigour of their doom.
Must I see this and live?
No Zannazarro—here is my convoy to thee.
So—now we have ended, my Eurione,
All our employments on the earth—this is
The last of all our mortal interviews.
The wheels of time worn on the road of age,
Will lose their motion, ere we shall again
Meet in the robes of flesh, which must ere that
Change to a thousand shapes its varied dust:
Yet still (—dear girl) our souls inseparable
Shall walk together to eternity.
Farewell dear Brother—if thy soul do take
Its flight ere mine—stay for me in the clouds.
See, each wind leaves Civil Wars,
The gods approve your Sacrifice,
And to behold it, all the Stars
look through the curtains of the skies.
Peace reigns through every element, 
Whilst this fair pair to heaven are sent.
Sparta's dear Iphigenia died
A spotted sacrifice to this
Bright Nymph compared, whose Virgin pride
Says nature nought hath done amiss.
And yet this flower so choicely made 
By deaths untimely stroke must fade.
Romes honoured Decii might have fought
Ʋnder this youths command, yet been
More famed then when their valour brought
The blood of foes, to embalm it in.
Yet this brave soul must fall before 
With ages frost he's tinseled o'er,
What's falling now shall rise more pure,
The fatal stroke but sinks the Mine,
Whose oar this flaming calenture
Shall only for heavens Mint refine.
Go then and live where time shall be 
Confounded in eternity.
Prepare, prepare the fatal stroke
Which their fair threads must separate:
Goodness may pity, not revoke
The inevitable doom of fate.
What their crimes were, let men forget, 
No letters but heavens alphabet,
When mortals are from virtue fell,
Their vices should in censure spell.
What horrid prodigies are these?
The gods are sure grown angry with our prayers.
I have been long attendant on those powers
Within this place adored, yet never saw
The gods thus moved before. We have profaned
Something their knowledge calls Angelical.
Be gone these gaudy trappings of my pride,
This lowly dust looks lovelier then a throne.
Lies here no charm 
To release our fears?
Here—here lies the guilt of our impiety,
The gods are pleased again, and those whom we
Intended Martyrs must our Saints survive.
Ho—Oroandes—what damned imposture's this!
To what extent of miracle grows this!
The arguments of mercy from the gods
Embolden me to seek the like from you.
My violent passions forced my love into
Strange labyrinths of attempts. But what I first
Trembling with guilt did undertake, these miracles
Have proved legitimate. Armed with a high
But inconsiderate heat of fury, when
Eurione into the inmost room
Was of the temple brought, resolved to bear
Her from the rigour of her doom, I had
Thither in private first conveyed my self
Attending on the hour in which the Priest
With his sad charge should enter, which arrived
I that come there to offer sacrilege
Unto that holy function, saw my self
Ordained the instrument of heaven to free
Her from the hands of a foul ravisher,
The hallowed lights being only kindled to
Make way to the injured object of his lust,
His prayers to blasphemies, his sacred unction
To prophanations more obscene then those
That revel in the sinks of sin were turned.
The badges of a reverend age—(these robes
The sacred livery of heaven) thrown off
Appears a sprightly gallant, fitter for
A champion to the stews, then servant of
The injured gods, whose violence had not
My presence rescued her, had cozened heaven
Of your intended sacrifice to please
His own exuberate lust.
This dreadful story
Strikes trembling earthquakes through all my veins.
To what vast monster will our sins unchained
From fear of vengeance grow!
That this is true, witness those powers which owned
That cause which I (though rashly) undertook.
Pardon me you diviner powers—I have
Been too neglective of the charge you gave me,
But will redeem it in my future zeal.
That villains blood forced out by torments shall
Begin the purple deluge—For you fair souls
I must forget those crimes heaven hath been pleased
Thus freely to forgive—rise higher in
Our favour then was that exalted story
From whence your father fell.
Mountains of grief fall from my burdened soul
In their delivery: but your sovereign mercy
Must either with one cordial more relieve
My sickly hopes, or I am lost for ever
Thy actions speak thy wishes—here Oroandes
Take from my hand this gift of heaven—she's thine
By their decree. 
Ere your extended mercy shall contract
Its liberal hand, let me be happy in
The full fruition of my joys—My love
To Zannazarro, though long smothered in
His fates obscurity, must now break out
In cataracts of prayers, until you make
Me so much sharer of the blessings of
This happy day to meet my hopes in him:
Thy thoughts arrive clothed in the robes of joy.
Here Zannazarro—Embrace in her thy happiness.
With such a trembling pleasure bodies shall
Encounter with their separated souls.
Now all your seas are calmed—only my bark
Still d•gs her wings beneath a tempests weight;
Yet will I struggle with my griefs to show
How much we to this days delivery owe.
Good wench no more, thou'st ti•'d me with this story.
But had you seen it Mistress you could never have been weary, it was the sump•uousest sight that ever eyes beheld, the Kings good grace (God bless him) is a brave man—by my troth my thought it did me good to see him, but we were all overjoyed when the sacrifices were releast.
Prithee no more—the sacrifice releast,
Happy are they—but I must die a sacrifice to love,
No helpful Angel will vouchsafe to look
From his blessed throne on me; my Vanlores ghost
Is now triumphing amongst the Saints, and sees
Or else regards not mine afflictions here.
A cruel Father first divorced what now
A harsher fate eternally divides.
But know my dear, where ere thy wandering spirit
Roves unappeased with sacred sunerall rites;
Thy Theocrine lives but to pay her tears
Oblations to thy memory, and will
Ne'er put off sorrows sable robe until
The mourning wreath shall knit my winding sheet.
—These were the bands wherewith we once confirmed
The obligations of our love—but now
Are seals of my affliction—sent me back
As messengers of his untimely fate.
Look yonder she is, in one of her fits I protest:
I doubt she is crazed, good Doctor behold her.
Love—love—I see it by the beating of her pulse.
Why how now daughter, never out of these quandaries?
Thou wilt spoil a good face with this puling.
Your tres humble servitor Madam.
Nay do not look so slightly on him,
He hath promised me to cure thee wench,
He is a man of art—come forth of a strange country,
And knows more then a thousand of our dull Ilanders.
Foh—they are buffones—horsleaches,
Know nothing more den the Farrier, how to give
A great drench—pig enough to break de horse
Belly—begar mere pisse-prophets,
De very spawn of de white which, fellows
Dat use no medicine but what day pick out
Oft hedge—not so virtuous as Madams
Old book of receipts—
Sir did you bring this fellow here to rail?
Tic but his humour, Theocrine, give him way.
Me scorn de stinking drugist, have no use of his horse, loads of trash—Mine be de pure extract—de spirit of de Mineral, here be de Chemical pill, here de quintessence of balsam—dat which cures all solution of continuity though in de ventricles of de heart—but here be de grand Elixir, the sovereign medicine—that cured the great Mogul when he had been seven year sick of a Le∣thargy.
Doctor—Isle leave her to your care.
Me warrant dat shall cure her—come Madam
Begar you but dissemble—dis is no inveterate
Disease—me see no symptoms of it in your face,
Dere is no giddy rolling of the eye—no swelling
Of de veins about de forehead—nor does the
Pulse inform me but the systole and diastole
Keep due time—dis love to Vanlore be but a
Pretence, to free your self from him, you hate
The more deserving Buffonie.
If grief for him be my disease—thy honesty
Is as recoverable, now practise hath
Made the malignity inveterate,
Keep thy strange terms of injured art to fright
The Ague or a toothache off—My griefs
Are grown beyond imaginary cures.
Pishaw—suppose you did once love him,
He be dead, and dere be better men dat seek your love,
I have encountered with dat Vanlore in my
Peregrination, and found him to be a kickshaw
—A man of no worth.
Thou art a villain to abuse the dead,
Had his deserts crauled on the earth like thine,
Tic baseness to depress them now he is
Above or else beneath all mortal hate;
But were he living, thy invectives might
Sully the Sun as soon as spot his fame.
Go then, and let the wondering multitude
Admire thee on a stage, come here no more
To scare away my private thoughts, the worst
Of which more pleases then thy company.
You will be of de oder mind, when I have freed You of all de grief for Vanlore.
It must be by some speedy means to cast
This flesh into the grave that mould of death,
There to be model'd for eternity,
Within whose everlasting springs we shall
Meet with those joys whose blasted embryo's were.
Here made Abortive. If thou hast a poison
Subtle as that the eyes of Basilisks
Shoots forth destruction in, with more delight
••e tak't then ere a fainting Patient did
Receive thy promised Cordials.
What stronger confirmation needs then this? 
She's constanter then times vicissitudes.
—Yet Isle make good my word, 
—Receive my Theocrine
The promised cordial, and approve my art.
My Vanlore!—may I believe my eyes intelligence,
Or is this joy deluded fancies birth?
Real as our affections, when we first
Assimilated souls in sacred vows.
My joy hath almost rarefied my spirits
Into a substance volatile as that▪
Which souls begin their separation in.
Support me, friend, with the relation of
Thy fatal story, or this surfeit will
Be near as dangerous as the dearth of hope.
For fear thy father should prevent our story,
I must shrink under this dark vail again.
Tic a relation, Theocrine, will raise
Thy virtue in a blush—thy Father, Love—
—Thy cruel Father.
I always doubted it was his wretched spirit
That raised this dangerous storm.
It was—and by a means so full of wickedness
I tremble to relate it—whilst I lay
In the Leaguer at Ardenna, he corrupts
Croon and Lewcippus, two mercenary slaves,
To do what he too long expected had
From the wars doubtful fortune, but those villains
By his gifts thawed from their poverty,
Let forth in streams of luxury their sins
Wilde Cataracts, until the channel grew
So big it bore the Boys of reason down,
And lets this secret in their midnight cups
Flow undescreetly out, which by a friend
Of mine informed of, from their poison I
Received my antidote, and knowing where
They had designed the place to steal my life,
Thither prepared for my defence repair.
The place was clothed in privacy enough
To warrant them a safe retreat, if in
Their black design successful, hoping to
Surprise me unawares; they here being hid
Attempt my life, but finding me prepared,
Had with a guilty baseness fled if not
Inforc'• by me, first to unravel all
This knot of villainy, confessing how
Corrupted by thy fathers gold, they had
Sworn my destruction, which repenting, now
To merit mercy, they engage as far
Towards my assistance, vowing to obey
What ever I commanded; and to show
Their faiths example, this dear relic of
Our first affections give me, which received
With those strict bonds of base souled cowards (threats)
Chaining up their obedienee to my will.
I then instruct them with what message they
Should cheat thy Fathers willing faith, thy token
Although the choicest Jewel of my soul
Trusting them with to strengthen impudence
At their return, which done, I left the Army.
But were unkind,
Thus long to let me languish in despair.
That only cast a cloud on the design,
Those villains lavishing the time until
Detected vice made them forsake the Army,
Whilst I to live unknown repaired unto
A troop of wilde Bandits, amongst whom I have
(Though honoured with their Captains title) lived
Till weary of their sins, yet keep them still
Friends to protect me when with thee I make
A safe retreat unto those desert haunts.
Teach me the way my Vanlore, though it lie
Through dangers greater then the midnight fears
Of sickly brains sully their fancies with,
Through all Isle follow thee.
Then my good angels cannot stay behind,
Thou must, my dear, pretend to love this fool,
Nay more, consent to marry him.
How!—do not run dangerous hazards.
We must or else lie still at anchor here.
When thy consent ripens thy fathers joy▪
Ours will grow near maturity—this disguise
Will furnish me with means enough to know
The night-walks of his thoughts—by which we may
Proportion all our actions—he comes
This kiss, and bid thy Vanlore then farewell.
A skilful man I protest, what store of implements he hath? Gally pots, Glasses, and Ventosses, I hope he hath done the wench good—save you Doctor; how thrives your endeavour?—
Prave—prave—better then we expected;
But me scorn to pipe forth mine own praises.
Madam speak for your self, and inform de •old
Monsieur your vader—
—How is it Theocrine?—ha!—
Well Sir—as the harmonious music of the spirits
Supplied with air sprung from well tempered blood,
Composes all the organs of the soul.
Only in this calm sea of health I find
Some pleasing spirits hover about my heart,
Things that till now I was not sensible
Of, since I first did love forgotten Vanlore.
Now de magical potion begins to work.
Forgive my disobedience Sir, 
My hate unto that worthy Gentleman
Your wisdom had provided for me, shall
Pay for redemption all the powers of love,
So you'll not punish it in the denying
That blessing which till now I called a curse.
Shall your consent tell me I'm pardoned Sir?
With as much pleasure as I got thee girl.
Now thou hast reconciled my thoughts, my gold
Is not more cordial then this blessed change,
Now I shall live to see thee happy in
Possession of a vast estate.
The man is unto me more pleasing Sir.
So I would have him as long as he hath an
Estate to boot, I do not like when love grows
Daring, and encounter poverty, because they
Imagine the threadbare suit adorned with a few
Needless virtues.
Vat dinke you now Seignior?
That you're a man of art incomparable,
As Aeseulapius sell—it was a cure easily done,
And therefore I hope will not stand me in much.
—My good word shall be ready.
Me be not mercenary, de generous Artist
Scorns all reward but what comes willingly.
Say thou so? then thou art for my turn,
I like when men will not exact—Come, we will
Dine together, and then go visit the Lord Arratus
Sprightly kinsman—Come my girl.
Come grannum, are they fresh and wholesome, such as may be tilted at and not endanger the head of the Lance?
Away you wag, do ye think I would furnish Custo∣mers with ware that should not be for their turn? I protest they came to town but yesterday. Since I dealt in the fleshly occupation I have not had better.
Thou shall be payed well for them Punk,
There's gold—and here's more left yet.
This is a Boy of mettle.
Let us alone to melt it mother, Come sir, you are sad.
If any service—of mine might please you, I will
Strive to show activity in your content, let me lead
You to the private lists of Venus, where
We will make the blood dance measures through our veins
Till warmed with the delicious sport it glows
Our wreathed embraces in extracted balm.
We will kiss you into ecstasies, and make
Our breasts the pillows to repose your head.
We will please each sense with some delight. Your eyes
With unvailed beauties whiter then the Alps,
Your touch with skins like polished Ivory smooth,
Your taste shall surfeit on the balm of lips,
For Indian gums, the fruitful valley that
Lies underneath fair Venus mount shall send
Far more delightful perfumes, and when tyred
With these delicious sports, we will sing
Your wearied spirits into rest.
And whilst you sleep our nimble fancies shall
Study some undiscovered passage through
The coral banked straights of love, with which
We will entertain your naked innocence.
Our Banquets shall be all on Cordials, sauc't
With strong provocatives, whose sprightly power
Each minute shall create new appetites.
The Wenches have ravished him.
Who would not spend Estates upon these Ladies?
But have you ne'er an ordinary bit for my man Gudgeon?
I would not have him sit idle.
Rather then he shall want employment, I will
Venture my self to give him a heat;
But he hath more mind to a Country dance
I see he is putting his feet in measure.
I wou't we had a Fiddler here, I could foot it, I saith.
Shal's have a dance Gentlemen, I have an old Stallion within that can play.
Call him good Grannum, and let's to it, can you dance Ladies?
We will do any thing that tends to your de∣light Sir.
Come twist thy guts up old squeaker.
Couple your selves, I am in tune.
Wooed dance Croon?
Not I, the sport's too light, let Gudgeon supply my place.
Come Gudgeon—thou and I—Play the shaking of the sheets.
Within—Ho—house—ho—what, all asleep!
Hark the Colonel, and the rest of the Blades
Are come—shall I call them hither?
No, we will wait on them, come Pupil,
We will acquaint you with the City Gallants.
Save you Gallants—whore's our Captain?
Here is a prize for him worth a bording.
—A lovely beauty—S-death! how came you by her?
Where we found store of other treasure, nay our
Trade at Sea will prove better then yours at Land.
But is not our Captain to be spoke withal?
Not now, he is employed, but where we know not.
We expect his speedy return, but till then I am his Viceroy in our Common-wealth.
Then take charge of this Lady, but let her be
Preserved untouched for him—and hark you Sir,
Be careful of it—if her complaints inform
Him otherwise, you'll dearly suffer for it.
What dreadful precipice of misery are
My sullen sates descending—Can I hope
My honours safety, whilst my body is
Commanded by these that no Law controls?
Come Lady, you must now be a wilde inhabitant
Of these dark woods with us, yet do not weep,
Though our profession seem to promise none,
Here you may find civility.
Pray heaven I may, my journey hither hath.
Been full of strange misfortunes—I have found
Crowned expectations for captivity
Unhappily exchanged.
Valiant Bandeets farewell—look to your charge.
With as much care as we would strive to keep
Jewels, whose loss would ruin all our hopes.
Come noble Lady—if your birth hath clothed
Honour in higher attributes, forgive
Our rudeness, since the child of ignorance.
Alas! what ere my birth hath been, I'm now,
A slave to you, and must forget those vain
Airs of ambitious honour, so I may
But find civility enough to be
Protectress of my Virgin honour, all
My others will most willingly be spared,
Yet they are such that were I known I might
Perhaps repair these broken fortunes which
Thus makes you run the hazard of the Law.
We wish this curtain of your fate may be
Swiftly withdrawn, till then, let all our vows
Prevent your fears, the rudeness of our lives
May be your trouble, but shall never grow
To a disease more dangerous.
I live in hopes to gain ability
Of an extent so large as recompense.
Stand up brother—come, our brains are not warm enough yet—fill out—here noble brother.
Thanks brother Colonel—I will pledge thee were it a Tub full—and pay for it too—here's gold enough.
Here—a health to my Lord Arratus.
Come to my Nunckel—there lies my hat.
Here Gudgeon, thou must have it too.
I ha more already then I can carry upright.
Round with another health—here
To my brother Buffonies Lady.
That's the two young Gentlewomen of the house—
These be Gallants Gudgeon—sons of fame.
She blew them from her breech.
House—more Wine. here, where be these Vermin?
What will they not hear?—let's break down the doors Brother,
Or fire the house—nay I am valiant too.
Why, what do ye mean there Gentlemen to beat my mothers doors down?
Some Wine and Wenches you Cockatrice.
You have too much already Sir, to sleep—
Why you harpy, doest think we will be confined to the Lobby.
You will have the greater benefit of the air Sir.
Swounds we will not be bafl'd thus.
No that we will not brother, I feel the spirit of Wine in my brains, and will not be bafl'd.
We will scale your windows you Whores.
Brother—let's—brother Colonel—Isle in first.
We will not put you on a matter of such dan∣ger Sir.
Danger—I scorn the word—I fear it not brother, Isle do it—I and my valiant sword-bearer.
Isle not creep in at windows, not I, amongst Whores to have my eyes scratch't out—not I.
How—not venture? why thou wilt not turn coward and fear scratching?—shall not be said but we Country boys are as valiant as the best of them.
But the window is narrow, and will spoil your new suit.
Come, come—prepare—help me and Isle put them off.
Valiant brother, thou shall have the honour to enter first.
I and my squire will enter this enchanted Castle,
And relieve the imprisoned Ladies.
Gudgeon let's untrusse and prepare for the combat.
Isle help my brother whilst you prepare Gudgeon.
—Now for the boots.
My foot is at thy service noble brother,
Nay off with my breeches too—I have drawers on.
Hast thou drawers too Gudgeon?
I, but I had as leave a been hanged as ha come to this.
Come now, your helping hands, Isle scale the walls,
Attendant be at hand with my weapon.
We will second thee immediately venturous brother.
Come Gudgeon follow thy Master.
Oh—oh—help us brother Colonel,
Draw up thy forces.
The conflict is begun—we will leave them to the mercy of the Wenches, and now the gulls are uncas't make use of their feathers—here's a prize lads.
The Golden fleece was but stinking sheep∣skin to it.
Come let's be gone, the Bloud-hounds will pursue.
Pox on the slaves they're gone.
This Devil Lust hath undone us.
Tic no now time to dispute it;
Let's rather bethink our selves of some course
To preserve our credit with his uncle.
There's it, and I am deceived, if I have not found it out; thou know the opinion he hath of his valour: I will home, and possess him that he privately withdrew as we fear to fight, and that thou were in quest of him whilst I come to inform his doting Lordship.
Blessed be thy pregnant brain,
Be gone and thrive, I will return upon my cue. 
Out of my doors you Rogues.
Good reverend Matron—we heartily repent—Gudgeon our clothes—what's become of our brother Collo∣nel, and the rest of the Blades?
Faith even sheathed in your scabards by this time, you ignorant Rogues to come to abuse a civil house and be cozened of your clothes.
Oh we shall die with cold.
Good Gentlewomen give us some slender gar∣mints, my Nunckel shall give satisfaction—Oh Good∣geon my Hat and all my fine Ribbons, and my Sword—ell's gone.
I wooed we had our old ones here.
But faith tic pity to turn them off thus,
The puppies will catch the pip—have you no old breeches?
By my fey nothing that belongs to man, but an old armour that a beggarly Soldier pawned—and that Isle fetch.
And Isle lend the page an old petticoat and wast∣coat.
We shall be bound to pray for you.
Go arm the Knight whist I prepare the Lady of the lake.
I doubt we shall not pass the street for the Scone∣drell boys.
Put it on Gudgeon, and be thankful.
Any thing to hide thy nakedness, good Gudgeon.
I have played maid Marrian ere now.
So now you are provided, my honoured Don.
We kindly thank your good Ladyships, we shall be bound to pray for you—tic not so cold as it was.
Come, march my valiant Hector.
Nay faith here is each of them an old pair of slippers too.
Good-be-wy my honourable young Ladies.
So now let's in and share. 
I wonder at this—when saw you him last?
Some three hours since, when leaving him at a Play, whilst we went to dispatch some business in the City, at our
return we mist him—I perceived some difference be∣twixt him and a blade of the town, and doubt the sword hath disputed it.
Tic most like that's it, he is resolute.
Must I then be so unhappy when I first began to che∣rich love to lose its wished for object?
Grieve not Lady—I hope all is well.
I doubt his valour will betray him to
Some desperate quarrel, in whose fury all
My hopes of him may perish.
I will go send my servants abroad,
We cannot be too careful of his safety.
Trouble not your self Sir—I have took order.
—Ah—ah—ready to die with cold.
What have we here? a prologue to the mask of Witches?
Some intended sport without question,
Which now will come out of season.
Ha! forgot me Nunckel—I am your poor kinsman.
Thou art my shame, and make me grieve that ever
I entertained a thought of raising thee
So much beyond the pitch of thy deserts.
Let not your anger Sir
Add weights to his unhappiness.
Sure she is bewitched—you are a moving advocate,
But so it render him not lost within
The place he did in your affections hold,
I shall be easily wrought to pardon him.
That were a love too much depending on
The accidents of fortune to be thought
Worthy of him—I on this Armour look
As spoils got from some conquered enemy,
His garments lost by stealth, not from him took
By any force of man.
She is in the right Nunckel, my brother Colonel
stole them, whilst my squire and I scaled the walls.
I thought it was some such desperate attempt;
Let me disarm thee love, and see thy wounds.
Rare Artists! this Philter works wonders.
He hath met with some cheat for Knights,
And the nails of whores for steel.
Let me wipe off the blood, and thy poor ser∣vents too.
I will not trouble you Mistress, I use to heal such slight wounds as this by washing them in mine own water.
I had rather go in out of the cold.
Thou make me blush unmannered fool:
Why doest not with more thankfulness embrace
The tender of her love?—Lewcippus have them
In, and see them once more clothed.
I can impute as much to youths irregularity
As others can: but if he leave not this,
My hate may ruin what my love hath built.
I hope your wisdom Sir will look on this
But as an error, which correcting age
May easily reform.
—This is an ill sign—I doubt he will spend all.
I shall do much for your sake Lady.
—Let's in and see him, though it were amiss,
To make him mend, it is to laugh at this.
BEe gone, and let me gaze my self to marble here.
Oh I have lost the quiet of my soul,
All peaceful harmony. My eyes have sucked
A subtle poison, and dispersed it through
My souls oreflowing rivulet. Oh Heroine
I have defiled those noble thoughts in which
I should have clothed the memory of this
—Fain would I smoother this proud flame—
—But vainly strive—
It hath laid hold on reasons battlements.
—This is Heroine's— 
The same whose fair Idea until now,
I only entertained within my thoughts—
And must I let this glorious angel fly
From the polluted temple?—I must
—Here lies a spell that charms me 
—What did I say—
Pardon thou fair commandress of my soul,
I did blaspheme—this sacred beauty is
Fit for loves highest Altar, where my heart
If sacrificed dies in Indian fire,
Pure as the Elements, when quintessene't
Into perfection shall communicate
To bodies glorified—
—These bloodless shadows hold no symmetry
In their proportion, this interior orb
Sits like a smaller Planet near the Sun.
—I should not thus sharpen a Scorpions sting,
If not already Basilisk'd to death.
—But I like Atlas vainly struggle to
Of•ethrow a world of fancy—I'm resolved.
Convey this speedily to Oroandes.
The cure is dangerous, but where the sharp disease
Breaths nought but desperation, it is in vain
Through reasons Limbeck to extract our thoughts.
Mufi'd in clouds of sin and shame I go
To grope for light, or sink in endless wo. 
Be not too confident my Vanlore,
They're desperate gamesters
That throw their whole stock at one trembling cast.
If in this mornings progress we are maskt,
Time ne'er will lend a beam to light us forth
Of sorrows subtle labyrinth—should thy plot
Cramped with prevention halt behind thy hopes,
And I be married to this wretch—we may
Go then aside, and sacrifice our tears,
Our fruitless tears unto those Gods for whom
We have prepared our holy vows—but never
Must meet in warm embraces.
Do not doubt
The powerful influence of our stars—should what
I have prepared to combat their design,
Be by some sullen spy betrayed,—I have
Fitted a friend ordained for action in
This Comic Scene, whose sword hath glister'd amongst
A throng of braver enemies then they;
By whose assistance, if they durst oppose,
He cut the cordage of that hand although
Before the Altar, that lays hold on thee.
I would not have that silver feathered dove,
On whose pure wings we first raised our affection,
Her yet immaculate pinions dip in blood.
Yet must we not
Tamely let Vultures prey upon our hearts.
I hear thy Father, 
And must betake my self to canting.
Oh—oh—oh!
Help me good Doctor:
Oh this tormenting Gout, my joints are racked.
Mark you Monsieur—you must be—peasant till my me-di-cine can operate.
Oh I can hold no longer, set me down softly Geafery.
And lay up de leg Sh-free—
Here on de Cushoone—so—no, easy now.
Not much—not much—how now girl?
Hast thou sent to invite thy ghosts?
I have Sir, but doubt your want of health will much obstruct their mirth.
We will have the fewer girl, twill save charges.
I do not like these costly feasts,
They but undo young couples—Oh my joints!
Doctor, we shall have your company.
Me be very sorry, me cannot be your servant,
But de number of de patients dat call upon me.
We shall excuse you Sir, but could your time permit, you should be ranged with the best of our friends.
Me humbly thank you Madam.
We will be free, though my husband be not Courtly.
Not Courtly say, marry the better wench, it puts me in hope I shall not live to see thee want, the swaggering Gallant goes out like a snuff, when the constant house∣keeper gives the best light at last—Oh—oh—oh! my pain is intolerable—
I would not have him hearken to this paltry poetry, nor
visit ••arlotry playhouses. Let his employments be to read the Statutes.—oh—twill do him good—the knavery of a Lawyer, or the cunning of a Bankrupt shall never undo him.
And tose as I have heard be diseases Epidemical—but be de law de special antidote.
It is our last refuge, but in these parts not thorough∣lie prosecuted, I have now at the least fifty suits depending, and many of them I know to be poor rascals and not able to pay—oh now—now—And yet I can have no further re∣compence then throwing them in Gaol—Oh my knee!—where they shall lie till they rot, if they pay not.
Some Tradesmen Mris. Theocrine
Desire to speak with you. 
Do not buy thy garments too gaudy,
Gold is better in thy purse then on thy back.
Take example by thy aged father, Theocrine.
Oh now it tugs again—now—now!
Be of good comfort, it is but de acerbity of de humour—I will to my poison mixers, and prepare de richest ingredients.
I think an ointment of good Foot oil were good,
It is cheap and easily got, I would not
Be at too much charges—lead me in
Geofry—oh!—farewell good Doctor—oh!
This double charges will undo me.
Thou ne'er wilt be so happy, wretched Miser,
To have that file polish thy cankered soul.
The generous spirits punishment would be
To thee the effects of mercy. Is Theocrine,
My virtuous Theocrine, descended from
So vile a Father? Sure her Mother was
Some Angel clothed in flesh, that could not be
Corrupted with the affinity of vice;
Else had the rudeness of his nature planted
Some thorns within that Paradise, which now
The amorous Myrtles tender branches dress
In such soft lovely robes, her passions are
Sharpened with anger, but like thorns placed
To guard those roses Virgin modesty.
Nor can pale fear in her more refuge seek,
Then to improve the Lilies on her cheek.
Come follow me Vanlore,
I have prepared thy habit—let's hasten. 
Fie, fie!
Not ready yet, and to be a Bridegroom ere break of day?
I cannot tie my bond-strings.
Assist him Gudgeon—S-death! what doest gape for?
Cham't thoroughly awaked yet, chad rather
Be at whom again, a keeping of Sheep,
There chad time to fetch out my full sleep,
Here cham tottered up all hours of the night.
Why, thou doest not grumble Rascal, give me—come, p•x on thy gouty fingers, they are fitter to tie sacks—
It is no matter for your frumps:
Chon't be thus abused long, chill get me home, and be a paltry Serving-man no longer, to lick trenchers and live upon scraps.
Why, how now slave, were thou ever thus fine before?
Yes in a pranked suit, it is much credit sure, even as much as the slit in our hawked Bullocks ear, or a mark in the side of a Sheep.
Come Tutor, now come help me truss my points, Chwas never thus troubled with harnessing my self before, and this be the fruit of marriage, I will marry no more yet in hast. If my Nunckel had been a man as other men be, he might ha married her his self, and ha saved me this labour, but no matter Gudgeon, we will have about at trull-me-dems when the Parson hath done.
I to my grief have heard all this.
Unmaner'd slave! are these the fruits of all
My ill bestowed expenses? I see it lies not
In the power of art to polish thee, I have
Ransacked the City for the choiest wits,
They racked invention to improve thy knowledge,
And yet thou still remainst a senseless block.
—Pox on your ugly looks—you sleepish clown,
Pull up thy spirits—or by heaven— 
Master, give the testy old fool a clout of the car.
What, art thou barking counsel to him?
Never were there such a couple of whelps
Harl'd together, hell take you both for muddy slaves;
He rather leave my revenues in the walls of a Hospital,
Or build Temples for the next Faction to pull down,
Then bestow it on such a puppy.
'T will become your discretion, Sir, to smother
Your anger for the present, let this days
Business be past over ere you nourish the flame;
Then if you see no reformation, we shall not
Counsel to ought your judgment approves not of.
Should you so untimely withdraw your love,
His disgrace would reflect on your reputation.
You shall prevail for this once, come Sirrah
—See thy behaviour redeem thy credit
—Or thou art lost—
—Lost! hey—it is no matter and we were
Both lost, so we could find some of our old
Mates again—Each can't abide these Courtnowles. 
Must we part here?
Yes there are some ceremonies yet to come
—Ere you enter farther—
—To morrow night
No Cherubin will guard the gates that lead
Unto our blissful thrones, these Ivory temples
Will dedicated both to Janus stand
Open in all the Civil wars of love.
How Oroandes—thou art wanton friend,
We yet are clothed in thoughts as pure and white
As new created Vestals, such discourse
Will not be harmony—when fettered in
Your bridal beds, we willing captives lie.
Nor discord my Eurione—the modest blush
Corals the Virgin cheek no longer then
The treacherous light betrays her to the view
Of the delighted Paranymphs.
The curtained bed presents unknown delights
Clothed in unpractic't nature, which improved
By loves assimilating virtue warmes
The unformed embryo into full blown joy.
What shall I call this, experimental or imaginary?
Thy virtue best knows what—
I see my Lord the active wars afford
Sometime to melt in passive thoughts, your steel
Soft love may polish to a looking glass.
Yes, and work the waving plume into a fan.
The stubborn helmet into lawn, and strew
Bodkins and pins for rapiers round their beds.
Why, Ladies—though we have been
Immured in steel, we are no Cyclopes yet,
Our joints are supple, though not weak as those
Whose knees are oftner to his Mistress bowed
Then to his God, who measures out his life
In wanton Galliards, and a fiddlestick
Knows better how to handle then a sword,
No stand of pikes their bristled squadrons place
About our chins, nor are our lips hedged in
With quickset beards which thatch a Scythians face.
The Soldier when he'th stewed his bowels in
The blood, and sweat of enemies, is then
Most fit to kiss the balmy lips of peace;
His fresh and lusty appetite digests
What glutted Courtiers surfeit on, and makes
They labour his refreshing exercise.
We cannot doubt the softness your limbs,
As long as flints will break on feather beds.
Thy active wit my Glorianda sports
In our rude fancies deserts.
Let her friend, to morrow night she must
Impaled within the narrow circle of
Thy arms bebarr'd that liberty, and then
Her world of Virgin thoughts will all conclude
In the possession of Elyzium,
Her Lilies and thy Laurel both will be
Oretopt by Cupids Myrtles. The Phoenix
And warlike Eagle to a wilderness
Untrod by fancies future steps may fly,
Whilst Venus D•ves are harboured in your breasts.
—My Lord—
To me!—thy business. 
From his Majesty.
It nought contains but what must be obeyed.
I shall return that answer Sir. 
They must not see this, it may contain
News that may ruffle all their calm delights.
What was this fellows business Oroandes?
The King hath sent for me. Go virgin friends,
This night lie shivering in your native ice,
The blooming spring approaches, which must change
Your snow to beds of roses—goodnight
—Blessed Angels clasp their wings about your beds.
Come—Isle only wait you to your Chamber door,
And there—leave my best wishes to attend you further.
Carry me gently—oh that my pain should so vex me at this good time!
What prodigies are these?
The light appears again.
It is some spectrum.
I hope the Devil wo' not forbid the banes.
—Prepare—prepare
I come to bear
Thy body where
No eye shall ere
Behold thee more, but those that share
With thee in everlasting care.
—Oh!—Oh!—I cannot rise,
Some good body save me from the spirit.
Come—come away,
Hell hates delay,
I sent the day,
And dare not stay,
Lest light my ugly form betray,
Ghosts may not see what mortals may.
Be gone foul fiend, there are some saving drops
Of mercy yet hang over him and stops
Thy eager hast.
Oh do not wast
Thy time in the air, heaven his eternal doom
Hath sealed with Orphans blood, but will no room
For such damned souls admit,
Thou art called up to sit
Circled with glory amongst the blissful thrones,
But he cast down, down, where in hollow groans
His sins shall still complain.
Tears will wash off their stain,
There needs no flames to purge them Live—live then
But only to repent on earth—which when
Performed, come rest with me.
Where art? oh let me see.
That is not in my power to grant—to thin
Unbodied air I am resolved, which in
This region only hovers
Till time and fate discovers
What will become of thee.
What but to go
Wi•h me where floods of flaming sulphur flow,
Through dark and souty caves,
Where endless madness raves,
Where living flame in everlasting night
Still dying burns, but burning gives no light?
The busy Furies there
His restless bed prepare
Of molten gold spread o'er with burning flakes,
Curtained with horror, and begirt with Snakes.
Then cease, and hast unto
Those white souls that have flew
Above my reach, which I have only power
To envy not to hurt.
But can the hour
Not be a while prolonged?
Then destiny were wronged.
I thought thou durst not stand-to encounter with So brave an enemy as this.
They're gone—and too much frighted to re∣turn in hast.
Our plot hath equal to our wishes thrived.
I am indebted—brave Bandeets to you,
But will requite it in the like attempt
When ere occasion shall require my aid.
We are so much your creatures Sir, that tic
The child of duty, when our gratitude
Offers all service to so loved a master.
Time will admit but small commerce of words,
My actions still shall speak me yours—
Dear Vanlore let's be gone;
They will pursue as soon as they've collected
Their yet unrallied spirits.
Thou art the loadstone Theocrine, by whose
Attractive power the Compass of my thoughts
Directed by thy wit, their Needle, steers
My almost Shipwrecked hopes, into a safe
And quiet harbour of content.
—The hour five—the place the plain beneath the
Hermits rock.
I have not mist in either circumstance,
Unless my haste anticipated time—it yet is not full five
—The morning hath not lost her virgin blush
Nor step, but mine soiled the earths tinseled robe.
—How full of heaven this solitude appears,
This healthful comfort of the happy swain,
Who from his hard, but peaceful bed roused up
In's morning exercise saluted is
By a full quire of feathered Choristers
Wedding their notes to the enamoured air.
Here Nature in her unaffected dress,
Plaited with valleys and embossed with hills,
Enchac't with silver streams, and fringed with woods,
Sits lovely in her native russet, whilst
Lame Art to hide her known deformity
With painting surfeits each discerning eye.
It is he, but strangely changed.
Oroandes, you're now a loyal Subject.
All my ambition ne'er flew higher Sir,
Then in that region of your thoughts to thrive.
There it was grown to full maturity
Ere thou wrote man, my Oroandes, but I must
Like wanton Narrow either ruin all
The glorious structure of thy hopes, or live
Imprisoned in thy loyalty, thy life
Till now my strongest fortress is become
The fatal engine of my ruin.
—Heaven—what have I done to merit this?
Nothing but been too virtuous, and by that
Centred affections, which I must remove
Or shake thee into Chaos.
This language blasts me, sure I have no sin
Ponderous enough to boy your vengeance up
Unto this dangerous height. Did I but think
One Viper lodged in my remotest thought,
I'd tear each fiber of my heart to find
The monster forth, and in my blood embalmed
Throw it as far as lifes short span can reach.
But heaven my witness is, no flame of zeal
But hath been yours in the second magnitude,
My vows of kin to those I paid the gods,
My prayers, but love, and duty, fired into
A holy Calenture. Yet if all this
Like a small Stars kind influence governed by
A regal Planets cross aspects, must drop
Its fading beams into that house of death
Your fierce destructive anger, let me show
The latitude of my obedience, in
Dying at the command of him for whom
I only wish to live. Did all my friends
Look on the object through their tears, the ghost
Of my dead Mother, capable of grief
As of eternity, and yet clothed in
Humanities most frail affections, all
Those rivulets of sorrow should not wash
The sanguine stain of my resolves, so they
If executed could procure a calm
In this high tempest of your soul.
Thy virtue fathoms not my depth of guilt,
Such a prevention of my anger would
Only exchange the active passion for
Sorrow as insupportable; those characters
Which must unfold the sables of my soul
Are in dark Hieroglyphics hid, through which
Thy strength of judgment cannot pierce.
You speak in misty wonders, Sir, such as lead
My apprehension into wilde Meanders.
This will unriddle all our doubts—draw.
Against my Sovereign! an act so wicked would
Re•ort the guilty steel into my breast.
Fear never yet marbled a cowards blood
More then obedience mine, that breath hath locked
In ice the panting channels of my heart,
No spirits dare from their cold center move.
Will you deny—when I command?
Pardon me royal Sir; had such a voice
Legitimated my attempts, I had
Not paused at the encounter of a danger
Horrid as all the wars of the elements,
When ruffled into storms could present;
I would bestride a cloud with lightning charged,
In's sull career affront a thunderbolt,
Leap through the clefts of earthquakes, or attempt
To prop the ruins of a falling rock,
Yet count all this my happiness, so I
Met death in the white robes of loyalty.
But to encounter such a ghastly foe
In the black shadow of Rebellion, shakes
The strongest pillars of my soul. You are my King,
My King—whose frowns should be
More dreadful to me, then oraculous truths
When threatening sudden ruin; your sacred person
Is circled with divinity, which without reverence
To touch is sacrilege, to look on sin
Unless each glance is ushered with a prayer.
Kings are but living / temples, wherein is
As in the Nations center, the chief seat
Of their protecting God, and shall I then
Pollute my hands in blood, whose every drop
Would swell my Countries tears into a flood?
Are my attempts prized at so cheap a rate?
Wears not my sword a danger on its point
As well as thine?—draw—or I shall conclude
It is fear, not loyalty, that charms thy hand.
This stirs my blood—were you a private man
That only had his better genius to
Protect him, though allied to me by all
The ties of Nature and of friendship, yet
Being thus far urged, our Swords long since should have
Made known whose Stars the brighter influence had.
I have unfettered all those legal bonds—draw,
For thy denying now but sleights my power.
Then—since there's no evasion, 
Witness ye Gods—my inocence is wronged.
—But gracious Sir— 
Before I fall—or stand, less fortunate
To see you overthrow, oh let me know
What fate,—what cruel fate hath robed me of
The treasures of your love: I never yet
Sullied my soul with any thought that might
Deserve your hate, heaven is my faithful witness
I harbour none of you, but such as are
More full of zeal then those pure orisons,
Which martyred Saints mix with their dying groans.
And must such goodness die!—know noble youth,
I am so far from calling it desert
In thee, that hath unsheathed my sword, that in
This midnight storm of fancy, I can shed
Some drops of pity too, pity to change
So true a subject for a treacherous guest.
I come not rashly to attempt thy life,
But long have struggled with my hot desires,
Stood fiery trials of temptations, which
Have sublimated reason till it's grown
Too volatile to be contained within
My brain, that overheated Crucible.
I am diseased, and know no way to health
But through a deluge of thy blood.
There needs not then this storm to break down
The baize that verge the crimson sea—this stroke
Shall open all the sluices of my blood.
Hold—or else thou rob'st me of my fixed resolves.
—There is a cause—
Commands me die in the attempt, or kill thee.
Dear Sir, reveal it—
That ere I fall my penitential tears
May from that leprous crime expunge my soul.
Alas brave youth, thy innocence needs not
The layer of a tear, thy candid thoughts
White as the robes of Angels are, but mine
The dress of Devils, I that should protect
Am come to rob my best of subjects, to rob
Thee of thy dearest treasure; I know thy love
To fair Eurione inseparable
As goodness from a deity—yet must
Deprive thee of this darling of thy soul.
With pardon, royal Sir, I cannot think
The Cyprian Princess is so soon forgot,
With whom compared, my poor Eurione
Though bright to me, to more discerning eyes
Shine dim as the pale Moon when she lets fall
Through a dark grove her melancholy beams.
Dare thou affect her, yet dispraise a beauty
That in its orb contracts divinity?
This profanation, what had else been sin
Will render meritorious—guard thy self.
—Ho—thou bleedest.
Oh but too slowly—if your wound admits
No other medicine, this will near be balm.
I doubt that thrust—
It was a gentle one, and hath concluded
The business that we met for.
Now we are friends again; friends till death. 
Oh do not faint,
Call up your spirits Sir, there yet is hopes of life.
None—my vital powers fail—they're heavy leads,
My eyes are bowing to eternal night,
My heart beats thick alarms, yet can rally
No troops of scattered spirits—oh—oh!—I faint.
And I grow wilde with horror, wilder then
A flame provoked by angry winds.
—What shall I do? or whither fly,
To leave behind me this pursuing guilt?
—Oh—oh—be gone—be gone Oroandes.
Some company draws near.
May thou live long and happy in the embraces
Of her, whom I unjustly strove to have.
My dying wishes waits upon your joys.
Angels attend your latest hour, I go
From hence, but to my everlasting wo. 
S-death! Isle not loose my share.
Nor I, by heaven, although I search
For what's my own through my opposers blood.
Swounds! what do ye quarrel for trifles?
Pox on you for covetous Rascals, take all mine.
And mine too, so you will be content.
Another prize, the spoil of this will reconcile us.
He bleeds—Sh-ho—he stirs not, let's strip him.
There's life in him—let's bear him off.
I have heard the captive Lady speak of a precious Cordial
she hath, if it recover him, his ransom may be better worth then these gaudy clothes—
Here, lend your hands.
Oh Gudgeon we are undone, there is no recovering of her—what shall I do for another wife?
Shall I let her cry Master?
Ah, do good careful servant, some of these honest people may chance to know of her, aloud good Gudgeon.
—Oh yes—oh yes—oh yes
If any man—in City—Town—or Country,
Can tell any tidings of a strayed Lady.
What's this? A hobby-horse dance?
Oh no Sir—good Nunckel be quiet—
My man Gudgeon is only making known my loss.
Is this thy grief, unpolished clown?
Why should I cry my self as long as I had a man?
Thou art a scandal which will ever stick
Like a corroding cancer on my name
—Be gone— 
Back to thy rustic father, and there spend
Thy time amongst beasts less savage then thy self.
Why then farewell, a turd for all such Nunckels.
Come Gudgeon we will even go home to plow again.
Ay, and whistle better tunes then ere we learned at Court. 
Oh save me brother,
Here comes the ghost.
My Lord Arratus, you are suddenly expected at the Court.
Why good friend?—what's the matter?
The King and my Lord Oroandes are missing.
How! lost!—I hope my daughters messenger hath not transported them, was it a ghost carried them away
friend? speak man—I hear them still.
I come not to jest Sir, my Lord, are you ready?
I will follow thee—how am I perplexed?
Come brother I will see you to your Chamber.
We will not go through the Gallery,
The place smells of Brimstone. 
How sad a change is this! this morning was
Appointed for more joyful enter views.
When last nights slumbers robed our wakeful hopes
Of the delicious births of fancy, it was
With fairer promises, else our closed eyes
Had not been then m•de floudgates to these tears.
—Poor Eurione, I fain would comfort thee,
But my own griefs make me a stranger to
—That balmy language.
Dear Sister—thy passions are too violent,
The messengers are not yet all returned,
Not have we spoke with Arratus, some of which
—May happily bring news of them.
They may Eurione, stifle thy passions until then.
My Lord, you either come to share in grief
With us, or ease ours by some blessed discovery.
—You've heard what royal mineral let fly this damp.
Our Sovereign's lost.
Too sad a truth.
My largest intelligence lies within the walls of the
City, and there he hath not been yet heard of.
Is none with him my Lord?.—
Yes, Oroandes—
I will go have the City searched.
That hath already proved a fruitless labour.
Vain as the glimmerings of our hope, they're gone
Beyond the reach of our industrious care,
Some cruel fate hath laid an ambush to
Betray the strength of all our joys in them.
Here comes our last of hopes, speak thy success.
Not good my Lord, we've traversed all the fields
That circle losty Erix, and yet seen
No cheerful beam of wished intelligence,
We le•t no traveller unasked, no Cottage lay
So unfrequented but we found it out,
And into strict examination took
Its rustic honour. Yet our journey was
Oft by the dangerous excursions of
Troops of Bandeets obstructed, safe from whom
Our speed not strength conveyed us, all we found
Worthy to fix an observation, was
A place beneath the Hermits rock, which stained
With store of blood, did by that blush confess
So late a guilt, no cloud had since it was shed
Dropped tears enough to wash it off, we searched,
The purple grass, but no vestigia found,
'Less this may do it, to inform us whence it came.
Oh my Prophetic fears!
Our Sorrows are confirmed.
They are, in bloody characters.
I will go and secure the Citadel, and cry treason▪
—Sorrow outgrows all my resolves.
And my heart rents with this divided grief.
This is an act of these untamed Bandeets,
These plagues of Sicily, but if the force
Of Syracuse can bay their power, we will have
Their heads to build a temple ore his grave.
I've now got strength enough to render thanks
Unto the fair preserver of my life.
—Were is she Sir?
Here, ready to second my first weak endeavours.
They then were strengthened by some power above
The common reach of art, my weakness else
Had yet confined me to my sickly bed.
Let me assist you Lady—
Your change of colour argues faintness Sir,
This will recall your spirits— 
Do ye feel no alteration?
Yes my spirits stir, as if they would shake off
The sluggish weight of weakness, I am grown
Active as if the vigorous strength of youth
And health were wedded in my heart, my blood
Runs as it scorned to be confined within
The channels of my veins, yet is allayed
By th'even temper of my soul. Sure this
Rare Cordial was some deities rich gift.
The fitter to be given to those they love,
For such you are, else my poor medicines had
Ne'er thus effected miracles.
Am I no longer useful here? if not,
My business calls me hence.
Sir I should wrong your courtesy to draw
You from the front of time, if ought that may
Concern your self commands you hence.
Then I will take my leave.
My thanks attend you Sir. 
How much in every turning of the •ie
Doth he resemble my heroic love? 
You're sad sweet Lady.
I have a cause, and such a one that did
You know, your goodness would commiserate
My wretched fortune.
Reveal it Lady, I perhaps may be
Enabled then to give your Cordials back
In some such courtesy as may deserve
To be a thankful handmaid unto yours.
I was resolved to weep away my time
In private sorrow, but discovery can
Not aggravate my woe, besides I may
Venture to lodge a secret, where I have found
Such temperate virtues the souls portals bar,
Isle only with this question usher in
My own discovery, •s Sicily your place
Of birth or not?
It is, and breeding both.
Isle not demand what were the Parentage
Where I find virtues plant Nobility,
Yet would be loath to a Plebeian breast
To trust what I must now divulge.
You may be confident, I am a Gentleman
As well by birth as education Lady.
I do presume it Sir, and therefore wish,
Of all I now remain amongst to be
Known unto you alone—
You never had relation to the Court?
There was my breeding.
Near the person of the King?
One of his Bed-chamber, and it is no boast
To say as well beloved of him as any,
There being in the opinion of the Court
A near resemblance of our looks.
Then sure my name is not a stranger to you,
Have you not heard of the Cyprian Princess?
The beauteous Heroine.
The wretched Heroine, such I'm sure
Is my condition in my present state.
Pardon this child of ignorance, my rude 
And unbecoming boldness.
Rise Sir, we are companions yet,
And hope we shall be, till your royal Master
Possess, what was long since intended his;
By what disaster I was cast upon
This dreadful precipice of danger, as
We are withdrawing Isle relate, but not
To tempt a danger stay you longer here.
Your care can have no satisfaction but
A loyal servants prayers. 
Not find the body say?—
No Sir—yet by the large effusion of his blood
Had a too sad assurance of the place,
Some Mountaineers have certainly c•nveyed
His body thence to burial; those bloody characters
Are arguments of no less ill then death.
—Then I am lost eternally—lost to all
That bears a show of goodness, heaven, and earth
Will both strive to forget they ever knew
A soul desorm'd with wickedness like mine.
—My feverish sins dry up the dews of mercy
In their descent, and blast all virtue that
Approaches near me, I shall never find
A Saint in heaven, or Fiend on earth but will,
As a dire prodigy, created to
Scatter infection through the world, forsake
My ha•ed company, as fit to mix
With none but the society of Devils.
Sir I wish I in ought •lie could serve you.
I thank thee friend— 
—Heaven—
What an unwieldy monster am I grown
Since by this act swel'd to a regicide—
—Oh my accursed stars that only lent
Your influence to light me to damnation,
Not all my penitential tears will ere
Wash off the spots from my stained soul, this gangrene
Is cured by no Lixivium but of blood.
My heart is lodged within a bed of Snakes
Such as old fancies armed the Furies with.
Conscience waits on me like the frighting shades
Of ghosts when ghastly messengers of death.
My thoughts are but the enforced retreats
Of tortut'd reason to a troubled fancy.
—Ho!—am I surprised—
Sir not by me, I only finding that
You were much troubled at this accident,
Am come to lend you my assistance in
Concealing of your person, until by
The mediation of your friends you may
Open these harsh obstructions of your fate.
This is a courtesy I never merited
Either from heaven, or thee their messenger.
My hopes are yet not wholly ruined, I will
Along with thee, and in some dark disguise
Expect the clouded rays of better things.
Now Theocrine I boldly may engage
My promise for thy safety, we are past
All habitable places—
Were not thy company my best security,
This deserts wilde inhabitants would fright
Me more then all my fathers Scouts, to whom
Without a blush my innocence would dare
Disrobe my actions, now I fear no fate
So sad as the preventing my desires.
Thou art the joy and comfort of my life;
More cheerful then the suns society
To winter starved Scythians;—Come my Love
This bed of Violets courts us to repose.
Now,—now within the circle of my arms
I grasp a gem, by me more prized then all
The worlds five zones embraces, now we live
In•h' upper sphere of fancy, and spin out
The evenest threads of all our mortal web.
These are the sugared minutes of our lives,
The balmy drops that cure the minds sad wounds.
Since man lost Paradise, he knew no place
To emblem heaven, but in a women's face.
Why thou art wanton friend, this is discourse
For Love that hath not out-grown infancy,
Ours now is too mature—
Nor ever will, when we are both grown old,
Thy polished ivory furrowed o'er with age
In silver robes on beauties ruins placed
Our mutual wonder still shall last, but I
Must bind up all the gaudy flowers of love
In threads of admiration, no epithets
Such fragrant virtues separated from
The general name of good, can ere again
Pick out and bind them in due praises up.
I can be well content to hear thee talk
On any argument, but a less pleasing
Thou could not well have taken. 
S-death! Captain, what do ye mean?
This is no place of safety, the ways are all beset
With troops of horse, our Scouts beat in from all parts
Wounded and bloody, if we all betake not our selves
To our arms we are lost in an instant.
Oh prithee Vanlore hasten hence.
I only fear thy safety. 
S death! we must be gone.
Tic not our use to run.
Pox on it, the odds is unreasonable.
Swounds, I think they have horsed all the Carters in the Country, the thick skinned rogues my Rapier could hardly pierce them.
But theirs pierced us, I have a wound here yawns like a Dragon—let's hasten to a Surgeon.
Hell perish all the slaves,
I'm killed by a rustic dog.
And what torments me most, fall unrevenged.
Poor Brother we would help thee, but want it our selves.
Yet bear me from the villains, and if your time
Permits, bury me like a Soldier, I was born
Of noble parentage, but drove by want
To these unlawful courses, and have this,
This for my punishment— 
Hark—Swounds, we shall be surprised
Here right ere long—
What desperate wretches do I live amongst?
Terror alarms them from every side,
Their Scouts bring no intelligence but death
Approaching at their backs, and yet
They bathe in riot, and with bloody oaths
Stab heaven betwixt each word they speak, their prayers
Are only for damnation, though they breath
Their souls forth with that fearful wish.
—Dam me—A short life and a merry.
Swounds if we die—we die—let's be
Merry whilst we live—
I tremble at this Villains sight. 
Whether now Doxy—S-death! you
Whore come hither—Pox on your squeamish face,
Lie down—or Isle cut thy throat.
You will not offer to abuse me thus.
Dam me, Isle do'c, and thou were my sister,
Thy puling shall not save thee.
Upon my knees I beg thee not to touch me.
Thou wilt be heard better lying upon thy back.
Thou know not whom thou injurest;
—I am a Princess.
The better, then the boy I beget will be noble
By the Mothers side—Swounds, will you not bend?
Is none more civil near?
What villainy is this,—
Forbear unhallowed slave, 
This weapon shall revenge her if thou durst
Abuse her with the least uncivil touch.
Swounds, help me here,
This Rascal hath got my sword.
Dares the thawed snake to sting?
Deliver him his sword—
I will, so you will promise he shall use
It not to force resistless women's honour,
As late he did attempt this noble Virgins,
And if by me not timely rescued had
Made it the prize of his oremastering strength.
Must you Sir make conditions? 
What is the cause of this?
Sheath your Swords, that man
That dares proffer another blow,
Forfeits his life for tribute to my sword.
This was a timely rescue, and hath by
The fair redemption of my honour, more
Then satisfied all those arrears, your life
D'd stand engaged in to my useful art.
The brightest stars that rule my fate did light
Me to the blessed employment, but had all
Set ere their influence had attained its end,
Had not this Gentleman's assistance lent
New vigour to their fading beams.
I must confess a debt of thanks to him,
Which if irregular opinion prove
No enemy to his own safety, shall
Be suddenly discharged—You may perceive Sir
How black a storm waits on the lives of all
Your wilde associates, wherefore if you have
An overswaying power amongst them, choose
The now presented opportunity
To free you from all future fears, which thus
Isle light you to, draw up your company,
And let those persecutors of my honour be
My convoy to the Court, you'll find a Prince
To be entreated, when your advocate
Bears Heroines name.
Pardon me best of women, and impute
My rudeness, to my ignorance,
If any service can extenuate
Crimes of such monstrous growth, our bloods shall pay
The forfeit of our disobedience, in
The not performing it.
Your hopes of safety prompts me to believe.
—Come Sir—you shall attend us to the Court.
I am your vassal Madam, proud to have
Such a command to usher my desires. 
—Not yet—not yet at quiet—no disguise
Is dark enough to curtain o'er my guilt,
Pale as the ghastly looks of men condemned
It sits upon my Conscience. I see there is
No place affords that soul a safe retreat
That is pursued by a sharp-sented sin.
The prosperous murderer that hath clothed his guilt
In royal Ermins, all those furs of state
Cannot preserve from trembling, he looks on
Dejected wretches, as assassinates,
And each petition for a poniard fears.
—Yet these are more secure then I, they may
Pretend to merit in their wickedness,
And call their crimes the cure of sickly states;
But I am left no refuge, less to know
The depth of horror can no further go.
—Alas poor virtue, all thy white winged zeal
Is wrought into a bed of sables, since
Leaving thy heavenly dictates I betrayed
My self unto these sooty guards of hell,
Whose black inhabitants already call
Me one of their society;—my eyes
Are grown more killing then the Basilisks,
And each vein filled with poison, since these hands,
These cursed hands were stained with royal blood.
—Ho—all this is true—
But do I want more desperation yet?
Are there not fiends enough now waiting on me
To guide my trembling hand until it reach
The center of my life?— 
This fatal weapon slew my Prince
—This was his blood that stains it,—
The blood that warmed those brows a crown embraced
—Let forth by me t'embalm the earth, and in
Warm vapors spend the precious breath of life,
Which mounting upwards sent presumes to heaven;—
—But now thou must be dipped in that which will
Leave a perpetual rust upon thy steel
More fretting then a canker.—blast all that near it grows,
And as it cools infect the ambient air
With blasts more deadly then the steams of hell—
—How it pants to come forth!—
—Ho!—something stays my hand
My better Angel sure hath left me quite
—How ever I will not do it,
Although that every blast of air I draw
Be more tormenting then the gasps of death.—
—No, I will live—live till disvellop'd guilt
Makes me a public spectacle of hate—and then
Fall with my sins about me, when each tongue
Adds to their ponderous weight a full mouthed curse.
—The subtle spirits, that like lightning fly
Thorough my blood, hath yet not suffered me
To parley with sleep since the unhappy act,
—I find them something calmed, and will attempt
To reconcile them in this gentle shade.
We have lost our company.
No matter, we shall find the way to Court,
I fear nothing but how we shall do to live honest.
The place requires it not, at most twill be Enough to seem so.
Though we never used it much, I doubt not
But Hypocrisy is an art easily learned.
Come let's hasten, I would willingly see thee
Between the King and the captive Princess.
Her captivity is like to be our redemption.
If it prove not so, we must dance off the
Stage in a halter—What do they call her name?
Heroine—daughter to the Cyprian king,
Betrothed to ours a long time since, when he
Was abroad in his travels.
Twill be a joyful meeting unto them.
Had we not had ill luck, a Bandeet had been his
Taster.-.-
How now, what have we here
—So ho—what art?—
Tush, some drunk Forester, let him alone.
Heroine!—A Princess!
—And carrying to the Court by Bandeets!
It is the unhappy Lady that was betrothed
Unto my murthe•'d Sovereign—lighted on
In their excursions by these renegades.
—Poor Lady—I have spoiled her entertainment there;
—But I will follow them, and with my blood
Crimson the sables that must cloud the day. 
Come—come—see all things in order
The Princess is at hand—fie—fie,
This is an unexpected trouble—
—A way you gross wetted rascal—doest not see
We strive to paint our sorrow in chequered work,
But this it is when women sit at the helm of state,
They square all Court entertainments to the fashion
Of the last Romance they heard. 
Hark, they are entered the
Palace, I hear the Cannon—
Go off from the Forts—be gone—and make way.
The best of welcomes this sad place affords
Waits on your Graces entertainment.
And we• to do what service lies within
The verge of our endeavours—
I thank you both sweet Ladies, and must first
Employ your service in declaring what▪
These silent emblems of a sorrow mean.
I have not seen grief in the like disguise,
The laurel and the sunerall Cypress here
Have wreathed their ill met branches, and contends
Whose leaves shall Crown the Syracusian queen.
Will it please you ascend your throne, and there
Lend your attention to the saddest story
That ere did yet Siciliaes Annals blot?
Behold, great Princess,
All but the memory of his living fame
Of Syracusiaes Monarch. 
Oh help—help the Princess.
Madam—dear Madam.
Oh—oh—God!—
Bear her forth, and give her more air.
Hold—I am better here—if any thing
Revive my spirits, twill be this that puts
Me in the mind of my deceased Lord.
—Unhappy woman, first to know—then love,
Engage thy faith, yet never to enjoy!
Why stand you thus amazed 〈◊〉
Pardon us Maclam—had the united dust
Of some dead friend, whose memor〈…〉 •ear forgot,
Visited earth in his known shape again,
Our wonder could not have arrived unto
A higher pitch—
Let me embrace thee friend▪
—My dearest Or〈…〉—
Stand off—yet farther off;
You know not what you touch,
You safer far may grapple with a flame,
Or in his midnights walk affront a fiend
Armed with full vials of destructive wrath.
The graves inhabitants, when folded in
Corruption, are not more defiled then I.
What tends this language to?
Destruction—Zannazarro.
How hast thou lost thy temper Oroandes?
P•ithee look on me friend, or am I grown
A stranger to thy knowledge?—
Leave me Eurione, thou art of kin
Unto those hallowed Angels that did once
Attend my actions, and must now with them
A stranger to thy Oroandes grow.
Neglected thus!—Alas—where shall I weep?
You are to me a stranger Sir, yet in
Your look I something read that may concern
Your absent Prince, collect those scattered spirits
Now roving in confusion, and relate it.
I would, but that it hath a sound so full
Of trembling horror, twill unnerve your joints,
—Yet I must do it, no other way can lead
My soul from out this wilderness of flesh
—He's murdered.
—By whom?—
This cursed hand; do ye start?
I thought it would strike the blood out of your cheeks,
And make you paler then the act made me.
It was I—it was I, that when your blooming hopes
Cheered with the sun of Majesty, were grown
Big with expected favours, did eclipse
The glorious light in a black cloud of death.
I cut the heartstrings of the Land, and fed
The groaning earth with blood, whose purple had
Been by an ancient stock of ancestors
Died into royalty.
Ungrateful slave, why are our swords so slow
—To execute the villain?
Oh hold, believe him not—he raves,
These are the births of a distempered brain.
Thou hast but injured me Eurione
In staining their just fury—farewell,
Rest in E•izium whilst I roar in hell. 
—Oh brother, if this be true, thou hast undone us all.
True—do not think
It is any natural distemper that
Spreads this malignant vapour through my veins,
Which nought but the poison of my guilt corrupts.
—No I have done it brother,
And you are all bound as you love your Prince
To see it revenged with torments, here's a note
Will when I'm dead direct you where to find him.
And now I've done my business on the earth,
Isle give the first stroke to revenge, and here 
Open a passage for your Swords to enter.
What bold hand is that?
One that here may claim a privilege, 
—Rise thou mirror of true loyalty,
—Ne'er higher in our favour.
Our gracious Sovereign!—
—Welcome—oh welcome royal Sir!
You are all my much loved Subjects, such in whom
Never was king more blessed—Madam
Your presence crowns our blessings—now I stand
Exalted in the zenith of my fate.
Who would not pass a stormy night, to be
Thus courted by a lovely glorious day?
—You all are sharers in my heart,
—But thou my Love— 
The great commandress of that royal fort.
—Off with these night p••c't curtains, no such vail
Shall cloud the perfect beauty of our joys.
Ascend this throne, a place too humble for
Virtues so near allied to heaven as thine.
Now you expect the story of my fate
In Syracus•s seeming Widowhood,
But the full sea of pleasure cannot yet
Contract its swelling waves, tumultuous joys
Cannot be reconciled into discourse,
Till Hymens topour to possession lights
Our just desires, that eldest child of hope.
—I only have a promise to perform
Before you all unto this Gentleman,
And then will hasten to discharge the Arrears
〈…〉and engaged in to your loyalty.
—Are the Prisoners ready?
They wait at the door Sir.
Go fetch them in, thou must my dear 
Meet my first known embraces, in the seat
Of long neglected Justice, set forth the Prisoners.
—My Lord—read the Indictment—
Vincentio Carlo, you are here accused of a murder committed on a Syracusian Gentleman, his name Vanl•re, the act done by two Soldiers whom you hired in the Camp at the siege of Ardenna: Guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty and please your good Grace, alas I never knew the man, I!—therefore I beseech your Majesty to be good to me, I am a poor ignorant man, and full of grief for the loss of my only daughter—
That will be proved an act of your own,—Read on.
My Lord Arratus, you are here accused to be of confederacy with Signior Carlo in the murder of his daugh∣la Theocrine.
Who I!—why I!—who dares?
Bandeets lay hold of him, where are the witnesses?
Oh—oh—so weak, I am hardly able to go to the Bar.
I doubt we shall find it a harder march
To the Gallows, but this I may thank thy villainy for.
Thou least Rascal, thou promptedst me to all.
Read their accusations.
Croon and Lewcippus, you are hear accused for mur∣thering Vanlore, at the siege of Ardenna, and being accessory to the death of Theocrine, daughter to Vincentio Carlo; Guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty—my Lord, I confess I was with this villain Lewcippus hired to do it, by this wretched Carlo, but had no hand in the murder, it was Lewcippus committed it.
I hope your Majesty will not believe him,
For the Varlet is composed of falsehood,
In the death of Vanlore he was as far forth
As my self, but for the loss of Theocrine
We neither of us had any hand in it,
It was a plot contrived by Carlo, and my Lord
Arratus, but for what ends we know not.
I hope my good service to your Majesty
Hath merited better then to have my reputation
To be called in question by a common Rogue.
I protest I will sue the Rascal for a slander,
—I will slave—by mine honour I will.
Swear not my Lord, by what you have abused;
Honour (that venerable title) was
Slain when to'th law you forfeited your life,
Bleeding to death at those unworthy wounds
Which these low actions to high titles gave.
—Stand all forth, and attend your doom.
Be merciful—oh good my Liege, be merciful.
Swounds! I see I shall be cheated of my head.
Your actions merit none, yet since it is
The best companion of a Judge, we will in
Her virgin zone the sword of Justice wear.
—Discover your selves— 
Here are the witnesses, brought to affirm our accusation.
Oh let me go—they are Spirits,
Ghosts—Hobgoblins—I will not stay,
This is some enchanted place.
Nay Sir, you are too fast to stir.
S-death! what jugling's this?
Sir recollect your spirits—and bestow
A blessing on us, both your children now.
Nay it is no point of my Religion to pray for the dead.
Sir we still live, and live to want your prayers.
I want my money more that these two Rogues have
Cozened me of, I hope your charity will
Make them restore it again, I am
An old man and like to come to want,
And every one hales what he can catch from me.
Cursed Miser, the Law will free thee from the fear of want;
For though thy damned intentions did not wade
So far as action into guilt—thy life
Is forfeited for the intended sin. 
If we were ever gracious in your eyes,
Let us beg pardon for him.
Their lives are yours, yet justice must not be
Robbed of all interest in them, for your sakes
We'll miti gate their punishments. All Carlos wealth,
That Devil which did tempt him to this sin,
Being by the Law made forfeit unto us,
We with his daughter, the fair Theocrine,
Wholly bestow on Vanlore.
Oh I am undone—I am undone,
I had better been hanged out of the way
Then to have lived to have seen my goods
Thus gave away before my face.
—Oh that ever I was born!
For Arratus—because he valued wealth
More then his honour, he shall ever lose
Those glorious titles, now grown burdensome
Unto his age, which may betake it self
To needful rest, whilst all his places of
High trust are by the worthier Vanlore managed.
On whom, as but a just reward unto
His merits, we bestow them.
Your Majesty will by your goodness teach Me future gratitude—
And me perhaps repentance when too late.
For these two villains, the base instruments
Unto your guilt, since we desire to have
No blood defile this days solemnity,
Let them by public Edict be for ever
Excluded our Dominions. And now we've sheathed
The sword of Justice, let me open wide
The arms of Friendship, unto you that have
Been masked in this Meander of our fate.
My debts are great to all, but must remain
In full arrear, until my offerings paid
To sacred Hymen, gives me liberty;
Whose Altars now we will all prepare to warm
With the purest flame that ere Sicilia saw.
Come Heroine, let's conduct them to
The Temple, where united hands shall prove
Our cares are conquered by Victorious Love.

THis is the hour which fair Artemia
Promised to borrow from all company,
And bless me only with it, to deny
Her beauteous presence to all else, and shine
On me, poor me! within this garden here,
This happy garden, once while I was happy,
And wanted not a free access unto it,
Before my fatal and accursed crime
Had shut these gates of paradise against me,
When I without control alone might spend
With sweet Artemia in these fragrant walks
The days short-seeming hours, and ravished, hear
Her sweet discourses of the lilies whiteness,
The blushing rose, blew-mantled violet,
Pale daffodil, and purple hyacinth,
With all the various sweets, and painted glories
Of natures wardrobe, which were all eclipsed
By her diviner beauty; but alas!
What boots the former happiness I had,
But to increase my sorrow? my sad crime
Has left me now no entrance but by stealth,
When death and danger dog my venturous steps.
But welcome danger, since thou find so fair
A recompense, as my Artemiaes sight.
And art thou come, my dearest Eugeny?
Has thy true love broke through so many hazards
To visit me? I prithee chide my fondness
That did command thee such a dangerous task.
I did repent it since, and was in hope
Thou would not come.
Why hoped Artemia so?
Would thou not see me then? or can the hazard
Of ten such lives as mine is, counter vail
One glance of favour from thy beauteous eyes?
Why dost thou use that language to a heart
Which is thy captive, Eugeny, and lives
In nothing happy but in thee?
Ah! love,
There lies my greatest sorrow, that the storms
Of spiteful fortune which orewhelm my state,
Should draw thy constant goodness to a suffering,
A goodness worthy of the happiest man
Those storms of fortune will be soon oreblown
When once thy cause shall be but truly known,
That chance, not malice wrought it; and thy pardon
Will be with ease obtained
It may be, love,
If old Sr. Argent do deal truly in it.
But keep thy self concealed, do not rashly
Venture two lives in one, or when thou come
Let it be still in silence of the night.
No visitation then, or other strange
Unlooked for accident can bar our joys.
The Moon is now in her full orb, and lends
Seemer light to lovers then the Sun.
Then only come, but prithee tell me love,
How dost thou spend thy melancholy time?
Within the covert of yon shady wood
Which clothes the mountains rough and craggy top,
A little hovel built of boughs and reeds
Is my abode, from whence the spreading trees
Keep out the Sun, and do bestow in lieu
A greater benefit, a safe concealment.
In that secure and solitary place,
I give my pleased imagination leave
To feast it self with thy supposed presence,
Whose only shadow brings more joy to me
Then all the substance of the world beside.
Just so alone am I, nay want the presence
Of mine own heart, which strays to find out thee.
But who comes to thee to supply thy wants?
There Artemia names my happiness,
A happiness, which next thy love, I hold
To be the greatest that the world can give,
And I am proud to name it. I doe there
Enjoy a friend, whose sweet society.
Makes that dark wood a palace of delight;
One stored with all that can commend a man,
In whom refined knowledge and pure art
Mixing with true and sound morality
Is crowned with piety.
What wonder's this
Whom thou describ'st?
But I in vain, alas!
Doe strive to make with my imperfect skill
A true dissection of his noble parts:
He loses, Love, by all that I can say,
For praise can come no nearer to his worth,
Then can a Painter with his mimic Sun,
Express the beauty of Hyperion.
What is his name?
His name is Theodore,
Rich Earthworms son, lately come home from travel.
Oh heavens! his son! Can such a caitiff wretch
Hated and cursed by all, have such a son?
The miser lives alone, abhorred by all
Like a disease, yet cannot so be escaped,
But cankerlike, eats through the poor men's hearts
That live about him, never has commerce
With any but to ruin them; his house
Inhospitable as the wilderness,
And never looked upon but with a curse:
He hoards in secret place of the earth
Not only bags of treasure, but his corn,
Whose every grain he prizes 'bove a life,
And never prays at all, but for dear years.
For his sons sake tread gently on his fame.
Oh! Love, his fame cannot be redeemed
From obloquy; but thee I trust so far
As highly to esteem his worthy son.
That man is all, and more then I have said:
His wondrous virtues will hereafter make
The people all forgive his father's ill.
I was acquainted with him long ago
In foreign parts. And now I think on it, Love,
He'll be the fittest man to be acquainted
With all our secrecies, and be a means
To further us; and think I trust his truth,
That dare so much commend his worth to thee.
He is my neighbour here, that house is Earthworms,
That stands alone beside you grove of trees:
And fear not, dearest Love, Isle find a means
To send for him, doe you acquaint him first.
Then shall I tell my cozen that you are
A younger brother, Mr. Dotterel?
Oh yes, by any means Sir.
What's your reason?
A crotchet Sir, a crotchet that I have.
Here's one can tell you I have twenty of um,
Euphues dissuade him not, he is resolved
To keep his birth and fortunes both concealed,
Yet win her so or no way: he would know
Whether himself be truly loved or no,
And not his fortunes only.
Well, access
You have already sound, pursue it Sir;
But give me leave to wonder at your way.
Another wooer to obtain his love
Would put on all his colours, stretch r'appear
At his full height, or a degree beyond it;
Belly his fortunes, borrow what he wan???ed,
Not make himself less then he truly is.
What reason is there that a man possessed
Of fortunes large enough, that may come boldly
A welcome suitor to her self and friends,
And ten to one, speed in his suit the fair
And usual way, should play the fool and lose
His precious time in such a hopeless wooing!
Alas Sir, what is a Gentleman's time?
Euphues he tells you true, there are some brains
Can never lose their time what ere they do:
Yet I can tell you, he has read some books.
Doe not disparage me.
I warrant thee,
And in those books he says he finds examples
Of greatest beauties that have so been won.
Oh! in Parismus, and the Knight of the Sun.
Are those your Authors?
Yes, and those are good ones:
Why should a man of worth, though but a shepherd,
Despair to get the love of a Kings daughter?
I prithee Barnet how hast thou screwed up
This fool to such a monstrous confidence?
He needs no skrewing up; but let him have
His swinge a little.
He shall have it freely.
But you have seen your mistress, Mr Dotterel,
How doe you find her? coming?
That's all one,
I know what I know.
He has already got
Some footing in her favour.
But I doubt
He will play the tyrant, make her dote too long,
Wear the green sickness as his livery,
And pine a year or two
Shoe's not the first
That has done so for me.
But if you use
My Cozen so, I shall not take it well.
Oh, I protest I have no such meaning Sir,
See, here she comes, the Lady whimsy too.
I thought sweet heart, th'had'st wanted company.
Why so I did yours, Madam.
Had I known
Your house had been so full of gallants now,
I would have spared my visit. But it is all one,
I have met a friend here.
Your poor servant, Madam.
I was confessing of your cozen here
About th'affairs of love.
Your Ladyship
I hope will shrive her gently.
But I tell her
She shall not thank me now for seeing her,
For I have business hard by. I am going
A suitor to your old rich neighbor here,
Earthworm.
A suitor? he is very hard
In granting any thing, especially
If it be money.
Yes, my suit's for money,
Nay all his money, and I himself to boot.
His money would doe well without himself.
And with himself.
Alas! your Ladyship
Should too much wrong your beauty to bestow it
Upon one that cannot use it, and debar
More able men their wishes.
That's true, Barnet,
If she should bar all other men, but that
Would be too great a cruelty.
Doe you hear
My cozen Madam?
Yes, he will be heard:
Rather then fail, he'll give himself the hearing.
But prithee Euphues tell me plainly now
What thou dost think of me. I love thy freeness
Better then any flattery in the world
I think you won dross wise.
In what?
In that
That makes or mars a woman, I mean love.
Why prithee?
I think you understand so well
What the true use of man is, that you'll ne'er
Trouble your thoughts with care, or spoil your beauty
With the green sickness, to obtain a thing
Which you can purchase a discreeter way.
How doe you like this, Madam?
Wondrous well,
It is that I looked for. But what entertainment
Would old rich Earthworm give us, do you think?
Unless your presence, Madam, could infuse
A nobler soul into him, it is much feared
It would be but mean.
Because (you'll say) hoe's covetous:
Tut, I can work a change in any man:
If I were married to him, you should see
What I would make him.
I believe we should,
If cuckolds horns were visible.
But could
Your Ladyship be pleased with such a husband?
Who could not well be pleased with such a fortune?
Wealth cannot make a man
But his wealth, Lady,
Can make a woman.
Yet I doubt old Earthworm
Would prove too subtle to be governed so:
You'll find him, Madam, an old crabbed piece.
Some gentle fool were better for a husband.
Fie, cozen, how thou talk.
Hoe's in the right:
Fools are the only husbands, one may rule'um.
Why should not we desire to use men so
As they would us? I have heard men protest
They would have their wives silly, and not studied
In any thing but to dress themselves,
And not so much as able to write letters.
Just such a husband would I wish to have,
So qualified, and not a jot beyond it,
He should not have the skill to write or read.
What could you get by that?
I should be sure
He could not read my letters; and for bonds,
When I should have occasion to use money,
His mark would serve.
I am not of your mind,
I would not have a fool for all the world.
No, fairest Lady, your perfections
None but the wisest and the best of men
Can truly find and value.
And I protest, Lady,
I honour you for not loving a fool.
You would love a wife it seems that loves not you.
A tart jest, Barnet.
But he feels it not.
Fie, Mr. Dotterel, it is not nobly done
In you to hate a fool: a generous spirit
Would take the weakest parts, and fools you know
Are weakest still.
Faith, Mr. Euphues,
I must confess I have a generous spirit,
And do a little sympathize with fools.
I learned that word from a good honest man.
But hark you, cozen Barnet, this same Lady
Is a brave woman.
Are you taken with her?
I love a wit with all my heart.
It is well,
He is already taken off, I see;
From fair Artemia, or may be soon;
Upon this tother I may build a fortune.
But, Madam, if your Ladyship would marry
Upon those terms, it were better that you took
Old Earthworms son.
Has he a son, I prithee?
Yes, lately come from travel, as they say,
We have not seen him yet, he has kept close
Since his arrival; people give him out
To be his father's own.
Nay, then I swear
Isle none of him, if he be covetous
And young, I shall be troubled too long with him:
I had rather have the old one.
Here's my father.
Health to this good society; I am sorry
That my poor house must not to day enjoy
The happiness to entertain you all.
We are invited to th'old Lady Covets,
And thither must our company remove.
Sir, Isle be governed by you. I was bold
To come and see Mrs. Artemia.
Shoe's much beholding to your Ladyship
For doing her that honour.
Tell me, Uncle,
I hear Sir Argent Scrape is at her house.
Nephew, it is true, and which thou'lt wonder at,
That marriage, which we talked of as a jest,
In earnest now's concluded of, and shall
To morrow morning be solemnised
Betwixt Sr. Argent and the Lady Covet?
I doe not think it strange; there's but one hedge
Has a long time divided them, I mean
Their large estates, and it is th'estate that marries.
But is it not strange? nay, most unnatural?
And I may say ridiculous, for those years
To marry, and abuse the ordinance?
My Lady Covet is at least fourscore,
And he this year is fourscore and fifteen:
Besides, he has been bedrid long, and lame
Of both his feet.
Uncle, hoe's not too old
To love, I mean her money, and in that
The chifest end of marriage is fulfilled,
He will increase and multiply his fortunes;
Increase you know, is the true end of marriage.
They have already almost the whole country.
But you shall see how now they'll propagate
Is such a marriage lawful?
Ah! good Uncle,
Dispute not that, the Church has nought in this;
Their Lawyer is the Priest that marries them,
The banes of matrimony are the indentures,
The bounds and land-marks are the ring that joins them.
But ther's no love at all.
Yes, pretty cozen,
If thou art read in amorous books, thou'lt find
That Cupids arrow has a golden head,
And it was a golden shaft that wounded them.
Well, thither we must go; but prithee nephew
Forbear thy jesting there.
I warrant you,
Isle flatter the old Lady, and persuade her
How well she looks: but when they go to bed
Isle write their epitaph.
How man? their epitaph?
Their epithalamion thou mean.
No Sirs
Over their marriage bed Isle write their ages,
And only say, Here lies Sir Argent Scrape
Together with his wife the Lady Covet;
And whosoever reads it, will suppose
The place to be a Tomb, no marriage bed.
How strangely thou art taken with this weddig
Before thou see it!
And then let me see,
To fit them for an Hymenaean song,
In stead of those so high and spirited strains
Which the old Grecian Lovers used to sing
When lusty Bridgrooms rifled mayden-heads,
Isle sing a quiet dirge, and bid them sleep
In peaceful rest; and bid the clothes, instead
Of earth, lie gently on their aged bones???
Thou'lt ne'er have done. Well, gallants, it is almost
The time that calls us, I must needs be gone.
We'll wait upon you Sir.
Your servant, Madam. Exeunt.
Stay, cozen, I have a request to thee.
Thou can not fear that Isle deny it thee:
Speak it, it is done.
Why then in short it is this:
Old Earthworm, cozen, has a son they say
Lately come home; his name, as I have heard
Is Theodore.
Yes, I have heard of him.
I would entreat you by some means or other
To draw him hither, I'd faith speak with him:
Ask not the cause, but do what I request:
You may hereafter know.
Well, Isle not question't,
But bring him hither, though I know him not.
Cozen, farewell, I shall be looked for straight.
Rich Earthworm's son? why in the name of wonder
Should it be her desire to speak with him?
She knows him not: well, let it be a riddle,
I have not so much wit as to expound it;
Nor yet so little, as to lose my thoughts,
Or study to find our, what the no reason
Of a young wenches will is: should I guess.
I know not what to think; may she have heard
That hoe's a proper man, and so desire
To satisfy her self? What reason then
Can she allege to him? Tut, that's not it;
Her beauty, and large dower, need not to seek
Out any fuitors, and the odious name
Of his old wretched father would quite choke it:
Or have some tattling gossips, or the maids
Told her perchance that hoe's a conjurer?
He goes in black; they say he is a scholar,
Has been beyond sea too, there it may lie;
And he must satisfy her longing thought,
What, or how many husbands she shall have,
Of what degree, upon what night she shall
Dream of the man, when she shall fast and walk
In the Church-yard to see him passing by
Just in those clothes that first he comes a suitor:
These things may be; but why should she make me
To be her instrument? some of the men
Or maids might do it as well: well, since you have
Used me, fair cozen, I will sound your drifts,
Or't shall go hard. The fellow may abuse her:
Therefore Isle watch him too, and straight about it;
But now I think on it, Isle solicit him
By letter first, and meet him afterword.
I Do not more rejoice in all my stores,
My wealthy bags, filled garners, crowded chests,
And all the envied heaps that I have gleaned
With so long care and labour, then I do
In thy most frugal nature, Theodore,
Concurring just with mine; in thee, my son,
I see, methinks, a perpetuity
Of all the projects which my soul has hatched,
And their rich fruits, I see my happiness
When I consider what great hoards of wealth
With long care raked together, I have seen
Even in a moment scattered; when I view
The gaudy heirs of thriving Aldermen
Fleeting like short-lived bubbles into air,
And all that fire expiring in one blaze
That was so long a kindling. But doe thou,
Do thou my son, go on, and grow in thrift,
It is a virtue that rewards it self:
It is matterless in goodness who excels:
He that hath coin, hath all perfections else
Sir, I am wholly yours, and never can
Dege narrate from your frugality:
Or if my nature did a little stray,
Your good example would direct it still,
Till it were grown in me habitual.
Twill be a greater patrimony to thee
Then all my wealth: strive to be perfect in it,
Study the rules; one rule is general,
And that is this, Give away nothing, son,
For thrift is like a journey, every gift
Though ne'er so small, is a step back again.
He that would rise to riches or renown,
Must not regar, though he pull millions down.
That lesson, Sir, is easy to be learned.
Laugh at those fools that are ambitious
Of empty air, to be styled liberal;
That sell their substance for the breath of others,
And with the flattering thanks of idle drones
Are swelled, while their more solid parts decay.
What clothes to wear, the first occasion
Of wearing clothes will reach a wise man best:
True, Sir, It reaches us how vain a thing
It is for men to take a pride in that
Which was at first the emblem of their shame.
Thou hitt'st it right, but can thou be content
With my poor diet too?
Oh, wondrous well!
It was such a diet which that happy age
That Poets stile the golden, first did use.
And such a diet to our chests will bring
The golden age again.
Beside the gain
That flows upon us, health and liberty
Attend on these bare meals; if all were blessed
With such a temperance, what man would fawn,
Or to his belly fell his liberty?
There would be then no slaves, no sycophants
At great men's tables; if the base Samentus,
Or that vile Galba had been thus content,
They had not born the scoffs of Caesar's board.
He whose cheap thirst the springs and brooks can quench,
How many cares is he exempted from?
Hoe's not indebted to the merchants toil,
Nor fears that Pirates force, or storms should rob him
Of rich Canatyes, or sweet Condition wines:
He smells nor seeks no feasts, but in his own
True strength contracted lives, and there enjoys
A greater freedom then the Parthian King.
Thou make me more in love with my blessed life.
Besides, pure cheerful health ever attends it,
Which made the former ages live so long.
With riotous banquets sicknesses came in,
When death 'gan muster all his dismal band
Of pale diseases, such as Poets fain
Keep sentinel before the gates of hell,
And bad them wait about the gluttons tables;
Whom they, like venomed pills, in sweetest wines
Deceive! swallow down, and hasten on
What most they would eschew, untimely death.
But from our tables here no painful surfeits,
No fed diseases grow, to strangle nature,
And suffocate the active brain; no fevers,
No apoplexies, palsies or catarrhs
Are here, where nature not enticed at all
With such a dangerous bait as pleafant cates
Takes in no more then she can govern well.
But that which is the greatest comfort, son,
Is to observe, with pleasure our rich hoards
Daily increase, and stuff the swelling bags:
Come, thou art mine, I see; here take these keys,
These keys can show thee such amazing plenty,
Whose very sight would feed a famished country.
I durst not trust my servants.
Me you may,
Who equal with my life do prize your profit
Well, Isle go in, I feel my self half sleepy
After the drink I took.
Twill do you good, Sir.
Work sweetly, gentle cordial, and restore
Those spirits again, which pining avarice
Has 'rest him of; ay me! how wondrous thin,
How lean and wan he looks! how much alas!
Has he defrauded his poor Genius,
In raking wealth? while the pale grisly sighs
Of famine dwell upon his aged cheeks.
Oh avarice! then thee a greater plague
Did ne'er infest the life of wretched man.
Heaven aid my work; that rare extraction
Which he has drunk, beside the nourishment,
Will cast him in a safe and gentle sleep,
While I have liberty to work my ends,
And with his body's cure, a means Isle find
To cure his fame, and which is more, his mind.
Jasp. Sir.
Are those disguises ready
Which, I bespoke?
They are all sitted Sir.
Then at the hour which I appointed thee,
Invite those people Jasper, but be true
And secret to me.
As your own heart Sir.
Take this, I will reward thy service better,
As soon as these occasions are dispatched,
I thank you Sir. I have a letter for you
Left here but now from Mr. Euphues,
Old Mr Freeman's nephew.
Give it me,
I will anon peruse it, but my hast
Permits not now, Eugeny waits my coming.
I like this well yet, if I should prove false
To my old master for my young masters sake,
Who can accuse me? for the reason's plain
And very palpable, I feel it here:
This will buy ale, so will not all the hoards
Which my old master has: his money serves
For nothing but to look upon; but this
Knows what the common use of money is:
Well, for my own part, I'm resolved to do
Whatever he commands me, hoe's too honest
To wrong his father in it; if he should,
The worst would be his own another day.
Just thus in woods and solitary caves
The ancient hermits lived, but they lived happy.
And in their quiet contemplations found
More real comforts, then society
Of men could yield, then cities could afford,
Or all the lustres of a court could give;
But I have no such sweet preservatives
Against the sadness of this desert place.
I am my self a greater wilderness
Then are these woods, where honour and dismay
Make their abodes, while different passions
By turns do reign in my distracted foul.
Fortune makes this conclusion general,
All things shall help th'unfortunate man to fall.
First, sorrow comes, and tells me I have done
A crime, whose foulness must deserve a sea
Of poenitent tears to wash me clean again;
Then fear steps in, and tells me if surprised,
My wretched life is forfeit to the Law;
When these have done, enters the Tyrant Love,
And sets before me the fair Artemia,
Displays her virtues and perfections,
Tells me, that all those graces, all those beauties
Suffer for me, for my unhappiness,
And wounds me more in her then in my self.
Ah Theodore! would I could ever sleep.
But when thou come; for in my self I find
No drop of comfort, welcome deatest friend.
Pardon the slowness of my visit, friend,
For such occasions have detained me hence,
As if thou knew, I know thou would excuse.
I must confess, I thought the hours too long,
But the fruition of thy presence now
Makes me forget it all.
Collect thy self,
Thou droop'st too much, my dearest Eugeny,
And art too harsh and sour a censurer
Of that unhappy crime, which thou were forced
Lately to act; I did allow in thee
That lawful sorrow that was fit, but let
Well grounded comforts cure thee; nought extreme
Is safe in man.
It is time must work that cure.
But why thy pardon is not yet obtained,
Let me be free in my conjectures to thee.
Speak, friend, as to thy self.
Your old rich kinsman, who to morrow morning
Is to be married to the Lady Covet.
Is that match come about? oh avarice!
What monsters thou beget in this vile age!
I say, is next heir male
On whom thy whole estate was long ago
Entailed.
It is true.
He must inherit it
Should thy life fail.
It is granted.
Then, friend, hear,
What not a bare conjecture, but strong grounds
Move me to utter; think upon that word
Thou spoke so lately, think what avarice
Can make her bondsman do, that such a price
As sifteen hundred pounds a year, will make
Him labour not thy pardon, but thy death.
Can there be such a miscreant in nature?
I should not think so, if I weighed him only
As hoe's thy kinsman, I have been informed
He labours under hand to apprehend thee
Just at the assizes now, and has laid plots
To stop all pardons, which in that short time
Might be procured; and then what bribes may do
In hastening execution, doe but consider:
If this be false, some Courtiers have abused
His fame. And pardon me, my dearest friend,
If I suspect the worst for fear of thee.
When I consi???er what accursed effects
Proceed from wretched avarice, I begin
To feel a fear.
This very age hath given
Horrid examples lately, brothers have been
Betrayed by brothers in that very kind:
When pardons have been got by the next heirs,
They have arrived too late. No tie so near,
No band so sacred, but the cursed hunger
Of gold has broken't, and made wretched men
To fly from nature, mock religion,
And trample under feet the holiest Laws.
He has been ever noted for that vice,
Which with his age, has still grown stronger in him.
Ah Eugeny! how happy were that last
Age of a man, when long experience
Has taught him knowledge, taught him temperance,
And freed him from so many loose desires
In which rash youth is plunged, were not this vice:
But hark, hark friend, what ravishing sound is that?
Ha! wondrous sweet! it is from th'adjoyning thicket.
This is not the Elision Grove,
Nor can I meet my slaughtered Love
Within these shades; come death, and be
At last as merciful to me,
As in my dearest Scudmore's fall,
Thou should thy self tyrannical.
Then did I die, when he was slain:
But kill me now, I live again;
And shall go meet him in a grove,
Fairer then any here, above.
Oh! let this woeful breath expire:
Why should I wish Evadue's fire,
Sad Portia's coals, or Lucrece knife,
To rid me of a loathed life?
It is shame enough that grief alone,
Kills me not now, when thou art gone.
But life, since thou art slow to go,
Isle punish thee for lasting so,
And make thee piece-meal every day,
Dissolve to tears and melt away.
Ah Eugeny! some heavenly nymph descends
To make thee music in these desert woods,
To quench or feed thy baleful melancholy:
It is so sweet, I could almost believe,
But that it is sad, it were an Angel's voice.
What in the name of miracle is this?
Remove not thou; Isle make discovery
Within this thicket.
Ha! what means thy wonder?
What dost thou see?
I know not how to tell thee;
Now I could wish my self to be all eyes,
As erst all ears. I see a shape as fair
And as divine as was the voice it sent;
But clouded all with sorrow: a fair woman,
If by a name so mortal I may term her.
In such a sorrow sate the queen of Love,
When in the woods she wailed Atones death,
And from her crystal-dropping eyes did pay
A Lovers obsequy.
Let me come near.
Sure, black is Cupid's colour; death and he
Have changed their liveries now, as in the fable
They did their quivers once.
Ah! woe is me!
What means that woe?
Ah Theodore!
my guilt
Pursues me to the woods, no place can keep
The monuments of my misdeeds away.
I understand you not.
It is Matilda
The slaughtered Scudmore's Love, his virtuous Love.
Whose life by me unhappily was spilt.
The sad melodious ditty, which so late
Did pierce our ravished ears, was but the note
Of this fair turtle, for her slaughtered mate:
In which (perchance) amidd'st her woes, she sends
Black curses up against my spotted self.
But I with prayers and blessings will repay
What ere thou ven'st'gainst me. Oh! do not wish
More wretchedness to my distracted soul
Then I already feel. Sad sighs and tears
Are all the satisfaction that is left
For me to make to thy dead Love and thee.
Those lips can vent no curses; it would take off
Much from the sweetness of her virtuous sorrow.
Where lives this lovely maid?
In the next village.
Has she a father living?
No friend, he died
When she was in her infancy; her mother
Two years ago deceased, and left her all
The substance that she had, which was not great,
But does maintain her: in that little house
Ere since this fatal accident, she lives
A miracle of truth and constancy,
Wailing her Loves, and now it seems was come
To vent her woeful passions to the woods.
How happy had he been in such a Love,
If fate had spared his life! but he is dead,
And time at last may wear this sorrow off,
And make her relish the true joys of love.
But why do I thus wander in my thoughts?
This passion must be cubed in the beginning,
Twill prove too stubborn for me if it grow.
Come, let us to my cave, as we intended,
Ere this sad object stayed us.
Sad indeed,
Believe me friend, I suffer with thee in it.
But we were wounded in two different kinds.
Come, let's be gone, though I could still dwell here.
Methought I heard a noise within the wood,
As if men talked together not far off,
But could discover none. The time has been
In such a solitary place as this
I should have trembled at each moving leaf;
But sorrow and my miserable state
Have made me bold. If there be savages
That live by rapine in such woods as these,
As I have heard in ancient times there were,
My wretched state would move their pity rather
Then violence. Isle confidently go,
Guarded with nothing but my innocence.
Come, master Steward, you have had a time
Of sweating for this wedding.
I have tan
A little pains to day, yours Mr. Fruitful
Is yet to come, I mean your sermon
Yes, but the pains are past, and that's the study.
But to our business that more concerns us:
Is the deed really written that my Lady
Must seal to day?
Do you believe she'll seal it?
I warrant you, I have so followed her,
And laid it to her conscience, that I dare
Hazard my life it is done.
Well, here's the deed,
It is plainly written
Isle peruse't anon.
I know the other feoffees are as true
And honest men as any are in the world.
Save you, Mr. Fruitful.
Worthy Mr. Freeman.
How does my Lady Sir? I have made bold
To bring her company.
Please you draw near Sir,
I will go up and signify unto my Lady
That you are here
What's he? her Chaplain, Euphues?
Oh, yes,
She uses praying then it seems
Yes, Madam, and fasting too, but gives no alms.
Cannot he teach her that?
It is to be doubted:
But he has other ways which are far safer,
To speak against the fashion, against painting,
Or fornication; if he were your Chaplain,
He would inveigh as much against covetousness.
He would hurt me little in that: but has he learning?
No surely, Madam, he is full of knowledge
But has no learning at all; he can expound,
But understands nothing: One thing in him
Is excellent, though he doe hate the Bishops,
He would not make them guilty of one sin,
Which was to give him orders, for he hates
Orders as much as them.
Well, I have heard
Though he came lately to her, he has got
A great hand over her, and sways her conscience
Which way he list.
Uncle, it is very easy
To rule a thing so weak as is her conscience,
Isle undertake that a twined thread would doe it
As well as a strong cable; if he could
Rule her estate too, he would have a place on it.
Why that will follow tother.
I think not,
Rather her conscience follows her estate;
Oppression had not else increased it so
She wronged a worthy of mine, young Scudmore,
And by mere fraud and bribery took away
His whole estate, five hundred pound a year.
I must confess, it was a foul cause indeed,
And he poor man lacked means to prosecute
The cause against her. But he feels it not
At this time, nephew.
Was it that Scudmore, Sir,
Whom Eugeny Sir Argent Scrap???s young kinsman
Unfortunately killed?
The same. Well, let
All these things pass, we come now to be merry.
Let's eat up her good cheer; a niggards feast,
Is best they say.
Shall we have wine good store?
Oh! fear not that.
Hold belly, hold, in faith?
Yes, and brain too.
Nay, for my brain
Let me alone, I fear not that, no wine
Can hurt my brain.
Say you so, Mr. Dotterel?
Why such a brain I love
Madam, I am glad
I had it for you,
For me, Sir?
Yes, Lady,
It is at your service, so is the whole body.
Did I not tickle her there, old Lad?
Yes, rarely.
Shall I presume to call you servant then?
Oh Lord! Madam! if I were worthy to be!
Nay, I know you have good courtship, servant,
Wear this for my sake.
It is your livery, Madam.
Well, you are a happy man, if thou knew all.
Madam, I see your Ladyship can tell
How to make choice in dealing of your favours.
It pleases you to say so, good Mr. Euphues.
Why Sir, I speak but of the Ladies judgment.
It was more of her courtesy then my desert.
Here comes the Lady bride.
Joy to your Ladyship.
I thank you Sir, yo'are very welcome all.
I have made bold to bring my friends along
As you commanded Lady.
They are most welcome.
Me thinks your Ladyship looks fresh to day,
And like a bride indeed.
Ah Mr. Euphues!
You I perceive can flatter.
Does your glass
Tell you I slatter Madam?
Bestow this
Upon young maids, but let me tell you, Sir,
Old folks may marry too, it was ordained
At first be as well a stay to age,
As to please youth; we have our comforts too,
Though we be old.
Madam, I doubt it not:
You are not yet so old, but you may have
Your comfort well, and if Sir Are???ned Scrape
Were but one threescore years younger then h'is
What a strange but thou make? Eup You would perceive it.
Servant, could you find in your heart to marry
Such an old bride?
No mistress, I protest
I had rather have none.
What age would you desire
To choose your wife of?
Just as old as you are.
Well, servant, I believe you can dissemble.
Will it please you to draw near? Sir Argent stays
Expecting within.
We'll wait upon you.
To what strange fortune, friend, are some men born?
I mean by thee; surely when thou were young,
The fairies dandled thee.
Why prithee Barnet?
That Ladies thus should dote upon thy person:
Dost thou not see how soon the Lady Whimsy
Is caught in love with thee?
But is she think thou?
Is she? Come, thou perceiv'st it well enough;
What else should make her court thee, and bestow
Her favours openly? and such a Lady
So full of wit as she is too, would she
Betray the secrets of her heart so far,
But that Love plays the Tyrant in her breast,
And forces her?
True, and as thou say, Barnet,
Shoe's a brave witty Lady, and I love
A wit with all my heart. What would she say
If she should know me truly, that thus loves,
And thinks I am but a poor younger brother?
Why still the greater is thy happiness,
Thou may be sure she loves thee truly now,
And not thy fortunes.
Has she found me out
For all I sought to hide my self?
The more
Thy worth appears, the more her judgment's seen.
Oh! it is a gallant Lady! Well, she might
Have cast her eye on me, of Euphues,
But it was not our good fortune.
Doe not despair,
Some other woman may love thee as well,
Come, thou hast worth, Barnet, as well as I.
Nay, nay, abuse not your poor friends, but tell me
What dost thou think of young Artemia now?
Of her! a foolish girl, a simple thing,
She would make a pretty wife for me: I confess
I courted her, but she had not the wit
To find out what I was for all my talk.
And that was strange she should not, but it is fate
That governs marriages
Let her repent,
And know what she hath lost, when it is too late.
But dost thou think this gallant Lady Whimsy
Will marry me?
Make thou a doubt of that?
It is thy own fault boy, if thou hast her not.
That I protest it shall not be; but tell me,
Shall I express my love to her in verse
Or prose?
In which you will.
I am alike
At both of them indeed.
I know thou art.
Come, let's go in.
Thou long to see thy mistress.
We'll drink her health in a crowned cup, my Lad. Exeuat.
COme neighbours, pray draw near; my fellow Jasper
Has told you wherefore you were sent for hither.
I, I thank you friend.
And my good master too.
My master touched with sorrow and remorse
For that unhappy error of his life,
That fault (alas!) which by too true a name
Is termed misery, determines now
By deeds of tender charity, to make
The wronged poor amends, and to the world
Declare the fruits of a reformed life.
An I first your pardon, neighbours, he would beg,
And next to Heaven, be reconciled to you.
Now blessing on his heart.
Good tender soul!
I ever thought him a right honest man.
He that before did churlishly engross
And lock those blessings up, which from the hand
Of Heaven were show???'d upon him, has at last
Found their true use, and will hencesorth redeem
The former misspent time. His wealthy stores
Shall be no longer shut against the poor;
His bags sealed up no longer, to debar
The course of fitting bounty. To you all
Of corn and money, weekly he'll allow
In recompense a greater quantity
By far, then men of greater rank shall do:
Nor will he come himself to take your thanks,
Till, as he says, he has deserved them better.
Mean time by me, he pours his bounty forth,
Which he desires with greatest secrecy
May be performed; for all vaing lorious shows
And oftentation does his soul abhor:
He sounds no trumpet to bestow his alms,
Nor in the streets proclaims his charity;
Which makes the virtue vice, not would he have
The world take notice of you at his doors.
See, see, religious man!
Ah neigbour!
Some in the world have been mistaken in him
Nor would he have you blaze his bounty forth,
And praise him openly. Forbear it, neighbours;
Your private prayers only he desires,
And hearty wishes: for true charity
Though ne'er so secret, finds a just reward.
I am his servant newly entertained,
But one to whom he does commit the trust
Of his desires in this, and I should wrong
His goodness strangely, if I should keep back
The least of what his bounty doth intend.
Come in with me, Isle fill your sacks with corn,
And let you see what money he bestows.
We'll pray to Heaven to reward his goodness. Exeutn.
Our Dotterel then is caught?
He is, and just
As Dotterels use to be: the Lady first
Advanced toward him, stretched forth her wing, and he
Met her with all expressions, and is caught
As fast in her lime-twigs as he can be
Until the Church confirm it.
There will be
Another brave estate for her to spend.
Others will be the better for it, and if
None but a Dotterel suffer for it, what loss
Of his can countervail the least good fortune
That may from thence blow to another man?
She spent her tother husband a great fortune.
Dotterel's estate will find her work again
For a great while; two thousand pounds a year
Cannot be melted suddenly; when it is,
Men can but say, her prodigality
Has done an act of justice, and translated
That wealth which fortunes blindness had misplaced
On such a fellow; what should he doe with it?
And thou say right, some men were made to be
The conduit pipes of an estate, or rather
The sives of fortune, through whose leaking holes
She means to scatter a large flood of wealth,
Besprinkling many with refreshing showers:
So usurers, so dying Aldermen
Pour out at once upon their sive-like heirs
Whole gusts of envied wealth; which they together
Through many holes let out again in showers,
And with their ruin water a whole country.
But will it surely be a match?
As sure
As the two old death's-heads to morrow morning
Are to be joined together.
Who, Sir Argent
And his Lady?
Yes, if she keep touch
In what she promised me, Isle undertake
Her Dotterel shall be sure, and given to her
In matrimony.
Given to his wife?
I see thou mean in Dotterel to bring back
The ancient Spanish custom, where the women
Inherited the land, ruled the estates:
The men were given in marriage to the women
With portions, and had jointures made to them:
Just so will be his case, he will be married
Unto a brave subjection: How the fool
Is caught in his own noose! what confidence
Had he, that he would never marry any
But such forsooth, as must first fall in love
With him, not knowing of his wealth at all?
Well, now he's fitted: he begun at first
With fair Artemia.
He might have told
Her of his wealth, and mist her too, or else
I am deceived in her; true virtuous love
Cannot be bought so basely: she besides
Has been in love, I'm sure, and may be still,
Though he be fled the land. But now I think on it.
I must go see whether old Earthworms son
Have yet performed what she desired; she stays
At home
He in, and see how Dotterel
Counts his brave mistress: I left him composing
A sonnet to her. There are the old couple
Within too.
If a man could get to hear
Their way of courting, it would be full as strange
As Dotterel's is ridiculous: but stay.
Here comes the lovely Bride and Bridegroom forth:
Prithee let's venture to stay here a little
Behind the hangings man; we shall be sure
To hear their love; they are both somewhat deaf,
And must speak loud.
Content, He stay with thee.
Leave us a while; now, Madam, you have seen
So have your learned counsel, that I deal
Squarely with you; my personal estate
Is no less worth then I professed, when first
I moved my loving suit.
I marry, Sir,
A loving suit indeed.
Let um go on
In their own proper dialect.
I find it,
And should be loath but to require your truth
In the same kind; you seemed at first to question
How strong my title was in that estate
Which was young Scudmore's once; it is a fair manor.
It is true, old rottenness, too good for you.
My counsel can inform you that I kept it,
And did enjoy possession while he lived;
And now he's dead, who should recover it?
The heirs are poor and beggarly. S. Erg. Nay, I think
We need not fear their suing against us.
If they should stir, a little piece of money
Would stop their mouths.
A little piece of dirt
Will stop your mouth ere long, and then the suit
Will go against thee, mischief.
Prithee peace;
Thou art not merry now, but choleric.
I think of my wronged friend.
But you were saying
You made no doubt but shortly to enjoy
Your kinsman Eugeny's estate; that were
A fair addition to your land; they say
It goes at fifteen hundred pound a year.
It is true, and it is well worth it.
But what hopes
Have you to gain it shortly?
He, you know
By Scudmore's death has forfeited his life
Unto the law; and the estate's entailed
On me as the next heir.
But he is fled.
No, no, I know he lurks not far from hence,
And I shall shortly learn the very place
By some intelligence: I have provided
My secret scouts; and then you know th'assizes
Are now at hand; the time will be too short
To get a pardon, specially as I
Have laid some friends to stall it underhand.
Here's a new mischief Barnet.
And a strange one.
And then you must not spare a little money
To hasten execution at an hour
Unusual; those things may well be done,
Else what were money good for?
You say right.
If it were once come to that, I fear it not.
Well, Sir, I see ell's right and straight between us;
You understand how welcome you are hither,
I need not tell it o'er again.
No, Lady,
I will be bold to say, I doe not come
Now as a stranger, but to take possession
Both of your house and you.
He cannot speak
Out of that thriving language in his love.
Will you go in again? our guests perhaps
Think the time long.
With all my heart:
A cup of sack would not doe much amiss.
We'll have it with a toast. Who's near there, ho!
What a strange kind of pageant have we seen?
I cannot tell, whether such strange
Unsatiable desires in these old folks
That are half earth already, should be thought
More impious, or more ridiculous.
They are both alike.
But a monstrous
Unnatural plot as his, to apprehend
His kinsman, I ne'er heard of; If I knew
Where Eugeny remained, though it were his fortune
To kill a friend of mine, I'd rescue him
From this unnatural and wolfish man.
That would betray his life to satisfy
His avarice, not justice of the Law.
Here comes another piece of matrimony
That may be shortly.
It is better far then tother;
They are the last couple in hell.
Save you gallants.
You are the gallant, Sir, that on your arm
Do wear the trophies of a conquered Lady.
Madam, I had almost mistaken my salutation,
And bid, God give you joy.
Of what I prithee?
Of this young gallant, call him by what name
Or title you are pleased, husband or servant.
He may be both, Sir, he is not the first
Has been a husband and a servant too.
I am her servant, Sir, and I confess
Have an ambition, and so forth.
How now servant?
I tell you truly, Madam, it is reported
(And those reports are fatal still you know)
That Mr. Dotterel and you are purposed
To bear th'old Knight and Lady company
Tomorrow to the Church.
That I confess.
And so will you I think
Nay, but to do
As they do Madam, tie the lasting knot.
Do you hear, servant? this it is to have
So proper a servant, every one supposes
I must needs be in love.
I would you were
As deep in Cupid's books as I.
That is
In Cupid's favour. You are a happy man.
My servant has been searching Cupid's books
I think, to find that Sonner that he gave me.
Are you content that I should show your poetry?
Do Mistress, I am not ashamed on it.
But you shall give me leave to read it to um.
It is but a Sonnet, Gentlemen, that I fitted
To my fair Mistress here.
Let us be happy
To hear it Sir.
Take it as it is:
Dear, do not your fair beauty wrong,
In thinking still you are too young.
How! too young!
Let him alone, I know the song.
The rose and lilies in your cheek
Flourish, and no more ripeness seek.
Your cherry-lip red, soft, and sweet,
Proclaims such fruit for taste most meet.
Then lose no time, for love has wings,
And flies away from aged things.
How do you it like, Gentlemen?
very well.
The song's a good one.
Oh monstrous!
Never man stole with so little judgement.
Of all the love-songs that were ever made,
He could not have chose out one more unfit,
More palpably unfit; that must betray
His most ridiculous theft.
Who would have thought
My Servant should suppose, I think my self
Too young to love, that have already had
One husband.
Oh excuse him, gentle Madam,
He found it in the song
And it should seem
He could get not other song but this.
Surely, a woman of five and thirty year old,
Is not too young to love.
Oh spare him, Madam.
Let's raise him up; I think the Sonnet's good,
There's somewhat in 't to the purpose; read it again.
???For taste most meet.
Very good; and there he tickled it.
Marked you that, Madam? the two last of all?
Then lose no time, for love hath wings
He gives you fitting counsel.
Yes, I like it.
I thought when they understood it, they would like it.
I am sure, I have heard this song praised ere now.
This doe's deserve a double favour, servant.
Let this be the favour, sweet Mistress,
How some men's poetry happens to be rewarded!
Shall we go in? but prithee Euphues
What is the reason sweet Artenia
Thy Cozen is not here?
I know not, Madam,
But her pretence was business; I am going
To visit her: if you go in to keep
Th'old couple company, Isle fetch her to you.
I prithee do, farewell; come servant,
Shall we go in?
He wait upon you, Mistress.
I Will acquaint him, Lady, with the hour,
And to his longing ear deliver all
Your sweet salutes; which is the only air
Of life and comfort Eugeny takes in.
Your constant love and virtues, sweetest Lady,
Are those preservatives, which from his heart
Expel the killing fits of melancholy,
And do in spite of fortune quicken him.
Oh would those comforts could arrive at him,
That from my wishing thoughts are hourly sent.
Such virtuous wishes seldom are in vain.
I should be far more sad in the behalf
Of my dear Eugeny, but that I knew
He does enjoy your sweet society,
Which he beyond all value does esteem.
His own is recompense enough for mine,
And I the gainer in it; did not grief
For his misfortune stain that perfect joy
Which I could take in his dear company
If I should speak, Sir, how he values you,
I should too much oppress your modesty.
Our fri???ndship fairest Lay, is more old,
And he more true then that his heart so long
Should be unknown to me. He not be long.
Before I visit him, to let him know
What hour shall make him happy in your sight.
My longer stay, sweet Lady, might be more
Observed, and pried into. Let me be bold
To leave you now, but be your servant ever.
All happiness attend you, worthy Sir,
Would I my self might go as well as send,
And see that seeming solitary place,
That place of woe. Sure it would be to me
No desert wood while Eugeny were there,
But a delightful palace. Here at home,
The more that company comes in, the more
I am alone methinkes; wanting that object
On which my heart is fixed, I cannot be
Possessed of any thing. Nothing can be
My comfort, but a hope that these sad clouds
Of our misfortunes will at last blow over.
But mischief's like a cockatrices eyes,
Sees first, and kills; or is seen first, and dies.
How dost thou, Couz'? I wrote a letter for thee
To Earthworms son; has the young ten in the hundred
Been here?
I thank you, Cozen, the Gentleman
Was with me, and but newly parted hence
H' has got a title then by coming hither,
But he may be a Gentleman; his wealth
Will make it good.
His virtues make it good;
Believe it Cozen, there's a wealthy mind
Within that plain outside.
How is this?
Have your quick-eyes found out his worth already?
They must be blind that cannot, when they know him.
Well Cozen, you may laugh at me.
By no means.
I know your judgment's good.
As good as it is,
It must content a woman. When you know him,
You 'll find a man that may deserve your friendship,
And far above all slighting.
 I am sorry
I came not soon enough; but prithee, Cozen,
What are the ways have taken thee so soon?
What taking do you mean? you promised me
You would not ask the cause I sent for him.
Though you shall know hereafter. But I hope.
You do not think I am in love with him.
I'll look upon the man, and then resolve you.
Well, do; perhaps you'll know him better then.
He knows you well.
Me? has he told you how?
Did you ne'er meet one Theodore at Venice?
Can this be he?
Yes, very well: although
He be old Earthworms son, and make no show
At home.
And have you found out so much worth
In him already?
How do you esteem him?
We women well may err.
I smell a rat;
And if my brain fail not, have found out all
Your drifts, though ne'er so politickely carried
I know your brain Cozen is very good,
But it may fail.
It comes into my head
What old Sir Agent Scrape told to his Lady,
His kinsman Eugeny lurked hereabouts;
He was her sweet-heart once, and may be still;
I think she's constant; though she keep it close.
This Theodore and he were famed for friendship.
I have collected, Cozen, and have at you.
Let's hear it, pray.
You shall; this Theodore
I do confess a most deserving man;
And so perchance your lover Eugeny
Has told you, Cozen! ha? do you begin
To blush already? I am sure those two
Were most entirely friends. And I am sorry
To hear what I have heard to day, concerning
Young Eugeny.
What, prithee Cozen? tell me.
Now you are moved; but I may err you know
Good Cozen tell me what.
Nay, I believe
I shall worse startle you; though you would make
Such fools as I believe he is in France.
Yes, yes, it may be so; and then you know
He's safe enough.
Oh Cozen, Isle confess
What you would have me, do but tell me this.
Nay, now, I will not thank you; I have found it.
And though you dealt in riddles so with me,
Isle plainly tell you all; and teach how
You may perchance prevent your lovers danger.
Oh I shall ever love you;
Well, come in;
Isle tell you all, and by what means I knew it.
OUt villain! how could any fire come there
But by thy negligence? I do not use
To keep such flies, as should at all endanger
My house, much less my barn.
I know not Sir,
But there I'm sure it was, and still continues,
Though without danger now; for the poor people
E???e this have quenched it.
There my wonder lies.
Why should the people come to quench my fire?
Had it been in a city, where one house
Might have endangered all, it justly then
Might have engaged the peoples utmost aide,
And I ne'er bound to give them thanks at all.
But my house stands alone, and could endanger
No other building. Why should all the people
Come running hither so to quench the fire?
They love not me.
Sure Sir, I cannot tell;
Perhaps the people knew not what to do,
And might be glad to see a sight.
Me thought
As I came by I saw them wondrous busy,
Nay more, me thought I heard them pray for me,
As if they loved me. Why should they do so?
I ne'er deserved it at the people hands.
Go Jasper, tell me whether it be quenched,
And all secure; I long to hear the news.
The fire is quenched, and little hurt is done.
I come to bring you happy tidings Sir.
That's well, my son.
But Sir, if you had seen
How the poor people laboured to effect it,
And like so many Salamanders rushed
Into the fire, scorching their clothes and beards,
You would have wondered justly, and have thought
That each man toiled to save his fathers house,
Or his own dear estate; but I conceive
It was nothing but an honest charity
That wrought it in them.
Had a charity?
Why should that charity be showed to me?
If I mistake not strangely, he begins
To apprehend it
As I came along,
I heard them pray for me; but those good prayers
Can never pierce the skies in my behalf,
But will return again, and ever lodge
Within those honest breasts, that sent them forth.
Surely it works.
Oh! all the world but I
Are honest men.
What is it that troubles you?
Your goods are safe; there's nothing lost at all.
You should rejoice methinkes. You might have suffered
A wondrous loss in your estate.
Ah son!
????????? not the thought of what I might have lost
That draws these tears from me.
Doe's he not weep?
Or do my flattering hopes deceive my sight?
He weeps, and fully too; large showers of tears
Bedew his aged cheeks. Oh happy sorrow
That makes me weep for joy! never did son
So justly glory in a fathers tears.
Sir, you are sad methinkes.
No sadness, son,
Can be enough to expiate the crimes
That my accursed avarice has wrought.
Where are the poor?
Why, Sir, what would you do?
Ask me not, Theodore; alas, I fear
Thou art too much my son; my bad example
Has done thee much more harm then all the large
Increase of treasure I shall leave behind
Can recompense. But leave those wreteched thoughts,
And let me teach thee a new lesson now;
But thou art learned Theodore, and soon
Wilt find the reasons of it.
Do you please
To speak it, Sir, and I will strive to frame
My self to follow.
Where are all the poor?
Jasper, go call them in. Now prithee learn,
(For this late accident may truly teach
A man what value he should set on wealth)
Fire may consume my houses, thieves may steal
My plate and jewels; all my merchandise
Is at the mercy of the winds and seas;
And nothing can be truly termed mine own,
But what I make mine own by using well.
Those deeds of charity which we have done,
Shall stay for ever with us; and that wealth
Which we have so bestowed, we only keep;
The other is not ours.
Sir, your have taught me
Not to give any thing are all away.
When I was blind, my son, and did miscall
My sordid vice of avarice true thrift.
But now forget that lesson, I prithee do;
That consening vice, although it seem to keep
Our wealth, debars us from possessing it.
And makes us more then poor.
How far beyond
All hope, my happy project works upon him!
You're welcome Neighbours, welcome heartily.
I thank you all, and will hereafter study
To recompense your undeserved love.
My house shall stand more open to the poor,
More hospitable, and my wealth more free
To feed and cloth the naked hungry souls.
I will redeem the ill that I have done,
(If heaven be pleased to spare me life a while)
With true unfeigned deeds of charity.
We thank your worship.
We know full well
Your worship has a good heart toward us.
Alas, you do not know it, but have had
Too sad a cause to know the contrary:
Pray do not thank me till you truly find
How much my heart is changed from what it was;
Till you by real and substantial deeds
Shall see my peaitence, and be fully taught
How to forget or pardon all the errors
Of that my former miserable life.
Jasper, go in with them; the way
Into my house.
I think I had need to show um;
No poor folks heretofore have used this way.
And Isle come to you, Neighbours, presently.
Long may you live.
All happiness betide you.
And a reward fourfold in the other world.
How dost thou like this music, Theodore?
I mean the hearty prayers of the poor,
Whose curses pierce more then two-edged swords.
What comfort like to this, can riches give!
What joy can be so great, as to be able
To feed the hungry, cloth the naked man?
Now, Sir, you think aright; for to bestow
Is greater pleasure far then to receive.
No vice, so much as avariace, deprives
Our life of sweetest comforts, and debars
So much the fair society of men.
I taught thee once fair otherwise; but now
Study this last and better lesson, son
With more delight then ere I did the former.
You never yet knew scholar covetous.
And now I think on it, Theodore, I have
A niece, the daughter of my only sister,
Her mother died a widow two years since.
How she has left her orphan daughter there
I do not know; if she have left her ill,
Isle be a father to her; prithee, go
Enquire her out, and bring her to my house,
How well soar the world may go with her.
Bountie's spice of virtue, whosoever can,
And won't, relieve the poor, he is no man.
Where lives she, Sir?
It is not a mile from hence,
In the next village; thou ne'er saw her yet;
But fame has spoke her for a virtuous maid.
Young Scudmore, while he lived, and was possessed
Of his estate, thought to have married her;
Whose death (they say) she takes most heavily,
And with a wondrous constant sorrow mourns.
Sure it is the same fair maid.
Her name's Matilda.
The very same; I can enquire her out,
And, if you please, will presently about it.
Do, while I my Neighbours visit: he doth live
Mighty, that hath the power and will to give.
This is the same fair nightingale that tuned
Her sweet sad accents lately to the woods,
And did so far enthral my heart; but that
Fond love is vanished. Like a kinsman now
Isle comfort her, and love her virtuous soul.
Oh what a blessed change this day has wrought
In my old father's heart! you powers that gave
Those thoughts, continue them: this day will I
Still celebrate as my nativity.
But is that lawful to convey away
All my estate before I marry him?
It is more then lawful, Madam, I must tell you
It is necessary, and you Ladyship
Is bound in conscience so to do, for else
Twill be no longer yours, but all is his
When he has married your. You cannot then
Dispose of any thing to pious uses;
You cannot show your charity at all,
But must be governed by Sir Argent Scrape;
And can you tell how he'll dispose of it?
It is true, perchance he'll take my money all,
And purchase for himself, to give away
To his own name, and put me while I live
To a poor stipend.
There you think aright.
You can relieve no friends, you can bequeath
Nothing at all, if he survive you, Madam,
As it is his hope he shall.
That hope may fail him.
I am not yet so weak, but I may hop
Over his grave.
That is not in our knowledge.
But if you do survive him, as I hope,
Madam, you will; there is no law at all
Can bar you of your thirds in all his land,
And you besides are Mistress of your own.
And all the charitable deeds which you
After your death shall do, as building schools
Or hospitals, shall go in your own name;
Which otherwise Sir Argent Scrape would have,
And with your Riches build himself a fame.
I grant it is true: but will it not seem strange
That I should serve him so?
Strange, Madam? no;
Nothing is now more usual; all your widows
Of Aldermen, that marry Lords, of late,
Make over their estates, and by that means
Retain a power to curb their lordly husbands.
When they to raise the ruins of their houses
Do marry so, instead of purchasing
What was expected, they do more engage
Their land in thirds for them.
Well, I must trust
The feoffees then; but they are honest men.
You need not fear them, they are zealous men,
Honest in all their dealings, and well known
In London, Madam, Will you seal it now?
Yes, have you it?
It is here: here's Mr. Trusty too
Your steward, Madam: he and I shall be
Enough for witnesses.
It is true, give me
The seal. So now dispose of it as I
Intended, My Fruitful.
I will, Madam.
Trusty, come you along with me.
Now all our ends are wrought; this is the thing
Which I so long have laboured to effect.
Old covetous Lady, I will purge your mind
Of all this Wealth, that lay so heavy there,
And by evacuation make a cure
Of that your golden Dropsy, whose strange thirst
Could ne'er be satisfied with taking in.
You once had Wealth. But soft, let me consider;
If she should marry old Sir Argent Srape,
We could not keep it; for his money then
Would make a Suit against us, and perchance
Recover hers again. Which to prevent,
I will go spoil the marriage presently.
The fight of this will soon forbid the Banes,
And stop his love. Then she wants means to sue us.
Be sure to keep thine Adversary poor,
If thou would thrive in Suits. The way to scope
Revenge for one wrong, is to do another:
The second injury secures the former.
I'll presently to old Sir Argent Scrape,
And tell him this; he's meditating now
What strange additions to his large Revenue
Are coming at one happy clap, what heaps
Of Wealth to morrow he shall be possessed of.
What purchases to make, how to dispose
Of her and hers. But soft, the Cards must turn.
The man must be deceived, and she much more.
To cozen the deceitful is no fraud.
Methinks a youthful vigour doth possess
My late stiff limbs, and like a Snake, I feel
A second Spring succeed my age of Winter.
Oh Gold! how cordial, how restorative
Art thou? What though thou can not give me legs,
Nor active hands? Alas, I need them not;
Possessed of thee, I can command the Legs,
The Hands, the Tongues, the Brains of other men
To move for me. What need he Hands or Brains
That may command the Lawyers subtlety,
The Soldiers valour, the best Poets wit,
Or any Writers skill? Oh Gold! to thee
The Sciences are servants, the best Traders
Are but thy slaves, indeed thy creatures rather;
For thee they were invented, and by thee
Are still maintained. It is thou alone that art
The nevers of War, the sement of the State,
And guide of humane Actions. It is for thee
Old Argent lives. Oh what a golden shower
Will rain on me to morrow! Let me see,
Her personal Estate alone will buy
Upon good rates a thousand pound a year.
Where must that lie? Not in our Country here,
Not all together; no, then my Revenue
Will have too great a notice taken of it;
I shall be raised in Subsidies, and sassed
More to the poor: No, no, that must not be.
I'll purchase all in parcels, far from home,
And closely as I can; a piece in Cornwall,
In Hampshire some, some in Northumberland.
I'll have my Factors forth in all those parts,
To know what prodigals there be abroad,
What pennyworth may be had: so it shall be.
Ha, Mr. Fruitful! welcome, how go the squares?
What do you think of me to make a Bridegroom?
Do I look young enough?
Sir, I am come
To tell you news, such news as will perhaps
A little trouble you; but if your Worship
Should not have known it, it would have vexed you more.
Vexed me? what's that can vex me now? speak man.
I thought that I was bound in conscience Sir
To tell it you; it is conscience, and the love
I bear to Truth, makes me reveal it now.
What is the business?
Do not suppose
That I am treacherous to my Lady Covet
To whom I do belong, in uttering this.
In such a case I serve not her but Truth,
And hate dishonest dealing.
Come to'th' purpose.
Then thus it is; My Lady Covet, Sir,
Merely to cozen you, has past away
Her whole Estate; you shall not get a penny
By marrying her.
How man? is it possible?
It is very certain Sir, I for a need
Could show you the Conveyance, for my hand
Is as a Witness there, so is her Stewards.
Oh horrible deceit!
Ask her her self;
If she deny it, I can justify it;
So can her Steward too.
You make me mad.
I keep you from being so, by a mature
Prevention of your cozening.
O what hopes
Am I fallen from? who would believe these false
Deceitful creatures?
Sir, I could but wonder
That she would cheat so honest a Gentleman,
That came a Suitor to her for pure love.
Love? mischief of love.
Alas, I know
It was not her Estate that you sought after,
Your love was honester; and then that after,
Should cozen you?
She shall not cozen me.
I'll have my Horse-Litter made ready straight,
And leave her house.
But when you see her Sir,
It may be your affection will return.
If you should leave her only upon this,
The world would think that you were covetous;
And covetousness is such a sin you know.
You do not mock me, do you?
Who, I Sir?
I know your Worship do's abhor the sin
Of covetousness; But I confess indeed
It would vex a man to have been cozoned so.
Hovel lived all this while to be of reached
And cheated by a woman? I'll fotsake her
Immediately.
Sir, it is a happy thing
When men can love with such discretion,
As to forsake, when they shall see just cause.
Some are so fond in their affections,
That though provoked by all the injuries
That can be off'red, they can never leave
The Mistress of their Hearts.
I warrant her
For any such affection in old Argent.
I do believe it Sir, you are too wise.
How do you Sir?
E'ene as I may.
You do not mean I shall be ever the better
For you.
How's this? I do not understand
What you should mean
You may, if you consider:
But if you do not, I'll explain it to you.
Have I deserved such dealing at your hands?
As what?
As that you should speak one thing to me,
And mean another; But I'll make it plainer;
You seemed to love me, and for love it seems,
Thinking to marry me, have made away
All you Estate.
How's this?
Nay it is too true?
Or else your Chaplain do's you wrong.
Oh Villain!
Nay Villain him no Villains; is it so
Or not?
If she deny it to you Sir,
I can produce her hand, and have the Deed.
On monstrous villainy! Oh impudence!
Can thou abuse me thus, that first of all
Did counsel me to do it?
I confess
I gave you way, and for the time did wink
At your false dealing; but at last my conscience
Would not permit me to conceal it longer.
I have discharged it now, and told the truth.
It was well none of you, Sir; well, I'll away.
Madam, seek out some other m???n to ch???at,
For me you shall not.
Stay Sir, my Estate
Shall still be good; the Feoffees will be honest.
I, that they will, to keep what is their own.
Oh monstrous wickedness! was ever????????? like
Heard of before?
I know the Feoffee minds.
How fare you Madam? Wherefore look you sadly
At such a joyful time?
Oh Mr. Freeman
I am undone, and ruined.
No, good Madam,
We'll see you shall not want.
How's this?
You shall have a fair competence allowed you.
What riddle have we here?
Our thou ungratious
Dissembling villain.
An indifferent means
Will keep your Ladyship; for you are past
Those vanities which younger Ladies use;
You need no gaudy clothes, no change of Fashions,
No Paintings nor Perfumes.
I would fain know
The bottom of this.
Servant, can you discover
What this should mean?
No Mistress, I protest,
With all the wit I have
And for you House,
You shall have leave to stay here, till we have
Provided for you.
Oh my heart will break!
Here is the finest turn that ever I saw
I will resolve you Gentlemen; This Lady
To cozen me in marriage, had it seems
Past her Estate away; into what hands
It is fallen I know not, nor I care not, I.
It is fallen into the hands of wise men, Sir,
That know how to make use of what is theirs.
This hypocrite persuaded me to do it,
And then discovered all, as if one purpose
He sought my ruin.
No not I, good Madam;
It was for your souls health; I have done you good,
And eased you of a burden, and a great one
So much Estate would have been still a cause
Of cares unto you; and those cares have hindered
Your quiet passage to a better life.
Excellent devil! how I love him now.
Never did knavery play a juster part.
And why should you at such an age as this
Dream of marriage, a thing so far
Unfit, nay most unnatural, and profane,
To stain that holy ordinance, and make it
But a mere bargain? for two clods of earth
Might have been joined as well in matrimony.
It is for your souls health, Madam, I do this.
How much was I mistaken in this Chaplain?
I see h' has brains.
Though 't be dishonesty
In him, yet justly was it placed on her!
And I could even applaud it.
I protest,
I love this Chaplain.
So do I, sweet Mistress,
Or I am an errant fool.
But yet I hope,
The feoffees may prove honest; Isle try them.
Isle go and bring them to your Ladyship.
Isle stay no longer; make my Litter ready.
Lady farewell; and to you all.
Nay, Sir,
Then let me interpose; let me entreat you
By all the rites of neighbourhood, Sir Argent,
Make not so sudden a departure now.
What though the business have gone so cross?
You may part fairly yet. Stay till to morrow:
Let not the country take too great a notice
Of these proceedings and strange breach; 't will be
Nothing but a dishonour to you both.
Pray Sir, consent; give me your hand, Sir Argent.
At your entreaty,
Isle stay till morning.
Before that time you may consider better.
I'Ll not refuse my Uncles curtsy,
But go and see his House; I should before
Have done that duty to him, but I thought
My visits were not welcome, since he lived
So close and privately.
Sweet Coz', you'll find
A happy alteration in my Father,
And that there dwell a kind and honest soul
Within his breast; though wretched Avarice
The usual fault of age, have heretofore
Too much kept back the good expressions
Of such like thoughts, he now will make a mends
To all the world, and has begun already
With his poor Neighbours.
Cozen, I shall be
Too bad a Guest at this sad time, and bring
Nothing but sorrow to my Uncles house.
You'll be your self a welcome Guest to him;
And I shall think our roof exceeding happy
If it may mitigate that killing grief
Which your so solitary life too much
Has nourished in you Cozen, feed it not;
It is a disease that will in time consume you.
I have already given the best advice
That my poor knowledge will afford, to ease
Your troubled thoughts If time which heaven allows
To cure all grief, should not have power to do it;
If death of Father, Mother, Husband, Wife,
Should be lamented still, the world would wear
Nothing but black. Sorrow alone would reign
In every Family that lives, and bring
Upon poor Mortals a perpetual night.
You must Forget it, Cozen.
Never can I
Forget my love to him.
Nor do I strive
To teach you to forget that love you bear
To his dear memory, but that grief which lies
Wrapped in amongst it, and turns all to Poison;
Making it mortal to that soul that tastes it.
It is that, sweet Cozen, which I hope that time
May by degrees extinguish. Will you please
To walk along? my Father long ere this
Expects us I am sure, and longs to see you.
I blame you not at all, that by the Law
And virtue of your places, are required
To apprehend me.
We are sorry, Sir,
We were enforced to see you.
But I wonder
What curious eye it was that searched so far
Into my secret walks, that did discover
This dark abode of mine, and envied me
My solitary sorrow; such a life
As I enjoyed, a man might well afford
To his most great and mortal Enemy.
It was a plain fellow, Sir, tha brought us hither,
In the Kings name, and left us when we had you.
But Sir, we wish you all the good we may
I thank you Friends; I cannot tell at all
Whom to suspect, nor will I further vex
My thoughts in search of such a needless thing.
I call to mind what once my Theodore
Told me by way of a surmise, but sure
It cannot be so foul; shall I entreat you
To carry me to old Sir Argent Scrape
My Kisman? I would only speak with him
Before I go to prison; And let one,
If you can spare a man, go run for me
To Mr. Earthworm's house, and bid his son
Meet me with old Sir Argent; he lies now
At my Lady
house: I have about me
What will reward your pains, and highly too.
It shall be done as would have it, Sir,
I dare not send to fair Artemia:
The sight of her, and of so dear a sorrow
As she would show, would but afflict me more.
Perchance I may come safely off; till then
I would conceal this accident from her.
But Fame is swiftest still when she goes laden
With news of mischief. She too soon will hear,
And in her sorrow I shall doubly suffer.
Thus are we Fortunes pastimes, one day live
Advanced to Heaven by the peoples breath,
The next hurled down into the Abyss of death.
But are you sure it is hereabouts he lives?
Ha! who is that? it is he, and in the hands
Of Officers; Cozen, the mischief's done
Before we come.
O my dear Eugeny!
Artemia too? Ay me! she swoons: help, help!
Look up, my Love; there is no fear at all
For me; no danger, all is safe, and full
Of hope and comfort.
She begins to come
Unto her self again.
But pray Sir, tell,
How came you hither, Noble Euphues?
I never knew the place; but now by her
Instructions found it out: I came to bear
Her company; and her intent of coming
Was to inform you of a danger near,
Of such a monstrous mischief, as perchance
You scarce can credit; old Sir Argent Scrape
By me, and by another Gentleman,
Was overheard to say, ???hat he had Scouts,
And had laid certain plots to apprehend
His Kinsman Eugeny just before the Assizes,
Besides what further means he did intend
Closely to work your death, he then declared
To the old covetous Lady, whom he came
A Suitor to.
Prophetic Theodore,
How right thou were!
This thing when I had heard,
I told it her; and we with speed made hither,
But ere we came, the mischief was fulfil'd.
I thank you, Sir, for this discovery:
How ere I speed, pray pardon me, if I
Shall by the Hand of Justice, die your Debtor.
How soon from Virtue, and an honoured Spirit,
Man may receive what he can never merit!
Be not thou cruel, may Artemia;
Do not torment me with thy grief, and make
Me die before my time; let hope a while
Suspend thy sorrow; if the worst should fall,
Thy sorrow would but more enfeeble me,
And make me suffer faintly for thy sake.
If worst should fall, my Love (which Heaven foresend)
How could I choose but suffer?
I will hope
Your safety yet may well be wrought, and knowing
Sir Argent's mind, you know what ways to trust.
Good Cozen help us with thy counsel now,
If thou dost love my life.
Fear it not Coz';
If I may aide you, Sir, in any thing,
You shall command it.
Sir, I cannot thank you
So much as it deserves; this timely favour,
If not in life, yet shall at least in death
Endear me to you.
Do not name that word,
My dearest love.
You must be speedy, Sir,
In all your courses now.
Then let me beg
That you would meet me at my Lady Covets.
Isle ring Sir Argent Scrape so loud a peal,
As shall perchance awake his bedder'd soul,
And rowze it, though so deeply sunk in dross,
Drowned and orewhelm'd with muck. Go you together,
And leave me to my way.
Farewell dear love.
Madam, it is sure; I know your Ladyship
Is so possessed.
I think he loves me well,
And will not now start back from marrying me.
That is the happy hour he only longs for.
But if so strange a thing should come to pass,
(Which yet I think impossible) that this
Your marriage should break off; I will give back
Into your hand this bond which I received;
And it is worth nothing, Madam, as you know
By the condition.
True, I fear it not;
But I durst you if it were otherwise.
He waits the hour when you will please to tie
The happy knot with him.
He shall no longer
Waite for it now; Isle go confirm him.
But think not, Gentle-Madam, that I shark,
O??? cheat him in it; I have to a sum
Greater then this from him as good a title
As right can give; though my unhappy fortunes
Made me forbear the trial of my title
Whiles his old crafty father was alive;
He held from me a farm of greater value,
As all the Neighbours know; I then forbore it,
And will do still, since by an easier way
I may have satisfaction. But here comes
One that has lost a marriage.
Tell me, Trusty,
What say the feoffees?
They'll say nothing, Madam,
Make me no answer, but that they know how
To manage their own fortunes.
All the world
Conspires against me; I am quite undone.
I promise you truly, Madam, I believe
They mean little better then plain knavery.
I, it is too true.
How does your Ladyship?
I was in hope to day we should have seen you
A joyful Bride.
Ah Madam, it was my folly
To dream of such a thing; it is that has brought me
To all this sorrow, and undone me quite.
I hope not so. But, Madam, I confess,
The marriage could have done you little good;
One of your years, and then a man so old.
Oh do not mention it; I am justly punished.
Pardon me, Madam, I must make so bold
As leave you for a while. Come Mr. Barnet,
Shall we go see the party? I wait you, Madam.
My sorrow will not leave me. But, alas!
It is a deserved punishment I suffer
For my unjust oppressions; I detained
Scudmore's estate injuriously, and had
No conscience to restore what was not mine:
And now ell's tan away; what then I would nor,
I cannot now perform, though I desire.
Fear not, Artemia, there shall no means
Be left untried to save the Gentleman.
I did approve thy choice, and still will do,
If fortune will consent. My Lady Covet,
Are you sad still?
Never had any woman
A greater cause of sorrow, Mr. Freeman,
For I protest it does not trouble me
So much, that by this cheat I lose the power
Of my estate, as that I lose all means
Of charity, or restitution,
To any person whom I wronged before.
Why then you make a true and perfect use
Of such a cross, and may hereafter take
True comfort from it.
If my conscience
Were satisfied, I could forsake the rest.
My Cozen I perceive has made more hast
Hither then I; but I have seen a pageant
That in the saddest time would make one laugh.
What, prithee?
I have seen you neighbour Earth???worm
In such a mood as you would wonder at,
And all that ever knew him heretofore.
He is inveighing against Sir Argent Scrape
For being so basely covetous, as thus
For hope of lucre to betray his kinsman;
A thing that he himself would scorn as much,
He does protest, as can be.
I have known
It otherwise; what may not come to pass
When Earthworm is a foe to avarice?
But he they say has made it good in deeds.
He has been so exceeding bountiful
Now to our poor, and vows to be so still,
That we may well believe he is quite changed,
And strives to make amends for what is past.
He has they say a brave and virtuous son
Lately come home, that has been cause of all.
It well may be; I know young Theodore;
Uncle, he is of strange abilities,
And to convert his father was an act
Worthy of him.
Madam, Sir Argent Scrape would take his leave
Of you.
When it please him.
Get me my litter
Ready presently, I will be gone, Madam,
I now am come to give you loving thanks
For my good cheer, and so bid you farewell:
But let me tell you this before we part,
Things might have been carried another way
For your own good; but you may thank your self
For what has happened now.
If you suppose
It had been for my good to marry you,
You are deceived, for that in my esteem
(Though once I was so foolish to give way
To that ridiculous motion) had brought with it
As great a misery as that which now
Is fallen upon me
How, as great a misery
As to be beggared?
Yes Sir, Isle assure you
I am of that opinion, and still shall be:
But know, Sir Argent, though I now want power
To give you that which you still gaped for, wealth,
I can be charitable, and bestow
Somewhat upon you that is better far.
Better then wealth? what's that?
Honest counsel:
Let my calamity admonish you
To make a better use of your large wealth,
While you may call it yours: things may be changed:
For know, that hand that has afflicted me,
Can fin out you: you do not stand above it.
I hope I shall know how to keep mine own.
I do begin to pity the poor Lady.
This has wrought goodness in her. Who are these?
My neighbour Earthworm? Lord! how he is changed.
It was basely done, and like a covetous wretch,
Isle tell him to his face: what care I for him?
I have a purse, as well as he.
How's this?
Betray a kinsmans life to purchase wealth?
Oh detestable!
Oh miraculous change!
Do you not hear him Uncle?
Mr. Freeman,
Happily met.
Sir I am glad to see you.
I have been long your neighbour Sir, but lived
In such a fashion as I must endeavour
To make a mends hereafter for, and strive
To recompense with better neighbourhood.
It joys me much to see this change in you.
Pardon my boldness, Madam, that I make
This intrusion.
You're welcome, Mr. Earthworm.
Let me be bold then, noble Theodore,
To claim our old acquaintance.
I shall think it
My honour, worthy Sir, to hold that name.
Is that Sir Argent Scrape in the chair yonder?
Yes, Sir.
Oh fie upon him: but soft,
He will be told on it now.
Ha! Eugeny,
Why have they brought him hither?
I am come:
Me thinks these looks of mine, inhumane wretch,
Though I were silent, should have power to pierce
That treacherous breast, and wound thy conscience
Though it be hard, and senseless, as the idol
Which thou ador'st, thy gold.
Is this to me,
Kinsman, you speak?
Kinsman? do not wrong
That honest name, with thy unhallowed lips.
To find a name for thee, and thy soul guilt,
Has so far posed me, as I cannot make
Choice of a language fit, to tell thee of it:
Treacherous bloody man, that hast betrayed
And sold my life to thy base avarice.
Who, I betray you?
Yes, can you deny it?
Isle witness it against him, if he do.
It was his intent I know.
And so do I,
I overheard his counsels.
Out upon him,
Unworthy man.
I could e'ene laugh to hear
Old Earthworm child.
But think upon the deed,
Think on your own decrepit age, and know,
That day by natures possibility
Cannot be far from hence, when you must leave
Those wealthy hoards that you so basely loved,
And c???rry nothing with thee, but the guilt
Of impious getting; then if you would glve
To pious uses what you cannot keep,
Think what a wretched Charity it is;
And know, this Act shall leave a greater stain
On your detested memory, then all
Those seeming deeds of Charity can have
A power to wash away; when men shall say,
In the next age, This goodly Hospital,
This house of Alms, thy??? School, though seeming fair,
Was the foul issue of a cursed murder,
And took foundation in a Kinsmans Blood.
The privilege that rich men have in evil,
Is, that they go unpunished to the Devil.
Oh! I could wish the deed undone again:
Ah me! What means are left to help it now?
Sure the old man begins to melt indeed.
Now let me turn to you, my truer Friends,
And take my last farewell.
My noble Chaplain,
What pranks comes he to play now? I had thought
His business had been done.
Health to you Madam.
How can you wish me health, that have so laboured
To ruin me in all things?
No, good Madam,
It was not your ruin, but your good I sought.
Nor was it to deprive you of your means,
But only rectify your conscience.
How's this?
Another fetch; this may be worth
The hearing.
Madam, you conveyed away
To three good Honest men, your whole Estate.
The have not proved so honest; I had thought
I might have trusted them.
Then give me hearing:
They by the virtue of that Deed possessed,
Have back again conveyed it all to you.
Ha?
Madam, it was done before good Witnesses,
Of which your Steward here, was one.
Most true.
And all the other are well known to you;
Here is the Deed.
Let me peruse it Madam.
Good Mr Freeman do.
What plot is this?
One Manor only they except from hence,
Which they suppo???e you did unjustly hold
From the crew Heir; his name was Scudmore, Madam,
I do confess I did unjustly hold it,
And since have grieved much, that while I might,
I made not restitution.
He was poor,
And by the Law could not recover it,
Therefore this means was taken; by this Deed
They have conveyed it hither, where it ought
Of right to be: are you content with this?
And all the rest of your Estate is yours.
With all my heart.
Madam, the Deed is good.
For that Estate which justly is passed over
To Scudmores Heir, I am so well content,
As that, before these Gentlemen, I promise
To pay him back all the Arrearages
Of whatsoever profits I have made.
I thank your Ladyship; Now know your Chaplain
That wanted Orders,
Mr. Scudmore living! discovers himself.
My Friend, how coldest thou keep concealed so long
From me?
Excuse it, noble Euphues.
Oh happiness! beyond what could be hoped!
My Eugeny is safe, and all his griefs
At quiet now.
Is this a vision,
A mere fantastic show? or do I see
Scudmore himself alive? then let me beg
Pardon from him.
Long ago it was granted;
Thy love I now shall seek: but though a while
For these my ends I have concealed my self,
I ever meant to secure thee from danger.
What strange unlooked for happiness this day
Has brought forth with it!
To tell you by what means
I was most strangely cured, and found a way
How to conceal my life, will be too long
Now to discourse of here, I will anon
Relare at large; but one thing much has grieved me,
That my too long concealment has been cause
Of so much sorrow to my constant Love,
The fair Matilda. Sir, she is your Niece,
Let me entreat my pardon, next to her,
From you.
You have it: Go, good Theodore,
And bring her hither, but prepare her first:
Too sudden apprehension of a joy
Is sometimes fatal.
I'll about it gladly.
Dear Cozen Eugeny, if I yet may be
Thought worthy of that name, pardon my crime,
And my whole life, how short soar it be,
Shall testify my love to be unfeigned.
I do forgive you freely Now to you
Grave Sir, in whose rich bounty it must lie,
To make me happy, in conferring on me
So bright a Jewel as Artemia,
It is your consent I beg.
You have it freely;
Her heart I know, she gave you long ago,
And here I give her hand.
A richer gift
Then any Monarch of the world can give.
Blessed happiness! gently my joys distil,
I est you do break the vessel you should fill.
Here comes another couple to make up
The days festivity, Joy to you, Madam.
Thanks noble Euphues.
We have tied the knot
That cannot be undone: this Gentleman
Is witness of it.
Yes, I saw it finished.
Mrs. Artemia, as I suppose,
I may pronounce as much to you.
You may
As much as I shall wish your Ladyship.
Here comes the dearest object of my soul,
In whom too much I see my cruelty,
And chide my self; Oh pardon me, dear Love,
That I too long a time have tyrannised
Over thy constant sorrow.
Dearest Scudmore,
But that my worthy Cozen has prepared
My heart for this, I should not have believed
My flattering eyes.
To know brave Theodore,
Next to enjoying thee, was my ambition;
Which now affinity hath blessed me with.
His friendship, worthy Scudmore, is a treasure.
I shall endeavour to deserve your loves.
Come, leave your complements, at all hands now,
And hear an old man speak; I must entreat
This favour from all this noble company,
Especially from you good Mr. Freeman,
Although this be your Daughters wedding day,
That you would all be pleased to be my Guests,
And keep with me your marriage-festivals.
Grant my request.
It is granted, Sir, from me.
And so I think from all the company.
Then let's be merry, Earthworme's jovial now,
And that's as much as he desires from you.

IF once is shown the glimering Star, whereby
Pluto is daunted, and great Jove knows why:
When by its circulation, driven course,
At last by passage, lights upon by force
Some waterish cloud, which by its structure foul,
Is obscured from men's mortal eyes, they howl
To see the radial beams so quickly gone,
As if all vanish, relics thereof none:
Just in resemblance, so shall I produce
My future breathing, till some me conduce,
To see your sparkling, splendent, orient eyes,
Shining like Luna, Sol, Stars in the skies,
Viewing my Pygmy, if perchance there be
Pleasant looks in the Royal company
Of your bright Train, more Angel-like then she,
Apelles drew by art, yet could not be
So well as nature wrought her; that same look
Would purchase more, then I can with my Book,
For it would raise Ambition, and bereave
My fancy of its reason, to perceive
Nothing but a Chimera, and thereby
Term my self new again if possibly;
But if in opposition, it appear
Just to the contrary, no looking cheer,
Nor smiling carriage, but then takes their place,
Frowns, discommending, and absurd disgrace,
Then I much like a Prisoner at the Bar,
Shall be dejected, flying hence and far
Do purpose to remain, as long as sense
I have to weep for this my insolence.
If story produce no laughter, nor the Wit
Laugh at my folly in so doing it.
Received with gladness still my Lords you are,
Gladly received, I say; we will suffer all
Our hands to be now numbed with sense, l•t
fall
Our deadly swords; nothing in opposition
Stands, we hear, but the whole Universe
Endures in a paralectick posture; vast
Worlds did Iulius C•sar conqu•r, yet ne'er
Was able to withdraw our minds, but forced
To fly our summons; we will range the steepy
Banks, those which with rudeness hide
Titan his rai•s, seek some terra in••gnita,
Where men are absent, beasts may fulfil▪
Our Warlike, yet not wilful, intentions▪
Let us find it out, that by the prospect
We will gain the Victory, and surround the foe,
Drench their hot hearts, as we all else, you know.
None dare appear: but Numenia land
Is said to have a will, bent to withstand
Your Majesties (dread Sovereign) Army, for
To know the right of Kingdoms, we abhor▪
The same, great Aberden, I will confirm, that▪
They did help with unknown, potent strength,
The last great Camp we raised▪ showing to them
Benign favours, so they took them for their friends,
No •o; which cause dotard in winning the
Rich Trophies, that you overcame at length.
What? sure it cannot be; but if perchance
That they do act a matter so disliking
Me and mine, they shall not further• trouble
Their dull brains to make a search in pursuit
After it; but I will so employ their
Grasping hands, to set all labour by, but what
Concerns the martial Banner, and bring it
Home to them; War, which treads dame Nature's
Cour•es, trampling under feet, her set
Delivered forms, shall disclose, enclose to
This Realm, strange unheard •les. Numenia,
With the rest of former Victories, shall
Know my tribute; and I'll quickly see
Wherein they my great force do disobey,
Find them as far as stars doth light the way.
Then let us make a rule, and raise a Camp,
Fall on them undiscreatly, and berdane
Their Forces of a time, in which they
Premeditating, may find Ammunition
To dissolve our Troops, and to disgorge
The obdure faculty of their sense,
Defraud them in the time, and send them all
To the native Earth, the Mother which they call,
And fitly may be termed so, and boiling
Blood into the air, by the meteorious form
Of it, a strange essence make, a full
Similitude betwixt, we foresee they
Purpose for to lead on; but let us go.
Pray know for what, and why you do so,
The thing is known, Aberden; yea, it is,
Great Sovereign.
See that the thing be fit,
And bear, within its self, the full prologue
Whereby it purposes to maintain its self,
For too rash Counsel often breeds within
A subject height, which may be called a sin,
And that in prodigality, then done
Beside its shifts, it can no other shun,
But come to ruin.
I, it is so, but this is not so bent,
Because, great King, we have Your Counsel in it.
But for I know, rash counsel doth maintain.
Fear not that thought, for▪ it will prove most vain,
If it be so, yet danger may be with
It cannot be, it is a thing of mirth.
Your censure so the subject for to be.
Yea, that we do, that to eternity.
So, shall we move with freeness, till we come
To that same object, which we in delay,
Do stand most fearful of, hoist •ails
To it, search the triangular shapes
Within its Region, where all the Pole doth count
Full fifty Degrees it doth with height surmount,
Yet comes not near the torrid Zone, whereby
Our skins are scorched, and our flesh doth fry;
We will know the nature of Numenia's Land,
In what longitude, or latitude doth stand.
We will know my Son his resolution to
This great design, this overtaking of
(I hope it will not be so as I call or prove
In it) our strange unseeming enterprise,
In following that my subjects do devise.
Stentorian voices doth surround my ear,
Echoing within the concave of the terrestrial
Ball, all doleful sighs doth pierce my tender
Sense, of hearing; from those our spoils
Formerly obtained, and deeply groaning▪
Bidding farewell to Neighbours and their friends,
With clamorous noises of loath departing,
And still Bizantia stands, who feeds the blood
Of free born souls, who wishes nothing but
The element they move on; Oh spirits
Generous, who nothing else desire to be
Sepulchers for their falling lumps;
What, is it thought a vapour impure,
Of restless waters, can withdraw the fight
Of quick-sight fury, or the bellowing waves,
Stopped danger courses so, which gravel not
Below, but fly above, the sense perceiving,
And shall we thus decrepit rest at length
Which will accompanied be with phlegmatic
And cholerous humours, for to be drawn
Out by artificial manner, skill, and art,
As verity doth us show, whose Turrets
In a Tapers manner gives light to all
Our Hospitality, and yet we are almost
Stupid, lulled with idleness, nothing but
Slumbering dreams doth take abode and seize
Upon our faculties: rouse, rouse, your leaden sense,
Display your Arms, cleanse rusty swords amain,
Look out your Helmets, Coats, bring home again
Your lost deceiving follies, search them out,
And let not rust and canker turn their edge from
Shedding blood; let not the hymns of music
Dull your ears, let Drums and Trumpets sound
Still your intentions, until there be found
No vile lascivious fact with wanton ones,
Which brings dull hearts, and lingeringness in bones,
Hollarro's part doth differ far from it:
They'll know as much, if they then defraud not
Their much enfeebled hands, for th'star where I,
And under which my native time did come,
Did impregnate here in stout acts to be
As valour, rage, choler, blood, temper, free.
Hollarro Prince, my son and only joy,
The matter still stands in a doubtful way▪
To whom it bend•, your judgement Prince, I pray,
Decides the cause, Aberdens fickle will
Runs hazard, yet on tiptoe•, whether the heads
Be mine or no.
Great Queen, you know,
I ne'er led my mind in opposition
To the same decree; let not de•oysterous
Humours so vail your discretion• for
Aberden the King, cannot deny,
I'll undertake with temperance so far,
Without a self-disaster, to bring on
The purpose to a head, if you'll dotard
Procrastinate the thing which you have heard,
But to the same effect the cause to me's
Unknown.
Why, it is this, if pardon lead
The will of him, the subjects heads, who captives
Are, by legions of his forces might,
It is the elixir of my diligence,
May be a sacrifice to me, I•m my hand
May have command of them, disposing with
At pleasures will, none challenge dare the same,
It is no crime, since reason doth not blame.
If it doth violate the Land, the Laws,
It's soon amended where is known the cause,
Let nothing interpose the same, but try,
And gain my favour, least it come dearly.
And were it not sufficient to have all their
Bodies for your servitude, but in a fine
B••eaving of their troubled lives, and to
Send them to some unknown coast, where all
New found discovered creatures and their souls
Doth sleep, while you enjoy only vain
Pattern of a hairy scalp; sure reason
Should discover more then it, to please a
Fancy so with noisome shapes.
Hold you there,
The King, though private carried in it,
Divines as much, nay more; for surely it
By the discerning Jove was long foretold,
So waver not in will more this or that,
But bring the same.
Great Queen, your counsel is
A severe guide. I'll go i• earth and sky.
Were twist together by a prodigy,
And all the foes with branded Lances met,
Making such airy sounds with swords, helmet,
That to the clouds doth raise a clamour, so
By wounded souls which is deep 〈◊〉 most low,
And all the sky with comets range their course,
I would not fail, no not by all their gorse,
But bring a sure certificate.
My Uncles Palace is Apelles shop
Of living pictures, which are set in
No forms else but Ladies models.
The Palace is the Judges, Ladies Diamonds;
So it's a store, each Madam is an Angel.
I, counterfeit
Unheard of sound, who can dispose it so,
They that do enlighten dull natures eyes
Why, can it be so termed? Cupped is blind,
And it should follow his strange fashions.
Yet opposition rise, though fortune deem
The splendour of its rays, therefore to seem
In much less; oh that it could be said
She turned was to moory shape, 〈…〉
It may not forth her worth so bright,
For in her breast carries concealed fire,
Which makes her fumes still by the flame aspire;
All else were rightly coloured, but if she
Give elimation, they turn' quickly be
To Euro•a's blushes, none dare take its place,
What decent is, unless she first embrace
Their rosy colour, but dejected are,
Her crimson lips doth so excel them far.
Do then explain her, sure she may be known,
No fire there is, but by its smoke is shown.
Her splendent parts doth so transcend clearness,
That by its supernatures work, it dazzles all
Bright shining shadows; she is transparent,
No muddy form is placed in her, but she
Is the elixir of Virginity.
Divulge her then, she sure cannot be lear,
You count her so beyond the crystal clear.
No quick-sight apprehension can discern
The mould from whence she is took, nor delicacy
By all her pencil art demonstrate her;
Diana still grows shapeless by comparison,
Yea all the Goddesses are immured by her,
None dare appear, nor in place come nigh her.
Oh sure she is invisible to be
Named in our presence, that know her may we▪
In her you may discern Loves only face,
All Nymphs their parts, and that with comely grace,
A front dependent, eye much like a sloe,
Her lip a cherry, in her chin a bow;
Her breast like alabaster crimson rose,
Her waste like slender Pine disovered shows,
Her hair the tresses, on her neck like milk,
Display their pastimes like a twisted silk
Or threads of gold.
Still some passage lights in thy design,
Name her▪ that this discourse may be at fine.
What, stupid still, possessed with ignorance,
Not know her by these tokens I advance?
I'll spare no passage now to spend my breath,
To name the quintessence of a•• the earth,
Lerenica she disposes of
My fickle will, and fancy at one both.
What she? how backward runs the course?
The time hath been when opportunities
Hath sought occasion in their properties,
By casting favours by her mush-red eye,
Deluding objects to sobriety.
To get the will of him, who intended
The Zenith of love where under it did
•est, should be prolonged further, casting
Aside those indisposed fight and tricks,
As vain, and whom doth none regard.
The Styx, her mists doth paraphrase your words,
Wherein grim Cerberus doth bathe himself;
Let the same vapour rise, and by its stench,
Infuse an opiate virtue, there to dull▪
My vital spirits, to cut the hair
Of danger's purpose, and whereby I shall
Receive a quiet death, for a vexed life.
Fear not,
A gilded bait shall entrap this Barbell,
VVe'l find her stratagems, devise a way
The filly blind boy knows not, the which shall
Employ affairs deserving worth a name
Of Chronolgoy, a cheat, or somewhat
May work effect with this same peevish brat.
Let hope go with that design to the end,
Methinks my top-sayls move with celerity,
I gain acuteness and agility;
Who ever did take arrogance in strength,
Or sound brave Nectars notes with Bacchus juice,
More freely then do I, must be more then
Mother Nature doth put forth, sweep away,
Enclose within thy arms; oh Cynthia,
Thy master Titan's Candle, let not him
Prance on his journey to the top of th'hill;
But curb his fiery trigon, suffer not
No more his fight till we have done our plot.
Though friendship promise more then strangeness doth,
Deride not one, but do receive them both,
I'll bring whole fountains of new-found desires,
Which shall suck up the honey of your fires,
And flames of love: we go.
Since time, tradition, forces against will
And all the Countries invitations,
Me to withstand Aberdens 〈◊〉▪
Of choler, which at length consumes all what
It meets with, whose vast supportment would
Not subsist, but be demolished▪ and top
Submissive to its feet, know if let rest,
Sloth would enter course, yet Fame not be
Ejected, your valour still would •••gne,
And, Bugargo, if you maintain our right;
Supporting all our cause, and not detarding
Shame, but Derisius, Gervoron, both
Take part with him, you shall have recompense,
I stand obliged all due to common sense.
Courage strikes my resolute contentment
High (Celerinus) immense vast Trophies,
A Diadem, be purged from my thoughts;
If all the prises then were equal poised,
And shared the lot, deciding judgement would,
As me possessed, term trouble: for a Peasant
Without delay transported to a Prince
Were a too great Hyperbole, I'll undertake.
All grateful motions attend then your soul,
You are the head, we members wait there on;
And what composure may be thought upon
By loving deeds, all experientiall skill
May be put forth, or sacrifice thy will.
Stand firm to it, inform us then no more,
Affection lead, thou shalt have gold or ore▪
I wave my self, though special charge commands,
Either gain Kingdom, or else lose your Lands;
What spoils can blind, or mask our piercing glance?
What keen struck sword, black armour or the lance,
Whose sight corrupts the Element, which pare
Contained in its self the cold moist air,
Put forth betwixt my eye, all my desire
To know the day it's that thou dost require.
What, is it thought that King Aberden will
Hoist sails to us, dreads he, nor land, nor soil,
Which lends a death, a murror, and a broil
To their inhabitants, they'll ne'er wait,
Pitching a leaguer to overcome the wall
They are bent against, which shares with Nile,
The Alps would fair imprint a backward call,
If once their eyes cast upwards be.
Burgargo, doe command my legion, when
Fear smites thy arm, fire Beacons, and let
Drums sound loud.
Let Bizantia's Monarch pursue the way,
He has at length begun; for Morpheus
Doth bear more frequent rule with leaden Mace,
Then Mars with valour carried in his face.
Here is no determed theme, by whose oppose
May vent hot sparks of manhood from our
Loins; for as quick sight with well wrought temper,
Gives a gloss to affect the matter; so
Oft experience by assiduate practice,
Makes that which is uncord then most prompt▪
Though love is strong, yet Cupped by might
Combines with Mars a steely shirt though hard,
Yet oftentimes is safer then a linen frock;
My blood doth bubble, when is brought before
Idle disposed fashions, martial blades;
Seeking, lost nothing, all armour proof, yet
Useless are, which would possess with a
Fear, they stand in danger of each other;
Nor can the same be nought but great,
They raise a Camp postreeme with us, when as
The East and West doth seem a distance, not
A foot in length, being fadomed by their might,
Since then so large our enemies be found,
Our glory still grows greater by their sound,
What answer you?
It is right, renowned friend
In prime to careful be of our Sovereign
In maintaining right, next to this City
And thy Country good, if truth thou binds in
That same Gordian knot.
Then bold faced Champions, leviated from the blood
Of well tried Princes, you may discern the
Blast, if by prevention not made sure,
Cause ruin o'er this Land, if flint and sie:
Being met, expel their fiery beams;
Well may your generous souls inflaming
With valour, betwixt rough danger and
Mild sloth, let fly over sleepy hill, until you
Are conducted to the contrary by grim death.
Since cause is equal, victory cannot be
Debarred from us, and no ways misery
Take here abode.
Lets then beguile the time no more by talk,
But see your guard and front be sure,
Call o'er in summons, display your Colours,
Flags, Banners, Pendents, Streamers, see your men
Be right for th'cause, great General Bugardo.
When that is done, I'll cause my sacred Priests
To move the gods, and all their hymns set forth
For your welfare, all what can thought be worth.
Why so, since time delivers otherwise to be.
Stretch forth thy arm, it's nought but exercise
Brings on the same.
Oh hold then pray you there;
I'll stretch my hand, if fortune will give leave.
But shall not be to kill, but to maintain
Life by its help.
How strange to common sense!
Draw out thy sword I'll show thy postures;
What if a man should challenge field with thee?
Then I should dye.
Before the blow did come?
I quickly sure, the sight's as good as blows
With me; but since your Treaty is to draw,
I stand hear guardian of my self.
See, see,
If it were possible, he would invite Heraclitus
To laugh: I dare swear Plato might read
A piece of Philosophy in his posture;
Stand up man with a full breast, surely
Mr. Quermero, your breech and feet are
At difference—
Hold up your hand, and steady; how like you
It—What, no answer, but by conjecture
Postures; he shakes his head, it is well, hold up
I say—hold in I say this breech, oh
Pretty face; but if you'll make no answer,
It is my means shall force you;
What none—what none—what none.
Gently good cousin, my bum is addle,
Have care you break no Eggs; for if you do,
The sent perfumes the room▪ beside all
Myrrh or Spiknard.
Why answer you not?
Let pity force compassion▪ it is
My weak stomach and foolish condition,
The nakedness of sword lends such terror
To my heart, reflects amazement to my
Eyes, that while supported by my hand, no
Word can utter the cause I it dismissed.
Oh senseless pagan, take it up again;
What, afraid, here take it, try thy valour,
Shake thy weapon▪ now I'll draw mine.
Then I'll
Put up.
Hold, stay thy hand, and let us two enclose.
I wish Aberden had no greater foes.
Hey bravely done, this is all, well manned.
Hey-day, methinks I am a second George for
England, have at you then.
Stand further off.
Stand further off.
Have care—
Stand further off.
You'll run in danger, hazard the little life
You have▪ put up, put up.
Stand further off.
What now, draw blood, brave Champion,
My joys still grow the greater, wind whistle
Forth thy fame, like sturdy Oak thou stand•
All other are but shrubs, my blood cries blood
Again, stand Guardian still.
Stand further off.
Your dexterous art works opposition to
My termed design, none can then curb your will,
But what must spring from Bizantia.
What, kicks thou? stand further off.
The pumel of my sword is lost, thou art like
A Crocodile, pursuing flies, flies pursuing
Your hardy courage, rises more and more,
I hope to see the Land all in a gore;
My spleen now rises, works in the concave,
A desperate motion, nothing shall thee save.
I fear neither friend nor foe, stand further off.
I purpose now to put in motion some,
Beyond capacity, strange unheard act;
So then thou goes.
Oh, oh; What, my back broken by a fall,
But stir not till he is gone, make much,
Foster what I have got▪ perchance the fact
Is such, that quickly will not go.
Lie still,
When sense bereaves thee of thy will, congealed
By a known accident, enforced by that
Works invisible, a cord yet stays
His friend, favouring by course what licence
Give it's aid, I fetch attendants to wait
On thee.
Attend thy self, see that thou dost;
Is he gone? Sword, where art thou? Hay, hay,
What, as lively as thy Master is, oh
How the flesh corrupts thy edge; stay, is
Perpurgerus gone? I'll lye close still, may
Be he stands perdue, but gone or no, I'll
Up, and see my wound; hay boys, none, none,
none.
Oh stay here; what's this? oh deadly thrust,
Fetch a Surgeon, I cannot go
But must because am forced; Oh, oh, oh, oh.
A Conquest lost for want of obedience;
That superstitious terror, which with
Force con•atenates the will• of natural
Bears, and hangs its Flag, assign of true
Discretion, as making votes, sole
Recreation in nought but prayer,
And offering sacrifice, still stands in
Behoving power, imploring the aid of
Sublime Gods or Deities; a decree,
Not challenged by a right, then let us la•d
Them according to their deserts, we shall receive•
Pledges of felicity, and cancel out
Our black transgressions; thus should it, none
In exchange betwixt them and us, for what
•Ascends when we descend, three-fold descends
•Again when we ass•nd; this same it will,
By graduation, form a ladder passing
From the celestial queer to the terrestrial ball:
And now ne'er want pleaded more her
Cause than at this present; my care shall
Be to see it fulfilled, yet my Mother Queen
Stays out her time, my duty shall wait
Leisure of her coming.
Well, Prince Hollarro, I see you are not perverse
You wait my leisure; I•• recompense,
My ears hang at your tongue by a symphaticall
Attention, striving with priority, who to
Super-excede; the •enor by your voice will give
The Victory, what answers King Aberden?
Most mighty Queen, my entreats did play
Their course as Fortune thought it fit,
Bent with a resolution not to return with
Fruitless answers, until thought possessed
My tender judgement, they had gained
Anger from King Aberden; yet like a
Valorous Champion stood his ground, not
Flying at the first, but reply over the
Same again; but when the fury ended, mildness
Did deliver, he would conceal.
What, not the head, the least request could be;
Why, when the swift long-winged foul•on play••
Her game, her recompense shall be the head;
What so ever her prey be, he would conceal, O
If King would favour me, with majesty
Of his great presence I'uld know the reason why.
Great Princess, I'll see.
So go thy way.
Adrenimia, you sent for me, I know the cause,
Grief still doth poise the libra of my will,
By a just weight, the beam is level, but to
Whom give down (it's yet reserving power)
Is unknown, you plead for it, ten thousand
Pleads against; you are my Queen, all
Other are my subjects; you save my name,
The other save my life: to whom should it
Give down? pray Lords aid you me in it;
She pleads for head of those that captive be,
The request is small, though much denied by me;
Are you content? then I shall notwithstand;
Do you deny? then I will leave the Land.
Your Majesty Astrea yet much courts,
She with her grasped hand, and severe looks,
With scale and sword makes in your mind her
Sphere, yet will it enter into the hearts
Of your subjects, and deem t'the clemency of a King,
Grant it the Queen, great Sovereign▪
The Prince answers for all.
Are you so all agreed?
We are all, brave King.
The game is up.
My Queen, the only will of him, who ever 〈◊〉
Thy sole refuge, doth grant with •ervency,
The subjects heads that taken are by us;
They are thy ransom, take you them when you please;
My Ships have gained upon the angry Seas,
Dancing levalto, my courage not refuse,
To do the same, thy pleasure wills to choose;
Therefore, brave Princess, this thy self-design
Shall be a virtue, not in least a crime;
So take it freely, take it as a bliss,
Before my subjects, confirm it with a kiss.
Continuance long we wish.
My King, my Monarch, what can I term thee less,
In granting thy poor Queen a happy bliss?
I thank thy high and mighty power for it,
Thy subjects too, I'll frame a thing what's fit,
Or best becoming all the tedious sense,
Of your blessed wills for this your kind presence.
Shout aloud,
Let a cloud
Distill rain
To the plain,
While with mirth
We on earth,
Mercy, Peace,
Each embrace:
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
It combines,
And inclines
Man and beast
To a feast.
And Jove sounds
To their rounds,
Making sport
To their sort.
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
Mars put down
To a room
Lower then
Worst of men.
Forced to be
There is he
With relief
Pini•g grief.
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
It's a time
Rolls of wine,
Follow game
The self same,
Go about
Till they rove
Fancies of
Those that quaff•;
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
Within this
Ell's a bliss,
Not a sin
Is within,
But all joy
Nought did•oy
The least mite
Of our right;
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
Ceres with
Her green sheaf
In the morn
Brings in Corn,
As the sky
All doth die,
Lands and streams
With light beams;
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
The time is all well-nigh spent,
Fury begins to rage,
All to War they a•e fully bent,
Nothing else will assuage.
Now Joves past•mes must give way,
Both man and beast must fear,
Mars must both rule and bear the sway,
It whistles in my ear.
Those that mount even for to pass,
Their time in Taverain,
Must look to keep a Fort at last,
Regard their Sovereign.
Ceres dismissed is with that
She hath with labour hew'•,
Turning her with fame in her lap,
Drums sound another tune,
DIsplay my tresses, see decent places
Become their shapes, withdraw the straggling
Hairs, reduce them to a set form.
It is done.
Behold, delicious, sweet face't Hymens day,
And what your will is with acceptance pleased
To be, my purpose was to have took labour,
In conveying you to some chaste Nunnery,
Where all refreshment of a doleful day
Shoe•lt be low sighs; but your mind is turned
You in its place receive a Palace bright,
Where Diadems come to a grasping hand,
Such riot by a fury is employed,
That reason would conclude (if sense guide not)
That walls and houses were all even ground,
And by it fumes sent by an airy help,
Draws a curtain betwixt friends and foe,
And no other music practised,
But clamours from both wide and shril-sound throats,
Is it were a ransom to a Victory,
The cause whereof Bellerrio counts you fair.
Had you by favour obtained the good will
Of Duke Bellerrio, and no outraging
Carriage by a mysterious form, metamorphosed
The design, but expedition wrought with
Nature so, that in the passage of affection,
You by discretion wrought to the object,
Combined with a smile, following by track,
Or by tradition, to the wonted place,
All the Nuptial Rights that are wished for,
To present to the view a happy morn,
As Bridegrooms morrows, Sack-posset, and beside,
A thing not to be named.
Oh! My blood is young.
It would have favoured time, so as an hour
Rest, when waken all the joys b•ing past,
And what did boil by a lascivious lust,
Would cooled be by a dull appetite,
You may protest when tall Bellerrio,
Did by his own known Counsel hide
Within my soul a treasure not corrupt.
In those consenting silent times he moved,
Was but a gliding beam to Sol his self,
Which by its fullness brings on this malady;
But now renouncing those bad infections,
Receives by means some vital Spirits in,
To bid defiance to those false allurements.
It were too hard, you speak not like a Siren,
For beauty, shape, with modesty, if tyrants all with∣stand,
are invitations to Venus Courts,
The efficacy therein by which they bear,
If were abrap'd, the Academy of Love were gone;
Nay if by nature possibly I could
Be turned a Man, if Icy temper seized
Upon my limbs, and put to prospect as
One wanting soul, the like reward, also
Hopeful enterprise, would then regenerate,
As I have hear-said, calor naturalise in my veins;
Nay if Midas his wish, with Iasons golden fleece,
Put to redeem your same beauteous piece,
Yet all would prove too vain; for you are such,
And have like virtues, both in least and much;
I cannot so my self so full express,
As if a man I were I do confess,
For then I should enlarge at every word,
And here for three, three hundred then afford.
Believe me, Histerica at this time doth pierce
My understanding a thought of great belief,
That he prefers you to a place so high,
To be the prologue to his enterprise;
But by his carriage he should be what wise,
(And if he be) he should have took more care,
Than to send such Orations as these.
Learning is not a bait fit for Women's stomachs;
Rather by entreaties, must persuade, and
Fostered Muse, than any Tullian phrase, or
Homers lines, you are too high in your design,
And withal too tedious, away, away,
Be sure your words are not in office, like
Compelling swords, but turn their calling to
Rebounding echoes; they are air, and so
They vanish, and doth not enter my soul;
And if by lot he chooses you again,
Tell him from me he is not wise.
Too hard
Nature to work upon, and by temper,
Was not first decreed to be a woman;
For women are soft, you carry an opposition:
For men to love, you stand against the cause,
But it is no matter; now Bellerrio comes,
He'll speak himself.
My only thoughts, thou art my Diamond that
I daily wear, and when my eye is cast
Upon its splendour, its turned a min• of gold;
When crystal beauty ushers in her train,
And Ruby colour fetched from the Indian mine,
Doth act their quarrels in a lovely face,
Whose cheeks are Roses, brow a comely mace,
So Paris joyed, when he fe•ch't Helen home;
So Ulysses joyed, to see his sweet hearts loom;
So Hippomenes joyed, when he the Apples got;
So Ae•ea• joyed, when saved, it was his lot,
So, and beyond all that, rejoiced he,
(Except your self) obtained by a decree, the fairest of yo••ex;
Nay, these are nought, in thought but vain deceit•,
Mine is the substance, these are only baits,
Not in the least, derived from a name;
Mine's pure and perfect, their's is void of shame.
Nought can by artificial art be brought unto,
More decent then pure Lerenica's hieu.
It is you, it is you, your sex I honour still,
You above rest, in you my only will
Hath free beatitude, content and life.
All things what else, that is then void of strife,
I will endure for to maintain the cause
Of your brave sex, and Champion in the Laws,
That concerns you and yours, who perfect is,
Sole happiness, a thing beyond all bliss,
Let me embrace your will.
Illustrious Duke, it were an injury
Enforced by me, and I should by liberal
Freedom violate the means of your true amity,
Not concluding with a favourite, the
Purpose was my own decree, you did
Display their flames so in their ardency
Of generous contemplations, that
In circumference of its boundless hope,
No room was left for me to express
My self in equal balance poised your worth,
But with a back-recalling sound of love,
Made a retreat not worthy of the same,
And with cherishing thoughts that pleasure
Might be filled, and no disliking taste rise
From its stench, you for to term me
Most unworthy of such bright enterprises.
Alas your answer is indisposed now,
Do but resolve me how it would become
A Peasant to deny a Prince, a martial man;
Women fine smiling shows, surely I should
Condemn my self as guilty, one stupefied by art,
If that I should think so; come come,
Your words doth not diminish, but give aid
To my dull hopes of a brave Victory.
Madam if leave may have so much freedom, hear
This time, to help the case, give me a word,
A Dialogue is good, when there's three persons;
The Duke speaks fair, not sending his words
As if they dealt more cruel by sighs and
Sieges, more tempestuous than storming
Neptune's blast; Or as if he intended
Batteries against your beauties favour.
But with a comely grace, understood of
Sweetness, and smiling passage; withal, a
Brave decorum, it would pierce an Adamant,
Make restless motions, calm, serene and clear,
And in stern looks where fury hath before
Took potent place, it would quickly extinguish all.
No want here is of foul conspiracy,
A problem sure, and that invisible too
Contained therein, no new found art can be
By stars or reason, or interpreter,
So quick-sighted in the way of these strange
Politic notes; to lay it open, or
Divulge the same, it must be silence with
Perseverance thereof, who is the spouse
Of long-sought mystery, reveal this same;
How can it be that you should both join in
The same broad channel of deliverance?
As if slit-looks should reason so the case,
To be nunciate betwixt their tongues,
Histerica keep silent in these hours,
Bellerrio I'm not worthy to be yours.
What still persuaded so, you transform it,
And where you think conspiracy to be,
It is not so, but the Oracles means,
Delivered to our ears, the cause is right,
Come bring no critical point, no posture of
Confusion to my maladies, be more mild,
You deserve all, I single you from the rest,
Because an Angel, and a Virgin blessed.
It is decreed, the business pursues the cause.
My Liege, the post of quick known news
Did come, not knowing your Majesties
Privy Chamber, to my hands, he being
Accompanied with many conditions
Of King Aberdens will, and the fuel
That now maintains the quarrel betwixt us
And him, sent to your Highness presence,
Did leave then to your best times consideration▪
Are they now present?
They are, my Liege.
Read them, I'll attend.
Aberdens Conditions of this waging War,
sent from Bruzantia to Celerinus,
King of Numenia.
Since all the Regions
Under Nothern Pole,
Stretch forth their
Distance as far as they can,
Doth do obedience, (not
One doth condole)
Unto the Country and
Bruzantia's man.
Send yearly tribute,
And their daily vows
Unto their Gods to
Prosper our success.
That by the clamour of
Their open mouths,
We have a music that
Beyond all bless.
It is the purpose and
The only care
Of great Aberden to
Have you do so;
And that hereafter
You do not despair
To do the like, and to
His presence owe.
If you refuse, his ships
Are all rigged for
The Ocean waves, and by
A prosperous gale;
To sally out and come
Unto your shore,
Before you think his
Ships be put to sale;
Therefore consider, take
A serious time,
Regard your cause, to
Whom it •hold then bend,
Do not then waver, follow
Straight a l•no.
To have Aberden either
Foe or Friend:
Put it up, its read, enclose the lines,
A bold design to such a powerful name.
His usurping grace strives too too high,
Who swells with blood of lost innocent ones,
Which will by vacuation prove a gall,
He cannot carry manhood for a praise
Of Warlike courage as the free-born souls
For country, good, and health, without more time;
My mind is fixed, no other fancy takes
My genius, but send a daring challenge
To his will.
It is right, dread Sovereign,
My never tired yet hand shall bring with it
Vermilion hue, when 'se're return, and I,
As long as strength doth give its aid,
Withstand their bold attempt.
My mind by looks did so much answer him,
They were so fixed by fury in my brow.
I slight his threatening lines with spitting fume,
We can set envy up as well as he,
Upon a banner tossed, and make him know
It was rash without a Council chose,
Thus answers him, Orestes.
The Chaos was my Mother, so to Chaos
Will return, ever I be thought base in a
Pedigree, my mind stands to their will.
So,
Hector by way ne'er gained such fame, as we,
By this dread undertaking; but before.
We force a Camp, I shall engagement bring
Upon your souls, that you a solemn vow,
By this my signature of all Numenia,
To stand your colours, as long as flesh or
Bone, and blood by circulation, keeps dame
Nature in, and fight for him, (my self the
Meaning is) as breath hath interal passage,
And then postreme, to kill who's ever you take;
See that you do confirm.
Long live Celerinus King.
Well said, brave noble souls,
But before we for leaguer do provide,
We will know our Generals will and Captains too,
So Burnomoy bring them then into presence,
And things right managed with a discreet will,
Brings good well hap, and very seldom ill;
For if the case be plain, and take no heed,
Oft ruin comes by that same bad misdeed.
Your command, great Prince, is here fulfilled.
Your business, stout Liege.
It runs by Cypreans fields, Br•zantia's plain,
By a spectatious sight, and information,
A Paradise to show whose in, beyond,
The •agus fragments go, by Poets famed to be
Paved with a Pearl, her grace surrendering to
The Queen of beauties pride Chlo•is with her
Decency, strikes admiration to the insatiate
Soils, to see themselves by Autum's clusters
So pressed down, and cooling Rivers which with
Melodious tunes sing by the woody banks,
While they with as well pleasing noise,
Whistle like Orpheus reed, Ti•an in
Aestivious time•, when torrid heat hath power,
Dismisses night, and gives day the full hour,
Of number twenty four; then Burgargo,
This Region (which I named) by situation,
Transcends the metropolis of every Nation,
I stand defiance with a barbarous call,
I purpose to choose you my General.
When sense doth rave beyond its bounds, why then
There is no reason that we should be men;
Let sense and reason scorn my only state,
When I deny to govern this by fate,
Which hath been separated from the rest,
By Jove his hand, and he to be the guest
That it should entertain; this Isle that which
Gives livelihood, and makes the inhabitants rich,
My hope is fixed upon, and firmly too,
That sacred Gods will aid and fortune show,
Because we stand in our defence, not lust
To have a War; but this our cause is just,
We stand for right, not what is got by pelf
For lives, for wives, who are our second self;
It is pity that this Nation should go down,
And save your Majesty, none ought to wear the Crown,
Except your self, who wisely with your hand,
With voice gives leave, with that their force with-stand,
Let them display their colours, black visage, so
unseemly sight, with plaited hair you know,
Much like a Horses main, which gives a light,
They are savage creatures, special in the night,
When skies become their favour; let them come,
I'll be your General till day of doom.
Your answer's good, they are both rash and rude
In judgment, doing actions, and before
Their nature be by valour curbed so,
They'll ne'er rest silent, but stratagems
Inventing still, though with grief and amazing
Flashes bring a float of destruction
With whole waves of sorrow to their pedigree,
My breast doth breathe not with a fair clear passage,
Because corruption grows from nomination of
Such hellish heathens; the Numenia's Land
They strive to make their prey, and spoil of it;
It is not the fear of their great potent arm,
It is not Aberden with his hellish charm,
It is not their Chariots with their Iron wheels,
It is not their Ships with their well pitched keels,
It is not the fierceness of their nature soul,
It is not the savageness of their grim soul,
It is not the words of their well threatened 〈◊〉,
It is not the strokes with which they make their noise,
It is not the armour that they daily wear,
It is not the colours wrought with silver clea•,
It is not the conditions that they all sent,
It is not the words that they pleased to put in it,
It is neither this, nor that, shall work so fast,
But I will fight their fury to the last.
Your answer's like your self, noble, and that
Most generous; I like a branch, you are
The root, if you perish I must not stand.
Let fame want Trumpets for to blaze her self,
Let my poor soul want blood to raise her self,
Wh•n I deny to be as firm as you.
Then my Lord Orestes, see a Legate
Be prepared to send to King Aberden.
You know the drift of the cause, we will maintain
The War he promises to our Land, and
Burgargo with these two Captains, which are
Derisius and Gervoran, and that valiant
Soldier Burnomoy, draw down your forces
To the port-Towns, cast trenches, ditches, that
If they gain the Land, they know not where to
Lead a squadern up, but stand amazed
at their rash stricking shore.
Heavens bless Numenia's King.
After you return, (as undoubtedly victorious)
Trophies shall be prepared of pure Gold,
Elixirs essence, what doth Nature hold,
Be presents to your reward.
My soul runs wandering from its way,
Not knows its guide, till fortune by favours
Whip, lash the occasion forward, that they
May join their Forces by Sea or Land;
My hands want blood, that (by its natural heat)
R•ceive a quickening sense, my •ury plays
U•on the strings of the ••••cordium,
Which causes a palfie in my hand, th••
Hold I cannot till some blood I have,
I could with ease digest the wrong that's done,
If I should cause one of Aberdens friends
To use my Altar, his head upon my spear,
In the air to be an atom of delight,
It is a thing disgorge with me most sure,
I feel a weakening cause rise in my bones
Which can be deemed nought else, but want of blood,
Prithee Hollarro what, must still vacation,
A rust corrupt your souls and weapon too,
Resolve my quere, sure you are not bent
To raise perplexity to a Queen her will,
Blood, blood, still I will call.
Great Adrenimia, the conditions which your King
Was pleased to make a War, expected answers
Are, when Post brings news, the tidings which you
Wait leisure on, unto my Fathers Court,
No sooner arrival shall take its abode,
But with a fiery look and watery eyes,
Bring to your Highness those same prodigies
Which lurk betwixt affection and defraud,
Your pleasure wills to crave that harsh design,
Like Ebian wood, whose colour cannot be
Changed to a whitish hue, no more can your
Entreaty turn its black melanchollious
Humour to a white waterish phlegmatic
Cause; my spirits raise ambition in my
Veins, that such who works against natures will,
Receives no free permission there to lay
Its store for that same matter which you crave;
But if a War go on with immatchlesse forces,
My father's such a man (your Husband, Aberden)
Stands to a word, though mentioned long before,
To let those captive subjects, which by lot
Caught in the gins of our free-born like souls
Of Amazons, ne'er yield field to any,
Either foe or friend, to less or many.
What, is it so? what, is it so? still Hollarro stand against
That same cannary bird, what's ever it be,
Sings such a note with pains ripening forth,
Such unagreeing discord, and unhandsome
Quavers, shall quickly have a Pip upon
His tongue, a slit or ga•• about his neck,
Make him sing sweeter changes then those same;
Hollarro take care, look not to untwist
Those arms of great Aberden and his Queen.
He granted me, you stand in opposition;
Talk more with silent counsel, then to the face
Of a Queens power, condemn it a disgrace
That she takes pleasure in, it's blood that I
Crave of my King, until the day I dye,
If none can have from foreign Countries then,
Constrained I must take then our innocent men,
Your part shall not scope free, if you do not
Go to the Wars, the next will be your lot,
Therefore blow up those fires that almost dye
In your stout Soldier, that perpetually
They may bring home great spoils unto the Queen,
As captives, bracelets, all what my youth hath seen:
See, see, you do, do so, dispatch the cause,
Or else in this Land I will bring new Laws.
Your will's a Law, great Madam, to my force,
I shall not be him that withstands your loss;
The frigid Zone ne'er new the Icy way,
Or tract her course more plainer then doth I,
In your bright Horizon, the sphere of hope
Wherein my restless will doth make her Orb.
While Titan drives four prancing Horses,
That needs neither whip nor bridle; so move I
To please the tender affection of your
Princely grace; take not in least in heart
My bad attempt, which flies by the swift wings
of ignorance, guided by staff of folly,
Ranging within the bowers of restless will,
Seeking the corners of vain bad defigns,
Still let them fly for refuge to your grace,
Let them there take their most reserving place.
You are most hollow-hearted, while you see
No good there is in gaining, what your will
Hath mind to work its force, you then dotard
Most fatigated in that, what your purpose was,
Desist your talk, I leave your presence.
I,
Stand submissive as becomes your Son,
And wait your royal Person.
The Legate is dismissed from them, it is well
Their answer rises so high against our will,
Which hath bid stern Mars stand off, and the Brute
Of troy-novant his race, hath stood with his
Shoulders pending to the ground, by its
Massy and assured w•ight, blessed in the
Perifery of a swallowing main, burst
Great Numenia's wall, make skies to echo
As you do at Rome, when Pope stand elevated,
Quell you their voice by your secret harmony,
That will make Hercules for to wonder,
And Leo rejoice to hear such single notes,
And Tigers repeat it as a loving Song,
That when the Inhabitants hear, struck with the
Amazement of a terrors will, terming it
Thunder; let Austere, Bores, and the other two,
Of Cardinal points, your fame blow aloud,
In represention of (wrongs new redressed)
Not to be veiled by curtain of a foe,
Or frightment, but fully resolved to be
Revenged of the quarrel, and his Majesty.
Our glorious purpose, like the sparkling star,
Gives light in dark, when leaden Saturn stands
Nigh on his side, whose pale-fac'd tanyed state
Makes splendour rise of th• ••are above the rest,
When all the mists and waterish vapours of
The middle Region cannot withstand him;
But like a Diamond among •able stones,
Cast bighter blaze above the rest, then them;
So we proceed, excel the others hope.
Liberty stands bound, when with the crafty
Whistle, or second sound of their advanced
Pinions, dives to the burroughs of a
Childish fear, we will afford upon their
Terrestrial plains, such unheard language,
That shall not by graduation, but at first
Seize on their clownish brains, and endue
Our native Land unto posterity,
With victorious praise.
Right, Fafrisius,
The celestial Queers runs counter for to
Gain us trophies by their help; for the Globe
Which was the Antipodes Land, is now ours
By fortunes only guiding, by women's
Innocent looks, strives with her force and will
To have all good for us, and nothing ill.
Your speeches are fully poised, no venture done,
No good is had, we will strike an oblick cross
Unto their Land, if 't be for no cause else,
But for our Countries good, as for our King;
That all the Penates with divine sound,
Bless all the Cities, Towns, and Castles of our Land,
With most tranquillous times, Linraides
Spreads Fields with Flora's Vesprey, and that Sol
May have perpetual motion in the Ram,
Though hot and choleric, yet a handsome
Spring, which shall bestow on this the Title
Of a fruitful soil.
Your souls are generous
To the last—
And doth hope for to endure.
As long as blood doth warm the heart.
We will
not flinch our ground.
Your valour's stout,
Much like a Trojan blade.
Or Irish Moor,
Who never stepped from him that gained
Ground.
Then you will fight?
We will my Liege.
Then let valour range her course, go see what
Ships are rigged, and Galleys fit for sail,
That in two hours space or less, we may
Bestride the Sea, with the whole Navy of
Our Army, ten thousand Ships well prepared,
To bear within concaves of their vast
Great bellies, both men and Ammunition,
Shot, under the conduct of Hollarro Prince,
Twelve thousand horse, and forty thousand foot,
Bearing the colours of a golden Ball
Set in a large black field, with chevern of
Three Mullets ore; next him, you Yernomoy,
Bring up a wing of thirty thousand foot,
Furnished with pike and sword, musket and bandalere
And all displayed, with Griffins rampant on
Their shield; so you Fafrisius follow next
With nine thousand horse, well saddled, bearing
A Rose upon their Arms, beset in Erg.
Buzaraine, with your Captains and the rest,
As Nevermo, stand you a distance from the rest,
With nine thousand both of foot and horse,
To aid these Lords, if that need require.
What subject you take, bring home unto my Queen,
These are all your precepts.
Heavens bless Aberden King, and prosper
his success.
Action was not wise,
Diana him espies,
And caused him to be by Dogs tor•,
Because he did her see
Naked with modesty,
And graced him with two horns before.
Helen she was most fair,
Paris thought none compare
Unto her well shaped soul and face▪
She did at length destr•y
That famous City Troy,
And cause both famine and disgrace,
Demonise that Queen,
W•o for lucre and gain
Pe•raid Ephesus with a wile
Unto Brennus that man,
Which afterwards became
His sole destruction and exile.
And Atalanta, she
Did chaste Peleus see,
Would not give way unto her will,
She falsely did accuse,
A•d basely did abuse
Him, to Acasius of ill.
You see by these four examples,
how women they do fail,
In any matter that mantles,
the good in ill prevail:
They seek with sweet sugard words,
And all things that pleasure affords,
for to destroy
their only joy,
b• they •are Knights or Lords:
Then fie upon this world, that such a thing should be.
Then let us leave those silly brats,
that do perdition bring,
And discourse of more serious that's
belonging Aberden:
He draws his stout Capt•ins •n,
And his potent Army long,
against his foe,
which he doth know
to be of the same throng:
Then fie upon this world, that such a thing should be.
THeir first arrival on Numenia's Land,
They purchased it by a Legion of
Their sacrificed lives. Aberdens men
Were new beginners in those stratagems,
Their Armour was no friend, but played a foe,
To their well nigh and half sweltred bodies:
Our trenches work by wisdom, not by force,
While we like Trojans stood and mazed their folly.
Come brave souls, lets meet them in the front.
Let them strike anchor in our barren forts,
While there no controversy rises on ground,
For their determed wills to make a choice,
Whether Sea or Land afford their execution;
Though AE•lus confirm with Neptunes
Blustering noise on the azure gliding Seas,
Which hoists to the memory a panick fear;
Yet those shall stand in no similitude
To our own Land contrivings: cheer then up,
Your Numenia bloods, we will put them to it
Great King Celerinus, will you please to lead,
Lets ralley them before they gather head.
March, march, let swift and sure set feet strike off
Sloth her entreaty•, the metamorphious forms
Of their strange Land, shall lend to none of our
Determi'd thoughts such a prodigious sense,
As make a quick flown fury rise, as
Choler in the veins created by burnt
Adust blood, but with a milder grace,
Send comfort to our hope with new supplies.
The soaring Eagle ne'er prided more
To play with air, or stand upon her wing,
In the defiance of the lesser birds,
Then I do in my potent Soldiers strength.
Let them strike lance with dexterous art,
My care shall ever be employed to gain
The field, her triumphs, by Bruzantia's hands;
Lets dotard time no longer.
My Liege, your will,
Though putrid bodies by corrupted stench,
Breeds impure Atoms, infects pure air;
Yet those most innocent souls must not go
To the Elizium of eternal rest,
Without reve•ge do follow.
What, still multiplies surround their courses?
They rise like Ants from muddy mole hills,
Surely want ne'er showed her face within the bounds
Of this new prodigal lle: men like the
Putrefaction of a loathsome form, breed
Like the Atoms, the Sun his rays, and
Ne'er diminish, though voice with bloody notes
Send thousands to their far-sought homes,
They lye with arms spread open to receive
Their unnatural mothers, like Vipers to their dams;
Yet Terror strikes no sense to their benumbed wills,
But a carriage of presumptuous Law,
Of free doom, licence, of their free born right,
They like a Fury more than modest Grace,
Spend wind and limbs a sacrifice to us:
We fear nor courage, nor their valour; no,
Their sights are not the weapons of our lust
We have to fight; come, come, march on.
We will,
For ne'er shall that strange sound take place
Within receptacles of a hearing,
That Bruzantia's men lost ground; come march
With me, my Lords.
We follow your command.
The service was hot, yet fear not you,
Though ground doth thirst with her insatiate
Will, to drink up more congealed coagulated blood
Of our lost souls and Soldiers, receiving
A surfeit by its strange and faulty virtue,
We have enough to stand a field, and face.
Lets draw the scattered forces to a head,
Bring ranks in order, and each his Ensign place,
Not lose the day with folly in our hand.
My stomach ne'er did faint with killing till
This day, my arm bids not desist, though
Reason would plead for it, my sword cries
Vengeance still, each blow it gave, brings rosy
Blood, its hue, from those strange hags, Bruzantia's
Men, sending their woeful cries to the skies,
To frame a thunder.
Valour runs with thy great will, from hence
Lead thou the blew male-frocks to the field,
Thy manhood shows thy grace, thy fame this day
Won first its root, the next the branches they
•thou wilt obtain, on which the Trophies hang
Of those lost men, of which they made a mang;
Let us see them once more, come follow me.
They force me to it; well surely, I shall be
Prepared for the cause, this sword shall curb
These will, and this maintain its right,
A Caesar, nay a Caesar ne'er was
So valiant as my two swords are, one cuts
The flesh, the other hews the bone, my helmet
Shows a force to kill a Guy, or Hercules,
My Armour binds my body to the same;
I wish a fortune would give more advice
To him that falls in hand, then run his life;
Suppose this Pillar were great Bevis stout,
And I a Hector, as I am, stand to
Oppose the fiend, my first progress it should
Strike him under the•are, the n•xt take him here:
Oh, oh, have at the man, have at thee;
Nay this is nought, when Drums and Trumpets sound
A fame unto my valour, I should be
More like a General then a common man.
I am sure as fancy pleases, now I could
Put ten to flight, if all were Trojans stout,
I should redress my self with Tygars strength,
And make them fear my swords.
The pillage of the soil is left for him,
Who bears the victory of these two land broils,
At present doth an opportunity show forth,
The way to steer thy course; forbear, I'll not
As long as heat infuse my livelihood,
To cast a backward look to those before
Lie gasping on the ground, I will exchange
My broken sword for two, which are like clefts
For them to gaze at; and keep them under
The thraledom of a fear; but I'll pursue
The chase to find my prey.
What, art thou gone? it is well
Thou scapedst so, he knew I was here,
Or if he had not, I would have made him fear
To take my swords, and leave a stump for me;
Oh I wish he were now present, for now
My choler rises, I would show him such
A twisting combat, as know a friend from foe.
I am a Lion now, he's but a Lamb,
I'll tear him, tear him, tear him; what, a
Broken piece, he left unto my lot:
Come, come, again, and let me flesh my
Appetite, and kill thee for a name.
Come, come, Perpurgerus.
What, stand you still? rouse leaden spirits from
Thy earthly soul.
This broken sword hath caused the absence of
The bravest Hector: this sword and hand cau•'d it;
I made him run, I, run.
Some childish boy▪
He was a Man, whose shoulders were like
Mountains; a foot, a Pasty peel would
Equal with its birth, his eyes strike dead the
Heartiest man that goes, all armour furnished,
Yet forced to run.
How did he bear the blows?
How did I bear the blows? like V•lcans anvil;
For as he struck, my rebounding sense
Answered him again; he stood like
Nicodemus, or a fool, while I stood
Breaking my sword upon his nose,
He snuffed, and said nought else, but run.
You are stout.
I ne'er knew my heart until this day,
Now I perceive the rigour of its will.
The stygian lakes recoil, Hero and Lender
Makes cold, their loves are froken to an Ice,
Proserpina doth rule with fiery look,
Pan now doth make a sword, a shepherds crook;
Diana chaste, begins to fly for fear,
Cynthia doth mask her face till the next year;
Endymion waken is by these loud cries,
Nymphs they do court their Garlands miseries;
Ceres doth lavish forth her full ripe ears,
Venus complains her self with waterish fears;
Iuno is lumpish, and her love is gone,
Pallas turned foolish, and she wit hath none;
Mars rules full out with his most severe look,
Themis stands potent with her justice book,
Nemesis is troubled from the funded deep,
Morpheus is waken from his creeping sleep;
Apoll• stands smiling at their folly so,
Jove bids me fight, and know my friend from foe.
More aid shall come, I'll fetch them out my self.
Great Prince, my valour rise beyond its bounds,
All for your Fathers right.
Now let Burgargo come, my weapon's fixed
To play its part, pierce tender bowel with
Its three formed point, and make his blood
Still wait upon his shoes.
Stand still your ground, the day breaks from the
Skies, for to discern the foe, my hands are
over loaded by the spoils of this days labour,
While some lie gasping, others crying loud,
Here legs, there arms, all bodies mortified,
My spirit thirsts to see the Prince Hollarro,
And to change Gloves with him, try valour at
The point of naked nimble swords.
Oh Goddess blind, thou fortune hath enforced,
To show my progress of my lingering days
In this brave soul, so stand prepare to fight.
Your worthy carriage shows as much, nay more
After the encounter of our steely blades,
Let after victory either rise or fall;
And let Astrea poise the truest cause
By this the combat of our martial will,
So General come on; stand, see your self.
Your valour's to be praised he that dare
Twist his hand with me, must have a grace
More then such young years can put forth;
I praise thy courage, but not thy discretion,
Because thou runs upon thy death.
Desist your purpose, till I close my wound,
The blood speaks on my cause, a fury leads
•y temper now, stand still and pause, and then
• will renew the second blow.
Vain purpose of your will, to strive with him
Who always returned with victory in his hands,
You cherish folly in a strange conceit,
strive with a weaker hand for to oppose
A decreed sense which is much stronger;
Yet shall it not be uttered with a voice
I killed thee unawares, but take thy time.
Rest upon your blade, ground its point,
The time runs in swift motion to one
Of our ends, the Elizium field doth open
Large her panting soul, for to disgorge
The vicious humour of our Fabric,
Within that space, the which we shall possess,
Rewards stand ushering in our power,
To have the Crown allotted by those Saints;
Come lend your force again, I now prepare
For to receive my death by your unnatural
Hand.
Fortune support then both our hands,
Valour withdraws unskilful helps,
And shows a fair prospect to a foul design.
Hold, hold, I dye, take you the day,
And Crown your self with Trophies of my blood,
Your riper years sprung in a blossom stout,
Shall be Encomium to Bruzantia;
My spirit it doth vanish, as my blood
Flows from the veins, sending by legate cause
All praise to your most severe stoutest arm.
 Oh, my breath is proved an airy substance now,
I wish it were confined a longer space
To run its course, that I my King may show,
The man gave me this wound, him to exalt
Above the rest by Title, degree and honour.
 Oh, now the fading hour-glass consumes its sand,
Each corn a drop of blood, and the three fates
Come with their hungry appetite to cut
My fatal end, and blood doth b•bble by
The hottest combat that us two did fight:
 Oh, I must I must, the bones begin to be
Afraid of flesh, the sinews stand at difference,
All my body cold, save only heart, doth
Leap by its extremity of pains, and
Hot with sorrow; I come, I come, make room
Amongst you, ghosts, see there be place for
Me, * I dye.
Thou dyes then like a man, whose breath did bear
The whole Numenia's Land in a subjection,
The only pillar of thy Countries good,
Death hath surprised the conquest of thy soul,
And this thy trickling blood that's here displayed,
Doth show thy progeny to take its flight
From rutus, or other greater Monarch,
My spirit's sorry for such a thrice noble friend.
Return, return, thou runs upon thy death.
Draw in that sulphurous breath: I live! and
Here my General he lies slain; no, no,
Die slave, as thou hast been ordained.
R•bi• dead, dead? Jack, dead, dead? are you
Or no?—faith if you be not I'll make you,
I'll paunch you, Rogue•, and make you know
What I am,—what not
Dead still, but stir you, hang
You, hang you I'll have one of you sure
Enough; come away, come away come—come—
Fight, fight, the day's our own,
Squeeze forth thy spleen with a censorious frown,
And turn my serious blows into a wrack of gall,
Delivered to my sight, ten thousand men
Were slain, and like an Abyssus did the earth,
Enclose all in a lump, converting so
Their oakey chaists into a putrid form,
And these my Robes, a badge receives from those,
Of honour, pomp, and glory to the day.
I follow them my self, so the compunction
Of their boiling blood did then rebate
My f•rm•r st••mes into most pleasant cal•s.
Stand, stand, thou slave.
I fear no Rebel, such an one as thee,
Consume thy self to ashes, and there lie:
My General Burgargo, what, thou killed;
What mortal motion propagated it?
This cannot be withstood, but hymns must sound,
And El•gies complain thy doleful fall;
The Firmament crack with a thunder, and
The stars want light at this thy funeral;
A marble shall enclose thy sacred soul,
But cause its nature weeps, and may be termed for thee.
We contemn liberty, and honour with the same,
By a most sottish will, and by idleness,
Their ranks dispersed, doth inflame fear with it;
The blew pavilions in which comfort lived,
Are routed by the heavens stormy blasts;
His Forts demolished, and his Army broke
Into a hundred squadrons, not able
To do a damage to our potent strength,
His Subjects hear our captives and his chiefs
Of all the Soldiers slain, shot, powder, by
Them vanished, all Bulworks they consumed▪
The best politic way that must come here,
Is to destroy both branch and root of them;
And that Hollarro be the Captain of
This new Dominion, so shall dame Peace
Still flourish with her train.
Your purpose is confirmed by me, and that
United to your only self. My wound
Doth fester, and begins to •ave beyond
A fury of its hot inclining, visiting me,
Thus with torn tossed discord.
The Heavens shows a face to prosper our
Success, the Sea is calm with gliding streams;
The wind doth shut a savour with its blasts,
And the sky looks clear with serene splendent hieu,
All by invasion strive to do us good,
Then suffer all our Navy to the coast,
And spring Bruzantia's Land, carry the
Captives to the Queen of love, Ad. enemy.
A conspiration works with harmless will.
The air displays her friendship to the cause,
The Element of water joins her force,
To suffer all a shipwreck, if not now
We take this opportunity the Turrets
Of our hope consume with fear after invasion
Of an obstinate and a perverse sense;
So let us go to that our native soil,
The Captains stand and tremble at that word.
Nature her Empire will at last give way,
The limits are unclosed in which she moves,
A fainted courage can never withdraw
Such a design, if knowledge be against:
So most great Sovereign of your sacred will,
Draw down the Forces to the River side,
Because the day is vanished, and their force:
Then, stout Hollarro, draw your whole Army down,
Clear all the Camps, and set the bondsman free,
Fear lest the Pleyades with its constellation
Drop stormy weather, and a season foul;
For now the Equinoctial line doth poyze
The day and night both into equal parts
And no die••sterous soil doth work such fate,
As make a wisdom rise against our hate▪
Father, you King of great Brrzantia,
Conquered Celerinus of Numenia.
I needs must visit you with good for ill,
If such a thing were forced against my will.
The noise of fame, and nimble swift-flown hope
Gives freedom pardon for to use her scope;
You need not bid, but command him that stands
Submissive in the way of your commands.
I will conduct the Army, hoist the sails
To where you please, in him it never fails.
Confirm thy resolution.
Hunger, hunger, preythee Perpurgerus•
Give me some victuals, my teeth begin to gnash.
Here, take all.
Oh reward thee, its ready cut to my hand.
Burgargo's gone, and all my Lords taken
Captives; when Titan, obscured within his Orb,
The verdant fields receives a Gown of dew,
But when my General lies in Elizium,
Then floods of sorrow spends their store,
And do prolong it by a cunduit art,
And stew the whole soil in salt, brackish tears.
The wind doth show its force as by a fury,
So doth the ebbing Sea abound with gall;
One strikes alarm with a thundering voice
In the air; the other like a Lion,
Roars forth her spleen under the Globe,
All to the celebration of the soul
Of great Burgargo, my only General,
Without a transformation of a sudden change.
They'll rage their bounds too far beyond their power,
And if no clam strike overthwart their Laws,
S•ch a strange tossed tempest brings a ruin
To the terrestrial Ball, and so with their
Raging motion strike a fire, as Cyclops
Throws his Thunder-bolts, bring a consumption
To the substance of't▪ all for Burgargo.
The two-wing Pegasus doth stand ready
To show the fame about the world; her motion
Is swift, but he is swift as she,
Cutting the air, and parting grosser forms
To view the lacrimy of such a friend,
Soaring the Climates, prancing by the stars,
Viewing the lower, middle, higher of
The three Rgions, before he comes to the Moon;
So passing all till he comes to that light
Of Iupiter and Falcifer at one sight;
All for the praise of him who strived with hope
To gain the Land from damage, loss and foil:
The holy Saints doth clamour with a sound,
Welcome Burgargo to our possessed ground,
Take the Trophies of Martius Campus field,
Who ne'er did turn to Enemies or yield,
Sit with a Coronet of a golden twist
Upon thy head, to be the Prince of all the rest,
All make submissive forms, a solemn bow;
All stand afraid, and make to him a vow,
To be their King, for they did ne'er enjoy
Such an Heroic soul as that same boy;
Yet more's our loss, and pity for the same,
Parting both with his body, and his name,
Because, of his blood no posterity follows.
The valorous of all souls return with joy,
The Cassiopeia and Ursa major crave,
A fame of that same honour to the grave;
They run by Tropicks of the frigid Zones,
Leaving the carcase as the firmer bones;
All stars lament by constellation,
His down-thrown fame by a rebellion;
They tear their Robes, casting about their sloufs,
Nothing is left but print of their foul hoofs;
The pale reflects of Cynthia's crystal front,
Springing in the vaulty heaven there a font,
To glide with restless streams a hilding bless
Of gravities, and parts, from the work and mess
Of best proportioned honour, pulling to
The gifts of praise to whom they all do owe;
They all presage unto a dreamy Throne
Of their best wisdom, what he doth entomb,
As honour, valour, and sobriety,
Meekness and patience, with celerity,
They found an Empire of all thoughts in him;
They found the sweet of joys filled to the brim,
Within the structure of that sacred soul,
In show no shadow, but in self the mole
Of only valour, brave man-hood, with the same
On which they'll fix an everlasting name.
You have no envy in a rational way,
Lets make a happy Burial to the deep,
It greets the cause, prolong no future speed,
Since he dyed valorous, 〈◊〉 a va•o•os
Grave receive his soul•
Confirm the same with
A Page of consort to the Muses, and
Make a following pomp, express his worth.
Resolve no resolution, for the cause
Thou understands prevents no remedy
In my sole knowledge, thou gives there no aid,
To a prevention of a future danger▪
Wisdom cries help, to call a resolution
In the hand of Labell, of a real deed,
With a commission of an issue true,
Of shroud and pensive to a quick return.
Charybdis or great Sylla threaten death
To their swift navy, or the mount Aetn•
Hath burnt their top sails, or cast down their masts,
Turning their rudder to another coast,
While time affords an ornament to d••k
My sensual mind with shapes of horror, fear,
And love, doth now dismember the defence
I had, whereby I conduct my proved skill,
They captives are, no captives they received,
For else my King would have blazed his troops home
He promised the company whom he took,
No company here is sent, Murgoru•,
Tell the cause, the Court is black for want of
Sparkling Lords, to give a Iustre to its
Marble walls.
Most high Princess,
Things by the counsel of vain sorrow's will,
Doth sojourn with the cause, the whirlwinds
Apt to make a tempest rise, bellowing the
Waves till their whole mountains soar aloft,
〈1 line〉
Strikes with a desperate blow to swift wind ships,
•ay cause dotard, and make sloth to ascend
•er private and her with-drawing chamber,
Of your censuring soul, and cause the twinkling of an eye,
A minute more or less, to show in length
A number of long years, but suffer not
Such Rivals to exhale such innatural
Fumes, bring 〈◊〉 to the vital
Spirits, and perplexlty to the Brain▪
The informer of the day-light, struck a knell,
The twelve a clock, against his sounding bell;
When then by co••se the ships did promise fight,
They arrive our coast before the next night;
But now by fortune bond to favour good,
That hour is gone, and they still in the stood,
And Sol like nimble passenger surrounds
The hills again, descending to the downs,
And yet no Herald doth blaze forth no •am,
None strikes Love's ••sets, or her word• proclaim,
It must be some strange temp••t that drive• back
Their ships from shore, when they all thing• did lack
Why it's a ransom, for a Kings disdain,
For his own Queen, not to her send a line,
If storms did bind the ships within the harbours,
Yet quick flown message might come to my ear,
But ne'er since the voy•ge took 〈◊〉 game
Upon the restless Seas; I heard by Post
They stay their living, or confined their dead.
I feel a pain, like Cerberus fasting jaws,
And Tantalus his gaping with desire
To gain the Apples, are not to compare
To these the torments that doth drench my soul,
All bring an ocean of a foul despair,
Because they stay beyond the bounds of time,
And cause a lingering motion to answer
For their dotard.
Let earth kiss the corps with sorrow, and rest you!
Could potent strength, or magna•••os deeds,
Bidding defiance to envy▪ spy••, and force;
Solemn confirmed to Jove in haughty sky,
Or virtues Off-spring, or the Nymphs of th'maine,
Save this same mortal man from being slain;
Then fortune had conquered death, and thy soul
Still lived with us: but we may curse the fates
With more hatred vows, and not lament thy
Rape so to despair, because Mars honoured so
Thy Royal valour, dying like a Champion:
The scraggy fleshless bone man, durst not bring,
Or put to sight, a sheet to wind thee in,
Had not first glory, a rich Garland hold,
To crown thy merits, framed of brandish gold,
The Country laments thy fall, and thy King too,
My subjects to thy Hearse doth make a bow,
Giving the praise and honour of the day,
Lauding thy name, and crowning thee with bay;
But now the Cypress must take place for it.
Hector was famous for War,
Achilles did excel him far;
Scipio was valiant stout,
Hanibal put him to rout;
Ulysses knew to handle Lance,
Ajax did above advance;
Turnus fought well at a field,
Aeneas him forced to yield;
Priamus had kingly power,
Agamemnon him brought lower;
Hercules did valiant acts,
Alexander did great facts;
Paris was a valiant soul,
Burgargo doth these control;
Hector was no man to him,
Achilles knew nothing in;
Then fall in pieces thou earth,
Weep thy self into a dearth;
Scipio he was not stout,
Hannibal knew nothing to it;
Then let us all mourn a•un,
To this soul that is here slewn;
Ulysses held not a sword,
Ajax he knew not a word;
Then lament this down-throw fall,
That is happened to us all;
Turnus may be termed foul,
Aeneas knew not his soul;
Then break forth into a maine,
Shower tears as if it were rain;
Priamus had no hand in war,
Agamemnon knew no jar;
Then send rumour to the sky,
And make thick clouds with our cry,
Hercules was child in show,
Alexander •ever like knew;
Then we will mourn our selves to death
Because he is bereaved of breath;
Paris he was not a man,
Burgargo did all withstand;
Then we will make both hills and dales
Know the loss of all us males.
The faculty of penetrating grief,
Surrounds the brave Idea of all joy;
The sable dressings of her mournful days.
Draws a curtain betwixt our eye and mirth,
The body of Burgargo must be interred,
And valiant deeds dies with that soul;
For Iulius Caesar when he conquered Troy,
Ne'er knew such deeds as he doth here employ,
All are not worth a nomination to
His rare achievements.
Let all their barbarous words bring hail with them
Inviting Aeolus, to make a tempest roar;
Yet those we would whistle by as a jeer,
For all that, Burgargo's gone.
Thy soul doth crush all pomp in infamy,
Let not rage spend the courage of your hearts,
You are, my Lords, my only Lords I have,
The Scythian Wolves ne'er warred amongst the flocks,
As your two valours did amongst your foes.
My other Lords are took for sacrifice,
To that hellish Queen Adrinemia;
Yet we will grapple for the reason of't,
When Laws are settled, and the havoc quelled,
Prolong your journey to the silent grave,
For triumph of the Corps and Funeral;
And let all Poets use their brains and pens
In praise of him and pomp of burial.
My Liege, your will's fulfilled.
Are you not yet persuaded to combine?
No, nor never.
How Vulters in a cogitatious shape,
Know my inflamed heart, masqing dismal
Prodigies, let echo answer contrary,
Sound a retreat, cherish the trope of hope,
Strike dum that sense, that is protractor
Of those airy notions that again-sayes all,
Answer once more, let passion move the favour,
Dispatch the case, and mercy take a place,
Shall birth rebound, I will and can: speak▪ speak.
No no, great Duke, I cannot.
That sound strikes dumb my soul,
The Lily, Rose, stands in battalion form,
Acting their decent hieus against your frowardness,
The Daisy carries lance to show the savageness;
Vesper and Hesper doth by aspect show
Their influence to fling still against you;
Mounts and Dales make skirmish against other,
Because you suffer such a Rose to smoother,
Confounding nature, and deceiving earth,
Killing both matter, and both air and breath.
None of these strange To•ds may make such need,
And frame a darling of a vain despair,
I will not wrong both nature and the soil
With foggy mists of vicious quality
As not to marry, but that vapoured slime
Shall turn the voluptuous humour to
A •iccid substance, and not rolling forth
That radical moisture to be soon exhald;
I'll marry, but not yet.
The winding comets, by confession bring•
An antidote, to acute •eavours sharp;
But you my Comet, and my blazing star,
Turns me a Pagan, and speaks death thereto.
The cask wherein the camp of graces lay,
Is turned a den of groaning mischief loud;
I cannot live, if the oadstone of your will
Change a virtue stupid to the Iron.
Cupped may bend his shaf•, his arrows loose,
But ne'er hit so fair a mark as this,
Venture a whole quiver to the Sea and Land,
But rebound venom to such lips as thine;
Marry, marry, for the present time
Excels both past and future though divine.
Sir, she is the master-piece of all Arts,
A whirly-gigg of glittering stones,
The Sun is clouded, and the stars want light,
When she by her airy motion enters.
See, speak again, she's like a purple die,
Neither loose colour, nor her face thereby.
The flowery shade devoutly kneeling to
Brave Titans rays, with a compendium
Of servitude, that by obedience,
Both Woods and Fens receive a party shade,
And Groves stand shivering with the drops of cold,
Because offensive to his glorious head;
But I stand like a Willow, more then Oak,
Unto the shrine of your beatitude,
Expecting 〈…〉 I may 〈◊〉
To violate the wi•d with a 〈◊〉
Of your bright palm, 〈…〉
Of favour from your look•.
The question of a danger, 〈…〉
Meeting with death or life 〈…〉;
Therefore I'll enter with a 〈◊〉 none,
I hate no look from a Hermaphrodite,
A man in show, but woman in the speech,
Therefore desist; no favour from my hand•▪
No, none.
The enraged foe, both pride and avarice,
Aims at the Capitol of poverty;
And Phrygian plains, who, bound with Charioteers,
Is formed a channel useless, out of date.
Voluntary hearts oft ransacked bodies
Of a lively-hood, and royal freedom
Grant such a small request.
The night derides the day, sure otherwise•
Such instances should not offer to rise,
But more or less, none from me.
Alas poor man.
Oh object of despair!
But most sweet Madam, please to let me wait,
The shadow comforts me when't wants the bait.
The festered thoughts of your vain restless will,
Mocks but your habit, and with fancy fill.
The servile tribute that I owe to you,
Binds my glory for to waite you know.
The Apple mollifies the heart that sees
Its lustre, but not my soul i•'t please.
It is, it is your goddess-like soul that sweeps away
The gloomy night, and brings with it bright day;
Come then we will go.
I'll wait your purposed will.
Weep forth Phrygian Swan▪
Phrygian Swans weep forth
To see so fair (but cruel)
A creature on the earth.
Who is beyond all nature,
Or pencil art can make;
Weep forth, weep forth,
So fair, but obstina•e.
Heavens send a smile
Prospering the success,
To gain so fair a substance
Within her self a bless;
Who is beloved of all souls.
Yet makes their bodies quake;
Weep forth, weep forth,
So fair, but obstinate,
She's a morning star,
Lighting men's hearts;
But when they see that object,
She wounds them with loves darts▪
Yet they are so entangled,
That they'll die for her sake:
Weep forth, weep forth,
So fair, but obstinate.
Let quick-foot nimble Doe
Surround the valleys all,
And make a pleasant consort,
As they each other call,
For peace doth bind them to it;
Aberden got the day,
Both Bucks and Does may play their fills,
There's none will again-say.
He rides in great tri•mph,
With subjects waiting on,
And with his most cursed Queen▪
Without Rebellion.
•elerinus forced to turn
His Ma•esty to yield
And glad that he escaped so
To give Aberden field.
Their valours play their part,
Aeneas and Turnus great,
Did neither of them manage
Their Army so complete:
But when the foul smoky clouds,
That they with Gun-shot made,
Was vanished, and was turned serene,
Aberden he best plaid:
WElcome once more unto Bruzantia's Land,
My Lords, we lost not one but Yernom•y,
Without discredit of the sword, or pelts,
The flashes of their thunder-roaring Canons,
Bred but a night not overcame the fight.
They fainted as their sword aimd at our heads;
Saying dame nature forgot the Deities;
Fortune was turned a fool, they cared not •or't,
When their raged Army was torn by discord,
No Empire took their will, time chid their folly,
Because they did dismember counsel skill;
Experience hang a Flag to show the woe
That would pursue the evicted Army.
Amazed all stood at distance, intending
To give a shout and fly; but grief mounting
Upon the soaring wings of uttered speech;
Did stop and cease both anger and the cry,
Conspiring then again to win the Isle,
Which was turned frustrate to the purpose, and
We took the Lord, the which my Queen shall have
In grateful sense.
Your Princely grace, and sacred Majesty,
May dazzle the lustre of a glorious fire
Foundation of mildness strives against the stream,
If it seek a revenge within the gates,
Or flowery bank of your resigned will;
Mercy the sister of a peaceful time,
Saved millions from the sparks and darts of death,
Which by the worthy motions of your will
Was carried on, or otherwise sharp and
Keen swords had made no standard there,
But sent pale death as Captain of the Fort.
The Darts strove in the air, even then to choose
Whether to fall or fly; their feebleness
Did so surprise their force; yet valiant you;
My sacred Liege, stuck to the glittering Arms,
Holding both sword and shaft to work a sign
Of manhood, courage, degree and title;
And passing fenced fords, to captivate
These Lords we have, they trembl' within
The Ring of fear, knowing no side
Where passage makes escape; the Swan did
Sing not half so many notes, as hollowing cries
And bloody screeks did make a harmony;
Well, it is fortune, not the fates did work this
Bold attempt.
You speak still like you selves, which Lords
And Princes are: what say you captives?
Our soul and bodies are desolate of peace,
Yet let your Queen and men be filled with wrath,
We will choose no spoiled gain, but truth to Celerinus.
Yea, King, its so; though we be captives now,
Time changes, and in them our manner doo;
Though furies tear my body, yet my soul
Shall stand for Celerinus, King of all
Numenia; and your Queen's wrath are Pearls
To us, because we dye not guilty.
My lov's no worse to you, since truth rebounds
With hope, you shall have hence my favour.
No favour we crave.
We desire no favour.
The ancient freedom that we did possess,
Strikes a perpetual fame unto your name,
A full ripe plumed bird should be the guide
And messenger to over-fly the world,
And mount up to the skies, to let them know;
Your excellence.
It is, it is most true.
The day grows on, my Queen expects me now,
The harmless will of her known genius,
Flames in a lake of longing sighs for me,
Proceed and be the buckets to quench it;
But since the day consumes, I'll send for her,
My Lord Nevermo, conduct the Queen to presence.
My Liege, I go.
Come Captives, here must be your doom,
She'll have your lives if you were twenty more,
But yet my favour goes with you.
I thank your Majesty.
Great King, all glory wait on you;
But I am conduced by willingness to dye.
So I am, since I am an exile.
You are, stay, here's the Queen.
Aberden, welcome to your Kingdom, and your Queen;
Lo, I see Celerinus subjects bound,
And for my use, which gives a resolution
To my sense, if your own Queen by tractive
Operation, work effect, to dismiss
From contemplation of your soul, all
Opportunities that doth bring despair,
You shall find no stratagem that to be
Irrevocable, and the objects of
Foul melancholy, shall not afford the
Idols of vain puffing fears.
For those are they that doth commit, and doth
Drop unto eternity great contrarieties
Unto your majesty, and place of Prince,
The service of a sadfull humour,
Works undiscreetly, and changing certain things,
It's always proved; the Chaos testifies
You a great Warrior, both in Waves and Land,
Whose pectorall force (expected) did prevail:
No loss of War or Arms, if nature stood
To oppose the slaughter of so many lost;
But I'll sacrifice my wishes to your self,
Gladly received my King.
Your patient favour receives a great applause;
And I your King expect no future joy;
My Queen, your receivance is most grateful,
And bids adieu all sadness, but not contemplation,
Which shows a firm judge of a prime design;
Safety pleads leisure, and show fair shape
To commonalty, not a vain flasse-glass,
Of best contriving virtues,
To effect the Guardian (not a bad excuse)
Of their firm liberty, the Gems of all
The Indians strikes no lustre to your
Fame; you are not fair, but virtue follows it:
My Queen, the Captives stand at your command.
My Liege, your favour.
Duty doth force obedience to my knees,
Great Queen, your sacred will if 't please to grant
A blessing to Hollarro, a wounded subject
To serve the Queen; your will?
Rise, valiant Prince, my bless go to thy years,
To find Aberdens blood in thy young youth.
You may term void of sense unto my state,
But hope survives the spirits, because I bring
A pardon firm and just, it is my duty.
Hollarro, rise, your duty binds no further;
But what I know.
Your will, great Queen.
It were a sacrilege, and that rashly
Committed against your Princess goodness,
Not to offer my self a Soldier to your will.
Mine follows by a triple form, great Queen;
Your subject salutes you with a happy
Bliss.
I stand a safeguard to your goodness.
Faithfully done, here wants brave Yernomoy.
Forgive the fact that's done, not robed your will;
He's slain, to pay devotion to your looks;
Rude was his fancy, but senseless was his guide,
Allowing no recovery to his kindled fame:
He died a Hector, a Prince; nay more, he slew
Millions of Forces to ransom then his death;
He left the world by Burnomoy's stout arm,
But Burgargo, Hollarro, sleep did charm,
For to describe true valour in fancy fair,
In real substance to deserve the chair:
The Goddess of all hope favoured his deeds,
The Goddess of all might helped him in needs;
The Goddess of all right stood true to him,
The Goddess of all hap did valour bring:
The Gods and Goddesses struck union to
His well fast blade, his stiff framed bow of Yew.
So brave Hollarro shall be only name
Through all Numenia, there to carry fame.
Hollarro still thy achievements soar above
The mean capacity of a Queens recompense:
These are the captives, I like them well, their
Heads are large to be a pinnacle of fame;
They're mine, great King.
They are for recompense
Of your deserts.
You render pure substance of a divine will,
By outward show, no excuse they expect,
But dye a sacrifice, for to restore
The jewel of my fainting liberty:
The Harchet's well prepared to execute
The case, the block perceives its finished, not
In gaud, but martial way, to make the Harmony,
My attendants expecting the prosperous
Sight of that same day, by forming new
Altitudes, erecting large Houses for t•e
Same: I'll make no great dispute, but finish it.
Great Queen, the subjects I avouch by true
Affect and powerful law, descend of noble
Blood.
Well, they are no worse, but better for my use.
Ah las, we must then dye.
I, I; see who attends us there.
I am here, I am here.
Well, what art thou?
A Gentleman of quality, as good as your self.
Why, I am a King.
Well, so am I, sause-box.
My Lords, conduct the knave to prison, and
Prepare a lash to execute its office.
Oh las, you will; I'll try your force:
How, how—how—let go your hold.
The slaves and bondsman, which have wrought a
Council, to dig the works of War, as the
Pioneers do raggifie the walls:
And they who use to toil in labyrinth,
And founders of their folly, are prisoners
To your pick-axe; Hospitals doth crave my
Aid, and Euncuchs make a market for
My home return; so force pleading my will,
I leave you with my Serpents and my foes,
As emblems to my valour and my state,
Use discretion as time doth interview,
And appoint a season to your sport;
For I must dismiss your rank.
My King, a happy repose unto your soul;
Who attends there?
The passage of a drowsy pomp withdrew
A door of breathing betwixt the ark of store,
Of hidden vows, showing the pride of fortune
In a chance, ravishing the beauty of a
Monsters hide, and stuck a stage of desire,
To harbour the fancy of a dreadful sign,
To spill the blood of captives; Lerenica,
You'll screek and vanish with the dame of fear;
But I'll repulse that guide that titles it,
So bring the captives to the slaugher-house,
I'll shift such Robes fit for such enterprise.
Madam, I'll improve my reverend service,
To see the same fulfilled.
The sovereign balm for fear, must be a heart
Void of a sensual cause; but I'll attend
To see the genius of all mortal souls,
Wear the sad Cypress of a gloomy day.
Lerenica, your servant, will wait your time.
Spare us, and let us speak before we dye.
Give them time to breathe their last farewell.
The stroke's a Basilic, the sight doth kill,
Confirms a death by venom of its raze;
Perfidious creature, more degenerate Fate.
Steeping his aspects in foul Leth•'s streams:
So Adrenimia by her cursed hand.
But fury bids defiance to those guiles,
My time doth show by prospect now full old,
Tossing my senses by grim horror's wav•s;
So noble Prince confirm to future time,
And to posterity I dye a Man,
A prop of th'Country, the Numenia:
So by a swifter motion life surviews
The dregs of mortals to the prime of things:
My appetite is fresht by gizzard of a cause,
To view the spirits of transcendent Kings,
Great Jove, who weighs the ponder of this ball,
Make creatures Angels in Numenia's Land,
To stand the stratagems of forrai• foes;
Brazen their souls to yield to no deceits;
(Oh, death makes my senses fly)
And dare Aberden rule great Ce•erinus?
Suffer the primum mobile to rest,
Which rules the sphere according to their Orbs,
Consume the highest Region, and drive down
The splendent lights, but at length I must die;
Desist thy talk, thy Candle waxes dim,
And only such is left to see death grim.
The smoky mists bids light adieu, with her
Obscure cloak; then suffer a doleful sound
To echo my spirits with an Ebian cry:
These chains says, Mirth depart. So decent are
These new found novelties unto my soul!
So hymns of Elegies please a parting close,
Rack I must suffer for my King and Land.
Well, it is my duty, my breath's bound thereto,
Only a faculty's left to close a hymn, to
Spend all its bounds to eternize your fame,
Inform, some Goddess, where I shall begin
To make a prayer according to the time:
Brave valiant soul, Burgargo, I'll relate,
Because thy death, my pain doth propagate,
Thy sacred shrine directed, journey sweet
In leaving us, bids mine go to and sleep;
The griefs doth punish, consume the fountain
Of my weak vital spirits, and the main,
A frustrous case bids anger play her part,
And aim at nothing but my wounded heart;
My life is trouble, but my death gives ease,
So Jaylemen, Keepers, take us when you please.
We are ready in our office.
Procure them to the Queen her grace,
I'll stay a season, but I'll follow straight.
Madam,
It is a vain trifle of a small despair,
I bring to presence, and not tediousness,
The business concerns much your safe-guard,
Grant it, and then I will relate.
It were colours of a melanchollious sight,
For to convert the gesture to the sense;
And meaning of the close, your generous thoughts
Must speak to Ladies, not covert with a smile.
The night spends forth her dews, beguils her hour▪
With strange adventures of a darksome truth,
So I diluted in the practice of,
In courting Ladies to their own content,
Shall crave a place of watchman to your self,
In the foul progress of a dangerous time.
Contempt, despise, and only disdain grows
In my own breast against a cowards soul,
If that report doth bring a news unto
My audience, not valour flows from veins
Of your Microcosm; I should deride
The case unto your face, so plead not that,
I'll shift for one, take you no care for me.
Oh obstinate!
Heavens bless the wisdom of my genius now.
What State or General drew that velvet screen
Of painting troubles twixt my eye and heart?
Lerenica, what's that name Lerenica?
Sure it is no Taper of a fiery blaze:
She pierces the rights, and joyneth union.
Could my stiff arm withstand Numenia,
And not the glances of a women's eye?
The Realm produces no such knots of fear:
I see her basis, and her vertex too,
Surround the Camp of her delicious soul,
Yet stand a aloof, not undertake the cause,
Because discr•erest deeds bid me forbear.
The various forms that heart and spirit moves,
Were cause enough to make one lunatic:
She enters souls, not cares for mortal shows,
And makes my tongue tremble because I report it;
Well, it is thy garb and gesture wins the soul
Of Prince Hollarro to a nuptial song;
My breath must have no passage, if dis-joyn'd
From the bright rays of such a mo•-•un's light;
Bellerrio shall know, it was 〈◊〉 laid
The same design (I love Lerenica)
I long to see the wells and springs of fire
Still kindled more; so I'll go to my sire,
And make his Majesty acquainted with it.
A heap of vermin dispatch a famine
To a common-wealth, and ill-disposed manners,
So you despair unto a Ladies will.
Hold your tongue, you are troubled with Historical fits,
Time which reaches forwards by its means,
Falls under question of a sole denial:
Muse no more, but let discretion answer
Unto the cause; the bud is sprung, and fruit
Must have its time to come unto maturity;
But too long kept, grows putrid in it self:
Trenches and shelves are horrid stratagems,
Unto the ships tossed on the ruder waves,
But time dilate them to their confusion,
Making no Caves but solid earth of them.
Mark then that Gentleman, which is rough before,
But bald behind, and there no hold to get.
The revenue of a Maiden• life,
Is the whole Wardrobe of all mirth and joy;
But when combined unto a fouler Mass,
Provision of all strife and vain discord,
Venturing the plundering of such nature gifts,
Were sacrilege beyond the end of hope;
Therefore desist a truder to bereave
The same which never nature doth restore,
Mine's kept for better spirits than your self.
Those words are like a Parthian, flying kills,
And raise a mutiny of f•ries in my brain;
Forbear that contemplating case, Homer
Had ne'er blast•d fair ••elen's fame so far,
But knew the disposition of that shrine,
Would equalise her ••ibuted parts:
Prefer no more those sparing words, but quench
The concealed fire of affection;
Shall limbrace, gran•▪ help my mind?
Great D•k•, you take a spangled action of
No man, to cou•• he meeting of two
Opposites, secrecy require•• advantage of a sight,
But you err grosl•, losing honour by it,
Because you foe•c•, rather then persuade.
Madam, it is my desire must br•ng excuse,
Because it's parts are invisible• to the eye,
Then a short return shall not impoverish
My honour: I must, because in love.
Vouchsafe no further to prolong your talk,
For it is tedious, and the time requires
Our absence now; Histerica, make a
Fire in my Bed-chamber.
It is done, Madam.
Since yet dejected, still I'll beg the place,
To be your servant for an hours space.
Dismiss that faculty.
Forbear, I cannot My Liege.
Oh strange, that pale Eos should feed the Tweed,
Shouting such murdering cries unto the Altar,
(Steeping its sound in poison of a rage)
Of all victorious souls, your own fame
Strives at a higher glory, then one fair,
It is a painted hieu that Ladies use,
To put fine art before true plain Nature,
Though you feel a pain, it is only love,
A foggy wrath ascends, when bright Sol mounts
Swift Pyrosus; play no more upon fair,
Let worth surmount the Towers of its foul mask,
That influence cannot strike such unheard blows,
As make your soul fly to despair for help.
Oh Lerenica, Lerenica, thou, thou.
Of future joy the Monarchs of the world
Will sprinkle the notes of such a vain design;
Phoebus will make the heavenly Diamonds
Strike rays to show the folly of your will;
She is not worth a glimmering spark of stone,
Much less your Princely Bed; Hollarro, choose
One that is deserving, and my will shall
Not be against.
The Tartarian Prince is gone to foreign soils
With other strange Hecatombs of all men;
The Captain of my soul must follow them,
If your Princely grace deny my full request;
Could I sound sweeter then the Dalton Dames,
When the tall Cedars by my force did fall,
Having more fame then the Ephesian Towers:
At that same instant, by the stately steps
Oh manhood, valour; and not this request;
It is true, she's fair, her virtues second it,
Which is the pinnacle of ambition I aim at,
For means are dregs of th'earth, her person shows
Her parts, Princes must have their liking;
Not combined to objects of honour.
The Audacious pines do not stand without fear,
Nor doth your valour without trying it,
Therefore that blind and senseless Boy must take
His bow, leave you his Arrows to supply his place,
The matting waves of love, strives against stream
Of reason, bringing contempt and disgrace
To noble spirits, their smiles are smoothly
Carried to delude the Olive-branch of hope;
Therefore take one that is of noble blood,
And follow discretion as your will doth guide
Your disposition.
The sails of hope is turned to leaden plumbs,
Because you plead still for a worthier one,
Though it might be said, it is my fortune so,
To mix with flashes of both fear and hope:
Yet when my restelsse Navy comes to shore,
That same coast must give my sentence then,
So as I sail by rudder of sweet love;
I hope the Magistrate of your affection
Will give a glad mittimus to my soul;
For if contrariety plead at the bar,
Having its trial to win over-throw.
That deadly sentence must close up my breath,
And make me fear neither Heaven, Sea, nor wind,
Therefore deny and kill; Oh, oh—
Strange to a common sense: reason then with
Your self, she is a woman nought but flesh
And bone, and a mere gall of bitterness;
You know your Mother well, her savageness,
To brew her hands in teppid blood of foes,
And you thus stand in a disposition
Contrary to her heart; I wounder at
That unnatural sympathy, but ever
You despair, make choice and venture there,
Where sense doth guide your fancy, but for
All, she is too low your birth.
Oh my back, oh my belly, oh my sides.
Oh your breech, firra, come away.
Oh prithee spare me, give me time to breathe.
That I may have wind to cry withal, oh, oh, oh.
Ha, ha, ha, what, do you feel it then,
You must not be so bold.
What, as to cry; I will cry, if the King were here.
But you shall not cry long.
Oh bless thee, bless thee, shall I not cry long?
Nay then I'll bid the gentle whip, come, come.
The civil pleasures that a dewy shower
Doth gratify the earth withal, cannot
Be expressed; so your reply trebles my joy.
Flort no more with Deities of fear,
But take the Empire of all hope and force;
Grief leads no more vain anger as a sign
Of wrath, and ill-disposed manners; haste
To the Rock of mirth, make splinters fly
To be attendants on your Majesty.
Thou hast been valiant, no report shall go,
Thou art dismayed by a woman foe;
Pursue your course, as you have then begun.
I will my Liege, long live your Majesty.
The fiege of Thebes, and Ulysses Acts,
Ne'er betrayed fancy with so sweet a fight;
The Heads doth gape, but cherishes no amber breath;
Oh las it is a pity that no sooner had
Hold them up, let's see the glory of the same,
The night will betray my mirth, before my eyes
Be satisfied, the Banquet and Music
That I took therein, brought recreation
To my vital sense, besides no equals,
Or raptures promised by a future joy,
Could bring reward to what I here have seen;
The Artillery of all hope was waggon'd up,
Betwixt their heads and shoulders, that's their necks,
My soul cannot by public, or secrecy,
Be sufficient Actor to King Aberden,
In duty, or in praise, for this same fact.
Unbolt the Prison Gates, set them open,
And let the numerous slaves be glad to see
Such great Triumphs, and their selves set full free,
And mysteries explained, by Gods of Temples all,
Because such prosperous jubilee fell out,
I recruit my self to see those signs.
The progeny of humanity challenge title in it,
Because you show like the B•thinians,
The copulating troops doth entertain,
Of fame and valour, your most bright Queens health,
The heads doth show your praise, and doth prepare
A sacrifice unto your sacred shrine,
With amorous gesture of a lowly look,
Not like Amazons, but a Persians smile,
The natural rights within a Jewels hieu,
Doth show the perfect virtues of its self;
So all your sex may with a comely brow,
Seeing your deservements by wisdoms deeds,
Turn thanks as bodies of a further fame.
Discover Engines to subdue the hill▪
Of all renowning praise, that when obtained,
May be a ransom to your Empress;
The ancient Romans had ne'er reflection
Of so great happiness, by any Pope,
As we obtain by your Sovereignty,
To keep all Laws and customs in their forms,
Not suffering them to be wrong violated,
Making decent pavilions of sobriety,
To be the Magistrates and Rocks of right,
The streets rebound (as Alexander came)
With redoubling voices of your worth and fame,
When Sols bright rays shines through the curtain
Of an Eastern fog, then Animals rejoice;
So do I by your conjuring words,
As if I had obtained the Phoenix nest,
Which is a fountain of all sweet incense.
Records and Chronicles to posterity,
Let them challenge memory of the same,
The •rook wherein the Nymphs correct their ga•bs,
Let show the splendour of this brave design,
As orient matter of a mineral,
Strikes beauties pride through the dark of night,
The deed's Siren, cause it wins the hearts
Of all my subjects unto Elizium.
I am executor bearing the Axe.
That brought content and pleasure to a Queen;
The Mayors and Senates of Bruzantia,
Stood Officers to the act and instruments
Thereto; we live like Elephants, disturbed
By none, bearing the Castle of liberty
On our shouldiers, and Wars thrown down,
Living by Counsel of tranquillious time,
While our foes heads do obeisance to the Queen,
Making a dance in a triangle,
Avoiding the tortures of a moments fear,
I'll bear the Axe of hope.
Lets muse no more, seeing the deeds of worth,
The streets themselves its praise will warble forth.
The tempters of all justice, lastly throws
At greatest strength, when others potent shows.
Love's guard bids yield; when honesty doth play
Her questions and occasions for the day.
Join are to arms, as honour bids us do,
And make their heads and bodies lowly bow.
And for this prize, let go the prisons then,
Draw up Purcullises and set free men.
It is done, great Queen, as your generous soul,
Is pleased to have, for it doth all control,
Then Querme• m•st go among the rest,
Which of all others he will think him blessed.
See all do go, my joy doth countervail
All former faults, be they even or or frail.
Clap hands for joy, because the Queen such things
Doth propagate, and delightful tidings.
Long live the Queen in health.
Wheel off the plain, and purchase more fame
Then Ixion does by turning wheel in flame,
Fetch captives more, till th'Land it self doth yield
No martial soul to bear, or sword or shield
Bring all Numenia's brood unto my hand;
I know your strength none of them can withstand,
So I you leave to see the tombs of those
That dead do lie, and prisoners to unloose.
Love speaks as bold, as any Druids preach;
Because its darts strike at the hope of fates,
The champion of all eyes checks bashful thoughts,
Fearing to enter the bared Gates of love,
The standards of a lofty foundation,
Gives freedom to the lesser pinnacles;
So I by examples, get benefit
To make a fair progress in affections,
And as an interposition of th'Moon
Betwixt our eyes and Sun, causes eclipse;
So fainting doubts with-draws a screen mantle
Betwixt despair and hope: But, fair Madam,
If you'll yield to be a Princess, I am
The man will make you.
Most noble Prince,
The place is too honourable for my birth,
And your bright grace flows by dame virtues spring
Of valour; you might command, not woo a
Humble soul, the Zodiac wherein your
La•p of goodness keeps its motion round,
Like Cy•thia's silver streams, is too radiant
F•r on me to gaze; your honour deserves
A Princess rightly born, for manners, tongue,
N•• poor Peasant from a broken Isle;
A 〈◊〉 should make answer for my part,
I am inf•••our.
The spirits of a double breast leads Van▪
In love's Empire, no gulf doth back them to it.
So unknown beauty of a judged look,
Oft force affection to keep triumph there.
Your beauty shows beyond a Prince his favour,
Discretion guids the manners of your soul:
You plead too poor, then moves the honour that,
You shall sit crowned with canopy of fame,
To be a Prince his spouse: I venture soul
More free then Scipio, Marius, or Sylla did,
To maintain the troop of your crystal beams,
My lance shall drop at your foot which monsters tame,
And be a servant at your wills command,
Yield and have the same.
Great Prince, your will
Hath vigour to with-draw the proudest soul;
You'll knock at Pluto's Gate sore Pegasus,
Yet fear no death by incense of their breath;
Your brave Heroic mind dare face great Brute,
Make Gain•• toys, and not know where their's scope;
And when you dance upon uneven waves,
The Eolian blades, stand trembling with your fear,
And Tritons sound your fame, to please the sense;
Why, it is strange that you doth these repose,
And not a women's shows of mean descent;
I wish my blood were higher for to join
In equal manner with your Princes right:
But read some Poet, and you'll then agree I am too low.
Oh, Poets are m•n composed of species four,
They'll praise both virtue and vice all in an hour:
It was not Medeas words, but Ovids quill,
That Hippolytus most chaste of will;
For if that acute Ovid likewise would,
Medea had been as chaste as ever he could;
And it was brave Virgil made Aeneas fame,
Soar above action of brave Turnus name;
But if that famous V•rgil pleased to be,
Turnus had been as great, nay more then he;
So it was not Helens looks, but Homers mind,
That made Paris his soul to her combined:
For he as well could •urn her nature so,
That where she's fair, she should be black as crow;
Dispute no more of Poets, but give leave
My hands for to embrace, else you deceive
Me of my life.
Your words imbrew the altar of my will,
And you may force where you have used your skill,
The Phoebus of your mind hath grace full bright,
My irksome caves, and my more irksome night,
The influence that's shown by its bright rays.
Turns days to nights, and nights into clear days:
Therefore my duty is, to not oppose
Your Princely grace, but make choice where it show•,
But still I am too low.
Most nobly received,
We will make a happy Nuptial to the day,
And th'King and Queen shall grace bright Hymens play.
I am submissive.
Come my joyful Bride.
It is not long till I lye by thy side.
Thou blazon Taper that surmountst my skill▪
Taken my Mistress mace of all my joy,
Shall not live happy by the victor got,
I'll work thy ruin by some budding plot;
I'll go to Celerinus, make my plea,
And join him once by love to cross the Sea.
That he may errors my foe, Hollarro stout,
Put King Aberden and the Queen to rout;
And thee Hollarro, which by that design,
He vanquished one, at last thou wilt be mine:
Fair Lerenica, but cruel to show
Thy love to me, and to Hollarro owe
The right and title of it; but that fact
Shall ruined be, before he once doth act.
I'll be a Traitor once to King and Land,
And Prince and Queen, because my love withstand,
Fetch him over the restless seas, the stars
Will prosper my success, because the Wars
Began first in our Land. Why tarry I
To lose the day? both King Queen, Prince, shall fly,
Let sweet faced Hymens nuptial songs
Fill all, both hearts and years,
W•th grace to quell the mournful day
That brings in jealous fears.
And no compendium of state
Drop envy to the hour,
That Bride and Bridegroom spend their time,
〈◊〉 a pleasant bower.
Strange factious doing in the Land,
Brings not a slavery
Unto the Magistrates of it,
By foul conspiracy.
Ices flowery banks shows not fair
To that joyful couple,
Nor Mulmutius half so stout
When his Sons did grapple.
Then let the leader of all hope
Hollow triumphant fame,
And let bright Sol beraze the day
Of such a nuptial train.
Still am I forced to fly,
And be a traitor to my King,
Because her obstinacy
Doth force a horrid combating,
Lerenica
Doth bear the sway
Of all this troubled distract,
Causes ruin
And undoing, oh most unseeming act.
Celerinus shall enclose,
And know vermilion from white,
With his Bruzantia's foes,
And frame a field, them for to fight,
Make a battle
Which will rattle.
Sending thousands by the fact
Unto their home,
And their dark tomb, oh most unseeming act,
Wayliday, wayliday, wayliday, wayliday.
THe north and south both Poles do not contain
The very thoughts of this our great Lands joys,
A Conqueror by popular grace;
I reign with reverent voice among my flock,
Revenge will not spring up by angers dew,
Or show its muddy face by foul conspiracy;
Fortune is prosperous, spurning gods of Love
To dress our Land with crown of Trophies, Gold,
Repulsing Legions of Furies that spend
Their breathing hours nought but to wrack and ruin:
All Lands implore my aid, drooping their head,
Till hope doth blow the fire of better days,
Sharp empty titles they make fame of them,
While we with hostile voice crack Thunder-bolts;
And it was Hollarro's valour stated it,
Which is a captive to fond Cupids bolt,
Planting female Cannons charged with love,
Whose shot is fear, and powder jealousy,
Turning this Land to the Antipodes.
Lerenica hath a stronger arm then he,
And by her sweet-fac'd plots, which Tyrants turn,
Hath the pledges of his Princely brow;
But at the length he loves her so entire,
That he hath promised union to her shrine,
And marry her.
It is pride, not fortune sure, that nature leads,
His years are too young to hide such vows;
That glorious rays will vanish with the Sun,
Striking a seeming passage of despair,
And waken the papavered sense of his brain,
Which by an opiate virtue is made dull,
And will revive desire of ecstasy;
But if that balm, that sovereign balm of love,
Hath so impregnated by a silent look,
The bed of all his joy, and heart of fire,
Them to unjoyn, shall not be my desire;
Let Myriads of prayers, and countries love sound all
Large Hymns of mirth unto their nuptial;
And let all acute Poets seek their store,
To give the Bride a gift beyond all o'er;
Let mirth and triumph then so join together,
That there's no difference twixt fair or foul weather.
The trembling silence of your dreadful vote,
Hath turned his title to another sense,
The extreme load which virtuous valour bear
By loves punnyard, is an abyss of pain;
But your reply gives a supporter to
That heavy heart, which is by th'load oppressed,
Out of the stage where honour plays her Scenes.
I know he'll call reward unto your name;
His duty binds such sonly grace to me,
That Reason says he will not forget thee.
The Syrian flames quench the damp of spirits,
So honoured terms brings conclusion to good will;
I know the dainty Soldiers of such troops,
Fear not the fight of ashes of men's Tombs,
The constellation of his nature good,
Doth bring a recompense beyond that form:
There is no royal looks, or face of fame,
Be more in gratitude then his own self,
I wish the presence of his Princely plumes,
Would over-fly the Court into this place,
That peace might show my pity to consent,
To the bright day triumph of his Bride,
I give my free consent.
His presence is
Expected, heavens starry light doth show
By their true rays, the substance not far off;
For time doth sacrifice unto the dame
Of patience, the flower of its first prime,
Because our mind stays leisure of his will,
Until it please be present in our sight,
The dismal looks of th'progress that he goes,
Debars the splendency of his bright beam,
Or otherwise he would have seen the Queen
(Your self) my joy, with his blessed spouse;
But stay, he comes with her.
Is this her?
Yes, this is she; welcome Hollarro.
The civil war of all the world, b•nds knee
Unto your judgement and excellence,
And so I hope this Lady gives the Baize
Unto your Crown, I wish long happy days.
Great Queen, the weakness of my youth did bend
My fancy to a sensual careless end,
Because no knowledge seemed to admit its trust
Unto your sacred wisdom which is just;
But let a fickle fancy with weak mind,
Crave pardon for my folly there inclined.
And I, most Princely Queen, which Mother be
To my poor soul, I thank on bended knee,
Because you grant the same.
Rise hopeful child,
Then King Aberden give the day its fill
Of merriment unto a Princess will.
I will, blessed Queen, Hollarro take the Bride,
And to the Church be thou a swift sure guide.
Where all the Gods of th'Land stand in a form
Of servitude, as they were all forlorn;
But haste to th'Bishop that combines the knot,
I'll stay at Palace for a future plot.
It is strange news you bring.
But it is far truer.
How can a hazard of such war, employ
Any intention of undertaking?
We pay a tribute to them of pure gold,
And sacrifice our lives for recompense,
And the highest force of all my potent souls,
Is a common Soldier; Burgargo gone!
And it is a small Nation of its strength, to stand
In revenge of the looks of Bruzantia,
I will not for a world be their combatant.
Oh how can you upon Haemus of fear,
Rest so securely with subjection;
Let Zephyrus gales move quicker in the ear,
Inform the sense how Tie•a•ny doth rule:
I'll undertake with damage of my life,
To bring your Army in by port Braveron,
Amongst Bruzantiae's Lords, and King and Queen,
Before you tread a furlong on that ground;
Let hopes survive the spirits of a King,
I beg it on my knees; you may persuade
Your self, that I am here no Harpalus,
But a true Athenian to your Majesty;
Shall my request return with joy?
A Monarch's will is not designed of,
Without the counsel of his subjects votes;
Therefore no sails of joy must carry on
Your wandering Pinnace, till the sight of them:
The Olive branch doth cluster with her fruit,
In the plain soil of our inhabitance:
Therefore to reflex on a gloomy shade
Of fear and anger were discretion.
Pity such angry days that invent it,
As not to admit of a private end,
No foreign aid can help them, for their Land
Is grown infectious by the f•tnesse of't;
Therefore surround their Camp, your victory
Is sure enough, which fertility will make
Your Land as prosperous as the Aegean Isle,
Which is named Delos, where then there was born
Apollo and Diana, God and Goddess;
Then let not peace, like an innocent lamb,
Rule in the Theme, but a rampant Lion,
Rousing from den of f•rye and ruin,
Shall I you engage great, King?
Not my self,
Unless my subjects by degrees would grow
In love with Diamonds and a Pearl her grace;
The massy weight of gold sha•l ne'er draw
By North Pole virtue my mind to that Land,
But here's my Lords, Lets hear their votes.
The man of generous brood Bruzantia,
Affords unto the province Numenia,
Is here imploring by a wooing cheek,
As the Moon doth the Earth in the Antipodes,
That we may ceize a Lares, or Silvaines great,
On their fatigated limbs in plenty:
Yea, he will undertake to lead from coast,
Our squadrons to the Court Bruzantia.
No happier sky doth show a light by blaze,
Of ply•eatery influence or rays,
Then those same lines, if vigour be with them;
I'll follow th'motion to carp twig from th'stem.
The same I'll follow, and as a darling,
Cherish; attired in such scarlet Robes;
Will you maintain the deed?
I will, Captain,
Blaze your Troops unto the river side,
Let no delay strike in with tarriance;
For now their Land is Garden of the West,
Filled to the bounds with aromatic fruit,
An Ocean lake of dainties there's in hid;
Therefore the time runs by d•me fortunes will;
Put off no longer, but hoise •ales to it.
No more, no more, my Lord; c•n Pigmies stand
Against Bellonia's threats? lets slide the main,
And all our Galleys la•ch into the Ocean,
And make those azoar parallels upon
Its gliding surface, give a happy voyage.
Nereus, and all the gods do pardon not
Our wrong that's done, be pleased to view the bounds
Of thousands well joined ships ready for sail,
Ten thousand men at my command, all proof,
Burning with desire of War, dappled Nags
For to supply those Alexander souls.
No more let frozen thoughts take place within
Our natural forms, as to be love-sick with
An idle disposition: I know bright Sol
Will favour us, by being in Cancer, a
Waterish sign, proceed as preparation
Doth give leave.
Oh blessed Numenia's souls,
Make no dispute, time doth grow further on.
Gervoron lead up the blew mayle frocks,
And you Burnomoy be my General,
Aberden shall see what force guides our hand,
Once more commend our selves unto the seas,
Make no delay.
None great King, they are ready,
All utensils for the voyage so we go.
Now all Bruzantia's rights confirms the day
And Lacedemonan customs of the boy
Hyacinthus bids merriment to the same:
Let shepherds write this nuptial wedding day
In red Capital Letters for a Holiday,
Joy to Hollarro, and the Bride his spouse.
Hymens fits crowned with Garlands of all joy,
To welcome train of marriage, Ladies beds,
Sprinkled in form of solace, and of mirth,
And the Pyrene mounts drop offerings to
Such sacred meetings as this day affords,
Long live you both is health and happily.
Great King, the duty of a weak desire
Comes short in limits of a recompense;
Let humble will, with intention, her aid,
Strike thanks so worthy as you do deserve,
Most virtuous Queen, the law doth guide my sense,
If that I taste once of ingratitude,
(A stranger plant then ever Glaucus eat)
To turn my self into a main of fear,
And counted their a God not for to live,
But by a fained will, so thanks to you
For gracing Nuptials of my wedlock hour.
The mind that treads in natures paths,
must say
With the guest of most free deliverance,
All thanks to King and Queen.
Then Prince Hollarro, now the knot is done,
It shall not be said by Bruzantians,
I like Amyens, cause your banishment;
But all their tribute's quited by this day,
And thou shalt be the King of fruitful place,
And issue of my hope of all the Land;
Acknowledge Prince of the Cecilian souls;
And like great Butes, have a Champion race;
How like you it, my Lords?
You are a •ire of all firm judgement,
Brutus divides not the least Atom from it,
Where the way your credit takes its course,
I• argument enough for me to yield.
The succour of the Gods descends from Jove,
So all our lives and Pedigree of us.
Hath conduits of all plenty, good and great,
From the protection of your mighty hand;
Therefore if I deny, no pardon's the•e,
But grim unjustice must divide the spoil,
Give me the worst, and shame thereunto boot;
So let both Nature, Nation, and all friends,
Give vote as free, as my soul doth unclose,
Or wish to have the same Hollarro King.
Great King, your will is good, I like the
same.
Hoping he'll prove a Lap•thenian soul,
A second Phlegias; your motion's good,
And liked of all, here is the Bardes presents
The Groom and Bride a song.
Great Sol was di••
By a pearly dew,
But now doth fling
Off that muddy hieu,
By the sweet motions of such smiles,
The Bride and Bridegroom time beguiles;
Then let both heaven, earth, and sea,
Four Elements, whats ever they be,
Give happy joy, and mirth for ay,
To those brave go•sts of this same day,
For ever, for ever, let all sing
Hymns to the Queen, and her brave King.
A joyful day,
But more joyful night,
Lead on the way
To that same delight;
And when its past a happy morn,
To the Groom that is by his Bride born,
And so we wish to after rest
To the Bride, that is by B•idegroom pressed:
So let all joy wait leisure on,
To pleasure them in splendent morn;
For ever, for ever, &amp;c.
The Diadem Hollarro is stayed,
Of all Bruzantia on your noble head:
Numenia's Land is struck with fear and quakes,
Under the ••ow of such a martial soul.
After the drowsy pomp of nuptial terms,
You shall begin your Reign.
The massy weight of such a grave design
Would act its part far better with your self,
But since a freedom breathes such spicie notes
Of father's love, my duty must give way.
For Cel•us, the father of immortal Gods,
Ne'er did endue his Sons with greater joy:
Caeus he was not in least politic,
To lose his Trophies by a Hercules:
Strength shall not subdue wit, if it hath play,
I'll rule the Land, and I will you obey.
Thou shalt, brave Prince: the Temple's clad
with joy,
To receive your sacred presence, and also
Honours most stately camp doth obeisance
To your heroic shrine: be thou the King.
Heavens bless his Majesty.
My breast's an altar to the sacrifice
Of loves due rights, unto my loyal King.
Thou art a Queen, and my only spouse,
Both King and Queen, Lord bless your Majesties.
What is the news within? Heaven• bless• me!
What is it?
I wish all things were right, then see,
My Lords.
A foul invasion, we are betrayed,
Celerinus comes.
I, and die you shall;
Fall on brave souls, let's ruin root and branch,
Like the Hybernian blades, sound a loud,
Lead up the fronts; strike, strike.
Oh Traitor, traitor.
Die, die, thou slave.
Wound not the Queen: let her pains rest, to be
A future punishment.
Oh I die, I die, thou vain destroyer
Of men's lives.
Conduct the Queen to prison,
The day's our own, with the Supreams of the Land.
We will, great Liege, let's follow out the
chaise.
Oh me, stay, what's here to do? what, a
sleep? or tumbling;
Pox take it, you'll break your brains with it, and I
My belly with plum pottage; rise for shame:
What, is here the slave that imprisoned me;
A bard, a bird, or a turd, tell; what, art thou
Dead, alive, or drunk; rise, and stand,
Thou haste a velvet Cloak I'll see how it fits me,
Hey, it becomes my Princely person right.
I look like some grave Minister or Divine,
A black blew velvet, and scarlet gippo;
See, my foot stands like some reverend Bishop,
And my back-side like a Prince behind;
These pottage, pottage, trouble, when I King;
But stay, they'll do me curtsy at time,
I'll put them up; hold up velvet Jacket;
Oh these are warm still from the heart to the breast;
But for all my jesting, what do you mean
To go to dinner or no? I'll promise
Here's good furmity for the same, Come go?
What, you are mad sure: but if you be,
I'll right your senses straight to its same form:
Oh how their guts cry Peas and Bacon hot:
I'll break the Pitcher and let the juice out,
As hot as my pottage; stay, where are they?
Ho, in my pocket, in my pocket,
What art thou? and for whom?
A turn-coat, and for my self.
Dye then thou slave.
I with all my heart.
Once righteous cause, shows face against its foe,
And Northern scourge brings yoke of Scipio's fear;
My hands imbrewed in warlike Champions,
All save Hollarro the B•zantian soul;
A Brennus, or Nenius of fame
Whose shallowed concaves, compels in valour
All mushrums of fear (save only he)
Trampled by beast of forest, and of plains,
I shall be Lord or King by the conquest.
Nay, that thou shalt not, stand then like a
man,
An equal bond is now shared by my blade:
The Cyprian Queen like chaste Diana,
Of all my hope, waits leisure of a time;
I'll not stay from her, but requite my self.
Oh, oh, I have got the wind colic by
Lying on my belly, the peas and Broth
Doth run such Barly-breaks within my maw,
That if the back-door hold not, I shall leak;
Hold Punniard and Sword. I dare not stir,
Fear lest I send my broth then parboiled out:
Ill ventured, my breeches is clean; up, up,
I go as if I had a Frenchman in my Boots;
But now I'm forced to turn, I shall be killed,
Or else foully bestride.
The wrath of Narrow is not yet appeased,
We are like Nevervian souls, stout to a spoil,
Though Law and Nature be our enemies,
Yet we will rain the Hype•borean pole,
And make our Land like shepherd Hyraeus host,
A place for to receive none but the Gods:
But after Gradivus hath then clattered thus,
Let's make a burial to the Elizium field,
So Soldier take up the bodies of the dead,
Carry them as Trayo•s to their long sought home.
See you perform your office, the King commands.
We will, great King, and noble General.
Lo here is slain brave Burnomoy, the blade
Who deserves pomp, as much as Burgargo had.
That time and this is not now poised alike,
The War conveys a change of Sea and Land,
Therefore he must be buried among the rest,
So then confirm your place.
Come, lets make a hole, and put them all in.
Oh, what must I do then? faith I'll dye with them,
For I shall be killed if I stir.
Let's take the plunder of the field first;
Oh here's a good suit, I'll have this, none else.
What, here's one fellow warm, I believe he
Is alive still;
But if he be quick, he shall be put in the grave first.
The time runs round by hidden motion,
I was a King, but now more desperate;
And you my Queen, but fortune frowned thereon.
I wish that Halia could have then oppressed
To drown their ships in Cynthia's merciless realm,
Her Father Ne'er•s with a glad design,
Before they footed this Bruzantia:
Fair Lerenica, I must fly for fear,
To adore the sorrows of an exiles place;
I'll leave my Princely Robes, and dress my bones
According to the custom of a Pilgrims form;
And beat the banks which Neptunes waves have tossed
To hunt my death, because I loathe the same;
And at my last farewell, I'll use no art,
Let sighs, tears, kisses, bid loath to depart.
Those drops of blood doth stain my maiden
face,
Because my sole Artemon must fly hence,
Sure Jove will strive to make the Ganymedes,
For the Hesperidon Dragon cannot stand
The force of such a Hercules: let hope,
Whore's ever you tread your Princely guard, then
guide
Your hood-winck actions in unknown places.
I willing am to stay, to make a prayer,
When you depart you'll kill my life, that thing.
The Swan's near death, when she begins to sing.
Oh Damsel of my breath, let not such debt
Lie on the fabric of Hollarro,
Though I have •iomedes fame, I'm loath
To prove Domitianus to thy soul;
Heaven and Earth will not forgive the fact,
No sacrifice nor kneeling pay the act;
The st•rry bowers would send a loathsome smell
To strangle death in the prime of my days;
Besides the edge of furious war would bring
A State to beg relief for thy great woe;
What, I be D•mophoon to Phillis?
To cause untimely death? far from Hollarro,
Aid requires no help; I'll carry you
Along with me, to make the Indian foes
Grow stiff with fear, because they see the Sun
Eclipsed by your bright brow; then go with me.
Display your self no more in i•ward love,
My heart and tongue cannot express my mind;
I'll dwell within the Land, Bruzantia's walls,
As long as breath sees still the inner rooms;
Go noble Prince, as power doth give thee aid,
For thy own sake, In•• live and die a maid.
Sweet Lerenica loath, but I must go,
My soul bids fly, my heart cries out the same,
Then fair Lerenica, please to take the air,
Of other Princes from Numenia:
So I must go, my tongue fails, nought but this
I can express; fair, give me adieu kiss,
Constant Lerenica, constant Lerenica.
Go noble Prince, stay, take another kiss;
What, art thou gone? woe, woe, Lerenica,
Cannot my warbling voice crave Niobe,
To be with her turned into a dull stone,
That those stretching motions may then faint
At my more flinty nature, then my breast
Can expel from it, as such stormy blows,
Or with Iphianassa and Lysippe,
Changed to strange furies, that no woe may pierce,
My vital spirits; pish, now I feel
A stronger temper then those Goddesses,
No Daelalus his Labyrinth can hide,
My woe from running its due ordered course;
Then let me frame a twist as Iphis did,
For to make sorrow have abortive birth,
Or turned to man, to have a stronger heart
In the defiance of my wandering woe:
But stay, I wrong poor natures time,
For to dotard the blow that rids my pains,
So pangs strikes larums to my parting close;
Then do appear thou ender of my life,
Bring licence from Elision souls to me;
Come, come, thou quick Physician, welcome now,
Thy medicines to my poor panting soul,
No tears shall hinder virtue of thy will,
Nor Ivory breast turn point of steely form;
So then I come Hollarro, dear Hollarro,
To which place thou'l follow me, woe, woe, woe.
Now I will frame an ocean for my soul
Of pure blood, to hoist a Galley in.
And its same say I shall aim at no port else,
But the Hollarro, Hollarro of my joy,
So spend you drops and make a quick conv•y,
Drench all my soul to make that great deluge;
But if your wandering channels run to him,
Inform his ear my heart was the messenger,
And for his own dear soul I bleed my last,
I wrong my soul to stay the time so long:
Now then you happy Nymphs, make passage free,
Let no foul ghost turn back my bloody hand,
Though grim Prometheus vulture's tear my breast,
Yet still my journey tempers all those pains.
Then Jove that loves Diana's Nymph that's fair,
Ruling the whole universe in form,
Send down a smiling look, take pity of
Her, who doth welter in her own hot blood,
As in the great red Sea, whose water boils,
The time begins to challenge privilege:
Oh, oh, I fail; oh, oh, I fail, and come,
Now, now, methinks, whole Kingdoms •ome to
me:
Oh sweet sweet Music, and a melody,
Hollarro, so I go, Hollarro—
Mars, Armocares, is still our friend,
The mounting Eagle soars upon the wind,
And makes pale Moon a Diadem to her Crow•,
And so all language smiles •i•h hollowing cries,
To show our force like the Athenian,
Great Agatho, strange man of might, but weak
Unto our souls, who are Hyperions Son,
They stood like Pigmies, while we A•bions
And Bergions stood to oppose the wrath;
Their Towns are ours, we will make a happy sky,
Present a prosperous morn unto our souls;
And when crystal Aurora gives the foy!
To Cynthia's wandering Chariot, then I'll give,
And all divide the Land according to the place
Of every Soldier, the whole Kingdom shall
Be in fragments.
Great King, the appointment of your sun∣bright
Judgement, gives peace and plenty to our minds,
Whole Regions of a violentiall form is turned
To peace, her wishes in a splendent case;
And as the aggregate of future loss,
Is over-vail'd by joy of present time;
Even, so your sacred will stops envies teeth,
To give this Kingdom in a recompense.
Though Maulinus, they were noble in their deeds,
To use the chain of liberty with friends,
The Phoenix of that age, which robed the time
With his best deeds, are trifles to my vote;
I hope my time will not prove like Cavinus,
But live to see my men in silver forests,
Urania's • ur shall not content the mind,
Nor 〈◊〉 Lu•e so well as gift will do,
Tomorrow morning it shall be confirmed.
Your royal Majesty hath shaped my lot;
If Achilles were here, and Pargamus,
Their same could be no greater then ours won;
Neptune and Nereus conspired with all one vote,
And Titans rays for to redeem your Land,
And, noble Liege, you have fulfil'd your part.
The storm is over of great rage and War,
Rhenus her waves ne'er flowed with Nilus tides,
To make a fertile soil, may be compared
To this your most King-like decree of fame.
Here I Ulysses, they Alcanders stand,
While the Troys blades strike dead those Sarpedons,
The Agonius god is at command:
I'll do what pleases fancy of my care,
Though Alexanders fame runs much in world,
Yet bounty takes the place of all his acts,
Alecto, and the other two, cannot
Withdraw the purpose that I have decreed;
So we will begone, to morrow is the day.
Whore's now Lerenica? sure• speed will drive
Her feet, to make a ranscat for her bold
Attempt, I shall be King or Prince, the King
Fore-tells, by service I did perform;
The brazen Gates of Hell dare not withstand
The bilbow blades of my great thundering arm:
But stay, what's this? the spoils of some strange story,
It is not Lerenica sure, her face is black,
A contrary climate to her element;
I'll cl•nse thy face to see with sorrows eyes,
Sure't cannot be fair L•renica;
Let's see thy chin, thy finger and thy ring;
Oh las, it is the signature I gave
To her dear soul. oh cursed Bell•errio,
I have done wrong for to defame my King,
And lose my Dame, a mock-star of the Sun;
Oh slavery of Heirs, to fight and die
By that great War I overcame by blows;
Let one Urn conclude both of our ashes,
A servile man unto my sorrow: no,
This arm shall send a weapon to my heart,
No policy shall work by quick design,
To turn the mind that hangs on that same string:
She's dead, she's dead, and stabbed her self for grief,
By home-bred strife, and a full stretched arm;
What, shall I live to see those days of woe,
With this my body, and want the life of the soul?
No, sure I may with Carthaginians,
Be buried quick as Philenius were,
Make Celerinus prove to me a Cyrene
Oh that would be a joyful day to see,
Such a mutation in my barbarous plot;
Or like Orpheus wife Euridice,
Be stung with the Aristaean Adder,
And so cause end to this my gloomy light:
But these afford no aid unto my dying soul,
Then let me be with Babylonian dame,
To Dirces fish converted, in moment,
That all Pallanian dames may hiss my woe,
To see my foul and unreserving thought;
Let flocking furies strangle breath within
Such a presumptuous soul, to venture it;
I cause h•r death, then death must recompense
That virgins act; I must, I must then dye,
The battle's ended, but in arms with me,
Such objects fright my inner vitals sense,
So thou must be my friend when all forsake;
A happy key to open death the Gate.
Cut, cut, the veins, that hath wrought such a foe,
To fair Lerenica in her resting sleep:
Then here I come with a most sweet content,
With Census bird, to pine away with mirth, oh-oh-
The pangs begin to work, I leave this place
To be surnam'd (Bellerrio's comfort
With Lerenica)—
This dismal life gives tongue unto my mind,
What Arcadian mountain, or Pholot wood,
Receive my soul, and charge it as a prey,
A Panetolium forest would befit
My sense with decent alarms of fear;
Rouse then authority of hellish cries,
Be thou a foe when substance wants its force,
Bring in a full career of desperate shouts,
And tax the muster-role of all my sense,
Though the Athenian Cynegirus
Holded the ship, while hands and stumps did last:
So I in fathers Kingdom equalled him,
In that Halcyion's nest of all my joy,
No choler moved me to it, but duty did imprint
To lend that aid of my full strongest arm,
By whose great blows the air it did inflame;
I forced all those Symbarians by a rule,
To make the earth a pillow for their souls.
That which was matter and spirit, is now turned
To matter only in a putrid form:
The Spirit's gone like an airy breath,
And a sweet music only by its sound.
When I have done all, this, must now return
Into a hopeless humour of my life,
Losing my Kingdom, cast as reprobate:
No sure, I shall ne'er undergo't with hope,
To boil in lak• of famine and despair,
Vengeance oryes loud unto my fearful soul,
But impotence warns me to desist,
A desolate forest yields no comfort to
A Princely humour, lest be by combat
Of savage creatures in their form and shape,
But let a hope survive my vital sense,
Often good fortune haps to a foreign Prince:
But stay, methinks I wander without brains,
Whore's Le•enica my only Queen and joy;
Oh that's the deed, no hope can recompense;
Now, now, these thoughts bequeath my life to death,
Let Orcus streams that flow from Stygian lake,
Make her full course in channel of my throat;
Or like Oenomatus, an El•an King,
Treacherously slain, not knowing friends from foe
Or else like Daphne•, turn to tri-form,
Wearing a Laurel Crown of Prince's power;
But all these days are gone, a quicker charm
Shall do the deed, come thou my steely man:
Oh strange, oh strange; what, is my soul an Adamant?
The point is turned, sure gods hath against said,
I'll try once more, perchance it was my fear;
Heavens bless me, what's the matter? what, is
My sword confounded, and my breast yet firm?
Well, I'll go range for a fury to kill
Me, or else die with despair.
After the Queen is punished by courage,
Of lash, of fury, with a martial hand,
The storms grown calm of all our foreign foes,
All poetic Centaurs leave the game,
Not one assail on credit of our fame;
Then Gervoron be you the Lord of
The woody Province of Bruzantia;
As for Bellerrio he hath sung a doleful close
Of echoing quavers to Elizium:
And all my Souldlers have a •itting bound,
According to the valour they have won.
Most noble Liege,
Time doth surrender office to your Crown,
Giving the Theater of all Kingly power,
Making all Rebels venture for safeguard,
Suffering no bulwark of discretion;
Therefore grave judgement is in balance now,
And your great Majesty hath poised the same,
By prosperous spoils; all ponderous rage is gone
Fled with the viper to the cave of fear:
All foggy shadows turn a crystal rays,
To make the misty humour ascend up;
Tears wiped from us, a joyful day now coms,
No stars are now, but turned to glittering suns.
Let Tagus spangled shore void up all Gems,
And Nilus gliding streams recruit all stems,
The quintessence of all four Elements,
And all the earth as they each one frequent,
Join all in one to make Elixir true,
Yet all are vain to what is born to you,
The mass of all the round terrestrial globe,
Is unto that you have, but a poor node;
You in abyss of joy is plunged full out,
And in a Wardrobe which none can recrout;
Go blessed souls, take spoils or fields, what you
Do most approve of, or best in your show.
Noble Heroic Liege, all grace wait on
Your Kingly honour, and royal person.
Honour of honours, and the field of fame,
Give Victors, Trophies, to your divine name;
Let them all sound, to make the rocky stones
Know whose's their subject, who helps their great moans,
And let the wheel of valour still at hand,
Stand present at the sign of your command.
The rector of all the spread dappled skies,
Who holds the Poles, and all that on them lies▪
Bids gloomy Luna take possession free,
Of golden Titan and his splendency.
So we will depart, Aberden must give way
To Celerinus, who still rules the day.
Let s•ble mourning fling away
Her dusty Robes, here comes the day,
Which makes bright Ceres smile to see
Such Bacchalian tranquillity,
All Gods and Goddesses both far and ne'er,
Must sing and praise this day with grateful che•r
The Stygian lakes must cease •be,
And Cerberus greedy of his fee,
Peace doth make Bellonia frown,
Mars yields up, and gives Peace the Crown;
Then let us all clap hands for joy of thy•,
That nought can recompense below a bliss.
See how the flocks possess the ground,
While men do wait thereon,
And all things in a blessed form,
And joyful union;
All Cities quiet, singing hymns,
While children plays thereby,
Skies send to them a happy morn,
All by mil•e jubily;
Therefore since peace doth make these things,
Let us spend all our days
To frame such peace while peace doth last
In all our wandering ways:
How bravely Nymphs and Satyrs play,
And skip in valleys low;
And how great Jove doth like the same
In such a pleasant show;
Then sound, clap hands, and make a noise,
Till skies they do rebound,
To see such friend•hip and such love,
Twixt their Land and this ground.
Aberden cause Celerinus to fly.
Celerinus made Aberden know why.
Neither of those Kings knew which first should die.
Here's Aberdens ashes laid in tomb,
And Soldiers lye so thick, there is no room
For future damage, the clear stars wax dim,
A Serpent now is vice-roy of all sin,
His Subject made their answer and design,
Still viewing Countries, till with him made fine:
The wide mouth of all swallowing angers throat,
Gapes like Eagle or Lion from his vote,
No Empire bounded, but this Nymph will see
The bounds and freedom of its liberty;
She's born of crooked nature, because her will
Is oft employed to manage what is ill;
But let grim Anger wait, as long as days,
Or years, or months, or Sol hath any rays,
She still shall be debarred from us three,
Who live in ring (naked) of amity.
The hellish Queen, great Adrenimia's paid
To her deserts, in prison chained, and laid
For future trouble of a dreadful day;
Greedy her hands were to spill blood always;
But now expect revenge from that same King,
Where she employed such a Lethalian thing.
The Prince Hollarro still must wander time,
In smiling Dales and Woods then full of crime;
The hoisting sails of all his hope must be,
After foul cross to have community,
Until the spangled skies doth give such rays,
I wish bright Sol may turn all nights to days;
But if my wish be too severe in sight,
I wish all native Princes had their right.
—credula vitam
Spes fovet—

MOst silent audience to you I speak,
The Author bids you welcome, &amp; doth you greet
With this his harmless Poem, not full out
Six months old, or penned into a book;
The wandering Lover is the name of this,
You must expect no great tologies,
Nor Nectors Drum, nor no Ambrosian phrase,
He once doth show, or out of it doth raise,
But Mother-like tongue plainly writ and spoke,
As in pursuit you'll find it in his Book;
The Storie's good to pass the gentle •ime
With Love-conceits that run in easy rime,
Of most bold Person, with his martial brow,
And mild Euphrates wound with Cupid's bow;
How they do differ, and how matchless bee
In their affections, neither doth agree:
But why should I thus trifle time away?
For it is full season that our Comic Play
Should be now acted in our solemn doom;
Lo here the Player's come, and I will give in room.
THE cause of that strange and unexpected Accident, Eu∣phrates?
Your Ingenuity best knows Sir.
No, no, I pray thee relate it to me.
I am no Orator, much less no Hudorigrapher;
Why, I'm sure Person would offer you no abuse; he looks not as if Mars were seated in his Brows, or Dame Envy in his innocent Breast, or Fury to be the overswayer of his amoricious will; pray thee, the rea∣son?
Many words umbrage dissimulation: Father, I beseech your patience. Oh my dear Grievance! for why, even for thy sake my soul doth die.
Fie, fie, Son, extirpate those fond Flames, and illuring Contemplate∣once out of memory; for it is a thing neither decent, beseeming, nor comely for such a noble spirit as yours, much less these are not times for Love-Fancies; why, she's dead, there's no recalling of her; and why should you now wrap yourself in the Robes of Discontentment? Time may put a Period to my years, where are you then? in a Lake of Misery.
If she be dead and here me left,
Of life mortal •he hath bereft
Me; and I wish I had run the race,
That I might her sweet Corps embrace.
But here I swear by Mars Divine,
That ere before the Sun doth shine,
Or trace about the Zodiac round,
This hand shall great Person confound.
Be not so obstinate, there's in the world as beautiful as she.
But not so virtuous.
Yes, virtuous too.
The tallest Cedar that ever grew, there was some to parallel it both in hight and straightness.
I shall desire your pardon at the present Father, for being thus absurd to leave you, which I am forced by some indispotìon of my Body, and return to my Chamber,
Where with divine and sacred contemplation
Pass the time as in a recreation
Of bright Greciana Idea, until be past
Those careless hours that do run so fast.
Farewell Father.
Farewell Son; I wish some good event come of't.
FERCOR!
Sir.
Where be those Bills of Exchange that came yesterday? let them be drawn.
They are in your Closet Sir, amongst the rest that came from Spain.
What! you only stay for a happy Gale; you have all things ready for the Voyage.
All, sir.
Oh happy friend! well met once at home.
Oh Neslo! once more in the prospect of these mortal eyes of mine: What News? What News?
News that doth even terrify me with the most vigorous strength of sor∣row that could have happened.
What is it?
The Lady Greceana this last night stolen away by two insolent fellows, and by a third, one more wittier, but wickeder; I may term him in knavery con∣dusted and conveyed to the Thessalian Court, which as we all know, are open Enemies to us Germanes.
It is true.
Know you their Names?
Person, Bremon, and Lermo; oh wretched Villains that dor'st attempt such an inhumane thing! Hark, the people utter horrid rumours within; let's in and see.
We attend you.
WAS it not rarely accomplished▪
I by the Heavens it was; it was always my saying, If once we evinced that Atlantic brazen Gate, it were as sure as Venus commit∣ted Adultery with Mars.
I must ingenuously confess it was an Herculean task for us, having so many stratagems, so many Bolts and Locks, and at last being environed with a most energetical Bulwark, and that fortified with a most strong Moat to over∣come, but by your acute wit Mr. Lermo, the which I must needs commend.
Sir, my wit is but shallow in comparison of your strength; but it hath been accustomed rathert to choose Vlisses then Poleph•mus, sic parses componere magna solebani.
Com•, come friends, it is too tedious; let us not dispute upon that sub∣jest now, but treat upon the facetious spirits of Venus; even now I h•ve an innu∣merable Chymaeras entering my turbulent brain, what we shall do with this An∣gelical and Goddesse-like Dame; well, I'll go fetch her into the Court; my eyes have a longing desire to glance upon her delicious Physiogmonie.
Go prosperously, and return happily. It was reported (and I am ve∣rye confident you very well know) that Euphrates (a man of good fortune and noble parts) was a great Suitor of this Lady, the flame of which love I fear is still kindled in her Breast, and not easy to be quenched.
I do remember it; but time, place, and distance, with some other in∣tricates, may work another effect, and cause her to bury his former love in the grave of Oblivion, and not to embalm it up for a perpetual egrimonie to her mind; and I hope that old Proverb will prove true, Out of sight, out of mind.
BE not so coy Madam, Time—
What of Time?
Nothing but Time.
Speak, prithee speak, what means thou by this hidden talk?
Hidden talk Madam? you may term it hidden talk, or what you please; but if you'd lived to my years, and had so much experience as I have had in—
Thou art a pretty piece of Mortality indeed; if I'd had so much ex∣perience as thou'st had; in what I pray thee, thou pattern of deformity?
Madam, I say as I did before, time may alter, witness Sybilla.
What of her?
Nothing Madam, but she was a fair goddess, but she being coy and squeamish, cast off Phoebus in his glory; &amp; afterwards she thinking the May of her days, and fresh colours would always continue, and time and fortune could not wear out, not imagining that white and red should once return to black and yellow; Juniper, the longer it grew, the crookeder it waxed; so she with age that had no blemish in her face, had wrinkles without number, and all that knew her shunned her company.
Believe me, a learned speech!
Madam, I beseech you give me leave to speak a word or two to your Ladyship.
What insolent audacious Idiot's that? Know him Crecia?
It is Euphrates man, Madam.
Euphrates man! what makes he here? ask'im his business, and send him away.
My Lady desires your business.
I am come of an Errand from Mr. Fercor, to tell your Lady that he is going Factor into the Straights for her Father, desiring to take his leave, because he hath some private business with her, and he will wait upon her at three in the Afternoon.
What's the fellows business?
He's come from Mr. Fercor your Fathers Factor, that is going to the Straights, and he will wait upon you this Afternoon upon business, and then take his leave.
What business should he have with me my Fathers man? it is true, he was always a proud fellow, it may be it's for some fancy or other to wear; well, if he come Il'e see him.
I shall obey your command.
Madam, my Master desires your company to Dinner.
Tell my Father I will wait upon him presently. Come Crecea, let us walk in.
I am ready to attend your Ladyship.
SIR, you have much honoured me with your company, and I clearly discern the power of your affections, where your welcome cannot be equalled to my desire, much less to your deserts.
The occasion of my coming was for no other respects but those due unto your merits, whom I honour and am ready to serve.
You owe me no service; but I am ready to embrace your friendship, noble sir, and friend, since it hath been my happy fate thus fortunately to light into your company; as true it is, Necessity hathno Law, so it hath no shame; for contrary to my disposition I must become an importunate suitor to you.
Sir, name it, no sooner asked but granted.
Your kind reply shall embolden me to declare what I was intended to have concealed: only this it is, Whether or no those three Vagabonds were the atrocious Actors in that same dismal Tragedy, in conducting Greceana to the Thessalian Court?
Worthy friend, I shall venture as far upon the brinks of liberty as I can pass without mendation or fabulating unto you; for this I can affirm for a truth both by prospect, and likewise by a most pensive report, That Percor was one Malefactor in that same illitable Enterprise, in exhausting the only Diadem and splendent Lustre of Chaste Virgins to that place of deprived Li∣bertie.
For answering me this querie in one respect, for uttering the utmost of your knowledge therein, hath linked me to you with the chain of everlasting A∣mite; and contrary, hath pined me up with the bolt of terrissitie from you, for hearing of such penetrating and poisonous sentence;
But this I am resolved before,
Those splendent eyes I see no more:
To trace throughout Thessalia round,
And search out that even unknown ground
For invaluable precious Gem
In all the judgements of vain men,
And fetch her home by day or Night
By frost, or some vile cunning slight.
If such an Anglicise hath took once possession in your undaunted and well-known Manhood, I shall not be him that withstands it; but this I would have you take in consideration of your Judicial Policy, the grave Counsel of that famous Student in all Arts and Sciences, ANTONV S POMP.
Him dear friend I have sent for.
In my best apprehension, you in that have done discreetly.
It's three hours since I sent a Letter by my man, which I wonder I hear no News, it may be he's not at home, and he stays to bring him along with him, therefore I will wait with patience. But stay, here he comes.
Sir, I have delivered the Letter.
Delivered the Letter! to whom you Rascal? did I send you in hast, and you have loitered all this time?
Sir, I stayed to bring him with me, because the contents of your Let∣la as I heard said, required speed; therefore he was come half the way, staid to talk with two Gentlemen, and said he would wait upon you presently.
In this thou hast satisfied me in some respect: But noble friend Dross∣mus, I trespass too much upon your patience.
No sir, I take it for an honour that I am able to serve you in any thing.
Your love sir is more then I deserve.
Your desert is more then I am able to require; but stay, who comes here? it should be Pomp by's gait; it is him.
Then his counsel I'll in this matter; and so I go inspight of Fate or Fortune.
And so I too in spite of the—Devil and his—Monkey.
Are you one Mr. Euphrates?
I am the man, sir.
From you I had a Letter this day by a man, whose tenor I very well understand, and have pondered on it a seasonable time, and likewise my Judge∣meant is as follows:
First, Sir, I am compelled by duty to praise your fidelity in the war-like attempt of Venus; and notwithstanding, your Martial Animoscity in the civil Combat of Mars; if you be resolved, as I hereby understand, I would advise you (by the reason
they know you) to attire your self in women's Apparel, taking another Sociate with you, and you may by Arts and Fortune accomplish your desires.
I shall do herein my endeavour, and Metamorphic my self with smi∣ling looks.
Then go prosperously.
And I with him sir, you wish.
By your many savours and kind replies the mind of your servant is impleated with so much advantage, as to crave your company in this same dis∣mal undertaking.
Sir, I accompany you with helexitie.
My Father must not know of it; so attend me tomorrow morning be∣twixt four and five, at the back Window in the Garden, and you shall find me ready to take shipping in the Lyon.
Your will shall be fulfilled.
And what, must I be left behind? marry godamercie, I believe you will miss your—before you return; he doth not mind me, nor I will not mind him afterwards; and if any one ask me whose man I am, I can tell thee I am mine own Master now; but I'll be sure fi•st before I say so, I'll go see him safe.
WHat, here's no man yet in prospect; what prodigies have happened by the way? sure something must be the cause, but what's, uncertain.
In the Court not long since there were some debates by men of superio∣rite in war-like Achievements, of which the rumour did pass amongst the vul∣gar and commons, as then I did lend an attentive ear, That a Lady of an un∣known birth was to be enjoyed by the encounter of two Knights.
Not the Lady Greceana!
Time will divulge it.
But now yonder I perceive the happy sight of long-wish'd for friends; the Lady's well I hope.
Very well, she advancing nigh.
On unhappy Girl, thus to be rape away by Wolves, Bears, (what shall I term them?) in mans shape, and by most illitable resolutions!
First begot in vain Conversation, and then brought up by cruelty, the unhappy Nurse in their infidelious hearts, and conducted here to a pensive Habitation, which af∣ford• no pleasure to the eye, but objects of misery; none to the ear, but self-undoing, out∣cries: Oh Euphrates, where art thou? in what cavern of despair?
Madam, why so melancholic?
Oh that these innocent hands were wreathed about thy ever-flourishing Breast! then might I sit down and crown my self with contentation; but until
then, what fate and unhappy fortune recommends to a desolate Virgin.
Sir, will it please you to receive your Enterprise into company?
Madam, remember your self, here behold as great virtue, but far greater Bravery; and I speak to you without fabulating, and you may believe me, you in Germany have only mere shrines of love, and wise gods, but we their per∣sons, and likewise their Virtues; and what can be recorded that hath been found out by Arts and Sciences, but the nobleness of a Courtier hath found out by practise? I should term them most seamless and void of reason that think to gather more Fruit then Leaves, or see more at the Candle snuff then at the Sun beams; what may it please you answer, is not all this true?
All true, all true.
Sir, Your speech is good, but not aptly placed in my disposition; there is one thing yet draws my mind, even as the Load-stone draws to it Iron away, when you think me most attentive; for why Gentlemen, I must confess it is far more difficulter for me to glance any pleasing look, or shape a state of dissemb∣ling, than to utter the truth and reality of the matter.
Why Madam, was ever that frail cogitation cast into your memory, as once to imagine that us Courtiers can feign our selves otherwise then we are? my meaning is, to dissemble.
Lo Mr. Lermon, this may be recorded, Queen niscit dis•imulare, nes•it regnare.
Sir, my meaning will be concealed; for I desire the Place of my discon∣solation, wherein I may take my turbulent repast.
Madam, we attend you.
And we also.
SIR, your saying is very aptly located, and I wish it may come to an of∣fact.
Sir, if once the flames of bright Greceana's love not once take place, nor in his breast there move their ever-flashing Furies, or so cruel betwixt Dia∣na and Venus, there to keep a duel, our matter may be effected, and with speed we might perceive brave Greceana dead, and only there virtuous Medea rest in his most true and ever faithful Breast:
Even at that prospect with my head then bare,
And hand lift up, gave everlasting prayer.
To the immortal Gods, great Mars and Jove,
For his unfeigned and unmatched Love.
Well! but Mr. Hormone, this, I am possessed with much timorousness, that her love is so radicated in his contemplation, that it is like that famous and un∣paralleled Stone A•boston, found in Arabia, of iron colour, which being once made hot, can hardly or never be quenched; but send for him; if he be willing, my Daughter shall not resist.
I will fulfil your pleasure.
Who attends there? whore's your Master?
He's gone to the Lyon, Sir.
What, to drink his Mornings-draught?
The Ship sir, that set out for Thessalia this day, the name of it was Lyon.
I sir, that's the thing he's gone to.
Oh what, and how much terror hath overwhelmed the faculties of my soul! how my breast pants! how I sweat at the tenor of this Sentence!
Why?
There's reason enough; but no more at present.
Explain it to me I pray.
At your request Isle do what fond fancy will give leave, and ease my mind of this heavy burden; by vulgar report the Lady Greceana is gone to
Thessaly, and my fear is, my Son hath undertaken that unhappy voyage in pur∣suit after her.
Let fancies flee, I'll bring you more news afterwards, that would vex every vein in your heart if I should get that old mans Daughter;
What mine? away fond slave, away. Let's in, and see more for certain.
Lead the way.
GOod God! did I think a man so void of reason, or had so little sense? What fond Chymaera's hath imbibe'd into his besotted brain? He told me he loved me; it may be so, am I then forced to love again? No certainly, there's no such Obligations in Venus Court: But why should I thus contem∣plate upon this rash Doteard! fly from me like my dullest breath, for he is gone whom I did love: Oh Euphrates, Euphrates! why so cruel, when thou art loved not to love again? But if I should sum up all the sighs that thou hast cost me,
I should loath the nomination and thought of such a man; but it is thy feature
I look at, thou knowst' not my grief, though I perceive the vigour of it; but I must be contented; Crecea where art thou?
At a call Madam; what's your pleasure?
I have no pleasure in this age; pleasure flies from me, and grief returns in their place, and doth remain.
Why Madam, what sad news have you received? it's all for a man.
No, not for that.
I fear it much.
You may persuade your self to contraries; what was it then you think
Fercor came about?
Believe me I know not; why thats not it made you so sad I hope.
No, nor light neither.
You are so catching.
But I shall take some time to let thee know it.
I then attend.
He told me he loved me.
Ha, ha, ha, what's the man mad? sure he is not right.
He was in earnest, but I returned him presently an answer, and set him going.
But would he be said, Madam?
Faith with much ado; but pleased or not, I care, I hope he's gone ere this, and committed himself to the brackish and merciless waves, where Neptune is overswayer with his Iron Mace;
 See the unhappy prospect of my foe! say I am not with∣in.
Mr. Fercor, I thought you had been tossed ere this with turbulent waves.
Tossed I am, with waves I am not: Wheres your Mistress?
Is that your business? she's not at home.
I do not desire your company then.
Marry come up here; I'm gone sir.
Just Heaven, what will she be so cruel to her servant! I must aba•e the pride of that fierce humour, and my resentment of it shall make her see that Lovers must be treated in another fashion; but these scorns I'll turn into her shame; and Euphrates whom she thinks her own already, shall as even fail her hopes as she hath mine, when a more worthy Object shall change his mind, and his disdain of her, shall revenge hers of me.
TIME and Tide stays for no man; shake off these panick fears; though it be boisterous at your entrance, yet you may land with an happy Gale.
It's not the waves that works upon my nature, or the fierce rumour of their horrid noise, nor the tossing of the Ship in the Ocean that can work any distemper, or search out any desolate vacant Cavern in my illatable body, in which it may accumulate daunting and disporting fancies; but it is a certain fa∣culty, more strong and vigorous in its operation, which may aptly be compared to Dedalus and his waxen Wings, the higher it surmounts, the more it doth me melt.
But this is nothing to the business concerning my particular, for this is as fit for love as a Pudding for a Dogs mouth.
You have propounded a mystery to me, Fercor, beyond the Element of my capacity and climate, in which I walk not; a task too high for me to look; but if your intention be continued to the promise you formerly made, here is one who being desolate of a place, would undergo the elaborate Science of Na∣vigation.
Sir, my promise is firm, and I intend to fulfil it: is this him that would learn?
This is the man: I shall leave you to your selves, for time and duty calls me hence.
Sir, if you think it convenient to go to sea, and see the hidden mist∣ries in the Ocean, I shall fulfil your mind
I would go if it were but to see my Master, but I would not be drown∣ed, ones clothes will be so wet when he is taken up; but pray you tell me seri∣ously, How oft hast thou been drowned?
Thou art a fool sure, sees not me yet alive?
Oh Gentlemen! be they dead that be drowned? I thought they had put on fishes skins, and walked upon the sands, and kept the fishes company; it were a thing to be marvelled at, that a little cold, cold water should kill a man of reason as I am, and not a senseless Gudgin.
Thou art wise from the crown of the head upwards; if thou goes with me, Isle make thee understand the Card and the seven Stars.
How to play at Cards Sir!
I tell thee, the Sea-Card, and the thirty two Points.
I can play at one and thirty.
But I have not many points about my Breeches.
Thou art very dull; but wilt thou learn?
I, begin with the Points first, for they are most in fashion,
North, North and by East, North, North-East, North-East and by North, North-east, North-east and by East, East, North-East, East and by North, East.
I'll now say it after you; North-East, North no more by the East, but by the West side, that's on my right hand, and by North.
Thou art void of reason, hast thou no memory?
I'll say again, North by North, which should stand in the place of East;
I'm out of it again I dare say.
And so dare I too; but farewell, I perceive thou art an idiot, and so I take my leave, for neither time nor tide will permit me any longer to stay.
Good boy, good boy, I had rather be hanged where I may leap for my life, then drowned where no body sees me.
EVPHRATES! Oh miserable Euphrates! how can thou frame thy affections according to thy habit, who was wont to exercise thy self, and to take only delight in achieving rare Exploits, riding a Tilt-Horse, and now confined within the protection of a Petticoat; certainly Drosanus, I shall never manage it with dexterity, but instead of making a Course I shall make a Leg.
Though it hath been your daily practise to be employed in Martial Af∣fairs, yet for a certain season you may metamorphose your self as Galathea and fair Philli• did in the year of offering sacrifice unto Neptune, who were compelled
by their indulgent Fathers for their safeguard; follow this practise to enjoy the Trophies of your Victory.
As power doth lie in me, so shall I do my duty: stay, yonder comes Person my ordained Enemy, he knows not me, let us stand aside.
How now! what strange conceit! what new contraries hast thou given place to enter into thy mind! hast thou turned the delicious pastimes of Diana to the lascivious sports of Venus; thy ever-wished for chastity to wanton looks▪ thy conquering arm to captive imaginations of Love? Dost thou begin that strange creature Pyralis, to dye in the air and to live in the fire; to leave the sweet delights of the Court, to follow the hot desires of Love? (Oh Person!) these are not words becoming a man of thy animosity; but for thy affections being a Lover, can Cupids Brands quench Dicta's Fire? or his feeble Shaft, headed with Feathers, give a wound more emedicable then Viana's Arrows, headed with steel? Oh Greceana! because thou art fair, must I be fickle? and falsify my Vow because I see thy virtue? fond man that I am to think of Love! nay, vain passion that I follow, to disdain Love! But here comes Bremon, Lermo, and the lustre of the day, Greceana; I must vale my Physiognomy with a Vermili∣on blush, lest they perceive the Alabaster hew in my face, and laugh.
Do you perceive? he's in love with her.
I, very well: But let us know the event of it.
Sweet Lady, can you love?
Withdraw my Lord; can such a thing as Love be once named here, where every Marble that supports this place in Aemulation doth spend tear• with us; nay, where the wound of such a mighty Lovers, a Euphrates, hath not in my frail breast bled their last.
Tush rare Greceana, these sighs and panic fears that seem to Ladies terrible, are common to every Soldier, when from field returning, all besmea∣red in blood, where Dukes and Kings lye slain; yet in their Tents at mid-night it frights not them from courting a sweet Mistress.
He saith the right; and note of this how I can po••ise?
This his great Father of his Love desired,
When from the slaughter of his foes retired,
He doft his Cushes, and unarmed his head▪
To tumble with her on a soft dry Bed.
It did rejoice Briscis to embrace
His bruised Arms, and kiss his bloode-staind face;
Those hands which he so often did imbrew
In blood of war-like Trojans whom he slew,
Were then employed to tickle, touch and feel,
And shake a Lance that had no print of Steel.
Hear me one word good friends; I rue that ever I did undertake that matter in conducting that piece of Deformity away; for she is neither wise, beautiful, nor constant, I'll prove it Bremon; Four Elements meet in the stru∣cture of that Greceana, of which there's not one pure; she's composed merely of Blood, Bones, and rotten Flesh, which makes her Leprous; where the Sun exhales, the moist complexion, it doth putrefy the Region of the Air; there then's another; sometimes the Sun sits muffled in its Cave, whilst from the Clouds fly hiddeous showers of Rain, which sweeps the Earth's corruption in∣to Brooks; Brooks into Rivers; Rivers send their Tribute as they receive it, to the seething Ocean; Thus Air, Earth and Water, all infected! she then framed of these, can she be beautiful? No Bremon, no; if she be, she has the help of Art▪ by Nature she is ugly: I'll see if I can persuade them to this; for while two Dogs fights for a bone, the third may get it.
Are you in this mind, sir?
I, and will continue in it.
Let's go for the space of half an hour, and take the fresh air, I'm migh∣tie full.
So am I.
Lets go then.
Every word of their utterance carry•s' virtue in them; I'll divide them into particulars: For Perco's, they are of a mixed composition, neither of Honey nor Gall, much like the fruit called Mandrake, which is fair in show, but in taste bitter and acid. For Bremons, it's of a different nature from the former, hollow hearted, only skin, neither bone nor flesh, but pliable every way, which is plain flattery. Lermo's, the constructure of it is of both these, head of Per∣co's, feet of Bremon's, the middle of Douts, being his own Lot. I pass now to
Greceana's, as it were from turbulent waves to Crystal streams, whose brink is formed of contentment, and the streams themselves delights: They are—
By your favour, let me put in one word, which is this▪ Let's not dispute of words, or Castles in the air, but the subject, which is formed of material sub∣stance; we must go about while we do prattle here, the Gole may be won; and like simple Wood-cocks, think we are most safe when we are in the most dan∣ger; but let not these words take place in your heart for a reservement of hatred, but for innocentious amosity.
•r•sanu•, th•y 〈…〉 sovereign. Balm for a love-sick heart; no time to come hence forward shall be trifled in vain alluring self▪conceits, but labour to put a Period to discontentment, and 〈◊〉 expect new Trop•ies of felicity.
NESTO, noble Nesto, is there no tidings from Greceana.
None as yet; but expected they are.
It is reported Euphrates hath pursued her, and it's for certain ere this
he hath obtained the happy visit of her, which all as yet he aims at, it being the rich Object of his desires; if Fortune had stayed his courses in that Progress, you might have seen which is the greatest confirmity, Hormone my son, and Eu∣phrates my son in law; but since it is determined otherwise, I am submissive to the will of Fates': Stay! yonder comes Mr. Hormone, we'll see how he takes it, and how affected to this Melady.
It is true friends.
What?
That my son hath followed her: is this your Friend?
It is one Mr. Nesto, who usually waited upon Greceana while in this Nation she was present, but now lives upon his means; he's a Gentleman.
Upon Greceana!
Yes, servant to her.
She's now in Thessaly.
She is so▪
And there should stay if it had not been for my son; but generous souls are prone to valiant acts; I take my leave of you.
Nest. Your servant, sir.
I am forced against my will to leave you.
I AM glad you are come Daughter, I have here stayed in expectation of you these two hours.
Your business, sir?
I have a Letter from Fercor, which is of concernment to you as well as me; the thing I like well, and do at it rejoice.
The cause of your helexity, Father?
He professes himself your most humble servant.
What's his meaning by it?
He loves you.
Is any thing more ridiculous? you know I never gave nourishment to that condition; in you it is the most harsh unpleasing discord; but I hope you will be instructed better, knowing how much my fancy goes against it; talk not of that, and welcome.
Sir, speak to her, or else you'll do no good.
You retain!
I see your unkind temper; will no thought soften your heart? disdain agrees but ill with so much beauty; if you would persuade him not to love you, strive to be less fair, undo that face, and so become a rebel to Heaven and Nature.
He loves my face then▪
As Heavenly Prologue to your mind; he doth not dote like Pigmalion on the colours.
No he cannot; his was a painted Mistress; and besides, you increase my wonder of his folly, for I have told you that so often—
What?
My mind's so opposite to all his Courtships, that I had rather hear the tedious Tales of Robin Hood, then any thing that trenches upon the limits of Love: If he come fraught with any of Cupids devices, keep 'em for his Whirl∣gigs, or land the next Edition of his Messenger, or Post with a mad Packet, I shall but laugh at them, and pity him.
Thats pity—▪
Do not mistake me, it shall be a very miserable pity, without love: Were I a man, and had but half that hansomness, (for though I have not love, I hate detractation) ere I would put my inventions to the sweet of Comple∣mints, to court my Mistress hand, and call her smiles blessings greater then the suns beams, entreat to wait upon her, give her Rings with wanton and most la∣mentable Poesies, I would turn Thresher.
This is a new Doctrine from women.
I could provoke if truth should be uttered, how he calls it happiness.
Just Heavens! can Fercor be so void of reason to call that happiness which is a madness? I thank my stars, I never was so vain: But pray you Fa∣there the truth, provoke me if you can?
Fercor it's not.
Not Fercor.
No not Fercor!
Change not your countenance at that word, you'll fain persuade me you no∣ver did nor can love.
It's not for love nor any vain passion from thence proceeding, that doth change the faculties of my body, but to see silly men thus to entrap them∣selves. Father, after my duty I take my leave of you.
WO, wo, Thropheus, what shall one do in this case, being abused by their children! while they are young easily to be corrected, but being old, stub∣born and perverse, I compare her to tkat subtle fish for her craftiness, namely, a
Barble, that will not meddle with the bait until with her Tail she hath unhook∣ed it from the the hook; no more will she give any audience until she see the thing reality it self: And to a Crockodile I her conceit, if they see a man a∣afraid of them, they will eagerly pursue him, but on the contrary, if they be as∣salted, they will shun him; having eaten the body of a man, they will weep over the head, but in fine, eat the head also: thence came the Proverb, Croco∣dile tears: Feigned tears in such manner she doth with me; let me entreat her what I please, still she's quite contrary to it, having made many protestations a∣against it, and having let many a tear by the reason of it, at length is contented
and receives it; from whence I affirm, Women's tears are but seigned tears: but hoping to see her better resomed, I'll follow her.
MAdam, give car.
Sir, vex me not.
Your words are like Arrows headed with steel, directed only to wound my heart.
Why fairest one? think but what enjoyments thou shalt receive at thy impartial sacred Decree.
Enjoyments will be turned to curses at that day; if it be with you to spend the Prime and the first Blossom of my youth, and suffer all to be ex∣hasted by the hot influence of that most loathsome and consuming lust, to find those things that therein's hid, and likewise those that are forbid.
Remember for what canse those things to you were given, not to keep always, or to be smothered with the unhappy Nurse Chastity, but to be employ∣ed upon the like resemblance, and to produce the real substance of material joy.
Persuade me to it.
But I'll have caution of what I take in hand, to spend those things that be irrevocable, and that with prodigality; no.
Ne'er follow such vain cogitations, but reflect your self into this cli∣mate, wherein I shall lead you, and happily leave you: What profit doth there flow from hidden Treasure, but only to feed the insaciate Misers eye, when if it were put to some use, it might increase its substance, and enrich the owner: Such youth and natures bounty, that receive again from the expense; but were there none but mere Damage, yet the pleasure of't, and the delight, would recompense the loss.
What ever the pleasure be, or the delight, I am too young, not plumed for such af•ight.
Too young! I like you better; there is a price due to the early Cherry, the first Apples deserve most grace; the budding Rose is set by, but stale and full∣lie blown, is left for Vulgars to rub their sweaty fingers on? Too young! as well you may affirm the tender Twig too young to grast upon, or you may say the ri∣sing Sun's too young to court the day.
I see you are obstinate, therefore I mean to answer you no more, but take my leave.
Go happily.
I now perceive words composed of wind are but a flying substance, not able to carry the efficacy of acting, to preserve vain hope and lose the treasure; but some other way must be invented, which in short time I'll produce:
No time henceforth there shall be spent,
But make her know I thus ambent,
Those things to do, and them up-stir
Which are as yet unknown to her.
COME honest Pudd, I'll undertake to manage that business thou hast in hand.
I shall be shamed face when I see my poor Crecea, thinking how I shall stumble at the splendent lustre of her orient Cheeks.
Her eyes you mean.
Eyes and Cheeks are all one.
It is true, to you.
I, and to you.
Believe me, it were a kind of profanation to make doubt of the con∣trary.
How happy am I then in such acquaintance? a man shall have his due when your meaner Society hath neither judgement to discern, nor credit to commend it: but may I take your word? will you be true if I should take up the Lance of Law and wrestle with Crecea.
Nay, there's no man in the earth more liberal, take it upon my word—
Your word?
I have not any thing in the world more dear or precious in my esteem, which I will not most willingly part with upon the least summons of thee my friend.
Well said, my Boy; thy Mistress and my Master are together for a season, and why may not we be together, and court our Mistresses at our plea∣sure?
Hasten about thy business, I'll attend thee. I will see now what lies in my poor judgement here to do, &amp; turn this Fool into an Ass, which if it take effect, it may produce laughter both unto me, and likewise to his Master.
UNfortunate Euphrates! therefore unfortunate because Euphrates! Was it not sufficient to behold the fire and warm thee, but with 〈◊〉 thou must kiss the fire and burn thee? Oh Greceana! Greceana! Art must yield to Nature; Reason to Appetite; Wisdom to Affection: Could Pigmalion entreat by savour to have his Ivory turned into Flesh, and cannot Euph••tes obe∣tain by plaints to have the Picture of his Love changed to life? What Pigmali∣on? what Pyrgo•eels? or what Lysippus is he that ever made thy face so fair, or spread thy same so far as I? But alas! she is the Paramsur to a Courtier; Person
the great hath both her body and affection; for what is it that Courtiers cannot obtain by prayers, threats, &amp; promises? Will she not think it better to sit under the cloth of State like a Queen, then in a poor House like a House-wife? Yes, yes, Euphrates; thou may swim against the Stream with a Crab, feed against the wind with the Deer, and pick against the steel with the Cockatrice: Stars are to be looked at, not reached at; Courtiers to be yielded to, not contented with Greceana to be honoured, not obtained; for she is the only pattern of that Eternity which Iupiter dreamed a sleep, could not conceive again waking: But the feeding Can∣kerr of my ca•e, the never •ying worm 〈◊〉 my heart, is to be killed by coun∣sell, not cries; by applying of remedies, not by replying of reasons: And sith in cases desperate there must be used Medicines that are extreme, I will hazard that little life that is left to restore the greater part that is lost: And this shall be my first practise, for Will must work where Authority is not; as soon as Person has made his Oration, and declared what he intends to speak, I will by device pierce his heart by some strange Weapon, that by that means I may speak with her, and utter my love, and dye with denial, as conceal it, and live with despair.
Why so melancholy?
Faith not well; troubled with some affairs.
Be patient, time may work a period to them, and you may sit crowned with Laurel, and relate the story with helexity of those painful hours you have spent in pursuit after her.
Those days would be golden ones to me.
Fear not.
Come let us retire to our Lodgings, to morrow they will be here, at which •me we'll meet'em.
I'll follow.
Cupped and my Greceana plaid
At Cards for Kisses, Cupped paid;
He stakes his Quiver, Bow and Arrows,
His Mothers Dove and Team of Sparrows,
Looses them too, and down he throw•
The Coral of his Lips, the Rose
G•owing on his Cheek, but none knows how,
With these the Crystal of his Brow:
And then the dimple of his Chin,
All these did my Greceana win.
At last he set her both his Eyes,
She won, and Cupped blind did rise.
Oh how has she done this to thee!
What shall alas become of me!
PRincely Lady, how unworthy am I to employ my ser∣vices in honour of your virtues! how hopeless my de∣sires are to enjoy your rare opinion, and much less your love, are only matters of despair, unless you give large warrant to my boldness, my feeble-wing'd Ambition—
My Lord, I interrupt you not.
Oft have I turned the Lesson of my sorrow to sweeten discord and enrich your pity, but all in vain; there had my com∣forts sunk, &amp; near rise again to hear the story of the despairing Lover, had not now, even now, your ingenuous disposition—
Come, out with it.
After some fit disputes of our condition betwixt your Highness and my lowness, gave consent, which did embolden, then encourage my faltering tongue.
How's that? how?
I give consent to your fond fancies leading, which is more pernicious then that under Tongues of Asps, which is most deadly and emidicable?
Though not your hand with your body, Madam, yet your affection, with disposition, (as I understand) gave Li∣cense.
It shall not need my Lord; you are a servant, pleading by the privilege of Nature; though I might command, my care shall only conceal what it hath not forced: I can but make one choice, and it is made ever this.
To whom?
Euphrates..
Ties of Marriage are Tenors not of will, but during life; I want skill to choose without directions of example in this Land; for which I daily learn, by how much more you take upon you the roughness of a Courtier, by so much more I am engaged to
fly from you, by the reason of the duty I owe to Euphrates, for respects of Birth, degrees of Title, and advancement; I nor ad∣mire, nor slight them; all my study shall ever aim at this perfe∣ction, only to live and dye so, that you may see in any course of mine, I still remain in constancy until the thread of Life be cut by Fates.
Madam, remember your self.
It is decreed we must yield to Fate, whose angry Justice though it threaten ruin, contempt, and poverty, is all but try∣al of a weak women's constancy in suffering; here in a strangers and a eminent hand forsaken, and unfurnished of all hopes, but such as wait on misery, I range to meet affliction whereso ere I tread my train; and pomp of servants is reduced to none but rough Jailers and most sad imprisoners; yet yield I not my Lord to them.
SEeing no persuasions will prevail, nor once move thy in∣durable heart, some other means must be invented, which in short time I'll produce; in this same Garden here shall be e∣rected the unhappy Gibbet of thy Fate:
Seeing no persuasions will prevail with thee, there thou shalt hang even for thy constancy.
The churls brow of War (my Lord) is a sight of whore∣roar for Ladies entertainment; if thou hearst a truth of my sad ending by the hand of some unnatural subject, thou with all shall hear how I dyed worthy of my right by falling like a con∣stant Virgin; and in my close, which my last breath shall sound, Euphrates thou comliest, shall sing a Requiem to my soul, unwil∣ling only of great glory, cause divided from such a Heaven on Earth, as life with thee.
I hear she still remembers me; though out of sight, yet not out of mind; shall I make known my self, and by the force of us two, relieve her from that Tyrants hand?
No, by no means; I'll devise a plot that with a little pa∣tience things best becoming our minds it may to us produce.
Let's hear't.
While he his Mistress there is courting, I in the same manner will him counterfeit in courting you; and not able of my self, perceiving to my entreats, yet you give leave, will to him moan make; but why should I relate it any further, let me alone, I will it accomplish.
Then manage it.
Else I will for my bold attempt suffer what your plea∣sure is ready to give sentence.
If you to my love will yield, you shall enjoy the sweet∣nos of liberty and favour, and sleep securely; and is not this now better then to befit the Hang-mans clutches, which certainly you shall do if yield you'll not, or to buy the cordage of a tough Halter, which will break your neck? Be no longer constant, but yield, and hope for pardon.
Oh▪ step to him, else he will mischief her.
Be patient, sir.
For pardon! hold thy heart-strings, whiles contempt of injuries in scorn may bid defiance to thee and base foul Lan∣gauge: Thou poor Vermin! how dare thou creep so near me? thou a Lord! nay, thou a slave▪ why, thou enjoyest as much of happiness as all the sling of slight ambition flew at; a Dung∣hill was thy Cradle; so a Puddle by virtue of the Suns beams, breathes a Vapor to infect the pure air, which drops again into the muddy Womb that first exhales it; bread, and a slavish ease, with some assurance from the Beadles Whip, crowned all thy happiness: But let all the world, as all to whom I am this day a spectacle, time to deliver by tradition six posterities with∣out another Chronicle then truth; Lyon, constantly my resolve∣tions suffered.
What man is he that would suffer himself to be thus a∣bused? I will no longer expect Executioner, but play his part
my self now in his absence; I, poor Vermin, dare thou creep so near? no longer then shall mercy hold this hand, or Love be overswayer of this Weapon; Isle end thy life. He draws his sword
Oh! step to him, I wish now my Women's clothes were off.
Sir, no injury to women do; for that case is mine, though to you unknown; the passages of you two Lovers I have seen, which if it you'd minded, might in like case have perceived mine: Therefore give leave, and yield to nature; be more mise∣rabble, for I shall never endure to see such havoc with dry eyes: Speak, speak the fair Lady.
Sir, let us two Virgins taste your bounty, and both your mercies in this, that at a time of night so late, a place so private as this Garden is, to spare the lives of both us two, and grant that both your valours shall encounter, and upon whom that fortune please to smile, shall make his choice of our two Wills, Bodies, and Affections, and you both covert a liberal grace: Grant to my entreats a happy reply.
To you I yield.
In like manner I intend if this same Lady she be plea∣sed
I am.
Times have their changes, sorrows make men wise;
The Sun it self must set as well as rise.
To morrow then I'll meet you in the Castle Yard, where I'm resolved death or life •here to receive.
There then of youl'le wait in expectation.
Since I this motion here have made, instead of you will meet him there my self.
Will you?
My self I will because I may send his ever boiling blood into the air to breed strange Vapors.
You are resolved?
I am.
THE Act is done.
And no blemish thereby you received?
None; great thanks to Jove I give for this most dan∣gerous Encounter there by me performed, and limiting out my life thus far, to be revenged of him that always desired hate▪ Go fetch Greceana in, take upon you the victory, and challenge your demand.
I shall do any thing wherein I may perform my duty I to you there owe.
Ladies, both of you my Enterprises are, and only by the strength of this poor mortal Arm, which many Herculean Blows hath undergone, which hath been for no other cause but this, That I amongst your servants may be numbered one; but since it hath been the ingenuous disposition of your birth to grant to him, whosoever Fortune gave the victory should en∣joy his choice, therefore whatsoever I make, or service so ever I do, it is to you.
To me, my Lord?
I, to you, and no other person, Madam.
Am I then cast off my Lord? It is no matter, I shall undergo it with as much ease as power doth able me.
I am in that case worse then ever I was; before I was most miserable, but now no misery is to be conceived in comparison of this; seeing my Lord it is my unhappy, or happy Fortune, (I do not know how to term it as yet) to be yours by Lot, not by Consent, I shall desire to know of what A•ian and Nation your valour is descended.
To name my Predecessors to this day, of whose Otto∣mes the structure of this body of mine doth consist, it were a thing too too superfluous; but my Father was a Germane, of a
Noble Blood, and of which Nation I proceed.
A Germane, that's my native Soil, and in which en∣duress the Diadems of my wishes.
Are you of that Country?
I.
Blessed is my soul thus happily to be led amongst my friends, but thinking to have been foes: Madam, in what part? for travellers are somewhat quisitive.
From the Court.
Still happiness doth abound.
We both fair one, from thence doth take our course, and not in any place in which we came as yet did take abode un∣till with wished prosperity we were cast upon this experiential happy Land, in whose bowels I have you found, which causes my future trouble to be now present pleasure
I'm glad of that; but further I'll you examine; There was a person when I there did live, descended of noble blood, Eu∣phrates by his Name, who was a subject to his Majesty, and in great favour with him, if you did know.
We did, Madam.
Is he alive, or dead?
His never dying deeds are still alive; for his valiant acts are such as they'll never be in that Nation out of memory extirpa∣ted, but doth daily show themselves more glorious in their co∣lours; but for his Body, Person, and his Virtues, hath sung a Requies to Elizium, where all the bodies of good men doth lye.
I, for certain Madam, he is dead
Dead!
Oh Heavens, and all your influence▪ do your Justice here upon this body of mine, in doing this unnatural act to try a Women's constancy: Oh my Dear! he's living, still living to do thee service, and I am the man; no breath she still receives: Come blow you Eastern Winds, and all you four Points join here in one to make a prosperous Gale, that by the virtue of that sweet structure, it may breath some life to my dying Love; wherein I may relate my folly in doing this unto her: Oh joyful sight! she breaths; hold her up! give her more air! it's I, it's I
Euphrates thy dear friend, and lo, I strip me from my Woman. Clothes, in which I was disguised from thee, here did undertake this voyage for no other cause but to relieve thee from this bondage of tyranizing Monsters; it was I that kill•d Person thy deadly Foe, and he that was in thy sight I know most heinous: Speak my Dear, speak, if not, I dye with thee; therefore from this most hellish torment speak and relieve me; I know I'm guile∣tie, and it was my folly in doing this, therefore am dutiful to o∣bay the sentence of what Justice you command; here I lye down at thy feet, thy kind Euphrates in his love, but unkind in doing this.
Rise, rise, thou happiest of all men in my sight; I have past some silent time in a slumbering swooned, which for the love of thee was no other cause.
I know it full well, and am ashamed to live, to hear how basely I have unto thee done.
No words of it, but let this word be last,
The joy doth countervail the sorrow past.
Then let that pass, I'm guilty as well as you; fear lest we trench upon vain time too much, and here stand prattling until it hath uptript our lingering heels.
It is true; but I shall ne'er be my own man again, think∣ing how basely I did deal with her: Come fair Greece•na, let's no longer stay upon this unknown ground, but haste away to our native Country.
I am ready to obey, and rejoice to hear the mo∣tion.
SHe's a coming, see you manage it.
Fear not, let me alone, I'll warrant thee Lad: Oh my pretty little Minks! art thou come? here I am in expo∣ctation of thee.
Are you the man of valour that would speak with me.
I am the man of valour, and only valour it self that would speak with thee.
Mrs. He is a man of unknown parts, excellent in birth, and of an undaunted courage.
Is he so? by his show he should be none of these, for he hath a foolish look.
Nay, Mrs. I'm the valorous Gentleman that ever Nati∣on bred; for not long since in streets where I was walking, met with two Constables which charged me with felony, saying I had killed a man▪ but to say truth, I was in that quarrel, where I had my head beaten as soft as a Foot-Ball, upon which I had dyed if I had not been valorous; and then my courage rising, I took one of the Foot-men there standing by, a deadly blow, run∣ning most nimbly away, and throwing over two children that there stood; was not this valour?
I know not what you count valour, sir.
Why, I count all my deeds valour; nay, and besides at that time I was so basely cut, that I run under the Table, where perchance (saving your presence) my Breech stuck out, upon which I had such a blow that I limp ore since; come Nesto, joul my head and this Post together, and see whether I can endure it or no with courage.
I know you are valorous, but Isle try.
With all my heart—Harder—nay harder still—still—Oh! oh! so no more—nay, no more—no more—hold—Do you see now, pretty Sparrow, how I can undergo it.
Excellent, but your Band stands wrong.
Nay, It is my face stands wrong; but I'll use my self no more to this foolish fashion.
Now thou holds thy face crooked.
That's because I would have an eye in my—
Out you beastly, bawdy, blockish, and most nasty fell∣low; you a man of valour, you a man of Clouts; look how eve∣rye joint of his frail body quivers.
It is singing Prick-song.
Isle prick thy Skin full of eyelet Holes.
Nay, is she gone? I'm glad of it; is this your brave Mi∣stress that should be my Wife, that every word will bite off my Nose, and every stroke will punch my Skin full of eyelet Holes? I was never in such a dirty case in all days of my life; I am up to the ears in my own dung.
Avaunt; out you nasty Bare; come along with me.
To my Aunts! oh! by no means to my Aunts; I would not have her know for a Cow.
I say, Avaunt.
Avaunt, nay then Isle go along with you, if you'll be sure to purge me clean, and whip me soundly that I may so no more do.
I Understand it well that you would be in Matrimony with my poor Girl, Medea.
It is true, I have been tossed by Sea and Land to unknown ground, where never habitants was, still none to me that I can find more pleasing to me then Medea; she sits like Sol, berayed with Stars most bright, lighting with her stellation the most te∣nebrosious place of Fercors heart, and I the only spectator not daring to presume to be an Actor, doth pine with despair.
Take you great courage, not daunt your valorous spy∣rit, though you have been my servant, of my poor will now Master is, therefore Isle fetch her, and see what her stout mind will yield unto.
YOU must, you must.
Father, forbear, I cannot.
Madam, may it please your goodness to honour my affe∣ctions so far, as to adorn me with the salutation of your hand.
What, sure instead of professing Navigation, you are turned Courtier, a mere bundle of Complements; I take it for an affront, and my spirit will digest no rude affronts; though I be a Woman by Nature, yet hath a manly courage to disdain you.
Despise not his affection.
Father, if you did know how I do loath the sight of this man,
I am persuaded then you would no further me urge; I cannot give him one good word, much less one pleasing look, or with him dissemble in the Climate of Affection.
Madam, if your frail mind unto one of these particu∣lars will yield, I hope you will not shut me so far out of memo∣rye, but I to have so much privilege in your affection, as to beautify my self with the real Badge of your smiles, and to be reckoned amongst the honoured company of your servants.
Certainly the man doth rave; let him go to bed and have more sleep, and I hope he will be more himself.
Nay, take your choice, if you do make him your by∣word, not yielding to his entreats, be sure your self whenso∣ever your Petition comes to my ear, it shall not once pierce my mind.
Euphrates is the man whom you very well know that ever since I knew the force of Loves Weapons, hath embalmed him up to be the only carper of the Blossoms of my Virginity.
But say Euphrates should be engaged to that only Para∣more of Virgins, Greceana by name, then I hope some other should be the happy Extorser of your youth prime.
What answer you?
That he should.
AFter so many storms as Wind and Seas have threat∣ned to our Weather-beaten ship, at last sweet fairest
we are safely arrived on our dear Mothers earth; ungrateful only to heaven and us, in yielding not before our happy arrival! How forest thou my Dearest yet?
Confirmed in health, by which I may better undergo the roughest face of change; but I shall learn patience to hope, since silence courts affection for comforts to this truly noble Gentleman, rare exampled pattern of a friend.
I wait but as the shadow to the body; for, Madam, without you let me be nothing▪
Though she hath cost me many a redouning blow in fetching her to this her native Land, yet without license of a Fathers will, I will be—
Question not my liberality, my only son, my only dear and and joy; I here embrace thee, likewise wishing thee to embrace Greceana for the sake of me; enjoy her, and take her.
Father your bounty in granting to your child his de∣sire is not to be paralleled; therefore when bright Sol descends his fiery Trigion into the more concavity of the Earth; or pale
Cynthia traces about her Orb; then shall you by real aspect confirm us to be man and wife.
I rejoice to hear it.
Medea, now behold he is gone, whom you thought always had been sure; therefore be no more thus obstinate, but bend your mind to his affection.
Certainly it was ne'er decreed by Fate or Fortune for him and me to be once, made one.
Come then my dearest, thou and Isle be gon,
I hope thus far in my own opinion;
For now you embrace Virginity,
For to embrace wedlock for perpetuity.
My duty still stand obedient to your will, not daring to resist, nor can without breaking a solemn oath: Therefore your pleasure is a command for me to obey with great grati∣tude, thinking to me an immense beatitude.
Wood E's behangd it was a dangerous business I took in hand; for standing, sitting, lying, and tumbling, I believe ne'er a Jack-•udding in town will do it.
Thy reason Pudd.
Ha, ha, ha, I have neither sense nor reason; ha, ha, ha: Stay mess yonder comes my Master; I will go salute him with a rare sentence only of my own brains invention; Oh how my tongue now warbles in my mouth to think of 't! Blew leu leu leu.
Go, go, thou art not mad; why loyterest thou?
Master—
What then?
I am here—
Art thou alive?
Still for you to beat—
Me to beat?
Me into good service.
Thou shat be my man while man I keep,
Seeing how faithfully I thee have beat.
I have been in study ever since you were gone, in Sci∣ences of invaluble worth, and hath profited very little
Name some of those, I desire to hear him talk.
What are they?
Nandivigation, Astronimation, Mucinification, Fid∣lication, and Lutination; Do you understahd me Master, if please your worship?
Very well and excellent.
I am versed but little yet, hoping to be better:
Give over musing, I will thee interrupt, give me my answer:
Father, what your indulgent clemency thinks most convenient for my youth and person, I am ready to give ear:
My mind is to have Fercor:
Parents must have their wills, and children must obey; therefore compelled, Fercor I am thine.
Gladly recevd thou art:
Come all you Hloy Sisters Muses nine,
Unto our Nuptials and us combine,
With solemns most sure ne'er to be broke,
With hanous crimes, or vanished in a smoke;
For shoe's the North-Pole to which all stars doth bend,
And I the Ursa minor doth on her attend.
WIth Tragic sights this Play it doth begin,
But afterwards with mirth it sought to win,
From thence to joy; and not long after
It did produce us Love, with some small laughter;
Seeing it ended in a loving Q•u,
Even so I hope it is with us and you.

TIC not far off, 'Ile ask this Gentleman.
Can you instruct me, sir, where the great
Lady Aurelia Mammon lives?
Yes sir, I can.
Pray do me the civility.
Have you
Affairs with her, my friend in black.
Have you
Relation to the Lady, Sir?
She owns me
A Gentleman-usher, with your pardon Sir,
Are not you inclining to a Scholar?
I have spent time in the Academy.
The Academy?
Another beggar,
I did think so by your serious face, your habit
Had almost cozened me, and your hair, they are
Of the more Court edition, this is
A beggar of the upper form of Learning,
Your business with my Lady,
If you please
To prepare my access—
It is to no purpose,
My Lady keeps no Library, no food
For booke-worms, I can assure you that,
Learning is dangerous in our Family,
She wo'not keep a Secretary for fear
Of the infection.
Does she keep no fool?
Yes, yes, and knaves;
I thought so,
In which class is your name, I beseech you?
We enjoy equal privileges, indeed the knave
Makes somewhat more on's office, but my Lady
Is not so nice, so we can bring Certificates
That we are sound, and free from the infection
Of book's, or can lay down our understandings,
And part with that unnecessary stuffing
In the head, (you know my meaning) or renounce
The impious use of humane art and knowledge,
We are in a capacity of employment;
Perhaps you may, on these terms be admitted
With your Philosophy, and things about you,
To keep her horse, de'e observe?
A fair preferment!
The fittest here for men of art, or if
You can keep counsel and negotiate handsomely
The amorous affair of flesh and blood;
(There you may exercise your parts of Rhetoric.)
How lies your learning that way? it is an office
Many grave persons have submitted to,
And found it a smooth path to court preferment,
But she is here, I'll leave you to your fortune.
With me, your business?
The Lady Honoria, Madam, by me humbly
Presents her service, and this paper to
Your Ladyship.
The Lady Honour? it is
Some borrowing letter.
This is not civil.
I am so haunted with this mendicant
Nobility at every ebb of fortune.
I must be troubled with Epistles from i'm.
What's here? — you are, a Scholar.
I have studied the arts,
Your Lady writes as much, and would
commend you
To my inployment, but I want no Chaplain.
If you did, I cannot flat•, Madam.
I have known wiser men converted by
Preferment.
They were things that had no Souls,
Or use of that bright Entelecheia
Which separates them from beasts.
I did expect
Hard words, and do commend the pure discretion
Of your most learned tribe, that think themselves
Brave fellows, when they talk Greek to a Lady;
Next to the Goth and Vandal, you shall carry
The babble from Mankind, pray tell your Lady,
Learning is out of fashion in my Family,
Why should you be an Enemy to Arts?
The Lamps we wast, and watches, that consume
Our strength in noble studies, are ill paid
With this disdain, your smile would make us happy,
And with your golden beam strike new day
Through learnings universe.
You but loose your time,
I know you are writing some prodigious volume
In praise of hunger, and immortal beggary.
This may in time advance you to a Pedant,
To whip the Town-top's, or gelded Vicaridge,
Some forty Marks per annum, and a Chamber-naid
Commended by your Patron.
You're not worth
My anger, I should else—
What my sweet Satire?
Present your Ladyship with a glass, a true
one.
Should turn you wild to see your own deformity.
I pretheeraile, now for a storm—
I wo'not loose my temper on such a trifle.
But here are two come timely, to disperse
All cloudy thoughts, my diligent daily waiters.
Now Poetry be my speed! my noblest mistress.
What have you there, dear Mr. Fulbanke?
Lines, that are proved to express your beauty,
Madam.
Bless me! turned Poet? I must tell you
Servant,
Nothing in nature is more killing to me.
Umh! I see my Lady Mammon is no wit.
Do'e think I made i'm? I have an Estate, Madam.
I know you have fined for Alderman.
They were a foolish Scholars of the Town,
And I made my address to be confirmed
In your opinion, they were wretched things,
And like the starved composer. The nine Muses
I have read, Madam, in a Learned Author,
Were but a knot of travailing, tawny gipsies
That lived by country canting, and old Songs,
And picking worms out of fools fingers, which
Was palmistry forsooth, and for Apollo
Whom they called Father, a poor silly Piper,
That kept a thatched house upon Cuckolds Hill,
Not far from Helicon, or old Bride•well,
Where he sold switches, till his hut was burned
One night by a tinkers nose, that lay in straw there;
And he, for loss of this poor tenement,
Ran mad, from whence came all the mighty stir,
Of that, which we now call Poetic fury.
It is very likely.
Madam, be your leave,
I am a country-man, what should a man lye for?
I ken no College learning, but I have
Been whipped for latin in my days, that have I;
And have heard talk of the Philosophers stone;
Although I wear not velvet like his worship,
My heart's embroidered with love and I
Defy the man that thinks me insufficient
To do, whats fitting to be done between
You and I Madam, as the best what lack you
Finical-fartical-citt within the walls.
Take heed how you provoke me.
I'll provoke any man living, in the way of
Love.
Did all the Ladies sleep well?
Yes and their Monkeys Madam, and have all
Their several thanks, and services remembered
To your Ladyship— but Madam—
She has left us.
I'll find a time to make, you sensible—
Me sensible?
I defy thee.
Be no• rampant, and thank Heaven
We are not armed.
I scorn it.
Dare thou meet me?
Yes, the next day after Simon and Iude
I dare, when all your liveries go a feasting
By water with your gally foist and pot-guns,
And Canvas Whales to Westmin•ster▪ I am not
Afeared of your green Robin-hoods, that fright
With fiery club your pitiful Spectators
That take pains to be stifled, and adore
The Wolves and Camels of your company.
Next whom the children ride, who innocent things,
What with the Giants, and the Squibs and eating
Too many sugar-plumms, take occasion to
Perfume their Pageants, which your Senators
Ride after in full scent.
Thou horrid Lump
Of leather, course wool, ignorance and husbandry,
Most pitifully compounded, thou that
Hast lived so long a dunghill, till the weeds
Had over-grown thee, and but ten yards off,
Cozened a horse that come to graze upon thee,
Thou miserable thing, that were begot
By the whole Town, thou dare call no man Father,
Found in a hedge, but bred up in a stable,
Wherewith the horse thou did divide the bean's,
Dung like the beast, and were as often curried.
Thus bred, at one and twenty thou were it able
To write a legible Sheeps mark in t•rre,
And read thy own capital letter, like a gallows
In a Cows buttock.
Suffer this?
And more:
Fortune conspiring with thy own ill nature,
That durst be damned for Money, made thee rich,
And then the Countries curses fattened thee,
Time, and thy sordid sins made thee at last
High-Constable, and now thou hast the impudence—
Thou least.
Fear not me Gentlemen, I am your friend,
A friend to both your honours; here, be noble
You have a just cause, and a gallant Mistress
Persons of your quality, to fight thus
For bloody noses, too't like Gentlemen,
And draw blood handsomely, he that gets the victory
Shall ha my Lady, and a pardon, though
It cost her half a Million, so I leave you.
Here will I stay, and observe both their valours.
We are betrayed.
I do not like these tools.
It is not for my credit to be killed,
If he have but the courage to advance,
I am no Merchant-taylor of this World,
And yet he looks less rampant. Sirrah Maslin—
I were best deliver up my cold iron, here.
He does approach.
And yet I wo'not. Fulbanke.
I am of thy opinion, we are both
Betrayed; for my own part, although I carry
No flesh that fears a sword; yet I do not
Affect to have devices put upon me.
Tic something thou hast said; this may be •
plot;
Some third man has projected by our ruins
To make his path smooth to my Lady Mammon;
And thus her Squire promotes it.
A consp•racy!
I read it in the rascals face, too't quoth
Like Gentlemen• no, they sha'not laugh at me.
And my Lady had a mind to ha my throat cut,
She shall excuse me.
To my wishes! but
I am not satisfied,
We can without some blood come off with honour,
You know th'affront was mine, and though I wot not
Have my revenge writ in too deep a crimson,
Yet something must be done, it will be public,
And we may still be laughed at.
Thou say right,
Things cannot well be cleared without some blood.
I have considered, and you shall be satisfied,
So, I have made fine work, the Bore will
fight now.
The credit of a wound will serve, thus
then—
Stay, I have a device will bring us both off.
Why may not we consent to give each other
A careless wound in the leg, or arm, and so
March off with honour?
This knack was in my very thoughts, it is
Ex'lent.
But since I named it first, it is my invention,
And I will strike the first blow,
hanged, I pass not,
But gently then, a scratch ith arm, or hands
Enough, a small thing does it, gently, oh!
Thou hast cut of my Sword hand, this is foul play,
I cannot hold my tool now.
But stoop to reach it,
I'll cut thy head off, Ith field we must
Use all advantages. This weapon's mine too.
Farewell, and say I have used thee honourably.
Ha. ha. ha. are you hurt Sir?
I see the Alderman has outwitted you.
Let me see, ha? a scratch, a very scratch;
Bear up, there may be ways to your revenge,
Leave not your applications to my Lady.
He counsels this, that will assist you — but
I ever thought your habit much beneath
The person that should court so great a Lady.
It smells too much ot'h •eame, I know you're rich.
Air, air your gold, and make your body clinkant,
The rest commit to fate, and me, consult
Your Taylor.
And my Surgeon; Sir I thank you.
You do not know, how I am contriving for
you.
That very word has cured me. I'll about it.
So, when ther's no other mischief to be
done,
Let them go on, and love my Lady Mammon;
I'll assist one, in hope the t'other may
Go hang himself, and then it will be hard
To judge, which of the two has the better fortune.
Bless me but with one smile, if you did know
With what devotion my Soul looks on you,
How next to my Religion I have placed,
(If not above it,) your diviner beauty—
Your name is Alamode, a Courtier.
It is sweetened by Honoria's breath,
I have
No stock of pefum'd words to court you, Madam,
Can you affect a man? A soldier?
When I have marched upto a breach, which looked
Like Hell with all his sulphurous flames about it;
My heart was fixed on honour, and I took
From gaping wounds the fleeting Souls about
me
Into my own, and fought with all their spirits;
The mangled bodies that I trod upon,
(For now the dead had buried all the Earth)
Gave me addition to Heaven where, in,
My strong imagination I saw
Thee from thy Chariot dropping down a Garland.
You are a Colonel.
I profess a soldier Madam.
It appears a bold one; art thou come Alworth.
What said the Lady Mammon?
One that has some relation to her person.
They call him Alworth, and I have observed
She looks on him with favour above a Servant,
He has not the impudence to court his Lady
So peremp•ory? what a strange monster wealth
is?
I have but made a trial of her friendship,
And had no meaning thou should leave me
Alworth,
Depend upon my care, I know your parts;
And shall not be forgetful of their merit.
But thou art come most seasonable to relieve me.
I do not like their whispering.
If you please, Madam, to absent your self,
Leave me to the excuse.
Do so, dear Alworth.
I am happy when you command me service.
Be confident, I keep a silent register of all,
And shall reward them.
Your own virtues guide you.
My Lady's gone.
But has commanded me to let you know
Her resolution, she hath found you both
Ambitious of honour, both deserving,
And such an equal furniture of merit,
She has no art to reconcile her thoughts
Into one fortunate choice.
It is very strange.
The Gordian, which great Alexander
could not
By subtlety dissolve, his sword untwisted;
I use her own words, Gentlemen, you may
Infer, that you must either quit your courtship,
Or by your selves agree, who best deserves her,
And dare do most to merit such a mistress.
How, best deserves her?
And dare do most,
I should interpret this to fight for Honour.
But you can best expound, and so I leave you.
What says my perfumed Alamode to this?
Will not a sword quite spoil your satin Doublet,
And let in too much air? your lips and language
Bathed in the oil of Gessamine will not carry her,
You have worn a sword thus long, to show the hi•t,
Now let the blade appear.
It shall. I have yet
No ague, I can look upon your buff,
And punto beard, yet call for no strong-water,
I am no Tavern gull, that want protection,
Whom you with oaths do mortify and swear
Into the payment of your ten pound surfeits;
Upon whose credit you wear belt and feather,
Top and Top-gallant. Go to your Landab—
It'h new Brothel, she's a handsome leverett,
If she deny free quarter, tear her trinkets,
Make Cu••ice of the Matron, yet be friends
Before the Constable come in, and run
Ot'h ticket for the dear disease.
Go on sir.
I will have patience three minutes longer,
To hear thy scurrile wit, and then correct it.
Answer but one cool question, if Honoria
Should possibly descend to think well of thee,
And by some philtre should be brought to love
thee.
What Jointure could we make, what's the per annum?
Have you done yet?
It is not impossible,
You may have a Catalogue of Town's and Leaguers
The Names of Bridges broken down, your nose
In time may keep them company in Landscape:
You will tell of Bulwark•, Barricade, Fort's.
Of outworkes, half moons, spurs, and parapets
Of turnepikes, flankers, Cats and Counter-scarfs,
These things will hardly pawn with Jew or Christian;
But i'll come closer to you, you may have
In ready wounds some twenty, i'll admit,
And in diseases can assure her forty;
This wo'not do, she cannot eat a knapsack,
Or carry baggage, lye in your foul hut,
And roast the pullen, for whose precious theft,
You and the gibbet fear to be acquainted.
If you return into your wholesome Country,
Upon your honourable wooden legs,
The houses of Correction have but thin
Accommodations, nor the Hospitals.
It does appear by all this impudence,
And little wit pi•fer'd, and put together,
You do not know me.
Cry your mercy, Sir.
You are a great Field-officer, are past
These petty things, but if these times preserve
Their smooth complexion, it wo'not be
Ten hundred thousand pistols to a ••iver,
But you may run this gantlope once again.
You imagine you have stung me now, and
that
I think my self concerned in this keen character?
I tell thee (wretched thing,) thou doest not reach
A Soldier, it is a name, three Heavens above
Thy Soul to understand, and it were a sin
Would lessen our own worth, to make thee know it.
You are a Courtier.
Very good.
Nay rather.
A very impious one, you shall confess it,
Or I will cut your throat, this is no canting.
Very fine.
Nay we know you are a fine Gentleman,
A Taffata-sattin-plush-embroydered-
Lac'd-scarlet-tissue-cloath-a-bodkin devil;
Pride is thy meat and drink, thy Library,
And thy Religion, thy new clothes only
Bring thee to Church, where thou dost muster, all
The fashions, and the trinkets, to the last
New button, upon which thy conscience sits,
And as the devil guides it, dost condemn,
Or save the people, that done, not the window's
Scope thee, for thou wooed quarrel with the pictures,
And find fault with the Apostles, for not having
A better Taylor, these Sir are your virtues,
Your high, and holiday devotions.
What moral vices follow in the week,
Is best known to the devil, your close friend,
That keeps the Catalogue, yet one touch of them;
Thy lust has no bounds, when thy blood's a fire,
Thou leap'st all like a Satire, without difference
Of kindred, or acquaintance; and were those
But summoned, whom thy body hath infected,
They would stuff an Hospital, and out-stinke the
Pest-house.
And yet I walk upon these poor supporters.
How long the Surgeon knows.
These all my faults?
No, those are but thy Peccadi••ioes,
Thy ma•ice is behind, thou wooed not take a bribe
To undo a Nation, sell thy Country men
To as many persecutions, as the devil
Or Dutch men had invented at Amboyna;
With all this stock of villainy, thou hast
An impudence—
I'll hear no more,
A little i'll entreat you, all is but
A preface to your bearing, which must follow,
Your tribe will bear it.
Then have at you Sir.
You're very nimble Courtier.
As you see.
Good Monsieur Quicksilver,
You may be fixed.
And your arrear's be paid.
What think you now?
It is your fortune Sir.
You're at my mercy, ask your life?
I scorn it.
I'll kill you then.
A boy may do as much
At this advantage.
Will you not ask your life?
No it is not worth it.
And't be not worth your asking, it is not
Worth
My taking at this posture, there's your weapon,
Rise, use it again.
It shall be thus to render it.
Though I was not so base to beg my life,
Yet since you have given it me, I scorn to employ it
Against one that was the master on it,
This is gallantry.
You taught it first.
In spite of all the Widows in the World
We will be friends.
I meet it Colonel.
And for the Lady Mammon—
We'll take our chance.
A match, now let us to the Tavern.
I Think I have brought your business we
about, Sir.
Thou hast obliged me everlastingly:
Nay nay, be covered, thou art my best friend.
It was but Justice to advance your merit
With all the Retorick I had, for where
In prudence, could my Lady Mammon place
Her self with more advantage to her fame?
A widow of a thousand pound per annum Jointu•
With some few present bags of musty Gold,
Old Plate, and hungry household-stuff would serve
The Country well enough.
Excellent Phantasm
Where the report of building a Free-school
And now and then an alme-house for old women,
With five teeth and a half among sixteen,
Would make a mighty noise, and the poor hinds
Wonder, there's so much money left in nature.
The City is her only sphere of glory.
Right, very right.
Here My Lady Mammon.
(Yours now as things are ordered)
Good.
May have high and noble ways to employ
her treasures.
Do things above the vulgar admiration,
Surround the City with a wall of Silver,
Transmute dull Leaden-hall to Gold, rebuild
The great Cathedral of St. Pals with Porphyry
And clap so bright a spire upon it, shall make
The Sea-man afar off wonder what new
And never setting star, Heaven hath created
To make the day eternal in this Island.
My own Phantasm.
There is no end, Sir, of herwealth, if you
Have but the patience to spend, you may
Out-do the Roman Luxuries.
I'll give thee my Gold-chain.
O'h no, it may do you better service, Sir,
About your own neck hereafter; for all this
Infinite Treasure that she brings you, Sir,
What Jointure do you make her?
You are mortal.
I ha thought of that,
I will secure my whole Estate upon her?
Beside her own, I have no kindred, that
I care for, they are poor, and as my pride,
While I am living, will not look upon i'm,
At death, it will be wisdom to forget them.
It would endear my Lady much, if you
Surprise her with this act, before she think on'•.
I would have you do things gallantly —
You shall
Give the direction to my Counsel;
His name.
A very honest able eminent person,
One Mr. Traverse, see it done your self.
My Lady will take it well, without all
do bt, Sir.
But shall I engage your trouble —
It is an honour;
I'll give him order to dispatch all presently.
He is a very honest man you say.
He's right, I know him intus &amp; in Cute.
My Lady, Sir, leave things to me.
My most divine Aurelea!
Dear Mr. Fulbanke,
I have no happiness but in your presence,
When shall the work be perfect?
I was considering,
It would become the glory of my Bride,
To have some state, and triumph at our marriage,
I know the City will expect we should
Accept some entertainment, perhaps Pageants,
And speeches to congratulate our Nuptial.
Twill please me much.
There may be prejudice in these delay's,
Oh Sir, the state is all; what thinks your
Ladyship?
We will have tilting too, and feats of Chivalry
At Court where I'll defend my Aurelia Princess,
In the guilt armour that I mu•tered in,
And the rich saddle of my own perfuming,
I'll have my squires, my plumes, and my devices,
And with my lance encounter the whole mirror
Of Knight-hood, and compel the foreign Princes
To hang up all the Tables of their Mistresses
As Trophee's to my most victorious Mammon.
Without some cure he will be mad immedi∣italy.
Present my humblest service to Honoria,
Say I am all obedience to her commands,
Were I in Heaven, this invitation
Would have the power to draw me thence, I kiss
Her fairest hand, this for your favour,
Mr. Fulbanke,
Please you to know my Lady Sir?
If I mistake not the Lady Aurelia;
Widow to the late high Treasurer, Sir
Omnipotent Mammon.
But are you Master of this rich Peru?
She will please to own me, ha?
It is but Justice.
A thousand streams of joy flow in your by∣soms,
I'll take some fortunate hour to visit you,
And with an humble lip print my devotions
On your white hand.
You'll do me an honour sir.
Some high affairs compel this rude depar∣ture,
But you have mercy to excuse your servant.
What heaps of words some men have got
together
To signify nothing?
How do you like this Gentleman?
These Courtiers are another sort of flesh-flies,
That haunt our City dames, but we must wink,
Or loose our Chatter?
Bless the Body Politic.
By your leave Gentlemen.
What Pageant's this?
Where De'e think I have been, Madam?
At the Brokers.
At the Exchange by these silke-stockings,
Mr. Usher— a word to the wise,
If they will fit your rolling pin, they are paid for;
Perhaps the wages you receive in your
Relation to my Lady, wo'not find you
Convenient vanities. Now I'm for you Madam.
In good time.
I wanted but your hand,
I could ha fitted you with gloves, but here are
Some trifles for the finger, you must wear
This Diamond, and this Ruby,
De'e understand
What you do sir?
And here's a casting Net of Pearl.
A Carkane•? these will deserve—
Tell not me of desert, I hate it perfectly,
Hang toys and yellow rubbish that paid for i'm,
How De'e like my clothes?
Sir I am concerned to thank you for these fa∣vours.
You? prithee away, I ha nothing to say to
thee?
We have no other gratitude sweet-heart,
But to invite him to our wedding.
Wedding? Phantasm.
And you had come but half an hour
sooner,
This very shape had don't.
Do not, do not make me mad too soon.
You have been very bountiful, and we pray
Your noble presence at our Festival,
Which we have deferred to be attended with
Some Triumph, such as may become the City,
And my dear Ladies honour, is it not so,
My America? look how the oyster gapes.
Leave him to chew his Country cud, come Madam.
Sir I confess.—
And be hanged, I am undone, and I could
cry now.
Sir,
You have been at a great charge to go without her,
Such rings, and Carknet, beside the cost
Of this fine habit? for your bounty, Sir,
Bestowed on me, the unworthiest of your Servants,
I have a gratitude, if you please to accept it.
What is it? a halter or a knife to cute me,
Or a comfortable poison?
It is the first
You named, a most convenient, neatly twisted
Halter, for I do see your inclinations,
And shall commend your fortitude, beside
Twill show a brave contempt upon their scorns.
And who know's, how the example, Sir, may spread
To cure some o•her mad men that love widows.
You have my judgement and the cord for nothing,
Lose not the nick of the next beam you come at,
No way like this to be High-Constable.
Here, take my clothes; I will be mad, and
hang
My self immediately; — and yet I will consider,
Till the ayre be a little warmer; when I have
Cut Fulbanks throat, it is but a hanging afterwards.
It is good to be ma•icious, and wise;
Some notable revenge would be worth all
My cost, and then a sico for the Devil.
Please you to have a little patience
I shall acquaint my Lady that you're come, Sir.
Before you go, dear Sir, I know your pru∣dence
And near employment with my Lady, has
Endeared you to part ache some of her Counsels;
You shall obliege a very humble Servant,
To let me know how she affects, you reach
My meaning, by what motive am I sent for?
My Lady keeps the key of her own Cabinet,
But if you'll have my Judgement on the scheme,
I think my Lady will this day determine
Her choice, I incline the rather to this Judgement,
Because the Colonel is sent for too.
My attendance is expected, Sir, your pardon.
Ha music.
I like this well
My Lady will appear presently,
I'll give her knowledge, if you please.
Your favour, Sir,
You are learned beyond books, what's your opinion
Of my Lady, in relation to things at present?
What do you think of me?
My thoughts are much
Too narrow to conclude your worth, which left
An object for Divine Honoria's wisdom,
Must only take from her, a worthy character
And just reward.
I like this preface.
My noble Colonel, thy Servant.
Excuse the trouble that I give you Gentle∣men,
You're welcome, and thus knit into a friendship,
Your persons have more grace, and shine upon i'm.
Some chairs, pray sit. I see you both preserve
Your fair respects to honour, and I have
After some pause, and serious dispute
Within my self, collected now at last,
Upon whose person to repose my self,
My fortune, and my same, and since but one
(Where many may deserve) can wear the Gar∣land
The loser must content himself with his fate,
And wait a kinder providence.
It is but Justice.
This wreath of baize, emblem of victory,
Must crown his head to whom I fall a Conquest,
Forgive the Ceremony.
Oh it is very pleasing,
I like it well, Madam, and commend your
fancy.
You, Sir, were bred up in the School of ho∣nor,
The Court, this may not unbosom your Temples,
Wise Courtiers are the Jewels of a Crown,
The Columns and the ornaments of state,
Fitted with parts; and piety to act:
They serve the Power for Justice, not themselves;
Their Faith the Cabinet, in which is laid
The Princes safety, and the Nations peace,
The Oracles, and the mysteries of Empire;
Men borne above the forded guilt of avarice,
Free as the mountain air, and calm as mercy.
Borne without Eyes, when the poor man complains
Against the great oppressor, without hands,
To take the bloody price of mans undoing,
But keeping at each sense a Court of Guard,
Draws fear from Love, and teaches good by example.
Divine Honoria.
You must give me leave,
To try, how it becomes his brow; me thinks
With the same grace, in dwells upon his head,
Does he not look like mighty Iulius now,
When he returned triumphant from the Gaules,
Or bringing home the wealthy spoils of Egypt,
Pontus, and Africa▪ allow him but
The same commands, and men to fight, why may not
His Valour equal what is famed in story,
Archiev'd by the great souls of Rome, and Carthage?
A soldier merits first to be called man,
By whom not only Courts but Kingdoms flourish,
Unto whose several offices, the World
Owes all the great and glorious names of honour.
How would the age grow rue•lie, and the soul
Of Commonwealths corrupt with ease, and surfeits,
Should not the sword call i'm to exercise,
And sweat out their unmanly Luxuries,
By acting things worth envy, even of Princes.
The honour of the Gown without his sword,
Will run it self into contempt, and Laws
Are not good made, but while the sword secures i'm.
The Court must wear no silk, nor the proud City
Make the Sea groan with burden of her wealth,
Did not the active soldier, with expense
Of his dear blood, expose himself abroad,
Their convoy, and security at home.
I am transported.
Give me the same favour
To let me look a little on this Chaplet,
To which I have annexed my self a Labell.
Me thinks the Trifle looks, as it had lost
Some Verdure since I took it from your heads,
The Courtier, and the Soldier both inviting
In such a high degree of merit, hinders
The progress I should make, but pardon me,
I shall soon quit the Labyrinth.
What's the meaning?
I would you were not two, or that one had
Less of desert, when you are both in balance,
Have you no art, Gentlemen, to contract
Your selves into one person?
It is not possible.
Think you so? it is worth the experiment,
Come hither Alworth.
Madam.
Nay come nearer,
This is a Scholar, Gentlemen, and the cloud
He wears, removed, for he's no more a Servant,
May bring him into a civil competition:
Me thinks it fits him, your opinion?
We are in a fair way to be ridiculous, what
think you?
Chiaus'd by a Scholar?
Are you in earnest Madam?
I repent not
The placing of it there, in him do meet
The Courtier and the Soldier, at least
He's not without the best capacity
Of both your words, when they have brightest lustre.
There is no remedy.
Would I had Mammon.
Gentlemen stay, &amp; hear the Scholars character.
No thank you Madam, we have heard too
much,
Fortune has given you Laurel, and us willow.
May your wreath flourish, Sir?
Soul of my muse! what active unknown
fire
Already doth thy Delphic wreath inspire?
Of the sudden how my faculties swell high,
And I am all a powerful Prophecy.
Sleep ye dull Caesars, Rome will boast in vain
Your glorious Triumphs, one is in my brain
Great, as all theirs, and circled with thy baize,
My thoughts take Empire ore all Land, and Seas.
Proof against all the Planets, and the stroke
Of Thunder, I rise up Augustus Oak,
Within my guard of Laurel, and made free
From age, look fresh still, as my Daphnean tree:
My fence's narrow yet, till I create
For thee another World, and in a state
As free as innocence, shame all Poets wit,
To climb no higher than Elizium yet;
Where the pale Lovers meet, and teach the groves
To sigh, and sing bold legends of their Loves.
We will have other flights, and taste such things
Are only fit for sainted Queens and Kings.
All that was Earth falls of, my spirits free,
I have nothing left now, but my Soul and thee.
What means this Ecstasy? this was not
meant,
Unless you use my favours with less insolence,
I can repent, and frown i'm back to nothing.
Have you forgot your distance? can a smile
And this green trifle forfeit your discretion,
Or make me less, than when you were my Servant
I look you should be humble still,
Good Heaven!
What unexpected, most prodigious cloud,
With his black wings, hath in a minute veiled
The brightest day, that ever smiled upon me?
Did not you place it here?
It is confessed,
As an encouragement to your virtue, Sir,
No Conquest of Honoria, yet you triumph,
And make me blush as I had courted you.
O do not charge my thoughts with such a stain,
This might deserve your anger, and vouchsafe me
The boldness to say Madam, if you punish
My hasty application of your favours,
You gave me the encouragement to be guilty.
It is a tyranny to cherish Servants,
And punish their obedience.
But when •lattered by
Pride, which darkes the soul, you challenge
And measure the reward by your own fancy,
You loose the noblest recompense of service,
And merit but the hire of common duties;
It is possible, that Gold may satisfy
My debt to your employment.
Till this minute
I was not lost, but having heard this, Madam,
You must do something like a miracle
To save me now;— I dare contemn your Gold,
And am compelled to ask your Justice, what
Action since I had reference to honour,
Looked with a mercenary stain upon it?
Gold is a pay for souls of dark complexion.
I served you for your self, and since I'm thought
Beneath the merit of your smile, I'll make
My self above the price of sordid contracts,
For I can with as much ease despise your wealth,
As I can shift the ayre, I take my leave,
And can pray for you in a Wilderness.
Come back, this minute every cloud is vanished
That did present displeasing forms: I find
Thy soul is pure, forgive this Trial, thou hast
Deserved me best.
I dare not understand you now.
The language is not hard.
I want a name, to call this blessing by,
Then I may kiss your hand, and may I not,
Madam approach your lip, and be forgiven?
Now I begin to doubt.
My Faith?
That I am not awake, or if I be
That I am short-lived, and must soon dissolve
Under this storm of happiness; ha? it is come
And I have lost my courage of the sudden.
Your pardon Madam, something gathers here
That wo'd surprise my heart. I am ashamed on it.
Who waits, contribute your best help to his
Support, convey him gently to his chamber,
Run for Physicians, thy good genius guard thee.
I am not Worth your fears.
And worth my love?
That very word should cure me,
I have been
Too much, I fear unkind, to both our dangers.
wait at the door, my Clients are so
numerous
And pressing with their suites, they almost stifle
me.
Let me enjoy the air of my own Chamber;
I think I have lost some lungs in the last cause.
Let me indulge a little to repair i'm,
A glass of the Greek wine, The Italian Merchant
Presented me, and let the Term go on,
I'll drive the Law at leisure, and o'er take it.
So so, this looks sprightly,
Be careful of this Treasure, it is my blood,
Wast not one drop, upon thy life I charge thee.
Wast quoth?
You shall not prove a wast, I'll warrant you.
So, so, remove.
Sir your Idolaters, the Writs are come.
The weather's ho•, let no more spirits enter,
Now like the sovereign Bee, methinks I sit
•n my prodigious hive, surveying all
•y winged, industrious people, bringing honey,
•nd making wax more precious than▪ a trade
•o both the Indies. My good Emissaries,
•nd faithful spirits of the Law, descend
•o your infernal shades, until I call you,
A Gentleman desires to speak with you Sir,
•rome the Lady Mammon.
Admit him.
What a fine thing this Term is?
•nd what an ungodly time, the long Vacation?
Sir, I'll not hold you long, I know you have
business,
•here have past some overtures of love and marriage,
•etween your City Client, Mr. Fulbank,
•nd the Mistress that I serve, the Lady Mammon.
•nd you should draw a Deed to settle on her
•is whole Estate, if she survive, as Jointure—
I understand you Sir.
I am glad you do, this Sir is his desire,
•nd to have all dispatched with expedition.
Very well.
But the reason of my coming is
To desire you sir, to let all this
Alone, there is another thing, that will
Concern you more materially.
Your meaning?
You are not married.
I enjoy a freedom.
My Lady Mammon has a vast Estate,
And is a widow, you do understand?
Her name is precicus to the World.
The VVorld's an ass, you look like wiseman,
You have a good face, and a handsome person
Under a Gown, you have a good Estate too;
I am a Servant, that have credit with her,
By my relation; and I have no mind,
The City Mule, your Client, should break
His back with burden of his gold; in short,
I wish you well, and if you have the confidence
To make a motion for your self, this high
And mighty widow, may be yours; I'm plain.
Say you so?
I'll bring her to you, and prepare her too,
Have I been tedious sir,
My better Angel!
Legions attend my Lady, trouble not
Your head why all this kindness from a stranger.
I had a revelation to do thus;
Have a strong faith, and think upon it, your Servant.
If within half an hour she visit you,
Think it no dream, and thank me afterwards,
Now leave your wonder, and be wise.
Can this be true? it is not impossible.
This is a pretty vision would I had her.
If she appear I may believe, and prosper.
The tide is coming in,
Mr. Maslin the High-Constable, a good man
And full of causes.
What intrusion's this?
I have given a sop to Cerberus your door∣keeper.
Of Mr. Maslin you are become a stranger.
It is not for want of love to be at Law.
Your worship knows, I am apt to trouble you,
And the whole County where I live.
Your business?
Sir, it is extraordinary, and I desire
Beside your learned worships fees, to pay
For expedition.
You speak reason.
I do abound in reason, look you Sir
It is all of this complexion; here's a piece
For every day till the next Term begin,
And two for every day it lasts.
Have a care of your health, good Sir;
And you of your spectacles.
What must I do for this?
Do? you must undo
A friend of mine.
A Friend?
We are all friends in Law, Sir,
Never did man suffer so fast an injury,
And therefore take him to your legal malice▪
Has he killed your Father?
VVorse, worse:
Made a whore of your sister?
VVorse than that:
Ravished your wife?
VVorse than all that, and yet this comes the
nearest,
H•s cheated me of my wench; a widow Sir
That has more money than all your profession
Has got, since the dissolution of the Abbeys.
In short, this is the Case, Fulbanke, the City
Gulf has swallowed my Lady Aurelia
Mammon.
O Caniball!
Devoured my widow, wife
That should ha been, this man I hate, this man
Must be undone, and there's part of the money.
The Lady Aurelia Mammon?
That very Polcat; but I must tell you Sir,
They are not married yet, if you have now
A dainty Devil to forbid the banes—
Although this be a case, more pertinent
To the Court Ecclesiastical, yet,
Let me consult my Law-giver.
Sir, so I may
Be revenged, I stand not much upon it,
Who has this Mammon, let the Devil take her,
Or your worship take her, it is all one to me.
Hum! I shall stretch a point of Law for you.
You shall have your desire, I do expect
Her presence instantly,
Is that a conjuring book, expect her in∣stantly?
Now i'll pronounce you master of your wishes,
For you shall have—
The widow?
What is sweeter than the widow,
You Sir, shall have revenge, and Mr. Maslin
To vex him more, de'e observe I will have the widow,
My self.
You will, and what shall I have?
Sir, you shall have revenge, revenge, the joy
Of flesh and blood, life and delight of nature,
The poor mans Luxury, and the rich mans bath,
Above all wealth or widows Sir. Mr. Maslin,
I'll tame his blood, and his Estate by Law,
While you shall crack your spleen with mirth and
laughter,
And wonder at my subtle arts to vex him.
All this is reason.
This shall be done by Law for the High-Con∣stable.
The Lady's come; this Gentleman
Has studied the black art.
Do you withdraw, and leave me opportunity
To wind the widow up.
Behind the Hangings;
Vouchsafe your Servant touch your hand,
your lip
Is an ambition more becoming Princes:
I am not proud, where fair salutes invite
me.
I come to give you a little trouble, Sir.
Madam command me, to the extent of all
My faculties.
His faculties? that will carry her,
She is a glittering fairye, but he'll conjure her.
Stay if he takes this prize, what shall have
For all my expenses! that's considerable;
Oh, I shall have revenge he says; the widow
Were much the better▪ but we must be ruled
By our learned Counsel.
You have order from
A Gentleman of the City, Mr. Fulba•ke,
To draw up writings, sir—
A Jointure Madam.
But I received a Countermand.
From whom?
From p•ovidence that would not suffer such
An excellent Lady to be lost, and thrown
Among the City rubbish.
Do you know Mr. Fulbanke Sir?
As much, as I do wonder at his impudence,
And saucy ambition with his mean deserts
To look at such a blessing; your fortunes
Are worth you• preservation, and a man
Whose art, and serious knowledge in the World
May fence it in from a rapine, and that greater
Enemy to an Estate, pro•usion.
Excuse my plainness Madam.
It is a Truth.
Can you vouchsafe your smile upon a Ser∣vant,
To whose faith and care you safely may commit
A Treasure of more value than the World,
Your self; in me behold him Madam, one
That would devote his soul a Sacrifice
To be for ever burning in those beams,
There is no Law, but in your breast, your lips,
Preserve the Nations Oracle.
This Language
Doth taste too much of Poetry, take heed, Sir.
If this dislike you Madam, I can court you
In a more legal way, and in the name
Of Love and Law arrest you, thus
Arrest me?
And hold you fast imprisoned in my arms,
Without or bail or maineprize.
This does well.
I can do better yet, and put in such
A declaration, Madam, as shall startle
Your merriest blood
I may put in my answer.
Then comes my replication, to which
You may rejoin, Currat Lex. shall we?
Join issue presently?
He'll have her se defendant•.
What do you think of this, Sir?
They are very familiar.
It is he, the very he, come as my heart
Could wish to his vexation.
Is this the honest Gentleman
You trusted, Sir;
Who attends?
My passion stifles me.
Are you come
My delicate• Devils cut in way? let him not
Approach too near, he can take measure
Of his forehead at this distance.
These were my fears, marriage had made sure work,
I was against your stay for tilts, and triumphs.
It is Mr. Fulbanke.
Would any strumpet vex an honest man thus?
Strumpet; you shall have suell to this jea∣lousy.
Excellent Pigeons! admirable Spiders! ha,
ha, ha.
I'll be revenged.
Cu••at Lex.
Excuse me, Sir, I must follow the Law,
Joy Mr. Fulbanke, and a whole bundle of ba•bies▪
ha, ha, ha.
Your wedding day was notably deferred
To be attended with more Ceremony,
And such an antimasq•e of sucking Devils.
He looks like the pied Pipe• in Germ•ny,
That undertook to cure the Town of Rats,
And now the fry of Vermin dance about him.
I am left to chew my Country cud, an ass,
A ridden-empty-pated-sordid Coxcomb:
You do command in chief o'er Cuckolds sconce
Or Haven, to which all the Tups strike sail,
And bow in homage to your Sovereign Antlers.
Most high and mighty half moon, Prince of Becos.
And so I kiss your hoof.
Well; if there be money and malice in the
City,
Expect a black revenge upon ye all.
My nimble Lawyer thinks he has got my
Lady,
And hugges his happiness, my next work shall be
To spoil his practice, mischief is my office.
Most noble Alamode,
My old acquaintance?
I am proud that you will own me, Sir, your
Creature.
When is this day of Triumph in the City.
For high and mighty Fulba•ke, and your Ladies
So much expected marriage?
At the Greek Calends;
My Lady's has left the Alderman already.
He may now change his Heraldry, and give
In's coat an armed beast at the new bull-ring
In a field dirt.
whether is she gone prithee?
To Travers sir, who has yet no Term for
life.
Your hopes thrive I guess in the fair Honoria.
She's a haggard too.
Possible?
She has gulled us learnedly,
And took the Scholar, in few months you'll hear
Her brought to bed of Philosophy, she's gone,
And I may as soon hope to re•rive thy Lady,
My Lady? with your pardon, gentle sir,
Can you find in your self any warm thought,
Or meaning to my Lady?
Could I wish
To live, and look at happiness?
You have been a noble Patron to me.
What can thou do?
Do, I can do the office of a Gentleman,
And you shall go your part, and perhaps owner.
Make me so happy.
I'll conduct you,
You come in the opportunity.
My stars conspire to make me a full hap∣pines,
Since, fame spread my intended marriage
With Lady Mammon, methinks the people
Look on me with another face of fear,
And admiration, in my thoughts I see
My self already in the Throne of Law,
In which the petty purples waite, dispersing
As I incline to frown, or smile, the fate
Of trembling mortals,
He is returned.
Where is thy Lady, thou art (I observe) her
favourite.
And must be mine;
She's in her Chamber sir.
Come I will have it so, thou art too humble,
It is a becoming Duty, My ambition
Will be to observe the wonder of your happiness,
And how you'll rise to greatness, and to glory,
By matching with my Lady,
You are not
A stranger to her closet, it will be
An engagement to acquaint me with her temper.
She is a woman, Sir, but you are wise.
Nay, nay, I must know her nature.
It is very gentle, she is angel Gold,
And you may bend her as you please, she is
A teeming Lady too.
What Children?
All provided for, they'll not trouble you,
She has a thousand friends.
Thou art kind, proceed—
You are a Gentleman,
Whose wisdom I may trust, I should not use
This freedom else.
Thou moist tell me any thing.
She loves to be abroad, and to disperse
Her shine upon some persons that adore her,
That's all her fault, she wo'not be confined, Sir;
And how the softness of your nature will
Consent, to keep her under lock and key—
Umh! if she be so volatile, I must
Hang weight upon her, twill be necessary.
Retain thy wisdom and observe my Lady,
It is my duty, Sir.
My noble Client.
I ha not leisure to ask how go causes.
Yours will be heard, the first day of the
Term.
I build upon your care.
You may be confident,
Neglect my Doctor, to whose care, and art
I owe my lungs, and life?
Oh you are pleasant,
But I am now engaged, and shall desire
I may be excused, you know my Lady Honoria▪
She is not sick.
No, but a Gentleman
Whom she declares most precious to her, is,
(In the height of expectation, and fair hopes
To have been her husband,) desperately fallen Sick,
And now I think on it, it is my wonder, you
Made no addresses timely to that Lady.
Men that are eminent in Law, are wont
To be ambitious of Honour.
Oh Sir
It is a maxim in our politics,
A Judge destroys a mighty practiser.
When they grow rich, and lazy, they are ripe
For honour.
You have Sir a swelling fortune.
I have Mammon, I think, and for my own
part
Can easily consent to accept of Lordship.
If this man take the toy, and dye, she's worth
Your thoughts, my learned in the Laws, I wish
Sir I could serve you.
Nay, nay prithee Doctor.
The Gentleman may suffer,
If he dye,
You and I shall be friends, i'll not engage you
To poison him.
You have more justice.
Yet I should not break my heart, if he were
dead,
And the fair Lady mine, I know not, but
This very mention of her, at this nick
Of time, when her deligh• is taking leave,
Hath a strange operation in my fancy:
You know my constitution, I may want
Your eyed, but honourably.
You shall command it.
Then i'll to her instantly, and bear you com∣pany.
You can pretend no visit, being a stranger.
No, I will go under the notion of
Your friend, and fellow Doctor, one of the College.
You may do so.
I need not shift my habit.
And what then?
Observe, and see the Motions of my Lady,
Who knows but I may feel her'pulse? I prophecy
Something will follow fortunate. If I thrive
Thou shalt be King of Cos, my learned Hyppocrates
And I will be thy Servant.
It is too early to court her.
It is a fault of modesty
In men to think so. Women are no fools,
And howsoe're they bridle it, it is p•ovidence
'T entertain new comforts, I have heard
A modest Gentleman say, that made his love
Known to a Lady ever her husbands flesh
Was cold in the crust, I mean new cofind up,
But he had a repulse, the answer was
He came too late, the widow had been promised
The day before.
If you be so resolved,
I'll waite upon you, Sir:
The rest to my kind stars, come we'll take
Coach.
Presume to lock me up? thou hast my Jew∣ells.
I'll leave him instantly.
He fears his tenure,
And would secure your Ladyship from starting,
But this doth very well become your prudence,
To quit the house ever he improve his interest,
By some new quirk in Law.
A noble Gentleman!
And one that honours you religiously.
You much obliege me sir, and I look on,
you
Designed by providence my preserver; we'll
Into t'h Country instantly.
Any whether, excellent Phantasm!
I am your Servant Madam, to wait on you
Through the World.
I was borne to make you—
A fool, or I am mistaken.
This is his Clarke, and spy upon your person.
How the rascal squints upon us?
Tell Mr. Travers,
The Bird is flown, commend me to his night-cap,
I shanot see him till the next vacation,
So farewell penny a sheet.
And dost hear? bid him
Provide new locks and keys, and bars and bolts,
And cap the Chimney, least my Lady fly
O•t at the Lover hole, so commend us to
The precious owl your Master.
One token from me.
You have trusted me with tokens of remem∣bronco,
I would my Master had received them in
His propria persona, to have thanked you.
Their toes are somewhat harder than my haunches;
But this is nothing to the general damage,
If our great Lady Mammon be run from us;
Which I believe, as sure, as I am waking,
And have been kicked, the most convincing argue∣meant.
All our hopes come to this? our mighty hopes
Huge as a Mountain, shrunk into a wart?
We are undone, and may go hang our selves.
I was too blame, my curiosity
Now suffers for the Trial of his virtue;
And he too apprehensive, when I chid
The Ambition of his love, made himself past
The cure of my affection.
Sir, you are welcome:
Madam, I presumed
To bring another able Doctor with me
For his consult, in case there may be danger.
You have very much obliged me.
She is a very gallant Lady!
•nspight of all the clouds that dwell upon her.
Who waits there? show these Doctors Mr.
Alworths
Chamber, there is another Gentleman within
Of your profession; your cares shall find
〈◊〉 gratitude becoming both my self,
•nd your own worth, and I may tell you Doctor,
•f it may give the least addition to
Your Cheerfulness, in his you will preserve my
life.
Madam, retain but your own virtue•, and be
confident.
Poor Alworth, there is left no other way
To pay my satisfaction to thy merits,
But with my sorrow for thy sufferings,
A•d what will be thought pious to thy memory,
•f Fate translate thee hence: ha, he is returned.
What think you Sir?
I wish he could sleep Madam, I am for his
sleep,
•t would be a benefit, truth is, I much fear him▪
But it is not prudence (give me boldness Madam)
To let this Sorrow play too much a Tyrant
On your fair cheek: This shows him precious t•
you,
If the Srars envying his converse on Earth,
Court him to their bright Dwellings, you must be
Armed with a noble Fortitude, and consent
To let him rise a Constellation there,
And not impair your self, who were not meant
To be snatched hence, by over-hasty sorrow,
But live the worlds best Ornament.
Did you say
That sleep would much advantage him? What think•
you
Of some soft murmurs of the Lute, or Voice?
I have heard the purlings of a spring will make
Our senses glide into a dream I have a Page did use
To please him much.
What think you on her?
I think? I cannot think too much upon her.
But I'll not leave her thus, her very presence
Is able to recover him.
Let me tell you Sir,
I find no Danger in him, be then counselled
Not to betray your self, you find his temper
Not apt for your design, Expect a time—
I love her infinitely. Mammon is a Blouse,
A deformed Gypsy, did ere see her Doctor?
She paints abominably, eyed like a Tumbler,
Her Nose has all the colours of the Rainbow,
Her Lips are blue, and her teeth straddle, you
May pick'em with a bed-staff.
You describe
An Elegant person.
But Honoria
Has all perfections. Stay, what fees de'e think
I have had of you since our acquaintance, there's
A purse of gold—no ceremony, I am still
In thy arrears for bringing me to see
This wonder of her sex.
You are not wilde.
Your cause shall cost you nothing too, that
ended,
Quarrel with all the Country, your Law's paid
for.
Serve me but now, I'll be thy slave for ever.
I now suspect the Lawyer is short lived,
Men of his Robe are seldom guilty of
These restitutions, but who can help it?
If I knew any handsome way to serve him,
He has obliged me.
He'll shame us all,
He's zealously persuading the poor Gentleman
To dye with all speed, and tells him stories
Of Heaven, what a fine place it is, and what
Excellent company the Angels are;
What a base Prison to a noble Soul
The world is, nothing right under the Moon,
Or worth a manly thought; and presently
He courts my Lady, and falls into such raptures
In her commendation. The Gentleman
(Whose Crisis is not desperate, if I
Have any Judgement) smiles at his folly.
They are both here.
He's a Gentleman, whose condition,
And as he has relation to your favours,
May invite some passion: But you are wicket
Then to condemn your self to solitude,
And for his absence to despise mankind;
Be just for your own sake, and Madam, look
Beyond his Hearse, with pity on the living,
Amongst which, you cannot want, as just admirers,
And some that may be worth your second thoughts.
What mean you Sir?
I mean your second choice.
This language makes your Charity suspected.
You are too violent, leave us a while.
Your friend is full of counsel.
You have goodness,
To place an innocent sense upon his language,
I know he has much honour to your person,
And it is sometimes as necessary, to
Advise the living to preserve their health,
Which their immoderate sorrows would consume,
As cure the languishing patient.
Now Madam,
Your grief is useless to him, he is dead.
Dead?
She Faints.
A blessed Opportunity!
There is a Coach at door will hold us all,
My dearest Esculapian, help, and find
A bounty will deserve it.
I Have secured the person of Honoria,
At my Manor in the Country, who
believes
Her Alworth dead, and must be allowed some time
For that digestion. I have made known
My self, and the affection which engaged me.
But though my Lady Mammon have a place
Beneath her in my thoughts; on better counsel,
I think it wisdom to preserve my interest
In her, already mine by her consent,
And the great plea of Law, Possession.
If I can make the Lady Honoria sure,
She shall be my wife, and that my Concubine,
Rare, Excellent!
Oh Sir, you're welcome home.
Thou look with a warped face.
You can resolve me,
Is there no case, wherein a man, without
Impeachment to his Credit or his Conscience,
May be allowed to hang himself?
What's the matter?
Thou art not desperate?
I know not, but
I find some inclinations to Hemp.
You are my Master, I may be concerned
To follow a good example.
Leave your fooling,
How does my Lady Mammon?
There's the business.
My Lady Mammon is Sir—
What, what is she?
She is my Lady Mammon, yet I lye,
She is not mine, I would she were your Worships,
I know you will be mad, but it must out,
My Ladies gone.
Ha?
Run quite away Sir,
With a glib Gentleman came to visit her,
And the young spirit that did wait upon her.
Without much ceremony, she would have your
Worship
Provide more locks, and keys, and bars, and bolts.
I tell you Sir, Verbatim, for a need
I have it all in pedescript.
Mammon gone?
What think you Sir, of a no Exeat Reg∣number?
Gone? my vexation? no pursuit will reach
her,
Give her the start, and she'll out-strip the Devil.
These things will turn me wild, but that's no cure,
I must be a man again, and tame this passion,
Her loss may have recompense, if Honoria
Can yet be gained, my hopes are full of blossom,
I'll return instantly, come you along Sir▪
What are these? ha? it is money, whence I pray
Comes all this Treasure?
From the City Sir.
But whether goes it?
Do you not observe
Us march in rank and file, this money goes
To maintain many honest Gentlemen
That want it, that will fight, and do fine things
For all our goods; you are a fool I see,
And do not know the Law.
What Law?
Club Law.
How's that?
The Cannon Law, do I speak loud enough?
The Gentlemen behind will tell you more.
I like not this: let us to horse immediately.
It is high time, that we tame the insolence,
Of this long Robe, these Princes of the Law
Will invade all our Liberties and Fortunes.
Presume to take our Lady Mammon
from us?
And as I hear, she's closely hurried
To a Castle in the Country, made a Prisoner.
I should consent the City be still great,
And our names spread, like our ambitions,
But we not prudently consider, whom
We trust with our revenge—
Our Mercenaries,
Who finds 'em buff, and iron, and when they
Come lame and halting home, who shall provide
'em
Good Hospitals, and old shirts to make lint on?
When we please, we can scatter all the Regiments▪
If we but rein our purses.
I am clear
There is no other way to carry on
The work, the sword strikes Terror, and who
knows,
The body of the Law being vast, and powerful,
Might (if not timely thus prevented) raise
Considerable strength and opposition.
But thus we stifle all, and having once
Recovered Mammon, we are Princes.
Omnes, Princes!
Where shall we dine Colonel? I ha lost
My credit at the Ordinary, this Town
I think is only situate to starve in.
What are these?
They have City faces.
And are a thought too handsome to be Ser∣joints,
They have serious eyes upon us, and move to us.
Would you with me Gentlemen?
Yes Sir, with you.
May I take boldness Sir, to ask your name?
My name?
For no harm Sir, you are a Soldier,
And I presume have had commands.
What then Sir, keep off.
I come in friendship, and mean all
Civilities to your person: De'e want money?
Would you have your pate broke?
For such a foolish question to a Gentleman?
I do want money Sir, you wo'not furnish me.
Do not mistake your self, come hither
sirrah,
Will this do you much harm?
Harm! pray be covered. Miracles! De'e
know
What you have done?
An act of Justice,
To call it Charity, would stain your honour,
I look for no security.
Not a note under my hand never to pay you,
What must I do for all this Sir? whose throat
Would you have cut now? these fine Devils
Must do something.
Buy you new clothes, a better sword▪
The Leather of your boots are of two families,
You may want linen too, get fresh, and part
With bosom friends.
I have more stowage.
And I'll employ it, at your service Sir,
What will become of me?
Nay Sir, I must tell you,
You're like to have more of this.
Has he no cloven foot?
This is the rarest Citizen!
De'e hear Sir?
We are making of our Will, and in the humour
That now predominates, that Gentleman
May be the Cities heir.
Were it not pity this should be a dream
now?
You have commission, and full instruct∣once,
Be sure you do not pinch to spare our purses,
Our Money grows, we are fain to weed the silver,
Our men are rank, and rot upon the stalk
For want of cutting, every drum-stick is
A Lime-twig, they are mad for innovations,
Pray know my brother Sir.
I am his faithful servant.
One of the Birds, that keep the Capitol,
Our feathers are all at your service Gentlemen,
When you have plucked and picked us well, you
may
Give order for our roasting, we are tame Sir.
Beshrew me an understanding fellow.
We have no more to say, it is the Public
cause,
Bring Mammon home, and we will rout the Laws.
And so we'll pray for you.
For your selves Gentlemen, I do conceive
We shall do well enough.
Captain Squanderbag,
What think you of this change? silver comes in
Upon us like a Sea.
An ebb must be expected, I hate naturally
This metal of the Moon, ••is a pale flood,
Would I were in Pactolus streams, or Tagus,
There were a lasting Element.
What do you
Think of these Golden Images?
I honour the bright sons of Sol.
Pity these Gentlemen should want Civil
War,
They take such pains, and pay so heartily,
We have much to do of the sudden.
This long peace
Hath made us tame in the world, let i'm now pay
'fort.
We are emergent from our shades, let's
rise.
With subtle motion, treasure makes men wise.
She has gulled the Lawyer too.
Most excellent,
I do adore her wit, and will she visit
The Cou•trey, ha? come nearer,
I have repented Sir, my past neglect?
And made this satisfaction by my Counsel,
Which has prevailed, and now she comes to you
Sir,
With pure affection to your self, the Lady
Mammon is only yours.
Did you hear that?
The Empress of the world is coming hither
To me, with pure affection to my person,
We are her Vassals.
Because the times are dangerous
Sir, she comes private, but one Gentleman
That knows not her design, I ever thought
You were born to be a great man.
We'll go forth to meet her.
By no means Sir, it was her desire,
You should be only thus prepared, I'll tell her.
It is my happiness,
Shall I be at last a Dominus face totum?
There's Latin for you Neighbours, I am inspired
With Languages, with all things, and you shall,
The poorest Copiholder of my Tenants
Be allowed a Concubine.
Whew! then we shall
Be Turks Sir.
Turks? the Turks a Civil Gentleman.
But no Christiam.
Ye'e are a fool, we
Must all come to it if the times hold, and my
Deer Mammon stay with us.
Bless me a Turk!
Is that such a matter; why you, and I,
And the best on us, are but Turks, if you
Take us one way.
I grant, as we are brethren, and
Turks, another way, and worse—
Let me see, how shall I consume my
wealth?
What think you of building Sir a Church?
A Church? and give it my own name to
save
A Consecration, No, no, I must do
Something to shame the Chronicles—silence,
I'll build another Town in every County,
In midst of that, a most magnificent College,
To entertain men of most eminent wit,
To invent new Religions.
That were excellent, we want Religion
extremely.
Can none of you invent? I think I must
Keep men in pension to project me ways
To spend my gold.
Pave all the high-way with it,
It would be excellent for Travellers.
I'll pave a street, that shall run cross the
Island,
From Sea to Sea, with Pearl build a bridge
From Dover Cliff to Callis.
A Draw-bridge?
This may be done, but I am of opinion
We shan'ot live to see it.
'Twon'ot be want of money, but of time,
Mere time, to finish it; my Lady Mammon,
Believe it, can do all things; for your parts,
But think what you would have, I say no more:
If she smile but upon you, you are made,
And may go sleep, and when you wake, run
mad
With telling of your money—ha? it is she.
I Charge you kneel, and kiss her hand,
My Lady Mammon!
How's this?
Welcome to my heart, Madam.
Is my Lady in earnest?
You have done me Sir a favour, I'm at
home,
And disengage your further service; I
Wish you a fair retreat.
Do you hear Madam?
You will not thus reward me, after all
My travel and attendance?
It is my meaning,
Nor will it Sir, be safe to lose much time,
These have a natural antipathy
To men of your fine making.
It is Alamode the Courtier,
Whom my Lady has only made her property,
To be part of her convoy.
You wo'not marry him?
I think I she'll not,
I must not be confined, while there is air,
And men to change.
How Master Courtier?
They'll toss him in a blanket.
As long as you please Madam, he's well∣come,
And he shall eat, if you frown, he must vanish,
Or I have Cannibals that will devour him;
With his sword, boots treble tanned and spurs up∣on 'em.
Sure I dream, but Madam
You wo'not play the Cockatrice thus wo'me.
If you will stay, upon your good beha∣viour;
I may dispense some private favour—
Good, excellent VVhore, I'll stay to observe
her humour.
I'll be your guide Madam,
On, go before, and bid'm ring the bells,
For bonfires, twill be time enough at night
To burn up all the Villages about us.
Indeed it shall be yours: Sir, you are too
civil.
Entreat my Lady hither, and attend her,
I did embrace too much, Mammon is lost,
If my stars prosper my ambition
To Honoria, I forgive their future influence.
Here is a blaze to melt a frozen soul.
What is my Jailers pleasure with his Pri∣sooner?
That character doth wound your servant, Ma∣dam,
• am your Prisoner, by the fate of Love,
Condemned to everlasting chains, my heart
Consumes at every frown, and I beg now
Not to be happy owner of that beauty,
•ince you decree my Exile, but to dye,
Collect up so much terror in a look,
•nd from that Throne of Majesty, your eyes,
•art forth a flame of wrath so high, it may
•urn me to ashes, I'll submit your Sacrifice.
I have no thoughts so impious, to destroy
〈◊〉 life that may be happy, if you be not
Your own Tormentor.
Those words have a sound of mercy, Ma∣dam.
Cruelty and honour
•re inconsistent.
I taste Heaven,
Already, a warm stream descends upon
My timorous heart; Oh pause, let me consider
How much I am behind in worth, to know
What change hath blessed it.
Change?
Let me but touch
•our white hand, were my breath the Treasure
•f all the East, no other Altar should
Have Incense, I am lost to find the sweetness.
For every smile I drop a Pearl, these Diamonds
Are pale, and beg a lustre from your Eyes,
Wear them, and be their ornament: I'll rifle
My Indies for more wealth, and when I have,
With giving up my soul, purchased a kiss
Of bright Honoria, from my dust at one,
One pitying look upon me, I ascend
A new Creation from your Eye.
What means
This rapture? what would all this passionate noise?
Expound, I am still Honoria.
Oh say but mine.
Sir, shut up your shop,
Your gay temptations wo'not take.
Is it possible?
Not all this treasure buy one kiss?
A •housand,
From those that have a subtle art to sell them:
Why do you trifle with your soul? Intents
That carry honour, need not bribe with wealth
To purchase nothing.
I can love you virtuously.
By that love be commanded then, to tell
me
How have you disposed of Alworths dust, why
was I
Surprised dishonourably, and transported
Against my own thoughts and consent, to this
Unhappy place? and immut'd up like
Some guilty person, not allowed the freedom
Of air, nor to see heaven at all, but from
The narrow limits of a Casement? can you
Interpret this affection? it is tyranny,
That must without a penitence, draw from heaven
A justice, and from me (by you made miserable)
A just contempt of all your flatteries.
There are some men in the world, that would
not think
You handsome in that look, and make you tremble.
You dare not be so impious.
When my love,
That courts you honourably is scorned, I can
Be angry, had I wanton thoughts about me,
As some may mix with flesh and blood, you are
Within my power.
That power is circumscribed,
You have confined already this poor weight
Of Dust I carry, but if blacker thoughts
Tempt you to force my honour, I can call
Rescue from heaven.
What needs this bravery? you see I use
No violence, I court you to a Bride.
My vows once gave me up a pledge to Al∣worth,
And my heart cut out for his Epitaph,
Will not contain one Character beside.
I play my self to death in flames unpitied,
Resolve, nor look for tedious considerings;
If I may honourably succeed your Alworth,
His soul had not a purer faith to serve you,
If this be slighted—
Help, help, we are all undone, O Sir, where
is
Your two handed sword?
Thou Messenger of Horror, what's the mat∣la?
The Castle is besieged, and the Beacons burns
blue Sir.
The Devil's up in Arms, and comes against us
With the whole posse Comitatus! they
Will pull the house down they have broke into
The base Court, Heaven protect my Pia matter.
I did but p•ep out of the Garrat, and
One Soldier swore a huge Granado at me.
They cry down with the Laws, and if they have not
Honoria sound of wind and limb, they'll cut
us,
Sir, into Labels. Would I had compounded
For any leg▪ or my left arm; but now,
Now farewell comely Court-hand, and long Dashes,
Do you not hear the Mandrakes? what do you do
Sir?
I'll into the Cellar straight, and bar the door,
And if there be no remedy, ever they reach m•,
I'll drink, and dye a Martyr.
I am blasted! stay,
There is a close contrivement in this Chamber,
Madam, will you retreat, and save your person?
This way sirrah.
De'e think they will not smell us out? I
fear
My constitution wo'not hold.
Down with the Laws &amp; custos Rotulorum,
Fico for Writs and Mous-Traps.
Make a guard Soldiers.
I am come Sir, to see fashions.
You find us drudging Sir, in your affairs,
Captain, I leave him to your entertainment,
That face deserves a reverence.
It is the Colonel,
But he looks more composed, and carries state.
Madam.
And how go things, my Military friends?
My gallant men 〈◊〉 action? you are now
In sprightly postures, and become your selves,
What pity it is, men of your noble soul
Should want employment.
We must all acknowledge
Your care of us.
I honoured your profession,
Since I first handled Arms.
What service, with your favour▪ have you
seen?
Hot service, I was knocked down thrice, and lost
My beard at taking of a Fort in Finsbury,
And when I had my Marshal trinkets on,
I thought my self as brave a Macedonian
As the best on i'm. But whore's the Lady Mam∣mon?
Surprised? and ever since a Prisoner?
He is not worth my passion, this room
Has in your presence a protection.
I take your word, you wo'not quit the place
Wi•hout your servants knowledge, Madam, but
If the sly Enemy of your honour, think
By obscuring his base head, to fly our Justice,
When you are safe, I'll fire the house upon him.
Here, her• we are, fire, fire.
Be silent Villain.
Yes, and be burnt alive, I cannot find the
door.
From whence that voice?
It is here, it is here, I hate burning, as
I do the Devil, and a dry Proverb, help.
The Lawyers here.
Gentlemen use no violence, I'll come forth
And meet your fury.
What are you sirrah?
A poor Court-hand practiser.
The choice is given, whether thou wilt be
hanged
At the next tree, or have your ears cut off?
My ears, my ears by any means Gentle∣men▪
Hanging will make a villainous long Dash.
Once cropped, and twice a Traitor, sweet Gentle∣men,
Delicate Commanders.
Time has brought
Your turn about, by your respects to•honour,
I see your soul is noble; though I cannot
Dye at my own choice, I can make a will,
And dispose some Legacies, rich Jewels, Sir,
Plate, Gold, and Silver.
All this I lay claim to,
They were the Lady Mammons, in whose right
I challenge all, I take those to my custody.
How? How? Marshal take him to yours.
Me to the Marshal? that were pretty, me?
Come Sir—
How? I beseech one word, have you forgot
me Sir?
Your name is Fulbank.
Plain Fulbank? it was I,
Did in those days bring in the good advance.
You did, your duty Marshall—
I ha done Sir,
So have not I, secure his person too,
Safe, as your life will answer it.
Letters, whence? ha?
From Alamode?
He writes where a party of horse may handsomely
Secure the Lady Mammon, give him a reward,
Make it your province Captain, you will find
Directions in that paper.
Sir, I have observed
That Gentleman with the black-patch uncase
His eye once to my Lady, there's some mystery,
I do not like it.
Some spy: when I walk off, command him
to the
Guard till further order.
Madam, I call it my first happiness,
That I am in a capacity to serve you,
And you shall order your own justice.
What will they do with that young Gentle∣man?
She minds not me.
Your pardon.
Give me favour to attend you,
With whom my soul desires to be renewed,
Your faithful honourer, march on.
I obey you.
You will know the cause hereafter, and us
better,
When both your eyes are open.
Thou hast cured him: de'e know us Sir?
I know ye all.
What are we?
You're all close fires, in want of air kept
tame,
But know no bounds, let loose into a flame.
We'll teach you better Morals Sir, Come
on.
HIs thoughts are all now taken up with
Courtship
To Honoria.
You may see Captain,
A handsome piece of flesh and blood may do much,
When there's no other enemy in the the field.
What will be done with the Gentleman was
carried
To the guard?
The stranger with a black Eye?
He's fast enough, and will have opportunity
Of place and time, to cool his hot devotions,
If our Commander in chief march on thus.
Are not these pretty hand Granado's, Gentle∣men?
Fire to the fuse, and toss some health about.
Come away, tomy Colonel, honest Squanderbag.
Ha? these are my Scythians, mark those
fellows Captain,
Cut'em in pieces like so many Adders,
They'll join again, i'ch compass of an acre,
Their limbs will creep together, and march on
To the next Rendezvous without a halt.
This is Spanish.
Draw home your arrow to the head, my Cen∣taure.
Mine is French Wine.
You must take your chance,
The Yeoman of the wine-seller did not
Provide'em for our palate.
Supernaculum!
See, there lies Spain already, now would I fight—
Drink thou mean.
With any King in Europe.
Do not spill your Ammunition; ah Sergeant,
This was excellent Drink.
Who wants my Colonel?
I want it, top, give me't.
He'll have it again?
The to'ther charge, and then we'll over-run
Christendom, Sa, sa:
When you've done with Christendom, what shall
Become of the Heathen Princes?
We'll put the Heathen Princes in a bag.
A bottle thou meanest, he's all for drink.
And after, roast the Great Turk with his
Bashaws,
Like a pudding in's belly.
Thou Boy!
There he is for eating.
Dost know what thou hast said now? but
What shall be done with the Jews?
They are included,
And go upon the score of Modern Christians,
There sha'not a Nation scope us.
These are the men,
The tools, that cut our Triumph out of the quarry.
They will deserve their pay.
Oh pay is necessary, use it now and then,
Like Physic, it keeps the Soldier in health
And expectation, they must fight for honour
Some-times.
Tobacco, hey?
Here boys, a Magazine, with pipes attending,
White as my Ladies tooth, and shining more
Then forehead of Dulcinea de Toboso.
A Soldier's a brave life.
It is cheap, all these things come to us by
nature.
Our Colonel.
I'll cashier him that rises, keep your po∣stirs,
We are all Soldiers, and can sit and drink with,
To your Arms Gentlemen again, ha? this is wine.
We have the modest gift of drinking, Sir,
Without inquiry of the Grape or Vintage,
Or from what Merchant.
Is not this better than a tedious Prentiship,
Bound by Indentures to a shop and drudgery,
Watching the Rats, and Customers by Owl light?
Ti'd to perpetual language of, What lack ye?
Which you pronounce, as ye had been taught like
Starlings.
If any Gudgin bite to damn your souls
For less than sixpence in the pound. Oh base!
Your glittering shoes, long graces, and short meals,
Expecting but the comfortable hour
Of eight a clock, and the hot Pippin-pies,
To make your mouth up? all the day not suf∣feared
To air your selves, unless your minikin Mistress
Command you to attend her to a Christening,
To bring home plums, for which they may relieve
Your teeth that water, with her next suppository.
You have some Festivals, I confess, but when
They happen, you run wilde to the next Village,
Conspire a knot, and club your groats apiece
For Cream and Prunes, not daring to be drunk,
Nothing of honour done, now you're Gentlemen,
And in a capacity to be all Commanders, if you dare
fight,
Fight? you know we dare, Sir,
And with the Devil.
In hope you wo'not give him quarter,
There's money, do not purchase Earth, nor Heaven
with it.
I must away, remember the two things.
The two Does.
Drink, and your Duty, so,
Now as you were—
Noble Colonel,
Let me kiss thy hand, I am thine body and soul.
But will you fight with the Devil?
Why not?
So will not I.
Wo'not you fight with the Devil, and one
of
Our Regimen•?
Not I?
Perhaps the Devil is his friend.
And yet in a good cause—
He wo'not fight with you then, base, I say,
To take advantage of the cause, or person:
Fight upon any cause with any person.
Hark you Sergeant, you do know our Duties
Better than we our selves, what do we fight for!
Silence the first word of Command, let us
Be serious, what, what do we fight for?
For pay, for pay, my Bull-rooks.
La'ye now,
Can any Christian Officer say more?
Hang these Intergatories,
And give us to'her charge to'th man in the Moon.
All, all give fire together, Oh for a noise
Of Trumpets.
Here are Drums.
The General is coming this way, to your
Arms
Skud ye Metropolites.
Sir, I congratulate your honourable
Employment.
And I your noble presence here.
I could not with my Rhetoric invite
My Lady hither?
I sent you a party—
Yes Sir,
Your men of rank and file do carry still
The strong persuasions, they prevailed with her.
I left her to the Guard.
The reason of that Clamour?
The Soldiers, Sir, express their joy thus
loud,
That Lady Mammon is brought in, the Guard
Hardly secure her person.
Give her fair access,
On pain of death, be none uncivil to her,
This service will deserve a memory,
And public thanks, all our design did reach
But to gain her.
The work will be to keep her,
The Gypsy has more windings than a Serpent▪
The Moon is not more changing.
Is this she?
Madam, I'll take my leave.
Forsake me in this
Condition?
If I could expect a worse
Would fall upon you, Madam, I'd not part yet.
How?
For I can tell you, what will follow in∣stantly,
And it does please my wickedness extremely,
The next pay-day you will be torn in pieces,
Oh'twill be excellent sport, ha, ha, ha.
And can thou laugh Villain? Secure him
Soldiers.
They will have work enough about your
Ladyship.
I am going as nimbly as a spirit, Madam,
And to your greater comfort, know I am one.
The Devil thou art.
Called by another name,
Your evil Genius, to assure you that
You have been all this while cozened, my dear
Mistress,
And that these colours are fantastic, see,
I vansh into air.
Presto, was this your Devil, Madam?
Oh my misfortune!
Madam, your person is most welcome hi∣there.
I fear your Soldiers, Sir,
You may be confident
Of safety from them, Madam, that fight for you,
We are your guard, all wait upon my Lady,
And let your applications be with reverence,
And see her entertainmen•s high, and such
As may become my honour, and her person.
What is there left addition to my happiness?
Mammon and Honoria both within my power?
Ambition write non ultra, fix, fix here,
The two great darlings of mankind are mine,
Both Excellent, and yet but one Divine.
Wealth is the nerves of War and VVi•, without
which
We are dull, and useless engines, Mammon leads
To Conquest, and rewards ou• blood and watches▪
But honour is the lustre of all Triumph,
The Glories that we wear are dim without her,
Till she come in, the Lamp, our glorious flame,
We grope our way in the dark, and walk on crutches.
Riches may shine, and Star-like grace the night,
But Honour is the radiant soul of light.
I almost could be angry with my fate,
And call that care of my Physician
•nkinde, that did remove my first distempers;
I should have dropped into the shades, and lost
Her memory, that flatters me to ruin▪
VVhat's all this murmur? are these thoughts my
own?
Or is there some black spirit crept into
My melancholy blood, that would corrupt
That spring, by which my innocence should live?
Hence, I command thee hence, thou dire Enchant∣meant,
And let the virtues of Honoria
Resume their throne within my soul, and strike
Religious tremblings through every thought,
Lest I rapine at Providence? She is here.
This warrant must admit you.
There's for your Office, you may withdraw
your self.
Your servant.
Oh my Alworth?
This humility
Transcends my hope and merit, I am now
No more a Prisoner, since my better part
(Enlarged by this your charitable visit)
Hath freedom to behold my greatest happiness,
Your self.
I am so full of joy
To see thee alive, I cannot ask thee, how
Thou were preserved.
Heaven was not willing 〈◊〉
Should die, till I had given you better proof
How much I would deserve your smile upon me.
Here you may, undiscovered, Sir, observe
'em.
You may be gone, and wait at some fit di∣stance.
My cure was hastened by your thoughts up∣on
me,
And my desires had wings to reach your person,
(For I was soon acquainted how you were
Conveyed) and next my thoughts to kiss your
hands,
I brought my resolutions of revenge
Upon that Traitors head, that ravished ye
So rudely from my eyes.
Prithee no more,
But let our hearts renew, and seal a contract
In spite of present storms; and I am not
Without some hopes to change thy sad condition,
For he, to whose commands thou owe this misery▪
Is pleased to say he loves me, and I can
Employ his kindness to no better use
Then thy Enlargement; if this prove unfortu∣nate,
It shall at least diminish thy affliction,
That I can bear a part, and suffer with thee.
Better I sink by many deaths, then you
Engage your self to any unkind Fate
For me; I have crept newly from my dust,
And can alone walk cheerfully to silence
And the dark grave: But do you believe, Madam,
This man looks on you with a noble flame?
He's now a great man.
His affection
Has all the shows of honour, and such high
Civilities flow from him.
Pause a little,
And give me leave to tell you, as these seeds
Of War grow up, I cannot think a person
(Though many may be honourable) can
Better Deserve—
What?
To be made Lord of this
Fair Empire.
Did this language come from Alworth?
That said he loved me?
Yes, with noblest fervor,
My love commands it Madam, and I can
In my true service to Honoria,
Advise her to call home her noble beams,
There shine to the discredit of her light
On me, that wo•lt upon a worthier object
Draw up more admiration to her brightness,
And at the same time, by their influence show
The beauties of her better choice.
This language
I understand not yet; can Alworth then
Find in his heart any consent, to give up
His interest in Honoria to another?
Yes, when Honoria is concerned to meet
A greater happiness than Alworth, I
Can make my self an Exile, which is but
The justice of my love to her great merit.
I am a trifle Madam, a thing meant
Beneath your smile, a very walking shadow,
And time will come, when you have showed me
all
The bounties of your grace, nay sealed them mine,
By the most holy character of marriage,
Yet then I must forsake you, when my nerves
Shrink up, when the weak flowings of my blood
Cool in their channel, and tame Nature leaves
me
A spoil to death—
Why do you talk of death,
So far off?
Though we do not hear him tread,
Yet every minute he approaches, Madam;
And give me leave to tell you, without flatter∣ing
My self, I am in danger; first a Prisoner,
A spy they may pretend, but this will vanish.
It is the title of your servant, Madam,
Is both my hononr, and my crime, nor can I
Wave my relation to your favours: this
Known to the man, under whose power we stand,
His angry breath may doom me to the scaffold,
And I must then resign, nor will the act
Be mine, but a constraint, and I then lose
The glory that may now be mine, to engage
Him in your smiles, you in his love.
When will this dream be over?
As for me,
It shall be enough at distance to look on you
With thoughts as innocent as your own, and if
For the convenience of both our persons,
One Earth must not contain us, do not think
That I can wander, where I shall forget
To tell the stranger world your story, Madam;
And when I have made all mankind, where I
come,
Bow to your name, and taught 'em to repeat it
In all their dangers, and their frights, to cure them,
I will seek out some air, that is infectious,
Where no birds dare inhabit, or man build.
A cottage to repose his wearied head,
And there I prophecy, by the virtuous charm.
Of your blessed name, to purge it, and as soon
As the great miracle is spread, to invite
The best of every Nation to live there,
And own you Tutelar Angel.
Fie, no more,
Alworth now dreams indeed, but he more vainly
Persuades me to forget my vows to him:
Is this a fear to die, or something like it?
For I would give it fain some other name.
A fear to die, that arrow strikes too deep,
If you but think so, and wounds more▪ than all
The horror my des•ruction can appear in.
If I can entertain the thoughts of life
Without you, how much easier must it be
To die for your concernment? I have not lived
After the rate to fear another world.
We come from nothing into life, a time
We measure with a short breath, and that often
Made tedious too, with our own cares that fill it,
Which like so many Atoms in a Sun-beam,
B•t crowd and justly one another. All,
From the adored Purple to the Hair-cloth,
Must center in a shade, and they that have
Their virtues to wait on'm, bravely mock
The rugged storms, that so much fright 'em here,
When their souls launch by death into a sea
That's ever calm.
This deserves my attention,
And you in this small lecture Alworth, have
Made me in love with death, who for thy sake
Can with my innocence about me, take
More satisfaction to bleed away
My life, than keep it, with the smallest stain
Upon my honour. This I speak, not to
Court up your drooping thoughts to me, if I
Be fallen, or have lost my first esteem—
Oh pardon, t'other syllable of this destroys
me;
What is there, can but make me worthy of
Your faith? I am all, ever thine? The Colonel.
Expect a cloud to darken all your triumphs▪
His threats move me as little, as his love,
Yet for thy sake I can be sad.
And I
But only mourn for you.
He is returned,
And with him the first poisoner of our peace;
What horror next?
Your happiness is now
Within your reach, kill but that fellow, and
Possess her by my gift, the act once done
By my command secures thee.
He shall make
His passage to thee through my heart.
I thank you
For your great promise and employment, Sir,
But take your tool again,
Did you not love her?
Yes infinitely, but scorn your Hangmans
Office:
I have done too much al•eadie; but if Madam,
The memory of my base surprise have not
VVeig'd me down past all fathom of your mercy,
I can ask you forgiveness in my heart,
And suffer all his Tyranny, to expiate
My black offence to you, and to that Gentleman.
Are you so resolute?
Were I assured
There were no punishment to attend this murde•
Here, nor hereafter, could she pardon this
Bloody assassination, and Alworth
Forgive me, when his soul is gliding through
The purple stream, and mounting up to fill
Some happy star, would she herself consent
To be the great reward of the black deed,
I should abhor the Pa•ricide.
Is it so? expect my next return.
Sir, you have shown a penitence would
strike
A marble through, and this return to piety,
Hath changed our anger into Admiration.
Sir, we have now no thoughts, but what are
filed,
With a desire you call us to your friendship;
Live happy, and adorn by your example
Of justice, the most honoured robe you wear.
Nay ye shall witness all my resolution;
Your hand, deer Madam, Alworth take from me
Thy own Honoria, it were impious
To keep you a minute longer in your fears,
Your loves deserve my admiration, not
My anger, and I cheerfully resign
All my ambitions, live you happy both▪
As I am in this conquest of my self:
I loved Honoria well, but justice better.
But Madam, though you must be Alworths Bride,
Yet give me leave to call you Mistress, I
Can be your servant still, and by your influence
Upon me, steer my actions, and keep
My passions in as much obedience,
As any Soldier I command, and Alworth
Be you so just, to •ell the world that takes
Delight to snarl, and catch at every error
In our profession: I am no enemy
To Arts, but can take pleasure to reward
Learning, with all due honour, be your self
The example.
You are perfect
In all that's noble, and it were a sin
Not to proclaim it.
Sir, This act will crown
Your name for ever.
Make your peace with Honoria,
Tic done, and we owe all we can call happy
To your justice, Sir.
Madam, you look upon us through some cloud,
None should be worn this day, and here are some
Did wear the title of your servant. Fulbank—
Oh you are truly noble, I ever honoured my
Lady.
Travers, Alamode,
Please you to name me in the list, I can
Be as much a servant to this Lady, as
The best of these.
Stand forth, and plead your merits.
I excuse them,
Your pardon Sir, I think the best in all the
File unworthy of me.
Plain truth, Gentlemen.
I could give reasons, but I have no humour
To spoil some reputations in public.
I told you what a Gypsy it was.
Some may
Traduce my fame, and charge me with a levity
And frequent change, but I have been less constant,
Because I found no man had wit enough
To manage me, or worth enough to invite
The stay of my affections. I acknowledge
The Citizen doth promise fair, but breaks:
Lawyers are cunning, but I love not snares:
The Courtier has no care of his own body;
The Countrey-man had no wit but in his acres:
And for you, Sir, your name is Squanderbag,
What would you do with Ma•mon, cannot keep her?
Beside, these men had the bad luck to court me
When I was swayed by an evil genius,
Which now has left me. I see already
A nobler path, and till I find a man
Knows how to love, and govern me with temperance,
I lay my self an humble servant at
Honoria's feet; your pardon to my past
Neglects, will make me cheerful to attend you.
Nay, since you're come to be my fellow-servant,
If you please, Madam, we may approach nearer;
What think you of me, shall I present my self
A servant to your favour?
Sir, you are pleasant.
I shall be so, if you accept my service;
Though I am a Soldier, I can love, and do
All duties may become your worth and honour.
I blush to say how much I am unworthy,
But I shall meet you honourably.
A match, seal it.
He has don't it compendiously; But Sir, you
know—
Yes, I know very well what you would say,
But this fair Lady's mine, and I'll deserve her:
Wealth has already made you mad, we have been
Out of the Sun a great while, I invite
You all my guests to day, and Lady Mammons,
Do me that honour.
There is no remedy.
It is well you escaped with loss of Mammon.
What anti-Masquers this?
It is Mr. Maslin.
This fellow wot not bend, and so they broke
him.
You look like the Commander in chief
Of this Militia.
What then?
I have a suit to you.
A suit? methinks you're naked.
I know not, but on my knees I beg their
pardon
That made me so, they plundered me so quaintly,
They are the nimblest Hocus Pocus's
That ever threw dice for hemp.
I am glad they fitted you.
No Sir, it was the Tailor fitted me.
So, and they unfitted you.
But with what art, how most compendi∣ously
They made me an Adamite, Sir—
Let's hear your wonder.
One ill looked fellow did but swear an oath,
And my hat flew up with the very wind of it,
And fell upon a head, that stood bare for it
Full three yards off:
Another did but squint upon my legs,
And my boots vanished with the spurs upon'em;
Cloak, doublet, jerkin, all convenient broad
cloth,
Three pile of wool, went from me at one mo∣tion;
No bars nor buttons could prevail a minute,
They broke into my body with that nimble
Burglary; I was undone ever I could wink:
But when my narrow shirt came o'er my should∣ders,
I thought't had been my skin, at every twitch
I roared, and gave my self gone for a Rabbit
For the next Officers supper.
In good time.
But truth appeared when I was stripped, their
charity
Left me my breeches, but the good old gold
Could not have leave to bear 'em company,
That was defaulk'd miraculously by a Mirmidon
That had lo• both his hands—
Lost both his hands,
How could he take your money?
With his stumps, Sir,
He routed both my pockets with his stumps;
Oh the knack some men have to fetch out money.
He is pleasant, see his wardrobe be re∣stord.
Shall I be warm again, Oh Madam —
Be not too saucy, she is now exalted
Above your sphere.
Oh Mr. Maslin, we are all undone.
So am I, they have not left me a shirt.
All faults, where we have power this day, are
pardoned.
Happiness crown your loves!
Now to the Priest,
Whose work is only wanting to confirm us:
Alworth, lead on your fairest Bride, remember
We are both servants to Honoria.
To show I can obey you Sir, come
Madam.
The Birth of Heaven, and the Earths Morning∣star,
Our life of Peace, and the true soul of
War.

Tic she in melting Charms that did entice
Revenge and War, to calmed Lullabies.
By which emboldened unpatron'd doth commit
Her Self unto the World's Protectorship.
And holds experienc't safety, since there are
So numerous Dangers in particular:
So bids farewell, in a disdainful fear,
Knowing, but cares not for a Censurer.
HEre Lads, here's that that subjects Crowns,
And Ladies to our Lure.
I wonder that Constantinople,
Abounding in such Charms,
Infatuated not our Turkish pride.
It was with them, as Stomachs clogged with Food,
That prized not in their Bulcking State:
I marry Sir,
Their Stomachs clogd, hath sent Repletion to the Brain
That to our good hath lul'd them in security.
Did you not see how all too late, they shook their heads,
And with their idle fingers,
From their Eye-lids, would have brushed the sleep.
Shook it, and brush't it quoth:
By mass, but if they use it thus,
They'll soon wax thread-bare.
Come hold, you'll shake and brush so long
That we'll be shook behind our lawrel'd-army.
Lady, you're here my prisoner,
And if you'll let me lord it but a while
In spoil of your Virginity, You shall for ever be my Conqueror.
Oh Friend, do you conceive that in this huge storm of woe,
When sorrows, like the groaning waves,
Whipped with a spouting Hi••ica•o, Ride posting on the neck of other,
To the deafened shore.
Rush in this narrow Concave of my Breast,
That there is room to lodge a thought of pleasure; Oh! No, no.
Madam, your future state depends not on that is past already,
Constantinople it self doth yet remain,
Although your friends, that in it lived
Are, by our conquering swords sent to declare our valour to the dead▪
And if you will subscribe to my desires,
I'll be a means to invest you in that State
That you's acquire greater and nobler Friends.
What hath the slaughtered Ghost of some dear friend
Surveyed your noble Actions in the town;
And in requital sent you here, to act a deed of worth,
And reap the prayers of a perplexed maid.
Oh Madam! How high will our victorious Prince
Judge of his Victory?
When with the great Imperial of the East
He hath a Jem that makes a foil of Nature:
And what art thou that with thy misty breath
Damps this bright Sun?
Oh! noble Sir:
Did you but knowthe foul contagion he hath breathed,
And how his Lungs hath wrought,
To increase the raging sea of my affliction,
No woman groaned at your Nativity,
If that you be not glad at my deliverance.
The wages of my toil; the cordial of my
Scattered blood spilt in the Enterprise;
And would you thus be reave me?
Then never more shall this my sword
In field cut titles for the god of War:
When as my fainting spirits did require
A whiles repose within her quickn•ng breast,
She did deny and falsely rates me thus.
Villain, but that my spirits all
Are charmed with noble pity to this maid;
And passion, stifled in remorse,
Lies swooning for a while:
I'd hack an Epitaph upon thy flesh
That all might shun thee.
It is strange Revenge is acted upon me,
That I in curtsy must be constrained
To love my loathed Enemy.
Madam, Be pleased to walk, and see your self deceived.
I would I could.
Welcome great Prince,
Me thinks thy restless blood,
Like the disheveld burning locks of Phoebus,
When he careers the circuit of the Heavens,
Darts forth such Rays of burning spirit
That crackles the world in astonishment.
Friends, Who's lost a man in this successful War,
Amongst these pampered Broods; By our command
Let him take three for one;
Let their enslaved lives pay satisfaction for our blood.
All thanks to our deserving Prince.
Great is the business that's in hand;
Therefore let's about it.
A gracious Prince.
Sir, Will you venture?
Is not the pressure of this mighty wo
Enough to sink my fainted spirits?
But by your mocks you'll add to it.
My high-born Lord,
Let all the Tragic Fancies in the world
Be true in me.
Let sorrow sink between my bone and marrow,
And may all tender soul• mock my distress
If I so mean:
I wonder that your Lordship staggers thus.
I know you're honest.
How dull thou't seem to be,
To strange that I do stagger?
I am sure the Leaden Clasps of sleep,
That do shut in the Golden Story,
Locked not thy Pent-houses
But that thou saw this huge ov'r-bearing storm,
And yet dost talk so strange.
O Sir! When you should make return of praises
To the gods for your deliverance;
Then to precipita•e yourself in wilful danger:
When an affront of mercy,
And might, deduce the never ended plagues of Heaven,
In showers on your head.
Ah Fool! D•'st ask if I will venture,
That nothing have to lose,
Unless this spounk of life, slighted as much
As she that hangs upon her satiated Lovers neck,
Who loathing would be gone.
But, dear my Lord,
If that you spurn at mercy, And defy the gods,
They'll draw your loathed thread of life
To Nectars broach,
And add destruction every moment.
Away: Thou never readst the maxims of the Wise,
That things at their acquired height descend again:
And when at full perfection,
Do admit no increase.
Sound the unfathom'd Sea of my distress,
Measure the unbounded limits of my sorrow,
My Native Soil, my dearest Country sack't
Our great Imperial, whose reflex
Rivaled the Sun, and shone throughout the Earth▪
Lies smothered in her dust;
And my dearest Friends promiscuously
Lie mangled in the foe•getful heaps.
Now might I here prick down a period to my woes,
Me thinks I could sustain.
But oh! oh!
I see a ragi•g stream, a mighty flood
Out-bearing all its Banks,
Will quickly sleep my patience to a sop:
My Love, dost think she lives?
Fond, she cannot die:
Her solo's in me, and mine in hers reciprocal:
So while I live, she cannot die;
But I may die in her: but I'm alive,
Therefore she is not dead.
Then I'll go seek her here.
The contaminous Bed of this grim Tyrant
Shall not de•own her from me:
And, ever I'll go without her,
I'll leap destruction in the face,
And k•ss the Instrument of my decease.
My Lord, I have •laid your passion,
And now in reason would confer with you;
Strangers we are, and now in this new Conquest
Each eye labours for new discovery:
The Language we are strangers in,
And pregnant Wits will sift us to the bran;
Therefore amongst these rue•al Hinds
That nothing understand, here in the Suburbs
Let us abide:
Until the pregnant time deliver up the truth.
Well, my great desires I'll curb,
And go along with thee?
Thee alone survivor of my friends.
Madam, I have puzzled the Invention of Arithmetic,—
And find the sum of your perfection
Too great for my receipt:
Therefore to them that better can esteem your worth
I'll render you:
For me to accumulate so rich a Jem,
Were for to lame our Princes Victory,
And a disloyal Fact:
So for your greater honour, and mine esteem,
I will present you to him.
O Sir, You lame your Victory indeed,
And make a light esteem of it,
In poising me with it.
Lady, it is true: the water i• its quantity,
Is more then the refined spirits;
Yet that's made up in the surpassive quality of them.
So in my drunk-opinion it doth seem
The extracted purity of all the East,
Is •entered in you.
And for to keep you from my Prince•, were greater loss
Then our received Alcaron,
The which I'll never do.
Sweet Sir, Will you proclaim your error,
And make (of invalidity) your yet esteemed opinion,
And make my else unhappy self hated by every one,
What can you think the Victor of the East
That sits Competitor with Phoebus in his glory,
Will be so blinded, to dote upon his slave,
Where there is no allurement,
Unless his Palate out of relish,
Embrace my salted lips for a recovery.
Recall your scattered judgment,
And lose not your esteem.
Madam, I am not destitute of sense; nor do I dream:
I'm sure it is real that I see;
So if you'll go along with me,
I will present you honourably: if not,
I will declare the Cabin where the Jewel lies,
And let the Emperor picked himself:
And so farewell.
Stay, patience but a while,
Give me but three days space,
And I will strive to stop these nigh exhausted Fountains,
And recollect some smiles, the better to adorn your presentation.
So long I wait your leisure, and wish you well advised:
So rest you joyful.
And you the like.
When thrice the burning Carbunckle of Heaven
Hath hit upon the insulting Waves,
And when he would hath thrice been
Mantel'd up in Black.
Must I? But oh disloyal thought!
I am glad thou hast met affection,
Whose Loyal Flame, hath to thy primitive
Non-being reducest thee.
If espoused love, my Lord Paleologus,
Hath yet survived the ruins of his Native Soil,
And should behold me prove inconstant,
How would the sacking of our brave city,
The death of all his Friends, •enew themselves
In a more Tragic Scene?
Oh! my Soul! that thou were• here,
That which of us were strongest, might support
That others grief a little.
Well! I do find my exterior Senses all,
Have a discharge from their great covering soul,
For to suspend their Faculties a while;
Therefore I'll hunt my rest.
What think you, Lords,
If we transfer us to Constan•inople?
If all things sitted were, we like it well.
Your counsel's good:
B•sides, our Conquest made more absolute,
F•om her sweet seated Turrets we may pry
Into the Affairs of Europe, and the bordering Asia,
And sit an Eye-sore to the Christian Foe:
I would it were dispatcht.
My gracious Prince, the Leaden foot of Time
Must stamp some days upon your back
Ere this can be effected: some great Commander
With a power must here reside,
To snafle the pressing crest of this imperious brood;
And many things of great import
Are yet to be resolved.
It is true; therefore, your Majesty must court
Your patience yet a while.
To that same purpose came we here
To argue and determine:
But since you are all agreed, that it becomes our State to go,
We do adjourn the Court a while.
And, in the interim, consider of our great Captains to be left behind.
My Lord, the tempest's great, where none escapes the Rack,
The Battail's sore, where none survives to give report.
The great revenging hand of Fate
Hath not pursued your joys unto the utmost;
Nor hath the flame of their great rage
Dried all the Fountains of your bliss; One yet remains,
Whose cordial springs will cool, the enraging passions of your blood,
The fair Irene lives.
How! Hath the intoxing magic of her brow
Conjured the influence of her birth?
Hath the impression of her purer spirit statu'd the Fates?
That the stern sword of great Revenge falls down in homage,
Fearing his Name unjustly threatening such.
Do you intend to wing't, on your own breath to her?
O that I could but fleet it in the Air a while invisible:
I'd fly aloft above her head, until the neighbouring Air
Filed with the sweet perfumes of her,
Like Africa Birds stifled me down.
My Lord, Aire's but a vapour;
And while you vapour an Addition,
The substance may evaporate.
The well composed Body of your Parliament must act
As well as the Lord Speaker; ever you be better.
Act: O! I act Wonders, Nature, and Arts be stairs
To my design.
Oh Sir!
I dread the Hawking Eye,
Of this imperious Victor;
I doubt some of his fawning Spaniels
Will discover your rich Game.
Which once but raised, I tremble at the event.
What if he seized her here below,
The ardent flames of our so chaste desire
Will mollify his horny talents so,
That he I surrend his seizen.
And if he sore the Clouds with her
I'll make a Daggers point spur to my soul
To post to him.
Let us prevent all this,
And in the Sun-shine make our hay:
Come, make hast, I'll be ruled by th•e:
Then we, disguised as we are,
Will venture through these Gates.
I know her Lodging well;
I, as I am, will go your servant;
And you, for an escaped Brother of hers:
And then when you are each informed of others state,
We will consult what best is to be done.
Come in hasto.
But I beseech you call home
Your banished Reason, in this same tickle point.
I will, let's go.
Madam,
I hope your wayward thoughts are all removed,
And your own inclination, courts you now.
Tic true Sir: my thoughts are not the same;
For every minute thoughts do change,
And for my inclination, tic too bashful for to court me.
Madam, Weighty Affairs are in transaction,
It is not a time to complement:
But briefly to declare; Will you, or will you not?
My dearest sister,
Had I but dreamt this unexpected joy,
Would have surprised thee thus,
I had rather chose confinement for the day
Then thou'st beheld me.
Arise, Sweet-heart let us rej•ice we met.
B•other 〈◊〉: Broth•r Tim.
My dearest Brother,
How doth the cordial R•yes of thy 〈◊〉 love
Restore my yielding spirits?
Sweet Sir, this is the effect of Natures consanguinity,
Make them mistake themselves;
So I presume a S•ppliant for them,
That you'll a while withdraw:
That they more freely may converse
Of their great Parents, and their Kindred gone.
Sir, Great's the respect I always bear
To spirits so nobly q•alified:
Therefore, for me, enjoy the place,
And freedom at their pleasure.
My Lord,
This worthy Gentleman is well content,
That you more private should discourse your miseries.
We thank you Sir;
And most of this our private conference
Shall be to study a requital,
For your high respects.
The freoness of your favours, Sir,
Makes me a sturdy Beggar,
To beg the obliegement of this day:
And if you will, before the Mountain tops
Be bcon'd with the S•n,
Show to the Nighted Veils
The days approach,
I'll smile on your desires.
That's laugh at my delay;
But this one night I'll dream away,
And then behold the final issue
In time to be more wise.
Madam, •he reciprocal regret
I have of all your woes, command me:
And so in expectation take my leave.
What hath thy near 〈◊〉 Dart• of beauty
Slain th• revengeful ire of all gr•m 〈◊〉 that did approach 〈◊〉
Were all the bloody and revengeful spirits on earth,
In general rand vouz'd, there is 〈…〉 beauty,
Such noble charms o• pity in thy look: if shown,
They'd all ashame dis•erse like heartl•ss H•ndes.
My noble, and most constant Lord,
I love you more, then I can tell you •o:
Nor will I vent Encomiums of your praise,
It were to lame your worth:
For your h•roick Actions
Will themselves engrave perpetual Epitaphs unto your praise:
Let us not stand and muse the fruits the enjoyment brings.
But act and stir to bring the enjoyment,
The state of which is desperate.
Fair, and discreet, pull down that Cypress Vail,
And make an Artificial Night:
For madd-men soonest recollect in darkness.
If I am mad, and pulling down that vail, make night,
O that I might within that shade, Her Arms the chains,
Lie Bedlam'd up for ever.
Prithee Demostheues act for me now, and when I have injoyd her,
I shall be capable to thank thee.
Well then: to morrow she must give her full resolve;
And as for me, I think it meet, she should most cheerfully
Present her self unto the Emperor.
In all obedience to his will, let her prolong his enjoyment
Of her, so long as possibly she can. Mean time, you and I
Will wander into Hungary: I know you'll find acceptance
Correspondent to your port; because you are like Enemies
Unto the common ••e. Nor do I doubt but your endowments
Will accumulate a mass of friends.
Then in prefixed time, with a strong guard in Turkish habit,
You may so nigh, as possibly you can, approach this City,
Where she, in her disportive liberty, taking the Air
At the appointed place may be surpri•'d; and carried successfully:
All which I wish performed.
O would it prove so!
I would joyfully take farewell of that lip,
And fancy, that mine own retained a remnant
Till I saw her.
Honest Demosthenes,
Thou hast declared the likeliest way:
But oh! it is straight and rug•general
For me poor weak distressed Wretch
To wander in the absence of my Sun:
Thou, thou, my dearest Lord,
O sad! Alas to think! What odious
And detested company, must I before•'t confer with
When you are gone?
How shall I reel twixt hope and fear?
And stagger on the Rocks of Despair,
Benighted in calamity and woe.
But longest nights ever now have had their days,
And I in patience will expect the Sun of my prosperity.
Oh! Oh!
Despair prevails; my Infant-hopes lie dying:
My soul of joy, it is like to be • radios night
Before thy Rays of Beauty, reflex't by 〈◊〉,
〈◊〉 forth a morning joy.
Sweet Pair,
The sharpest Drugs are of the healthiest operation:
Oft from a cloudy morn,
Ensues a glorious day: Your grief I hope is at the height:
And, in enjoyment, will afford a pleasant Theme
For your Discourse.
See, see, the restless Steeds of Phoebus bright,
Hath quenched their burning thirst i• the great Ocean,
And freshly rows for this days task,
Telling all s••ln contents, It's time to part.
Like as some beauty, through a mourning Vail,
So seems the Sun muf•'d in yonder Clouds:
My thinks she only seems a Torch
Prepared to attend the Funerals of some mighty man.
Thou more contemned •ight,
Than is the Dead-mans Torch,
Within the secret Monument! The Sun shines forth,
Which only lights friends to their last farewell:
I would some new born Phae•on had whipped thee from the Sky
Down to the restless Ocean,
That thy diffused Rays might there have been exstinguisht:
Then might I here the Prince of pleasure raing'd,
Unenvied' cause unseen of the mali•ious world.
See poor Demosthenes
The alone partaker of our griefs,
Surprised with equal passion,
Like us in a Letha•gick Muse, forgets the time.
Come, come, our fiery passions are too great
To suffer cold Distempers thus to stupefy.
Blessed be that Reformation,
And collected manhood: take leave in heart,
It is far spent day.
Me-thinks the purity of the great Globe
Of Heaven and Earth
Is circumvented all within mine arms:
Can I from thee, thou Universal Spirit be banished?
No, the pure refined Imaginations of my Spirits,
Will still be active, in creating thee anew.
Oh! the •avisht pleasure of this Kiss
Makes me despair, the enjoyment is so full, my bliss is at the height:
My Soul farewell.
Lady, give me a farewell of your hand,
And Heavens smile on thee.
Farewell my Love; farewell my honest friend;
Good Fares prosper your speed.
Farewell delight, pleasures adieu,
He's gone, by whom you to me did accrue:
Go where you're welcome, and may be
Enjoyed your course, as you have been by me:
And when you h•ve wheeled the world about
Returning chance, I have found Lovers out.
Till then I'll mou•n, and mou•ning sing
Though I be loved, and courted of a King.
Come in:
Save you Madam:
A noble Captain, desirous to accomplish our great triumph,
Hath b•asked your beauty to the Emperor,
Who doth by me his messenger, invite your presence▪
And for this purpose, I, with a noble Guard,
Such as become your State attend you.
Sir, He takes my beauty at a disadvantage;
For, with some friends, h' as past the time till late last night,
And am not yet accomplish: to see his Majestly.
Really Lady, We have command not empty to return.
I must, and will obey his Highness commands.
Where had this perfection,
Who not enjoyed, lames our great Conquest.
Dread Sovereign,
I saved her from the Embraces of a common slave,
That would have wrested her to his desire:
And pricing her, I found her only fit for your great self;
And I in duty and obedience, have told your Majesty of her.
Thou shalt not lose by it, how ere it hap.
Great Emperor:
Your Vassal humbly prostrate,
Wa•ts your Highness pleasure.
Lady, Great,
Your perfections are too heavenly,
And ill besit to g•oval upon Earth:
Be pleased to r•se.
How ere it is my duty, your Greatness
D•th command me.
It is st•ange the fatal breath of our great Guns,
Together with the smothered Air
Of your down tumbling Fabrics,
Should have concealed this beauty;
Which if the mighty Globe should crush together
Contai•s such sacred Rays, would dart into another world.
Most mighty Sir:
The best of my deservings
Have near attained the honour of your presence:
What shall I think of this your praise?
It is your Highness pleasure,
With these Hyperboles to whet your Eloquence on me,
A poor unworthy subject.
Madam,
The great distrust you have on me, I value not,
For it is a Maxim wise,
To try before you trust:
But the debasing of your self
It is petty Blasphemy, and grieves me much:
For know, the pleasures of Court,
With all the best of us you shall command.
The Bashaw of Natolia
Attends your Majesty.
Well! What's his great heart?
But go, I am at leisure.
Madam, Your look's so full an Academy,
Where the sweet Discipline, so quaintly is abridged;
That in this little gap of time, I flatter
Me a true Proficient.
Me-thinks my unbridled Nature,
Is so sweetly calmed.
That I could cringe, and bow before a beauty,
And call a moderate blush into this countenance
Which heretofore sparkled destruction,
And pursue my Lips into a chirping smile.
Which heretofore moved only in the accents
Of command, and death.
Go hence, prepare fit entertainment
for this fair one; see that two of the
best and truest Eunuchs at∣tend
her pleasure.
Under correction, my beloved,
I'll exercise before we part.
Your Vassal is rejoiced in her obedience.
I find change.
This touch yields greater pleasure
Then if my brows were circumvented
With the Imperial Crown of all the Earth:
Welcome Natolia.
Great Sir:
Me-thinks you have forgot Constantinople.
Hum! You're almost turned a Prophet:
Why well may I forget that great Imperial now
When that her Crown lies here.
I am sure Hadrianople now
Contains the imperial M•stress of the World:
But quick, assemble our great Council all,
I will converse of it a while.
They are, in a moment, as one man
Prepared, to attend your Excellence:
I will go hasten your commands.
My mighty Name, and wand•ing Spirit
Which heretofore, scorned confinement
Within the Lists of the wide World;
Are by this Sovereing beauty, now so captivate,
That they would wish restraint
Within the narrow Concave of her Breast for ever:
And could I, but unrivaled, in her Affections
Reign Lord Paramont, in freedom void of danger:
I'd throw my inferior Conquests from my hands,
And spurn this g•lt• temptation, from my brow,
The Beggarly Rewarder of my emptied Veins:
I'm called to Council,
What make I there? A Statue to fill up a place;
For here remains, my Life, my Soul, and Spirits all,
••'d fast in Golden Manacles;
Whose charming bondage is so sweet,
That were I sure, that Sirene-like
'swould bring me to destruction,
I'd not relinquished:
I le send for her; and from her Lips
Partake so much refreshment:
So, cordelize my S irirs, till I return:
So ho, there;
Go court Irene; here in heart.
I shall, great Sir,
Dread Sir, the Royal Court attends you.
Are they so soon in full Assembly?
Full halt an hour ago, Great Sir:
Withdraw:
Great places have a Court of trouble,
I must forsake my happiness a while,
I sent to take my leave of you.
Before the Leaden forced of Time
Hath pres• two Glasses •orth, I will ret•rn,
And here expect you.
I will attend your Greatness.
I wonder of our forward Prince.
He was not wont to do so:
Was there a messenger dispatcht?
Yes: and returned, and says he's coming.
I, but that forward man of War
Is stopped with the strong Charms of an assuring Remora:
But soft, he's here.
My trusty Lords, I have loitered my engagement,
And I'm sorry that your expectations will prove fruitless at this time
Through present indisposedness, of my infirmity,
I only came for to excuse my self,
And to adjourn it till another time,
And till our further order, in your own time, dismiss:
So fare you well.
Prosperity attend your Majesty.
A Remora in Land Na•oleo, it is strange
And yet it is probable; for the flect is monstrous.
Is it possible the Darts of that blind B•y
That wounds none, b•• •oway breasted Girls,
And you'• his Muliers, hat• pierced his slay•y Spirit.
I am afraid since the reverberating Harness was hung by,
The weaker Instruments have• made impression.
Then we are like to have a crew of mon•rel Warriors quickly▪
Let us depart, to pray for Reformation.
Absent, till you are called.
Madam, Am I not now a full a•complisht Courtier,
That can keep t••k with time.
And have been, since your riper years
Brush• ch•ldishness away, I do believe, great Sir,
No, fair one,
I was rude as the unbridled Camp,
Stern as the pale Revenge,
Fierce as the god of War:
My Spirits all were lined in proof
Impenetrable to remorse.
Witness the ruful Ruins
Of your stately •own;
Which dest•n'd to its fatal period,
Had not the Wit for to present you.
 For had the piercing Eloquence of your bright look approach•
My martial senses all, as they do:
Esteminated would have sunk
Below the dreadful Steel;
I should have crept for a revival
In the Lap of Venus.
Oh Sir! Had my great Kindred 〈◊〉,
My state and fortunes stood upright,
Which by the Iron hand of War
Is sh•unk to nothing• I might in some sort he deserving.
Why doest repent, that cannot be recal'd,
Thy slaughtered Kindred? thou rather should rejoice;
For in Exchange the Power of 〈◊〉 lies at thy command,
And in the lieu of thy consumed fortune
The Riches of my Realm, I do estate on thee:
And hence do court, that though•t embrace the
Affections of a King;
And guild our Turkey with so fair a Queen.
This is an indigested Passion (in your Greatness)
Which seen in its own flattering glass
Delights a little;
But looked on with the piercing Eye of Reason
Proves odiously informed:
Then loa•h'd Hate succeeds, and I with the in•el•ble Characters
Of ne'er expired infamy,
With wonder 〈◊〉, through the World.
Sweet Soul:
It's thy Charms that hath surprised me,
I dwell inseparably in thine 〈◊〉,
And not give time to Reason to consult with me.
Sweetheart, prepare to yield, and I'll go frame Petitions,
Do, good my Lord, and recollect your self,
Wh•le, for your good, I am obstina•e.
I wonder what delight
Our Emperor hath found out, that he contemn• the Establishment
Of his mighty Conquest.
It is certain, that same Remora
That great Natolia spoke of.
And do you think that he's surprised with the soft Charms
Of an effeminating Love?
Why not?
Temptation easily gains onidleness
The nimble courser whiles she sweeps
The Beesom of the yielding Air, rides safe;
But while recourse•, she sits p•uning on a bow,
Death, from the deadly Level of a Go•, arrests her.
It is true, While death and deep destruction
Were his Objects,
He looked unto his safety:
But the sweet Lullabies of an alluring Peace
Hath epileps't his active Spirits,
And kee•s him cradled in Security.
O that some Enterprise would wait our great Designs,
That with a fearful Larum he might be awaked,
And scared to fall asleep again.
O but it is dangerous nibbling with the couchant Lion.
But soft, I hope I have prophessed:
See there a Post in haste.
Stay, I see News:
Go you, excuse my promise to my Love.
It is my best honour, to discharge
Your Majesties Commands.
What means the blood
To post so from thy face?
As if it rid some deadly
Message to heart.
It signifies my deadly Errand:
For know that your neglected Bands
Are a prepared Banquet
For the Birds of prey,
And with their mangled Corps
Manure the Hungarian fields:
Who, proud in triumph,
Have made a Bone-fire of your Borders.
Well• I'll go raise a storm
Shall drive the flame back on their faces.
Away, command Natolia hither:
Go you, bring my sweet Greek:
What doth the Hungrian Power
Consist of?
I judge they are 20000.
With an accomplished Leader.
Fie: they • be a point so small,
As will not be discerned by my great Power.
They are 〈◊〉 few to satisfy my great Revenge.
Great Sir: You're pleased to talk of points,
And they are a sha•p one.
Withdraw Sir, till you're called.
Come, come, my Soul, I'll tell thee wh•t;
Although there is some fa•al Meteor dropped from the Sky,
That sets great Spirits on burning;
Yet such is the sweet fruits of calm Peace, lent me by thee,
That were there now a shoak,
Wherein the state of all the world contended:
And would my presence dart capivity to all,
I'd not suspend •he greater Conquest of thy love
For half an hour.
Oh that your Passion should transform your Reason thus,
To do•e on me your captive slave;
Who's very Bonds were Honour unto me.
Have pity Lady, I am conquered,
Shout foe•th no more denials;
For while you do my thoughts in pleasing doubt,
Make me forget my self?
W•ll! I will leave you now to better company.
But not so much desired, Natolia;
The Body of our Peace,
By the Hungarians, hath received a wound,
And here hard by the fatal P•st Call him here.
What are the fortes in Hungary lost?
They are not only lost, but the insulting Foe
Triumphs o'er all the Board•rs.
Great Sir,
This Wound neglected
Festers to your mighty danger.
I know it is not so great that we should fear;
Nor is it so small, as for to be neglected:
Therefore, forthwith, see that our Council be assembled.
I'll cause them wait your pleasure.
My trusty Servitor,
It is not so much your vowed Order,
Nor the inherent quality of faithfulness
Unto your Queens;
But it is the honesty and truth which I discover
In every action of thee,
Which brings me for to discover
The greatest secret of my Soul unto thee.
Madam, if ought lie in the compass of my poor power
For to redress, it's done at your command;
And if it do not,
It's lie promiscuously, as in the Gre•e,
Enfolded from the world 〈◊〉.
I have• so full a confidence in thee,
I will not seek an O•h to tie thee to it.
Knew then, my trusty friend,
I have a noble Lover
Whose constant heart, with mine, reciprocal is placed:
He Pilgrims now in the Hungarian Court,
Begging assistance of some Martial Spirits,
In stealth with him to approach these walls;
Where I at his appointment,
Under the colour of my private Recreation, in the air,
At his appointed hour, and place, was for to meet him,
And be conveyed from hence:
He thought your Emperor, as himself,
Would amorously have 'tane delay:
But oh! my woe, it is otherwise:
For where Petitions faintly do retire
The greatness of his Power makes way:
Therefore, my honest friend, go find
My Lord Paeologus by name.
Declare my state, which thou right-well dost know
The time will not permit me write.
Take this, and in Post-haste depart.
Now by the m•ghty Prophet Mahomet,
The hairy Scalp of my dead Father,
And by the Emperors Sword,
I'll act with all my Power, and straight about it:
Farewell, good fortune be thy speed.
Alas poor harmless Maid,
The period of thy hopes rely
On the successful Journey of a Nobleman:
But soft, here comes the interrupter of my joy.
What is Perfection reti•'d into Heresy,
And leaves the World quite destitute:
My Soul, let me partake.
Most Royal Sir,
The best of my Endeavours
Are homage due to you.
Tell me, what means thy unmannerly intrusion.
Pardon Sir,
Your mighty Council waits your pleasure:
Still these harsh News do mingle with my pleasures:
Farewell Heart.
What do you think, that drunk with blood,
They desperately reel on us.
My life for it, they are so flesh;
They'll pay their Nature's Tribute, but feed on us.
Soft: here comes the whining Captive.
Alas! I fear the consequence of these bold words.
What think you Lords of this same Scar?
Who's bent to go a Chiru•gion for it?
Your Self's the great Physician.
Away: it scarce requires the help of an Apothec••y,
And tell you me of it?
But our great Lord:
Your presence will g•ve quicker remedy,
And satisfy your great Revenge the more.
Fie, faint Scars, and inconsiderate reply:
Do yo• not know the petty Conquest of their Nation
Would not acquit the charges of my Train,
Should I go forth?
Away, forth go you:
Prepare sufficient strength;
And let this tinkling News •o more trouble my calmed Spirits:
Go all of you, assist in speedy levying of a Power:
Farewell.
Fie, fie,
That the lustful flames of a lascivious Wench,
Should burn the great remembrance of himself to chaff,
Which now is made the sport
Of every vulgar breath.
And must his awful Harnish hang contemptible in rust:
And must that b•o•d that hung ov'r Christendom,
Like a Malignant Meteor,
In ca•karat dust, be food to moths;
It must not be: Sold. Nor shall not be.
What doth deject Natolia so?
That which I would, but cannot remedy.
Let us conjoin in one, and help our selves.
Well! it is of too great concernment to be rushed into.
I will go wade,
And so will we.
Come, come, thou Center of my Peace,
Even now while restless Spirits roam the World,
Seeking the noblest blood,
To engrave their Characters of fame.
And while the nimble Posts, whip on each other,
With tidings of my danger:
While in thy bosom laid, I joy in peace,
And, peacefully enjoy, the fullness of delight:
Which mi•ht I but unrivaled still enjoy,
I freely with this mighty Ball, subverted were to its Original:
But speak my Soul, can thou affect?
O mighty Sir, to admiration!
Nay, rather to fruition,
Which if thou can, no longer linger our delights,
Here is a pious Mufti, which for the purpose I have brought
To join our hands as well as hearts:
And so infamy of stolen contents• may turn to honourable enjoyment.
Oh mighty Sir I since you are serious,
I do beseech you give a precedent of yielding,
By granting me but one Weeks respite,
To beg from our great Deity concurrence to your Yoke:
From under which, till Death, there's no redemption;
And then my 〈◊〉 fruits,
With all the best of me reap at your pleasure.
Great Emperor,
This her Petition, in honour, cannot be denied,
Nor any: Even my life lies at her mercy:
I'll go, invoke the Sun to haste,
And check the mi•u•es of their slowness.
Oh! How the 〈◊〉 of Greatness rides on a rotten Cable,
Subject to every flaw of malice,
And impetuous Billow of Rebellion;
O•r mighty Prince, but now,
Rid on the neck of an imperial Conquest:
But oh! one fatal change: he's pulled from thence
By the seducing Charms of whining love;
And, in a probability; of reducement into nothing,
To have his awful Majesty flouted by common 〈◊〉
I wonder that the wheeling Orb•s amazed
Stopped not their course at this change,
And all the World stand hush• in admiration.
Poor, and infatuated Prince:
We told thee, this would rowz thy infatuated spirits,
And who could stand the fierce return of them;
And yet me-thinks, ha•s made good use of life
That uses it for to reclaim thee:
Stand loyal heart:
Welcome Lords,
What solitary Muse possesses thee Natolia?
What hast thou plotted a deliverance?
I rather think he is reciprocal,
And sleeps with drowsy state.
I have not slept, nor was my fancy idle,
I have been ruminating this design,
And horror seizes all my spirits to dream on the attempt.
Natolia, it is no disloyalty:
He he's thrown d•wn his awful Sovereignty,
And do•es to be a Subject.
What will you drive at?
Let go the R•ins to the unbridled Soldiers,
W•o utterly disdain a Queenly Monarchy;
And if he will not be reclaimed, divide the Crown amongst us.
My very good Lords, and noble Friends,
I know there's none of you, but would embrace his death
Before the name of murderous Traitor;
Which, by this horrid act, will soon grain it self on you and your Posterity.
That should your brackish Cisterns tumble forth Oceans,
It would not wash it off.
There's many ways to be attempted, before we do deflower our Maiden Nation;
With the unmatched stain of Kill-Kings:
And blessed be the Fates, I hope there's one.
I'll know his Errand:
Sweet Sir, will your great haste permit you stay,
•o tell us what's your haste.
My Journey's at an end, since great Natolia's there;
For he, as well as I, may tell the Emperor, that his new Conquests stagger:
And that the Paeloponesian Lords, in general Rendezvous, •ith a great Force,
March to endanger his new Conquests.
Post on, declare it to him.
This is the utmost period of our expectation,
He'll now awake, or he's quite dead unto himself:
He certainly abhors the Rebellious Greeks so much
That he'll disdain this Saint-like Charm for it.
No: I do rather fear her witching tears will cause remorse,
And they shall have mercy for her sake:
But lo some News!
My Lord Natolia, the Emperor, i• haste, requires your presence:
Farewell, my Lord.
Even there's the opportunity we wish for:
Behold the Captain of the Janissaries, and many Companies with them.
I'll speak to them.
Welcome great Captain,
Where tends your m•rch?
No march: it is not•an Age to talk so rufly,
We will walk unto the Palace:
There to hang up our useless Weapons,
And then return to play.
Away, you're part of it.
You have not heard the News, the stubborn Greeks,
Our command of the Paeloponesian Lord,
With mighty Force regain our Conquests.
O then for certain, she a Grecian Goddess,
Invoaked by their prayers, for to descend in Charms, upon our Emperors spirits
Come, let us go, and pluck her from his Arms,
And burn her unto ashes; and strew her in the Air
For the enjoyment of the Bawdy Wind.
Nay first behold the effect of this same News upon him.
Let it be so; and for this time let us return.
Well! forthwith we must assemble•.
But had you seen what an Assembly here was now,
The Janissaries, all in mutinous Arms, going unto the Palace
For fury, we have stopped for present.
Well! these Tumults will awake him:
And till I see you, farrow•l.
Harsh News, my Love:
Your unbridled Colts of Greece, not brooking yoke,
Act to disquiet my tranquillity and peace,
And lame the greatness of my dear Enjoyments of thee.
But it shall not be so; thou'st go with me unto the Grecian Empire,
And there be crowned the Empress of thy Native Soil.
No: my dear Lord:
I'll be no Warrior: the iron-side of stern-look't Warriors
Are frightful Objects to my tender sight:
Oh now I hope the horror of my night is past.
Thou'st not be troubled with them,
The effeminated Court shall wait on thee.
But, great my Lord,
If I am found in favour in your sight,
Do not revive my sounded grief,
Not bring the horrid Object.
Of my demolished Country in my sight;
For if you do, I am so much Mother,
That you will find your Nuptials
But a patient Funeral:
For these my Eyes, that else would sparkle invitation
Will all be blubbered up in tears;
And these my silk Embraces
Incenter Melancholy: So that you'll find me
Little to surpass the breathless Corps
That lie in the cold Jaws of Death.
The weighty Reasons of so great a Friend
Cannot be gain-said.
Oh! Happy now,
Thanks, great my Lord,
You know I am still at your desires
When you return.
Though•t hardly be so, soon;
For ever the silent time flit by two hours,
I'll be with thee.
I have subdued the noble parts of your great Realm,
And now will with my Agent 'op the extreamet parts.
Now let disloyal mutiny force him from hence,
Or lad destruction's like to seize on me, poor hopeless Girl;
That have no other Cordial now, but what proceeds from the rele•less world:
Oh their inconstant breath must sentence forth my weal or wot:
I'll send to see which turns my Scale;
Go haste, and see the issue of the Court:
Return with speed.
Oh how my poor tossed Soul, flits on the angry surface of Calami•y;
And how the restless Waves of my continued grief works in suspense,
Against my poor floating Bark.
I wonder that my Eunuch stays so long.
Welcome the issue of the business.
Now Dear prepare your self to take your last farewell of joy.
The issue holds you forth a glorious Bride.
And art thou sure he's full determined for to stay.
Yes certainly, and in that full resolve
He hath dismissed the grumbling Court, and straight he will be here.
My Lord, my Loyal Lord,
My dear Paeologus, did thou but know the exigent that I am in?
That winged from Hungary, but sad, my now despairing thoughts,
Like my grim Fares, persuade me to my last farewell:
My huge coagulated griefs are far too great
For one days task: for if to morrow
By that the Lamp of Heaven, descend the certain Horizon
If thou, thou Sun of my delight appear not.
I'll crowd my self in the dark yawning grave,
And mourn in quiet:
So now Death in his horrid shape appears.
Come, come, my Love,
The fl•me of my desire
Hath scattered into air these interweaving Clouds.
Even so I do behold my self:
Come, let us talk of our approaching delight.
And so deceive the time.
Not so my Lord, for they are so sweet,
That time would, ravished, stop to hear them.
Still contrary:
Well! You serve to gloss the enjoyment.
What news?
Great Sir, Natolia courts an entrance here without.
Natolia may comma•d it; go haste him in:
I wonder what his pregnant Wit doth labour of.
Well! I'll withdraw my Lord.
Command thy liberty.
Come on Natolia.
Me-thinks thou swells with some great tidings.
My mighty Lord,
I am fallen for your Rise,
Had I disloyally affected renovation,
I might have perked the Pinnacle of Rule,
And spurned you in forgotten dust:
I need not desperately have rifled the Lion of his prey,
But slightly couchant, have surprised him:
Pardon my boldness, my passions high
Rains me at pleasure:
Whore's that great Spirit, that awed the Fates
And cowed the world?
What is it shrunk in fear,
To hide it self within a Ladies Lap?
Or do you think that the mistaken world
Will attribute this Imperial Conquest unto you?
Who, in your greatest might,
Could not withstand a whining fit of love:
Your new acquired name,
In after-ages shall be razed
From dreadful Chronicles,
And registered in froathy birth of working brains:
And your great Deeds shall be a Winters tale
For downy Boys, and puny Wenches:
O mighty Prince! I dread the event of this same Lethargy;
For while your charmed senses
Snort in security,
Your active and great Commanders
Plot dreadful actions.
If this that's spoke be kindly taken, it is enough:
If not, too much.
Unreverend Villain!
Thou hast sufficiently begged death.
I could afford to make thee feel I sleep not,
But ancient Love pleads some respect:
Therefore I'll favour thee with Banishment;
From henceforth see my face no more.
Go instantly, Depart the Limits of my Power;
For if thou dost but stay to bid farewell unto thy friends;
For this neglects, of my command, thou die.
Great Sir, Let me but stay a day
To pack some things for my relief abroad.
No: they may come after you.
Then gracious Prince farewell;
I still will wish your Reformation.
Great Lords, we need no longer groan in expectation,
We see the dire Resolve:
The froward fancios of a woman must sna•le us:
By the great Mahomet, we will not suffer it:
He's give her up a Sacrifice for our Revenge;
Or we will force her from him.
Are your Resolves no fouler?
By the hairy scalp of our great Fathers
We wish his standing;
And only hi•, to pull this Witching Charm
From h•s ren•wned Bosom.
A very lamentable—
Surprised my sight as I came here,
That mighty man of war Natolia,
Driv'd by the gusts of his own sighs,
Sailed in the brackish Sea of's own Creation from Turkey.
From Turkie• declare the enigma.
Banished?, I mean.
The great Natolia banished
Go Sir, we b•g,
And tell the Emperor, that we in arms
Attend his presence at the Palace Gates,
And needs must see him.
Declare the manner, Sir:
For what!
The zeal of Loyal Love
Emboldened him, to tell the Emperor of his state:
But the bewitching flames of Lust
Bu• n•d all his weighty Reasons into chalk,
Which with his Self must, banished, roam the World.
Fie on it, there's not a head in Turkie
Fi•t so sure, which reels not with a sigh
Of this same idle Whore:
Come, let us antidote this poison.
Great Empero•r,
The troubled Janissaries all in Arms
Attend your presence at the Palace Gates.
What means the unwarranted Assembly of them?
Well! I'll go to them.
Well! did he know he kissed his last,
And courted his farewell:
He'd 〈◊〉 our expectation:
But soft! he mounts the Battlement.
How n•w! What mean these postures
Of Disloyalty and Treason?
What mean these curled Dangles and Perfumes,
They speak some od•riserous Sacrifice, and must not be in vain:
Bring forth that Witch-like Saint,
That with her Charms poisons thy blood:
We will loose thee from Enchantments,
By the destroying her.
Imperious Villains! for the best life that breathes amongst you,
By your base sultry breath stain her perfection:
Slaves, what hath she done deserves it?
Must she be murdered because I love her?
She hath fettered your heroic spirits,
Impriso•'d your freedom,
And even reduced you to a sluggish carelessness;
Cause brave Natolia's banishment,
Because he sought for to reclaim you.
It is false:
She never knew the Conference as yet;
Much less his Banishment:
It was his unreveren'd impudence that caused it.
It was no impudence, great Sir:
It was his zeal of love,
Ingratefully rewarded,
Cause through respect of her.
This day shall see the dissolution of her, and her Enchantments.
We know we shall be thanked,
When you become your self:
Therefore pardon our rudeness.
Patience, In•e send for her:
Ah! ah! pure innocent;
Why doth not every thing that pleads
Non-guilty,
Appear like Aspen Plants,
While their great Queen ascends her direful Scaffold:
Me-thinks that mighty Rouf an Emblem of her,
Should crush together,
With destruction on her Foes: But soft! she's yonder!
Oh how all murderous thoughts
Creep back with fear at her approach.
What will my mighty Lord?
The preservation of thy life.
Do's any covet an improfitable Clod?
Oh! oh! my Soul.
Sad Funerals still succeed a Nuptial Dream:
Thou harm•esly enjoyed the Wedlock thoughts of pleasure,
While sullain Brains bring Death to be thy Bridegroom:
Look o'er and see the Dogs of Death,
That do pursue so sweet a Game.
Oh gilt-temptation!
Oh Fates! Is my weak Limbs
A subject for your great Revenge?
Well! well! my colour's past; my period draws fast on,•
And I must down to dust
And loathsomeness, return to a none-being.
Great Sir! Who's my prepared Butcher?
Thy Butcher:
That word murders my Soul-deep perplexity;
I'll speak to them again.
Inhumane Wretches! On your allegiance pass: l•t her alone,
I'll stop the gap, betwixt her, and your base Revenge.
Mad men must be madly dealt with.
Stop your unreverend proceedings,
She's not for common Butchers:
This my own hand shall give enlargement to her Soul,
To tower the Heavens to invoke revenge upon your murderous heads.
Well! I am prepared a Sacrifice of Reconciliation
Betwixt you, and your imperious Camp,
Oh! oh! my dear Paeologus;
Thou little know I lip the grave,
And have not now a friend in all the World
For to receive my dying words.
Oh my dear love! that I might melt into thy bosom:
Oh now!
I feel the chillness of cold Death seize on my y•elding spir•ts:
I will go slumber, •nd not see the fatal blow of my Decease:
Farewell Paeologus: My dearest Lord for ever now adieu.
Not once farewell to me, my S•ul,
Farewell to thee:
O had thou but looked,
I never could have struck this fatal blow.
To a•mes, our
Emperor is himself, with his Falchion •overs head and body.
O damnatio•, Villains,
I am my self indeed:
For you have rifi'd me of the sweet addi•ion,
And now in all my self,
I cannot find one thought of comfort,
For to please my self.
Well! Revenge and Fury be my Conducts now;
I'll send the Royal Spirits of slaughtered Princes to attend her.
Bring in that great perfection,
That such honour may be laid in dust.
Shines not the fair Irene here.
She did of late:
But Death defaced that beauty now,
Behold her breathless Corps,
By her pare Spirits forsaken •.. born there.
I beseech you Sir, the fatal Story.
The great content the Emperor took in her,
Made him lay by the great Affairs of State to court her:
At which the imperious Soldiers high incensed,
Forced his unwilling hand to part her head and body.
Were they married?
Oh no! she kept aloe•e:
But should the morrow been a Royal Bride.
Oh sad! my Errand's done:
I an unwelcome messenger must now return,
Farewell, sweet Sir.
I wonder our dull Post exceeds the lazy time,
I am wearied with the tosses of this tedious night,
And fain would see my Sun.
I do discover one.
Soft! it bears resemblance of our expectation.
It is certain none but he.
Hum! Me-thinks his looks speak horrible destruction.
Oh! and alas!
What mean these News?
That toss thy tongue from Order,
And shakes the frame of thy composed Spirits:
Oh dead! I need not bid thee speak;
I read me senseless in thy look;
Yet of the manner give me satisfaction.
The pure Soul of fair Irene,
Hath now acquired its proper Center.
Oh! oh! Do's that bald Tyrant
In secret Clay, reap her sweet Corps.
Oh! my dear Love, whose presence made delight,
Must thou be rotting in the irksome Grave,
The food of loath'ome Worms:
Sith I in the Air enjoy the light of Phoebus.
Oh no! There was inherent simplicity in us:
I know her Soul in restless expectation doth remain,
Therefore, I will not now, as hereto, brook a delay•
Demosthenes, thank thou these noble Gentlemen,
For their •rue pains in this lost labour:
For now the life and soul of all my spirits,
Press to acquire their Center, and rack me fearfully:
Go thou relentless Steel,
And spur them forth:
Come, come, my Soul,
Although our bodies, separate for ever, molder in the dust:
Our Spirits shall conjoin.
Oh! oh! my Love, I haste.
Oh doleful Tragedy•
I did not dream this •oint.
I wonder where unseen
He wore the fatal Steel.
I was inseparable in life,
And will not be disjoined in death.
Oh! oh!
Oh! Loyal Servant!
This is a Spectacle of like Woe
To that of Juliet, and her Romeo.

IF you have any service to command me
At Sevil, honour me with your Com∣mission,
To morrow I embark, and leave the Isle,
Until you Mart returns, and games renew.
But first you'll kiss the fair hands of the Nymph,
And take her passport with you?
That's a duty
I dare not fail in, though my interest
Were not concerned in it. I intend this day
To carry her my casket of my richest
And choicest merchandise; when she hath bought
What best pleases her fancy, I shall be
Dismissed, having no more commodities
To sell unto the Shepherds of her Court.
Have you sold well?
To what end should I feign?
The trade goes well enough, I complain not:
Rich Rubies, Pearls of price, bright Diamonds,
Store of fair Coral, costly Amber-greece,
Portraits, and other such dainty devises,
Have passed through my fingers at good rates:
Diana's festival is still kept solemn;
And as the games which fail not every year
To be renewed, invite unto those woods
The neighbouring Shepherds, to dispute the prizes
Proposed on those days, I saw among them
Some noble strangers clad in pastoral weeds
That for the honour of this Island chose it
Their sanctuary and repose.
You need not
Wonder at this, the place which they have chosen
Denotes their judgments; here ambition
Hath no employment; if at any time
We sigh here, it is for love, no other passion
Is seen among us; though this Island be
A part of Portugal, we have our laws,
And Empire to our selves; she that rules here
Hath not the name of Queen, we subjects are
Our Sovereigns companions, and her virtue
Makes us to taste so much repose, that she
Hath put the Sheephook into the hands of
A hundred Hero's, who wearied with Laurels,
And the noise of the war, are here retired
From the four corners of the World: She rules
So sweetly, that crime only feels her anger.
And as she is descended from the blood
Of Zoroastres, she knows well the virtue
Of Herbs, and the influence of every star;
She understands the secret mysteries
Of Magic, and sometimes makes use of it
To serve her interests; there is no Prince
Nor Monarch that stands not in fear of her.
And suffered her not to reign in peace
For his own safety.
I know this Hassle,
And charming residence looks not with envy
Upon the Court of the King of Portugal;
Besides I am not ignorant that the fair
Ismenia, drawn here, by the sweet report,
Of these enchanting pleasures, to enjoy them
In quiet, left the favour of her Queen;
And that this beauty by a sudden change,
Adds no small lustre to this Paradise.
See where she comes, Diana too with her,
I must in private speak unto this fair one;
An interest of love obliges me
Continually to make her my devotions.
Go Sir, and prosper, may your Saint prove sweet
And gentle as those South-gales I expect
In my embarkment.— 
TRue, I hate that horrid noise;
Now my free thought released from such a trouble,
Enjoys it self.
So soon to quit the sports,
What was your fancy?
To avoid discourse
That troubled me, and here I meet with new.
Can such a subject as brings homage to you,
Produce the effect you speak?
What doth not please me,
Both troubles and offends me.
You will one day
Quit those disdainful rigours?
Yes, when you
Have neither hope, nor love.
Do ye entertain
Every one thus that loves you?
If he be such
As you, I use him just in the same manner.
Surely the Shepherd Clidamant speeds better.
It is then assuredly because he doth not
Resemble you.
He entertained discourse.
With you in gentle whispers at the Sports.
I do confess it,
We talked of you, and of your little skill.
Your subject was more serious, without doubt.
What ever it was. yours, I am sure, offends me.
Remove this hated object from mine eyes;
Your presence will at last provoke my anger.
Can one displease you, speaking of your Loves?
Thou Husband'st for him that so sweet dis∣course.
Every one knows that who but speaks Melintus,
Speaks jealous.
It is no secret what men think of thee;
Every one knows, that who speaks but Ismenia,
Speaks cocket.
Really thou hast much reason
To be afflicted at that late discourse,
Clidamant merits much, and I'll oblige him.
Leave us.
He doth expect you, and I trouble you;
But we'll find out a way to cross his fortune.
He thinks that Clidamant enjoys my love.
Thou hast no reason, Shepherdess, to draw him
Out of his error: in the mean time wilt thou
Not yield thee to the faithful services,
The prayers and tears of the devout Thersander?
Wilt thou not love him yet? he that encouraged
By thy fair presence, only to please thee,
Hath gained so many prizes, who to give
Thy anger no pretence, thought he loves much,
Can more be silent, since the ardent flame
Where with he burns for thee, is only known,
To me, unto Thimantes, and thy self.
Ne'er speak unto me of it.
What! still cruel?
But hearken, I will give thee an advise
Shall touch thee; whilst we may, we should lay hold of
The flying time; he only makes beauties,
And he destroys them; in the lovely season
That thine lasts, use the gifts which nature gives thee;
Thou wilt one day lose this fair lustre which
So charmeth hearts, and be an object of
Contempt, as now thou art of adoration.
Rather that love, whose Orator thou art,
Yet know his use so little, doth times office;
'T is he that withers a face; the cares,
The troubles and the griefs, which by his means
Possess a heart, deface the lovely features,
And mow the flowers▪ he is like time the Tyrant
Of all things; he in a few days dries up
Our Roses, and our Lilies.
Shepherdess,
Such fear hath small foundation, quit this thought
For thy own interest; when love is once
Lodged in the heart, the ey hath then more light
The face receives thence its full perfection;
Then we esteem us, then we please our selves,
And know out utmost value, we correct
By art even to the least defect, we call
Our Glass to counsel in the ordering
Our gate, our carriage, and our countenance;
There our eye cheers with smiles, or kills with frowns,
Or faintly darts its glances, or with strength,
Either to wound near hand, or further of;
Therefore once more for thy own interest,
I say unto thee, love, at least a little,
Thersander that adores thee.
Really,
Thou dost surprise me, to speak thus unto me,
Thou that hast never yet had love, nor thought
Tending to that sick passion, thou that make
So many Lovers only for thy glory,
Without remembering one of them, thou that
Please thy self by turns in their discourse,
Thou that wilt gain all, &amp; conserve thee nothing.
Thou suffer Thimantes to adore thee
To day; but tell me wilt thou entertain
His love to morrow?
I love, but I have always had my method
In love, the Lover that is troublesome
Unto me, is my Lover for a day;
I burn not yet for love, not do I sigh for it:
I make a sport on it still, but ne'er a torment;
In thrusting no one of, I'm every day
Attended by a multitude of servants
That present courtship to me, and all strive
Who shall be foremost, on whom I command
And reign as Princess; they suppose they please me
In putting up my praises; when I go
Unto the Temple, they fail not to follow,
And carefully to tread in all my steps.
I am not pleased to see in such brave Shepherds
A troop of slaves attending on my train;
I please them all in flattering their desires:
I'm much delighted, when I make them jealous,
Provided that their jealousy extend not
So far as, to betake themselves to arms
For the honour of my beautyl; this high point
Of evidences might, perhaps, enrage
Even all my other lovers.
Ha! how ill
Thou know love, and his maxims, I behold
Thy changes as so many crimes; for my part,
If my heart were taken with an object once,
I could not pass from love unto contempt;
I should be fixed unto my first Idea,
And that God wholly should possess my thoughts.
Well then, Diana, love, if thou think fit,
Beyond the grave, and make so feet a fire
Arise beneath thy ashes.
Oh, alas!
What signify those sighs?
They signify
The sorrow of the heart.
But whence proceeds
That sorrow? is it from thy brothers death,
Or from some lovers? come, deal plainly with me,
Dost thou not love Thersander yet at last?
No, I assure thee.
Speak, I'm very secret.
I'll tell thee then, in Sevil I received
Both life and love, Cleagenor, Ismenia,
Is the name of the Conqueror, whose image
Is graven in my heart.
O Gods! how this discourse
Hath cozened my thought, I was about
To give instructions; — but pursue.
Our parents
Approved our love, and the day for our marriage
Already was appointed, when Nearchus,
Provoked by an infamous desire,
Came to solicit me unlawfully
In favour of his flame; this favourite
Unto the King after a passion painted,
And coloured with sighs, called his presents
To the assistance of his faith; but this
Proving effectless, he resolved my ruin;
He came with open force to satisfy
His beastly and unruly appetite;
And to that end would carry me away.
My Mother having notice at that instant
Of his design, made me to take a drink,
To frustrate it, and then, her subt'le policy
Spread through the Town the rumour of my death:
Indeed the virtue of this drink procured me
So long a sleep, that it appeared to be
The sleep of death; Nearchus terrified
With this sad news, came to behold it painted
Upon my face; remorse of conscience
Within his heart then, quarrelled with his love:
His sad despair armed him to kill himself:
But whilst his soul was troubled herewith,
I was conveyed secretly into
A Bark; scarce had I yet finished my sleep,
But at my first waking I saw my self
Upon the Sea. My Mother then related
The whole adventure to me, and the secret
Imposture of my feigned death, when suddenly
A storm brake the discourse, horror and death
Marched on the floods: alas, what shall I say?
Our vessel being carried by the fury
Of the winds and waves, was split upon a rock,
The several pieces floated on the waters;
I know not which of the Gods took care of me
In putting one under my trembling hand,
Which making me pass on those moving graves
Through the disturbed empire of the winds,
Carried me to the shore in all appearance
Devoid of life; here in this quiet Island
Of Erithrea where Melissa reigns
My body found a receptacle; she
Returning at that instant from the chase,
Perceived it lying, which th'enraged Sea
Yet threatened on its banks, and that same God.
Which would complete his miracle, inclined
Her heart to pity at this spectacle:
She cause me to be carried to her Court:
It is unto her succour that I owe
The remnant of my days: here I first changed
My name, the better to assure my flight,
And so to disappoint Nearchus pursuit.
How Shepherdess, is not thy Name Diana?
No, Celia was my true and only name;
But for my safety I made to Metissa
A feigned relation of the miseries
Of my sad life; since she received me
Into her palace, where I live with her,
And am now of her Court. Seven times the Sun
Hath finished his Carrier, since I have seen,
Or heard news of my mother.
Was Cleagenor
Informed of all this?
Oh, alas! this is
One of the point that causes my affliction:
Cleagener surprised by the same
Imposture, came to see me in my bed,
As in my grave: I wonder that the noise
Of his redoubled cries brake not my sleep:
The heat to revenge me dried all his tears:
He found his rival, and assaulted him;
They fought on equal terms; Nearchus fell
Under his arms for dead; Cleagenor
was forced to fly t'avoid the fury of
Th'offended King: his sudden flight gave not
My Mother opportunity to inform him
(As she intended) with the fiction
Of my pretended death: since his departure
It is now seven years complete, in all which time
I've heard no news of him; so that I know not
Whether I mourn the living, or the dead;
In the mean time to weep my fate more freely,
And to conceal my miserable fortune,
I feigned a Brothers death.
I'm sensible
Of thy misfortune, and will bear a part
In thy sad grief, if that will make it less;
I no more now condemn thy sighs, nor tears;
But yet at last preserve thy beauty from
Those murdering sorrows; in this doubtful case
Fix thy fair thoughts upon some other object;
If death hath seized thy Servant, sure thou lose
Too many tears and sighs; or grant he live,
First probable that he will keep his constancy
For thee whom he thinks dead? but here's my Lover.
WHat business brings thee hither?
Here I come
A little to divert my thought.
What thought?
It is a disease which doth assault my sense.
What first, without more circumstance?
My plaint
Without words would express it; at the sports
Too many Shepherds had unto my grief
Too long thy free ear, and perhaps, thy heart;
A World of people pressed round about thee:
The Shepherd Dorilas, me thought, discoursed
Too long with thee, I saw so many others
Prostrated at thy foot —
Without more words
Thimantes is become a jealous fool.
Since thou wilt love me, learn to know me well:
Thimantes I am free, and will no Master;
I'll ne'er depend on any but my self.
Tell me, I pray thee, did I ever promise
To speak to none but thee? dost thou imagine
So vainly, that thou art the only Lover
That serves me? have not I yet some which ought
To be conserved? and amongst all the Shepherds,
Whose faith I have received, if I should open
My mouth and eyes on none of them but thee,
And that one of those days thy mind should change;
And mine change too, (as all this well may happen)
Would all the others, jealous of this kindness
Expressed to thee thus in particular,
Be still my Lovers, though I had lost thee?
And if my liberty were not exposed
For all, which of them would commiserate
My fortune in thy loss; I think upon
Th'event of things, which thou can not assure:
At least if one quits me, another takes me:
Consider if this humour pleases thee,
If thou can serve me all thy life time thus,
And not be jealous; if thou can, hope one day
Both mouth and hand, and happily the heart
May flatter thy affection.
This way
Seems very strange unto me, but almost
Every fair evening some appointed place
Of meeting seems t'assure me of thy love
Sufficiently, and not to flatter me
With frivolous hope.
Yet hitherto it is
But airy words.
I hope all things from time
In waiting for that day, our names engraven
In every place, will speak my love, Ismenia,
I promise—
But no more, here comes Thersander;
That Shepherd, whose inflamed heart thine eyes
Hath rendered as hes—
Well Ismenia,
I leave you.
This is too much rigour, trust me,
At least afford the face, if thou deny
The heart.
OH stay, dear object stay, thou that art cause
Of all my torments, I have but one word
To say before I dye, the Nymph hath crowned
My valour with these prizes, here I come
To lay them at thy feet, with them my heart:
If thou wilt triumph on this festival day.
Suffer at least thy conquest in thy sight,
That's all the ambition of this captive heart.
Captive to me? if so, make it change Master,
I freely do release it; break its chain
Thy self, if thy design be not to have me
Free it with my own hand.
Alas! it is not
Its liberty that I desire.
Then let it
Live still a slave, and sigh.
How, Shepherdess!
Refuse a heart, this precious present which
Is always worth a Temple, and the Gods!
Think well upon it, it becomes thy justice
Not to despise this noble sacrifice,
Since I give but the same victim and incense
Unto the powers above; in my opinion
Our Goddess in the Temple is less fair,
And thou dost bear the bright name of Diana,
As well as she.
Since this rich present is
Of such high value, as it is worthy of
A Temple and the Gods, I believe, Shepherd,
That it becomes my justice not t'accept
This noble sarifice, and I should wrong
Our puissant Gods in daring to partake
Their glory, and to share their incense with them,
My name's Diana, to thy eyes I'm fair;
But I am not a Goddess like to her.
Although thou hast no Temple, nor no Altars,
Thou make thy self adored; it is to day
Thy festival which I have celebrated:
I have no other worship, nor no other
Diana, the fire of my love is not
A profane fire, and if some spark thereof
Warm not thy breast a little, I must suffer
The violent heat on it
Rather I advise thee,
Quench it with my contempts, this remedy
Will cure thee, that thou shalt complain no more.
Good Gods! what remedy is this which thou
Offer me here? I must dye, shepherdess,
If thou cur'st so; flatter at least, I pray thee,
With on sole word the love which thou hast raised;
If I'm, not happy, make me think I am so.
Alas! I cannot hear a single syllable
To succour me; if thus thou curest, Shephear∣dess.
I must dye, there is no prevention for it
Why carry thou a heart still so rebellious
To love?
Why dost thou persecute with scorn
This faithful Shepherd?
It is best be gone.
Yet thrust of thy disdain, if thou wilt spare
My hand, my death, finish the forming of
The sword that kills me, one word more of hate,
And I die presently before thine eyes;
Speak, answer me.
No more, here comes the Nymph.
Happy arrival, which hath freed me from
So great at touble!
Well for my part then,
I'll try the temper of the marble rocks:
My plaints may pierce them, though they could not move
A Virgins heart to pity, much less love.
SInce a full year and more that I have governed
This happy Island in the right and lawful
Line and succession of my Ancestors
By the death of my Sister, and since first
Diana's feasts were celebrated here,
Never so many Laurels crowned your heads,
Nor ever any day ordained for pastime
Hath entertained mine eyes with such delight.
Every one striving to bear hence the prize
Proposed to his contention, showed his skill,
Both at the Course and Lute; how hand somly
Thersander did behave him at these exercises!
With what a grace he acted every thing!
How charming was his port! and if I may
Say what I think of him, he must be sprung
Either from Kings or Gods; how happy is
Thimantes in his friendship!
This happiness which I enjoy's not new,
It hath a longer date then from to day:
His name is precious to me; 't was my fortune
To have the benefit of his acquaintance
At my last voyage, I saw his arrival
Form his own native country at the Court
Of the King of Portugal; the sympathy
Of humours which one man hath with another
Tied us together in so firm a friendship
That having met him sad and full of thought,
I prevailed with him as to bring him here,
In hope that in this quiet region where
Melissa reigns, he should lose all his grief.
Indeed although that prosperous Shepherd hath
Received all the prizes from my hand
Wherewith he's crowned, I find him notwith∣standing
Still melancholy may not this be in him
Some sad effect of love, blessed Shepherdess,
Who ever thou art! thrice happy is thy fortune,
In which this noble stranger bound his choice!
He is so far above the common merit,
That a Nymph should not much abase her self
In loving him.
Indeed he merits much,
And we esteem him all, we love his virtues,
Without being jealous of them.
Clidamant
Comes nothing short of him in my opinion.
Thimantes too will go as far as he.
Another time, Melintus without doubt
Will perform better.
Yes, when you shall turn
Your eyes on that side.
Shepherds, once again
Prepare, I pray you, for the Nuptials
Of Thirsis with Parthenia; Niece, that Shepherd
Is worthy of you, and you are not ignorant
That I intend, as soon as he returns,
To make him (as I hope) your happy husband.
Yes, if my heart can suffer violence.
In the mean time, let's go unto the Temple.
Our thanks and our devotions to pay
Unto the Gods on this so glorious day.
It is true, Thersander, I have done for thee
As much as possibly I could, I made
Thy sighs, thy constancy, thy faith appear
For to persuade her, but I lost my labour,
Diana is insensible, her heart,
Which loves sweet applications cannot touch,
Among so many rocks, is become rock.
What shall I doe, Thimantes? what a rude
And rigorous fortune steers my destiny?
Quit that ungrateful, and come forth of slavery
How shall I come forth? I'm born miserable
Under the frowning, and the fatal aspect
Of an ungentle Star, Which in despite
Of all my studies to defend me from it;
Pursues Cleagenor under the name
Of poor Thersander.
What is that I hear!
Good Gods!
Thersander, what haft thou discovered?
Hath thy own mouth betrayed thus thy secret?
See into what great danger thy imprudence
Puts thee at present; fairest thou no more,
Nearchus, and his power?
No, I fear nothing
After this sentence, but seek death, for since
It is resolved by fate that I must die,
What matter is it, by what arm it be,
Whether Nearchus, or Diana kill me.
Oh Gods! how happy is he? — 
Hath not she
For whom thou die had some intelligence
That thy heart loves elsewhere? if it be so,
And that thy inconstancy procures thy torment,
Thou wrongfully accusest her of cruelty.
Quite contrary, this love therewith thou see
My heart disturbed, is a sure testimony
Of my fidelity: it is true, alas!
I sometime loved an object of such beauty,
That the Gods never framed so fair a piece:
The Roses and the Lilies formed the colour
Which died her cheeks, and in hersparkling eyes
The Sun was painted; to express unto thee
Yet better her divine perfections.
Diana is her Portrait to the life
Celia is seen in her; she like Diana
Had a Magestick carriage, she had
A mouth, and eyes like her, she had an air,
Fierce too like hers, but amiable; lastly
In every thing she seemed Diana's self:
My heart is constant therefore as before,
Since still I love her in her living Portrait.
I thought at first then, that her death was false,
And that Diana was that lovely object;
But when I few Diana entertain
With such contempt the fervent love wherewith
My heart was taken, when I saw her rigours,
And infinite hatred, I perceived my error,
And said this is not Celia; so that
I saw well by her cruelties indeed
That I pursued her picture, and had passion
But for a Portrait.
What! is Celia dead then?
Alas! that's my affliction, I saw her
Stretched out upon her death-bed dead, Ismenia;
And more dead yet then she, I saw those places
Shine with a certain rest of brightness which
Her eyes had darted; presently on this
I had a Combat with Nearchus for
This charming Beauty; that proud favourite
Unto the King by infamous desires,
Formed him an object to his filthy pleasures,
This outrage was intended to her sweetness:
We fought on this occasion, it was
My fortune to disarm him; but the death
Of Celia, and the anger of the King,
(To save me from the rigour of the Law)
Enforced me to a flight, and made me wander
Seven year from Province unto Province: last∣lie
Wearied to see the Court of every Prince,
I thought to free me of all dangers here
Under the feigned name of Thersander, and
The habit of a Shepherd: to disguise me
Yet better, the afflictions of my heart
Have changed my Visage.
Hast thou nothing with thee
That formerly was Cilia's?
Yes, one day
I received from her hand this precious pledge
Of her unfeigned love, behold this Portrait,
And judge, I pray thee, if I love Diana,
Or Celia.
Let me have this Portrait; with it
I'll cure thy evil, Diana seeing it
Will become gentle, I'll go show it her.
What wilt thou do, Ismenia? but I see
Diana: O Gods! end my misery.
I Sought thee every where.—to Ismenia.
You will oblige me,—to Ismenia.
Ismenia, to restore my Portrait to me.
Troublesome Shepherd!
I have much to say—to Diana
To thee in private, therefore let us enter
Into this Wood.— 
Show her that Portrait! oh my martyrdom!
Traitrous Ismenia, is this that faith
For which Thimantes always answered
To me for thee? yes it is by thy counsels,
Thimantes, only that my seduced soul
Left her the conduct of my faithful love;
Nothing from thee or me can work upon her,
She jeers at all; but let us find her out.
I see w'are private here, we may speak freely.
A Mistress yet at last sighs for Thersander,
And one too in this Island far less cruel
Then thee; accept his service, and embrace
His faith: this portrait which thou see here,
He received from her as a faithful witness
Of their reciprocal and mutual fires.
What do I see?
That portrait (as I take it)
Whereof Thersander is so proud.
I gave
Such a one to Cleagenor; Ismenia,
Who gave it thee?
Cleagenor himself.
O Gods! what says thou to me? thou art in
An extreme error.
I tell thee again
Cleagenor himself gave it to me
This discourse holds no credit.
Every day
Almost I see him, and thou see him also
As well as I.
I comprehend not these obscurities.
He loves thee, and thou fliest him.
I fly
None but Thersander.
Well, henceforth accuse
None but thy self of these disasters, it is
The same Cleagenor that loves thee,
And whom thou fli'st.
Cleagenor! Ismenia;
That cannot be, is it possible that I
Should have been two months without know∣ing him,
For so long it is since he arrived among us.
Thy grief hoodwinked thine eyes, thou could not see him.
Think thou that since those seven years thou hast lived
Upon those fair banks, time that changes all things,
Hath not yet changed a face? there comes There∣sander;
Take a full survey of him, whilst I hold him
In some discourse; make show as if thou'd sten∣la
Into that Wood, and have a care thou do not
Discover thee till I have ordered
Thy meeting with him.
Happy pledge of love!
THou see what she hath done; unto Diana
She 'as given the Portrait.
See she enters there
Into that Wood.
A word with thee Thersander,
Perfidious, finish here thy crime, and be
My murderer; strike, strike this heart, I pray thee,
That hopes no more; but by what interest
Hast thou betrayed me?
Why complain thou?
O gross dissimulation! dare thou yet
To ask what is my plaint?
He hath his gate.
Thy heat hears nothing, give me leave to speak.
Yes, to feign more, and to lie at thy pleasure,
Am I obliged still to thee for my life?
How soon love doth degenerate into folly?
Thersander, hear her.
What is it she can say?
Since you are so obstinate, let thy love go
Which way it will, I'll have no more to do in it.
Speak then, what wilt thou?
I have nought to say now.
Thou would speak to him.
It was to laugh a little.
I pray thee, speak unto him.
I conjure thee,
Ismenia, in the name of all the Gods,
Jeer not my Passion.
It is now my turn
To be perverse.
I hear thee, speak, what sai'st thou?
Since thou wilt have it, know then that a Rival
Hath cause thy grief and torments.
How, a Rival!
At that Word I'm all fire, a Rival!
Yes,
A Rival, good Thersander, but a loved one.
What! loved of Diana?
Yes of her,
And more too, of thy self.
That's very strange;
How should I choose but bear a mortal hatred
To him my Mistress loves; who ever he be,
I must revenged die.
If this should be
Cleagenor, O Gods! how is he changed?
Where is that Rival?
With thee, Thersander;
Thou would defend him, if occasion were,
At the expense of all thy blood; believe me,
Thou never leave him.
Without dissembling, —to Thimantes
Tell me Thimantes, art not thou that Rival,
She means? I think thou art my friend, deal plainly
And freely with me, art not thou that cruel,
That false and traitorous Rival?
Answer him,
Ismenia.
Well, what wilt thou say at last?
Thersander hath for Rival in his love.—
Speak, whom?
Cleagenor,
Cleagenor!
Ismenia, ha! my joy, sure, is extreme;
True, I confess, I love this Rival equal
Unto my self, and if he may be loved
Of the object whom I serve, I will adore
My chains Without condemning her of ri∣gore.
Thou hast lost nothing by this bout, thy for∣tune
May create envy, fair Diana hath
Yielded to Cilia's portrait.
Who, to see
Those decayed features, could have known that face?
But my love hath at last drawn them afresh
Within my memory; I must draw near him,
And yield to my impatience.
Pardon me,
I can't believe thee; but here comes Diana;
See if her eyes have n't the same cruelty,
Always the same pride, and the same disdain.
Ismenia, I am come to tell thee something.
Me Celia?
How, Celia?
Yes, Celia.
Alas! I'm in an error; it is her eyes.
Her gate, her countenance, but not her heart.
It is she, Thersander, whom thou dost behold,
It is very self.
How! is it a custom
To call forth from the bosom of the Grave
Departed souls? and by what privilege
Hath that God, who at the eternal sleep
Presides, ordained her waking?
Though thy faith
Finds this point strange, is not love strong e∣nough
To make thee to believe a Miracle?
Cleagenor sees me, and knows me not:
How comes it, is my Portrait false? have J
No more artractions? see if it be thy Celia,
At least if it be not she; it is no more
That beauty which was late so cruel to thee;
Cleagenor!
My Celia!
Is it possible,
O Gods! that J should see again what J
Best love in the World?
Is it you that J see?
Take heed, be moderate, one may die with joy.
Ismenia, follow this example here;
Grant only at this instant but a kiss
To my impatience, see at last Diana
Cease to be unkind.
What! doth the object rouse thee, and the ex∣ample
Provoke thy spirits? thou wilt have but one kiss?
I will be satisfied.
Give me then
Some verses, or at least a nose gay of
The choicest flowers.
Ismenia, I'll not fail
To bring them thee.
Then trouble not thy self,
The kiss is thine.
Wilt thou with hold from me
So long what is my due?
It will be better
When it is much expected, and longed for.
Behold my whole adventure in few words.
I've made thee too a full description
Of my misfortunes thou see how I feigned
(To give my grief full vent) a Brothers death
In weeping of my lovers.
What felicity
Do I enjoy now?
Use your utmost skill
To make it lasting to you, and beware of
The fickleness of fortune, and her wrongs.
What! have we yet any thing more to fear?
Is not that blind inconstant Goddess weary
Of persecuting us?
Love is a child,
He must be governed well, Diana's beauty
Hath gained her lovers, they may hurt, Thersan∣der;
Melintus hath a subtle wit, and we
Both know he loves Deign, and besides
Is jealous of her; fear some foul play from him,
If thou appear his Rival; he disposes
The spirit of Melissa at his pleasure;
When he shall see you serve as obstacle
Unto his love, he will take speedy order
For your removal.
But to hinder him
To hurt me, I conceive Diana hath
No less power on the spirit of the Nymph.
But if the Nymph loves thee, as I observed
Her heart expressed some such matter lately,
When at her last return home from the Games,
Her free confession to us all, declared
How much she did esteem thee, but at last
With such an esteem that love followed
Close at the heels in plain terms, and indeed
Spoken by her of purpose, if she loves thee,
I say (as I'm confirmed in that thought)
How wilt thou steer thy course?
It is very true,
Her discourse comes into my memory.
O Gods! what's this you utter?
For my part
I begin to believe it, and remember
The passage too, I fear all things from thence;
This is the only mischief we should shun.
What can she not do against your interests,
When your refuse shall come to arm her anger
Against you? Know that with a single word,
In the twinkling of an eye too, she can calm
The floods and make a mutiny amongst them,
Call froth corrupted bodies from their graves,
Make their cold ashes speak, and their pale ghosts
To walk; these were the secrets, Zoroastres
Taught, whilst he reigned, to his posterity;
She is descended from him; and to give
Her self content, will make use of her art
To serve her passion.
I know that her skill
Extends to Magic. Yes I fear her love
With so much power, and yield unto thy counsel
Advise us what to do.
Disugise your selves
Under the names of Brother, and of Sister,
In the mean time we will spread abroad the rumour
Of this event that every one shall hear it
Within the Island.
J approve this project.
My life lies on it.
I go to begin
To lie unto Parthenia.
JSmenia,
I would speak one word with thee but a mo∣meant.
Immediately when you have born a part
In the contentment of this pair; Diana
Hath for the future no more cause to weep
Heaven hath been pleased that she hath found her brother.
It is this happy Shepherd, they acknowledge
Each other.
This event, J must confess
Confounds my spirit; Thersander found her bro∣there?
Yes Nymph, it is the same,
For whom my grief was hither to extreme.
The Gods at length have heard my prayers and sighs.
Yes, Madam they have granted our desires.
J'm very glad on it, and my soul is ravished
With this good fortune of our friends, which makes
Our lives content, Diana will obilge me
If she please at her leisure to inform me
with the discovery; but acquaint the Nymph
Therewith, and to that purpose go to see her.
We ow that duty to our Sovereign.
In the mean time Ismenia and my self
May entertain each other in discourse,
Thimantes, J believe, will not be jealous.
Let not a third come, Madam and J fear
Nothing from you.— 
Ismenia, J know not,
If J may safely tell a secret to thee,
Alas!
J know it well, since the heart sighs;
When one would say J love, and dares not speak is,
The heart at the named point gives an Alas.
Have not J well divined?
Ismenia.
I do confess it, see too, if thou can
Divine the object that procures my grief
Let me not speak him, spare my cheeks those
blushes.
I cannot, a sigh carries not so far;
You love; but what more, is beyond my skill
To understand, unless four self unfold
That sigh unto me by its cause.
It is true
I love.
But whom?
It is—
Outwith't.
Clidamant.
Behold a handsome way to name a Lover;
Ha! how you fear your lips should touch upon it!
One must draw 't word by word out of your mouth;
You have then but one lover; really
It is well is it happens; had you lists of them
As I have, which I name, and reckon over
Every hour of the day, your bashfulness
Would well become you; love is a fair fruit,
But then it must be gathered, modesty
Leaves it to fall and wither, but I pray you
What will Melissa say to it, who intends
To match her Niece to Thirsis?
Oh! I hate
That Thirsis, and shall be even in despair,
If the Nymph force me to observe my duty
In that particular; yet I would keep it
Without disturbance, if the love I bear
To Clidamant should not return me his;
For to speak truly I am violent
Where honour doth engage me, therefore would I
Have his heart to be sounded, and as I
Find it disposed, I should pursue my love,
Or quench my flame.
Speak unto him your self,
Nothing's more easy.
But, Ismenia.
Thou hast a wit would help me; if I should
Speak to him, he hath little understanding
If he should not know that I first was taken
And I should sin against the rule of maids
To make such a confession.
You may write then,
That is all one, still the same point of honour
Forbids it me; my Letter would discover
My love, and make him boast thereof, perhaps,
To my dishonour, if he might have once
That mark on it in his hand.
Let him then
Divine it, if he be Astrologer.
Treat not my passion thus with raillery.
I must then serve you in it, I perceive;
Well I'll about it with my best invention;
I'll write a Letter to him, and invite him
By a feigned love, as soon as it is night,
To meet me at the Echo of the Garden,
To entertain us there.
So in my absence.
Thou shalt discern his thought.
This business
Concerns you, Madam, and requires your pre∣sense.
You shall speak softly to him, and in those
Sweet moments, you shall understand much bet∣la
What his thoughts are, and thus you may your self,
To find out if he loves, speak of your self.
Thou wilt be present too?
Yes, J'l so well
Contrive it, that he shall believe undoubtedly
That it is I that speak.
But how can we
Speak to the Echo, for thou know the Nymph,
As soon as it is night, retires her self,
And then we cannot come there, what devise now
Hast thou that we may speak to him?
Cannot we
Speak to him from the terrace which joins close
Unto the Garden; you know that you can
Conveniently come there at any hour
From your apartment; it is upon this ground,
And these conjunctures, that I've taken the plot
For my invention.
J admire thy wit,
Tic wonderful industrious and ready.
I'll write the Letter here before your eyes,
Behold the paper for it.
How, these are
Thy writing Tables!
They can speak of Passions
Discreet and secret; J'l about my business,
And use my smoothest stile.
Especially
Appoint him well the hour and place of meeting:
How redevable am J to thy wit
For this great favour? what do J not ow thee
For this good office, thou give me again.
Life, and repose.
See what J write unto him
In two words for you, they are very pressing,
And will engage him to betake himself
Unto the place appointed to know more.
It is very well; it rests now how to giv' 't him.
Leave me the care of that; but here he comes.
YES, J have heard Diana is his sister.
Madam, Melintus and my selfare going
To seek Thersander, to congratulare
With him his happy meeting with his sister.
Thersander's happy, and thou art no less,
Since thy good fortune offered it self
Unto thy hand, from whence thou mai'st expect
All that thou can desire without that jealous.
Come, let us go, the Nymph expected us.
Having no opportunity at present
To speak unto thee, read, J think 't will please thee.
Read it, J think 't will please thee, what in the name
Of wonder doth she mean?
Take but the pain
To open, and to read it thou shalt find.
J think, J may make thine eyes withnesses
Of what it doth contain, there's nothing in it
Secret of serious, Ismenia loves
To jest, and to be talked of; and this is
Some new piece of her wonted merry wit.
J am impatient, prithee open it.
Let me see what divertisement is here,
Which she expounds good fortune, what is this?
List of my Lovers by an exact order
Of Alphabet.
It is very well put of;
But so far forth as J can see yet, neither
Obsetve J here Melintus or my self.
For my part, J renounce there; turn the leaf,
Go on.
Stanza's of Dorilas upon inconstancy.
It is true, Ismenia thou are fair,
But more inconstant then the air;
And every Lover is a Mark
Exposed to thy humorous dart;
As soon as he meets thy disdain,
He flies to death to cure his pain,
And makes but one large step in all
From his bright glory to his fall.
With these defects yet thou can charm;
But I'll not love, for fear of harm;
Yet J approve all things in thee,
Yea even to thy inconstancy;
And will not, to incur thy hate,
Jealous Melintus imitate,
Whose humour every thing offends,
And nothing pleases but its ends.
Melintus, what sai'st thou unto them?
J see for what design she put those Tables
Into thy hand, J called her cocket lately,
And that, it seems, provoked her to return me
The injury with one of the same nature.
Sonnet of Silvio, my most faithful Lover.
A Madrigal of Thirsis,—what's this follows,
Unto the Shepherd Clidamant.
Melintus,
Am J not purblind, see if this name doth Strike thine eyes thus like mine!
Nothing 's more certain,
It is addressed to thee; thou art more happy
Then thou imagin'st
As soon as the dark shadows of the night
Hang o'er the light,
At the Echo of the Garden let us meet;
But be discreet;
It is love invites thee; more anon,
When w' 're alone.
Ismenia.
Prithee let me see them,
Grant me this favour—not, then J, believe
Thou dost disguise the truth, and read Ismenia,
When it is subscribed Diana.
Oh fond jealous!
How long wilt thou thus be thy own tormentor?
Yet show them me.
To cure thy troubled spirit,
J 'l first o'er come thy curiosity;
And since the discreet Lover, what vain heat
So ever presses thee, never shows thus
His Mistress name—
But—
Quit those blind suspicions; as soon
As it is night I'll go unto the Echo
Alone, and with our noise; I'm all a fire
To know what she will tell me, in the mean time
Let's go unto the Nymph to seek Thersander.
To be more sure, and to inform my self
Yet fuller of thy faith in this my doubt,
I'll to the Echo too, and sind it out.
I Say to thee again that J receive
Much pleasute at this news, that thou, Diana,
Art sister to the generous Thersander;
He hath informed me with the strange misfor∣tune
Which separated on the churlish Sea
The Brother from the Sister, in what place
Upon a plank, escaped from the wrack,
The storm removed him from the anger of
The enraged Sea, what countries he hath seen,
What pains and troubles he hath undergone;
Lastly he named the happy fortune which
Conducted him to us here; I thank Heaven,
That made thee know him, I'm as sensible
Of this content as thou can be thy self;
He is so highly qualified, that he's worthy
The name of King, ye both shall find with me
A Sanctuary, and what ever fortune
Ye have, I will partake it good or bad;
My fortunes, ye shall bare too, so that all things
Between us shall be common: I believe
Diana towards me will be so well
Disposed of her part, and that whatsoever
Concerns me, will touch her.
Madam, I should
Be barbarously ungrateful otherwise;
I still remember that being on the Shore,
Cast as a wretched wrack there by the floods,
Expecting every minute deaths approach,
I met with you my port and sanctuary:
Oh that I have not power for all this goodness
T'express how much acknowledgement I have!
Thou hast.
How Madam?
In expecting nothing
But death as I do now, thou can be to me
At thy turn both my port and sancturary;
Thou can subdue the enemy that braves me,
That of a Sovereign will make a slave;
He's in thy power, thou can abate his courage.
What is that enemy which troubles you?
He's one whose Magic can enchant the arms
Of the most Valiant; he can draw tears from
The most Heroic; nothing is so strong,
Which he can't compass; and without respect
To any place or person whatsoever,
He equally distributes his flames.
I know him not yet by this Character.
How know thou not that tyrant of great Mo∣narcks?
That famons Conqueror of Conquerors,
Who notwithstanding is but a blind child?
If J durst to express me, J believe,
I know him.
Speak it freely.
I'm mistaken,
Or I have seen love painted in such colours,
Blind and a child, yet a great Conqueror.
It is the same love whereof I speak unto thee
Who is the happy Lover that procures
Your martyrdom?
Alas! coldest thou not spare me
The shame to speak him? cover, gentle night,
Immediately those places and my brow
With the same colour, so to please my heat;
I love; but let us finish since I've said
I love, Thersander is my object.
What,
My Brother?
He. If his heart be a prize
Not easy to be gained, there's nothing which
I would spare for him, I would arm to have him;
Nought should oppose me, every obstacle
J would o'rcome; already by some words
Which he observed not, spoken by the by,
My love was half expressed.
As he should not
Dare to pretend unto so great an honour,
He would be criminal, if he believed
To understand you.
Well then, be thou here
The mouth and true interpreter of my heart,
Express the kind heat of my timorous soul;
Tell him that I'm a subject to his Laws,
That he may boldly fix his thoughts upon
The person of Melissa, and not fear
To be condemned, that his ambition
May soar so high a pitch, and not be checked,
That he may sigh the same sighs with a King;
Husband there heart for me, to which mine aims;
But let him not think that it comes from me;
My honour would receive a prejudice
By such a thought, thou only shalt acquaint him
With this, as from thy self.
J understand you,
He must needs yield to this; I'll do your will.
As soon as he appears, I will retire me,
And from one of these places I shall hear
Every word that you speak one to another
In reference to my flame.
I should methinks
Act with more freeness, if J were to treat
With him alone.
No, J will hear my self
What he thinks of me, J can best of all
Trust mine own ears and eyes in this affair.
But, Madam, after all—
Shepherdess,
The thing's resolved, thou need not say no more.
Until he come, J pray thee, entertain
These woods here with some air, and let us see
If the Echo will answer to thy discourse;
Your prayer is a command; some plaints of love
Shall make the subject of it.
What thou wilt.
Ye Trees, ye Rocks, perfumed Valleys, sweet
And charming Zephirs, murmuring fountains keep
My griefs close in your bosom, you alone
Are witnesses unto my fires and moan,
Tell me if my sad heart, not daring to
Declare it it self, at least may sigh its woe?
May sigh its woe—Echo.
Well then my sighs, make no noise as pe pass
The airy Regions only breath alas
Unto the heart that sent you forth; since I
Can't speak to thee, dear object of my cry,
Let the Ecco, that's attentive, say for me
That if I love (as sure I do) it is thee.
it is thee—Echo
DIana's here about, her voice assures me.
Thy Brother comes here, take this opportunity.
Be sure thou speak unto him loud enough;
Thou art my only hope; I go from hence
To hear, and to observe thee.
We are undone,
Thersander will discover all in speaking.
It is now no longer time to utter sighs,
Let us resume our joy, and dry our tears,
Crown our sad spirits with flowers, and think no more of
Our passed misfortunes, let's form our discourse
Of the most pleasant thoughts, and let us chat
Of love.
Let me alone, I'll entertain thee
Upon that subject.
It belongs to me
To speak of that, and when I do consider
With what darts in my heart—
I know it well
It is of a longer date then from to day,
That I have read thy heart; and I believe
That never any one hath seen a Brother
To love his sister so.
The love wherewith
I am assaulted, and would make thee see,
Exceeds that of a brother, it begets,
Complaints and Sighs, it drives to despair,
And kills; the love we bear unto a Sister,
Makes not so many sufferings; but J love—
J divine whom, thou burnest with desire
To speak unto me here of Celiaes love.
Thou dost divine right, J take a great pleasure
To speak of it with thee; methinks I see her
Still when J look on thee; how sit I find thee
To be the faithful guardian of my love,
Assured of thy fidelity, and that
Thy heart is always mine.
Thou need not doubt it.
O my dear!
Brother I'm not ignorant
How dear I am unto thee.
Thy fair eyes—
How! flatter and court thy sister
By thy discourse?
I cannot speak, unto thee
Thou interrupt me still.
The advice is worth it, and I'll give thee notice
That from esteem they pass to love for thee,
That scarce arrivedst thou unto this place
But thy good fortune without any trouble
Gained thee the conquest of a heart, for which
Great Kings will envy thee, it is Melissa's.
O Gods! what dost thou say?
What doth astonish thee,
I see how thou art troubled to believe it.
This great heart finds no place yet in thy faith:
To make thee happy in it, I must embrace thee.
Wilt thou not yield to this excess of honour?
Think that thy Celia in this conjuncture,
Hath no resentment in her heart against thee,
Nor murmurs at it.
In this ecstasy
Wherein I am through this excess of honour,
I'm seeking of my self, but cannot find me.
How! dare to love the Nymph? t'aspire to her?
No my ambition's not so criminal.
Under those high respects, J see thy love.
How can I otherwise express it, Sister?
It the Nymph tempts me, and will make a crime on it,
It shall then have the name but of a lawful
Respect; and if I see occasion
T'express me further on this point, this lawful
Respect shall bear the bolder name of love.
Brotherm, it hath that name, and J am ready
To boast unto her, her illustrious conquest:
But the Sun, J perceive, plunges himself
In the waters, and the shadows seize the tops
Of the Mountains, it is time now to betake me
Unto Melissa; but behold, she comes.
What serious discourse have you together?
Our subject is of Love, of Mistresses,
Of Servants, and of Sighs.
What! hath Thersander
Already gotten him a Mistress?
Madam,
I have too little merit and address:
Besides to serve, to honour and obey you,
I have no other thought; our discourse was,
Your goodness for us, which my heart shall ever
Record as in a Register of Brass,
Where my acknowledgements shall never pass.
HO, Clidamant!
It is enough, let's go,
I hear some noise, and would not be seen here
In rh' night.—
Ismenia, Clidamant! they hear,
But fly me, and the night robs my sight of them;
But this is not Ismenia, and I am
Deceived much, if I saw not the gate,
The stature, and the gesture of Diana;
Yes, Clidamant abused me with a lie,
Diana builds his fortune at my cost,
And that note which he would conceal from me
Without doubt was subscribed with her fair hand;
Yes, it was Dianaes, though he read Ismenia,
To spare my grief a little, and my trouble.
How simple was J that J followed
Not close upon his steps: but soft, methinks,
J hear a noise, perhaps it may be he.
O Night, lend me thy silence, make these woods
To hold their peace in the absence of the day,
And let no sound be heard here but my love:
At last I'm happily delivered from
A troublesome companion, that would
Obstruct my fortune, that same jealous Shep∣heard
Without respect and faith.
I'm much obliged
Unto thee for this noble character
Thou give me; in despite of all my care
And cunning thou art come without my com∣pany
To see thy lovely Mistress.
I came here
To meet another person: for my Mistress,
I have already spoken with her fully.
Yes, if mine eyes deceived me not, thou talkd'st
Unto Diana, and seeing me follow,
Ye both fled at one time, these Woods concealed you.
Good Gods! what says thou to me?
But I'll be
More wise another time, and heed you better.
I understand not what this language means,
But this distrust doth me an injury:
Why covet'st thou to accompany me thus,
Since the object that expected me, forbids it;
Desire thou to publish secret passions?
Ismenia in thy sight gave me those Tables;
It is she that doth expect me at the place
Appointed; for Diana, she knows nothing
Of this invention: if thou can, enjoy
That lovely Shepherdess and think not me
Guilty of any treason, I seek only
Ismenia, and shun society:
In this affair, Shepherd retire thy self
And leave my love in peace, why would thou do me
So ill an office?
This appointed meeting
Denotes some artifice; I observed lately
At our last Games the amorous commerce
That passed between Diana and thy self,
So many kind respects, such gentle glances,
And private whilsperings forming the suspicion
That still awakes me.
Cease to trouble me,
And thy self too unnecessarily;
Our discourse only was an effect of
Civility; I say again, I leave
Diana to thee; oh how perfectly
I hate those vain suspicions and condemn them!
Ismenia's very free she would have had
Boldness enough to express her love by day,
Why should she make choice of the night to speak it?
Why dared she not to utter it in words,
But writ it to thee?
In vain jealous Shepherd,
Thou ask me that question, all that I
Can say unto thee, is that I am sent for;
I cannot tell thee more if the occasion
Be good or bad; if J could satisfy thee
Upon that point, believ't thou should excuse me.
I'll follow thee where ere thou goosed.
Oh Gods!
What a Tormentor have I?
I attend thee,
Then stay thou here, I'll leave the place unto thee.
I seign to withdraw, to withdraw him also. 
What! leave thou me alone? and cunningly
Hid'st me those secrets, which yet I must know:
Feign as much as thou wilt, in spite of thee
I will sind out to which of those two objects
Thou give thy faith, and dost direct they vows,
I'll be a witness of thy secret love;
Another shall inform me on it, Thimantes
Will tell me all the Plot; to him I'll go,
And give him notice of the assignation;
He'll come to let me know sure, if Diana
Appears there; or if it be Ismenia,
J shall do him a mischief; when Thimantes
Shall see his Mistress appoint secret meetings
To others then himself at such an hour,
He hath a poor spirit if he loves her still:
So shall I have pleasure in my resentment
In weakening the sierceness of Ismenia,
And of her servant, I'll to him immediately.
I Hear a noise, Ismenia, is it not Clidamant?
Fear not, we shall hear of him presently.
J hear no more noise, all is hushed and still;
Only the night, and silence reigns here.
Hark, J hear something, let us handsomely
Dissemble now.
Oh how I feel my soul
Seized with love and fear!
NO person follows me,
J am at liberty; jealous Melintus
Haunteth my steps no more.
Madam, it is he.
Well I'll go on to instruct me what Ismenia
Hath to impart unto me in these Gardens;
Ismenia!
Clidamant.
Is it thee, Ismenia?
Yes, I expect thee.
Thou may have pretence
T'accuse my tardy coming, but a jealous—
It is enough, thou art beloved, assure thee;
Draw near; but let us speak soft, I'm afraid
We should be heard.—
I Am obliged to thee for this advertisement;
If J find at the Echo either of them,
Diana or Ismenia, believe me,
I'll faithfully report it, to remove
Thy trouble, if J can: Ismenia
Appoints me very often here to meet her,
Where, notwithstanding her inconstancy,
Her mouth in secret gives me the hope
Of a most constant love, and for a pledge
Of her faith, never any but my self
At those hours entertains discourse with her:
I'll to her now, and charge her with this crime
Of coming here without acquainting me.
I'll approach softly without making noise
Lest it might raise a scandal in the night;
Ismenia,
Some noise hath struck mine car,
I'll return to you— 
O what feat is comparable
To mine! Ismenia, come to me presently.
Melintus, really I can no longer
Suffer your importunity? why should you
Imagine that J am the Author of
Your trouble? J speak to no person here
But to the Shepherdess Ismenia;
J tell thee once again, she sent for me,
And J am certain that the note is written
And signed with her hand; it is true, this fair one
Sighs only for the love of me, her mouth
Hath told it me already, and I answer
Unto her fires with a mutual heat;
Assure your self, and settle upon this
My faithful protestation, that Diana
Ne'er made me sigh.
O most perfidious!
See what an injury you do me now,
To satisfy you yet more fully hold,
There are the writing Tables, see her name.
Examin't well, and take repose at last
Without disturbing mine. Do ye place your glo∣rye
In persecuting me?
Shame of my love,
Depart my memory, J have wherewith
Both to reproach, and to convict thy falsehood;
And when I've done it, treacherous spirit, I'll quit thee,
And then J shall be satisfied.
Melintus,
What is it thou murmur yet? J must break with thee,
If this strange humour lasts, in acting thus,
You will lose all your friends, your jealous head,
And strange fantastic humours, but he's gone;
I will return unto the object which
Both charms and loves me.
There's our discourse,
Make an end on it thy self.
I'm rid at last
Of my impertinent; jealous Melintus
Hath left me now.
Adieu, let us retire.
I'm certainly informed that thy ambition
Aspires to Parthenia, in vain then
Thou hold me discourse.
In two words J will tell thee, that J have
Too full a knowledge of the eminence
Of her condition, as to dare to lift
My hope so high: Oh if I durst to love her;
But being less ambitious, J obey
My duty, and J better know my self.
Adieu until to morrow.
Oh Ismenia!
What content have J? and how skilful art thou
In this affair of love? I do admire
Thy wit, and thy invention; the thing
Answered my wish.
By this discourse of his
You may perceive love under that respect,
Like fire under its ashes; it is not lately,
Your charms have taken him.
In the mean time—
In the mean time, live all fair wits, say J;
Without me, you had been reduced unto
A sad condition, to die with grief,
And love, without expressing it.
It is late;
Come, in the absence of the day let's prove,
If sleep will follow on the steps of love.
HOw! in the night, perfidious, to exasperate
My anger, dare thou to grant private meet∣ings
To any but my self? yea in the night
Without light and attendance in the Garden,
Thou entertain'dst the Shepherd Clidamant.
How's this! Thimantes in a rage, O Gods!
Who would have thought it?
Wilt thou say that J
Complain now without reason, that J have
A cracked brain, and bleared eyes? it is too long,
Inconstant, to arrest thy spirits, behold
This witness, it hath told me every thing;
Yet J should not believe that thou were guilty,
If such an evidence accused thee not,
But since J dis-ingage my faith to thee,
This very instant, J restore thy papers
And will have nothing more to do with thee.
Well, let it be so then, J doubt it not,
But J shall be provided in good time;
When one forsakes me, presently another
Offers his service, otherwise J should,
In this unlucky moment of thy change,
Be destitute of an officious Lover;
But thanks unto the Gods, more then one calls me
His Mistress, and J shall have no less courtship
And press for thy departure, these notes here
Express the names of those that I've subjected,
I'll blot thee presently out of my Table-book.
Light Shepherdess!
For all this J am troubled
For thy disquiet, without further jesting,
Know that this trouble which possesses thee
Proceeds but from a fiction, speedily
I'll clear it to thee, only have but patience
To stay here till the Shepherd Clidamant
Arrives, before whom I have order to
Discover the deceit; and then I know
Thou wilt excuse me for it.—here he comes.
HAve J not staid too long? suspect me not,
Thimantes, J was sent for: well what is
Your pleasure?
Thy misfortune is extreme
Thimantes cannot suffer that another
Should love me, and one that account intends
To measure with thee sword and arm to day.
He is my friend, and therefore J am loath
To have a quarrel with him; to accord it,
Choose of us two him whom thou think most faithful.
I am content to stand unto my fortune,
Thimantes, what say you?
J agree to 't.
Then thus; for him, J do confess I love him
A little, but for thee,—nothing at all.
My mouth interprets truly what my heart thinks
O the most fickle and most want on issue
Of the inconstant sex! thou love a momen,
J love a moment also.
Notwithstanding
J have a secret to impart unto thee.
A Secret in thy heart loses its name
In less time then a minute, without doubt:
Thou though last night, that I discoursed with thee
At the Echo of the Garden?
Yes,
But what
If thou were then deceived, and that another
In my place counterfeited there my voice?
What hast thou told me?
That which may be true.
J cannot comprehend it, nor find thee;
Thou dost do nothing but deceive at all times,
And in all places; thou can turn thy heart
And eyes into all senses; how! another
Possess my place?
What if by this advise
J gained thee the heart of a fair Mistress,
One that 's illustrious, and of noble blood,
And who after the Nymph hath the chief rank!
Well feign thy fill, thou may speak what thou list;
I'm henceforth in no humour but to laugh.
If by the greatest oaths wherein my honour
Can be engaged, thou wilt believe the truth
Of what J told thee, that another person
Beside my self received thy vows last night
J hope thou wilt find out some fitter Epithies
Then false and wavering for me.
After such
An obligation, my charity
Would sway me much.
Then solemnly J swear,
It was Parthenia in my place, to whom
Thou did express thy love; she borrowed
My name and shape, and thine eyes suffered
This sweet imposture.
Still thou dost abuse me,
J knew thee by thy voice.
When we spake loud,
'T was I that spake; then presently Parthenia
Advancing in my place discovered softly
Her soul and thought unto thee: after this,
Judge, if I have deserved from thee, or no.
How! is it possible that she, to whose
High rank, I should not dare to aspire unto
So much as in a thought, that she to whom
I durst not speak a word in way of plaint,
That she, to whom my high respect concealed
My amity, should yet feel pity for me?
Alas! this cannot be, it is sin to think it.
Thou shalt see if I lie, and how she esteems thee;
I wait her here.
Therein I should obtain
The hight of my ambition; for this favour,
Oh let me kiss thy hands and die with plea∣sure.
WHat spectacle is this? I see Ismenia
Sports with my fortune, if I trouble you,
I will retire, continue that rare favour;
Who freely gives the hands, may give the heart.
Ha! Madam, really you are a novice
In love; I gave him intimation of
The arri fice we used, and he at first
Received my discourse with so much joy,
That he craved from me that civility.
Unto what jealous strange suspicions
Are you drawn by this object! he but aimed
To kiss my hand, and you are like to die for it?
Trouble you self no more thus to no purpose.
Ismenia thou restor'st me life, and rest,
I love thee, Clidamant; this jealous fit,
Methinks, might well have spared me the shame
Of telling it.
Fair Nymph, believe—
But let us
Enter into this Wood.
I wish the Echo,
Sometimes a friend to Lovers, would redouble
My voice in saying to you that J love,
And make you to repeat my words, J love.
Ismenia, be a faithful witness of
Our chaste amours, and come along with us
To hear what we discourse, Thimantes be
Discreet and secret.
Madam, I'm all silence.
See, what a strange unnecessary evil
Is that a jealous person doth sustain;
Foolish Melintus how thou art deceived
In thinking that Diana is the object
Gf Clidamant's affection—here she comes
Discoursing with her brother, J will leave them.
LEt us consider what we are to do,
She loves thee infinitely, and J have
Command from her to speak to thee again,
In her behalf.
Advise me what to do.
Since the Nymph loves thee with such passion,
As I perceive she doth, it is ft thou flatter
Her grief a little, otherwise I fear
That I shall lose thee after having found thee.
What mischief can she not do, when provoked?
Since there needs but to feign all will succeed.
In the mean time, Ismenia will be careful
To inquire for us, when the Merchant-ship
That's bound for Sevill will be fully ready
To set sail from the harbour; we shall hire him
To land us where we will; till when, our care
Must be not to offend the Nymph, for fear
She ruin us; she'll presently be here.
She's come already; act the Lover well,
Dissemble handsomely, therein consists
All that we can expect.
A Word, Diana.
Hast thou removed that fatal obstacle,
Which came to intetrupt the pleasant course
Of my affections? hast thou settled
My lifes content, and razed Celia
Out of thy Brothers spirit?
His heart follows
Where my voice and his glory calls him,
And cheerfully yields obedience
To such sweet Laws.
Blessed Interpreter
Of a most ardent love! hast thou advised him
To keep it secret?
Only that point, Madam,
J have forgotten, but J will redeem it;
And tell him on it before you; if you please
That I go for him.
Go, and bring him hither.
Feign handsomely unto her
Fear it not.
I'll speak before her but of you, and to you,
And yet not make her jealous.
Could you doubt
My heart should be so stupid, and insensible
Of my felicity how happy is
My fortune, and how gentle was the storm
That gave me this blessed port, whereof great Kings
Are jealous? What proud Conqueror would not
Submit and lay his arms down with himself
At the fair feet of such a charming object?
A rude obdurate rock, would be consumed,
The coldest Marble would be kindled by it:
Yes, Madam, a fair eye but opens
Its lid here, &amp; it is day; the nights black shadows
Fly only from the Sun of those bright eyes,
Her fires too at the sight of them grow pale.
I must confess then, Madam, that J love them,
And that J live more in this beauteous object
Then in my self: my spirit is charmed with
A happiness unparalleled, when J
Think that J love them, and am loved again.
Come, thou but feignest love? do not abuse me.
O Gods! what do you say? Madam, J love
Or rather J adore.
How hast thou then
Disposed of Celia that reigned o'er thy heart?
That affair's ordered well, I've put her interests
Into my Sisters hands; she 'ath promised me
To make all fair of that side, and will answer
To me for her.
Hast thou not boasted to me
That her eyes were the object of thy love?
That for thy sake she cherished the light
Of the alternate day, and that they would
Cover themselves with an eternal night,
If thou should cease to live or to be faithful:
Think well of thy part what you have promised;
Be firm, be constant, fail not in that point,
Consider not at all this supreme greatness;
Stick to thine object, love it for it self,
And have no interest for thy ambition,
Flatter thee with the honour to possess her,
Look only if she loves thee, not if she
Enriches thee; the beauty whom thou serve,
Should be thy crown, all greatness whatsoever
Should be esteemed in thy account beneath it.
Ne'er doubt it, Madam, J shall have those thoughts;
Greatness shall never blind me so far forth
As to oblige me to forget my love;
Which always shall pure as the day star burn
Base interest shall never sully me.
I'll tell my Brother now, what I forgot
If thou know well to love, know thou as well
To hold thy peace, love like the other Gods,
Is not without his secrets, he is served
Sometimes by hearts that can't express them∣selves:
Take heed how thou provoke his jealous power,
Adore his Altars, but adore in silence;
For silence is a part of his Religion;
And oftentimes this fierce God is offended
At his own name; if any thing hereof
Should be known in the Isle, thou art undone:
Love, without speaking of it, that's the law,
Which is imposed on thee; she for her part
Will love thee likewise, use the secret well,
Melissa otherwise would die with grief;
J know the excess of love wherewith thy soul
Is filled; but for thy own interest,
Put a seal on thy mouth.
Yes, have a care
That none suspect our love, I'll take my time
To publish it, in the mean time I'll study
Thy setrlement and they repose which makes
That of my life; this free confession now,
Would call up envy from her Cell, and make
Our greatest Hero's, to dispute with thee
What J have promised thee, thine enemies.
Judge then how precious thy obedience is;
Since all thy good and happiness depends
Upon thy silence.
Sure, J should be stricken
With a strange blindness, if J observed not
This your command; J will obey so well,
That, Madam, even you your self shall doubt
Whether J love, or whether you J love.
In the mean time thy sister shall assist me,
And have the ordering of our Amours;
Believe what she shall say, since I will make her
My only bosom friend, unto whose trust,
J will commit the secrets of my heart.
J will make use of her in the same manner.
Madam, a Jeweller, that uses still.
To come unto the Games, desires access
Unto your presence.
Cause him to come in:
This Sevil Merchant comes every year
To sell and traffic in the Island with us.
SHall you remain sometime yet on our shore?
I stay but for your Passport to depart.
Every year, Madam, by your Highness bounty
My trassick thrives so well, that whatsoever
Commodities I bring unto you Isle,
J carry nothing back, you empty still
My casket: now I'll show you, if you please,
such rarities, as can be had no where
But in my hands.
Let's see them.
Here's a Diamond
Darts flame of all sides.
It is a sparkling stone
I like his lustre.
Will you have it, Madam?
I'll tell you presently, show all at once,
Then I shall soon choose: let me see that Coral.
The piece is very fair; till now your Isle
Hath never seen the like.
And what's that other?
A piece of Amber-greece; Madam, it is rare
And of great price; I have passed divers Seas
To purchase it; alone it is worth as much
As all my casket.
For my part, J cannot
See any thing that's new here.
Shepherdess,
This rope of Pearl is very rich and new,
'T would make you look more fair, more gay, more sparkling.
Without those Ornaments of Art, she is
Charming enough, she needs no strange additi∣once.
She makes all our Shepherds die for love:
But for all this, though you are fair without them
I will bestow them on you, if you like them.
What says Diana.
Madam, your great bounties—
Lay them aside.
But, Madam, look upon
This Master-piece of Art, it is the Portrait
In little of the King of Andalousia.
He's one of the best made that I have seen.
And who is this?
It is his favourite
Nearchus sometime Prince of Pichery,
Who by a beauty fatal through her charms,
Gave up his arms, and life unto his Rival,
A gallant Gentleman, his name Cleagenor,
May I believe! good Gods! how he observes me?
But are you certain of Nearchus death?
He returned sorely wounded from the fight,
And died four days after, as all know.
His valour seems yet painted in his face.
But he that conquered him had more by much.
Behold his Portrait.
Oh! what shows he?
Is this that valiiant Cleagenor?
Yes, it is his picture.
O unlucky accident!
Of all those that J had, this only 's left me:
The offended King commanded me to carry them
Unto all places where J went, and trafficked,
That so he might be known, and then arrested;
For after this great Combat, to secure
His head from pursuit, he took flight immedi∣italy.
Thersander, in my judgement, nothing can
Better resemble you, J think your sister
Will say as much.
Madam, we see that Nature
Sports sometimes in her works, and makes some feitures
In faces to resemble somewhat nearly.
This Merchant,, I believe, 's of my opinion.
Madam, without doubt, it is Cleagenor,
The thing is little certain on the faith
And bare ground of a Portrait.
Sir, you are
The very same, I am confirmed now
In my first thoughts, all that which hitherto
Hindered me to judge so, was the name of
Thersander, and the habit of a Shepherd.
Who! J, Cleagenor?
Yes, Sir, J saw you
The last year in the fortunate Islands, and
Not above four months since in Portugal;
Sevll's your native Country; since you meet here
Your safety, to what purpose should you cover
Those things with silence?
Sure, you need not blush,
Thersander, at this fair acknowledgement.
I confess, Madam, that J blush a little,
Not that mine arm hath not done all that which
It ought to do in the death of my Rival,
Nearchus was too rash, and insolent;
From the fair and unspotted object which
Made my most chaste desires, he in his thoughts
Formed the object of his filthy pleasures;
But he hath paid for it, and his death is just
Only the thing that troubles and afflicts me,
And for which I am sorry at my heart,
Is that J told you nothing of my secret.
J guess the cause of it, and know your thought.
And what fear troubled it, and that you chose
Another name only to free you from
The penalty of the Law; but fear not any thing;
I'll oppose power to power for your defence;
Your interests are mine, J'l make your peace;
The King of Andalousia shall be weary
Of persecuting you; if he persift
To trouble your repose, J'l invade his:
If he refuse to grant what we demand,
From our request we will proceed to arms.
What obligation have you upon me
For all your goodness?
But let's make an end
Of seeing all the rarities.
Behold
With admiration, Madam, this rare piece,
It is Diana's Picture.
How Dianaes?
O sad misfotrune!
It is the Divinity,
Whose Temple's here, the Goddess of this place.
I cease to tremble, all is well again.
What Portrait's this?
It is a Beauties, Madam,
Whose heavenly graces made two desperate Lo∣verse,
That sight for her, arm for the field, and fight;
It is that fair ones whom I told you of
For Whom Cleagenor and Nearchus burned,
And who pursued hotly by two Rivals,
Coft the one flight, and life unto the other.
After Nearchus death, I bought his Portraits:
This that he had without doubt's to the life.
But who can better then Cleagenor
Instruct you in this point?
D' ye know this piece?
I know not what to say on it.
I observe
Much of thy sisters air in it.
O ye Gods!
Turn aside this misfortune.
Really
The glass, Diana, which receives thy image,
Represents less thy shape and countenance;
And any other but the Painter would
Believe indeed that the finished this Portrait
Upon thy presence.
There's no doubt of it.
One may admire in this adventure how
Art imitates nature: it is she
For whom Nearchus sighed.
O Gods! where are we?
Our fortunes now are desperate.
Know thou me?
I am of the same Town, and therefore know you;
Your mother is Melora, and she dwells
At Sevil; I shall make her a glad woman
At my return, to tell her that her Celia
Lives yet, and is in health here in this Island.
How! Celia?
Yes, Madam, that is her name,
What could of error blinds thy soul thus?
That Celia whom thou mean, and dost discourse of,
Died before Nearchus.
It was believed so
At first; but since, all Sevil knows the contrary,
And that false death is now no more a mystery
Unto me; J know where the mourning went,
And how a Coffin only was interred
Instead of you, that this apparent sign
Of your death only could secure you from
Nearchus ill designs; I know besides
That you betook your self unto the Sea,
Where you sight not, but for Cleagenor;
The Sea proved false to you, and to your mother,
And separated you one from another
By the assistance of a hideous storm:
She having saved her self upon a plank
Sought you from one end of the World to th'o∣there;
But hearing no news of you, she believed
At her return to Sevil that the Sea
Had swallowed you, and death had made her search
Unprofitable.
Thou know secrets which
To me are Riddles.
Wherefore should you, Lady,
Dissemble thus your knowledge of a thing
Which is no more concealed; one of your people
A complice of the Plot, divulged it lately;
Melora too since her return revealed
The whole Imposture, all impediment
Being removed after Nearchus death:
This that I know, I understood from her.
All this thou says, is strange news unto us.
You have the art, I see, well to dissemble;
But by your favour might it not be you
That did employ a friend unto me lately
To pray me to receive into my bark
Two Shepherds, natives of the Town of Sevil?
Madam, this Merchant doth compose Romants.
And tells you all these strange adventures only,
To show his wit, and faculty that way.
Yet his discourse in not without some ground,
I find good reason so to judge of it;
If I remember well, you willingly
Did put the interest of Celia
Into your sisters hands, she promised
To make all fair of that side, and to answer
To you for her: Merchant, another time
See us again. How both of you abuse me
With an Imposture formed under false name's
To carry on your love in a disguise!
What in my Palace, in my Court, my presence,
Sport with my person thus in a contempt!
Insolent wretches, you shall feel what force
My anger hath when thus provoked, I'll make you—
Oh, Madam!
Go, Impostor, thou shalt answer
For all the troubles of my heart; none ever
Affro ntd me yet without punishment:
I'll sacrifice you both to my disgrace,
In such a manner, that ye shall repent
Eternally that ever ye made me blush:
Depart my sight.
O what misfortune's this!
See that you separate them one from another
In several apartment, that they may
Hold no discourse together. O misfortune
Not to be paralleled! What shall I do?
Of whom should I take counsel in this case?
Shall I hear yet my love that murmurs?
Ought I to suffer, or repel the injury?
It is resolved in my offended heart
That those black Passions shall succeed my love,
By which the soul when in disorder, breaks
The chain wherewith she's ti'd, break forth my fury,
And ruin these ungrateful they shall know
My power, as they have seen my goodness to the:
They shall not mock at my simplicity,
Nor reproach me for my credulity:
How! treacherous Thersander; oh! that name
Thersander combats yet within my heart,
In its defence, my spirits at this name
Are wavering, and my anger's weak, my hate
Is in suspense; I am not pleased with that
Which I demand; I fear what J would most.
Ha traitor, must J to torment my self
Suspend my judgement upon thy destruction?
Must J dispute the case within myself
As doubtful to determine, no pass sentence
Against him for this barbarous affront:
Arm my despair, and inspire thou my rage:
And let me see how faithfully my Art
Will serve my vengeance in the punishment
Of these ungrateful Lovers, I intend not
To give a sudden death to either of them,
But they shall suffer that which shall be worse:
By the effect, and strange force of my charms,
They shall have, without dying, every day
A thousand deaths; I will continually
By turns afflict the sad eyes of the Lover,
And of his Mistress: both of them shall see,
That they may suffer equally, each other
To die and to revive, this punishment
Is strange and cruel; but it is that I use
In my revenges; come, why loiter we
In our design? my heart like flint shall be
Insensible of their calamity.
MIne eyes and ears ne'er saw, nor heard the like
The miserable cries of those poor Lovers
Fill all these places with astonishment.
Thersander and Diana are so changed,
I could scarce know them, as I now came from them:
Pale death by turns skipping from face to face,
Can't make them yet to dye unto their love:
But, Madam, is it true what's published here
Among the people, that those strange enchant∣mints
Come from Melissa?
Yes, they are the works
Of her Art, without doubt, she could do more yet
Nothing's too hard for her, the destiny
Of mortals seems to be held in her hands,
And as she pleases, she disposes it.
What can she not do, when she is in choler?
The miserable Thirsis feels th'effect,
And rigour of her power by sad experience.
Hath not same yet informed you with his suf∣ferings?
Yes, Madam, J have heard them fully spoken.
You know then that he loved Roselia,
And so deceived the expectation,
And desire of the Nymph who hitherto
Designed him for my husband, and knows not
That I have love for you; to her commands
This Shepherd was Rebellious: what did she?
Roselia was fair, she became sick;
She wept, she pined, she complained; the brightness
Of her fair eyes, extinguished in a moment:
The whiteness of her Lilies as soon faded;
And of so many beauties there remained
Only the place, where sometime their seat was,
Her Lover that perceived her taken from him,
Seeks her in every place, but cannot find her:
That was a Master-piece of her Apprenticeship;
But this without doubt is another work
Of higer knowledge; if in her resentment
But for my interest she made poor Thirsis
A miserable Lover, judge how far
She may be carried, moved at her offence,
In her revenge for her own interest.
If the Nymph knew the love I have for you,
I could expect no other usage from her;
She would without doubt cause me to be carried
unto some fearful Island where I should
Be rendered miserable all my days:
But let her art do what it can against me
Employed by her hate, it shall work nothing
Upon my faith, to do it prejudice:
Oh! could I flatter me with the same hope,
That you would have like constancy for me!
You need not doubt of it, I'm wholly yours,
My love is strong, and little fears her anger;
I'll keep it still sincere and firm unto you:
And you shall find me constant unto death:
Should she destroy me with her power, &amp; kill me
I'll rather dye my self, then my affection.
My life can't pay the debt J owe unto you.
WHat strange news do we hear? is it true, Madam,
That by th'effects of fortune and enchantment,
Thesander and Diana dye by turns,
And live again to wail their miseries?
Ismenia, tic too true, they are enchanted.
If I durst speak my thoughts, &amp; what I've heard,
They impute this injuftice to the Nymph.
It is not to be doubted but she is
The Author of it, and this cruel punishment
Denotes that she studies high revenge,
When she's offended.
Whatso'er her power be
Which causes fear, let us go presently
With our complaint unto her: in my judgement,
This is no way to make her self obeyed:
Fear is the parent not of love, but hate.
And that same fatal art which her revenge
Calls to her aid, establishes her crime,
And not her power. But here J see she comes.
WHat doth this stroke surprise thee?
Truly, Madam,
Their punishment's too great, and all the Jsfland
Murmurs at it.
Shepherds, what say you?
Can J revenge me of an injury?
Ye, Madam, and th'estate wherein you've put them
Hath made all those their friends that envied them.
Hear our petitions for them, and be pleased
To do them justice: what have they committed
Worthy of such a punishment? for having
Hid their love from you, lived in your Court
Under the name of brother, and of sister,
Deceived the hope and envy of their Rivals,
Conserved their honour, and, perhaps, their life,
•s this so great a crime, as should be punished
By charms which have no end? must they be made
To dye, and to revive continually
By turns, and by a strange unworthy fate
The living be enforced successively
Still to lament the dead? their piteous cries,
And hideous clamours give both souls &amp; mouths
Unto those rocks to join in plaints with me:
The whole Isle's moved with them, and disturbed
Madam, I join in this petition,
Vouchsafe to hear me: O forbear to dart
Thunder and wrath upon this happy place,
Where the Gods liberally pour upon mortals
So many and so great felicities:
Begin not to disturb the sweet repose
Of an abode that's favoured by Heaven,
To please those Shepherds, whose devotions
May fix upon some other Sanctuary
More safe, and other Sovereigns more sweet.
Yes, Madam, stop the mouth of this sad murmur,
Let it be smothered, this enchantment hath
Continued too long, break, break the charm,
And pacify our spirits immediately,
Which are astonished at this proceeding.
If in the freedom which J use too frequently,
My mouth might date to speak, and not di∣please you,
I should then tell you that this rigid course
You take, would leave you here ner Shephear∣desses
Nor Shepherds; they would seek this place no more
For their retreat and sanctuary, but shun it
Like a destroying rock; and this fair Island
The glory of the world, would be a wilderness:
To enjoy subjects, rule your passions better,
••d be more sovereign over your self.
Shepherds, and Shepherdesses, your discourses
Astonish and surprise me, know, my Art,
Is a sufficient warrant for my actions;
J could do greater yet, and stranger too:
Though this which you have seen seems unjust
Unto you, have you any right, or privilege
To complain to me, and to murmur thus?
Much less to reprehend, and censure me?
How! should the bold Shepherd Thersander dare
To injure me, and to deride my power?
Should he presume to lay aside his duty
And respect for me, and I wink at it,
That so can punish such an insolence?
Presume it not, the blood of Zoroastres
Is not yet born under so ill a star,
J know its influence better, and can use it
To the destruction of those that wrong me:
Yes, Shepherds, I am skilful in the qualities
Of herbs and roots, and as I have occasion
J choose them, some for poison, some for medi∣cine:
When I will, I prescribed some to confound
The memory, and to distract the spirit;
But those obnoxious weeds I never use
But for their punishment that do offend me;
Have I not reason to maintain my rank
In dignity and honour? those that dare
To brave me, without doubt, hazard themselves:
My scepter's guarded with enwreathed serpents,
Whose fearful aspects bid all keep aloof,
And threaten death to those that dare to touch it:
Thirsis hath felt their stings: what reason had he
To be an enemy to his own fortune
And interest, in foolishly refusing
The honour of the name to be my Nephevv:
I will advance him, and expect that he
Shall yet accept this honourable title
Of Husband to my Niece; Parthenia,
Your colour changes, but in vain you hide
Your thoughts from me, I can discover them,
I know that you love Clidamant, and more
What you design, and what you do discourse;
But understand both one and t'other of you,
That I must be obeyed in what I will;
My power can force it; take heed ye provoke not
My anger; if J may not be beloved,
J will be feared.
Madam—
It is enough,
You know my prohibition.
I hope
To bend her, but at present let's say nothing.
We all know your high rank and quality
With reverence and respect, so in that notion
We employ but our prayers to persuade you;
They are our only arms, be touched with them,
And dissipate these charms: Thersander, now
Begins t'awake out of his fatal fit;
You'll hear his plaints and clamours presently,
His cries and his despair for his dear Mistress
This is the hour, wherein he is tormented:
This object without doubt before your eyes
Will raise up pity, Madam, in your heart:
His sighs will quench your anger, and prevail
Much more then we; see he begins to move:
Madam, you will be touched, to hear him speak.
O Lamentable object! why mine eyes
Were ye not covered with eternal darkness,
That J might not have seen this fatal spectacle?
Oh! what cause have I to complain of fortune,
That my sleep is not the last sleep of death?
In the night of the Grave I should take rest,
And not be tied to die thus all my life,
I should be there but dust, and this sad sight
Should not have martyred my heart and eyes.
Yes, my dear Mistress, sometime my delight,
Thy sight is now my greatest punishment,
And in this sad estate wherein I see thee,
Thou which were once my joy, art now my grief;
Thy body's but a trunk that gives me horror,
Thy head all over's smoking with thy blood,
The graces lodge no more there, I see death
In every place, where I saw love before:
How! dost thou live no more then have I lost thee
As soon as found thee hopes born and destroyed
With an immortal love, fantosine of fortune
Which lasts good but a day, wealth too soon lost,
Brightness too soon put out, excessive joy,
To which so many plaints so soon succeed,
Why in that splendour where with all you slatter'd,
My name, did you promise so much unto me,
And give so little. Fair eyes, sometimes conque∣rous,
Whose lightsafe shut up in eternal night
In spite of all my prayers, call me not
From death unto the light; is it possible
That I can see here what Diana sees not
No, no, I live no more since she is dead;
Yet my heart moves; but this last struggling is
But a small spark that's left behind, and shines
A little after death; it is but a vapour,
An exaltation, a wind, a smoke,
Last dying and last kindled; I am coming
To join with thee, object of my desire,
To give thee soul for soul, and sigh for sigh;
Death is my aid, my hope is but in her;
I will express that I am faithful to thee
In that, not able to survive thy fate,
I put my self into the arms of death.
Madam, you see how great his torment is,
And whereunto your hatred hath reduced him;
You see besides how far without proportion
Of the crime to the punishment, the power
Of your enchantment goes; these woods weep at it;
And these rocks which before heard no com∣plaints,
Are pierced now with his cries, and become soft,
And sensible, the Echo likewise mourns,
And should you only, Madam, be without
Compassion for him.
Yes, without compassion;
Since he took pleasure always to displease me,
I'll please my self by a most just return
In my revenge, and never cease t'afflict him:
No, think not that J will incline to pity.
I'm too much injured to be pacified
His sorrow makes my joy, and I am glad
To see that by this famous punishment
I shall establish my authority.
Diana's turn is now; see he revives
To weep her lover, and immediately
To follow him by the force of your Art:
Sad spectacle? hearken unto her grief,
And op your eyes, and heart to her complaints,
What, my dear Lover, art thou then but dust!
Alas! thy mouth wants speech, and thine eyes light.
But inspight of the plot which makes me sigh,
I have the happiness yet to lament thee:
Flow, flow, my tears, and pour upon this object
Torrents of flame, not water, there is nothing
So cold in the dark bosom of the Grave,
Which the fire of these Rivers cannot warm:
Yes, by my tears at last, my cries, my plaints,
Dear ashes, I will kindle you again,
Though cold now and extinguished like the Phoenix
I'll raise you up again by force of sights,
Which you shall Echo to me.
Madam can you
Behold this sight, and not be moved at it!
Love, can thou not answer to my desires!
Thou art a miracle thy self, and therefore,
Methinks, should do one: art thou in the world
No more a source of life? oh can thou not
Restore my lover to me, from whose arms
They 'ave ravished him; which of the Gods can call him
Back from the gates of death, if thou can not?
My dear Cleagenor, J pray thee, answer me
By these my tender sighs, by Cilia's name;
How's this! I can pronounce thy name, and mine
And yet, O Gods! thou answer me nothing;
I see, alas! thy mouth and eyes still shut:
He's dead, and these names cannot touch him now.
Love, since thou hast no power to succour me
In that point as to make him live, at least
Make me to dye: I come, my faithful lover,
It is impossible I should survive thee;
I feel that my despair t'enjoy thee here
Gives me to death; my heart hath lost the spirits
Which made it move, J scarce can utter more:
Happy thy Celia, if her death could give
Thee life again, if thy sleep might have end
By mine, and if I could with all my blood
Redeem thine; J have done, any love is coming
To meet thy flame, and I aspire upon thee
The rest of my sad soul.
What! is your heart
Not touched yet with this object? are you still
Jnsensible of so much grief as she
Suffers by your means? oh! let pity yet
Disarm your anger, the Enchanted Lovers
Have suffered enough Nymph, break the charm.
Yes, I am touched at last, J must confess,
And really am sorry for the evil
Which they have drawn through their temerity
Upon themselves; but though their grief appea∣seth
My anger now, the charm which I have made
J can't undo; to tell you truly, Shepherds,
It is so strong that only a Divinity
Can break the chance on it; tic decreed by fate
That it shall last yet longer, and J cannot
Prevent it, though it be my proper work.
How! cannot you prevent it? heavenly Gods,
What saying's this? no, no, you have not left
Your anger, but retain it still; and willing
To punish them, and to revenge your wrong,
Will make of them a lasting spectacle
Unto the eyes of all; and to excuse
Your self the better of this cruelty,
Would put it off to some Divinity;
But the Gods by our prayers and tears appeased,
Jnspight of your attempts, will stop your charms:
Yes, Madam, the great Gods condemn your plots,
They are the Sovereigns, and absolute Masters
Of destiny, we hope all things from them,
And that they'll suffer crime no longer here
To reign and tyrannize. Thou Goddess, which
Art in this place adored which hold fate,
And fortune in thy hands, which hottest crime,
and whose cares keep the Shepherds that serve thee
In this delightful Island, look upon
The sad estate whereto love hat reduced
Two miserable Lovers, whom the Nymph
Pursues with horrid cruelty to death
By fatal charms, destroy the power of them,
And render to this government again
The liberty to lover, and to declare it.
Ha! what a sudden flash of lightning's this,
That strikes mine eyes, and what a clap of thun∣der
Shakes all this place?
With what a thick black cloud
The Sky is covered?
I believe Heaven trembles,
And its Arch opens; behold the Goddess
Descends, and makes sign, as if she'd speak:
We must give audience.
YOur prayers are heard, let nothing trouble you,
Fair Celia and her Lover both shall live
And love for ever, their afflictions
Are ended, and I have dissolved the charm,
No accident shall henceforth trouble them.
They stirred up pity in you, now they may
Make you to envy them; search all Records,
You'll find no subject equal to their love.
By what enchantment is thy life restored?
By what enchantment do'ft thou live again?
I'll recompense their inexemplar virtues,
And pay the price of their affection;
To consummate their happy Nuptials,
I'll op my Temple, and assure you all
Of my protection. It is my pleasure also
That the love of the Shepherd Clidamant
Be at the same time crowned with Hymen's ho∣nurse,
And that he end his days with sweet Parthenia,
That henceforth he command in the Isle with her;
My justice hath made choice of them to reign.
The Nymph I do degrade, she is too criminal,
And dispense you of your obedience to her;
I'll make the power of her Art unuseful;
And free this Island from all future fear,
And danger; but to save her from the Thunder
Of the offended Gods, I will recive her
Into my Temple, which shall be her Sanctuary.
Her Sex hath long enough ruled the Province,
I'll change the order of its Government,
And henceforth it shall be under the power,
And wise administration of a Prince,
Which shall be of the blood of Clidamant
From father unto son.
I confess Goddess,
You do me justice in approving crime
One makes himself a complice: without you,
The Gods, high Sovereigns, Masters, and dispo∣sers
Of destiny, would, sure, have punished me
With death; I go into your temple now
To employ other charms, to wash away
My criminal defilements with my tears
To pray unto the immortal powers, whilst J
Have breath, and so disarm them at your Altars:
But to the end her law may be fulfilled
In every point, Cleagener, fail not
To love your Celia.
O how redevable
Am I to your rare goodness?
Clidamant,
Enjoy what you deserve, accept Parthenia,
With her, the crown, and succeed happily
The rank which I freely resign unto you.
You command still, and keep your Sovereign rank,
When the reign is conferred upon your blood;
And by all my respects, I shall express
That it is but in your name that I'll be Master.
Though Heavens kind hand chooses a husband for me,
Since you allow him, I'll hold him of you,
And will possess no honour here, nor power,
But to express the more my service to you,
And my acknowledgements.
Ismenia,
Must we not couple too?
Yes, if the Goddess
Had said it; we will defer our marriage,
Till she descends again.
Ismenia,
I command in this place now, and J will it.
Since you will have it, I accept his vows
Offaithfull service. If Melintus too
Hath shaken of his jealousy, J must
Be reconciled with him.
Well, J agree to 't.
Let us remain friends.
Heaven hath promised us.
That we shall all be happy, let us go
Forthwith unto the Temple to conclude
This triple marriage, and henceforth we shall
Honour this day as a great Festival.

