WHat whisper's this Timante, that wakes our Prince out of his amorous slumber, and blows him thus abroad to seek for rest in agitation?
This noise, Osorio, hath past-by my ears; but judge you how unfit to be let into our beliefs. When it must be a woman's virtue that's of proof against such power, youth and honour, as our matchless Prince attempts with; whose repulse must counsel this retreat, and that cannot be, Osorio. Constancy would too much cheapen herself, should she impart such a proportion of virtue unto a woman, when the rarity of it in that sex, is that which hath raised Constancy to such a Virtue.
There's a degree in virtue women may attain to in their defence, that they retain even after they are taken: against Prince's assaults there's nought to be required but a neglect of speedy com∣position;
for taken as it were by assault, they re∣maine with as much honour as women were born to. F•d•mira hath already made such a resistance, that it almost brings the possibility of Women's de∣fending themselves against Princes, in question: therefore now even her surrender is a Trophy to her, and the gods owe the virtuous Princess of Navarr that satisfaction, the dishonour of Fidami∣ra; who, they say, quit her father's Court in a just disdain, to marry one who loved another. I am sorry the Prince is guilty of an injury to so excel∣lent a creature.
They say, Osorio, it is Agenor that inter∣cepts Fidamira's love to the Prince; it is surely fixed on him.
If it be so, he is but justly punished, for having set him so, as all things must pass through him to Himself, if his own joys be intercepted by the way; it is a strange fortune of a man, Timante, redeemed from death by such a chance, as none can know who gave him life; one, whom but-forgetting, must have killed, • preserved amongst the fury of a commanded extirpation of mortality; trusted to the rage of common Soldiers, who had paid so much of their own blood for this commission, as it was doubted whether they had enough left to exe∣cute it. In this deluge, to see one •ingle infant saved, was such a miracle to me, as I have not wondered at his succeeding fortune.
It may be, the Prince being a child then did beg his life: believe it, he was more to him then hi• father, as reviving is above begetting; and so loves him with such a supernatural tenderness, a∣bove the fondness of a father.
But look, Timante, where the Prince and Fimadira come: their looks me-thinks, imply so lit∣tle
peace, that even their sorrows seem to c•ntend for Mastery.
Come, Osorio, let's retire; we shall know what kind of storm these clouds contain.
Gentle Fidamira, forgive these looks and words that come in a morning to demand Albricias of you for the news; the use I mean to make of this my heaviness, is, but to sink me down unto a level even with you, that from thence you may receive your Equal not your Prince. I owe your virtue my conversion, for in pursuit of that which fled before me up to heaven for safety, my thoughts were raised thither, and detained; and were thus blessed for following you, and their intent forgiven. So now I may justlier resume •he name of Prince thus given by you; and yet preserve disparity be∣tween us for my becoming thus a Prince proves you an Angel, and that prompts me to a demand which I dare ask, because it is the greatest blessing mortality can taste, and consequently you only can impart; and sure I was not destined to owe you less then all the good that you can give.
If I were sad before for one attempted in∣nocence, I might be much more now, for this so general injury to all our sex, in which Sr. you seem to exalt but a resistance of unruly wishes to that height of virtue our sex can rise to. Nothing can be called temptation Sr. to innocence, to make it self a way ell's lost in the possessing; but such a virtue as should dare resist a Prince's fair and honourable love, when the yielding is a victory, such a bravery of virtue were a subject worthy of your praise. To what a hight of contemplation would such a subject raise your soul, the which the preservation but of inno∣cence hath carried even already into heaven?
Sure Fidamira's virtue is not no•re such an
extreme; Virtue is always gentle and pliant to the strength of reason. It weakens it self when it hardens in∣to obstinancy. What reason can virtue bring with it, to justify it's temper in the neglect of so fit an exercise of it self, as in a Prince his fair and virtuous love?
It must produce that which is above all Rea∣son, faith either to the gods or men: virtue preserves her temper in the tenderness of either of these vows; nor can a Prince bring any reason that this virtuous tender∣ness may not or'eflow, and not resist.
Faith to the gods, Fidamira! It is scarce a a good excuse for a despair: how can it then protect a froward contempt of all the joys and blessings the gods ordain for t•ose they represent themselves by? And Faith to men cannot be so religious as not to be subject to so high a dispensation. Might it not thus remit it self, even constancy might seem to be a sin. No Fidamira, the gods have not left such a temptation for Princes to rapine, as the permission of such a frowardness to defeat their just desires.
I wonder not to see a Prince so much mistaken in this virtue, Constancy, that is so free as tyranny enlar∣geth it. Princes should do well to prove it to be no virtue, since it may warrant disobedience to them, nor have You that call your selves the Images of gods, reason to rapine, if, in your large commission, they have reserved the So∣verainty of o•r wills unto themselves. You then, young Prince, you that have enthroned your self among the gods, by the confinement of your wishes to be just; know there are none so, that would distress, or much less break, a promised faith.
By these turning steps I shall wind my self into an admiration, so as I shall not wonder at her re∣fusall; it is time to go directly to my wish. I am so hum∣ble after my repentance, I do not bring my person, or my birth to claim a joyful acceptance: but allege your
virtue and your beauty, to which you owe even some constraint to place them in such a light where they may be most conspicuous; which I can pleàd to be preferred by your making me happier then any other.
O how blessed am I, that have the means to make so brave a Prince happier then he can wish!
No more my Fidam•ra. I will not exact a word more then is necessary for a consent.
If, Sir, I must expound this happiness unto you, you will not understand it at the first. Else know Sir, I love you so, I joy to think you may leave so new, and an unmatch't example of your virtues, as my condition doth afford you. Know Sir, I have deposited my faith, and have received a mutual pawn upon it, and it must be your anger sooner than your love, that must release it. And, were it not a blemish to your innocence, even death would be an ease to mine: but pardon royal Prince even this little digression into a doubt of you. The gods that will not have your virtues called in question by a fear, assure me already you will, by a forgiveness of me, possess your self of a diviner happiness then can be due by any acquisition.
O do not mock me thus i• a submiss deluge of the sentence of the justest Heavens, in which you have an Angel's part to be the bearer of it. It is not fit, I should so soon be trusted with that innocence, I am so lately reconciled to; and Heaven will be so just to make the guilty fire of my lust, but-the-refiner of your virtue for another use. But I find Heaven merciful in this, that it would vouchsafe me a miracle for consolation as well as punishment, that an accession of my love to Fidamira, should bring a patience with it to consent to this perpe∣tuall distance you have pronounced; all merit to Fida∣mira. In this separation from my self to this exalted patience, I disclaim, and own my bad humanity in my affliction for my curse; but I will promise you the rest of
my sad life to study this hard happiness, which is not at the first so easily understood. But I am afraid the thoughts of you which must be always mixed with my study, must keep it long obscure.
O that I were, young Prince, what you have called me but in my excuse, an Angel, that I might fly through all the quarters of the World, and with an Angel's voice proclaim the yet-unheard-of virtues of the matchless Basilino. The grossest part of the earth, (where Love's so over-grown with flesh, it is not to be known,) would shake it self a pieces at my voice; and Love abstracted, grown it self, would so remain in emu∣lotion of your praise, Princes should owe you more then to their nature.
Which by the easiness it gives them to out-do,
Makes the harder their out-suffering too▪
But your example would be a decision for them even in this. And for your part of happiness, you seem not yet to see it. You must know, Sir, this is none of those light-colored joys which fade and sully in the handling; this is one which wearing sets a gloss and lustre on. Which cannot decay but by your leaving of it off. And still the more you think on me, even those sad thoughts will be true shadows to set off your joys.
I must no longer, Fidamira, trust my infant-virtue against the growing strength of thy beauty which improves in this thy interdiction of them. I'll leave you, Fidamira, and without asking any thing, not so much as, who is that Subject, so much richer than his Prince by the consignement of your faith; And I doubt not but the heavens think me so fully punished as they will ne'er consent▪ to the breach of this my vow, of ever being guile∣tie even of the directest •olicitation of your love. And some auspicious deity antedeates this ease unto me, the belief that no other man shall ever enjoy the matchless Fida∣mira.
Go worthy Prince, and may you leave me all your sorrows. May your triumphant youth be crowned with such successes in all your future wishes, as that the pleasing multitude may persuade you, you had never failed in any. And may you never remember me, till your glorious life, glutted with praises of out-doing all your sex, may look back on me for a more transcenden•honour by this Mark, of how much you have out-done yourself, and so present you with an unhoped for joy, which is the only retribution I can hope to make you. Till then, let me, and sin, be at a distance from your thoughts.
Farewell, fair maid, you shall soon hear of resolutions shall some way deserve those good wishes you have now advanced.
May all the blessings which I would wish you, which are unexpressible, fall down as wonders on you.
The Prince stayed long with Fidamira, and is now going hastily to the King his fathe•. His looks me-thinke imply some strange resolve. He purposed now to make his last attempt, and to venture even his crown to take my Fi•amira, whose virtue's such, as I believe her beauty was bestowed upon her, to prove a trial of it worthy of her glorying in. And the earth hath not a fitter then the just offers of this worthy Prince.
O Agenor, had I now leisure equal to my sense of Fidamira's goodness, I should not defer a minute from the making thee admire her. She hath made me hap∣pier then I did hope. I am resolved, Agenor, and I have already so disposed my father▪ as I believe the second
time will carry his consent: come Agenor, let's not lose a minute.
Stay I beseech you Sir a while, that I may be acquainted with your will, and so know how to argue for you.
Come away Agenor, I'll tell you as I go, The King may intend to employ your credit with me to dis∣swade me, but I'll convince you by the way. I shall but reel along, between my shaking fear and shaking trust of Fidamira.
Leave us all! How much allay have all Princes trea∣sures in them? even those that they are ordained to coin themselves for blessings, their children, even these rich Images do sometimes prove burdens, not treasures to them: I am in this distress. The name of King which doth ex∣alt the blessings of a Father is only that which doth for∣bid me the indulgence of a common parent. Were he entirely mine I could let my judgment fall into a com∣placency of this his wish: but as I am but as it were his guardian to account to all my Kingdom for him, I must not consent to expose this State to such a hazard as his absence, when I stand as it were propped up by him. I am resolved to offer him rather to quit the thought of the Princess of Never•e, and to give him my consent to marry Fidamira, whom they say he loves with a pa•zion able to control his reason, much more his follies.
I have, my Basilino, been so affected with thy wishes, as when by the enquiring of my collected thoughts I could find no reason to approve of thy intended sepera∣tion from us, I did addict them all to search for an excuse of the indulgence of my consent. And thou art so unhappy in thy birth as I have multitudes to satisfy, on whom wisdom it self can seldom have its operation;
much less a natural •••dearness can move against it. In what a strange distress am I, whom reason doth appoint to displease him in this world I love the best, for others satisfaction, for my own interests, which are such as I can∣not repeal, without reproaching Basilino of unnatural∣ness, in preferring of his fancies so before them, I will by silence give him leave to pass by, and remit them all in∣to his power as a Suitor, not a Judge, and for my part do make him King of this his wish by my consent.
Oh Sir.
Hold Basilino, I made you thus a King, that you might have somewhat to give worthy a Father's asking, and that the deposition of this your wish might be by your gift to me, not my refusal of it. And now I do conjure you, Basilino, by the power of a King, that hath deposed himself, rather to pray than to command, to change this your desire of leaving us, into any other you can think of, and stay here; and by the gods we wish may move you; with us, the agreement to it shall be esteemed a blessing to us.
O that the angry gods would pity me so much, that I might now obey you in a fatal silence. It is not a feathered fancy that carries me to fly above my will, but a weighty misfortune that bears me down before you, to demand ease for my oppression, which I must have some time and distance to discharge my self of. Nor hath my curse been so defective in any circumstance, as to di∣strict me quite, and so free me from the sense of all your interests; but it seems to admit an unsensiblenesse of all my own, to keep me wholly from the survey of you, whose contradiction of my ease is the refined torment. But I could provide, by engagement to you, Sir, against any important prejudice my absence may but threaten; if I might hope as well to l•ighten that weight, I should else think too heavy to strive under. I could acquaint your Majesty with my arrival, and my residence in every
several place, and by my promise to return upon any summons, should import but even your fears, secure you from any prejudice of my distance, which I would con∣dition should not be out of the limits of France or Spain. Now, Sir, have pity of one whom you have robed of praise, by making him a King against his will; and this submission of my self unto your will, think a sacrifice worthy of a father and a King to value. And for your large offer, Sir, I am so reduced, I had but this one to ask of you, the which to ease you, I am content to deny my self.
O Agenor, Is not Basilino unjust to add unto my sorrows, by his sharing with me in them? Into what a parallel of misery are we both come, by thus our meeting one another?
In this agreement, Sir, where your misfortunes meet and not your wishes, a subject may interpose himself and break off the accord. I do not see Sir, how the haz∣art of the Princes desires equall's that of yours; you en∣danger Sir, the los•e of your own wish in the possessing it, for you shall rather keep a Prisoner then a Son; and by his Liberty▪ on those conditions he hath proposed, you shall be more secured than by his Residence: your people by the fame of Him from all neighbouring nations shall think he is a Prince of them too, and therefore fear you more. My opinion is you consent to his first choice, upon those terms he desires to take it.
There is, Agenor, such a darkness spread over Basilino as ore-casts my reason, and clears up his to me; Me-thinks I see this his obedience set too heavy on him, as it oppresses me, for whom he offers to sink under it. No, Basilino, thou shalt not thus acquit thy self of all those obligations, I can challenge as a Father and a King, by this out-suffering all the benefits that ever those names can •'re confer.
Throw off, my Basilino, the suppose•tion of those clouds which hang upon Thee, thou art deceived if thou believe thy looks are dark, or over-cast. The bright obedience of thy soul, shines through them, and hath dissolved those clouds that shadowed me into these drops; which fall but now like Sun-shine showers in sign of fair weather: therefore now upon this condition of thy so full obedience, I may venture, Basilino, to com∣mand thee any thing, and I will keep thee in the exercise of this thy virtue; therefore I command thee now to en∣joy thy first choice, thy intended travel upon what conditions thy own discretion shall make when thou art gon, and not before; It were a sin not to reward thy duty with full Liberty, rather then engage it, and in all that's left to me to express a trust of thee I shall, which is in this, not to enquire the cause of this thy resolution; but believe it is fitter for thee to act, then me to ask. I have only this to demand of thee, that thou would not make me so impoverish't by this grant, that I have nothing else to give to Basilino. Accept of my first offer added to thy choice, and leave me some request even as a benefit to engage thee by my performance of it to thee like observance of my latest will, which I shall wish no other prosecution of, by Basilino, than that the world shall find me of his imparted wishes in his absence.
I must again in this removed extreme wish for silence to comprise an answer which no words can car∣rye. You have been, Sir, so exact in this your blessing, as you have put it into a name that doth improve it▪ my obedience. You are, Sir, now so enriched in this your lib∣•ality, as I can ask you now a blessing almost equal to your first, the protection of the heavenly Fidamira. In which I dare boast some retribution of your benefits, ha∣avenge in her given you a subject for the exercise of all the worth &amp; virtue that even you are King of. Then, Sir, your leave to part immediately with Agenor only, that this
your gracious gift may be extraordinary in every point. That the grant and the receipt may be together: and I the sooner may begin to praise the divinity of this your goodesse,
Stay and take these blessings with thee. If it be fame hath pressed thee by giving thee in hand already a share of public honour, may thy successful daring carry thee so soon to such a height of true renown, as thou may quickly be so much above the praise of personal activeness, as even honour it self may soon restrain thee to command: And may that send thee home to this I keep but for thee. If it be Love's attractiveness that drives thee from us, moist thou obtain unknown, without the help of any title shown which may thou give her in reward, not condi∣tion. What ever it be that parts us Basilino, let it be thine own success, and not my distress, that may bring us soon to meet. For Fidam•ria; you shall not be able to go so far, nor so concealed, but my strange care of her shall be told you as the wonder of the time.
The consciousness of my self of being your son is an advantage •am scrupulous of in my undertaking, and I shall not so distrust my self, as to seek more by my professing it. It is a title Sir I will leave here, and you shall not hear you have a son abroad but by my obedi∣ence to any of your Summons, upon which I kiss your royal hands.
I must look off this parting. With all my blood Fare well. Agenor, I look to hear from you of Basilino, what's unfit from him.
Best of Kings and fathers, remain in peace, till the loud glories of your son, repay you these in tears of joy.
Do any of you know where Fidamira lives?
I do, Sir.
Go then presently, and take some of the guard with you, and bring her hither with all honour, and no show of violence.
I shall, Sir. 
It is strange this sudden resolution of the Prince! Sure this is that he told me I should hear of, when he went away.
The life of man protracted to a miracle were yet too short to tell the wonder of thy faith, much more that instant is but left me now for admiration of it. The Prince is instantly resolved to leave his fathers Kingdom, and hath obtained his leave. And hath chosen me the only partner of his thoughts, and his companion in his mean disguise. So as heaven finding thy virtue such as it might easily draw into a miracle, resolved to raise it more emi∣nonce by this farther trial. And I for this their end am punished with love, and trust of Basilino.
The time we had resolved for consummation of our wish∣es we must now differ till our return. Sure Fidamira thou hast refined thy self so near Divinity, thou art above the being enjoyed by sense. And it were insolence in me to hope for such a temptation in this absence, as you have met with, but even the love of Queens is not so impossible as my embracing it. The Prince's parting doth depend on nothing now but my return. Which he is almost as impatient of, as I of staying here; which is a blessing I re∣pine so much to leave, as I have need of't.
It is a strange resolve, Agenor: there is a •rinse∣cendency in that young man above the fate of Princes, and could any action endear Agenor to me, it should be Basilino's trust. For the differing of our wishes, the oc∣cession is so strange, it doth import the will of heaven.
And for the trial of my faith it is too easy, and assured a thing for heaven to intend, if heaven means a miracle in mine, it must by it's entireness after the breach of yours which to me would seem such a miracle, I should not wonder though my own should be preserved for my affli∣ction.
But this sad Digression hath no reason for it, but the distracted sense of your departure. Go then, Agenor, and serve that glorious Prince with such successful faith, as he may think, at your return, not knowing of our loves by the opinion of thy faith, that nature meant our faith's only to match one another, and for improvement of our joys, he may have his share in the bestowing them; stay not for any thing but for a confirmation of my wish.
How opportune a blessing is this last command of Fidamira's? by which she doth appropriate my faith so solely to her self as she applies my duty to the Prince as meritorious unto her, I can now serve the Prince with such a rare uninterested faith, it shall not wish for recom∣pence, having already more reward then he can give the will of Fidamira. Which the Gods keep for a re∣ward of all his glorious deeds at his return, in giving him but even as much to give to Fidamira as his consent unto her will. Which as the consummation of his glories, and our joys, I must expect. And now by loosing of your hands, let fall this partition which they yet hold up. And in this darkness pray our harts may not lye long under the whole weight of love they now must bear, but that our joys may be restored to ease them.
Mine shall turn inward all their light upon my thoughts, which shall be polished as they shall still answer one another with the reflex of my Agenor's Image.
Move Fidamira now, and let's with equal steps fall thus from one another, while this earth we tread by interposing of it's self between thy light and me, shall sh•ddow out this dark Eclipse.
It is no injury to Fidamira to leave her where I have put off my self. I find a yielding in my genius to the curiosity of passing by the Shepherd's Paradise, to which peaceful harbour I have heard of such a strange repair o wrack't and hop-lesse for•unease, as the distress hath pro∣ved a blessing.
Here comes Agenor not yet fitted for our jour∣ney. Have you taken your leave of my Sister, Agenor? did she not cry? she is fond of you.
She is pleased with me Sir as the object of your goodness.
I'll advise with him. You eome, Agenor, op∣portunly to vote in a cause concerns you too. When∣there we may take fitly this opportunity to see the She∣pheard's Paradise as we pass forwards to Navarr. I can have admission by a blank of my fathers with a warrant for it▪ and the time of the election of the Queen, which is every year the first of May, is now within three days. What says Agenor?
I do believe it, Sir, a curiosity worthy of an en∣tire purpose. Therefore not to be omitted, lying in the way of our design, which cannot be better begun than by the information of your self in such a variety, as all for∣reign nations do admire, as it were a heavenly Institution that extends it self to all strangers, whose births are such, as may be worthy fortunes prosecution, and the distress seem so desperate as it may bring honour to the remedy. And this may prove, Sir, your nearest way unto your jour∣nays end, the forgetting Fidamira. For, sure Sir, beauty is soonest worn out of our memories by the imposition of new weight upon it, and so the last presses away the former. And fame tellssuch wonders of this place, as sure it is rather a religious fear than your fathers guard, secures
their solitude from the invasion of nations on the pretence of adoration. And it may be Sir, the gods will not in∣debt you for so much as the composition of your broken mind, to any nation but your own.
It must be Atheism in love, not change of my Religion; it must be that belief which I resolve that Beauty is but an Idea, not to be enjoyed but by image∣nation; and by this Atheism must I be saved, Agenor.
Ther's nothing, sure Sir, so impossible to be en∣joyed as your enjoying this opinion long, unless you could refine your self into an Idea abstracted from your flesh. You must not only lose yo•r memory, but all your senses, to retain this new opinion. Can you think, Sir, beau∣tie was never enjoyed?
Never, Agenor. There is no Lover's soveraign-fancy that will not confess that Beauty is so set up, as it is even above his highest thoughts and to endear his thoughts alleges an impossibility of thinking height enough. Can our sense then, Agenor, get up such a pitch, where even our fancy flatts into an excuse?
These are but Love's raptures, that sometimes carry beauty above sense. In any kind it were injustice to require of our senses the carrying of us above ground, when they were not ordained to fly. Their motion is towards fixt-materiall-objects, which they can reach, and are not bound to comprehend Lover's descriptions, that enlarge beauty into a spaciousness, where it loses it self, because it cannot be compassed. Take this rule Sir, Sense is not bound to follow any thing out of sight, and within those bounds it can enjoy all it meets.
Well Agenor, we shall have leisure to discourse of this, as we go: let's set forward then towards the She∣pheards Paradise. We must change our names. Isle call my self Moramante.
And I'll change my name into Ge•orio: we must make haste Sir, the journeys equal the days we have left for them.
Are the lodgings prepared as I commanded!
They are Sir, you are obeyed in all things.
When Fidami•a comes, bring her in; forbear till then. I must do her some honour may be so sudden, so strange, as may o'er take Basil•no before he can get out of our kingdom.
I thought I might be tempted to own some power to oblige such a creat•re, on whom nature seems to glory to have bestowed all her•. Yet I will not be so un∣just to the departed Bas•l•n•, as to appropriate any thing I am to deliver to you. For in his Will he hath left you all that I can give you. Neither could I have believed, it could have been so difficult the being Executor to a Prince. For I find more due to you than he could bequ•ath, or I dispose unto you. Therefore be ple•sed, fair M•id, to ease me so much, as to name your wishes; since you have reduced a King to the belief of having nothing worthy of you, and therefore dares not choose for you.
If the departed Prince Sir, have in his Will bequeathed any thing to pious uses, to purchase prayers for his success, and fair return, your Majesty will prove an improvident disp•n•er of them in the choice of me, whose devotion is already kindled in so pure a flame as interest would dim it, and not nourish. And even my wishes, Sir, are all so clear from any stain, of self ad∣vantage, as they are such as your Majesty cannot possess me of.
•ll 〈◊〉 Fidamira, my impotence as a King in the disposing any thing so worthy; and yet beg the knowledge of thy will in a more powerful name, a servant unto Fidamira. And• by the virtue of that name believe my self enforced to a captivity of any thing that •he ••all wish.
You have already Sir furnished me with an unlooked for wish, the expiation of the guilt your procla∣motion of your self hath cast upon me.
I had another Sir so innocent, as it was fit for you to join, though you could not grant, the Prince his soon return, so crowned with his desires, as he may think he brings more joy with him, then even your crown can promise him. And this is Sir, my only wish. And it is so propitious to me, as it makes your Majesty all the return I can ever hope, for those your offered benefits, the wishing of you all increase of joys and glories.
Do not wonder Fidamira at the title I took on me. I spake to you in Basilino's name, and it was not un∣proper, in the performance of his will to use his name. And I am afraid, I shall too truly take upon me. The wish which you have chosen, hath so indebted me unto you, as I must speak something now in my own name, and retract the promise I had made to Basilino, to possess my self of all my power, which I think yet too little to tempt thy modesty to the choice of any thing it doth contain. But do not Fidamira in duty to your King, reduce him to re∣pine at his condition, in having nothing to present you with, but wishes back again.
In all humility and reverence to your power Sir, I thus fall down to beg of you, and that which only as a King you can bestow, Lib•rty. Which I have chosen as the greatest blessing Kings are trusted with, to satisfy your Maj•sty in the obligation you desire to mark me with. And I trust so much to your goodness, as I think I need not bring the gods to plead for my dismiss∣zion, whose cause hath furnished me with this •ute unto your Majesty; the per•ormance of some vows, which will require privacy to perfect: and thus your Majesty shall set me at Liberty, that am yet in bonds unto my vows.
You have made so st•ange a choice▪ ••damira, as the unwilling giving it endeares the gift, and that
which doth persuade me most unto this grant, is, that you shall take from me that, which is dearer to me than all you leave me, your company; and while you do avoid the merit of my actions, you cannot disappoint my suf∣ferings of some desert unto you.
Therefore you shall choose what place agree• best with your intent. If you will accept this Palace, I'll leave it to you, and your privacy shall be secured to you by a guard, that shall not come so n••re you, as to let you know you have a house. Choose what Temple you like best, and the entrance shall be denied to any other, that no impure breath may mix with yours. But Fidamira, these your devotions perfected, I shall expect you do ac∣cept our Court for Sanctuary to that Saint-like inno∣cence shines about you. It were impiety to let you live in the crowd of common persons and your own piety will enjoin you to allow my daughter your companion, as a pattern for virtuo•s youth.
It would be to me Sir, a retreat out of my self, to be any where but in my father's house. Whither I beseech you Sir, I may have leave to return, and re∣maine some few days; after which, I shall obey your Majesty, with that devotion which is due to those, whose Image you are; believing Sir, you will command nothing, but what shall be meritorious to obey you in.
You shall be Fidamira reconducted to your fa∣theirs house, and there remain undisturbed, till your own pleasure gives me admission to you.
Who waits without?
Carry back again Fidimira to her father's house.
How hath this face displeased the King, tha• was resolved, before he saw her, to lodge her in the Pal∣lace with such prepared honour, as raised all the Court in to a wonder of the cause? Me-thinks, I find now more then e•re I •old have guess't. 
O what a mock was this, to ask me liberty while she was captivating me? I had not so much power left, as to keep her here, when she would go. She is so much already Mistress of my will, as she disposes of it even against it self. Whither shall I repair for Liberty, that am besieged by my own guard these trai•erous eyes? I must condemn them to perpetual darkness, or they'll betray me to such a light, as will darken all my other senses, even by the inflammation of them. Will Love be content with no less Trophy, than the inversion even of Nature, •••ning the branches down into the ground, and •ache the roots to bud and blossom in the air? Must Love needs have a garland of such prodigious flow∣ers? Now Basilino I find, thou hast left me somewhat to do f•r thee, worthy of a King to brag of, the wrestling with these passions for thy sake, which else I shall im∣•••ce, and let into my heart, as an enlargement of it, and my life.
But I will so allay this heat,
By taking Thee into its seat.
As it still shall be withstood,
As if I lived but by thy blood.
ANd I into your hands resign, The Sphere wherein our Majesty doth s•in. Which moved and governed by a heavenly force, Thus every year doth terminate its course.
The gods, Bellese, by the voices of your sisters have chose you Queen, and you must now take• your Throne, with this Oath I am to give you, for the fair observance of all those conditions you are trusted with this Crown upon. Which are the faithful executions of the Laws, we live under and reign over.
Give me leave, fair Sisters, while I am yet my self, before I do become your Creature, and so more obliged to wonder at your goodness, to renounce all merit to this honour; unless the being surprised by it may pass for any, which if my person do not prove enough, my foreign birth will certify much more. Which as it will advance me towards your particular ci∣vilites, must needs remove me from the pretension of this eminence amongst you.
Therefore your former favours can only give a r•a∣son for this excuse, that to recover the desperate debt I owe you all, you have resolved to lend me more, so to 〈◊〉 me to make a retribution may comprise them all, and for this end I may avow a joy in this your choice:
which I shall study so to justify your judgements in, by the complying both with the obligations of your debtor, and your Queen, as when I shall resign that, I shall have purchased one I shall esteem as much, a creditor to you all.
We too Bellesa are deputed in the name of all, to assist the ceremony of your Oath, and the publication of the Laws.
Proceed Bellesa to the reading of the Oath.
By beauty, Innocence, and all that's fair,
I Bellesa as a Queen do swear,
To keep the honour, and the regal due,
Without exacting any thing that's new.
And to assume no more to me than must
Give me the means, and power to be just.
And but for charity and mercies cause,
Reserve no power to suspend the Laws.
This I do vow, even as I hope to rise,
From this, into another Paradise.
When your Highness hath possessed your Throne, I must begin to read the Laws.
That the Queen is to be elected the first of May, every year, by the plurality of the Sisters voices; from which election the Brothers are excluded.
That the Queen must be aged under thirty, and beau∣tie to be most regarded in the election.
That both the Brothers and Sisters must vow chastity and single life, while they remain of the Order; and the breach of this Law is to be punished with death.
That every year at the election of this Queen, what Brothers or Sisters shall desire to retire out of the •rder upon design of Marriage; shall then upon their demand be licensed, and at no other time.
That the Queen shall admit of none into the Order but one every year by grace, the rest upon publication of their pretence; which must be, either a vow of chastity, which is not ever to be dispensed with; or the verifica∣tion of some misfortune, worthy the charity of this ho∣nourable Sanctuary, which all the Sisters and Brothers are to be Judges of.
That there is no propriety of any thing among the Society, but a community of all which the world calls riches and possessions.
That detraction from the honour of a Sister, without proof, is to be punished with the penalty enacted for that fault.
That no brother or sister shall ever go out of the limits of the Kingdom, but by a final dismission.
That no such shall ever be received again upon any pretence.
That strangers shall be admitted only by the grace of the Queen, or by particular warrant from the King. And upon no condition stay above three days.
These be the laws your Majesty is sworn to protect. And now, I in the name of all the blessed Society bow in obedience to you.
We in the name of all the Sisters, salute you Queen, and beg to leave the seal of all our duties in your Royal hands.
Now Madam, after an hour's r•st, the Order re∣quires your Maj•sty to repair to the Temple, there to perfect all the Ceremony.
I can have no such rest, Votorio, as on my knees before the Gods; for I have yet a greater blessing to im∣plore of them then this they have bestowed; their propi∣tiousnesse towards my discharge of what they have im∣posed upon me.
Princes Votori• have no less,
To pay the Gods, than to possess.
What are those strangers?
They are admitted Madam, by special warrant from the King.
If you have leisure to allow us so welcome a civility, as to satisfy a Stranger's curiosity, you may oblige us in acquainting us, what the Queen said of us.
My profession, and your habit Sir, enjoins me both to this: and after I have satisfied you in this demand, to offer you my service, in easing you of any curiosity, this place hath put upon you.
The Queen desired to know only who you were, and how admitted, which I gave her an account of, as far as my knowledge led me.
Which was no farther then your admission by the Kings Letters.
The limitation Sir, which is upon the stay of strangers here, where curiosity is fed so much fuller then it can swallow, much less digest, might excuse an im∣portunate detention of any one but you Sir whose habit renders you so necessary to the resid•n•s, as it were a sa∣criledge to rob them of your time.
At it is a pious work, the distribution of hospi∣table civility▪ I am the pr•p•rest you could have met Sir, to pay the engine•ousnesse of your curiosity with the knowledge of any thing you can ask here.
Since this civility may be meritorious to you sir, I shall the willing p•t •ou to the exercise of it And first I would gladly •no• the an•equity of the in∣stituted regality, with the occasion of it, and the rest of
the particulars of this place which my Ignorance cannot furnish me with questions for.
The ingenuousness of this institution is such, as we may joy we owe it not unto antiquity. It derives it self no higher then this King's grandfathers time, who had a daughter called Sabina, a Lady of that strange beauty and perfections, as this, was but one of the miracles she left us to admire her by. The virtue of her resolution takes off much from the wonder of her wit. Which seems to have remained imperious and not flexible to her distress. She was sought by two Princes, The Dolphin of France, and the Prince of Navarr: whose passions seemed so equal, as the most powerful could not bear • denial, and the weaker found himself so armed by his passion as he despise∣ed the anger, which the power of France had vowed a∣against him, if he were preferred. Sabina's inclination to Navarr drew down the power of mighty France, upon this Prince of Vallance. But the hope of fair Sabina which he seemed to think himself a gainer by, after the loss of most of his country. Then Sabina, whom it seems the love of virtue only had made partial to Navarr, found the way to exalt her virtue more, then by persisting a∣against difficulties which seemed to take off from the glory of it, by the abatement it procured where it intended an advantage. And so fearing left his sufferings might raise his virtues to such an estimation, as he might be thought to have•d served her, and so the matching of herself might lessen her, resolved to take the glory wholly with the sufferings to her self. And so sent to the victorious Dolphin (•hat had already made himself Prince of Navarr, and bragged that with that title he would wo S•∣b••a) her promise that upon condition of his restoring Navarr unto the Prince, and swearing future, peace, she would never marry the Prince of Navarr. The Dolphin whose success had nourished his love with hope even in Sabina's direct denials, swallowed this as an assurance
of his wish, without examining the words, believing his own flattering omen more security then even Sabina's promise. He accepted the conditions, and presently resto∣red all his conquests though the Prince refused the treaty, and the future peace. Yet he instantly performed all that Sabina asked, who now resolved to publish the perform∣ance of her vow. It was sure the gods that did infuse these thoughts, for a reward of so supreme goodness, and made the monument of her admiration a Sanctuary for distress∣sed virtue, so to convey to future times a blessing with the memory of her. She begged of her father leave to make a vow of chastity and desired a propriety of this place as her dowre; which nature seems to have made of such un∣matched delightfulness, as if she had meant to brag, that she made a stage onearth worthy of Sabina's acting on this her divinest part.
Hither then by the consent of her indulgent father, Sabina came, attended by many Nobles of both sexes, whom love to Sabina, or admiration of the action brought with her. Of which she made this Order. And authorised by her father, erected this regal government, and enacted all the laws you have heard read; which have been so inviolably kept, as a punishment here would seem a won∣der. She enjoyed the regality during her life, and then left the propriety of all unto the Queen. Who is eligible as you have heard. The peace and setlednesse of this place is secured by natures enclosure of it on all sides by impregnablenesse, as if it were only for chastity to make a plantation here. At one passage only, the rocks seem to open a way of themselves, so as to let in the Kings care in a Garrison. Which he maintains for safety of the place, which delivers all strangers to us as suitors, not invadors. Thus Sir I have informed you of the institution of the order of the Shepherd's, which is called by the Foundresse, The Shepherds Paradise As being a 〈◊〉 receptacle of distressed minds, and a Sanctuary against for∣tun's
severest executions. Now Sir, I must needs tell you the generous end of the Prince of Navarr▪ that you may see, there was nothing accessory to this heavenly Institu∣tion that had not such a transcendent newness of bra∣very as they seem made for such a divine novelty. The Prince as it seems hating the earth, whose safety had oc∣casioned the loss of Sabina, In scorn of it forsook it, and came hither in a disguise.
And was admitted into the Order, where he lived con∣ceal'd, and dying without making himself known unto Sabina; but at his death, left such a notorious memory as all ages shall study to display, and put it to the royalist ornaments can be due to Princes. The Queen ordained a particular ceremony to be performed every year at his Tomb, which is justly observed.
This is so heavenly a tradition, as it be∣comes best our delivery. This order seems a match be∣tweene love, and honour, and chastity, which you are hap∣pie sir in being the Priest to. But give me leave to wonder, why the brothers are excluded out of the election, which is to be guided most by beauty, of which sure they be the best Judges.
The reason Sir, that I have heard was then given by the Foundresse, That it had been to have made them Judges in their own causes. Since there is none but hath a particular interest that doth prepossess his choice. Whereas all women are rather Inquisitors, then admi∣rears of one another. And being void of passion, no friend∣ship can incline them to yield priority in beauty. And so it was thought most probable, that where most of them agreed to yield, the advantage must be unquestionable.
The wisdom, Sir, of the Foundresse was such, as it carries away our admirations, even with this our prejudice. I have one more satisfaction to desire of you, which the omission of, I do believe, in your opinion might render me unworthy of these I do already owe,
the knowledge of your new Queens condition, and the time of her admission, with her pretence.
It is not above a year since she was received so, that, had she not had such a transcendent beauty, as might have endured the abatement of the envy, which so sud∣deign an election might have taken from her, and even after that deduction have remained incomparable, sure she had not been chosen Queen. It was thought Pantamora the precedent Queen▪ would have been relected. She is by birth a stranger, of some part of France. And brought with her marks of noble birth. Her pretension was an intention of her father to dispose of her to a person of great wealth and quality, who then loved another so passionately, as the contestation with his father about his consent was so loud, as the voice of it came to the laddie's ears. Who moved, as she said then, with the true honour of her sex, resolved rather out of due to her perfections then pride of them, not to expose them to such an under∣valuation, as the dispute of being enjoyed. Therefore left she her fathers house and repaired to this Sanctuary for protection of her beauty, which was in danger of pro∣fanation. This was received of all as an acceptable plea for her admission, as a trium•h that beauty had got by flying. She hath lived here ever since with so winning a modesty, as it hath so reconciled the plurality of the sisters to the strangeness of her birth and beauty as h•r chocie may be ascribed to an inspiration from above, rather then her aspiring thither.
You may well ascribe it to the gods sir, the merit seems to be so well proportioned to the reward and the sex is happy to have such an acquittance for the debt they owe to the Lady, as a Crown. We never met a greater tentation to uncivil detention, then the pleasing∣nos of your conversation. Therefore wonder 〈…〉 we cannot retire from you; we have two days yet to st•• &amp; we shall waite upon you before our retreates from hence.
There's nothing Sir, but my public duty could call me away from my attendance on you. It is a part of my duty the entertainment of strangers, so to secure the privacy of the society.
I perceive the Institution hath so provided for the Societie's self possessing, it hath not left so much as an omission to employ them in the redressing of. We shall not fail to address ours•lves to you to receive as much comfort at our departure, as the sorrow will admit of, which will be, Your blessing.
Sir, I must leave that now with you.
What say you Genorio, are you not indeb∣ted to this digression of my curiosity?
Take not upon you the digression sir, It was some infusion from above. But doth your curiosity carry you farther yet? doth not this place promise you the diver∣zion you seek, from thinking on Fidamira? Here you may have choice, either the remedy I prescribed; or that which you intended, the admission of new beauty to displace that, or you may harden your self by the neglect of this into such a habit of insensiblenesse, as you may be of proof against all temptation.
Had not my vow Genorio a much nobler aim then my own, I might consent to let it fall here, and break even to humour thee, so little I esteem my self. But I have pointed it at the expiation of a guilt, that doth so darken me, as the neglect of beauty might now seem a curse of blindness on me. But when I have cleared my self of that, then Genorio I will return, even thither if thou wilt, with opened eyes, to let thee see my quarrel to my self is greater then love can reconcile, in living so unmoved with beauty, as Fidamira's suit to me shall not unsettle me.
I can imagine no quarrel you can have to your self but one, which this your resolution of unsensibleness
of beauty must compose, the misfortune of the Princess of Navarre, whose repair you cannot render so much void of sense of beauty.
It is that, Genorio, which must value this my penance, the prostitution to her only for pardon, not reward. I will seek her to add one glory more to her, the forgiving me, and when I have but seen her, leave there my guilt, and take in place of it, the punishment of never seeing of her more. Me-thinks, Genorio, had I but once payed my devotion to her hands, I should then rest absolved in peace.
Look Sir, how we are blessed; the Queen comes this way, and the Priest leading Her. Let's stand by.
Madam, these strangers curiosity assure me, they would be displeased to leave any privilege uninjoyed. If your Majesty shall please to give the honour of your hand to their welcome.
What Country men are they?
Castilians, Madam.
This place is civil only in making all stran∣gers, of what ever Nation that are not residents; and for that, that there are none that are not so to virtue and to honour.
I am not yet so fast but I can fly,
And only to preserve my Faith and liberty.
While I intended to keep the Prince here, as nearer Fidam•ra, I find my self removed from her; come Sir i'll jest no more, we have seen all: shall we go on in pursuit of our design.
O what enchantment's this? Me-thinks I find my self fixed here, and yet the virtue of this touch
•uickens, and moves my senses so; as it implies divinity •ather then Magic. Me-thinks I find the hand that holds •e, as it presses, print Characters upon me, such as my •aste reads, and satisfies for this detention.
In what contemplation are you Sir? will you •et forward Sir, towards your lodgings, to prepare you •or your journey?
I was thinking how ridiculous a thing Genorio, your proposition of staying here was, since if we would the Order admits it not.
It were some loss of time in your design, but not impossible to do.
How might we conceal, or disguise our selves, if we meant it?
The means were not so unfit as the resolution, for the way must be noble; by a direct profession of some misfortune, and so be received into the Order, which the disguising of your self at any time would dispense with you; but Sir, let's go, it grows late.
We cannot go before we be dismissed by the Priest, who is now assisting at the public service; we must stay till the Queene's return from the Temple, and so take our leaves.
That hand with one touch more, would plant me here, I do not like this backwardness; Sir, sure the Princess of Navarre is not here. I am glad to find the burden of your guilt so light, as you do choose rather to stand still under it, then move towards your discharge of it.
I am so willing to be punished for her sake, Genorio, as I take kindly this reproach; and as you are her solicitor, to be my guide towards her: tell me where you think the likeliest place to find her, for in Navarre we may believe she is not so long concealed from her Father.
You must now needs stay while the Queen be past.
I understand you are Castilians, gentlemen: Come you lately from the Court?
We came directly from thence Madam, and made such hast to be here at the ceremony of the Election, as it is not three days since we left the King.
How does the King and Prince? have any of you had such access to the Prince, as to be able to inform us of his Person and Humour?
The honour I have Madam of being his Dome∣stick allows me to think my self a fitter reporter of Him, than this Gentleman. For his person Madam, Nature hath thrown away so many perfections on it, so that his birth needs not to make him Lovely. For the composition of his mind; it seems to have injured him by his birth, that exposes him to so much probability of flattery; the truth of his virtues being such as Parasites deceive themselves in the exaltation of them.
In my opinion Madam, he hath all that youth can brag off, with all that age can reproach youth with the want of.
I have heard the Prince much valued by all relations, and of so strange a passion of hi•, for a Lady of his Court; as though all other advantages being ascri∣bed to him, he intended this only, the loving her more then all the world.
It is true Madam, He hath long loved a Lady, called Fidamira, who is such a subject for a noble pas∣zion, as it seems no wonder; even the Prince's constancy in insensiblenesse, and the only strangeness is, that she is not moved toward him by his virtues, not that he moves not from Her by neglects.
You give her beauty a great power, that can dispense with there discretion, and the obligation to her Prince. Did you ever see her, sir? I see your friend is par∣teal to her.
I have Madam, and may allow her all the beauty in the world left out of this society.
We are not subject sir, so easily to envy, as you should have needed so soon to have qualified your friends praises of her: but pray sir, doth the Prince persist in this so meritorious constancy?
There was a rumour Madam when we came from Court, that the Prince to crown her virtue, and his wishes, had offered her marriage, which she had excused the acceptance of, by a pre-engagement of her faith. And that the generous Prince resolving to vie with her for the braver fame, took this excuse with the humility of a pri∣vate servant. And resolved to leave his father's Court; that at some distance from her, he might settle his re∣solution of leaving her liberty, and taking his again.
This we have heard Madam, but dare not affirm as true,
Fame of it self charged with the weightiest things, is leight enough to be suspected; But carrying love's quarrels it grows incredible for thoughts to reconcile them, and so the truth which Fame set out with, may be changed, before it can arrive. If this were true, though it were hard to decide an advantageous glory in this case to either of them, yet I should incline to recompense his sufferings with some odds of honour, since he is to enjoy her wish, and he nothing but the virtue of performing •ers. What say you, ladies!
As it is a strange virtue Madam must pre∣serve faith so entire, when it may be set in a crown, as the loss of a corner would never be perceived: I confess I wonder more at her, that might have had so large an •asion for her faith as a Kingdom; than at him, whose
kingdom being not enough to purchase such a faith, was then content with patient admiration of her.
I believe Madam, the Princes virtue hath re∣sisted by far the greater temptation: for her insensiblenesse might have justified his change, but even his constancy could not authorise hers. Faith must be set without a foil, so every blemish will be visible. Should a Prince scratch, or deface a Jewel, while he kept it in his own hands, he might set what price he would upon it, but in the common estimation that would depress it. So Fida∣mira must have lost of her true value though the Prince had rated her as high as ever. So that she seems to have preserved her value, and the Prince to have for her sake undervalued himself. Wherefore I should repair him by allowing him the greater share of glory.
Whenever you see the Prince again, you may let him know, how his honour hath been noted here▪ And hath prevailed against the competition of our Sex.
Give us leave Madam, to receive our dismission by your royal hands, and to wish the Prince had but once seen your Majesty. The desperateness of the ill, and the eminence of the afflicted, both concur to make the cur• worthy of you.
I could wish Sir, he did enjoy the best part of me, which is the peace, and quiet of my mind.
M• fear was quicker-sighted then my sense that did propose to me at first the readiest safety that tha• passi•• knows, of flying from danger. Which I obeyed so fast, as nothing could have overtaken it, therefore m• curse was forced to meet me, so to bring me back, and now methinks, I am so fixed, I can but move against my fear, for having been so bold as to precede m• love. Oh how I curse my fear for having disputed 〈◊〉
against the Prince's staying here. But since my soul is changed, I must disguise my self also to the Prince. Will you be pleased to go, Sir?
How out of tune are these words Genorio?
Have my eyes so soon infected my voice with treachery, that it betrays me to the Prince? I'st not the 〈◊〉, and not the sound, is out of tune;
No Genorio, but me-thoughts thy words were dragged along with such a sound as if they had gon to suffer for a fault.
Alas Sir, what accent can fall low enough to reach the depth of your dejection no tune, no words sad enough. The pity that I owe you sir, that are not only going out of Paradise, but into such a Labyrinth, as it is uncertain whether every step carry you backwar'd, or forward towards your journeys end; since we know no more where to find her we seek, then she knows we seek her.
Tic true Geno•io. But how might we un∣wind this maze of Pilgrimage; and make the way dire∣ctor to my vow?
Alas Sir, it is a case of conscience, wherein I may better be a client, then a counsel•r. I am now in suite for mine. Sure Sir, the heavens that have infused this ten∣der scruple of your guilt, affect your innocence so much, as to inspire your heart with the directest means of ex∣piation. For did they not intend you an unblemished purity, they would never have moved you with so precise a tenderness, as even to me seems superstition.
It is so just a zeal that carries me Ge∣norio as the perplexity of the way to it doth not distract my purpose. But heaven is so merciful to my willingness as it presents me with some means of ease, and offers me a line to guide my straying motions, by which benefit I count received, because I do avoid it, for Genorio's sake.
Were it a discharge for you Sir, to have me
become as miserable, as this reservation of your self from me would make me, I should with silence accept the curse. But I believe, it must be an assumption of more guilt un∣to you Sir, than yet you have, the suspicion of my forwardness, nay of my ability in easing you, in any way you can design me to, where your opinion oynes with my endeavour. For nothing can seem so hard to me to act, as it is now to suffer this tenderness of yours against your self, therefore Sir let me beg it as a grace, your disposing of me, as your opinion shall direct you for your ease.
You may well beg this Genorio, for tic a suit will make you so much richer then I, that I can ne'er discharge my self from an Indebtment to you. Therefore now Geno•io be not so ambitious to pursue your suit.
What an amazing goodness is this of yours Sir? that knowing all the obedience the prostitution of this life could render you, is so much your due, as it could scarce challenge praise, would honour an easing you, which to omit were impious, with the reward of obligation from you. You have set me so near your self, you have forgot what I was. You know Sir, you have made me so happy, I must trust to others to believe I was ever miserable, Then give me leave to accuse you of forgetting me, when you would seem to bribe my blood to your obedience, with so im∣mense a treasure as obliging you, that would be payed with your acceptance of its effusion of your ease. Therefore Sir, unless you mean this a torment to me, you must impart your thoughts.
How exactly kind art thou Genorio? that wilt convince me by my love to thee, not to my self, in∣teresting thy ease in this my opening of my thoughts; I was thinking of the difficulty of the way towards the directest end of this my journey, my devotion to the Princess of Navarr, and how thy information of thy s•lfe of her retiring, and the most probable place of 〈◊〉
concealment might take off from me the laborious part of search, affording me the ease of staying here, till thou come back to guide me. This was my thought Genorio and would not such a debt pawn me beyond redemption to thee?
I confess Sir you have found a pain disputes the joy of easing you, which nothing, but the sense of leaving you, durst have attempted. And this beginning is hard, all that will follow will seem don, this diffi∣culty past
Did not the perplexnesse of the inquiry leave the success uncertain, and assure the pains; I might persuade away thy first objection, since I must share the half of the first pain, of leaving me.
Could I leave you Sir, after that I could do any thing. Were she so strayed from mortals, as destiny knew not where to find her, my Genius would direct me to bring news of her.
Alas Genorio, the fright of this our parting hath almost distracted thee. I will venture no far∣there on thy temper. Since we are both engaged in this wilde labyrinth, we will keep together; that so, though we find nothing, we may not lose one another.
Stay Sir, heaven is so careful of your ease, as it vouchsafes, methinks, even me an inspiration, that whispers to me, that your staying here, will be asp∣cious to you.
So that the Gods are pleased to recompense my loss with a provision of your happiness. And now my leaving you, is become their direction, and the presage of it, is made a joy. Therefore now I do expect nothing but your instructions for my parting.
The gods had need join with me Geno∣rio, to recompense thy merits. I was resolved to stay here and profess my self of the Society, till you had found the way to this strayed Saint, then upon your return my
profession of my self would dispense with the engagement and I might, guided by you, the easilier perform my vow.
I will go Sir, without expecting any merit from my diligence, besides this of my obedience: for my mind gives me that your resting here, not your remove, must settle your peace.
Come Genorio, we will go together to the Priest, you for dismission, I for entertainment.
I'll leave you Sir with this presage, that I shall find your Atheism converted into Idolatry at my re∣turn.
Me-thinks I find my self nearer a change of torment then of ease. 
O where doth innocence reside! Is she all∣ways in her journey here on earth? and •udgeth but in Court sometimes, and that which honour, glory, and am∣bition makes their journye's end the Palaces of Princes she takes but in her way▪ and passes on. Is she so froward as not to love good company; Sure tic not that. But that she wants that pliable complacency that is required in the S•ciety of Courts. She cannot consent to give herself away in complement. Sure if she be fixed any where on earth, tic in the shade of solitude, where the clear soul by the reflex of speculation sh•was fair Innocence her self. Where she enamoured of her own beauty lives, and makes Selfe-love so meritorious, as'twere a sin to be delivered from it. Thither must I carry mine, while it is yet unstained the breath of the Court would must it over at the least should I consent to this intention of the king's, of placing me a• Court, though it were with a pretence of a comp∣•i•• to his daughter, who they say is my companion all 〈◊〉 in what she knows not of▪ why should he come hi∣•••••• to retract his promise of my privacy, before the time
he had allotted it, was expired; And he spoke with such a degradation of himself, as if he meant to ask some what, which would not sure with the divine Image, and therefore did depose himself from being King to make himself all man for his pretension: such preposterous humility to me could imply no less, though yet his words have had no other guilt then his submission. And I am bound in sense of all his gracious care, to provide against the per∣version of all this into his sin. And to secure his inno∣cence even by my hazard. Therefore I must suddenly fly from hence, and heaven to encourage this intent, presents me with such a retreat, as may make the extremity a blessing, the Shepherd's Paradise. Thither will I fly. For∣tune in all her oppressions hath enriched me with a full pre∣tence for my admission. The Prince his return cannot ask less then a year; then I shall be free again for my Ageno, whom since this face hath twice endangered in the loss of me. I'll change it till I may deliver it him. Therefore it shall put on mourning for its faults, and his absence. The order admits equally of all nations, and as a Moore I will fly thither.
Love, let not this averse-disguise
Those of thy order scandalise
Thy honor's not advanced by beauty
So much as by a true love's duty.
Did not I so much admire Madam you trance∣c•ndent virtues, I should wonder at the triumph the gods have raised them to. How well are the Prince his cor∣reactions and your glories fitted. He by his faith to you is suspended from his principality in the top of all his pro∣missed joys. And you for your discontents, are advan∣ced the sooner to a Crown.
Tic true Martiro▪ but the peace of my mind
was never yet since I came here so busy, as to think on any reparation due to me. And what I owe the most to heaven for, is, the indifferent sense of this crown, which as it is but temporary, fits so easily on me I shall not feel it when tic taken off. I shall make up the diminution of my power of doing good, with the addition to my time.
Give me leave Madam, to whom time is a burden, to ask how an addition to it may prove an ease. You cannot better improve this time, than in such a charity.
You must measure time Martiro. with your soul, not your sense; you must not antedate your desires so as time may seem too slow to bring you them. The com∣putation of your time must be like that of clocks, which weigh &amp; measure time at once. Andnothing leightens time so much as weighing it. If you must needs Maritiro any thing without your self, le it be somewhat you may hope for. Nothing takes away more from time then that.
Alas Madam, I am so free from this variety of wishes, as I have but one; and that so heavy a one, as as it cloggs times motion, and so lengthens my days unto me for a tedious course. And you have named a re∣medy to refine my torment by, the impossibility of at∣taineing it, Hope: for I am so desperate, I would not change my wishes for any thing that I could hope.
Tic then Martiro a vanity in your sufferings, not a desire of ease; and pity were a prejudice to you, as it would lessen the merit of your patience.
It were a cheapening of your pity Madam, to have it fall so low as my condition. P•incise can expect no more from you.
The descent of pity is the exaltation of it. love indeed should have an object level to its self.
You could love then Madam, if you had met with such an object, as you might not seem so much to incline to it, but to receive it as a parallel.
I would not have the reservation of my self Martiro, be a defect, but an election. I could love but upon such terms▪ as should reproach mankind a scar∣city of merit if I did not, and not tax me with a natural repugnance to love.
Upon these terms Madam▪ you are equally just to all our sex, in this general exclusion, by the con∣dition of deserving you. For to that great disparity, all worth may seem but equally distant; as all Numbers are equally disproportionable to Infinity. Therefore Madam persist in this right unto your self, and you shall be a universal wonder, not a private joy.
Fear not Martiro, As I do• not think my self worthy of a miracle made for me of purpose, which such a man must be as I could love; so I do not think the gods will so decline my thoughts, as to make me love less, than what I have proposed them, and so choose to afflict me with the greater miracle.
These thoughts are worthy of you Madam, love them still; so that your virtue may contend with your person, whether nature, or you, have made the greater miracle.
The occasion Madam, will crave pardon for this presumption on your Majestie's privacies. One of the gentlemen that your majesty lately dismissed, demands admission into this Society. And that your Majesty would appoint the time of his allegation of his pretence; the other is departed.
I will not differ his wish a day, this afternoon give order for a convocation, and I will go and prepare my self for the ceremony.
I will ask pardon of my love for all my past complaints, and bring my joys in suffering to plead for a forgiveness. He that will have the glory of a love, that
out of choice affects impossibilities, must needs delight in suffering. I will preserve my vow, and this darkness may keepmy passion from becoming madness.
Are you behind Martiro? the Queen is past, they say, to the Convocation, and we by you shall be stronger in our excuse.
It is a fair excuse for you too Melidoro; you being together, it will not seem strange, the time past you unawares. My being with you may discredit that pre∣tence, and may imply, you could not be so well pleased, as to forget how the time passed.
No Martiro, you must go with us, the ex∣•rcise of charity may better excuse a fault then an idle pleasingnesse. We may be thought to have borrowed the time, to lend your sorrow some comfort in▪ better then to have forgot it in our own security.
I am not so miserable, as to be rel•evable by so cheap a comfort as common charity. There's but one in the world happy enough to pity me, and I can pity all the world, whose joys though they be clear, and make some noise as they go on, yet are so shallow as the bottome's to be seen.
Come Martiro, this cloud of yours may break one day. Then we shall see what it contains.
When your Majesty is placed, the pretend•r by your leave may begin his plea.
With all respect to the presiding Majesty, and honour to the blessed society, thus I lay down my misfortunes at your feet, which I find I put off, even as I now take on me here. And I begin to grow doubtful of the justness of my pre•ence by a surprise of happiness, which enters so fast my eyes, as I must fly back unto my
memory in haste to bring out my sorrows. For I have such a new unluckinesse made of purpose for me, as I ought to fear that this joy breaks in upon me, but to car∣rye away my memory, and with it, my pretence to this divine relief, and so to make this instant lightning a per∣petuall storm. Now I must first address my self unto my own sex for judgment, in what you Ladies cannot be de∣ciders for want of experience in it. Loving against scorn, I was so humble, as I had no scruple left in all my suffer∣ings, but that of disappointing her I loved so well.
I could have wished that even her scorn had been pre∣ferred before my wishes. So that I must excuse my con∣constancy by Fate, since it occasioned such a fault in her, as this injustice you shall hear. In this continuation of my passion, which was so unhappy, I may now call it so, as to afford me many services done to her, which I will not expect so much reward for as their repetition. At last, fortune made one day my own life, which was so contemptible to me the deliverer of hers, and the presen∣la of what punishment she should appoint the barber∣os attempter. Whose threats had almost saved the act∣iv spilling of her blood, by that cold exanimation fear had drawn over her. Which notwithstanding did her that service, as to send forth some faint cries that guided me to the rescue, in a wood where despair had carried me, to envy the life of plants, and to despise mine own. There I found her on her knees, prepared to be a Sacrifice to that blow was moving toward her.
I, when I came to intercept it, (guilt is so weak, as tic no vanity to say,) I easily became as much master of his life, as he was of hers: and offered her to purge the ground, that had borne such a monster, with his blood. She then, I may say properly coming to her self, seemed to beg of me more earnestly his life, than she had don her own of him; as if her soul had been already carried up to heaven, and ought him this fright as a bl•ssing. I dis∣arming
him only, obeyed her. And gave him not only his life, but more then my own. When he was gone she told me she forgave him, since he had freed her from an inju∣stice. Her life was only welcome to her, to retract her nag∣lect of me. Which she would recant as far as faith and honour would warrant her. I was impatient to know how far these limitations did extend Whether my wishes were shut out by them. She told me, the execution I had stayed was upon a condemnation, where I had witnessed a∣against her, which somewhat qualify•d the obligation, th•t this p•rson, I saw ready to b• the executioner, was one she loved so well, she had begged this as a blessing of him, the dying first, so to end with a perfect innocence, since his jealousy had resolved him to the death of both. And that he had so much disputed this request a• had go∣ven me time to b• the suspend•r of this judgment. There∣fore that I should not wont•r if she was tender of his life, that had so lately give• her more then his own. For that she could not have lived after him, and must have died with the guilt of her own hands▪ the innocence of whose heart would be sufficiently proved to me, by the knowledge that it was of me only she was accused▪ Therefore bid me weigh the merit of my action, with my unhappiness in the occasion I wondered to see my self indebted, even after such a present, as two such lives unto her. Therefore acknowledging my misfortune, ascribing this releese to her chance, begged of her some command, whose perfor∣mance might absolve me from the fault of my contribu∣tion to this distress of his, with promise to undergo whatsoever she should promise a full forgiveness on. Th•n she with as much security as rigour, condemned me to more then I had freed her from. And told me that this mistake of her intended executioner did not so much a•at her passion to him and could much less dispense with the engagement of her faith. Therefore commanded me ne'er to see her more, and so rest contented all my life with this
joy of having made her happy. After this hard command, to soften it, she steeped it in such tears, as I grew rather ashamed, then resolved. Then she began to praise, and magnify the bravery of this my action. So as I was afraid to hear her long, lest vanity should seem to share with love, in the persuasion to this obedience. I gave her instant∣lie my promise of complying with her will, and to add somewhat even to her own wish, I said I would conduct her to her servant, and never more but once again accuse her of cruelty. And joy, that my accusation of her might now prove meritorious to her. And this settled in peace, and confidence with him, I should make him witness of my vow, so to secure her future joys. This I did the same day, and so left her there, where she began to be sensible of my company. And resolved to repair to this Sanctuary with so much devotion to forgetfulness, as nothing but the hope of my admission here, could have persuaded to the repetition of this story. Which if it do procure me, I may triumph over fortune. Whose depression of me hath but sunk me to the center of rest and peace.
Collect the voices upon the hearing of the pretension.
And mine Votorio shall confirm all. Methinks both s•xes are interested in gratitude in his pretension. Women, for the demonstration of their power; and Men, for the exaltation of their love.
My admission here is such a blessing, as it shames all my former wishes, and removes me from the probabi∣lity of ever remembering the frustration of them, but as a benefit, which frees me now from wishing any thing.
Let the oath be given him, and the habit, and this convocation dismissed.
SInce the exclusion of that light that lightened me out of my self, I find my self settling again into my own temper, and the dispute reduce•d now only to my memory. Fidamira doth prevail, having the deeper seat; my eyes had drawn a superficial darkness over it, which had but shadowed not displaced my Fidamira. And I find those shadows vanished now removed out of those beams that made them. Therefore I will now first go and take out the staines of these new colours which my eyes had received in such haste, and guild my thoughts over anew with Fidamira's rays, on which no other beams shall ever shine, but to make them glitter more. Oh that the Prince his stay might settle his passion, as much as my departure h•th unsettle•d mine. So that this journey may doubly secure my F•dam••a. I will first visit her, and from thence dispatch trusty enquiries into several parts to discover the abode of this wilde Princess of Na∣varr. Upon my discovery I will repair unto the Prince, who I doubt not but before his return from thence may well be at his journeys end.
The King's impatient search hath followed me so fast, as it hath been my habit not my legs hath saved me from reprisal. Here is one, but his Easy pace doth not imply he follow•s any body. The gods guide you, Sir, towards your desires.
As much good fortune waite on all your wishes Lady.
It may be Sir, you may much contribute to mine in the direction of my way, which my haste would be much
advantaged by a certain knowledge. The way to the Sepheards Paradise.
You are in your right way, Lady, my own emma∣diate coming from thence may assure you of it. And one day's journey, if your person furnish strength for your haste will render you there.
Your coming from thence Sir may inform somewhat may more advance me then the presen• prose∣cution of my journey, if your own haste permit you.
Though I move not upon my own occasions, yet they are so addressed to the service of your sex, as I dare al∣low you any time you shall demand.
Sure Sir, you are much indebted to our sex, that think you owe so much civility to me, that seem to be one of those that nature hath appointed for a punishment, thus to mourn for beauty's martyrs. My curiosity shall not presume too much, since it is seconded with such a face. I would only know, whether you were there at the last election of the Queen. And how the form is of receive∣ing those into the Society that desire admission.
I owe the sex so m•ch, Lady, I am confident I shall not add one to the number of those you call mourners: bu• m•thinks your bl•ck becomes you so well, as if beauty it self, weary of white and r•dd, had retired a while to black for a vari•tie. I can resolve you Lady of the election of the Queen, who's called Bell•esa. And having heard the laws read at the coronation, can instruct you in the form of rec•iving pretenders into the Society, which is the manif•station of some cause wherein virtue, pressed by f•rtune to an extremity, flies thither for a sanctuary, and brings her s•lfe entire.
I doubt not then of my being received, unless my birth prove such a misfortune, as may make me un∣fit for that beauteous society▪ which I hear are all such, they need not so much as a foil to set them out. Other∣wise my misfort•n•s are such, as it may seem a shame to virtue to be the subject of so many.
Virtue, Lady, is always in hostility with diverse enemies, and even her scars do not impair her but make her still entire. Therefore she suffers nothing by her liable∣ness to distress, and she is so beautiful, as she gives your colour a loveliness, that perswads me it is the bright∣ness of your soul shines through the darkness of your face, and brings me a pleasednesse that seems rather in∣spired then attracted from your looks.
You have professed your self so happy Sir, you must needs have store of pity to throw away upon mis∣fortune; So I may please you in the exercise of your own virtue, as necessity is delightful to an ingenuous libera∣lity. Is the Queen, Sir, that is to be chosen most by her beauty, unquestionably the handsomest of all the socie∣tie?
She is such a one, Lady, as will so much oblige you as to make you equal to the rest of the society compared with her; there is in my mind so much disparity, as all comparisons reach her alike. She put me that was armed with love; I thought, of proof against all the world, to flight to save my self.
You have forgot nothing Sir, there that may serve you in recompense of this civility?
Yes Lady I have forgot that there, which I never hope to remember more, but as a danger, from which I owe the gods thanks for my delivery. You will find Lady a Shepherd called Moramente lately received, he was a friend of mine, to him you may be pleased to present the wishes of his friend that left him lately.
I think Sir, our haste may now part us upon e∣quall terms, they both seem to require the prosecution of our way.
The gentlnesse of your conversation, Lady, and the harshnesses of your condition both deserve, and seem to need a wish, I will leave with you,
May all your joys have leisure, sorrows haste,
Your wishes only by success displaced.
How unsure are the calmest harbors, mortality can encore in? Fortune hath raised a storm for me, that drives me out even of this security, and makes the ex∣posure of my self to the wide Ocean of the world again, a wished-for safety. My sinking here now is inevitable, and this safe descent is more unsufferable to me then striking on a rock, and so to perish with pre-eminence▪ The sad mis∣fortune which admitted me into this sanctuary is so out∣weighed by this that falls on me now, as even this place that did relieve me then becomes my persecution. Here I found ease for all the pains, that spiteful death, by his cursed seizure on my love, inflicted on me: but here is none for the •xtinction of my power, whose separation from a noble heart if it be consolable, becomes the greater curse. In the remission of its self it must consent in yielding un∣to comfort. Love is not such an irremediable passion as ambition. Love when it goes least annihilates it self, and so becomes its own remedy: ambition yields not to re∣pulse, but scales up again as often as it is thrown down, and so is less relievable All the comfort I can admit of, is, that my vexation doth so new a thing, as to defeat the peaceful virtue of this place; though that will be much abated by the necessity of dissembling my discontents. Here comes Melidoro and Camena. They are so pleased they will easily be deceived.
We may give you, Pantamora, as much joy in the resignation of your power, as Bellesa in the possession; since she can enjoy but what you have done, and she can
not till she resigned tha joy as you have done.
I dot no rapine Camena, at my resignation, but it is to avoid a sin not as I am void of sense of soverainity, so as to prefer a private condition before so public an eminence: and I believe the possession of ones self enlar∣general much by the extent of power. Active thoughts are not to be weari•d out by ease. They that prefer retreates and privacies for the enjoying of themselves, cousin themselves of what they might improve in company; and so, it may be, lose more in that they might acquire than that they make use of in the easiness of their contentedness. Sure, for the prospect of my thoughts, I would choose an emi∣nonce to set them in.
Sure Pantamora, if our thoughts take their whore∣zon at a convenient distance, the emission of them so far i• a recreation to them. But if they look so far as to me• no termination but the air, they lose themselves i• their extents. Privacy may send out thoughts so far as a conspicuous exaltation; therefore sure they that in calm• solitude can keep their wishes within their reach, and their thoughts not much farther then their wishes, enjoy a much happiness as they can think of, and none desire more.
But it seems Pa•••more•, tic not the peace bu• the priority that you affect amongst us. And that thy• place had only the virtue to ease you, as it was capable 〈◊〉 soverainity, not devoted unto solitude.
Mistake me not Cam•n•, I doe not think it che•∣pens private joys, to raise the value thus of hers that eve• the gods intend advantage to. But I forgive you, that b• the estimation of your own happiness, cannot cons••• to allow soverainity prec•d•ncy. You will bett• unde•∣stand one another, therefore I'll leave you where you will• not be so easily mistaken.
Tic a hard thing P•ntam•ra, not to be so in yo• that change so often.
How much do I owe you Camena, that have set∣led me above Pantamoras wishes. I would desire sovereign∣tie for nothing but to lessen the disparity which is be∣tween my passion, and power of serving you. And give me leave Camena, with an humble patience, to show some sense of your disagreement▪ to our demanding a dismission at this late Election.
If Love, Me•idoro, raise it self to such a so∣veraignty as to possess all power, and fortune in it self, and to neglect all other; then my differing our remove from hence continues you in this your throne; for, they say, Possession, and much more propriety, retrenches Love's prerogative.
As love, Camena, seiseth all our senses, it keeps all their faculties so busied, as they have not lei∣sure to taste, much less to enjoy any thing, and when our senses have preferred it up into our thoughts, there it is enthroned higher, than any mortal joy can reach up to depose it. Love may rise to this transcendent height, that it may seem to look down on all things, and despise even enjoying: but, likely, our thoughts in this elevation stay not long, but growing dizy fall. Therefore when our imaginations settle at such a pitch, as our senses are within distance of them; then possession is a foundation to maintain Love at that height: and such love, Camena, remains unmoved, and sees the ruin of many aspiring passions that fall down by it. Therefore possession what it takes off from loves summer-prospect in the height, doth recompense it with strength, and security against the change of seasons.
Then Melidoro, the impropriations of our selves proves us both more habitable, and less delightful, and the security of your loves cools to a tepid warmth, which is not only void of brightness, but of light. Love is dark∣ended, Melidoro, wh•n the flame's p•tt out.
Hymens torches do imply, Camena, loves flame is nourished, not put out: and may not love blaze as well in them, as Cupid's wilde fires?
They say indeed, Melidoro, they are the em∣blems of the nuptial flames, which go out with them.
All flames Camen•, as they be lightsome, so are they wavering too: we see their light and their uncertain mote∣once both at once. Therefore suppose this flame of love put out by nuptial rites, it settles then into a temperate heate; whose equal ardor purifies it more. For love like gold, Camena, must be brought into a fluentnesse, and by receiving of impression so becomes most useful.
In this usefulness you speak of Melidoro, the gold is made lighter still, and is made currant by •llay• So women, like gold, lose of their value for the good they doe. I cannot yet resolve to abate so much from what I love so well, my self, as to submit to a propriety.
Nuptial bonds Camena do not convey you over to the propriety of him they are delivered to; they rather do enlarge the owning of your self. For they make the same as your self, what you vouchsafe to join unto it. So you are still owned, but by your self enlarged. D• not fright me then Camena, with that word [submission, when all I wish is but this Identity, To become mo•• subject to you, because we do dispose of nothing so freely as our selves.
That which in our freedome Melidoro, is an a•∣surance against these bonds, after our engagement do• expose us most to the penalty of them. This Identity 〈◊〉 man and wife, this aggravates our faults, as it imply• the husbands sufferings for them. This interesteth that whose tendernesse hardens our lives unto us, a husband• honor, which is so delicate, as breath, nay imagination wounds it; and our afflictions are presently ministred fo• remedies, and all our suffering made legall by this Identi∣ty. Therefore Melidoro, I will not hazard the blessing o•
my love to you by making you My-selfe, who have a title dearer to me farr.
Tis an affected cruelty Camena, to punish me for possibility of sinning, and not to leave me so much as your love to joy in, by this ascription of my punishment to that. No Camena, this is a deceit full of apparition of your love, which like the Sun now it is setting seems to draw neere us, when it is remotest: therefore now I must expect a following darkenesse.
Marke Melidoro, how you that would decline mens easines to jealousy, are allready insensibly crept into it.
Melidoro and Camena, I come to warn you both to the Convocation. The Queen hath appoynted to day for the hearing of a new Pretender, the hour is neere at hand.
We will both go along.
My innocence hath strengthened even the weakest part of me so, as to defeate the kings persute. And now se∣cured from those feares, lest I should once enjoy a thought∣lesse ease, I find a care rise up before me, how I should dis∣guise my story. Fortune hath provided such an excesse for me, as I might spare the halfe, lest my distresse may seem so irremediable, as to exclude me from this ease. The strangenesse of my curse is such, as it excludes all beleefe, otherwise then that my complaint is vaine. And tis no discretion to alledge the love of Princes, for a misfortune. I must therefore degrade them of that quality, and relate them but as father and son, this will interest both sexes in my pity, who am fled hither, choosing so to make peace for others, to come and begg my own,
The pretender is allready here, lets take our places and give her audience.
The very introduction to my story, Ladies, may be a pretence enough unto your pitties, that I am redu∣ced to begg beleefe of you in that▪ which above all things derogates from your selves, That your contrariety could be beloved. And that which will avert you Gentlemen from the credit of it, is, that it may seem a scandall to have this love imputed unto men; unto whose colours this of mine may seeme a staine, and not an ornament. Thus I am so miserable as before I plead my cause, to make my judges justly parties against me; but, this wonder past, and pardoned, then the consequence may easily be beleeved because it is successively naturall, A Father and a Son being the subjects of this wonder. The passion of the son was first. The father followed it unknown to the son; of which the father meant to apply the first discovery, only to benum and dead what was left of life. This was that only pretence which the fury •ealousy, did allow the son▪ which had perswaded as it seemes the father, that the blacknesse of his thoughts would match the colour Na∣ture had ment to sute with mine. And the gods know, I was so equally averse to both, as they had made our co∣lours The fathers purpose seemed to him past defeat; and finding me one day so constantly unmoved with all those stormes lover's complaints do raise, at last this swelling sadnesse broke into a rage, and v•wed rev•nge. The which the strangn•sse of, might be discr•dit•d in my be∣leefe, had not the wonder of his love presaged unnaturall events. He said, he would reduce himselfe to a condition should defeat even my pitty, and in revenge of my crosse-will would frustrate even my power of helping him. And there he seemed to prove, this purpose was designed above, since nature had curst him unto the making of his curs•, his son. Whose making was not thought enough, but his
end too was destined to him, and even for such a cause, as was a greater torment then the act. Therefore he said, his thoughts condemned his son of more then parricide, his intercepting of my love to him, and he should be sacrificed to this suspition. So little did the love of twice himselfe prevaile, set by his love to me. And this he said, he did acquaint me with, that my virtue which had been his tormentor, might have the paine of being the cause, and knowing this detestable effect without the meanes of a prevention, which his instant execution should make im∣possible. And thus he seemed to fly from me, as if the plea∣sure of this act already had displaced that of his being with me. Then I, counselled by virtue in this strange surprise, which seeing as her self she had not power to divert this rage, did prompt me to disguise her into a shape might please his fancy for a while, and so delude this fury by its own resemblance. Then I persuing him with haste stayd him, seeming to embrace his rage, not wrestle with it. Then I told him that I did allow this brave resolve, as a temp∣tation high enough to justifie my yeelding to. And I could never have thought to have mett a humor worthy the matching mine unto. I told him, mine was none of those warme tender hearts that sighes could blow into a flame. It had an adamantine temper, which only blood can soften; and that he had done like to that Painter, that had the figure of a lyon running mad, and wanting •othing but the foame to represent, grew so distracted with despaire of hitting it, as in a rage he threw his pen∣cil at it, and by this chance did rarely perfect his aban∣doned worke: and so his fury had, throwing it selfe into so high despaire, made up that figure, which only could have taken me.
I told him, that his feares were true, and that his son was guilty of interposing between him and me. But his offence was only naturall, not active against him, whose having of a son, had resolved me, not to submit the plea∣sures
of my bed to a minority in any thing. Therefore he that could intend to kill his son to impossibilitate his joyes, will easily do it to assure them. Which if he would promise, on the beleefe of his brave minde, that had ad∣vanced me to such proofes of it, I would advance his possession of me, even this night, before the ceremoniall rites. He agreed to this with so much joy, he seemed to have made and not destroyed a son. That night, I ha∣ving taken up the time on such a pawne as this, made pre∣sently the best of it, and layd it out so, as I thought the use of it should pay the principall. Therefore I sent in∣stantly to the son; and, by tokens, that I had taken from the father as pledges of his word, assured him his death was purposed by his father, and that night. That there did remain no time for any thing but flight. This he be∣lieving did fly instantly. Which I assured of, my next part was now, to unmask my virtue, whose vizard grew offen∣sive. Therefore thus winged with innocence, I did resolve to fly over these seas, which part our neighbouring lands, leaving a Letter which might clear my virtue, from that black engagement I had made. And coming hither, the kinde gods presented me with the selfe equall report of so divine a body, as it offers it to the releife of all nations &amp; sexes, and my arrivall here I cannot ascribe to lesse then a divine direction.
Thus have you heard a Story, whose strangenesse needs so much of your pitty, it must first aske your credit as a charity; which if you do vouchsafe, I cannot doubt a fair commiseration. And the newnesse of this my pretence brings somewhat with it, as a recompence for my admis∣sion, an enlargement of the powerfull vertue of this place which by receiving me into this happiness•, shall shew, it cannot only disappoint Fortune's malignity, but Nature's too.
Votorio, collect the voyees.
No vote opposeth the admission.
Nature, Madam, hath by my humility light∣ned so the darke misfortune of my birth, as ambition, whose colour is my contrary, seemes so unlovely to me, as I shall wish nothing but rest and solitude, whose shades best fit with me.
Let the oath and habit be given her.
How much doth heaven approve of this com∣passion? It hath allready payd me with all the blessings earth affords, and hath made the King the recompencer of my happy disobedience. He hath since Fidamira's flight heaped so much fortune and honor on me as if he meant that amazement should take up all my senses, and leave me none to lament her love with, which sorrow seemes to him his prerogative, she would admitt no partner in it.
But I have a pain deeper then any guesse can reach to allay. Such a one as the name of father forbids the cure of.
The king is gone this way, his afflictions make my curse inevitable; for even their releife, the finding Fidami∣ra, must prove her losse to me.
O Fidamira, thy feares have blemished even thy innocence, in this unjust affliction of thy Prince, that had no thought but how to shew that Princes are happy in the meanes of setting vertue in its truest light. If this pur∣posed remove of thee out of thy Fathers house did shake thee into needless fears, 'twas thy humility, that did not know, that thy transcendent merit was so much, that a King could not spare the smallest circumstance in all his power to honor it enough. So, what I was forced to do
even to avoyd omission, thou didst avoyd for an excesse. Was it not paine enough for me to part with Basilino, without the addition of this strange heavy curse, That his returne should prove a torment to me? For so it must by this distresse of Fidamira, whose happinesse I only was to account for, upon his request O that he were come back, that I might free the name of King from such mis∣fortunes! and resigning to his g•iltlesse youth break off this thred by ruder motions, and not stay till it wear out with age▪ I would my selfe undergoe a boundlesse pilgrim∣age, which, though it had no end but expiation of my guilt to Basilino by the expiration of my selfe, I'de un∣dergoe it so. Most of those I sent in search of her allready are returned, and with their silent sadnesse, bring mourning only for their answers. Into how wilde a di∣vination have my straying sorrowes led me here alone? and they have brought me to a way whose shady melan∣choly seemes to invite me to begin my Pilgrimage▪ Here comes one too whose lookes forespeak his newes. What, have you found her?
Who should I have found?
Canst thou looke so and aske, Who? Is there so much sorrow left in all the rest of the world as thou pre∣tendest to, and not imployed in F•damira? What art thou, that seemest so boldly sad to vye with me?
This is the king I must dissemble▪ I am one that may allow you any subject you can choose about your selfe, and then dispute afflictions with you. I am a voted Pilg•ime, whose wandring motions seeke their ayme hopeles of so much rest as even the knowledge of the end they are directed to.
Alas, thou art so short of me, as even thy misery is my wish. Were it in my choyce to be a Pilgrim or a King, I'de chuse thy curse for ease. If you have nothing else to vye with me, you may add this unto your greifs, if you did meane they should▪ exceed all others; they
being now outsorrowed by me, whose condition if you knew, would shame all your complaints.
My sorrowes Sir, do ly so heavy on me, I cannot rayse them up so high as a relation; yours must be leighter, needs, that you can lift them so high as your mouth.
This dumb dejection of your selfe under the pres∣sure of affliction may as well imply your weaknesse as the sorrowes weight. And silence so may equall all pre∣tensions unto misery. Therefore raise your complaints so high to put them in a ballance against mine, to try the which out-weighs.
I am content to leighten yours to weigh with you. I have loved, and have been so neere injoying, as the dis∣appoyntment did double the paine, by the reflex of that which lightt on her I loved, by this differring of our joys which I am now more distanced from, than I was ever neere.
I did resist and overcome a passion, whose oppo∣sition had but left me one pain in all the world greater than it, and that fell on me, the disappointment of hi• love, for whose successe I only could have yeelded, and I remain• guilty in the opinion of them both, a• the defea∣ter of their joyes.
The one I shall ne're see againe, to undeceive. The o∣ther I must see so guiltily deceived, as he unjustly must cond•mne his father.
This is the only misery (I do confesse) I could al∣low a pitty to. This is a lending of your senses to others torments, whose joyes only they cannot tast. Your own wishes in my minde could not releeve you, since they tend only to others ends.
I do allow you so much advantage Sir, as I confesse your present misery is above my feares. But give me leave to aske▪ as a stranger to your country and your story, Whether this Fidamira that you named be yet a live. Me∣thinks her death might ease you much.
Kind pilgrime, In the absence of my son, jealous of, so much comfort as my care, my cursed fate guided her the only way unto my guilt, her flight. I do not think her dead, no more then a disguise may be a preparation to it. As death may have a better pretence to seise her then as not her selfe, than in the lively illustration of her selfe, to whom all lives are due. And to let thee see, kind Pil∣grime, how due to me this thy ingenuous yeelding was, I will direct thee to an ease of all thy miseries, while mine are unreleevable. I'le terminate thy aimelesse course, and point thee out to such an end, whose sa•e attainder shall center thy sorrowes up in rest. You have heard sure of the Shepherds Paradise, whose peaceable bounds have that strange virtue from the gods, as to include all those within a peacefull acquiescence, that are admitted there. Thither repaire, for though you have not griefe enough to weigh with mine; yet your misfortune's full enough for a pretence to be received even there. And when you finde the smiles of that smooth place laugh at your wrin∣kled sorrowes past, then for my sake dispute your joyes with those contented soules. For you may sooner there outvie all their delights▪ than my distresses, should you run on in this sad maze till you did measure all the world and end your dayes.
I will submit my selfe to your directions Sir, but to an end differing so farr from what you do prescribe as mine shall be in a defiance unto peace. I will even there raise up new sorrowes which my dist•acted soul shall there erect for trophies, got from the cont•sting virtue of that place; which my sad life shall so defeate, as all those joyes that shall incompasse me, shall by the deadnesse of my sense, serve but to prove my miseries the more com∣pleat.
Follow my counsell freind; it may be the virtue of this place may be so strong, it shall incline your own willingnesse towards your releefe. I must leave you, and I
am sure not far out of your way towards my advice.
The gods be with you Sir, and may you live to be a wonder in the contrary extreame of what you now are. Alas, good King, how patient have I been to allow your sorrowes victory, striving with mine, which these were too that you brought forth. For Fidamira's flight belongs simply to me, and hath no comfort but the ad∣miration of her virtues, which this happy meeting with the King hath so exalted as the wonder mingles with the sense of my disappointment, and so tempers it into a hopefull patience. The kings counsell is so good, it will serve for more then he intends it, and I hope for as much joy to him, as he meant ease to me. I will goe back direct∣ly to the Prince, and now assure him that the Princesse of Navarr is dead, to stop his fathers course. And as I finde his thoughts are fixt or moved from Fidamira, so con∣trive his returne; the which will quickly unconceal my Fidamira, who must needs be hid in some neighbour∣ing privacy secure from her virtuous feares.
This penance of not seeing her, I take as due unto these faulty eyes that have been pleased with ano∣ther object. Which now redeemed shall make me watch their straying motions with a stricter care.
Beauty shall slide from them as it falls
Like smooth things lighting upon crystall balls,
Whose touch doth part and not together fix
Their own agreeing makes them cannot mix.
So beauty in mine eye shall meet with such
I cannot fix, but passe as it doth touch.
That which you reported of the Prince, Moramente, is now fully confirmed by this Moor that we admitted last. She past that way she said, and so describes his person and his parts, it seemes a miracle that faith or honor could have virtue to r•sist his will.
I know the Prince, Madam, so well, I wonder more at the unfitnesse of his wishes, than at the gods re∣fusall. Which was a gentle punishment of his forgetting selfe. And I beleeve wherever he is gone, heaven will di∣rect him to a choyce, between which, and his owne, there shall be as much odds, as between his choosing and the gods.
You beleeve then Moramente, he will love again, &amp; by a high successe shall know he was reserved by heaven, for more then he could wish at first, you think heaven doth allow of love's twice.
As it doth intend, Madam, all good should rise to its perfection, our minds are but love's pupills at the first. Which fit themselves but to proceed and take degrees, and so our second love is a degree wherein our soules at∣taine to experience that imploys it selfe in loves refine∣ment. So not by the first step, but by this gradation, Love ascends unto its highest.
I will allow you Moramente, Love is no irradiation of a light into our soules whose first instant brightness is in its perfection. But may not the first spark be kept alive and raised unto as high a light, as can the second, which is kindled still by putting out the first?
Tis not an extinction of the flame, 'tis but a change of the materiall that fomented it: so second loves have this advantage, they being the first instant in that height the first was long agrowing to, and have the first comparison to rayse themselves by, which must prove it higher by having got above it.
These degrees of elevation M•ramente, you require in Love, inferr this consequence that love should be a con∣tinuall motion, by change aspiring to transcendency. For it comparison doth raise it so, he is to blame that takes but one. For by your inference the number must exalt no•last unto the greatest height. Your inconstancy doth not concerne us so, as you should strive to prove it a virtue to us.
In this degree Madam, which I have named Love comes to touch a point, after which all motion is a decli∣nation. I do not allow loves leightnesse, or variety con∣tributors unto its heighth. I do agree the glory of it, is in a consistency in this elevation the second love attaines to; because the first cannot know how high it is. Had I thought inconstancy a virtue, Madam, I ne're had been blest with this so great a joy as seeing you.
What Moramente sayes, Martiro seemes to justi∣fy the Prince his second love, and so to make his cause a president to plead his own by, since their fortunes do re∣resemble much in the miscarrying of their loves.
So he hath reason, Madam; for the Prince's case would warrant any private •ans dismission of such thoughts whose entertainement did so much defame loves power by his Tyranny; and they ill subjects are, whose constant sufferings do better the world from his subject∣ion which can be taken only by their will.
I do confesse the Prince for many reasons might not only be allowed but wished a second, and succesfull love; that he may know our Sex have joyes that may out∣prise his sufferings; be may else grow vaine in this his sorrow, and beleeve love owes his more then it can pay in all our Sex.
What Madam then is my condition? whose suf∣ferings I should think injured compared with his, did I not find the Prince exalted by you to so high a pitty, as I am glad mine were now likened to them, might not I pre•end to have my second choyce, wisdome, not in∣constancy?
I beleeve you might; and I should pitty you the more, were you not here in this deligh••ull •••ce, and he abroad in search of that you have attained, Forget∣fulln•sse.
You speake Madam, as though you wished him here; where would he were even in my place, and I any where but with your pity.
You wish Moramente much against him, and more against your selfe: for you had my pitty in your admit∣tance, you had it at first sight; and, since, you have my in∣terest in all yo•r joyes as part of the Society.
If I wish him Madam in my place t'is that I dare wish more in his brave name then in my own, in whom so insolent a wish as your esteem could finde but such a pitty as distraction doth.
I do esteeme you so much Moramente, as I dare never resolve to pitty you so much. I trust the vertuous peace of your composed, and setled thoughts.
M••amente is so civil, Madam, he would make the virtue of this place defective, to endear your power by the applying of his wishes unto you. And your civility to us Madam is such, you borrow now this time from your devotions.
Tis true, Ma•tiro, time is not so civill as to stay for any body.
I have yet devotion enough Madam to forgive M•rtiro his excesse. I'le stay behind a little to dispose my selfe to that. 
I see there is no vizarding of love to make it passe abroad unknown; the eye or mouth are even enough to shew what tis. Nay did young Love himselfe wish a dis∣guise he could not ever be fitted. For who can take a mea∣sure of a growing love? where every instant adds as much as even your thought can comprehend. And now Love seemes to promise more advantage by this selfe discovery. It prompts me to Martiro's friendship, whose trust will both afford my love more room for recreation of it selfe, and helpe to carry it neerer Bellesa by an insensible ap∣proach, which it may make by him. I will professe •y passion freely to Martiro. I am sure to be beleeved, thats a joy which I defy my own misfortune to oppose me in. But I must not provoke it with unthankfullnesse▪ I must ac∣knowledg to my misfortune the debt of this experience.
All love's a light▪ which as it doth eject
Shaddowes, by them it doth it selfe detect.
So he that thinks love can be shaddowed quite
Knowes not, there is no shadow without light.
I will contribute now to B•llesa's knowledge, and will leave these verses here, which she must find at her re∣turne. 
Is this strange discovery part of my curse, my finding out of the Prince, only that I might misse Agenor? The peace this place affords had been too much for me without this disquiet of Agenors parting with the Prince. I can guesse no reason, unlesse he should, finding him set∣led here, have asked leave to go back again unto the King with the designe of seeing me. Which I am aptest to sus∣pect. I• doth so well agree with my misfortunes such a dis∣appointment. And yet I findsome bold devining-thoughts, that thank my fears that brought me hi•her. And pro∣mise me I shall redeeme the Prince his favour, by so strange a service. He may thinke I ow the virtue of my faith un∣to his fate, that did compell me to inconstancy. Which was ordained that his despaire might wellcome this destined blessing so much more; and I shall have a double merit by my contribution of dispaire and hope. I do confesse his passions, and already have professed his prayses, and he is himselfe our Prince. And now I must apply my selfe to the successe of his disguise. I shall so studiously persue his end, as his consent unto Agenor's choyse and mine shall be a joy of his, and no reward. Here lies a paper. This is his hand, I cannot mistake, mine eyes are not disguised. These are verses full of passion. I'le keep them so, as she he ment them to, shall see them more recommended, then this chance can do.
I thank my thoughts for this reproach they send me. Now the wish of my contribution to the successes of
my love, which now againe hath mastred my ambition; and all the quarrell I have now unto Bellesa, is, the having envied her, that so low a passion should be in me, for which I will accept no lesse satisfaction from my selfe then the dis-lustering of her in Moramen•'s eyes. I am confident she is already settled there with all the advantage love can chuse. And sure, she cannot choose but see her selfe there by the reflex of his addresses, which are so clear as her conivance implyes she findes her selfe no way disfigured there. Yet all this is no more advantage then I may allow her. I would not meet with lesser difficultyes to expiate my envy, which my heart hath let it selfe descend to. And now my thoughts shall take their rise no lower then the admiration of her beauty and her virtues, and from thence carry my loves successe above them all. I will not strike on the flat of envy or destraction, but in faire conspicuous flights will make above her. 
To what a rashnesse hath my Love transported me? as if I might expect my passion had given me an e∣quall power over others to that it had assumed over me. I did deliver up my wishes to Martiro, with such a confi∣dence, as if I had granted his contribution to them as a sute. He answered me with such cold civility as did imply surprise. He sayd, he wondred that so noble a passion could be so defective in so essentiall a point as secresie. But that he would impute this opening of my selfe to him a desire of making him a freind by this advance of such a trust, as must expresse my confidence in him by the ex∣posure of my happinesse to his discretion. In returne of which, he said he would promise me so strict a secresie, as my love should be lock't up with the profoundest secret• of this world, his hidden thoughts; which should never have more ayre then would afford them breath only to live, but not to speak. How dull was I, not to beleeve before that all that had seen her, were in love with her?
I'le give security now for my beleeving it, a generall di∣strust of all the world. All women needs must envy her, and all men me for the out-loving them. I will punish this my looseness so, I will endure the guilt of breach of friend∣ship for it, and lock it up even from Genorio at his re∣turn.
We may discharge ourselves of this charge now, having met you Sir, who are of the society. He demands Votorio, to whom, you can direct him better then we.
This stranger, freinds, is addrest to me, where you may leave him, and take your discharge.
We obey Sir, and leave you.
Dost thou bring newes Genorio, that thou hadst rather thy clothes should tell than thou? What black traver•e hast thou brought, to draw between me and my joyes were flying to embrace thee.
I am happy Sir, to come to be imbraced by you in this infectious Colour which must fully and black you too.
Throw then Genorio those blacks over me, for nothing can appeare so ugly unto me as this party-colo∣red doubt.
If the blacks be not so polished Sir, as you may see your selfe in them, then let your thoughts sink down as low as possibility can fall, and they must needs find your misfortune there. You have not many to confound your choyce.
It must be that, Genorio, that which sinkes be∣yond the centre of misfortune, so as it ascends upward unto heaven in a rebellion for Saphira's elevation thither. My distraction tells me it must be that, and justifiys this seisure on me. I am so mad allready, I do not wish it should be lesse. And I am not so happy as to be naturally mad, for I have so much sense left yet Genorio, as to thank
thee for the exempting of thy selfe from so soule a thing as telling it me.
Give me leave to tell you Sir, you have not gues∣sed so much misfortune, as your distraction is going now to make. Suppose heavenly Saphira at her home. Will not the part of lamentation that you ow her, ask an en∣tire soule to pay it her? why then do you teare that a∣peices, which even whole will be too little to offer up un∣to her memory? do you think that lesse then a man can be enough to mourn for her? Then Sir, collect your senses, and by this union strengthen them for the impo∣sure of this weight, that they may be the bearers of this sacred hearse. This leight-distraction shows they would fly from it as a burthen▪ Therefore Sir, consider what shame it will be for you to mourn for the divine Saphira as you are not your selfe.
As I am my selfe Genorio, I must needs be the unfittest to mourne for her; for so I owe her most, and am unworthy even of an ability to acquitt my selfe. Should I speake to save those senses that were guilty of her death? No Genorio, no lesse then running mad, and biting even the virtue of the place, so as by my inf•ct∣ion it may distracted dye, and turne this Paradise into a mourning wildernesse, where nothing but wild sorrow shall abide. There is nothing but the virtue of this place so inverted, can be a monument of greife fitt for the di∣vine Saphira.
But stay, before I go Genor•o, tell me the manner of her leaving of this world, that I may be higher swollen with this black raging poyson I must spread, that I may over∣come all Antidotes this place is strengthened with.
The knowledge of this circumstance will be so usefull to you Sir, as you must give me leave now to con∣dition for the imparting of it; Since not your selfe, I need •ot owne my duty, therefore promise Sir to reassume so
much sense as to comply with your owne duty, and your deare fathers wishes. Whose sorrowes for your absence joyning with his age, will quickly rob you of some part of those distracted griefs requiring a g•eat share for him. Therefore your duty to Saphira should advise you to a∣voyde so sad a mixture as his death must be, which must part griefes with her. And were it but to raise your mour∣ning as a private man up to the height of a great Prince, you were obliged for that to re-inthrone your selfe, that by this low dejection of yourselfe, it might so become the greater fall, and so you advanced in your designe of honoring Saphira.
Doth my father summon me Geno•io to the per∣formance of my word, in my return? I will begin at this great height of strayning nature, in my disobedience to him, I must benight the lustre of this place. Courts of themselves are sad enough Genorio, each one hath there his own particular affliction that benum's him of the sense of others. No Genorio it must be here, among these joyes, where greife's a miracle, that I must celebrate the funeralls of the divine Saphira, and so give blacks to all this society. If you will leave to me to guesse the manner of her death, I'le shew I am so stark mad, as I'le be∣leeve she dyed for love of me.
I'le contribute so much to the madnesse of the be∣leef Sir, as to let you know she dyed married to the King of Albion, whom her beauty which was only undisguised in her retreat into his countrey, which she chose for so∣litude, raysed her to the publick eminence of Queen, without the help of any other quality; all which untill her death she kept conceal'd, unwilling to owe any thing but to her beauty.
This may allay my griefe into a sober melan∣choly which I must now impose upon my selfe, the only meanes of expiation left. This methinks hath brought me to my selfe againe, her having been another's. And
now Genorio I will promise thee to stay but to use the virtue of this place for the recovery of this sad disease was growing on me. Therefore do you pretend to be admitted h•re, and I will promise within few dayes to declare my selfe, and so returne. I'le go and send Votorio to you.
I will obey you Sir, and with no lesse merit by the pain of staying now, than in the leaving you be∣fore. Sure fortune is not blind, it could not lead us up and downe, thus, as it were in such intricate and many changes, at it doth. She hath brought me back hither, &amp; perswades me now she will conveigh me to my end by staying here. Sure this pretence of staying here to mourn was but found out as the best disguise Love can put on, because the blackest sorrow. And nothing will conceale love longer then an approved pretence to sadnesse. I must apply my observation, and my curiosity as a stran∣ger, to discover whether his thoughts be not more fixt on Bellesa's life then Saphira's death.
The Gods protect you, Sir; Moramente told me you demanded me.
He hath obliged me Sir, in so speedy procuring of this favour, I am come to intreat your help in an au∣dience, for the delivery of my pretence to be admitted in∣to the Society. Fortune, since I went from hence, hath so intended my persecution, as if my having been but here had been a declaration of my selfe against her. Therefore now I am come back hither for Sanctuary, with this to recommend my sad pretence the having suffered for my b•ing here.
It is you Sir, have brought this darknesse with you, that hath ore-cast Moramente thus.
I assured only his enquiry in somewhat he desired
to know abroad, which if it hath afflicted him, it will adde somewhat to my pretence. The misfortune of having been so cursed as to bring sorrows hither, it will be in your power Madam, now to over-pay that which you were so lately pleased to call civility, my direction of you hither. Your happy admittance here must needs indebt you to any body that did but contribute so much as showing you the way.
That which helped you to retaine me in your memory may excuse me for your being fallen allmost out of mine. This black made me notorious to you and hath disguised you to me. It seems you are owner as well as bearer of part of Morament's greife•.
Among all misfortunes Madam, I have not this of nature, the being insensible of what friendship should affect me with, and so only this particular toucheth me, my own dysasters challenging this habit.
Your own misfortunes are now to be releeved by our knowledg of them: but you may ease us by the ac∣quaintance of this greife which you have brought to Moramente.
I wonder Madam, it falls so heavy on him to cause this dejection, since it falls on him but from another whom it fell on first. 'Tis the death Madam of the Princesse of Navarr, whom the Prince his Highnesse was so in love with, as he left his fathers Court even to ask nothing but her pardon. The story is too long to satisfy you by, of the Prince his reasons. But this is enough to possess you of the reason of Moraments sorrowes, his love and duty to the Prince.
The Queen Sir, is going to the audience-seat, and tis time for you to move that way.
I follow you Sir. In hope of time enough here∣after, to ask your pardon, Lady.
I shall meet you presently Sir, and I hope embrace
you, as one the gods seem to favour, and to have for∣given by their direction of you into this Society.
The gods should too much enlarge me to fur∣nish me with more ad•iration of the virtue of this place. Sure th•y chose to make me thus happy, as the subject whereon the virtue of this place might get the greatest honor by the despaire of my condition, that I should live to misse Genori•, to endeare the finding him here. This is he, my joyes tell it me better then my eyes. The Prince is here, &amp; left the sense of the Princess Saphiras death might qualify these joyes, the Prince being in love with the divine Bel•esa is fallen out to make her death as it were a sacrifice to all our lives. This free's the Prince from any scruple in his love, and so prepares the wished successe unto Agenor and my self. I will conceale my self still unto Agenor. It is not jealousie, but to do him right by this allowance of so much merit, as his constancy must be, in this place, imparadised in the strength of temp∣tations of our Sex: and I love him so I'de have him out∣merit me in what only I can alleadg it, constancy, which in a defence against this place's beauty will be done. I do not despaire of Belles•s taking too, my approaches have been succes•ull yet.
Love's well advanc'd, intrench'd within our eares,
It workes securely covered from our feares.
If e're it come to parley under ground
But with our thoughts, we likely do compound.
Moramente by me begs your Majestie's pardon for his absence which his indisposition hath occasioned.
I am sorry for the justnesse of his excuse. Let the ••tender begin.
Behold deaths Herald, sent to proclaim a Victory 〈◊〉 he lately had o're love, by which both sexes are de∣feated
so, as men may feare the being loved, and women may justly leave from loving, since nothing but dying can shew that they can love enough. Behold and pity me whom death keeps thus alive by my despaire. In living to proclame his Triumph, not only in my love, but in my life, I am that wretched he, that shame unto my sex, that was beloved by such a one, as had not sin enough to dy, but death was faine her virtue to imploy.
This treachery did death use me with, whilst I was as I may say even in his company, as much as darknesse and absence represent him. In this separation then, death I may say betray'd love too: for 'twas the deadly sinn of lust, armed with the power of a Prince that did assault the vir∣tue of this matchlesse Shee. To save whose life she gave her own to death delivering it with her own hands. Which being not strong enough to defend her innocence, were innocent in the defeate of her own life when it stood against her innocence. After this, do not be∣leeve that I pretend admission here for comfort, but bound to seeke through all the world the place which is the truest enemy to lust, and death, which all consent is this; for that virtue which defyes the first, defeates the last of his power. Therefore I must implore your ayde in this, that in revenge of this injurious life which nature is not so kind as to allow me hope of a justifiable freeing of my selfe of, I may live here where only life is such, as it despiseth death.
Votorio, collect the votes
They agree for his admission.
And I confirme it too. But methinks death hath not been so injurious as your sense would make it in this cause for it seemes to have come in upon the rescue, not the arrest; and we are interessed in your life as a record of the virtue of our sex.
Did I not justly prefer the estimation of this place before the rest of the world, I should have been a moving
monument, and should have disperst her Epitaph as farr as life would have have served to carry me. But since in this one cent• meets all the extended lines of virtue that touch this worlds circumference, here I have chosen to fix my selfe; that in a firm consistency the dimension of this virtue might be trulier taken here.
Votorio, let him be sworne.
You shall be obeyed, Madam.
MY whole life Saphira should have been thy Epitaph, had not thy end dispenced with my beginning. This is an obligation which my fancy brings unto thy memory, which I will offer to it now.
The Queen, Moramente, hearing of your indispo∣sition, is come to visit you.
The Queen, Gemella? Let her not be so cruell as so soon to interupt my senses in a sorrow that they are paying. But the seeing her will set me so behind by such an interposing joy, as will so lighten all I can pay after, as there will nothing passe for weight.
Madam you have set all my sorrows, that I ought my freind, upon my own account for my unworthi∣nesse of so soveraigne a remedy as your presence.
What distemper is it Moramente, that detained you thus long from the Society?
If e're your sight did cure any Madam, call it that; for that's the only marke that I shall e're remember it by.
They say you have a freindship so ieneere to you,
and so refined, as you are wounded through it. What pa∣per's that you seem to be suprised with in your hand?
The tendernesse of friendship Madam, is the best constitution of it, and misfortunes that fall first on friends have not their weight broken by the way, but fall heavier as they bring them down upon us. This paper, Madam, is a part that I have acted personating the unhappy Prince, whose sorrowes I took so cruelly on me, as they do excuse the insolence of taking his person too, in this meditation on Saphira's death.
Pray let me see it, Moramente. G•mella shewed me verses of yours the other day, which I liked well, they were discreetly passionate.
These, Madam, I dare commend more, as they concern me not so much. I'le read them to you, Madam, in the person of the Prince upon the death of the Prin∣cesse of Navarr.
Having allow'd my sorrowes choyse of paine,
They have chose this, the searching still in vain
The cause of this strange death, and though on earth
I find more reason for't, then for her birth,
As curses are much more then blessings due;
Yet that doth not seem strange enough for new.
Methinks heaven's wisdom needed not disburse
Such treasure, to resume it for a curse.
But as the benefactor's use, or want,
Doth justify resuming of his grant:
So the recalling her doth but imply
Her want brought heaven unto necessity,
So heav'n did re-impropriate this wealth
Not to impoverish us but store it selfe.
This then me thought, did me some reason show.
Because, it did transcend all reason so:
Then carried by this rapture up above,
I found that all the gods had been in love
With her, so as their immortality
Would have been tedious to them, if to dye
Had been the way to her▪ so, to be even
With all their loves, she dy'd and went to heaven.
The cause of your pain Moramente ought to cease, if it depend on the finding of a cause strange enough for this lamented death. Did you ever see the Princesse of Navarr?
I must confesse, I am eased of all the pain that I have ever heard of; and that which doth remaine doth not detract from your virtue Madam, since I ought to think your knowledge of it, would but improve it. In not having seen the Princesse, I attribute rightly unto the Prince, who as I conceive could not possibly arrive in Al∣bion before her death.
Sure Moramente, her Marriage was her death unto the Prince; that breath which did be∣queath her to another, was her expiration to him.
I believe Madam, the having made her self away must needs lessen much his devotion to her ••rtues; nor do I believe that e're he meant to love her; but moved with a religious sense of those hazards of hers he was accoun∣table for, did vow this search for expiation, not expec∣tance of her love.
Sure, love is very injorious, or it is injured much by mens complaints; for, since my comming hither I have heard no pretence to a misfortune, but Love hath had the imputation of it. Sure you know what Love truely is; therefore instruct me what in it selfe it is, that ne∣ver heard of it but c•iminated with sad effects.
I shall retract all my complaints if I be so happy as to be the first, that informs you Madam what love is, and shall doe so great a service unto Love it selfe, as it hath but one recompence great enough for my re∣ward.
True Love, Madam, is a Spirit extracted out of the whole masse of virtue; and two hearts, so equall in it as they are measured by one another, are the vessels where it is refined, heated naturally by each others eyes, and joyn∣ed by pipes as subtill as our thoughts, by which it runs so fast from one into another, as the exchange and the re∣turne are but one instant. And to confirme this doctrine, you Madam by this receit may make it when you please.
The reason then that I have heard Love cal∣led a poyson, is, when this Spirit is intended to too high a degree of heat.
If it be drawn from good ingredients, it cannot rise to an excesse. Pure Love is a virtue Madam that hath no extream; and wild desires take but Love's name, as rash blasphemers do repeat the gods by an habitual sinne, by which they only do prophane themselves. It is desire, Ma∣dam, you have so oft heard called poyson. 'Tis true, that's a mineral which if it be not well tempered and prepared, is very dangerous; but, so disposed, it quickens the virtue of all it mixeth with.
Me thinks Moramente you conclude, There must be a conformity of two hearts for Love's composure, &amp; so a single one that gets not another to joyn with it cannot attain to Love's perfections.
Loves perfection Madam, is such a blessing as the gods have, not left in the power of any one to consum∣mate▪ but, to indear it by the difficulty, have ordained it should depend on the consent of two. This rarity in na∣ture else, would prove too cheap if every single heart could be possest of it. Therefore I conclude that loves per∣fection must be such a compacted union of two hearts so close, as there's not so much as even a wish left out be∣tween them.
But how can this be done? For I have heard most women say, that when our hearts are softned so as they are impr•ssive, then men thinke themselves their sove∣raigns,
having set their Image on them; and so our hearts are rather wrought into subjection, then that equal union you describe.
I confesse, Madam, there may be men as vain as wo∣mens fears: but, vanity though it take many marks upon it selfe, yet leaves but seldome any. It is so light, Love ne∣ver feels it as it passeth over it; therefore Madam, Vanity doth but polish Love in its own conceit, and so sees it self in it, and pleaseth it self with the reflex without the im∣pression left. But a mans heart possest with true love as soone as it perceives but the least gentlenesse, where it is applyed to move, then with humble insinuations it works it self under that heart, it means to raise in this injection of it self into it; so that the womans heart is not subjected but exalted by this union.
You conclude then Moramente, that all love is a desire refined into the parity in union; and I have heard Martiro say, Love's soul was made of the impossibility of union: How can these two be reconciled?
I have heard of men so long immured up in darknesse, they began to make a sight out of the habit of privation of it: and so despaire at last may thus suppose it self a light, and custome may delude it, and such darke visions Madam are better wondered at then intended to disprove.
I confesse Moramente, I incline more to your opi∣nion, as the more clear by far. Martiroes lessons are yet too hard for so young a beginner as I, I shall acknowledge my self your pupil as the first I ever understood Love by. I hope you will come abroad now. Pray give me this paper, left it make you fall into a relapse.
You are a greater Mistrisse in love Madam then you know of: for I have not told you half of that I have heard of you, the repetition of which would ease me more then the repetition of all other griefs. I have so desperate a disease, Madam, I cannot hope for a relapse.
Can chance be trusted with more treasure then even love can glory in, kindnesse from the divine Bellesa? [I shall acknowledg you the first that ere I understood love by.] How well hath she expressed her ignorance in love by speaking thus plainly of it? Thus much understood by her that said it, were theme enough to change my story, and make it more successful then ever i• was cross. But this was said by chance, to let me see fortune is so confident in my oppression, as she dare show me joys in her hand to scorn me by.
I wonder Moramente, how so much sorrow did re∣maine for you, since your affliction hath been parted a∣amongst all of us. And none hath taken a larger share of it then I.
I need not Pantamora excuse this sense occasioned by me; since all your sex is interested more in this your loss then any one of ours, as you might glory that she was your own.
Sure Moramente the desire of that glory must have been the rack on which your soul hath been extend∣ed to raise your sorrows thus. Friendship gets not so far within us as to shake us so.
As friendship appropriates all joy, so Pantamora I have wished it as the greatest blessing I could wish the Prince, if he desired it, to appropriate his sorrows also.
This is vanity Moramente, that lightens through those clouds encompass it; as if you would seem to pre∣sent the Prince with all you have, your love, and sorrows too. I will help you forward Morament by my belief that there goes not only your passion, but her sense of it to justify your griefs: And I confess tic not unlikely you should move wheresoever you should apply.
I was never so near any happiness as even this mistake of yours. For this, Princess, I confess; I was not
in so much certainty of despair, as in all other good fortunes I have been, because I never saw her, nor she me.
• confess I guessed by that nearness to the Prince your sadness did avow you, you might have been im∣ployed by him in his passion to Fidamira, which we have heard of, either to divert, or delay the match, and from thence derive your interest to so much sorrow. But will you so far affirm this truth as to profess you love ano∣there now? for I cannot allow any thing else but Love such a passion of a noble heart, as this your thoughtfulness implies.
If I did love Pantamora, would you infer from thence the justness of my griefs, and so conclude me un∣hapy even by Fate?
No Moramente, It may be I believe so of your o∣men as I would share something in the direction of your love towards the success of it. For I should impute your misfortune sooner to your own fault in choosing, than to your ordaining Fate.
Suppose then Pantamora I were to love, How would you direct my choice towards an appearance of success?
You have a person and a virtue Moramente to dis∣credit counsel by mastering improbabilities. You may succeed in what friendship might be bound to a dissuasion in.
Tic true, I cannot think my self repaired by less then all that love can give, since I have suffered all it can inflict. And if I would expose my self again unto the hazard of a wish it should be such, as but the possibility of it should shame the more appearance of failing in it.
The attemptingnesse of your spirit is not to be reproved, but you must know that it is not difficulty, should most indear our undertakings if we may rise by easiy unresisted steps unto an equal height. Tic not the scrambling up a precipice that is to be preferred where
there is equality in all but easiness, there difficulty impairs and not improves the value.
I suppose Pantamora, all love's success is equally removed from me, therefore would I make a choice, whose eminent desperateness might some way flatter me in the disappointment of my wishes.
There may be such a virtue Moramente, as it may make too strict an opposition to it, a fault as an extreme too distant from it; and so, difficulty de•priseth what it would set off.
Such a virtue as yours Pantamora might challenge a complacency in all its wishes, that in∣solency in me were more misfortune then loves power reaches to shame me with.
If you could learn to wish as I do Mora∣mente, youl'd find much ease in the avoiding of a harsh resistance.
As you do Pantamora? that's with no∣thing. You are in a condition never to wish, but out of charity to others.
If so, they are all now employed on you, that your nearest wishes may end with the same success as mine.
And in return of this civility, I shall wish no more success then I believe is due to yours.
Can this too, be by chance? Sure it is, that each one here's an Oracle of Love. So that all that's seed's ambiguous, but even this in the fair•t sense could not divert me from Bellesa's riddle.
I congratulate, Genorio, your admission here: what think you of this place? were I not better stay here a while, then venture back so soon into that dange∣rous ayre where Fidamira breathes?
I believe Moramente (for so I now must call you) this place already hath furnished you with such an antidote as you might venture to seek out Fidamira, and defy the power of her love. You may much less then, ap∣prehend the danger of the place, from which she hath now removed all virtue, your father's Court.
Why? is she gone from thence Genorio? did thou call her Saphira mistrusting my obligation of a sorrow great enough for her? or hast thou plagues in store for me, and dost produce them thus successively, left over-charged, I should break all in pieces?
No Moramente, Fidamira is not dead. She is only frighted from your fathers Court by the fears of too conspicuous a life, to avoid the guilt of others sins, rumour, and calumny; and guided by her virtue, that was shy even to a degree of wildness is fled, and whither known only to the gods: your fathers search hath proved that she is hid from all mortality, his care hath been so exquisite.
No, I am confident she is not dead by this Genorio, I could not have been so long suspended from the sense of such a curse. She's not so much as strayed, for the gods must needs guide her in a journey they have sent her.
Me thinks, you should not name the gods without remembrance of the bonds of nature, and of pie∣tie you stand engaged to them in, to relieve your father; whose tenderness of all your prayers sinks under the pres∣sure of a fresher grief than your unhappy absence, the flight of Fidamira. His goodness is such he fears more your imputation of it to the forfeit of his promise, then he fears all his present sorrows.
I will presently Genorio ease him of all those fears by writing to him as from France, to thank him for such honours meant to Fidamira as did make good his promise. Her fears better than her assurance
proves it. I will acq•aint him too, with the remove of all those sad occasions drew me from him. And I will pro∣mise him a speedy and a joyful meeting, which I will perform too; for at the next election which approaches now, I will declare my self, and so return.
This is the least you owe your father Sir, but all I think you can yet spare him, engaged as you are here.
Well Genorio, this I resolve; and believe, you had rather stay here too then be the messenger. I must now go waite upon the Queen for my acknowledgements for the honour of her visit.
I believe Moramente, that (Visit) may begin your Letter to your father, but hardly end it with the promise of your Resolve. 
O that I could shut up those false lights that dazzle thus my faith to Fidamira.
I have found A•enor, but with a look so heavy as it weighs down his eyes, so as he hath not seen me yet, it is my darkness that hath so benighted him. I will stay yet unseen, and in the deadest time of his com∣plaints, this cloud shall break and give him all the light, whose want obscures him so.
Have not my eyes attracted poison strong e∣nough to stop my breath before I do break out into t•is foul profession of my tainted faith? or may I thus re∣cover, if I can breathe it out through these opening pores, before it seiseth on the nobler parts? I will take F•damiras name, and try if that can yet expel it before it fix, there's force enough in this Receipt. For this great Cordial, Love, unlike to others, doth improve its virtue by the habit, not remit it; and, to enforce what I have taken inward her name and memory [he pulls out a picture] I will send this after the infection the same way it did get in, to try if this can overtake it, and so bring it back. I
will not go without this shield before me. Tic no indear∣meant blessed Image unto thee, to say, Thou want• but speech: for I confess, I hear thee, and thou speak as loud as thunder to me, in so just reproaches, as they welcome the amazement that they bring. Thus armed, I will go on and challenge even Bellesa to satisfy my injured Love, and to repair his honour. In this strife between these two, I'll give the odds of life.
I did not think to have found Agenor thus o'er cast, he hath out done me in a disguise, he hath blackt o'er his soul. Have I lived to be obliged to a concealment of my self unto Agenor upon my discovery of him? O that I had enlightened him, before I had been thus in∣lightened by him! Thoughts that fly by us like instant lightnings never so little ill are not emptied sins. I might have found him dazzled, and might have freed him from the danger of this darkness he is now conte∣sting with, and this my blind belief might well move me to that: but my misfortune's so exact, as it hath o∣verturned the intention of the heightening of his joy down to the lowest curse between us both. I will yet find him out before he meets Bellesa with that odds which he hath offered her. I am so far from that vanity as I would not contest with her, unless advantage given me more then even Agenor for the Judge.
The Queen told me she visited Moramente, and had a great discourse with him of Love, and that she is well satisfied with Moraments reasons. Thus much is more in her then a declared fondness in another. It is not fear, struck to such a degree of cold, as makes it poyso∣nous jealousy, that makes me thus tender of Bellesa's loving; nor my despair thats sunk so low as malice; but the supremest admiration that ever soul attained to,
•hat sets her so near the celestial bodies, as it can allow her for low mortality but such a love as there is, which is but titular, and propitiatory, far above all propriety, which undeifies all we adore. I would not have her bow nearer the world then all the worth of it can set it self to her, which is so far from rising to equality, as it can scarce get height enough for comprehension of her. Therefore I cannot consent that any thing but souls should ever ap∣proach her, and they so purified as when they rise to hey∣ven. I do not doubt but her high thoughts are even as un∣declineable, as my wishes are. And in the belief of her be∣ing the impossibility she hath commanded me to justify in Love, I will go write my obedience to her.
What gentle fear is this that murmurs so with∣in my thoughts, like breath of ayre that seems to hold discourse between the leaves? I ne'er knew any thing yet so near Love as the fear of it. But I must still these noises in my thoughts. For innocence so gentle is, we need not take the pains to blow it off, we may even think it away: therefore I must not give my thoughts the liberty to play with Love, as it is an infant; in belief that they can rule it.
Your Majesty will be pleased to pardon this breach of your privacies, it was to perfect the cure you began, by this acknowledgement of my health to your Majesty.
I receive gladly these acknowledgements as they declare your health, not as they bring me any belief of contribution to it.
To assure you Madam of the virtue of your fa∣four I must acquaint you with news, by which I have been set up since I saw you, that might have pulled me down as low, as did Sapphires death, as I believe it will
afflict the Prince as much, Fi•amiras flight; whi••er •n∣known to all the search the King can make.
But now I am so changed into your •reature, that I have sense for nothing but what comes to me through yours.
Why, Do you think the Prince will be so much moved at this? Is there any Love can give neglect the help of a long absence to join against it, and yet master both?
I do believe Mad•m, they are strong enemies joined; but against either of them single, Love will have the better.
You see Moramente, I persevere your pupil still. Therefore tell me whether you would choose a∣against you, To be neglected in continual fight, or loved, enjoined to a perpetual absence.
You have almost posed your tutor Ma∣dam; I must confess, that I would choose the object not the speculation; neglect doth but exclude from that which we never had, but banishment doth interdict us that which is our own, and so becomes the greater curse.
You prefer then Moramente, the limited pleasure of one sense before the large extent of all Image∣nations. It seems that you have changed that worthy passion brought you to this place, for some you have found here.
You were once pleased to tell me my cause re∣sembled much the Prince, in whose name I dare dispute it, not my own. Do you think Madam the Prince is bound never to Love but Fidimira?
I yield the Prince is free, by her neglect.
Why did you couple us Madam, and now let us lo•se both together?
I should not tax you neither, if you loved ne'er so many.
I doe believe Madam, I am so unhappy as
to be thus indifferent to you. And yet I think if you knew who I loved, youl'd punish me, though you could not blame me for it.
Pray tell me not then, I do not love to be un∣just.
I am so unhappy Madam, a• it were insolence in me not to believe you would be so. And yet it were a freedom, that all but you must be beholding to me for.
Then I should be beholding to you, not to tell me, if it will set me a• difference with all the World.
The difference I make between you and all the world will make you disagree most with me, and there∣fore I'll forbear to let you know it.
I would fall out with nobody for so little as to satisfy a light curiosity, therefore I enquire no farther of it.
Give me leave Madam, to beg this satisfaction from you that you would be pleased to guess at it, for I have such a divine belief of you, as I conclude you can∣not so much as be mistaken in any thing.
To guess by your opinion, it should be with Ge∣mella. She makes you such a full return, at least her com∣mendations promise it.
It is a strange fate that crosses, to be des∣pissed where ever I love, and to be wished well but to my prejudice. But you Madam, have guessed as near as if you had named any other in the whole society. And now Madam, I dare say, that your knowledge is but thus wrapped up in darkness to disguise it. I know it by my curse, your being thus insensible.
I must give o'er then the being your Pu∣pill, since you would teach me more then I would Learn.
If I remain but with the merit of teach∣ing
you your power Madam, though my sufferings be the demonstration of it, I shall endure all with joy.
In these high points Moramente, I understand you not. I'll bring Martiro to dispute with you, he may be your Master, and teach you how to rise up to the lo∣avenge impossibilities, he hath promised me to prove the reason of it. I'll show it you Moramente, that will re∣council you to despair.
You have already Madam showed me the impossibilities, and I already find reason enough for loving them, your will.
You are mistaken Moramente, in the finding of my will, more then I was in the finding of your Love; e∣ven my ill will is not easily found, and much less that which you seem to seek.
No certainty hath been a torment great enough for me; must I now suffer doubt, which hath not so much ease as a despair was curse enough to fit me with?
I could have resolved on any thing that could have fallen on me; but this suspension is a Rack, whose wave∣ring flackness is the height of torture, which exclu∣death a patience towards the ease of the endurance. I can∣not impute these words to chance. I am enlightened even thus far for a curse, to see she understands my passions. I shall declare my self, and join the name of Prince to that of Lover, to assist me. No, I will try once more the single strength of Moramente, which if it prove too weak, I'll call that of Prince for my Auxiliary; which must needs help me to be wondered at, if not beloved. Sure Martiro hath not broke his faith for so little as Bellesa's infor∣motion; it must be for his own indearment, and my di∣stance from her.
Is the Queen this way, Moramente?
She's newly parted hence, Martiro.
I am seeking her with a command of hers, and so have only time to tell you that freedom to a noble hart doth not let loose a secret, but allows it more room as it were a recreation, and that impression trust makes on virtue, seals in that instant what it opens. And believe me M•ramente you shall always find the marks unbroken up. 
This must be true too for the exactness of my curse, that there may not be so much reason, as an ill office for her scorns, but all Antipathy. I will dispatch to my father as I have promised Genorio, The circle now of Bellesas reign is almost closed, and the last point that perfects that, shall open me away unto that end I owe my fate.
If my own joys were not sufficient to proclaim the debt I owe you Camena, the terror of those sufferings of which I am judge, and not a party, might well in∣dear this, even security, that you have settled me in.
Methinks indeed we two are only fixed, the rest in perplexed motions cross on another. What a storm of passions is amongst us now?
We Camena are arrived at Love's supremest re∣gion, where there is all serenity and evenness; there's not a breath of wind to ruffle this our smoothness: and from thence we look down on others, that are gon no higher then the second region yet, whore's always roughness and storms that blow against them.
Are there not some so happy loves as to arrive at this high station of secure joys, without ere passing through this harsh uneasy way?
There is a lower region Camena, where common unrefined lovers stay, and joy in flat security, whose plea∣sure is but an acquiescence. But all aspiring love that seeks to pitch it self in this sublimity of joy and glory, must
pass through this middle region, where it finds a stormy opposition.
This is the passage then, which Moramente, Genorio, and Martiro, are disputing now; I do confess I do pity Moramente, and I could wish mine into Bell∣lesa.
Why? do you think, Camena, that Bellesa and Pantamora are not moved? do you think that women are like winds, that do not feel the storms they raise?
I do believe Bellesa so unmoved, she doth not un∣derstand the storm you speak of by the noise of it, Pan∣tomorrow hath a restless humour, to which no motion is disquiet, nor no noise a storm.
Do you not believe Camena, that Bellesa doth act the Queens part more then her own, in this distan∣cing of her self from any sense of Moraments love?
I do not know. Methinks she hath so equal and •ignificant a liberty, as it speaks all things that she doth natural, as I believe her the perfection of our sex. I cannot think her void of sense but I beleeeve it sinks no deeper then the face of that civility, where men do see it set, and make a return •o Moramente.
Love Camena makes his approaches according to the hart it sets upon. All harts well fortified have out∣works, which must be taken first, civility and freedom of discourse; and lodged once there, there he begins his batteries. Moramente hath taken these outworks▪ and therefore I believe he may endanger all the rest.
I believe so well of Moram•ntes discretion, I think it will not pretend to more then Bellesas honour promises. Which is enough to make him happy, to be so discreet to humour him.
How much do you think her humour will afford?
Leave to be adored, and to be told so discreetly of it, as you may give her leave to answer.
And is this enough for a discreet love to live
upon; So you'll allow Love nothing but his wits to live upon.
Tic the best portion he can have Melidoro, and upon that stock Love cannot want, though he be often put to his shifts. There's nothing so sure a maintenance to leave, as wit. Tic subject to no casualty.
You have given me the reason I sought, how Martiro's love subsists: no body knows who he serves, or what it hath to entertain it self. Sure th•n it must live by its wits.
Martiro's love is a proof of what I say. We see it lives nobly, and is beholding unto no body.
That which is a disease in nature then, is a good constitution in love, The living without nourishment. And I do so little envy this singularity, as I may sa•ely be allowed to wonder at it, how this dark pa•zion could hover so long above us without ever making of a point.
I will comply with him so much, as not to guess at it, for fear I light of it but by chance. Methinks Genorios clouds begin to break already, and send forth some light that glimmers yet between Bellesa and Pan∣tomorrow.
Do you think, he that so lately was deaths Her∣ald, will so soon change sides, and serve the adverse party Love?
It was in loves service that he took that com∣mission, and tic but changing colours, and serving the same party still.
Fear not Gemella, Men are not so subject to des∣pair; the least ambiguous word will hold them▪ they will stay themselves even by the finest thread they can but catch before they sink. Gentle Camena, as much joy waite on your wishes, as I dare say you wish to mine.
Your condition and person Madam, save your ser∣vents the pain of wishes, and leave them only that of be∣ing incapable of admiring you enough.
I was here before him, but now must venture my patience and my love.
I am now grown so strong, it is too much odds to be thus armed, and too great a revenge on Bellesa to show her this my strength, she will believe herself weak∣ned by it. I shall be so far from loving her, she will not love her self.
What's that Genorio, your eyes so fixedly seem to call your mind upon? Hath it with-drawn your tongue too?
It was a little manual of devotion I was looking over. It was so long Madam since I had read it, I had all∣most forgot it.
Let me see it, Genorio. I do not think but I can show you as good a one.
I believe that, M•dam. Sure never any body con∣tested with you to your face. And I, Madam, yield with∣out showing.
No Genorio, I will show with you: flattery is so ill in nothing as in piety.
Give me leave Madam only to yield now▪ and a∣another time, to show you I had reason. I will put the book into your hands, you shall peruse it.
I will be civiller then you Genorio. I'll yield to your refusal, since you will not to my desire.
To show you, Madam, that even your curiosity is already above my devotion, and more dear to me, I'll put this into your hands, whose showing is a •ark of yielding.
Now I must ask your pardon, Genorio. This is a devotion which I yield to at first sight, without examine∣ing how much you are addicted to it. Look here Ge∣mella, here's a face that makes your colour better then mine as you cannot blush to see it.
Tic a lovely face, and you may safely commend
it, Me-thinks I have seen somewhere a face, that upon a little thinking I should know this picture by.
As beauty is best exalted by comparison, you Madam may receive this as a devotion to you, but I be∣lieve all beauty is so assuredly your trophy, as it is no me∣rit to bring any to you.
This is such a face Gemella, there must go much virtue in a woman to the loving of it, because it is not easy to do so.
Madam, I remember now who it is. As I past by the Court I had curiosity, hearing Fidamira so much talked of for the Prince his Mistress, to see her, and I remember perfectly Madam this is her Picture.
It is true Madam, it is her you have taken from me.
I have borrowed it Genorio, to restore it you better, by as much as our admiration can improve it.
It would be cruelty Madam to keep it, for surely he is in love with her.
As I am with you Gemella. And if you Madam are but pleased with looking on it as you seem to be, you may be pleased to keep it, and I shall love it then better than ever, as it pleases you.
Let not your civility Genorio be so bold with your Love, make much of this Picture, for they may say she is fled out of all knowledge, so, that not so much as her Picture is likely to be had again.
It may be Madam, she is gone to search that loft which she once cast away, the Prince. Women's esteems are governed by uncertaineties: but had I loved her near so much, she could not take this ill, •o be left in your hands.
Fidamira's valuation of her faith above a Crown assures me she cannot let it fall so low, as the seeking to put it off.
Here Genorio, take your Picture; and in your pri∣vate
devotions recant this dissembling of your faith.
Here comes Martiro that is so tender of his Mi∣stress Picture, he's afraid the air should fade the colours, and therefore shows it us but veiled.
My Love Madam is not material but elemen∣tarry fire, whose purity and rarity makes it imperceptible. I have obeyed you Madam in making the impossibility of the knowledge of it visible.
We will all hear it then, since we can't see it, Come Camena, and Melidoro, this is your love inverted, and you may safely hear without conversion.
I will read them to you, Madam.
I'll ask no more love's strangest rapture• why
They speak so much impossibility
Since love hath taught me to believe, and prove,
It is the essence of transcendent love.
To make even love corporeal, and subsist
You must allow't a soul that may resist
Reason: and wonder needs must be that soul,
For nothing else can reason so control.
If gross material love do then aspire
So high as wonder for a soul, then higher
Must that spiritual and sublimate,
That's not extracted out of will, but Fate,
Derive its soul, and higher must imply
Then wonder needs, impossibility.
Since then pure love will take its soul but thence,
From whence is vilified our noblest sense,
This sets supremest love above event
And proves all sensual lovers impotent.
My love's not that material flame,
That's let but by attraction from the same.
It is a lightning in my soul, which is
Kindled by an Antiperistasis.
It is so far above our commonsense
As contrarieties make it more inte•se.
Nor can this meteor Love remit it's heat,
It needs no fomentation, but it's seat,
Where no terrestrial exhalations are
It shall be fixed, and be a blazing starr.
Sure Martiro they that could understand these verses might know your Mistress, the impossibilities to me seem equal. But we will send for Moramente. It con∣corns him to disprove them; Gemella, pray cal Moramente:
This is the reason Madam, not the passion which is to be understood.
Why? will you bring reason Martiro for impose∣bilityes?
I Melidoro, and so good as it is impossible for you to understand. You have a limited Horizon term∣nates your thoughts, that reach no farther then your sen∣ses carry them. They must be shot up to the top of speculations, to be even with the understanding this.
And I shall not envy these your winged thoughts that help you thus above ground.
And I shall still think my self above any foun∣dation you can stand upon.
Madam I met Moramente &amp; Pantamora coming.
I sent for you Moramente, to make good my pro∣mise, that Martiro would prove the height of love reach∣ed to impossibilities. And he hath written on that argue∣meant.
I should be glad to hear that it were possible to say near reason on this theme.
I pray Martiro read your verses o'er again they may endure repetition.
I shall obey you, confident of Moraments judge∣meant, if not assent. [Martiro reads his verses again.]
I conceive your meaning Martiro, that since all love must have a soul as high as wonder, some may rise as high as impossibility: this, Madam is a point of faith, not to be disproved by reason, because it denies all principles in love. I would only ask Martiro whether his love did not pass first through his senses up to his imagination; and so the impossibility of staying there, conveyed it where now it is pitched; and it was necessity, not choice that drew it up so high.
No Moramente: My love had ne'er so low a thought as hope, it rose within my soul which did dis∣deign always to wish for any thing out of its own pow∣er. I never did expose it to the hazard of a wish, the na∣ture of it was Angelical, at first infinite, without need of propagation.
As miracles Martiro are not to be disproved, so are they not to be alleged for arguments, in this case Martiro you may not only allow your wishes, but your contribution to all others love.
Sure Moramente, it is a great security in love Martiro hath attained, to have all his wishes in his pow∣er.
You Madam are in such a security as you have not power to wish.
Learn Moramente of Martiro to assure your love thus by making it impossible.
I will learn that Madam of none but you.
(Whispers to Moramente) And learn of me to hope.
Vouchsafe me a word Gemella. What injury did you foresee I would do you, that you would advance me such a discourtesy?
That I may assure you Genorio, I did not suspect any injury from it. I would certainly have forgiven you if I had, and not have been in danger of revenge which this
discourtesy I know not of, might by a careless innocence seem to resemble.
It seems indeed you did not care so much when∣there it were true, or no, when you told the Queen I was in love with Fidamira, since you could not so much, as guess by any thing you know.
If I had said, she had been in love with you, you might have been offended at such a temptation unto va∣nity, considering her story. But I thought the Queen's opinion of the Picture would have indebted you to me for such a choice.
Do you think Gemella that any face, even with a promised faith to help it▪ could defend it self against Bellesae? Could you think then that a Picture could have life enough, even to remember what it was?
I believe Genorio faith much more lovelier then beauty: and it must needs be so; since all beauty doth but aspire to it, and it is the greatest Miracle beauty can wish, creating more then it self, which it doth producing faith. I would not allow all the worlds beauty to contest with Bellesa; but I should prefer the least faith before all her beauty my face with such advantage might dispute with hers.
I am glad Gemella you have told me how precious and excellent a thing faith is: sure, it is the fitter for a sa∣crifice to the divine Bellesa.
It is of a strange nature Genorio, it is only pre∣tious kept, not given away: as soon as we would lose it; to transfer it annihilates and becomes nothing, to show us, that as soon as we intend its profanation, it can pu∣nish us, by leaving us only an impotence of having any, instead of the power we would take to dispo•• of it.
I do confess Gemella, all passions but love break faith, as they carry it from one unto another: but that may convey it as entire as spirits may be powered from one glass into another without loss of virtue.
It is true Genorio, when love begins to work up∣on it to transfer it, it cease then to be in us; and there∣fore love would disguise the loss of it by the pretence of our disposing of it: when indeed there is no faith left, but the believing love, by which we seem to justify our infide∣lity.
Would you censure one of infidelity that should but change his invocation, to raise his devotion up to a more dignified, and glorious Saint? why, Bellesa is the supremacy itself of love, and all appeals are due to her from all love's lower seats.
Me-thinks Genorio, it were an injury to such a Judge to appeal upon confession of a perjury. Think G•norio, what a sentence you can expect, when you are so bold to bring guilt to plead for you. I perceive you did love Fidamira, and now you would bring your broken faith unto Bellesa, as a scarre you have received in her ser∣vice, by which you would pretend reward. Suppose she should receive you into love's Hospital, fine charitable pity; this were all the preferment you could hope, to be entertained to praise her goodness, if she forgive the crime.
My crime to Fidamira must needs be meritorious to Bellesa▪ and Me-thinks I cannot fear any thing so low in love with her as all that I could hope with Fidamira.
Mark Genorio, how you are already punished for your inconstancy, in your own choice of an assured tor∣meant; for it were a derogation from her not to believe it; and consider what an affliction it will be to you to be the first that must make her a curse to any thing. And I con∣fesse I cannot pity you.
O say not so Gemella, I was resolved to beg more of you. Do you think I would have cast away such a secret without the hope of a return? I have lessened that to you, which you call sin, the breach of faith, by ha∣avenge so entire a one of your virtue and honour as to trust you so.
Faith, Genorio, is all the beauty nature hath be∣stowed on me; and I am interested as much in her disfi∣guring, as handsome women would believe themselves obliged, not to protect a man, that had by violence defa∣ced one of that company. Therefore all you can expect from me, is not to conspire a revenge, which I will pro∣mise you.
I do believe you so generous, Gemella, as even an injury done you would not discourage me, from a pre∣tence to curtsy. This is one, I may believe, you take upon you, to endear the charity you may vouchsafe me. You may defeat even my ill destiny, which cannot have malignity enough to resist the virtue of your intending my felici•y.
I will already be so charitable, as to prevent your saying that, which must oblige me to a contribute∣on to your misery. You may know by this, I understand what you would ask of me: I will forget it, and leave you, and only tell you my fears, and not my wishes in your fortune. You shall live to see your wishes so enjoy∣ed, you shall not dare to own them. And you shall so repent this your sin, your sad contrition shall be such, it shall not hope forgiveness when you see your Judge, whose sight shall, notwithstanding, make your wishing it, a well proportioned torment.
There cannot be, Gemella, such a sin in loving of Bellesa, as repentance. You have forespoke a curse is not in my misfortune's power.
I will assure you, I am not so unhappy as to wish it. 
I broke my heart to pieces, Fidamira, first, before I broke my faith, to try if I could loosen this chain, Belle∣sa's eyes, Love's surest Engines had fastened it: And as it was falling a pieces, it fell upon Bellesa's eyes, that have so joined it now, I find it a chain of flame that cannot be unlinked. Those links of faith and hono•• that should
pull me back to Fidamira, I find are now so soft, as they melt away, set by this chain of Love. Sure, Love hath strange joy in store for me, for it already hath turned all the blessings that I had, into frights, the memory of Fi∣damira, and the Prince's trust. I must no more appear to Basilino the figure that I was; I must become a perspe∣ctive, looked on at distance, whose hollowness is a delight, though a deceit. I must have Arches and Vaults to hide my love, when I do show my self. Me-thinks Love prompts me this to answer all my fears.
Why should we fear, bold Love, when though it brings
Us to a Precipice, we know hath wings?
Look where he comes▪ I must now try whether his love be above his trust to me. What melancholy is this, Moramente that is so dark, as seems to draw a traverse between your trust and me?
Can you be in doubt Genorio of the cau∣ses of my sadness when you brought them me? do you think the world can furnish any more after Sapphire's death, and Fidamira's flight?
Yes Moramente I doe believe a present pas∣zion may over-cast more then the darkest memory of misfortunes past; which both those are, which you have named.
It seems Genorio, you rely so much up∣on your prophesies, as you believe I have exchanged my sorrows here.
No Moramente, I believe that all the fire∣tu of this place is vented upon your happiness; and that you are possessed of joys, which your modesty makes you even scrupulous to show me, lest it might resemble vanity.
I could not have so much as ease Geno∣rio, which would not be lessened by the fault of the con∣cealement of it from thy trust. If I had a new affliction,
the tenderness of thee might justify the keeping that un∣to my self.
This needs not Moramente, I am already pre∣pared with as high a sense of your joys as this descent to the extremity of fear can raise me to; and let your blessings be never so sacred, you ought not to keep them veiled from me.
You suppose then Genorio, I love, and with success. I did not think I had been so near a happi∣ness as even a friends mistake. I had thought my cross∣fate had been known to every body, to warn them even from wishing me well, lest they might share in my mis∣fortune. But I perceive your love Genorio will venture so far, as to suppose me happy.
Nay sir, I am so confident of your fate, as I dare refuse your belief in the discredit of it. I can disprove you by instinct of nature. Bellesa and you have an Identity in your beings, you are the perfection of both sexes, and therefore cannot be a verse to one another.
I thought how probable your guesses would prove, Genorio. Why, they are grounded on a parity with Bellesa: you could not have found in all the world such an impossibility to have inferred my good fortune by. And I believe you now Genorio, I am now as near being happy, as being equal to Bellesa, between whom there is as much distance as between possession and despair.
Had I believed there could have been a gre∣la exaltation of Bellesa's worth, then being made to make you happy, I would have raised her by it, for I dare vie admirations of Bellesa, even with you.
You must learn higher expressions then, Genorio than to match her with mortality: but it is a subject si∣lence can better comprehend, then you or I illustrate; therefore lets fall lower to what we understand, my fa∣theirs condition, and his desire of my return. I have alrea∣die writ to him in promise of my return, and assured him
Fidamira is only thought of now by me, by the fears of his affliction, not my Love.
You have done piously, and wisely Sir: this next election which is very near will give you a fair op∣portunity for your fathers wish, if not your own.
Come Genorio let's go see the Queen, and prepare our selves for the ceremony instituted for the Foundresse, and the Princes memory.
I will waite on you Sir,
I am happy thus far even in this reservation from me, which allows my prosecution of my Love without more breach of my faith to my Prince. 
The contemplation of inconstancy hath ju∣stified Agenor to me; 't has taken off the fault from him, and laid it upon nature. I find all things were made for a vicissitude of exchange; not only here below, but even above: they say the heavens are in restless motion, and I am sure that the earth which they say is fixed, is in conti∣nual change. It alters so, as we should not know it were the same, did we not know that it must change. And time, that changes all things, is it self by fortune changed in this general earth-quake. Then how can we hope for an unmoved constancy in Love?
And men that single are so variable before, and join∣ing lightness so much more.
It is I then for being constant among all these champion∣ges am unnatural, this was the miracle Agenor prophecy∣ed at our parting. I was destined to the retaining of my faith, after the loss of his, provoked by his intent of ma∣king me the procurer of my own spoils unto another, This injury I lay on my disguise, and to discharge him of it, he shall not have so much an ill office from me to∣wards his being despised by Bellesa. I begin now to find, that there is no danger of his being preferred by any but
my self, before the Prince whom now I find the gods so justly love, as I am made a sacrifice to his presage of never being enjoyed by man. I doubt not but his fate will soon accomplish mine upon Agenor, and were it not for his happiness, I would not wish any thing so no•r revenge.
Unless I should my self unveil my love, and so profane it by showing that, which I would have sought to with reverence; I cannot put a more transparent cover over it. I have showed it through so clear a tiffany as the least breath of Morament's would have blown away. And he me-thought did hold his breath, as if he had been afraid to see it. Sure women's loves are emblemed well by cockatrices eyes It gives, if it be first seen, a power ore it self, which it gets on another that it discovers first. I have not yet so little reason for self love, as to venture it upon so doubtful a return, as Moraments seems to be. Sure he hath discovered some modest tenderness in Bell∣lesa, that begins to bow her from that straight indif∣ference she seems planted in. There cannot be so much difference between us as between hope and despair.
Sure Gemella is the dark lantern that opens some light to Moramente. I will rather give my own sex the advantage of doubting there may be one preferred, than any man the vanity to think that I could• else be thus in∣different to him.
As soon as I this truth shall prove
So soon shall I leave off to love.
And love will lose by 't more then I,
Men will find other ways to court me by.
That were too much Gemella, sure vanity is ra∣there in your country then here: it is true, it is of another
colour, lightsome and bright, therefore it may be un∣known amongst you.
Why Madam, are men in love here subject to so much leightnes, as they must always keep in the dark for fear of running mad? do you use here to make love and scorn both of a colour?
No Gemella, but the first ground whereon all love's figures are wrought must be somewhat dark; it sets off all the colours that are laid upon it.
But these colours M•dam must be set within di∣stance, else the ground and they are all one.
There is no man but hath a perspective of vanity about him, by which he lessens the distance of his wishes which he looks upon.
I believe Madam there are some men so over-cast with humble diffidence they could not know love if they saw it. 
What say you Martiro, Is not vanity now a days so quick fighted, as it perceives the least color of kindness women can show at any distance?
Vanity Madam sees by the emission of its own rays, not by the reception of the object. And therefore may not only reach most distant lights; but, as it were, strike fire in the dark. But this irradiation of themselves is not in all men's eyes. There are some filed up with admire∣tion so, as they see nothing but an optic light.
Why even such men are vain, Martiro, in this elevation of their thoughts above the height of wishes.
If this be vanity Madam, tic elementary and not material. The purity and delicacy of it, is such, it doth not burn, tic only nutritive to love, and not offensive.
You need not Martiro read such lectures in the ayre unto the Queen, she is already distant from love's vi•ibili•y above imagination.
Gemella would persuade me Martiro, I might love without a declination of my self.
Love, Madam, appropriates what it joins unto it self, and doe you think a partner in the sove∣rainty of your self were not half a deposition?
This insensiblenesse you counsel Martiro, is ra∣there an admission to equality, leaving all hearts free, and Bellesa's can be no more it self. Tic an enlargement of her sovereignty to take homage from such hearts as shall bow down to offer it. If you will give selfe-love Martiro the empire that women should glory in, how limited will that be when they shall have no subject but themselves? All I counsel the Queen is, that she would know her self too. For beauty sees it self best, by the re∣reflexes that it makes on objects whereon it shines.
A heart that looks at first for so much from the Queen as an acknowledgment, sets too high a price upon it. Should every meanest subject pretend to have his name known to his Sovereign because he is what he should be? It must be some eminent service must allow him that pre∣tence for a reward. And the sovereignty of love is distan∣ced more from the approach of any subject to it. No blood, qualities, nor no fortune raises nearer then the common prostituted crowd. All are commons in an equal sla∣very, and the pretension to advantage is rebellion.
Therefore Gemella, the Queen is not obliged to look so low as even the knowledge of any of her Sub∣jests, till their services not their subjection challenge it, and then the taking notice of it, is all she should give.
This an Empire you have found for your Mi∣stress, Martiro, and it is a spacious one, it is all ayre, your thoughts are not subject to any thing sure so low as earth.
I dare say Madam, his Mistress, who ever she be, reaches not so near divinity in any of his exaltations of her, as you do in this humility.
You have exalted Madam my Mistress higher then ever my thoughts could set her, the taking of her Name into your mouth. I believe she is so much worthier than even my Imaginations of her, as even the noblest of your thoughts cannot exceed her. I am glad Madam, to hear that miracles are not ceased, it lessens much the wonder, the being made for you.
You are in such a transcendent height above all sense Martiro, as me-thinks miracles should not a∣maze you. Come Gemella, we must prepare our selves for the funeral Ceremonies of the Foundresse and the Prince.
I'll waite on you Madam. But shall I car∣rye him no comfort, not so much as an ambiguous word?
You see Gemella, I have so little confidence in men, I dare not trust Mart•os counsel, that ought to be the most unsuspected, as my ancient friend.
If I can make something out of this nothing Ma∣dam, you cannot be offended.
I must fly to silence to collect an admiration great enough for this miracle I hear.
As dying men whose spirits having run out their course are now so out of breath, they can scarce carry the soul one step farther; yet sometime as she is go∣ing out of them, refreshed with some strong cordial, the spirits rise again, and hold her there a while: Like lamps exspiring when they shut their eyes, given but a drop of oy•e, dart forth an instant flash, and live a while, not by that life that they had left, but did receive anew. This was my case. My spirits had scarce so much motion left as panting, when they received this Cordial, this so sove∣reign remedy, as it hath recovered a King, whose disease it was before the being so. I find more then a reflection
of my spirits in change of them into a youthfulness. I am already grown better then he that ministered this cure Basilino, by as much as I Love Fidamira more then he. [I thinke on Fidamira now onely by the sense of your afflictions for her, which if  you had forgot I should once more think of her to rejoyce at your forgetting her, and never more.] Now Fidamira I am free to think of thee which I doe fully. I will forget e∣ven that which is so hard, to doe, my age. I cannot be so old. I have been all this while in wardship to my Son, he hath till now disposed of my love. I am to d•y but come of years, and now my passions come into my own hands, which I will all bestow on Fidamira.
This from Basilino must imply that some success hath so possessed his thoughts, as the remembrance of his sufferings cannot get so much as one, and only my af∣fliction now can make him think that he is capable of a∣ny: he hath such superfluities of joys, as I am fed out of his waste. I find my body and my soul so reconciled, the one offers curiosity, the other strength to satisfy it. A vi∣sit to the Shepherds Paradise is a design worthy the newness of my thoughts, the election of their Queen is now within three or four days, and I have heard of such eminent beauty there, that it will be the greatest right I can doe Fidamira to carry her memory thither to dislu∣strate even their faces.
I'll ask no more of love but being thus kind
He would conform my body to my mind.
ADmired pair! whose wonders did per∣plex
All judgement to decide to either sex
Advantage, so each chose to live alone,
Left joining so, the one might the other own
And so you both, did one another love
Too well to be but one, until above
Meeting, you were ordained to be but one
And now shine in a constellation.
Vouchsafe that by your sacred influence
We may be drawn to follow you from hence.
Peace wait upon your souls which seem •' hav' been.
Such as you dyed, but for reward not sin.
Our virtues here even in their best extent
Are but erected for your monument.
Fair parallels whose souls so purely met,
It seems that they your bodies did forget,
Each being more then all the world forbore
The having one another to have more.
So short of you our imitation stays,
As we can hardly reach you with our praise.
Wonder of women on whose chastity
H••ven hath bestowed such a posterity.
As is a self perpetuation
Without the help of propagation.
We thus your Children in our yearly task
Come here to leave our prayers, and blessing ask.
Rest glorious couple in that greater bliss
You went to take, when you did leave us this.
Be pleased your virtues back to us to send,
Now they have brought you to your journey's end.
You that were such your virtues asked no less
Reward from Heaven, than all the world to bless.
Even after you were gone, so did entice
The Gods to let you make a Paradise
For mortals, which your virtues still implore,
That following you, we may yet owe you more.
Divinest Lovers, 'bove the praise of breath,
So much you scorned to join by less than Death.
By which emission you so much enjoy,
As one another would but seem a toy.
Accept this tribute, and our souls inspire,
So far tow'rds your example, as desire.
Illustrious Lights of honour, and of Love,
We but your shadows are that shine above.
Vouchsafe to obtain that we, as shadows do,
May be admitted too, to follow you.
Blessed souls that copied Heaven here so
Together, as each other not to know.
I find these marks which Paradise imply,
As gain of sight, and loss of memory.
This scruple only now doth here remain,
That I cannot from wishing yet refrain.
If it were meant this Heavenly residence,
Should but refine, and not extinguish sense.
Let it my grosser spirits so refine,
As my undarken'd soul may through them shine.
ME-thinks I find my mind on wing, loose from my senses, which like limed twigs held it till now. It is so light, and so ascensive now, it means to work it self above Martiroes. I am already so far towards it, as the belief that I did never love till now. O how I was deceived, while I conceived that Love was so Material it could be touched, and grasp't! I find it an undepending airiness that both supports, and fills it self, and is to be felt by what it nourishes, no more then air, whose virtue only we discern. I knew before, all I could have. I am so far above that now, I cannot suppose what I can hope, and yet am better plea∣sed with this, this inoffensive purity of my love embol∣dens me to show it to Bellesa, and in humility to her, it shall ask somewhat of her, as begging is the only Present impotence hath to make to power, and it shall be so far from being sensual, it shall be nothing but belief.
Your sadness seems so welcome to you, as I may excuse the interruption of it.
You are so far from interruption of it Madam, as you bring the cause along with you.
Have you not yet forgiven my curiosity to see the Picture? are you of Martiroes mind?
Why she's an Angel even in the knowledge of men's thoughts. I? what, Madam, do you think I am of Mart•os mind?
In keeping your love invisible, and therefore are displeased that we saw so much as the shadow of it.
I am not of his mind in that. I would show mine, because it is such a wonder, 't will not else be be∣leaved, and as wonders Madam hardlyobtaine that, so mine shall pretend to no more.
Do you pretend Genorio to be a friend unto the Prince, and will make the Loving Fidamira a wonder in any body?
Yes Madam, that were a greater, after having seen you, then that which I shall tell you.
I have only leisure now to tell you Genorio, that in revenge of this flattery, I will accuse you of it to your friend Moramente, who loves the Prince so much, a• he will chide you for it. I am now going into a privacy, I must desire to leave you.
I am so cursed Madam, as truth seems dis-lustred by my bringing it. I never committed sin enough a∣against another, to be equal to this punish∣meant  of leaving you. [To what am I trans∣form'd when the name Fidamira is a torture to me?]
Sure M•ramente hath employed his friend Geno∣rio to save him the shame of speaking for himself, Geno∣rio speaks so boldly it must needs be for another. I need not be so shy of this my though•fullness, since all the virtues they should fix upon, are here objected to them in Moramants carriage; Love and honour bent by humility into a lovely Arch, on which my thoughts may safely pass on towards his person, which when I consider I find it such, as scarce needs humility to recommend it. His Fate hath so directed him to me, as he hath had a real sense of my misfortune, and his destiny hath been so kind to him in that, as to indebt me some pity to him, as my self and the reviving of Saphira, though it be by Bell∣l•sa's death, t'will not be welcome to him. Me-thinks my tho•ghts would take air a little to refresh themselves.
That Infant love that's come to visit them, would carry them abroad with him; they shall go with him, and be so civil as to entertain him with music.
Press me no more kind love, I will confess
And tell you all, nay rather more than less.
So you will promise me, when I have told you then
Not to bring m• to witness it to men.
Though thusy 'are strong enough to make me speak,
Helped out by virgin-shame you'll be too weak
If I find thus I may be safely free,
Best by this freedom I engaged may be.
I find a glowing heat that turns red hot
My heart, but yet it doth not flame a jot.
It doth but yet to such a colour turn,
It seems to me rather to blush than burn.
You would persuade me that that flaming light
Rising will change this colour into white,
I would fain know if this whites inference
Pretend pale guilt, or candid innocence.
If you you will tell me which, without deceit,
I will allow you light as well as heat.
Then take you care of me, a mean• so rare
B•twixt men's vanity, and their despair.
I find so gentle drowsiness flow o'er my senses, as if my thoughts had wearied them in carrying them thus far; and my thoughts are so innocent they do not oppose the rest my senses ask.
Was it the rapture my soul was always in, when she contemplates the divine Bellesa, that did pre∣sent her voice unto me here in heaven? Sure it was: her soul, useless now unto her body, is gon to  visit heaven, and did salute the Angels with a song. Let sleep no more be called death's Image, here is an animation of it. Sure, all the life that sleep takes from
the rest of the world he hath brought hither and lives here. Methinks I should be innocent too now. Sure had I but even an ill coloured thought, her soul that is in hey∣ven would know it, and come back to awake her with the alarm. I will stay at this distance still, and only take this advantage now to wonder. Nearer her thus parted from her soul then I can do, united [he goes to step toward her] Doth the ground move to carry me nearer then my soul durst go? Tic true, I find it is the earthlynesse about me moves me nearer, then my reverence should keep me. Methinks I am so near her now, as I all soul, my body by whose carriage it was brought, is now re∣coyl'd and my spirit is now shot out upon Bellesa. And thus all spirit I may touch her and not be felt. Therefore thus all my soul abstracted shall fall upon her hand, to do it reverence. My spirit hath found a body in  this touch, and such a one as it cannot contain from venturing to lose it self to touch but this again [he kisseth her hand againe, and she begins to stirr] I was afraid the least mixture of a body would disquiet hers by that a version she hath to all, the first spy∣ritual touch moved her to note then several airs that join move one another. Never was so much fear in any body without the will of flying it Tic but just my body thus refined should be stayed here, now to expect its sentence.
My soul's sentinels kept not so ill watch, as not to rise up against this attempt upon them. I should be glad to find some body else here Moramente, to whom to impute this insolence which is so great, as it almost justifies you to me for not having been the committer of it. Was it not sombody that's fled? I can hardly think any body durst do this and stay till I did wake to punish it.
No Madam, he is so far from flying, as he is stayed here to glory in it. My spirit that was innocent
that fled for fear of being suspected, and I remain all body here exposed to your displeasure. And if you'll give me leave to call back my soul with suspicion of it, that shall beg punishment for this offender. And you shall re∣ward her innocence in parting from this guilt that was about her. And you may punish this body opportunely now. For life sure was never so dear to it as now, it's so affected with its crime. And do it quickly Madam while your power will allow it, that my soul may leave you in this world what it hath so much wished to see you con∣tinue in, the quality of Queen.
Tic a new insolence, this punishment you ask, that I should descend so low as but think upon your body. I shall think your mind less worthy then I did, and so much, I shall not think it very sensible of its declination in my thoughts.
Mistake not Madam, the only thing in this world impossible to you is the guiltiness of my mind. Tic not in my power to be so complacent unto you, as to afford i• you. Your ill opinion of it may lie so heavy on its in∣nocence, as to bow it out of its own frame▪ But even then It will become an arch triumphant, whose very incurva∣tion will become a beauty, as it was made so by th• weight you laid upon it. And the more you press i• you shall make it but the stronger still to bear all you• will.
Why this excuse adds still unto your fault. If your mind was innocent, it seems you did it but by chance and had no mind to it when you did it. And I can le•• forgive this profanation of my self than an intended insolence, which passion doth some way excuse, when it doth avow.
O Madame, you have found so refined a torture▪ as it reaches to my soul, which I called innocent foe• having been so wholly and so purely fixed upon your hand
as it is there, and therefore innocent: that which is once there and is removed, I did think worthy of such a pu∣nishment as even your displeasure.
Why your insolence enlarges it self still Mora∣mente; you would have me displeased because it was no greater, that it lasted not longer, and would put your soul into my hands, but by the delivery of your by∣die.
You can put me to no greater torment then this willing mis-understanding me, you would make me cri∣minal, for being but mortal, because my soul is carried but by my flesh and blood, nothing but this despair could make me so insolent as to wish my body and my soul might once meet again where the one remains, though after that they parted with mortality.
Now I understand truly your crime, you shall not have so much favour as my delivery of the sen∣tence. G•mella shall deliver't you; till then, see me no more.
The sentence cannot be so cruel, but the having it will be a mitigation, for this suspension is the execute∣on.
What sadness is this Genorio that diverts even mine, as to take notice of it?
The joys I owe you Moramente, may justify this sorrow: Is not this a strange curse?
So strange a one, I understand it not.
Had I not had already the joy of all your trust, it could not so afflict me, the not being trusted now with such a joy of yours, as all the society believes, and I have no other reason to doubt but your not having told it me.
My curse is so malignant, it infects thee for being my friend; and it is much now Genorio for me to
say, that I have any sense left for thy unjust affliction. I had no ease left but the belief that I had made thee hap∣pie, and thy mistake is never come to rob me even of that.
It would be as hard for me Moramente, to find a cause for the least of your benefits, as it is to repeat them all; they began so much before my memory, as I must trust report for that, and what I know may warrant my belief of that you saved my life, when my Infant-innocence was guilt to you, as it was cursed to be born your enemy. The education you gave was such as might make my life worthy your owning, since after having given me so much wealth, and honour, as an accession un∣to that could expect no more sense of it. Then as if you did study my blessing in making you some return, you have given me the disposing of your life, and the trea∣sure of your trust, such a gift as but by keeping it, I might make you a retribution, but you take it away without a daily addition to it. I have repeated this to you, which is too much for you to remember, that you may see I am thus far towards the deserving this, as the accounting all this is a curse, if the only means of gratitude which I have left, the joying in your joys, be but suspended from me.
Thou art too partial to me Genorio, to believe me in my misery, which if I have not let thee know, 't has been for fear thy misbielefe should add to it: but now I find even that misfortune which I only thought I could avoid, thy distrust, is fallen on me.
I shall easily MORAMENTE believe you as miserable as you would have me, if you were capable of any, loved by BELLESA as they say you are.
Though I had tenderness enough Ge∣norio to be sensible of thy distrust, as thy affliction; I have no sense left for this thy scorn, because it is mine.
Pardon my duty, Sir, that did believe there could not have been guessed a blessing for you greater then your merit. That did make it more probable to me.
Believe me Genorio I am as far from that, as if I wished it, I could fear.
Let it not seem insolence then in me, in this your affliction, to profess my self happy. For I think my self so only, as I hope to transfer it upon you. If Sir it be the memory of Fidamira that darkens all things else unto you, I do believe the miracle of my gratitude shall draw light out of that darkness for you. For it can seem no less to you that Fidamira should be given away; but the wonder of my obligation will lessen much this miracle they make I am that subject Sir you would not know for fear of envying, in whose hands Fidamira hath deposited her faith. And now you shall know to be envied by him, and all the rest of the world whose merits heaven will not honour with a less miracle then a lover's resignation of his Mistress. And this Sir I now beg of you the acceptance of a blessing, and that you may have her so purely her self without the abatement of inconstancy, I will give her reason for it, and only for that wait on you to her once to bring my self so criminal unto her, as her loving me shall be one, which then she can no longer do, as she can ne'er do ill. I do not ow you less then breach of faith, but this appearance of guilt is less.
Therefore Sir, resolve at this next election which is within two days to declare your self and so begin with this blessing of your self, the comforting your father.
I will waite on you till I may deliver Fidamira to you, and then return hither. And the only favour I will ask, shall be the leave to live here, with your belief of such a pleasednesse in my condition, you may think you have given more in acceptance then you have received.
It is so hard Genorio to believe that Fidamira can be given away, as it had need of such a faith as mine
in thee to credit it, but to assure thee that I believe that thou not only can, but would do so strange a thing for me, I will not venture to accept it. Glory in this Ge∣norio, that from the depth of this dejection, thou hast had the power to raise me up to joy that thou shalt have Fidamira as fully with my wishes as thy own.
What a strange curse were this, If I believed this offer were your wish; But it is true Sir, it is not fit you should wish any thing that can be offered you. And I must needs owe my good fortune less sense then ere I did, since even the first of it affords me no means of retribu∣tion unto you.
I have a message to deliver you Moramente, from Bellesa.
Tic welcome Gemella, what so ere it be.
She hath commanded me to tell you she hath thought much of your crime. And the more she thinks of it, she finds it such that there is nothing ill enough to punish it. Which being such a crime as nothing, com∣meted but once, can be punishment enough for it, she hath ordained you not only to wish it, but hope it too, and to see her as often as you will that upon the rack of hope she may daily torture you by the intention or remis∣zion of it, as she shall please. This only she thinks an ex∣piation proportioned to your fault; and hath sent me with this sentence to you, which I hope I have delivered so, you understand it.
I know not whether I do or no, methinks it is somewhat above my orb, humble despair. Which makes it harder for me to conceive, then if it were there. But I will instantly go Gemella, and study it before her, in sub∣mission to my sentence.
I must leave you now. 
How justly am I afflicted by my own offence, in∣constancy? The Prince's change is fallen out to punish mine
And he is so happy that even his change doth prove a service unto Fidamira, as it revenges her on me. I will not add so much unto my guilt, as a detraction from her, in the belief that he could prefer any thing before my offer, but a well grounded hope of Bellesa's Love.
None but I could do so new a thing, as to prefer des∣pair. How well doth my curse suit with my sin? My address to Gemella for conveyance of my passion to Bell∣lesa, that had already undertaken Moraments? My obser∣vation hath assured it me, without the help of my suss∣pition. And I am punish't as it were by fate with an ex∣clusion from the Prince's trust, before he can know a reason for it. O how deceitful and ensnaring joys, are Prince's highest trusts? They doe subject us more then even our nature or their power can. They raise us so above the sense of all their other benefits, as we are only fixed on that which they may so easily take away, as even cessation doth remove it. And •o we do expose, not only all the joys we have acquired, but even the imbred ease of our own souls. Which might have rested in their own level, but cannot in a declination from that height. So subjects hazard more then Princes give! Yet methinks love is so much above reason now, as it proves the Princes trust a convenience, not a loss, as it may warrant my profession of my passion to Bellesa, which I will do in so resolved a boldness as it shall be significant humility, as it must imply the extreme of all despair.
There's nothing speaks so truly of Bell∣lesa as my opinion of her. I will believe my admiration before my senses. I am so far from crediting what I hear of her, as I do not believe her self. Her modesty will not ad∣mit the knowing of her self so well as I do. For though my thoughts in their highest ecstasy pitch not at the top of all her virtues, yet they get up so high, as to assure
how low and near the earth her soul can fall. Though I cannot imagine all the good that she can do, yet I can satisfy my self how near she can come to doing ill, to which she can never approach so near as loving; Though that be far from ill, yet as it is but ordinary, it may be counted too much ill for her. Shoe's somewhat of her self; I know not what to call her, so unlike to all things sub∣lunary, that we may better think the humility she bears chose rather to be a woman, then that heaven meant her one; Unless it set her in this way, that passing through it she might rise unto a higher glory, then if she had been first created an Angel. I do not wonder at the received opinion of her loving. I would not have the knowing of her be common as to undeceive every body; and for those that hope it, they have made themselves a curse. I cannot pity enough, as it is a madness they will never believe it to be one. Moramente is a person worthy the knowing Bellesa, Gemella's womanish officiousness will be puny∣shed in the frustration of it. The election is now within two days, we shall see who remains here. Accordingly I will apply my pity of Moramente to his conversion in the belief of the divine Bellesa.
I have left the Queen and Moramente together: I believe between them two, the execution will be gentler then the sentence. I am come my self to such a perfect knowledge of all men, as I am too far from envying even Bellesa, as I am scrupulous of my contribution towards her loving one. The best of all the sex which I will allow the Prince to be, can secure me no farther of his faith, than that, if it be possible that there can be one in all the world prove constant, it is he.
I do now so much neglect all men, as I have no sense so low, as to be moved with any of their injuries. I do
forgive Agenor so, as all the memory I have now left, is of my own fault, that it was ever in the power of a man so to offend me. I confess I could wish his repentance, on∣lie to expiate that fault of mine, by showing how much I repent of it, by being now incapable of such an exposure of my self again. I am not so vain as to believe my looks can persuade him to this repentance, therefore I have thought a way how they may fright him to it, and for that I must put on this colour's contrary, and like a ghost appear unto him. His guilt will join with me in the per∣swasion of it. Thus I will watch him the next evening, as he goes to the Temple. His fears would now be welcomer then his love; but he may chance be so vain, as to believe that even dead I cannot choose but follow him: for vanity even feeds on dreams and apparitions, and loving Bellesa: he had need sustain his love with such like airey nourish∣mints. I am resolved I will once more change my disguise: I am sure it cannot succeed worse with me then this hath done.
My Fate inverting these two colours right
Puts innocence in black, and guilt in white.
This is presumption Moramente, not humility, to be pleased with so severe a sentence: But are you not so humble as to take more of the sentence on you, than I sent you, Hope?
I take no more Madam, then serves to keep my senses warm, lest they should fall into so dead a despair, as I should disappoint your cruelty by an un∣sensiblenesse.
Your hope and your wish Moramente, are then far distant yet from one another.
As far Madam as my wish and my de∣sert. I am as near deserving you, as hoping what I wish.
You may then hope a little more Moramen∣te: for I would not have a man so near deserving me, as I might give him leave to hope, that would lessen the grace I did confer, to have merit the pretender to it.
You may safely trust my hope Madam; hope seems so dull and slow a thing to me, I can scarce think it is a function of the soul. I must have it by infuse∣on, not inherencie. If you fear Madam the approach of merit, you must lessen your rigours, for in your cruelties an humble soul may challenge more merit then it hath reward, but the least of all your favours sets all desert at such a distance, as, by the same degrees they advance, me∣rit goes back, and so the distance is still enlarged. There∣fore Madam, you cannot remove your self so much from men's deserving you, as by a sense of their humili∣tie.
I do believe Moramente that the least kindness of a worthy woman, doth set all mans merit out of di∣stance: but I have heard that as you say their desert goes so far back then, as it goes quite out of sight, and vanity comes on without it.
If this vanity were inherent in the nature of us all, you owe your self no less then the belief that the virtue of your love might even correct our nature, your love is so divine a thing, as not to be subject to the defects of it.
Sure Moramente., it were ill done to give such a meritorious humility as yours, such a temptation to be perverted as a favour.
It were vanity Madam to tell you, how much a favour of yours would make me humbler then I am, there could be no such ill in any body, that your wi∣shing but well to, would not amend: much less any ver∣tu that it would not improve. And me-thinks you now should do me a favour, as it is the strangest thing in
all the world, the making me happy.
You have already forgot your sentence, the giving of you hope to punish you by the frustration of it, and so now I give you this.
I need not then ask you forgiveness for it, since it punishes it self, how strangely am I destined to your subjection, when even my forgetfulness proves a country∣bution to your will.
Me thinks Moramente, since you are so subject to forget your sentence of favour done, you would give me a great advantage over you, for you would quickly forget why I did it, and entertain such hopes as would enlarge my power of punishing you.
[It were more injury unto her to think this treachery, then insolence to believe it pitty]. I will instruct you Ma∣dam in this design of making my punishment notorious. Let me suffer on the same place where I committed my offence. If hope punishes it self proportionably as it offends, this will be a well fitted torment for me.
A Prince's eye by a casual look suspends the execu∣tion, but an admittance to their hand is an abolition of the crime.
That holds not with me Madam, for your sight was appointed for my execution; and so, the rule inverted, your hand must be the higher punish∣meant.
Yours Moramente, is so new a case to me, I know not what to say to it, and I had need apply my power while I am a Queen; it may be that only makes the de∣feature of your hopes a pain to you.
Soon only this might prove a cure to me, if I could profane it with the thought of being a Queen: there are a thousand qualities in this hand, the
least of them above all mortality can name. I consider so little your quality of Queen, as I dare say that's the least disproportion betwixt us. Had you all those titles united into one, which all the world contests but for the parting of, even this were a declination brought you to a name, which, as your self are unexpressible Could I believe that you could think so low, as to be pleased even with the name of Queen, it may be hope might not prove a punish∣nishment.
Why Moramente? had I that desire, could you satisfy it?
Easier Madam then deserve to be belo∣ved by you. Even when I had done it the conquest of a kingdom would be easy, you being but proposed to it for Queen.
I could afflict you then Moramente, by telling you I had a mind to be a Queen; but I will not, because I have forgiven you. Therefore now Moramente after this pardon, hope no more.
Did not the virtue of her hand hold me up I should fall back into a fearful doubt. Sure this is but to show that her will masters love it self. I am confident she is moved so much with my sufferings that the pro∣fession of my self may indear my humility. The election is to morrow, and it shall be in her choice, whether she will continue Queen or no.
The reason why Moramente sees not Bell∣lesas love that's fixed upon him, must needs be that he looks too high for it. He thinks it must fall down a• from hey∣ven upon him. If he had but looked in a natural and easy level towards her, he must needs have found her very near him. Sure his eyes were thus stretched up into the ayre, when I showed him my love so fair before him,
and he saw it not, I will not think he did look from it of purpose. But I can envy Bellesa in nothing, that is so near such a declination, as the descending from a throne: the expectation of which hath raised me now above all other thoughts. Bellesa sure will leave the paradise with Moramente; the advantage is so sure among the rest, as it lessens the glory of it.
What think you Camena? how much doth Bell∣lesa love?
What think you MELIDORO? I know how much.
Have you gotten the model of it? I would not at all adventures build my hope by such a one, therefore pray do not proportion yours to it.
They that have taken the true dimensions of Love and Honour, may model hers by that. She is so exactly what she should be; as they that know that, may know directly what she is.
What, doe you think then she answers Moro∣mente's Love?
If women at first be but so civil as an Ec∣cho, it is enough if she but show that she did hear.
I believe that Morament's complaints have not been so unhappy, as never to end with love, and so I think by this time he hath had an answer echoed to him.
Women may answer Love so, and disavow it too, as repetition of an others oath is not accounted swearing. The most I think BELLESA hath done yet, hath but obliged Moramente and not engaged her self.
Do you think Bellesa was so careless, as not to provide, against her falling from her throne, the light∣ing in Morament's arms.
It is but a year since they first knew one a∣another, and that is scarce time enough for a woman to make all her objections against loving of a man, much less to be so satisfied, as to resolve to give her self away. Will you be content to have my promise Melidoro to your wish, on those conditions if Bellesa yields to Mo∣ramente?
If I must still depend upon the uncertainty of a condition, I doe not dislike this you have proposed. And sure Camena, this belief of mine doth not imply less value of Bellesa, then those scruples you allow her.
I love freedom so well, I would not venture an engagement but upon terms I thought even impro∣babble. But when your wishes hang upon my will, you ought not to think them desperate. Look where Geno∣rio comes! me-thinks he looks as if he would  out-act all that hath been writ of sorrow; this sight me-thinks Melidoro should make no hope seem little.
Pray Camena lets leave him, he looks as if he would taint the ayre, and make misfortune infec∣tious.
How well hath fortune showed, I am her own, in having thus employed my self to betray that strength of happiness which was impregnable, and must have been delivered thus by me, since her self could not take it? Sure fortune grew Jealous, least the world should think she was in love with me, and there's nothing so detracting from fortunes reputation, as the opinion that she can fa∣sten her self to any one. She is the whole world's Mi∣stress, and her loose variations entertain all her servants in variety of hopes, and so draws on those general ad∣dresses which busy and divert her so. Me-thinks she might have counted me her child, and so have justified
unto herself her tenderness of me. For when my Infant-bloud seemed destined to the thirst of multitudes; even there she took me in her arms, and set me at the breasts of Princes to be nursed; and not content with that, endea∣red me so unto them, as if I had sucked their hearts into me, and they lived by me. This hath been confirmed unto me by such a disposition of their powers, as if they had no power but this of giving me so much: and because all this might be thought subject still to fortune, she prove∣ded me a blessing above her power of resuming Fidami∣re's Love. And sure it is that which hath incensed my mother Fortune thus against me, that repulse that she re∣ceived in her attempting Fidamira: for never was fortune more affronted, than in her refusal of the Prince. It must be so that she grew jealous of my being set above her reach, and finding her self so weak, hath got Love to join with her to take me by my self, that I might give away what could not be resumed. And now I am so com∣pleately miserable, I cannot call my affliction misfortune. I have this circumstance to perfect it, the attribution of it wholly to my self. I have told Bellesa my passion so di∣rectly, she seems not to understand it. Sure it had so wild a boldness, it looked liker Madness then Love. It is but just, that I that have so much neglected truth, should be discredited by it. Whither but to my self should I repair for satisfaction, since I am my own offender? Therefore from thence I derive a happiness that shall de∣fie even fortune, the adoration of the not epitheted Bell∣lesa; it shall be so little subject to chance or change, it shall make despair a reason for it, to be sure to defy both those. Nay I will not exact less of my self then the doing what was never done before, the allowing Bellesa to love ano∣there, and even proportion my joy in this, to what she shall receive in that. Thus I am so resolved, as I could e∣ven already tell it Fidamira.
Though fortune hath taken me at this disadvan∣tage, before my resolution had time to fall from my mouth into my heart: Yet thus half armed I will defend my self, though Beauty and Death, even those great enemies, are reconciled to join against me; Nay I will give thee yet more odds, I will suppose thee an Angel and so conclude thou know my thoughts, and justify them even against any reason thou can bring: By naming but Bellesa, thou must needs know her, if Angels know one another. She is here your delegate on earth. Tell me, blessed spirit, were thou not sent down to visit her? To fright me thou can not come in such a shape, and less to change me, that am fixed above the power of miracles. When you have seen Bellesa, you will think constancy to any but her self so ill a miracle, as you will not approve it. How blessed am I in this descent of yours? For if you came but to reproach me, I shall have this merit to Bell∣lesa the having brought an Angel down to see her, which may describe her, where she only can be praised enough, in heaven; Go then, fair Spirit, and when you have but looked on her, the impatience of the news you carry will quicken your ascent again, to entertain the blessed Quire with a relation may endanger your being envied there. For me, I doubt not but you will approve so of my adoration here, as in pity of my want of spirit and soul enough you will inspire some such transcendence, as may lessen the disproportion is between the admiration of all mortals and the divine Bellesa.
I am so unhappy, I can think my self less so, for the improbability of thy ever being so, which to re∣move from thee, I am content to impart to thee. All the Angelicallnesse I will own is the provision of thy misfor∣tune, to which thy belief may prescribe some remedy. I know Bellesa so much better then thou, as I can tell even what she shall be.
She a woman unto one shall be,
But still an Angel unto thee.
And to thy shame too, Fidamira lives:
And is an Angel but as she forgives.
Sure, the heavens have conspired this miracle of my love. And by an Angel have been pleased thus to assure me of the conjuncture that must make it so, Bellesa lov∣ing Moramente. And what a joy hath heaven sent me to be∣gin with? The making me an Angel unto Moramente by the delivery of these news which is such as even the rela∣tion of it overpays all his benefits. I will instantly seek him, with this obligation must remain to me. For Fida∣mira, I can wish nothing in her life, but her being here for an exaltation of the wonder of my love unto Bellesa.
In what distress am I? as I was going out of the temple the King meets me thus. Sure he hath believed me dead, and searched out my ghost. For thus he follows me rather joyed, then frighted. And since this habit can∣not deliver me from him, my tongue must needs deliver me to him.
Stay Fidamira what so ere thou art, Angel or Ghost. I do not mis-call thee by that name. O do not soul that pure reverence I bear thee with such a stain as vi∣olence. Tic thou that offer the first violence by flying. And if I shall dare to touch thee, tic in my defence, to stay thee here. Tell me if thou be•st a ghost, and I can quickly think my flesh away, and die instantly by thinking thou art dead, and so waite on thee as a ghost. But in thy looks I find no other sign that thou hast ever died, but that in Paradise thou dost reside. Thou can not be a
ghost and thus out-looke all Angels. Tell me fair, fair spirit, what is become of Fidamiras spirit. Thou know I am to account for it. Tell me or I must follow thee till thou doest vanish. And then, as soon as I can open this Cage that holds my spirit, let it fly after thee.
[I must reveale my self and trust him, or his willfullnesse in following me must needs discover me. Be∣sides, to morrow is the day that shall unriddle all our stories. I shall not advance his knowledg of me much, and so prevent his finding of the Prince unopportunely. I will resolve it]. Heaven hath been so careful of your comfort Sir, as it hath made me my self again, I believe only for that, and hath employed another guilt to advance this ease unto your innocence
Your body Fidamira is but lent you then again, for apparition unto me, not life to you. And it was kind∣lie don to call my knowledge of it an ease, since it will surely deliver my spirit from the cords and ligaments that hold it yet.
You are mistaken Sir, I am not dead, only trance∣figured into this colour's contrary. Which I have put on but as a case to keep it from fullying.
If thou livest Fidamira speak on. For I will be∣leeve thee so, as well as if thou were an Angel.
Will you forgive me Sir, if I call that, which it may be you meant an honour, your resuming of your grant of privacy, an intermission of my peace. From whence I did derive such fear, as the protection of a King did most expose me to, the apprehension of such an eminence intended me, as I could only come near the deserving, by the avoiding: And yet so possess my self of a more af∣fected happiness, your estimation of my virtue; which I tendered the preservation of the more, because yours must have suffered with it.
For, the honours you had designed for me, were raised to such a height, as being above the capacity of the greatest
part of the lookers on were likely to be misunderstood. Therefore to avoid the occasion of being but so much as an error in your unqu•stionable worth, I chose this as the less danger, the flying into some concealed retreat; and not trusting so much to my legs, I made my face run away to carry me securely. And in this disguise of a Moore I fled hither, where I made bold to use your name to be received. And here I found my flight and my dis∣guise so much out-done by strangers, as I had no won∣der left for my own condition. And these upon your promise of taking no knowledge of, till I shall advise you to it, I will impart unto you.
Ask no other caution Fidamira but thy be∣lief that I cannot disobey thee. Shouldest thou tell me that my son were here, and you two in love with one a∣another, I would ne'er take notice of it, till all your bless∣sings did ask me mine for consummation of them. In which gift I would ask nothing but the breathing out my soul upon it. So willingly I would give it you.
Your own guess hath engaged you Sir. The Prince and Agenor are both here, admitted into the order by the names of Moramente and Genorio. The ap∣probation Sir, which you have promised of his choice, if it had miscarried so as to have lightt on me, is a joy that over-pays me this comfort I have brought you, as it assures me of your consent unto his wishes, which are so justifiable, and I believe want nothing else for their perfection. To morrow is a new election of a Queen, and that light will clear all that must yet remain obscure to you. And the d•y warns me to be-night my self again. For no light ever interposed it self between this darkness since I put it on till now. And the reason of this Eclipse of my darkness• (I may call it so) shall no longer then to morrow be clouded to you. Therefore give me now leave to return to Gemella, the name my dark∣ness owns. And I doubt as little the justifying to you
to morrow the fitness of all my requests, as I do of your observance of your word till then.
Go Fidamira, and doubt not of my obedience though you leave me in a doubt, which is a pain equal to that of thy preserved life or hastened death. Which shall I trust to? Basilinos hand or Fidamiras word? My fears that find nature too steep to climb directly up against it, do thus by circular and turning motions seek to wind themselves up above it. As violent storms repulsed by senses that they meet, seem to fly back, and part them∣selves to go about; and so at last insinuate themselves through those fences, that they could not break: thus doe my doubts of Basilino's and Fidamira's knowing one another, and loving here, work themselves into me by winding-circumstances, which are so weak as must go a∣bout, my reason cannot get over it. Thus doth all jealousy run on in crooked serpentations, and seems to embrace all reason that it meets, but it is but to encompass it, and leave as it were so as an Island, as it cannot get out, mine must stay here all night, exposed to those cold blasts my fears can shake it with. To morrow Fidamira's pro∣mise will deliver me.
How surely do they think themselves away, that let Love close with their thoughts, intending they shall wrestle with it? for love in that instant that it is let in, falls under our wills, and like an inundation, all it finds pore∣table it raises up, and carries forward on it self, and love finds our wills so leight and so ascensive then, as it doth but take them up with this humility, and carries them along with it, and by this subjection of it self, raises them higher then they could ever have got without it. So that love, entered into our thoughts, as it uses no vio∣lence
to them; So it is liable to none from them. This have I learnt of my Tutor Moramente, and I am yet so strangely bashful, as my having my lesson so perfect makes me ashamed to repeat it. Gemella assures me I have had a Prince for my Tutor, I am glad of that: for though birth and quality be not the only foundation to build love upon, yet it is a fair roof to cover it. I owe some satisfaction to Moramente for all his humble suffe∣rings, and '•is enough my going now to Loves Cabinet to consult, whether I shall yet tell him my sense of them or no. The bringing it so near a question is a reparation for more then man can suffer. I must resolve.
I should be so scrupulous of being so much my self, as having power to resolve any thing without Belle∣sa's leave, had I not two such necessities, as Nature and Time to justify still my incapacity, by their impulsion of me to it. Nature's internal force would be too weak, I could forget I have a father, I am so Bellesas creature, had not time power over me, and that this light must see me a Prince, and her none. Her words by whose reflex we on∣lie can see thoughts, have sometimes been clear enough: yet they have been always so unsteady, as like glasses turn∣ed up and down, their reflex hath rather dizzied my brain then assured my sight. Now I must resolve to beg of her to fix them, so as I may see what figure they have made for me. She is now gone towards Love's cabinet. I will follow her thither, expecting nothing from the place but privacy. She's love's influence, and only can affect her self. And now to balance the boldness of this resolution with an equal humility, I will oblige my self not so much as even to wonder at the worst she shall resolve for me.
Hither where all things look so pleasingly, and so well pleased, as you must be all in love with one another; hither where the best of loves secr••ie doth flourish so, as you know not one another love, and yet live still, ad∣ding still to the delights of one an•there, is it were by mere instinct, by being bu• together. Whither but unto you should I repair for company? To your so pure innocence as ill can ne'er come so near, as to be withstood. For in your vein runs water instead of blood. My breath is yet so innocent it will not bl•st your tenderest purity. And I will trust you as to take counsel of you in the dis∣covery of my thoughts of love you are the fitter because you cannot speak. For you m•y answer me by instinct, as you seem to entertain one another, and not speak.
Speak.
Alas Echo you are too generally free to be trusted You will answer any body, and that they please. There∣fore the gods when they placed you here, to secure the secrecy of solitude restrained your voice to a present an∣swer only to those that spake unto you, and so disenabled you to tell any thing from one unto another, otherwise I would not trust even this privacy with this word Love.
Love.
Could I answer at that distance thou dost and not be seen, I would word that love. I think sure thou could not be so confident had thou not all these curtains drawn before thee, and did not know, that they that seek thee after thou hast spoke can never find thee But let the spy∣rit of this unsuspected place tell me, if it avow thee for its Speaker, and I will yield unto its Genius, and will re∣solve what methinks it would have me do.
Do.
Now you have answered so well for him, will you
now answer for him to me? Dare you promise me his constancy?
Constancy.
If he prove so, our prayers shall intercede for thee unto the gods, that this thy service in our love▪ may ex∣piate thy former fault. And that thou may be restored unto thy body, and thy voice doubled to thee, to have speech enough to tell the wonders of our loves, which no less then such a miracle can do. But if he now prove vain or ever inconstant, I will come back hither, and with my curses blast the beauty of this place. I will be so revenged, I will not leave it so much as solitude. I will be always here, and with my loud complaints storm it with a trow∣bled tumult. And for you, Echo, I will with my reproa∣ches force you to answer so much, as it shall hoarse that little voice is left you. Nay I will search all the earths concavities, and fill them up, so to choke you quick, there shall be left you nothing to reside in but Moraments heart. That I will leave you, even for a greater punishment, then death, upon these terms if you will stand to your counsel, I am content.
Content.
Hearing Madam you were gone this way. I made haste after you, lest you might light by chance into this place. Do you know where you are Madam?
It is you Moramente that are you know not where; if you had known where you were, you would not have hastened to divert me from this place: this is Loves cabinet, is it not?
It was Madam before you came hither, but all that was Loves, is yours where you are.
Doe you think, Love loses any thing in what I take from it?
Yes Madam it loses more by what you keep from it, then it gives or receives from all the world be∣sides,
this place is believed to have a tacit influence, and works all hearts into a •endernesse that it doth receive, as if the air contracted with the heart it should take Love, and breath together. This I tell you Madam, only that you may glory in mastering virtue, that seems to have power over nature.
My heart Moramente is harder to be known then it is when it is known. Doe not you think it can allow Love as much virtue as any other?
Yes Madam, as I believe all virtue improves in its ••ssa•ion more then in its exercise meeting with yours, as it is a greater virtue to yield to that then trust unto its own: So your heart may allow love more virtue then a∣ny other by a resignation of its power to your nag∣lect.
This opinion Moramente, makes me apprehend so little your guessing why I came hither, as I may now in return of a request you made me once, to guess at your love, desire you to do so at the reason of my coming hither.
It may be Madam, that Love himself in love with you hath give•n you this curiosity of rifling his Ca∣binet to try who he holds intelligence with. So, to disco∣ver Love's secrets, you came hither.
Ha•h this Echo run under ground, and carried him my voice? It is true Moramante, I am come to dis∣cover Love's secrets but more to trust, then to suspect: and I have found here so uninterested a Counsellor, as he asks nothing but words to gratify him; and he hath answered me so fitly, as if he had studied my cause before. If you have any suite Moramente speak to him, he is in his closet here amongst the trees; he is old and a little deaf, you must speak aloud, and it is likely he will answer you.
This is clear enough. I understand it. You know I have a suit Madam. And I will try if you have entertained
him against me. Tell me thou faithful speaker, doth Bell∣lesa love.
Love.
It is too much a miracle to be believed from any voice but yours.
Why Moramete, would you have me so strange a creature as to make an Echo speak false?
You were but dallying with love, and he had not strength enough to get above your other words, and so the ayre sent Echo back with it along to you. Had love any power over you, it would not lose so much of its sweet∣ness, as the being deluded by any voice but yours.
It is my voice Moramente, and I have let it loose from me, that it might not have so much as modesty to hold it back. Believe it. For if you put me to take it in again, I have virgin cold that would not let it speak so clear.
I will believe it so as I will worship it. All my souls faculties shall be converted into this one belief, and give me leave to beg for this kind voice, that for my sake is so unhappy as to go out of you, that you would take it in again, and let me h•are it, in that temple where it should be enshrined, your mouth, though it speak lower. My belief hath ears to save you the pains of straining it too high.
Rise Moramente, unless you wish an answer from a Queen, and not Bellesa. I have had long a sense well fitted to your sufferings, and I have believed so well of you as I did not fear the seemingnesse of my indifference would divert you from a meritorious persistence. And I have been so just to you, as you have lost nothing by my differing your admittance to the knowledge of my thoughts For they have been studying you all this while, wi•h this advantage to, of your not knowing it. So they have informed themselves of your nature streghtly in
it self, without the ply it takes, bent by design. And I have so satisfied my self, as I believe my time well spent.
You might well tell me Madam I was I knew not where, if I have been in your blessed thoughts; and thus you only could have done so new a thing as to re-call time, and in an instant bless all that was past, as well as whats to come. I have now no way of humility left but, valuation of my self ascribing so the more to the fire∣tu of your thoughts, which have made me what they have been, so modest as to say they have found me. For you have such a singularity, as you cannot think on any thing unworthy of you. Therefore give me leave to ask you, what you have thought of my love to you? For this was the only thing in me worthy of your thoughts, before you thought of me, I m•st therefore believe you have thought most of that.
For the first thought, I did allow your love Mora∣mente, it was so civil it brought me many in return of it. And by this exchange stored me with thoughts which wereso clear, as they seemed glasses for virtue to dress her self by, •ot shadows to draw over her. Therefore I have continued the entertainment of your love.
Judge Mad•m how absolutely you are Mistress of love. It hath had intelligence with you. And given and received presents from you, without my knowledge. I will not call this treachery, for I will allow all that is mine, to be yours more. But hath not my love been so true to you Madam, as to propose to you its perfection in the admittance of my heart into yours to lie under it, that it may rest it self upon it?
It hath proposed that which I cannot answer yet, because it knows not who it speaks to.
[The heavens conspire a parity in all] Oh  Bellesa give meleave to wish you any thing rather then an Angel. For so only your pro∣mise
may defeat it self. If you be mortal, you can have no scruple, but the making me happier then your self by the disparity between what you give and can re∣ceive.
I can give nothing now Moramente but my pro∣mise to be shortly my self, and so it may be I shall be able to give you more then now: and Gemella though she hath not told me who you are, hath assured me you are not what you seem, and so an agreement now would be void on both sides. Therefore now take this watch with my promise, that before it measure three hours more, you shall know my story, and then I shall have a fuller power to give: for having promised nothing, the time now admits not the telling your story, if you would advance the knowledge of you. Therefore we must now part, I for preparation of the ceremony of the new elect∣on.
I will then confess Madam only as much as the time will give you leave to know, which is, that I am more then I seem even more in love with you then I can seem to be: but there will nothing now seem strange in all my story, but your qualification of me with more honour then nature can bestow. I accept this pledge of your pro∣mise, and shall thus by you try both experiences.
If time in the despair doth seem to move
Slower, or towards the promised joys of Love.
Sure, Nature did make up our lines in wreathes; and the first instant motion is set against the Scrue; and so we move in a continual revolution to unwind our selves, and by the same degrees that we unwreath our lives, we find a flacknesse, and an enervation in those parts that loosen first. Our legs are first unjoynted. So by de∣grees
this looseness rises up and slackens. So the frame of man, as all the parts, unfastning at last, seem but to have a contiguousnesse, and no connexion to one another: for all their functions part, while they hang yet together, till the last turn devolved falls to the dissolution of them all. So that man is only brought by ruin unto rest, I am so near this last dissolving turn, as I will now lay my self down here on this soft ground, that I may fall in pieces with less pain▪ I have visible misery enough to assure me of pity, this head on which the sun it self did snow, and cold can only thaw.
There's nothing fitter for the virtue of this place then age, as nothing so unrelievable: but I have such unspeaka∣ble misfortunes, as makes my age a blessing, as it promi∣seth a speedy delivery from what your• could have no hope but death, the loss of three such Princes in my charge, as the safety of a kingdom dep•nd••h successive∣lie on each of them, the ones blo•d powered out at his na∣tions sacrifice. So innocent, as his infancy better ass•reth us now what he is; th•n it could have promised what he would have been the other a Princess, such an emission of nature, as it were above it self, as she promised nothing so low, as could be hoped before, and yet the miracle of her obscured all that he did promise. She was so acceptable to all, as she made the loss of her brother and sister a p•b∣lick joy, as it conveyed the Kingdom unto her, this an∣gel then vanished from amongst us out of my hands: or if she were a woman, now she's above an angel, for she might dye obscurely, but could not live so. My enquiry, had she been upon the earth, must have met with the re∣port of her; no nation b•t must have sent out proclamati∣once of their glory in having of her. Should I go back now to the aged King that hath no soul left but an ex∣pectation, and so take his soul too away, and then live to see unfortunate Navarr lye like a headless trunk, subject to the first power that would seas it? Nay, I will lay my
life down here, and by the application of all these sorrows to my soul try if I can •right it out of this weak body which hath no strength to oppose the passage of it.
I have sought Moramente every where but in Love's Cabinet, and cannot find him. Sure Fortune is scru∣pulous of letting me have so much joy, as •h'obliging him. Here is a stranger, the gods assist you Sir in all your wishes.
Pardon me Sir, if I do not so much as wish you well, least fortune, that hath undertaken the opposite∣on of all my wishes, might be by them brought against you.
It seems then you were chased hither by Fortune not led by Curiosity.
I have been so inconsiderable to fortune as she hath not thought my personal affliction• worthy her intention; but hath run through me and wounded others, whose loss hath brought no less then the curse of a whole nation upon me.
Have you ever been in love?
Never Sir, I have not known so light a grief in all my life, you are happy whose youth knows no true pain; and therefore doth account the frights of love, which imagination brings, the height of all afflict∣on.
Comfort your self then, for you are not so unhap∣pie as you might have been.
You may brag Sir, you have made me smile to think, to how little disquiet this place is subject: there∣forepray Sir, be so charitable to tell me, whether this place doth certainly make all happy, that are admitted to it; if so I would avoid it. It is a curse, I have not the wishing my self happy by forgetfulness.
If there be any certain virtue in this place, I believe
it is in the inversion of the conditions it receives. All the effects I have found of it yet, have been so. I thought my self when I came hither, as unlikely to become unhappy as you can now your self to be relieved. And I have seen another fortune turned to the opposite extreme of what it was brought hither. And if you would not forget, stay not here. For I am such a witness of that effect, as if you knew my story, you would believe that virtue un∣resistable.
How miserable am I? that even you, that proton∣ded to be an oblivious Trophy, are my remembrancer, and of a misery greater then your age is capable of. Will you give me leave to look upon this jewel? Pray Sir, do you remember so much, as how long you have had this jewel?
I have had it longer then I can remember any thing; it is part of my story which is so strange a one as if you knew it, it would make you think your self happy. I am so subject to forget, as I had almost forgot my haste, Which if you knew the occasion of, you would leave wondering at your self.
This fond young man's in love. And is grown vain of his afflictions, because they are of his own make∣ing. He carries a greater misfortune of mine about him, which he knows •ot of, than he takes upon him. That cross of diamonds the prince Pallantus had about him, when his infancy was smoothered in that crowd of death Pamlona did sink under, taken by assault some twenty years ago by this king of Castle. That there could be so little providence in fate! as to preserve this, and cast him away. Some soldier in whose bloody hands this spoil remained, must have sold it to this young man. His years will not allow him the honour to have bought it with a drop of blood. I will go rest me, left my spirits faint un∣der the weight of misery they must bring for their pre∣tence of ease.
I have lost the King strangely at the entry of the Temple, he took another way, but he cannot be strayed far hence.
I have watched my fears all night, lest while my reason was a sleep, they might have got the advan∣tage of a dream to fright me from my trust of Basilino. And methinks this mornings light shoots such a cheer∣full clearness into me, as my presaging thoughts do smile on one another. Well met Bonorio. Since I have lost you, I have found such a miracle, as the surprise of would have killed you with joy. This company must defer your knowledge of it. Let us stand by a while.
What do women say Gemella, for discovery of their loves?
As the humours are Madam, some say all they think, and yet think all they can too little. Others say no more then what just will serve a man to guess at what they think.
Sure that is best Gemella. For so women retain a power of rewarding modesty, and punishing presump∣tion. Which is so easily don, as by saying nothing. But what say you Gemella of Genorio's passion, that is so bold as to fly to me for sanctuary? I had thought friend∣ship had been the highest passion. Believing that Mora∣mints griefs running through Genorio had left this sad tincture on him. Is there no friendship so bold Gemella as to admit a rival to the trust of emulous desires?
Passion, Madam, is so shy of all things, as it scat∣ters our thoughts abroad upon all approaches can be made to it: And is so far from admitting any body, as it is afraid even of its own shadows doubt, and suspicion which it never shines but it will make. But I wonder most
that Genorio in so desperate a passion, should seek a reason for your will, though it be to neglect him. Perfect hue∣mility bows into it self, and finds reason there to justify its adoration, by an incapacity of a fault in her it is devoted to.
And sure, Humility is encouraged so, as by finding this reason, it leaves neglect less reason then it had be∣fore: but what reason doth Genorio's wildness prey upon?
My innocence; which his suspicion seiseth on, and disfigures with the imputation of malice: which I am so far from, as even his provocation can bring me no nearer it then joying in Moraments fortune.
Sure, he is in a desperate condition Bellesa, that is so far from knowing the cause of his ill, as the as∣cription of it to thy malice. I wonder that the flaming virtue of thy soul, that lightens through these clo•ds, doth not dispel them quite, and leave your body a fair sky, where it may shine. Here is a stranger, you shall to day here my story, which if my person could spare all this while, it may well expect improvement in your esti∣motion, by that addition to your knowledge.
If I could make you Madam as full return of all your favours, as I can do of your story, I should owe you nothing.
Are you he Sir, that demands audience for your pretence?
No Madam, it was my curiosity lead me hither; and I have been so well paid for following it, as I believe the virtue of this place must needs be miraculous for de∣votion, since it is so propitious to curiosity. The first instant I arrived, I was made happier then I dare tell.
I wish it may afford you that happiness to the telling of it.
The seeing you Madam, is a happiness above re∣lotion.
This is the Queeen Sir she is now going to give audience to a new pretenderbe: you there, and bring your promise entire with you.
O Fidamira. I have already seen Moramente, and Genorio, and have looked upon them, ke•ping my promise unto thee, between them; and they have not discovered me.
The audience will be within this hour, and the election presently after. Then my promise shall make you a full return for this your patience.
This Queen is a strange 〈◊〉, why may not I be so completely happy, as to have 〈◊〉 Son in love with her? •hey are all •uspicious thoughts that fancy me to day I will let my belief anticipate pa•t of this joy, left all at once be too much for my senses to support, would not you b• content Bonorio to be 〈◊〉 find your daugh∣la, that 〈◊〉 were that Moore you saw speak with me?
A father that loves a i will• as I do Fid•mira had rather mourn for her death, th•n see her mourn in such a life.
You speak as if you were in love with her. I will keep thy fondness no longer in pain. Th•• Moore is Fidamira, thus disguised Basilino and Agenor are• both here too. I am bound to secrecy while that Fidamira shall release me, and so I engage you. Let's set forward to the audience, in the mean time I will tell you my strange dis∣covery of Fidamira.
This is a joy Sir, becomes your delivery as the greatest blessing I can value, the seeing you so plea∣sed.
O why did nature suffer love to know
O•lie this secret hid from all below?
Why should not nature tell her st•a•th?
Then suffer love to curse her self.
What hope hath he to ease a hidden pain
Where it is less to suffer, than complain?
Sure, even imagination hath a vertical point, from whence it must decline: mine hath touched that, and now it stops again nor doth it charge Bellesa with a de∣clination, to say it follows her, but accuses its self of a rapture, that carried her along with it. I have been guilty all this while of treason to her, of parting her body and her soul, which sure heaven united for no less a miracle, then the propagation of them on earth. My fancy had re∣strained her to the being one her self, her disposing of her self, will make more such as her self, and so exceed even my fancy. And now I find it was a suppression, not an ex∣altation of her, to believe there could be any thing im∣possible to her, which I confess I did believe her loving was. Moramente, who was most concerned by my opine∣on, hath already begun to correct it by his scorn of my counsel, which I gave him as boldly, as if Bellesa had been no where but in my fancy. I will allot no less then all my life for recantation, and pay this blessed place all that for my conversion.
What speculation are you in Martiro? Were you not thinking what stars were in love with one ano∣there? and how by their tacit influence they entertain themselves! You never think so low as the moon, because she hath been said to have been enjoyed.
They say Martiro there is a Sagittary above, that answers to our Cupped here, and that the stars which we see shoot, are shot by him to inflame which of them he will• will aim at. Pray Martiro, do not the melancholy lo∣avenge stars delight much in the music of the Spheres?
No: I was thinking lower, how the globe of the earth might be made flat, and so the Antipodes laid level with us. Enemy mind I have seen as strange a thing as this come to pass.
There is hope Martiro, you may fall •o think of possibilities; this is somewhat towards it to meditate so low as earth.
I do begin already to think all things so possible on earth; as I think you two may be happy in enjoying one another.
This is an exposition of flatting of the Globe. Wee that were your Antipodes are now level with you.
Rest your thoughts then here, Martiro, on the Centre of the earth, and you will find more ease in that stability then you have don in the swift motion of the orbs above, where they have been till now.
I am but yet like one that is fallen high, whose sense at first doth but assure him he feels a foundation: so by degrees his senses begin to com again. I do begin to hear already, I may come to rift at last.
You will find Martiro, that fancy on the ground of sense may run division enough, and make much bet∣la music then in ayre. Here comes Genori•, we'll tell him the news.
Happy Martiro, I must acknowledge, you showed me first the way to this supreme beatitude in love above the orbs of wishing. And give me leave to brag, that I am risen a degree above you, to the joying in her loving another proportionably as it affects her.
My recantation must confess my opinion. And you Genorio have now brought me a reason to confirm the change of it, your having got a point above it: You have not left me so much as a singularity to glory in, I was never higher then the allowing her I loved impose∣sibility.
For all that you are many degrees further. And my new opinion assures your happiness that all wo∣men must love. For whom soever your Mistress• loves, your security keeps time with that.
Here is the expired Phoenix, and there the issue of his ashes. And there can be but one at once.
Come Camena, let's leave them both together, there's no danger of Genorio's making a sect.
We will leave you together. If the st•anger bring so good a pretence to misfortune to day as this your open∣neon Genorio he shall have my voice.
We will follow to the audience. If all happiness be but opinion, as some say it is, then mine is a High one. How, Martiro, comes this declination of your thoughts from that high belief can hardly reach, to this which sense can touch?
It may be Genorio, your thoughts and mine are a counter-ballance. And the fall of mine hath raised yours.
Sure Martiro, you have reached the imp•ssibility you soared at. And having wrought your self above it, have stooped with it, and come down 〈◊〉 of it.
No Genorio, but I have seen it fallen down by me, seized by another. And now I conclude there's no∣thing impossible in love. And this my discovery doth advance your joys, that are c•ried on with h•rs you love though an other be the bearer of them.
Why Martiro, Is not this an ingenious revenge on scorn, to reduce the woman to make you happy by the same degree• she can think her self so? For so is he that derives his joys from hers.
Do you know, Genorio, do you know, that they that love after the knowledge of the delivery •f their wishes to another are inconstant in the act, for they I 〈◊〉 another? For in that instant she is no more her self•. And he that will begin again, must love two at once. For of
lovers none knows which is which.
I am so far destined to this singularity, as this your intended diversion is my direction, for my passion is fixed so, as he that shall enjoy my wishes is such a one as my reason may dispute with my passion, which I should love best. If you knew my story Ma•tiro, you would think heaven had blessed me with my love for a miracu∣lous gratitude. I must speak with Moramente before the audience.
Go Genorio, we will go several ways to Bellesa with my recantation. This is Bellesa he's in love with, &amp; his friendship to Moramente is, that he frames the won∣der to himself upon.
This were to stoop to let my passion fall
To less than whats impossible to all.
All that I can say Gemella near a return, i•▪ that even in this my happiness my debt to thee finds sense e∣nough to be a pain by the difficulty of an acquittance. But if ever Bellesa and I join, then nothing can be diffi∣cult, even a compensation for thy merits will be ea∣sie.
I am so far from seeking a recompense, as I dare brag you owe me more then I doe know: the conceal∣meant of which, I will only call merit. And I will leave thus much more the helping you to ease your self of what you will owe me, by asking you somewhat which will seem easy to you, though it must take up all your life the giving it.
There can be nothing so hard to me as a cessati∣on in my gratitude to you: therefore the time it doth re∣quire will not only welcome, but satisfy the act. Lose no time Gemella, that I may begin.
To be constant all your life unto Belle∣sa.
Thou hast asked the only thing which I can do, but cannot doe for you: this is a pretension even above thy merit to wish to have Bellesa thought upon, one in∣stant, for thy sake. I should forget Bellesa in that promise to you. This I will assure Gemella, for her sake to be so constant unto you, as you shall be her shadow in my thoughts.
Did I not trust more to Bellesa's virtue of making a miracle for her, then to your being made one of your self, I should not have asked you so impossible a thing as constancy.
Why, do you think constancy in a man a mi∣racle?
Such a one, as it is in no mans power to be assured of for constancy. Moramente is to be judged of, as other miracles, after death; and so may be allowed de∣ification.
I should choose Gemella, that time for the Judgment of mine: for every instant of my life shall add more to my love, then all the rest of the world doth love in all; and my last instant's breath shall only sum it up.
Make not so unlimited engagements Mora∣mente, it is ominous, it is a defy to fortune and time, that both subsist by change, to resolve so bold a constan∣cie.
Here comes Genorio, we will be judged by him, whether large professions be not temptations unto fortune to glory in the frustration of them.
I doe believe sometimes that destiny is provoked by our undertakings to be so much our selves, and uses such violence as justifies our honours, not by a surrender, but by a defeature of our faith.
Sure Genorio thus to accuse sate of such a depra∣vation is to provoke it more, than to conclude it will not be offended with a virtuous confidence.
I believe too there may be such a subject for a miraculous passion, as inconstancy may be the greater miracle.
Pray Genorio, do you think a Salamander can be sensible of the change of flames? passions may be in some so natural, as they cannot distinguish their own altar∣tions.
If this Si•isle hold for a reproach, it reaches to both sexes. Will you be pleased Gemella to let me change this discourse for some privacy with Moramente?
You, I believe, have not the same business with him as I had to recommend constancy.
The impatience I have sought you with, Mora∣mente, all this morning will be proved to you by the oc∣cession of my seeking you.
No impatience can be welcomer to me Genorio, then this of showing me this clear cheerfulness risen in thy looks, that have morning in them now again; they have been so long benighted.
It is all reflex't from you Moramente, to whom such beams shine as must needs by repercussion clear one so near to you as I am. It is Bellesa's love to you that sends these sparkling joys to me from that great flame of glorious happiness that doth blaze on you.
Thou hast matched two impossibilities so well Genorio, as I knew not which to believe least, Bellesa's loving me, or thy knowing it.
You do well to wonder at it, Moramente: for heaven thought it news worthy of an Angel's sending to the earth to be the bearer of't: and the gods knowing my gratitude to you, could ask no less then a miracle for an expression of it; and chose me first to impart it to you, left you might have been indebted too much to any body
but one whose life was yours, by the delivery of such a blessing. An Angel that took 〈…〉 assure me of her speaking true, appeared to me l••t night in the Temple, and told it me.
The gods know, Genorio, that Bell•s•• loving was a blessing too pure 〈◊〉 mortality, •n th•refore did •l∣lay it with •idamira's death.
Nay Mo•amente, I have the same authority for F•damira's life, as for B•llesa'• love: the angel told me both at once.
Then Genorio the blessing that thou bring•st is so divine, it leaves me no• a wish 〈◊〉 •ouch't too with an equal reflex of those joys •hen• on thee in Fidamira's love. The wonder of thy gratitude to me in preferring me before thy self did require no less then such a miracle for thy reward.
Believe me Moramente, my heart is so set upon your joys, as I have scarce any sense left for Fidamira's love.
Thou dost affect out-meriting thy self. Here comes the Queen, Genorio.
This freedom is a double obligation as it gives me some means of return. Till when, it shall not be perceived that I am trusted with it. Doth it not grow late?
Look on your watch Madam I believe the hour of the audience draws near.
It is within half an hour of the time. How goes your watch Moramente?
Will you be pleased to tell your self Madam.
As just with mine as if the same wheels moved them both. Have you seen the Sun to day.
I have been in heaven this morning Madam, and
set it there, and it is as great a proof to me of the truth of it, the keeping time with yours.
Moramente is so happy, he believes he governs time.
Sure the pretender is impatient of his audience which I have promised him, and the hour I have prefixed draws near.
Sure, you your self Madam should be impatient in the interim between your promise and performance, for that is the only time you can owe any thing. We will waite on you now to hasten your discharge.
We will go, Moramente. I should be glad to see Genorio's looks tuned to bear a part in this general harmony.
Mine Madam are the discords which must be in this composition.
The Queen is gone before to the audience: her in∣clination now to Moramente is so declared, as even his looks avow it. The election is to be presently after the au∣audience, in which I can think on nothing to fear, unless confidence be ominous.
Let the pretender be called in.
Pardon this amazement Madam! All my Soul's faculties are drawn into my eyes to decide a doubt. In which if I durst so soon believe my eyes, they had already looked away my pretence, but they are too partial to me to believe so soon. Therefore give me leave Madam to bring them nearer the object they are now disputing on, that they may ask some Questions of my memory, so to de∣cid this doubt. It must be she, nature could not make two such! Blessed Saphira, I conjure you by the remove of
what only can be objected against your innocence. The affliction of your father and the hazard of a nation to an∣swer to this name, and in a word to speak me happier •hen even the youngest here can live to. You know who asks this pity of you now. One whose misery is a re∣proach to you. Therefore answer to this name Saphira, and with one word over-pay him to whom you owe the first you ever had.
The virtue of this place reaches not to cure distraction. You would have Bellesa revive the dead. He may be dismissed, Madam.
Stay Genorio, sure I owe him more pity that would revive me, than one would antedate my death. Worthy Romero I will answer to that name, and in this instant make thee so happy as to indebt all the Society to thee for the knowledge of me. And to enlarge this pre∣sent of my self unto thee, I will bring a witness thou wilt willingly believe, thy son, whose flight with me if it do need forgiveness cannot be denied now.
I will not weaken so much the Queens desire as to add my prayers to it. She that hath blessed you so, cannot be denied yours for me.
What say you to this Genorio▪
Since my fault is an exaltation of your happiness, that I will ask pardon for it.
Pardon me Madam, if I refuse a thought yet so low, as the joy of finding a son. You must have all my soul a while, till I have discharged my self of what I owe your father. In whose name I am to beg of you, and conjure all this society, whom I esteem so justly blessed, as I doubt not of their wishes to my success, to join with me in a pretence, I am to deliver to you in the name of the King, and of a Nation, which by me now begs relief of you. This Society understands you so well as I may better ask of them then tell them, what a bless∣sing your company is. And if it be such an one to stran∣gers,
let them judge what a joy it will be to a father, to whom you have been so long a stranger. And though it seemed misfortune cannot afford you less then a Crown, yet you ought not to make that Crown, which nature hath made yours, unfortunate. Therefore hear the dis∣tresses of the King your father, that cry so loud in the complaints of the loss of you, as they hear not the cries of all his kingdom for their exposure to the first strong pow∣er that will seize it. His age must quickly leave the first invader for his heir. You know your brother and your sister, the Prince Palant, and the Princess Miranda, per∣ished both infants at the siege of the cursed Pamlona. Since, the King your father having destined you to the Prince of Castle, a Prince thought a match for your ver∣tu as well as your condition. In the time of this treaty you fled, attended only by my son. I upon whose trust this misfortune lay like Treason, have been ever since in the search of you, and now the gods have been pleased to bless my despair with what they have so long denied my hope, the finding you, Madam. I must now address my self not only to you, but all this society for judge∣meant of this pretence of a King, and a Nation, which in a new way demands relief, not by admittance but dismiss∣zion.
I must confess Romero all you have alleged against me: But, in my defence, desire this fair Society, whose judgments would be injured in my unnaturalness, to believe that even these and the honour of this place did not divert me from the sense of my fathers afflictions, whose relief I did defer to bring thee more entire, after the Prince his marriage should, have removed all subject of dispute between us.
Here I resolve to stay till then, confident that my fathers consent to the estimation of my self, in the expression of my equal unwillingness, •o that, his passion to Fidamira did avow, would justify my presumption on his pati∣ence.
This was a sense Madam you ought your virtue, while the Prince's unsensiblenesse seemed to provoke it to a valuation of its self. But now the same virtue that did convict him will plead for his acquittance. Now as your goodness ought not to avert it self from his ripen∣tance, which his leaving Fidamira, and his journey de∣voted to your pardon, do assure: therefore Madam in my mind you owe the King your father this satisfaction for all his sufferings, A return of a full obedience •or all the hazard he hath run with you I have heard 〈◊〉 late, that he hath pitied so the Prince as your admission of him into yours, would b• a joy that would end•are your presence. I remitt my self to this Society. And b•g of them, that if their judgments agree with 〈◊〉, th•ir prayers may do so too
We have our own interests me-think• that ask our solicitations▪ that we that know th• blessing of such a Queen, may still enjoy it, both exal••d for hers•l•• and us.
Even this our derived light of Sovereignty must grow brighter, so drawn from a more glorious body then it was ere before.
We all join in this •up•ication for the P•ince.
I think my 〈…〉 the good f•rtune I owe this place, to contribute what my power aff•rds to all the wish•s of this Society. And my admiration• to you Madam engages me to what I owe my country and my Prince, to let you know that I w•s lately a witn•ss• of the Kings wish•s to the h•ppy conju•ction of the Prince, and Princess• of Navarr. And I am so ass•red of his con∣sent, as I dare answer for it with my life.
I wish the King and Prince so much happiness, as it were presumption in me to think I could afford it them. Let me ask you some questions of my father To∣mero.
M•thinks, Moramente, you are too cold an inter∣cedar
for the Prince, that are so much concerned in all his wishes.
Therefore Gemella I may be thought too par∣teal to h•m. Your uninterested prayers may challenge more success• Now Genorio, you that can report Princes lives away so easily, can you speak me dead too, and be be∣leeved? For only so thou can get trust of me again, when I perceive thou can deceive all the world. Did not some such Angel tell you of Bellesa's love, as of Sa∣phira's death.
Consider Sir, how meritorious this report prove• to your life, and you may think that an Angel prompted i• for your justification to the Princess, and the rest of the world to whom your vow was known. Doth not this your belief approve to her the cessation of your design, which else might have been objected to you even by her? And must not the sense that you express•d then of her death, indear you to her now? And when you know the reason of this my report, even the falsehood of it will justify my trust to you.
Sure, •oramente knows the Prince best of any by∣die. I will infor•e my self of him. And take his counsel b•fore I do res•lvi.
You cannot resolve better.
What say you Moramente? Have I not chosen a 〈◊〉 couns•ll•• in •his cause? Now you know me fully and 〈…〉, give• m• your advice. For I am resolved to be 〈◊〉 b• you in the disposing of my self.
Co•fident of what you say Madam, I shall beg of 〈…〉 •he Prince.
I• your charity Moramente so much above your lov•?
No Madam, It is my love that is so humble as to expect nothing but by charity. And if my intercession for the Prince obtain pardon for him, I shall esteem it as a favour done to me.
I thought you would desire nothing but pardon for him; and for your sake Moramente it will be easy for me to yield to as much as you shall desire for him.
I will no longer seem to owe you less Madam then I do. I do accept this pardon which is so strange an one, as it makes me a Prince, and the same that you have pardoned. And to deserve this grace, I do resign it back to you, and so expose my •elf to all your wills, without claiming any thing, that your not knowing me might seem to engage you to. You already are acquainted with my story, which I must thus far enlarge. That taking this place in the way of my design of seeking your par∣don, I was stayed here by you. So I have promised my self to plead it as your self you shall excuse. So that the dispute will be between Saphira and Bellesa. And now Madam to be no longer guilty of concealing any thing from you, I must let you know, that, that stranger which so boldly answered for the King, might safely do it. For it is the King my father. Of wh•se being here, you know the reason and the time just as I do, for I have but now discovered him. Now Madam I do so entirely prostrate my self unto your will, as I forge• any thing that might direct me to an expectation and bow my self to take your pleasure on me.
Thus then Moramente, I retract all I have fayd as Bellesa, but 'ti• to say more as Saphira. Me thinks fate it self is so much interested in this our union, as it seems to have directed all which your humility can call a fault. Therefore now I confirm my promise of being counselled by you in the d•sposing of my self, as far as my fathers consent shall go along with it, which we may safely ex∣pect
for the perfection not retardance of our joys.
Vouchsafe to call me your self Madam, and so believe you shall always be counselled and obeyed toge∣there.
Moramente hath prevailed so much with me, as I have not only forgiven the Prince, but resolve to enter∣tain such thoughts of him hereafter, as his affection shall present worthy of me.
You are born for no less then the blessing of nations.
Give me leave Madam, to present the Prince to you, that he may lose no more time in the application of himself to the desert of your farther pity.
He hath lost no time in that. If he were now to be∣gin, I should not so soon assure you Sir, that I trust you so much, that if I had one to answer for me, as you may for him, upon your two words I should not fear to engage my self.
By this it seems you know I am his father Ma∣dam, and you would not doubt how much I should joy to have the blessing of that name enlarged so far as to comprise you.
You that are a father Sir, know so well what I owe unto that name, as I believe you will chose to ask it of him, whose giving it must justify my joining.
Now Sir give me leave to retire to the new Election, that I may not be charged so much as with the breach of an order here, nor be reproached by the impatience of her▪ whose beauty and virtue is destined to the reward of this happy day. We will leave you Sir with your Son, the time cannot seem long to you.
I forget to day Madam I am a King, and only one that joys a fathers name. If you will have me re∣member I am a King, it shall be to obey you with more merit.
Come Ladies, let's to the election, we shall return
presently, and return a present worthy of a King, a fair and virtuous Queen.
I beseech you Sir conceal me still.
I am all obedience here, Bellesa.
Let me, Camena, desire your voice to follow mine to day. Though it seem to oppose your reason for a while; It shall not do so long.
I resign my voice so freely to you Madam, it shall not be mine so much as to ask a reason.
Now Sir be pleased to transfer all my joys, with your blessing upon Basilino.
I will not own to day so old a joy as the name of Basilino. This is thy birth-day wherein ell's new; and lowe more to thy name Moramente, then thou dost to me for B•silino.
You may Sir, for a just improvement of your joys derive mine from the blessings Heaven ought you, that have had credit enough to crown me with your fondest wish.
I have Moramente private joys of mine own. Thou know not yet, enough, not to need the ass•ipti∣on of all thine to me. And I will own only the giving thee that happiness, the knowing them. Which it may be thy goodnature will allow an equallshare with all thine own. But first show me the highest of thy good fortune. Fear not mine will rise unto an equal parallel.
I owe so much to my good fortune, I was not long a seeking it. You know Sir, it is now a year since I left you. And my curiosity was imploved. I think by heaven, to bring me hither, fi•st to the Election of the Queen. And coming into this peaceful harbour, my sails were taken off, and I coming a passenger put my self in∣to service here. The difficulties I have met with cannot be expressed, b•t in the same words that made them. This Princess is a creature no body can go•sse at, but by know∣ing
her to be a woman. A great while in a seeming nag∣lect of all the lov• •y wit could make, her own made love, which none but its own ma•er could understand. But since, she hath 〈◊〉 pleased to interpret it so fairly, as you Sir underst and it too. This opinion, of her being dead, Genor••, is to answer for. And now at this Election I was resolved to bring you back (th•t, which you have thus advanced unto your self) the joys of a contented father.
I must tell you in private how I came thus to an∣ticipate my joys.
Give me l•ave to consider well this Jewel Sir.
You have been so lucky in finding what you have lost to day, as I may fear you will challenge it.
If I could challenge it rightly, you should get by it. It is the same. Are you now at so much leisure as to tell me how you came by it?
I can direct you how you shall know. Ask the King or Prince, I know nothing of my self but what they have told me. What a reviving happiness is this sight of the divine B•lles•? Your eyes, that were this morning two expiring lamps, flame in a cheerful brightness. Now Nature by Be•l•sa's perfections can repair her own de∣fects.
How happy are you then, whose youth hath so long re••iv'd new vigour from those beams?
I am so happy Sir, I will not hazard this present with expectation of more which you might give me.
I have told you all which you must keep con∣cealed.
Is Gemella, Fidamira? and you in love with her? and do resolve to marry her?
You will believe me when I shall tell you I love her, as much as you can Bellesa. Methinks Moramente,
you seem troubled. Is it that any body should love as well as you?
It is but the admiration of the strangeness of this day.
Give me leave I beseech you Sir to beg some∣what of you this day, wherein there is no joy left you to come but giving.
It is no longer mine whatsoever you desire.
It is but a true answer to a question.
That cannot be called a gift, I owe it.
My quarrel to thee Genorio cannot be great enough to consent unto thy misery. I must needs pity thee.
There can be nothing, that hath thus reckon∣ciled me to you, that can be called misfortune. Tell me Sir what I am beholding to you for this your pity?
O Genorio, Fidamira!
Is it to her I must still owe more and more?
The more thou know her Genorio, the more thou art to be pitied. My father is in love with her, and is resolved to marry her.
Mine shall not then be the least contribution to the wonder of this day: for your sake I can resolve never to see her more, and so make my happiness the sacrifice of this solemnity.
Stay Genorio, let's think a little how to make you rather an offerer than an immolation.
Is this certain Sir, that he was saved at the sack of Pamlona? and this jewel found about him?
It is as certain as any thing on earth, and that my Son then being a child in the camp, begged his life of me, which he hath since loved better then his own, be∣cause he ought that, and this was due to him.
Then I believe twill be to your brave mind some satisfaction to let you know how happily this your mer∣cy was disposed. So as it may seem a reparation for all
other losses, having in this one blessed a whole nation. This is the Prince Palante you have saved. I that was trusted with him, and the government of Pamlona, can assure it. Now you may remember Sir, that you surprised the Town when I was absent, two Princes were then in my charge, this and a daughter of the Kings, both infants. The general execution that was committed then left us no hope of safety for these Princes. And since, the King ha∣avenge this Princess Saphira hath razed out the memory of any loss, and now the finding of the Prince Palante must be a joy to the King, and her, scarce to be believed; They did not come from Paradise: Let me then beg of you to be a witness to this claim that I shall make.
Now Sir I must not only challenge this jewel, but you too.
You will lose in the value of this jewel by taking me with it. I am not so ill natured as it would not add to my misfortune to be owned by any body.
I am so happy as I can change you from what you do believe your self, and so part you and your misfor∣tunes.
Grow not too confident upon this days success; undertake not such a difficulty as the making me happy.
You can have no such personal afflictions as the blessing of a nation will not out-weigh. Therefore be plea∣sed to know your self, and it may be you will find your misfortunes depend on that mistake.
If you could teach me to forget my self, that were a more probable way.
Would you not think your self happy to make these two Princes a return of all their benefits?
I will not hazard to be more miserable by the frustration of such a hope.
You, that did remit me to the king even now for knowledge of your self, will not refuse him credit. There∣fore be pleased to put off that unfortunate name Genorio
and call your self Prince Palante, Son to the now blessed king of Never.
What plot is this, Sir, between your father and this Gentleman?
It is to make you what heaven hath destined you, a happy Prince.
This j•well, I have so enquired after, is the wit∣ness of what the King hath bin pleased to acquaint you with. In the last war between the King your father, and this brave Prince I had the honour to be trusted with the town Pamlona, and the persons of all the King, children; who had then only your self, and a yo•ng Princess cal∣led Miranda, your sister. The town in my absence was surprised, and the impartial execution that was commit∣ted to the incensed So•ldiers, destroyed all our hope of either of your safeties. Now the King assures me that you were then brought to him with this jewel about you, who•e command saved your life by the intercession of the Prince. The time which hath changed all things else about you but this jewel, leaves my memory no other certainty. Your sister had another too, which concurring with the Kings relation, makes it unquestionable. It seems even your infancy had some such divinity in it, as did infuse a soul into that body, should have taken yours a∣way, and so at once enlarge your obligation, and invest your self with the power of acquittance too, to th•se brave Princes.
All this I am a witness to, and I think my Sons memory will retain this mark of his charity, this jewel which was then about you.
If this jewel be a certain mark of your birth. I can assure you that you were brought to me with it, and then I called you Agenor, a name fitted to the not-know∣ing who you were.
I dare say upon this security your father will willingly put his kingdom into your hands, therefore put off this amazement, and put on your self Pa•ante.
Why are you thus sad at the taking leave of Ge∣norio, and Agenor?
I can say nothing at all in answer of what you have said, but can object one thing which you cannot an∣swer. How can I be Bellesa's brother?
As shoe's your sister by father and mother.
You that are so mistaken in her may easily be so in me. She is a creation of her self apart from all things, there can be nothing so near her as brother or sister. Should I call her sister?
Call your self Palante, and give me leave to em∣brace you so: then this your reverence to her will oblige you to answer to what nature shall direct her to call you.
This is the last emission of it self your dying pas∣zion makes, as it contests with nature, whose reviving is the others death: therefore I do not wonder at the force of it, and I do not fear but you will share joys with me in that little, I hope to owe Bellesa of your brother; and from this instant that I hope indebts me to you.
The improvement of my life must be the same still of my obligation unto you Sir, that must owe it you. Nor could it be a part of a discharge for me to begin but now to joy in Bellesa's loving you: but I did it then, when my passion unto her made a burden unto my life.
Have you this blessing to give, that my fathers having Fidamira shall prove your wish?
I have now only that devotion left, you had for the Princess of Navarre, for expiation of my fault.
Conceal this purpose awhile, and you may chance find her, where I found Saphira.
This change of my fortune if it prove happy to me Romero, will assure me of a recompense of thy fidelity, though it cannot of my obligations to these Princes.
I have not a wish left now but the finding of the Princess Miranda, and the miracles of this day make no∣thing desperate here.
Would not you wonder Sir now, if I should challenge you of being the occasion of the report of the Princess Sapphire's death?
Miracles are here in their own element.
Doe you remember Sir when you thought your self the universal monarch of despair, and would admit no rival?
I can remember when I gave the odds between a Pilgrim and a King into the balance, and yet out-weighed misfortunes.
I can witness it Sir, for it was to me you gave it, who then in the habit of a pilgrim employed by the Prince in the search of the Princess of N•varr, met you in a lamentation, I thought belonged singly to me, Fida∣mire's loss, whom I had been then to seek. The sense of your affliction agreeing with mine own design, made me resolve to come back to the Prince, whom I had left here to try if the belief of the Princess Sapphire's death, who was then the pretence of his remove from you, could bring him back. And your own direction of me hither will justify this my charge against you Sir, by which I only pretend your intercession to the Prince for my par∣don.
Noble Palante your own revival must be a new life to her. So you will recompense her in effect for ta∣king from her but by report.
Remember all this Palan•e. Moramente what is the meaning of this between Fidamira and him? Am I not yet fixed faster then fear can remove?
Assure your self Sir, your wishes with Fidamira shall not be crossed without a wish of his.
Are not these strange things that we have heard? Sure Martiro your impossibility, that is fallen to the earth, hath engendered here this day, and is delivered of so many miracles.
I confess this day may justify my wondering a∣gain.
Heaven hath sent you hither Sir opportunely, to defend the rites of the Society, which must appeal to you for your preservation. The will of the Foundresse, which appoints the Queen to be chosen principally for her bea•tie, is now violated in the choice of the Moor Ge∣mella, who is now chosen Queen.
Was she chosen Queen as Moor?
Unless the gods have wrought a miracle for her, she was when she was chosen.
I will assure you Pantamora, my consent shall not ratify the election. [to himselfe] This way obliges her to stay here.
Could forgetting justice be in you Madam? you are so much interested in gratitude to beauty to be con∣scenting to this choice of your Queen.
I should be unjust to beauty should I disavow this choice.
Sure she knows her I expect no less then mira∣cles from you. And therefore will suppose you can make her handsome, if that will not approve this choice, which could not be made upon a justifiable appearance.
Suppose I knew she was but thus disguised, and I had been trusted with her beauty; such a trust had been broken in the concealment of it in this case.
That answers this Ladies complaint, if the beauty you produce be subject to no new objection.
Then thus I justify my choice [pulls off her vaile] expecting all admiration, no exception, now every body remains wondering.
None can wonder Madam so much as I, tha• you would expose your self to the blemish of an error for my sake. Nothing can seem handsomer in me now then blushing, which may pass for beauty as I am bound to blush for you, that are less to be credited in beauty Ma∣dam, than a•y body, because you may be so safely charity∣ble,
Therefore I must desire these more competent judges not to look upon my face but your favour in it, and as that is the loveliest thing in this world, so your choice may be justified.
What say you now, Ladies, and 〈◊〉 of the Socie∣tie, have I forfeited this Laddie's trust by thus revealing it? or my faith to the Orders, in this 〈…〉
It is such a one as leaves as much beauty here, as your leaving of the place admits of.
Her beauty was d•st•n'd to no less glory than the neglecting all power bu• yours to be enthroned by.
Heaven to acquit you Madam, hath given you this reparation for her beauty.
We all admit the choice.
Not••e carries me to pay this duty.
I dare own the joy, though scarce the honour of this day.
If I dissent, it shall •e to raise her higher yet. This place is so fruitful in miracles this day, as there hath been one wrought Madam out of your sigh•, which is no way a less miracle then yours, but as it is a blessing sent to you.
It is so strange a thing Madam, as we may brag we have a present worthy of you, a brother, this Prince Palante.
O do not over-charge me Sir, I am not yet strong enough to bear 〈◊〉, much less Bellesa's brother.
You must be pleased Madam to lessen the dis∣tance his reverence keeps him at, and bring him in, in the name of Brother.
I shall not change Madam, in being whatsoever you will be pleased to call me.
We have been so curious in this present we have m•de you Madam, as we have refined the truth of it. To∣mero, whose testimony you have approved to us, will
answer, this jewel is no counterfeit, which he assures us the Prince Palante, your brother, had about him at the the taking of Pamlona, before you were borne▪ Which proves this must be he. Whose single life my son then as∣ked, saved by the mercy of a soldier, whom the price of this jewel could not persuade to an obedience of my commands. So his safety hath many miracles in it. To∣mero is to answer for the jewel, we two for the rest.
I will affirm no truth more confidently then that this jewel is the same the Prince Palante had about him.
And I, madam, owe you so much as I may own, the saving of your brothers life, without reproach to you or him.
Sure Madam nature saw her defects in me, and meant to cast me away; and since made you so corrected a perfe∣ction, it cannot be believed you were of the same hand.
I will answer all your complements Palante by calling you brother, and so return half back upon your self.
Tic a title Madam brings many joys along with it, but none so great as the daring, in your love to this Prince, to own a compensation of my life to you.
I owe you the more Palante, that have furnished me with what I thought impossible, some merit to this matchless Princess.
I have a suit now which I deserve so little as I must join you two in an intercession for me to the Queen. I will not so much undeserve her pardon as to desire her love.
Were your fault greater then my credit with her, her own goodness would assure you pardon. Tic but the imputation of ill offices.
Tic more I perceive then you know Madam, I pray you lend me this veil, not to cover, but to reveal it. For it is so black a fault as passion even through this colour will lighten it. Let this Fidamira, that pro∣ved a cover to your innocence, prove one unto my guilt.
I had so long ago forgiven you as I was afraid you would have asked somewhat of me I must have refu∣sed you. Since you are so civil, as to think my good wishes useful to your happiness, I must esteem that a satisfaction for any thing you can remember, which I had long forgot. Therefore put off this, which is now the only mark for my memory?
Can you tell Moramente my brothers fault to Fi∣damira?
I believe I can Madam.
Pray tell me, I long to know it.
Now Fidamira it is time for me to challenge the reward of my obedience, which I think so meritorious, as I shall ask no less the• your self for recompense. My joys are yet to come. I have had no sense of all that you have had to day. I have reserved all my soul for this blessing I beg of you. I am no• yet happy, only in the power of dispensing with the election.
O Sir, settle your happiness on the joys of King and Father, and be not so cruel to me, as to make me guilty of your discontent to day, since it is not in my power to satisfy you.
I am so unhappy that you Madam that have had till now so much power over your self, should lose it now for its confirmation.
The having had so much power over my self is that, which restrains me now, the having made a vow of chastity, which is not in my power to recall.
What strange crosses do my passion meet▪ first, it was to contest with Nature, now with Heaven.
If I had known this story Palante, I should not so easily have owned you for my brother. But it is forgiven you now.
Had I sooner known you for my sister Madam, I should not have been in need of this forgiveness.
Then this is certainly she. Will you be pleased to hear me Sir in the behalf of this worthy man.
Alas Romero, it is not his fault, I impute nothing to him.
What sudden cloud is this Sir, that overcasts all our joys?
It is Madam, that no body asks me any thing but pardon to day. And I would give any thing my self, and it will not be accepted.
Will you be pleased to hear me sum up all the wonders of this day? This is the Princess Miranda. This gentleman, her supposed Father, hath by my knowledge of a jewel, and a mark upon her arm, confessed to me that he saved her life at the same time when the Prince saved the Prince Palante's. and to avoid the ruin you had pro∣nounced ag•inst such a disobedience he owned her for his child, and hath so bred her ever since.
This Sir upon my conscience, upon Romero'• chal∣lenge bids me acrew, and joy in these means of retributi∣on unto her, whom I owe all your benefits, the giving her the knowledge of her self,
This, Bonorio, is a merit to me above the being her father, as it will help to 〈◊〉 me from a desire would have disquieted the peace of this blessed day.
I must acknowledge more to you Bonorio then to a father, whose giving life is but casual, but mine was given me by the hazard of yours.
You have given me means to despise death, which is my despair.
There was but this one point wanting to close up all the blessings the circle of this world contains.
Lovely Miranda, sure heaven did desert the know∣ledge of you till the acquaintance with your Prince should make the finding you a sister such a joy as now it proves.
Matchless Saphira I cannot now tax nature for any of my wants, since she may answer me, She did reserve
all, that she could give, for you. And it is too much for me to come so near, as being sister to such perfections.
What I will thank nature most for, is, for that in∣stinct by which she did persuade me to love you so, as Ge∣mella.
There is none can challenge so much joy in this discovery, as I dare Miranda. For I have not only found a sister, but my self worthy to be a brother to you both; then before, as nature now, makes my inconstancy, her predomination, not the defection of my faith.
Nature and heaven joining now have mastered my passion. Now Miranda I must ask you pardon, that my cruelty should indebt you to another for your life. And heaven foe•bids me now so much the wishing the de∣feature of your vow, as it directs me to present you with the reward of it. And since your vow hath chosen this resi∣dence, I will propose to the Society the confirming you Queen during your life.
You have spoke Sir all our wishes.
We agree to it with joy.
I accept this as an accomplishment of your pre∣diction, Moramente, of my never being enjoyed •y m•n. And methinks heaven gave me a provision into this your happiness, which I dare assure you of.
Bellesa's love which you do now possess,
May by you only be made more or less.
I will leave her only the power of improving it; and will but own an incapacity of ever contribu•ing to the lessening of it.
I will now ease your complement Sir of having no∣thing asked you to day. I will ask a blessing will add to my sense of this days happiness: It is so great a suite Sir I will join Moramente with me to obtain it, leave for my brother to be received a servant to the Princess Mi∣rabella your daughter; for whose beauty fame promises as much, as her birth assures for her virtue.
This day is so auspicious to my wishes, as it
affords me all my suites, I will advance somewhat to you Madam, this promise, that she is already by your de∣sire ready for Prince Palante's acceptance or refusal.
There can be no dispute or scruple Madam, but this disparity between his sister and mine. If he will be content with so unequal a choice.
This raises the value of my new condition by the procurement of such an honour as the Princess Mira∣bella, whose perfections seem rather to add unto the lustre of your crown, then to need to be set there to •hen. Therefore I shall beg Sir, that you will procure me to be accepted.
Bellesa was to bring in the last joy. Sure now all this day's miracles are perfected.
I have a suite more to you Sir, that you would be pleased to let me keep this happy name Moramente.
You may in gratitude qualify that name, that hath served you so.
And I will keep Bellesa all my life.
There is no life Madam that name is so due to, a• yours.
What say you Melidoro and Camena? You are tuned for your parts in the consorts of this day.
I am so transported with your joys Madam, I have forgot my self.
Give me leave then to remember you of your pro∣mise, if Bellesa left the Society with Moramente.
All is d•e that was promised on that condition.
Then Melidoro you are master of your wish.
We will carry you to Court with us, where we will be witnesses of your joys. You see Pantamora, every one that durst scarce hope their wishes, possessed of them to day, and your security only left empty.
I shall stay here Madam, and learn to assure my wish•s by bounding them within the peace of this blessed pl•ce.
Come Martiro, I have nothing to think on now
but the making thee happy, which is so hard it will re∣quire my st•die.
That may be easily Madam, by leaving me here, and receiving this offering. May you always carry with you my accomplished wishes, and prayers instead of me, [gives her a paper].
These be verses Ma•tiro, pray read them.
Reason and Wonder are so reconciled
In you, as married they have had a child:
Whose first conception was the birth
Of more then was conceived before on earth
So Love that did so long in labour lye
Delivered of impossibility
Is now at last, and so can never more
B'in danger of miscarrying as before.
For your divine example needs must prove,
The height of virtue doth consist in love.
So Love shining in you by this reflex
Raises both light and heat to either sex.
Since your example doth to all declare
None innocent that love not, nay not fair.
For they can neither handsome be, nor true,
That may and yet refuse to be as you.
If any thing impossible be now
In love, tic that your virtue may allow.
For even your loving doth become a proof
It is impossible to love you enough.
These I understand Martiro, and will answer them with a wish to you. May your elected solitude enlarge, and fill your soul at once with such delightful thoughts as you may never think that you want any thing but time.
Your wishes are divine Madam, and must fulfil themselves.
Will you be pleased to think Madam who we shall dispatch to the King your father with these news and
to desire his consent to the Prince Palante's wish and mine.
Let me beg this commission, that I may employ this new life that you have given me on your service.
None can be so fit as Romero, that can inform the king of all that's past.
I will write by you to my father, who I think will not know my brother's and sister's hands. It is no time Sister to perform the rites of your enthrone∣meant.
There can be nothing welcome to me so near the loving you Bellesa.
I will promise Miranda, if Moramente will join with me, to come hither once a year.
Promise me Madam never to doubt your will.
Give me leave Madam to make the last suite to be received into the Society without the publication of a pretence.
It is a grace Sir you may be sure of, since it is in my power.
Among all these joys it is no wonder if no by∣die think of sleeping. Let's retire Madam to that rest, may prepare us for to morrows ceremonies, where these cou∣ples must be beholding to your dismission.
It becomes me Madam, to leave the last wish with you.
May you have all the joys of innocence
Enjoying too all the delights of sense
May you live long and know not till you're told
T'endear your beauty's wonder, You are old.
And when heavens heat shall draw you to the sky
May you transfigured, not disfigured dye.

O Jupiter! what a hard age is this to be a Servant in,
Especially to a foolish Master; if a servant shall
Give never so good Counsel, his word will not
Be taken, his Master thinks himself wiser, and so
His Family is bound to suffer with him; for it is the mischief
We are not Masters of our own bodies,
But they that buy us; and not much unlike
This Case of ours, and slavery, is that my Master is in now
By Apollo, with his ambiguous answers from his  three-
Footed throne: Nor is it with in justice I complain of him,
Who though he be counted a great Prophet and a Physician,
Yet he hath sent my Master from him sick,
And I think half mad with Melancholy,
For yonder he follows a blind man step by step;
I have heard of seeing men leading the blind,
But never of blind men leading those that can see before:
And ask him what he means by it,
And he answers you not a syllable; 
I can no longer hold my tongue, 
Unless you will tell me why we follow this Fellow thus;
Nay, I will vex you, for I know you dare not strike me,
Whilst I carry your Bag. 
No, yet if you be troublesome I shall take Away the Bag, and then beat you.
Well, I will not be quieted until I know who this is.
Well, because thou art in my esteem the most Faithful and secret  of all my Family, I will not Conceal this from thee, thou know I have lived
Religiously with both Gods and Men, and yet always have Lived poor and miserable.
It is very True.
And yet they that Rob the very  Churches, the Rethoricians, Sycophants, every Rascal grows rich.
I grant you.
I went therefore to consult the Oracle about my Son, that since my own miserable life is now almost Spent,  and past redress, whether it were not best for him To change his manners betimes, shake off his honour, and Learn to be as cunning a knave as he can; For it is that only conduces to living well.
And what said Phoebus to this?
That you shall hear; he plainly told me,
That whosoever I met first, I should never
Leave him 'till I had got him into my house,
If it were possible.
And this I warrant was he.
The very same.
You need not have obeyed the Oracles Counsel, you  simple fellow in this; for the words carry enough in Them, for follow the man you first met, implies As much, as let your Son live by the ordinary customs  And crafts he sees others use, that I warrant you Was Apollo his meaning.
How conjecture you this?
Why a blind man may see it,
For it profits no body in our age
To be  honest as you say, therefore still do as others do,
And be as other men are.
This is not all Carrion, we shall better
Know the mind of the Oracle by enquiring
Of this fellow whence he is, and what he wants,
And how he came hither. 
Come Sir, let us know who you are.
Yes, and tell us quickly too.
I say to the Parish. 
Do you hear him?
He speaks to thee, thou dost question him
Too roughly; Sir, I pray you, if the fair words
Of an honest  man can prevail upon you,
Let us know your  qualities.
I say unto thee  lament.
Is this all the  Oracle will do for us.
If you do not tell me, you shall have no
Cause to laugh, for I will destroy thee.
I say leave me, get you gone.
By no means.
Master I'll tell you what's best, let me lead
This blind fellow to some  Precipice, and
I'll steal from him and let him break
His neck.
do so.
Hold, hold.
Will you speak then?
If you should know what kind a man I am, I know
You would use me cruelly, and not
Let me go neither.
We'll promise you the contratry, if you will speak.
Lay your hands off me then first.
Well said, it is done.
Observe me well then, since I am forced
To reveal what I thought to have kept
Secret, I am Plutus.
Then thou art the basest sordid thing alive:
Is it possible, art thou Plutus!
Art thou Plutus with that miserable face
And dirty clothes,  O Phoebus, Apollo, Gods and Devils!
But art thou he?
Yes surely.
Thou the man?
Even very he.
But whence commeff thou in these
Pitiful  rusty clothes.
I come from the house of  Patroclus, one that Never since he was born could afford himself water.
But how come thou to suffer all this misery.
Why Jupiter brought all the evils of my life upon me,
Because he envied the good of mankind;
for when I was young I was  advised to leave
Evil company, and live with the just and modest and
The learned, but Jupiter put out my eyes that I might
Not discern them from others, such an ill will
He himself bears to  honest men.
And yet he himself receives true honour
Only from honest men.
It is true.
But if you had your sight again, would you
Hereafter fly such base company?
For certain.
And live amongst honest men?
Without doubt, for it is a long time since I saw
Any such.
That's no wonder, for I that have my eye-sight
Scarce ever saw any.
Well, now let me go, for you know all
I can tell you.
No, by Jove, we will now rather embrace you
More Earnestly then ever.
Did not I tell you what trouble you would give me?
Let me entreat you to give your self into my hands For ever, and when you know me, though I say it, you will Not find an honester man.
Yes, so you all say, but when you have enjoyed me And grown rich, then you mind nothing but mischief and Malice.
It is true, but we are not all alike.
By Jove all one.
A good deed to cudgel him.
But that you may know how much good
You shall have by living with me, you shall
Understand, I hope God willing  to get you your sight Again.
Not of all things, I dare not see again.
How is this?
This fellow is certainly born to be Miserable.
If Jupiter should know I were about such a business, He would destroy me.
Can he hurt thee worse then to let thee go wandering Up and down thus?
I do not know what it is, but I fear him monstrously.
Is it possible? thou greatest of all  cowards, Why dost thou think Jove or his thunder would be valued At a straw  if thou had thy eyes again never so little A while.
O be not so profane.
Have patience, and I'll make it appear to thee
Thou hast more power then Jove.
Who me?
Yes, for by what dost thou think Jupiter
Commands all?
By  money, of which he hath abundance.
Pray where hath he the money?
Of this fellow.
And with what do men sacrifice to Jove with?
Is it not with this fellow?
And what do they sacrifice for, but to get him?
For all their prayers are to be rich.
Are not you all in all then, and if you say but
The word, all this will be at an end.
How can that be?
Because no body can sacrifice Oxen or Sheep if You forbid them.
Wherefore?
Why, how can he buy any thing to sacrifice with-Out thee, so that you see, if Jove be troublesome, You know what to do with him.
Is it with me and for me, say you then, that men Sacrifice?
I say so by Jove, and moreover, whatever is famous Or esteemed amongst men, thou art Author of, For money rules all.
Why, you see with a little money I am bought
And made a Slave of, because I had none my self.
And you know the Corinthian Women when poverty
Tempts them are seldom persuaded, but if money be
To be had, then they are brought to reason
And to be  active, that makes them Wagtailes.
And the same thing the Boys do for reward,
Not for love.
Nay, but you speak of those that are of low
Quality, for the best sort of these scorn money.
What do they seek else?
Why, a good horse or  hounds is a tempting present.
They are too proud perhaps to take money, and
Therefore under this pretext hide their
Avarice, but it is all one, money and monies worth.
All arts, all cheats are invented for thy sake,
Plutus; the one is a Cobbler, the other a Cutler,
The other a Carpenter, another a  Gold-melter
For thy sake even of that gold thou gave him;
And as arts, so are all  thefts still,
For thy sake, men taken in adultery
Have their  torture given to them.
What a wretch am I, who till now never
Knew all this!
What makes the King of Persia  triumph so Think you?
What are all  Conventions and Sects of men Gathered for?
And tell me what mans and furnishes
The Greek Navies that are set out?
Or what sustains the great Corinthian Armies?
And gives  Pamphilus such cause of sorrow?
Yes, and Belonopolus his partner.
What makes Argyrius I pray you fart as he goes Up and down?
And for thy sake Phelisius  tells us all his
Fine stories.
And it is thou that aidest the Egyptians.
And for thee Lais  loves Philonides.
You set your shoulder against Timotheus his Tower And threw it down.
Good and bad, all things are done for thy sake.
And in war, on that side the money lies, there goes The Victory.
Can I do all this?
Yes, by Jove, and more, of all other things there Is an end, But of enjoying thee, and that hath no society.
Of bread.
Of Banqueting.
Of Music
Of Ambition.
Of Rule.
But he that hath ten Talents of thee, would then Have twenty, then forty, and still if he have not more Thinks he lives but languishingly.
Gentlemen, me thinks you discourse well,
I fear but one thing.
What I prithee.
That I shall not be able to exercise all this power You give me.
I see, it is a good saying, that money is a Coward.
Nothing so, but a thief that came into my house,
Because he could carry nothing away, reported I locked
My self up, and hid my self for fear, which I did for Providence.
Well, take you no care, if you be but willing,
I'll take order you shall see as well as Lynceus.
How can you do this, being but a mortal man?
Hope well from what I haebus but now said to me, And shook his Laurel at me too.
Hast thou him of thy Counsel also.
For certain?
Have a care what you do?
Trouble not your self, I'll pawn my head, I
Know how to bring this about.
And I mine too.
We will have help enough too of all those, who Because they are honest men, scarce have bread to eat.
Those are but pitiful friends though me thinks.
They will not be so thought when we have made Them rich again; but Carrion make hast, run.
What to do?
Call all my neighbours, you will find them
Perhaps busy at Plow, bid them leave off and be here
Presently, tell them every one shall have a part
Of Plutus with us.
I am gone; but who will take care of this victuals Here, which I have bought for Dinner.
Leave that to me, and now Plutus the most excellent Amongst all the Gods, enter here with me, this is my House, which this day thou shalt make rich.
I beseech you excuse me, it is very troublesome to Me to go into another mans house, especially one that I am Not acquainted with; for I never have any good by it; if I happen into a mans house, why then I am thrust presently Under ground, and stifled, and if any of his friends come In necessity, and ask for me to help him, he denies me, and Swears he saw me not of I know not how long, And if I fall into a prodigal mans hands, why then I am Divided amongst Whores, or lost at Dice in a moment, And so we are both turned naked out of doors.
You have not met with moderate men, I am one That on occasion can spend, and then again spare, but pray You enter, I long till my Wife and my Son see you, who Are two, next to thee, I love best of all the World.
That I easily believe.
Why should I not speak truth?
You, all friends and neighbours, poor and laborious That have lived with us upon  Onions and hard fare, I Now make hast and make use of the present occasion Whilst it is offered.
We are ready you see, and make what hast we can, Considering we are men toiled with labour and oppressed With Age, you cannot expect we should keep pace with You, therefore tell us first why your master sends for us?
I have told you this good while, but cannot get you To lift up your long Ears to it, that my master bid me tell You, that you shall all leave this sorrowful careful life that You now lead, and exchange it for a pleasant one.
By what means, or from whence does he hope this
 Neighbours, my master will be here presently And brings with him an old, crooked, ill-faced, unlucky, Bald, and I think, I may say  curtailed fellow.
O thou art a golden messenger, what brave new Is this? by thy description this must needs be a heap of  Gold that's coming to us.
Or rather a heap of all the old  worldly evils.
Well, do not think you shall go unpunished??? You bring us thus far upon our Crutches for nothing but to Delude us.
You think me a man naturally so given to jest,
That I can say nothing in earnest.
We shall make your bones ache by and by, you knave
Yes, when you have took your lots out of the  Urn, and are Judges in Athens, and these Cudgels you have In your hands, your wands, but (g) Charon will have you in His boat before that day comes.
Come, you are a prating fellow to delude us thus ????????? this while; in not telling plainly why your Master sent For us, especially knowing what business we have, and yet The hast we have made over hedge and ditch to get hither.
Well, I will no longer conceal the business, my Master hath got Plutus into his house, and you are all sent For to be made rich.
Is that possible we can be all made rich?
As rich as you would wish, every one a Midas and Such goodly asses as he was, so you shall have.
How I am delighted with this! I could dance for Joy if I thought this were true.
Do so, you shall follow dancing like my Sheep, my Kids, or rather like my gray Bearded lascivious  Goats, And I before you will represent the Cyclops.
And we in like manner will follow you our Cyclops; But if we catch you eating the best Sallats and herbs From us, as you go, and then when your belly is full fall Asleep by the way, we shall order you with these Cudgels.
Then will I imitate  circen, and feed you with Herbs that will metamorphose you into Swine, and then (as Ulysses did) feed you with  Sir reverence, and you shall Go grunting on, and like  hogs follow one another.
And we seeing our Circen go about to poison us, Will imitate  Ulysses, and hang you up by your two Stones, and slit your Nose, and then anoint it with a Sir reverence, and you like Aristillus shall laugh and cry, Pigs follow your mother.
Well, let us leave our Jests, and now we are at our Journeys end, every one put himself into his own shape Again; I'll go in a private way first, and fill my belly, And then we'll to the great work in hand. 
Neighbours, to say you are welcome, is in my Opinion an old dull complement, therefore I will salute You after a new manner, and with open arms, tell you, That to recompense the haste and pains you have taken In coming, if you will be still as diligent in your own Good, you shall enjoy Plutus with me.
Never fear, we will be as laborious and indefatigable
As Mars, and sure if we should stick at Trifles in this Busi???nos, we were worthy to have Plutus slip out of our Fingers.
I see Blapsidamus coming yonder, who by his hast Me thinks comes as if he knew something of this business That hath happened to me. 
What is the matter I pray thee? how comes it to Pass my Cramulus, thou should be so soon be grown rich? I could not believe it, though it was all the news At the  Barbers, by every one as soon as he Was set down in his Chair. Its news to me if you be so fortunate to see you call all Your friends thus about you to partake with you, and against Our Countries custom I am sure.
Blapsidamus, I will keep nothing from thee, It is true, the World is otherwise with me to day then it was Yesterday, and you shall find it so, because you are my friend.
Are you then so rich as it is said?
I shall be presently if it please  God; but there Is some hazard always in such great works.
What's the danger?
It is thus.
Speak On freely as you have begun.
If the matter hit right, we are all Made; if not, all Undone.
That's sad, and pleases me not by no means, For to be so marvellous rich, and so mavellously afraid is Not the custom of those that get it honestly.
How, not honestly?
I fear. you have robbed Apollo's Temple, And now repent you.
Apollo forbid! I never did such a trick yet.
Come, never trifle with me, it is so I know.
Prithee do not think so ill of me.
O Gods! there is nothing but villainy in the world, The hearts  of men are set upon nothing but Avarice.
Why, I think you are wild.
How different is this from the manners of the rest Of his Life.
By Heaven! thou art  mad.
A man may see by the uncertainty of his countenance, And the rolling of his eyes, the villainy he hath done.
Now I know why all this is,  if I had stole any Thing, by this way you think to get half,  is it not so?
How? I rob a thief, what's this?
Well, there is no theft in the business, what I am About is quite of another kind I assure you.
May be you will say it was not stole but took  Away.
Thou art possessed with a  Devil surely to Talk thus.
There is a third way yet, have you not cozened
Some body by some notorious  fraud of their money?
No certainly.
Why, then I know not which way to get the truth Out, unless you will confess.
Why, will you then condemn me before you Hear me?
Not I friend, but on the contrary would have brought You out of your danger with little cost, and before the Matter had been known amongst the people, we would Have stopped the Orators  mouths with a little money.
You are a kind friend to me, that for the laying Out of a shilling would look to get twelve.
Methinks I see thee now with thy Olive branch in Thy hand, and thy wife and children sitting about thee Miserably prostrate before the Tribunal, We want Pamphilles to draw this Picture methinks.
I tell thee I am so far from taking any thing from Others, that my design is to make all honest frugal men Richer then they are.
Say you so, have you stole such abundance indeed?
Will you destroy me with talking thus.
Nay, it seems you will destroy your self.
With what, I tell thee I have Plutus himself at My house.
You Plutus, what Plutus?
Why, the very god Himself.
Where is he?
Why, within there.
Where?
Why, I tell thee at my house.
Plutus in thy house, go hang thy self, I'll never Believe it.
By the gods it is true.
Wilt thou swear by Vesta?
And by Neptune too.
What Neptune, of the Seas?
Yes, and by the other too, if there be one.
And will you lend him now and then
To some of your friends?
Soft, yea, it is not come to that yet.
Say you so, must he not stir out of your house?
Somewhat is first to be done.
What is that?
Why, he must be helped to his sight before
He can go abroad.
Is he then blind for certain?
Nothing so Sure.
Somewhat I thought was in it, that he never
Could find the way into my house.
All in good time, he will be there now godwilling Shortly.
Were we not best get a Physician to him?
What Physician is here in this City? here is no art Understood here, because there (a) is no reward.
Let us consider.
You will find none but that which I have
Long since thought on is best, which is to carry
Him to Esculapius his Temple.
You have said well, therefore let us make no delay.
I am just now going 
O the  impudent wickedness that you pitiful Men have undertaken! whither do you fly?
Hercules, what have we here?
Nay, I will be the destruction of you both, for You have undertaken that which neither God nor Man Durst go about.
What art thou that look so pale and lean?
May be it is  Erinnis, one of the furies presented In the  Tragedies, by her face she should.
No, she wants a torch in her hand.
Nay, then we'll be bold with her.
Whom do you take me for.
A  Bawd, a scolding Eggwife,
Or else you would never trouble us thus, that never
Have done you any injury.
Is it no injury (think you) to throw me out of Every house where I come?
Nay, thou art sure to have one house left thee,
The prison, but tell us what thou art.
What punishment do you deserve (think you) for Seeking to take me that am innocent out of the World Thus.
What will you say if this be a neighbour of mine That keeps a  Victualling house, and poisons me and all The street with base wine.
I am Poverty, you know me well enough sure?
For I have frequented many of your houses a good many
Years I am sure, and waited diligently upon you.
O Phoebus Apollo! whither shall we run,
How shall we get away from thee.
What a pitiful fearful fellow art thou, whither
Dost thou run, stay for shame.
By no means, not I.
Fie on it, what shall one Woman drive away
Two men?
Why, is there any animal so dreadful in the
World, and infectious as Poverty?
Prithee stay.
By Jove not I.
Nay, but let me tell you twill be a shamful thing For us to forsake yonder God within, and run I know not Whither for fear of this old Witch, let us stand to it.
With what arms I pray you can we defend our Selves, what breast-plate  will not she pierce, and what Spear did ever keep her off?
Take courage, our God will give us  victory Against this wicked Woman, I warrant you.
Dare you take of holy  things that have such A wickedness in hand?
What do you rail at us for thus, that have done You no injury, you old Devil?
Do you think you do me no hurt in seeking
Thus to get Plutus his eyes again?
What hurt is it to thee to bring all mankind
A benefit.
What good will it bring to men think you?
First of all, we shall throw you out of Greece.
Throw me out? why, what greater hurt can you do In the World.
Why, it would be a greater to let it alone
And not do it.
Then before you go any further I will show you the Reason of this matter, and demonstrate that I am the cause Of all good to you, and that by my help only you subsist In this life, if I do not proceed as you will, And use me as you please.
What an impudent creature art thou to talk thus!
If you will suffer your self to be taught, I will
Clearly show you, you are out of the way
If you would make the just man rich.
O for the Pillory or the  stocks to deliver me Of thee!
You ought not to complain before you have heard Me.
Who can forbear to cry out miserably that hears This?
No wise man makes such a Noise.
But will you submit to punishment, if you do not Make this good?
Do what you can invent.
It is well.
But if I have the better of you, you shall pay for it.
Yes, twenty lives if we had them.
Our two is enough for us to lose I warrant you.
I were too blame to ask more. 
Let us now fall to the matter in hand, and decide The controversy by true reason, laying all jests and Scurrility aside.
In the first place then I think it plain to all men, That it is equity that  honest men ought to be happiest, And the unjust  only to be oppressed with ill fortune; The which things considered, we are now taking the way To it that is most probable, for if Plutus can recover his eyes Again, and not go groping up and down thus; He will live Only amongst honest men, and such as are  Piously Given: now judge you whether there can be a better Counsel then this.
I'll be witness, no body can complain of this.
For if we will but consider, the lives of Mankind, as Things now stand, we shall find it madness to see how for the Most part the wicked abound with riches unjustly gotten Whilst honest men are ready to starve, and spend their Days with this Lady; There is therefore no good to ????????? Done, without Plutus have his eyes again.
O ye most vain and Credulous  of all mankind Companions in Dotage and trifles; If that you desire Should come to pass, what good would it be to you? foe??? If Plutus should see again, he would (f) distribute
Equally to all men: and then I pray you who would care To study Arts or Trades? who would build your Ships or Your Coaches? Nay, you must even mend your own shoes Your selves, and plow, and sow, and reap, or else you must Not eat, you thought I warrant you to live at ease and out Of care.
You deceive your self, we will keep servants to do All this you have recorded.
Who will serve you, or whence will you have them?
We'll buy them with our money.
Who will sell them you, when they have as Much money as you?
Some Merchant of Thessaly greedy of gain,
That bring us Slaves from those that steal  them
Out of the suburbs, and by-places I warrant you
Will furnish us.
Where will you find any body to steal, when no
Body is in want? you may steal your selves too as well as
Work; and thus by being rich, be much more miserable
Then you were before.
May this misery fall upon thine own head for Belying us thus.
Neither shall you sleep any more upon your fine Beds and Carpets, for indeed you shall have none to lie on, Who will make them? for as you say every body shall have Money enough: where will you get rich perfumes? you Must not think then to walk in such pomp in the streets When you bring your  Brides home; and now if you Want all these things, judge you whether any body will Account you rich, what will Plutus do you good, and yet From me you enjoy all this and all else you have need of, I am the imperious Mistress of all Artists, and stand by them Until they are glad to find any way to support their lives.
Prithee what can thou do for any body, but help Them to Biles  and Botches, and starve them with vinegar, fill them with lice and gnats without number, with A dreadful noise, driving away their sleep, bidding them Arise, and try some means to prevent starving.
besides this, instead of a whole Cloak thou give them half one, and instead of a bed to sleep in, a Mat to lie awake on, for curtains and coverlets, rags, and for a pillow a ?????????no, Mallows for bread, and grass instead of Sallets, and ??????r an easy seat, an old barrel with the head beaten out;
Have not I now showed at large the good you do?
No, these are not of my evils, these belong to  Beggary, not Poverty.
Yet we count poverty and beggary are sisters.
You do perhaps, and it may be you compare Dionysius  with Thrasibulus; but my life hath none of This in it, it is the beggar that hath nothing to live upon The poor live sparingly upon what they have, And order so their affairs, that though they may be said In effect to have  nothing, yet they want nothing.
O what a happy life is this! you tell us of poverty If after all our time spent in labour to get and To keep, there scarce remain enough to bury us.
You spend your time in cavilling and jests, and Not seriously weigh the matter, nor do you seriously cons???????????? That I give men better wits and persons too then Plutus Can; for what does he give, but gouty legs, fat bellies But with me men are active, and slender-bodied, and of Warlike shape.
And all this they get by being farnished with Hunger.
Moreover, for what concerns the modesty a?????? Virtue of living, I can say more that they only belongs To me, and that from Plutus comes nothing but riots a?????? Injuring of others.
What is your modesty, to steal and break  house
Nay, the modesty lies in hiding himself when I Hath done.
Do but observe the Orators and Rethoricians when They are poor, how equally and justly they carry them selves between the People and the Citizens, but then Are no sooner rich, but they lay Plots presently to be???????????? The lower Sort, and cause Wars among them.
Though I do not love thee, I cannot but confess this to be true of thee, but yet you shall not scope us, Going about to prove Poverty better then Wealth.
Yet you disprove it not methinks, but wrangle, Jest and talk Idly.
Why, tell us then if thou be so excellent; Does every body fly from thee so?
Why? because I would make them better Honester, as Children do that avoid their Parents, because
They give them good Counsel and Correction; it is a hard Thing for any body to distinguish good from bad.
Do you think then that Jove doth not distinguish? You see he is rich, and gives it to us too as a blessing.
O ye dull Saturnine wits! why Jove himself is A beggar, and that I'll prove to you; For if he were rich, when he institutes his Olimpick Games in Greece, sure he would never reward the Conquerors with an Olive branch and a large oration, But he would give them Gold.
This shows rather how Jupiter loves Gold, by his Parting with it so sparingly; he gives away things of less Value, and keeps that for himself.
If it be so, you lay a worse fault to him then Poverty Gives any body, having so much wealth notwithstanding To be still so greedy.
I think Jove will have cause to crown you with That Olive bronco you spoke off for this victory over us.
Well, these jests contradict nothing of what I say, Namely that all good comes of Poverty.
Ask  Hecate then if it be not best to be rich; For the rich make her a feast, but the poor do nothing but come in and eat it, therefore let's talk no more, for I am resolved never to yield, though thou shouldest over???come me.
Then Argos  do thou hear and take compassion of me.
Nay, rather call upon Pausonus thy  companion.
Miserable creature what will become of me!
Get thee from me, and I care not.
Whether shall I go, into what Country?
Into the Stocks, or to the Gallows; come away.
The time will come you'll wish for me.
Come not before that day,
Till I am weary of being rich.
Well, when I am once rich, I'll keep jovial com???pany, feast, and bath, and sit in plenty, and fart at Poverty.
At length we are got quit of this old Woman, and now Blapsidamus let it be our business as soon as we ?????????, to carry Plutus unto Esculapius his Temple.
We had need dispatch, lest some body come in and interrupt us.
Within there's Carrion, make every thing Ready and bring Plutus to the Temple, with the usual Ceremonies. 
Come all you happy in your old age Who in the days of Thesius  lived in Poverty and Scarcity of bread, this is the day that I pronounce all Honest men happy.
O the blessed news, that thou art the messenger to thy poor companions!
The business is brought now about by my Master,
For Plutus that you all know hath been so long
Blind, now sees with perfect eyes, and all by the help
Of the most famous Esculapius.
Marry, this is pleasant news.
Twill make you rejoice whether you will or no.
Praised be the  high-born powerful Esculapius Thou great glory to Mankind. 
What a noise and knocking is hear to day, I pray
God it be a messenger of some good?
I have been all day at home expecting Carrion,
And now he is come.
Come Mistress, fetch some wine quickly, for I know First it is that you love; and then next, because I bring you such a heap of good news, I deserve some.
Where is it?
I am about to tell it you.
Dispatch in few words.
Hearken well, &amp; I will tell you all from head to foot
So it do not trouble my head, I care not.
As soon as we came to the God Esculapius Carrying with us (then the most unhappy, and now most happy) Plutus if any one were ever so, first of all threw him into the sea  and washed him well.
Would that make an old man as he is happy?
To put him into cold water?
Afterwards when he came before Esculapius, And had laid our Sacrifices on the Altar, with several Musics playing, we made Plutus lie down every one assisting in the Ceremony.
Were there any more that sought help from Esculapius?
There was one  Heoclides, who though blind it is thought in robbing and cozenage can exceed the theefes that see best, besides many others troubled with all sorts of evils: now after a little  Priest that waited upon the Ceremonies had put out all the lights, and we were laid to Sleep, and a general silence commanded; I was only kept Awake by a pleasant favour that came into my nose of a Hot Pudding, that the old Woman was eating behind me; At which I crept towards her, to see if I could steal some: And at length, lifting my head a little up, I saw a Priest go round every Altar in order, and take all the fruit and nuts, and things that was good, and put them in his wallet; Thought I, sure there is some great Sanctity in this kind of Theft, so I fell faster on upon the Pudding.
Thou wretched fellow, wast not thou afraid Of the God when thou did this?
Yes, I was afraid he would have come with his Robe and his  Garland and gravely have stole my Pudding from me; for that his Priest had taught me: But when the old Woman heard the noise of my chops Going, she began to reach out her hand as she lay and feel For her Pudding, the which I had now almost made an End off, but she feeling the pot there, thought her Pudding Safe, and I crept away as silent as a Snake, and with my Belly full laid my self to sleep.
And did not Esculapius yet appear to you?
Not yet: but when he did come, it was my ill luck, my belly growing now burdened with pudding to fall into such a fit of farting.
Was not that enough to make him destroy thee?
No, only  Jaso that followed the Gods blushed at it, and  Parocaea stopping her nose, turned aside: For I must tell you though it were in the Church, I could not fart (e) frankincense.
But what said the God?
Just nothing.
Is he so  coursly bred?
Alas, he is not only a devourer of farts, but feeds Upon  excrements, eats any thing.
Thou wicked fellow.
After this was all past being in great fear of the God still, I hid my self, whilst with great gravity he admi???nistred to all the diseased according to their several no???cessities, his boy having brought him a little stone mortar, And a box of Instruments of Surgery.
Was the box  stone too?
Not the box stone.
You lying fellow, you hid your self, and you
You say you saw all.
Why, I saw all through the Priests gown which
Wanted not loop holes I assure you:
Now to end my story here the oynment was prepared
For Neoclides; of the best  garlic three cloves beaten
In a mortar as much squils this wet with vinegar,
And this he applied to Neoclides and to the end historment
Might be greater, he lifted up his eye lids, but he
Stamping and roaring thought to run away, but
Esculapius laughing, said, Sit still till I release you,
To delay causes and betray Clients.
What a lover of the Common-wealth this god is, And how wife.
Next to him he went to Plutus, and wiping first his Eyes, and covering his head and face, he gave a sign with A whisper, and out came two mighty Snakes.
O monstrous!
 These crept under the cloth to his Eyes, as I take it and licked them, and Mistress, before you Can drink half a dozen glasses of wine, Plutus arose up with His eye-sight perfect; I in the mean time clapped My hands for joy, and took my Master up in my arms, The God and the Serpents vanished into the Temple, And all that were about Plutus fell to embrace him, And no man could sleep any longer for joy; I all the while magnified the God that had made Plutus see perfectly, and Neoclide's quite blind.
What a power this Esculapius hath, but where is Plutus?
He is coming this way with a number of honest People about him, that formerly lived very poorly,
But now Mistress Plutus shakes them all by the hands, but Those that had got wealth unjustly he looks awry upon; But it is a wonder to see how he makes the old fools Leap and frisk before him that can hardly go; And now let us all dance for no man can now say to us Our Hogheads are empty of wine, or our Barns of corn.
By Haccata I will crown thee too for thy news.
Well; dispatch quickly, for by this the company is At our Gates.
I'll go home that these eyes of mine may see him.
And I with these legs of mine will come
Marching before them. 
First of all we salute the Sun and next this happy Soil of  Pallas, together with all the land of  Cereopis That hath thus kindly received me. It grieves us much to think of our former misery, And the ill company we have kept, and how we have Wandered up and down; but all this shall be amended And the world shall see it was much against my will To be kept in the hands of bad men.
Out upon it, what creatures men are that are friends To a man only according to his succcess, every one I meet Now smiles on me, and my hands are almost shaked off: Who hath met me in the street to day without a com???plement? and all the old fools get about me and frisk.
Right worthy man, blessing attend thee, and us all, According to our Countries custom I have brought A small banquet to refresh thee with.
No sure, the first house I go with my eye sight into, Ought to receive from me, and not I from it.
Will you despise our good will.
Within by the fire side, when we are rid of this Rebel of company, we shall have more leisure.
Indeed you say well, for they had like to have had Me down for my Nuts and Apples but now. 
What a pleasure there is in living rich, especially to such as we that spend what we will; have still  never the less left for it, fetch in nothing, but every thing runs in as it were of it self; our barns are full of corn, our Hogsheads full of wine, the jars full of oil, pots full of Spicknard, and our purses full of money, our rotten earthen Pots are now all silver, and the kitchen shines like Ivory. We servants now in stead of Counters play at  even or odd with  Gold, nor do we now wipe our tails  with Pebbles, but choice herbs most delightfully.
The worst is, my Master yonder within with his golden crown On, is sacrificing  a hog, a ram and a goat within, and There is such smoke and stink in the house, I was fain to Come crying out.
Come child, follow me, and let us go to this God.
Who have we here making such hast towards us?
A man formerly miserable, but now happy.
He hath a good honest face.
Yes sure, and am that I seem.
Well, what's thy business?
I would speak with your god a word or two, for I have received a great deal of good from him; I was left well by my Father, and supplied my friends In their necessities, and thought that they might be useful To me again in time of need.
And what you fell into want, I warrant presently.
Most certain, I did so.
How did you do then, I warrant you were miserably Used?
Ye hit it right; for I was strongly persuaded That they that had so liberally tasted of my kindness in My prosperity, would make some return when my turn Of suffering came, but they all looked awry upon me.
And laughed at thee I warrant.
They did so, when they saw me  wither away.
They'll do so no more, I warrant thee now.
I am therefore come to thank Plutus for it.
But prithee, what is the reason thy Boy carries this Old torn Cloak after thee?
I come to consecrate this to the memory of Plutus.
It is the Cloak I warrant thou were first  initiated In amongst the gods.
No, not so; but I have suffered cold in it this Thirteen years I am sure,
And what are these old shoes for?
Why, these are a year old too.
And so these are sacred too.
By Jupiter, I think so.
You'll bring him a brave gift. 
O  miserable man that I am, thrice miserable, Nay, a hundred times over miserable!
O Apollo and the rest of ye, what doth this fellow ail?
Why, I am undone in this one day, and have lost All, and all by this god of yours; but if there be any Law left, I'll have him made blind again as he was.
This is some knave I perceive oppressed with ill
Fortune for his ill manners.
Let him deservedly then perish like a thief as he is.
Where is he that hath promised to make us all Equally rich in one day, upon condition he might have his Eyes again, and hath in doing so, made us ten times more Miserable then we were before, I'm sure some of us at least.
It is because thou art a fool and a wicked fellow.
None of you were counted wise I'm sure till you got money.
How fierce this Sycophant is? his profession now will not get him  bread, and that's it.
You shall never scope me this day, I will have you Before the Justice, and hear you upon the wrack  con???fess the horrible mischiefs you have done.
Alas, go and lament thy own condition.
And by Jove  let Plutus be acknowledged of all Greece this day for throwing out all of your profession.
O wretch that I am, what must I make you sport too? I pray you, where had you that new Cloak you have on? Yesterday, one  thred-bare served your turn.
I fear thee not, I have got now a ring ofEudam?????? That I wear here as a charm against thee.
But yet against the biting of a Sycophant, I doubt Man hath no remedy of prevention.
Are these scorns to be endured! what do you stay here for, for no good to any body I am sure?
Not to do you any good I am sure.
No, but to live upon me, and sup to night of that Which should have  been mine
O then thou wilt split with malice, for thou art Like now to have nothing else in thy guts.
You say nothing, but all this while I smell a good Supper within of all manner of  fish and flesh.
What's this he smells?
I believe it is rather hunger and cold that's coming Towards him, that he smells through the holes of his torn Cloak, then any thing else.
Must I suffer all this reproach, O the gods!
That an honest man and a lover of his Country should
Be thus used.
You a lover of your Country?
Yes, no man more.
Answer me then.
Well.
Are you a husband-man?
Do you think me mad to lead such a painful life?
Are you a Merchant then?
I can counterfeit one, if need be.
Do you then profess any art?
O Jove not I!
Which way dost thou live then, that hast nothing To do?
Why, I take all business both public and private Upon me.
Who entrusts you?
Nay, it is my own pleasure.
Thou art always meddling where thou hast nothing To do, and art hated of all men: with what confidence Can thou then profess thy self an honest man?
Ye  fool, do not I deserve well enough of the Common-wealth, think you, according to my place and Power?
Yes, if meddling with other men's business, and having none of ones own, be a good quality.
It is every mans business to see the Laws obeyed, and punish those that offend.
The City appoints Judges for that purpose.
Yes, but who shall find them work? that is, bring in Offenders.
He that will for me, for it is an Office bad enough.
Well, I am that man, and therefore judge if the whole business of the Common-wealth runs not through my hands.
This City had an evil  instrument of thee; But were not thou better live without this trouble, in peace?
O no, it is a sheepish  life to live without exer???cising our wits.
And wilt thou never change this mind?
Not, if you will give me your Plutus that you have got,  and Battus his Sylphium to boot.
Come,  give me your Cloak.
Friend, he speaks to you.
And next your (f) shoes.
Again he speaks to you.
Will no body help me?
Yes, I am ready to help you off with them.
I am undone.
See now what you get by meddling with others Business is all so just lost again.
Take heed what you do, I have witness here by How I am used.
Nay, your false witness have now forsaken you.
Wo is me, if I am left alone to you too!
Now howl and roar, dost hear Justus? now give me thy old Cloak, and we'll put it upon the Sycophants back.
That cannot be, man; I have, you know, consecrated it to Plutus.
By no means, twill become this fellow much better, and we'll get a better Cloak for Plutus.
But what shall I do with my old shoes?
We'll hang those in his fore-head.
Well, I see I must for the present be gone, for ye are too strong for me, but I'll return and be revenged upon you and your god, for altering the government of Man???kind, thus without asking the Senate or the Towns advice.
Now you are got into my  clothes, run betimes, and get my place about the bath  and keep you warm; It hath been my place this many years I am sure.
It is his best if he can, but the Bath-keeper will quickly take hold  of him and throw him out of doors, I warrant you, come let us in and salute our Plutus.
Good honest old Gentlemen, tell me if this be the way to the new god they talk of.
Ye are now come to the very house, good young Gentlewoman.
May I be so bold to call to speak with some of the House?
That's needless, for I am going in; but what's your business?
I am under a great deal of misery, and have been so ever since this god first began to have his sight again.
What's the matter, sure this is something amongst the  women, that the Sycophant is amongst men and of the same calling.
Alas not I!
Then thou art some she  drunkard.
You jest with my afflictions, and that's worst of all, I am withered away (e) with love.
Prithee who hath withered thee?
You must know, there was a young fellow with an honest good face, but poor, yet the truth is he gave me what I wanted, and I supplied him with his necessities.
What were they?
Why, truly he was not very importunate, only sometimes he wanted money to buy him a Cloak, and some???times a pair of Shoes, and sometimes his Sister and his Mother wanted clothes, and sometimes bread.
Call you this nothing, this was love indeed.
Yes indeed, for he said he asked these things not for their value, but as they were mine, and so wore my very shoes for my sake, and to put him in mind of me.
This was a wonderful lover.
But now alas, his love is quite vanished, for but now I sent him Cheescakes, and bad the messenger tell him I would see him to night.
And what said he, prithee?
Truly, he sent me my Cheescakes again, and bid me be sure never to come to him more, and withal added this proverb, that once the  Milesii indeed were Powerful.
A crafty fellow, he scorns ordinary  fair now, but would have devoured any thing when he was poor.
And yet heretofore this man would be at my Chamber door every day.
To see what he could steal, I warrant.
No, he swore it was only to here my voice.
By which he thought to hear some gift was coming.
And when he saw me sad, he would call me his  Minion, his Deer.
This was when he had got thy shoes on, I warrant.
And at Ceres feast, when we were in the coach to???gether, if any body did but give me a look, I was beaten for it all day, so jealous he was of me.
He would have no body enjoy your goods but he.
He would tell me I had such fine white hands.
When they were reaching him out money.
He said my skin  naturally smelt sweet.
Then thou had some trick to sweat wine.
He said I had lovely  eyes.
This fellow is no fool, he knows how to stir up an Old  women's lust, this was the right food to it.
Now gentlemen consider, whether your god, do not do unjustly, to see a poor woman under these afflictions, and not help her.
Say what thou would have him do, and we'll send for him.
It is just that he should make this young fellow deserve as well of me, as I have done of him.
Why, he pays thee all at night still I hope.
Alas, he promised whilst he lived he would never forsake me.
He hath kept his word, for I warrant he doth not believe thou art now fit to be called a living creature.
Indeed I am  wasted with sorrow.
Or rather dried up with it and shrunk.
You may draw me through a ring.
That ring must be as big as the hoop of a Sive.
See yonder he comes of whom I complain thus, Hoe's going to some feast I warrant.
It seems so, for he is very  fine.
Save ye Gentlemen.
Let's here what he will say.
O Mistress mine! how suddenly are you altered? Grown gray I protest, since I saw you.
O miserable woman that I am, how I am abused!
What, is it such a long time since he saw you?
How long think you? he was with me but yesterday.
Then this man differs from all others, for the More drunk he is, the quicker his senses are.
O no, this is of late his usual humour.
O Neptune, what waves, what wrinkles hast thou got in thy forehead!
Prithee do not bring the light so near.
She says well, for if one spark should chance to fall upon thee, thou would burn and crack like a piece of an Olive tree.
How say, wilt thou have a bout with me?
Where thou foolish fellow.
Here.
At what game?
At even or odd, how many teeth hast in thy head?
I can divine that, not above three or four, I warrant you.
Still thou art able to crack nuts, for a Mill hath but one tooth.
You are uncivil thus to  empty all your villainy and ill language upon me thus.
You must get some body to make you clean again then.
O wash her not by any means, for if her  paint were washed off, we should see a face would fright us.
For a man of your age you seem not to be very wise methinks.
He hath been  tempting thee, and playing with thee I believe, and thou find he is old and can do nothing and so thou despisest him.
By Venus! never touched me, thou wicked fellow.
No no, I were mad to offer it, that were to make a Quarrel between you and your Mistress.
Alas, I defy you for that, I love her so it's impossible.
She accuses you though.
Me, of what?
Of all manner of reproaches, and that you hit her in the teeth with that proverb, that once the Milesii were strong.
Well, you strive to win my girl from me, I see, But I will not contend with you for her.
You slight her, I see.
No, I reverence her age, or else no man should carry her from me, and so I give you joy Sir, and farewell.
He's weary of her company.
And yet who is fitter for it then I am?
I'll change no more words with such an old devil, that hath been  a whore this ten thousand years.
Yes, but as they say, now you have drunk the wine, methinks you should be content with the lees.
Yes, but this lees is fowler and more corrupted then ordinary.
What remedy?
We will try, I am going in to sacrifice to Plutus.
I have a word or two to say to him too.
Nay, then I'll not go in.
Have a good heart man, she cannot ravish thee.
No, I have  tamed her pretty well.
Go when you will, I'll follow you step by step.
O Jupiter! how this old woman sticks to him Like an Oyster to a stone. 
Who is this that makes such a noise and knocking at door, I can see no body neither, sure the doors do not make this noise themselves.
Stay Carrion, I say I must speak with you.
O! is it you that have made all this stir?
I could have come in whither you had opened the doors or no; go take your heels and run and call your Master and your Mistress hither presently, and all the Servants, nay the very dog and the hog too.
What's the matter?
Jupiter hath given command you should be all tied together and thrown into the Dungeon.
A blister upon thy tongue for this news, why does Jupiter threaten us so horribly?
You have committed the greatest of all wickedness; For since Plutus began to see, men have quite left to offer frankincense, laurel, bread, flesh, or indeed any kind of Sacrifice.
Nor never shall any more by my consent, for before this day you never made any provision for us, or gave us a word of true Counsel.
I know not what the rest of the gods will do, but for my part I am sure I am almost starved.
Why, now you will begin to grow wise, and know the world.
Heretofore, so soon as I was up in a morning all the bawds and whores used to bring me presents of all manner of good things, nothing was too good for Mercury, and now I am so ill maintained I can scarce go upon my legs.
Ye are right enough served, for returning evil still to those that you have received good from.
Alas! what is now become of all those custards that used to be made against my feast.
It is in vain to let your mouth water at those things now they are gone and past.
O the troops of Victims that used to be brought to my Altars!
Now how will you do to dance upon the  skins full of wine with one leg.
O the warm bowels and entrails I used to devour heretofore.
You have a pain in your own guts to think on it.
What pleasantly compounded draughts I have had.
If thou shouldest taste once again of them, we should never be rid of thee.
Stand my friend then, and help me, I am one that loves thee.
If I knew how, I would.
Help me but to a little of that victuals that you are sacrificing within to Plutus in such abundance.
I dare not carry any thing out of the house.
If you steal a little out of your Masters cup their's no hurt, I'll cast a cloud over you, that no body shall see you.
You have been used ye villain I see to pardon and conceal the theft of all those that would sacrifice half of it when they had done to you, this trick hath got you all you have.
Is not that fair to divide?
Yes, but you would be loath to take part of the blows I shall have for stealing it; if I am taken playing the thief there, you all leave us.
O do not torment me thus! now you are hapy your self, you should rather help me to some place in the house amongst you.
What, would you leave the gods for such company as ours?
Yes, for it is much a happier being.
But to run away from them and your Country me???thinks is not so handsome.
That's a mans Country where he can live happilest.
But prithee if thou were amongst us, what good could thou do, what office would undertake?
Any thing, I would be porter to look to the gates.
We need not keep any body out now, they that have plenty, bid all welcome.
Make me a Merchant then.
We need not trade, nor soul our fingers with money, we have all we wish, Mercury is no mineral we stand in Need of now.
Do you want a subtle man to manage your affairs?
We have no need of craft neither,
But rather of Candid people.
Do you not then need a guide in difficult matters?
Why, you forget your self, Plutus sees again now.
Let me then be the inventor of your Plays and  Musics, how say you to that? Plutus I am sure Will have need of those delights.
On the contrary rather there will be no need of Men's studying such arts now, for they are invented to get bread, and a living out off; Though our great men now adays affect such things to get themselves  a name for science and virtue.
Is there no way for me to be brought into the House then?
Yes, now the Sacrifices are past, if you will go to the well and draw water, you shall have the washing of the Tripes; but see then you be wondrous diligent. 
Who can tell me where Cremulus lives?
Now friend, what's the matter?
Friend said you, in good time, you're my friend indeed to get Plutus his eyes again, and now I am ready to starve, though I am one of Joves own Priests.
Why, what's the matter?
Why, every body now is got rich, and grown idle, and no body now comes with a sacrifice for good success in his journey, nor that he may cast his enemy at law:
We may lock up our doors, Jove will have no more sacri???feces, nor no body comes as I see, except whole troops that come to shit at the doors, that they'll come out of their way for.
Why, then all they leave there falls to your share by your place.
Nay, I have taken my leave of Jupiter, and mean to come and live here.
Take courage, man, all will be well again I warrant you; for your Jupiter, your  Saviour, or at least that you mean and worship, is in this house, I'll assure you.
That's good news.
Stay a little, and you shall see we'll put Plutus in Jupiters Throne, and do you light the torches and you shall go before him, just as you did the tother, and all will be well.
This I think very fit to be done.
VVe'l in, and call him out to the Temple. 
What shall I do?
Do? why, carry these pots upon your head, and go carefully with them, and set them upon the Altars read against Plutus comes to the sacrifice, and make your self as fine as you can.
But what becomes of the business I came her about.
Come come, all shall be according to thy mind; And the young fellow shall be with thee again at night.
If you will promise me that, I will do any thing.
Other pots use to have their scum upon the top; But these as they stand upon her gray head look as If they had their scum at the bottom.
All is now done, there only remains now that follow therest of the company singing &amp; dancing. 

YOu Peers of England that with awful dread
Have paced on the green Garments of fair France,
Here cease a while, and give the French-men rest,
That they may know whose Sovereignty is best,
Either the Dolphin•, or our Royal Lords.
But what avails our Conquests far from home,
When civil Discords stir uncivil arms
In the Kings Chamber, London, nay, his Court?
See Lords, read what is written there.
By blessed St. Peter, Gloster is to blame,
And W•nchester hath neither grace nor shame.
Yes my Lord, he is Lord Cardinals grace.
Lord Cardinal! marry fie, he was proud before,
But now his Hat exalts his proud heart more:
But when I come among them, Isle make them know
The benefit of Peace; fall out for women,
Wrangle at a word? the one's Protector
Of a sacred Prince, the other made a Prince
Amongst the Prelates; though Bewford basely born
Isle write to them: if with regardless eyes our lines they read,
VVe'll over and cut off their factious head
About old Playnseys son what says your Excellence?
Sir Walters son, marry Sir Rob. Westford;
This Drum I think marches from Amiens,
Is should be he, I sent him for the Prisoners.
Health to your Excellence most gracious Regent,
Playnsey long Prisoner in Amiens,
Releast by Momfords bounty and your care,
Requests before these Prisoners be dismissed
This Switzar may be searched, for last night late
I heard a Gentleman tell him in Dutch,
If he would bear a Letter to a Lord,
With whom Veleires had intelligence,
He should receive in hand ten Crowns in gold,
And 30 more when it was delivered him.
Who was it promised you so large reward?
On frolic yonker,
Dat is de Scryven Ec Doeniit for-stow
De secretary to Van Here Velieres
He was the Secretary to the Governor?
Yaw, yaw, mine Here.
Who were they sent unto?
To van Heron Montford dat is de grave van Callis ant van Guineas,
Dar is deen script deen Letters watt you see then.
To Momford! what should Veleires write to Momford.
Playnsey is this the plot for Momfords fall?
It is, and be assured that down he shall.
Oh let me hug thee! thou hast won my heart!
Forbear, lest the sharp eye of Jealousy,
See by this sudden Joy our Injury.
When it breaks forth we'll seem to weep for grief.
Lords take your places, and Mr. Playnsey take your seat,
For in this business your desert is great.
See here's a Letter sent from Amiens unto Momford.
How, unto Momford!
Yes, and if this speak right,
Momford betrayed Guineas on Friday night,
And means to morrow ere the Sun be set
To yield up Callis to the enemy.
High Heaven for-send it, gracious General.
I think there breaths not a more noble Spirit
In any Soldiers breast, than noble Momfords.
I'll gage my life Lord Momford will be loyal.
We would be loath to find him otherwise:
But here he comes himself, his eyes bewray
Sorrow, as clouds fore-shew a stormy day.
Better success betide my Noble Lords,
Than hath befallen the miserable Momford.
What hath befallen thee?
Guineas, Guineas, is betrayed.
And when must Callis be surrendered?
Never while Momford hath the charge of it.
Yes, if thou have the charge of it this night
It must be yielded unto false Veleires.
Here's a large promise of ten thousand Marks,
Your praise for Fridays work in yielding Guineas.
Know you this hand? Oh that on silver hairs.
After much honour won in flowering Youth,
Should sit so huge a shame as on thine doth.
My Lord! Lords all! this is conspiracy.
True, conspiracy in thee, for there he stands
That should have brought that Letter to thy hands.
This fellow fled from Hance Beamart the Traitor,
The Walloon Captain that betrayed the Lantern,
And so by consequence the Fort of Guineas.
Momford no more, his free confession
Hath purchased his pardon, fellow stay
Amongst our English, and expect good pay.
Thank had mine Here, lets Iacob gilt habben,
And Ec sall fight wid ten hunderd thousand Devils.
Shall such a one touch Momfords reputation?
These Letters and the accidents succeeding
Condemn thee, and thou know by Law of Arms
Thou merit'st death with more than common torture:
But thy exceeding valour of•en tried,
Sets open Mercies gate, whose gentle hand
Leads thee from death, but leaves thee banished
From England, and the Realms and Provinces
Under protection of the English King,
Only thy Lands and Goods thou shalt enjoy,
And wheresoever from them be still maintained.
My gracious Lord!
Thou find but too much grace.
Here me but speak.
No more; we must away,
To win by force the Town thou did betray.
Oh miserable! miserable man!
Why do you faint? why fall you on the ground?
Cousin arise.
Manet Momford Sir Rob. Y. Playnsey, and Cap. Westford.
Father, you are my Father!
The Lady Elizabeth your noble Daughter
Is my affied wife, for her sake rise,
And stop this tide of woe that drowns your eyes.
Oh miserable, miserable Man!
Dishonours-abject, base reproaches scorn,
Why was mine age to this disaster born?
Comfort your self, let not condemned despair
Add to your sorrow, more than common care.
If you be just, as I suppose you be,
Know Innocence ends not in misery;
Kings have had falls, great Soldiers overthrown,
No riches in this earth is a mans own,
He strives, he toils, with many pains he takes it,
In an age gets it, in one hour forsakes it.
Hoe's yonder yet, hoe's digrac'd, and can do us no more good,
Therefore let every man ask his own. Follow me Sirs,
Isle speak to the purpose and stand too't.
Nay Sutler by your leave I'll stand to the best man in the Army,
And have my due before the proudest of ye, if I do not,
Say Luce the Laundress is your Shee-asse to bear for others,
I'll venture upon him, let him take it as he will.
Do Luce, we'll be ruled by thee.
My Lord, my Noble Lord, I am sorry for your weak estate, I hope for all this to see you up again, here's 4 poor Creatures of us; amongst the rest I am Luce your poor Laundress, that have washed you, and trimmed you, and starch't you, and as I have done for you, I have done my part with all your company, here is my Bill, I pray see me crossed.
What do I owe thee woman?
Nine pound, nine shillings, and nine pence my Lord.
There's 10 pound for thee.
Oh good Noble man! that ever, that ever I should see thee thus down, down!
Your poor Vitler Sir, where your Lordships men went of the ticket.
Your Armourer an't please your Honour.
Your Carter Sir for carriages.
What owe I thee?
Some (7 marks) an't like ye.
What thee?
Twelve pound.
What thee?
About some 20 Nobles.
Ther's 30 pound amongst ye, all Thave,
The Treasurer owes me some two thousand Marks.
God bless ye Sir, and send it ye.
Wherefore stayest thou my Friend? Oh I know thee now!
Thou art not impudent, thou can not beg,
Thou art a Soldier, and thy wound-plow'd face
Hath every furrow filled with falling tears,
That arms and honour should be thus disdained.
I have no gold to give thee, but this chain,
I pray thee take it friend, thou griev'st at me,
And I am grieved thy want and wounds to see.
My silent prayer my hearts love shall express.
Heaven succour you, as you help my distress.
Brother Sir Robert, if you do not scorn
Momfords disgraced name, and Mr. Playnsey,
Son I should call ye if all vows be kept,
Will you vouchsafe to tarry here a while
Till I go down unto the Treasurers tent?
It may be he will pay me all my due.
Father I'll wait for you, and weep for woe,
That I have lived to see your overthrow.
Well, I'll stay too, or bear ye company,
For your distress doth make my woes abound.
Come Cousin Captain Westford walk with me.
To do you good I'd go though't be to death.
Ha, ha, ha, gill, gill, gill, I have been teady to burst.
Son pray thee tell me how thou laid'st this plot?
Marry Sir Robert thus, when I perceived
Your great desire for Momfords overthrow,
I got intelligence at Amiens,
How one Beaumart a Captain in Guineas Fort
Offered to sell it to the Governor,
Having this light, about a two months since,
I wilfully was taken Prisoner,
Born into Amiens, where I was confirmed
And knew the very time of taking Guineas,
On Thursday evening I attired my self
Like Veleires Secretary Lanclot,
Came to the Prison where the Switzer lay,
For I had liberty to walk the Town,
Had all my Ramsome ready sent by Momford,
And only tarried for our English Drum,
That should exchange French Prisoners for the English,
The Switzar being one that stayed with us.
So, I understand ye; but in the end
How dealt ye with the Switzar for the Letter?
I brought it home in secret, gave him charge
To give it Momford with all able speed,
Promising 30 Crowns, besides those ten
I gave him first, of noble Momfords bounty:
He took me for Veleires Secretary;
But now you see the end, Momford's disgraced,
And I am unsuspected in this case.
Excellent good! I hug thee gentle Playnsey.
But tell me pray, How goes all in England?
Marry I'll tell thee Gill, thy Fathers Ward
The Lady Eleanor, shall be his Wife.
The Duke of Gloster will not suffer that.
Tut, tut, it's all but talk, it's all but lies;
So does the Cardinal make show of Love,
But tittle tittle tattle, ell's but talk,
He shall have Lady Eleanor no •,
Say she die childless, there is land for you,
You marry with my daughter, shoe's my heir,
Still Mr. Playnsey there is land for you;
I'll turn out Momfords daughter forth of doors,
Seize all her goods and lands by a device;
Still Mr. Playnsey there is Land for you.
But how I pray? What colour have you for it?
Marry Son thus, About a twelve month since
Momford in trust made me a Deed of Gift
Of all he had, excepting certain land
Mortgaged unto a Norfolk man, one Strowd of Harling,
Now Sir I am acquainted with an odd Consort,
One Ca•bee, that doth serve the Cardinal.
Oh he can cheat, take purses, forge men's hands.
The same, the same, he raced out that Exception,
And put in other matter to my liking:
So I'll defeat old Strowd, turn out Bess Momford,
All shall be mine, and after mine all thine.
No more, Momford returns.
Captain, Ye see
That men dejected bust bear injury.
He knows I am exiled, and cannot stay,
And yet he drives me to a longer day.
There is a hundred pound, ye shall not choose.
I faith my Noble Cozen, I and Playnsey
Are without money, but send into England,
Ye shall not want for 20 thousand pound.
Brother Sir Robert I put trust in you,
This Ring shall come within a day or two.
I cannot speak for grief!
No more can I,
This wind ere the Sun set will let you see
London, that ne'er must be beheld of me.
Commend me to my Daughter, love her Playnsey;
Part silent, let your sighs serve for reply.
Captain think on Strowds mortgage, and farewell.
They shall see London, they shall see my Child,
But Momford must not, for he is exiled.
I am exiled, Yet I will England see,
And live in England spite of infamy.
In some disguise I'll live, perhaps I'll turn
A Beggar, for a Beggars life is best,
His Diet is in each mans Kitchen dressed,
But first I'll like an aged Soldier
Carry mine own Ring to Sir Robert Westford,
They say it is good to try Friends, him I'll try.
Though I believe he love me steadfastly.
Sir Walter Playnsey.
Lady Eleanor,
You are too strong in this opinion,
I yield you are my wardship, and that desire
To your Revenues, more than true hearts love,
Enforced me beg your wardship of the King.
I do believe you Sir, for did you look
Into my State with an indifferent eye,
Or love me half so well as you make show,
You would—
Come, come, I know what you would say,
You think I am your Foe, because I keep you
From private conference with the Duke of Gloster,
And his proud Uncle the Lord Cardinal,
That divers times have practised sundry plots
To steal you from my house.
Your love's but feigned,
Because you say you love me for my living.
I say my first love took first life from thence,
But since more dear familiarity
Hath brought forth perfect and true shapen love.
I love you Lady, and you are mine own,
Mine in possession, and I do intend
To make you mine by lawful marriage,
Then blame me not if being all my joy,
And the high-prized Jewel of my heart,
I over-look you with a wary eye,
Lest Gloster, or the Bastard Cardinal
Should with their swelling Protestations,
Cheat my fair meaning of thy hopeful love.
Sir here's a Servant from the Duke of Gloster
Hath brought you Letters.
How! Letters to me!
No thou mistake, they come to Eleanor,
My Lord and Master greets Sir Walter Playnsey,
I do accept his honourable love
With more than mean or ordinary care.
He doth entreat me to come and speak with him
About some certain Letters come from France,
Touching the present fortunes of my Son
Lately tan Prisoner by the bloody French.
He shall command far more than he entreats.
How now? whose that which knocks?
One of the Cardinals men.
Bid him to come in.
Sir Walter Playnsey,
From my Lord Cardinals grace of Winchester
I greet thee well, and charge thee without stay
To come, and answer such objections
As may by him be laid unto thy charge
Oh you should be his Sumner by your message.
And if I do not take my marks amiss
Thou shouldest be Glosters Skullion.
How ye Groom?
I am as good a man, and better born
Than up-start Bewford the base Cardinal.
Sirrah! were not thou in presence of this Lady
Whose love my Lord doth prize above his life,
I'd scorn to take these braves at Glosters hands,
Much less at thine. Madam know I am Bewford,
And for your love do undergo this scorn.
Then for my love let all these quarrels cease,
For fear Sir Walter do discover you.
Had thou been Servant to the meanest man
That breaths in England, being legitimate,
I would have born with thee: but thou to brave me,
Whose Master I esteem as basely on,
As on thy words, I cannot put it up,
For Madam know, that howsoever diguis'd
My name is Gloster, who holds scorn—
No more,
If ever I had interest in your love,
Show it in silence, thats the Cardinal
Who comes diguis'd, armed with some base resolve
To get me hence by foreign violence.
Is it possible that this disguise should mere,
So just with mine?
It is true, he told me all.
Wo'd we were well rid of his company.
Do you but send away Sir Walter Playnsey,
Let me alone to pack the Cardinal.
What do you say Sir Walter?
There is some hidden secret in this message
Which Playnsey sounds not, but I'll go to them both.
But Sir I hope you'll go to Gloster first.
And why to Gloster first?
Because hoe's the betcer man.
He lies that says it.
Were the Cardinal
Bewford himself apparelled in thy clothes,
I'd cross his pare for giving me the lye.
Keep the Kings peace Sir.
Sir Walter, so I will,
Yet the worst boy that feeds on Glosters beef,
Holds it high scorn to pocket up the lye
At ere a Sumners hand that follows Bewford.
Thou durst not speak this in another place?
Yes here, or any where to Bewfords face,
Even to his teeth, and I would thou were he.
Shall I be braved! oh I could tear my flesh,
And eat his heart for this disparagement,
I fear he knows me, and to work my shame
He braves me thus before my Mrs. face,
But Bewford with a shower of patience,
Lay the rough wind of thy distempered thoughts
For my vexed Soul hath tan a solemn oath
Ne'er to kiss comfort till I be revenged.
Nay Gentlemen, howsoever private brawls
Have set your Lords and Masters at debate,
Let my entreats so much prevail with you,
As in my house to use no violence,
And so I pray rest pleased, for ere I sleep
I do intend to visit both my Lords.
Will it please you to walk along for company?
I would, but I must stay an hour or two
About some other business in the Town.
About my Love you mean, but Cardinal
Here is one will do that business to your hand.
Why then farewell to you both.
A due Sir Walter Playnsey.
A word with you my good Lord Cardinal,
Your Brothers man seems very quarrelsome,
And should you both stay, there might grow some jars,
Which to prevent, I would entreat your grace
To walk before into the Spittle fields.
Whilst with good words I send away this Fellow,
Which done, I'll choose my opportunity,
And in the absence of Sir Walter Playnsey
Get out, and meet you at the Orchard-gate,
And there conclude about some stratage me
To make you Master of your own desires.
Enough sweet Lady: Sirrah Horse-courser,
I'll course you one day for your Jadish tricks.
Jades a fit Title for an Ass like thee,
That can not kick, but bear all injury.
Come Madam now let's go, the Cardinals mad
To lose thee thus, then banish hence all fear,
Gloster is on thy side.
Sirrah Jack.
What say thou Frank.
How you base Rogue, ne'er an (M.) under your Gentle, have I preferred thee to my good Lord Cardinal here, and am I no better than your homesome Frank.
Canbee, let me ne'er take purse again, and I think not, but thou and this Tom Tawny coat here gull me, make me your cheat, your gull, your strowd, your Norfolk Dumpling, whom when you cheated him of his sattin-suite, left naked bed to the mercy of his hostess.
And I damb thee not for thy unbelief. Call Canbee Coward think thou) I wo'd have lost this evenings work, but for my Noble, my Princely Lord Cardinal? no.
That's some reason indeed, but Prince and Cardinal if thou be, Iack-Hadland swears by the bawled Crown of King Corn∣fax the meeting thy greatness this evening has dampnified our re∣ceipts at least six purses.
Be what you will be both, only be resolute
In any quarrel against Glosters men,
And on mine honour I'll reward ye well.
My Lord, and ye were able to give him as much Land as would lie between Winchester and Walsingham, he wo'd be your prigger, your prancer, your high-lawyer, your—
Your nipper, your foist, your rogue, your cheat, your pan∣der, your any wild thing that may be, sblud the worst that any man can say of me is, that I am a tall Thief, and the best that any man can say of thee is, that thou art a base Rogue and a Cheater.
I'll jerk ye for this ye slave.
Nay Sirs be Friends, hold ye, here's gold,
Do but assist me against Glosters life
And I'll reward you better.
Cardinal, were thou Cardinal King of the Infernals, were thou Prince of Grim-tarter-tarmagant and Erebus, I wo'd not shed one drop of the worst Dogs blood my Duke of Gloster keeps, for thy meter, thy million, thy metropolis, shall I betray his life that saved me from the death of a Dog? no. Yet for my honest friend Frank Canbees sake, I am content to stand by, and give aim at this time.
See where he comes two of ye are enough to deal with one, I'll not meddle with him.
Let's set upon him all, and kill the slave.
Hast thou betrayed me Coward? Bewford know
Though I am over-matcht I am not killed.
Keep the Kings peace for shame my Lords.
Come Canbee follow me, Playnsey be sure
I'll sit upon your skirts for parting us.
Bewford Thou moist befriend him with thy power,
Had not he been, thou had not breathed this air.
Gloster thou wrongst me, with-hold'st St. Iohnses,
Look too't, for fear when I get enter
I pull not down the Castle ore thine ears:
Cardinal to spite thee I'll keep Eleanor,
And wed her in St. Iohnses make her my Duchess.
Thou wilt abuse her with lascivious lust,
As once thou did the Earl of Flanders wife,
And make her wretched, hoping in thy love.
Oh! your holiness would have her turn a Nun,
Your cloyster-lemmon but sh• minds thee not;
Fellow what ere thou art that take my part
There's 20 Crowns, go prove an honest man
There's 40 for thee, Canbee, kill that slave
A• ever thou intend my Love to have.
I will take my time my Lord.
Canbee come not near me, thou know my ancient order▪ They die that dare me: but if thou dare meet me, hark in thine ear, disturb not these honourable personages.
Be brief, appoint the place of meeting, subito, subito.
At our Old Hostises mad rogue to make merry, lay a fresh plot to meet the Norfolk gull, and be blithe.
Agreed, and I meet thee not, bafle my good name, &amp; chronicle Canbee for a Coward, my Lord I will have a limb of that Rogue.
I shall be mindful of thee Canbee: if thou kill him
Base slave, had not he been Gloster had dyed?
I am sorry Gentlemen for Momfords fall,
And for our Brother the Lord Regents anger,
Let him pull down the pride of Winchester,
And Gloster easily will be appeased.
Humphrey nor Bedford, nor thy self hath power
To make Lord Bewford stoop; dost thou forget,
I am a Prince, and a Plantaginet?
Bastards were never Princes in their state.
I am a Prince elected by the Pope.
I'll make ye gladly fly to your Elector.
First will I see thy death Witless Protector.
Keep the Kings peace my Lords.
Look to it, I'll rouse you and your minions,
Out of St. Iohnses ere a week be spent.
Sir we'll rouse ye, we—
Would never greater care came near my heart;
Could I have had my will in my Loves sight.
This evening had been Bewfords latest night.
But to the purpose, now Sir Walter Playnsey
Take no exceptions as you love our favour,
That Lady Ellenor's escaped away.
Is she escaped away my Lord?
She is, nay storm not,
For if you do your anger is in vain,
I'll answer any Duty for her wardship.
So rest your self content; if ye rest quiet
And will confirm your ward to be my wife,
I'll send ye within six days six thousand pound,
Being more than you can get by course of Law.
I but my Lord her sudden taking hence—
Nay, nay, stand not on terms, take this or choose▪
Send word ye love us, or our Loves refuse.
Come Captain Westford bring us to St. Iohnses.
Here's a good world when every Duke is King;
Thus I see power can master any thing.
I son, else durst not you and old Sir Robert
Being but new come from the dejected Father,
Offer such open wrong to Momfords Daughter.
Father I'll answer that upon the way
Please ye to walk but to Sir Robert Westfords.
Save ye Gentlemen, pray can ye tell me
Whether Sir Robert Westford lie in London.
Or at his Summer-house?
He lies at Stepny fellow.
Follow us we'll bring thee thither presently.
That's Playnsey and his son, I'll follow hem,
And try my Brother Westford ere I need,
Already have I took a little Cottage
On Bednall-Green, pretending my self blind,
Thither perhaps my gentle Child will come,
For she's full of charitable alms.
But howsoever now I shall surely see her
Bringing my own seal as a Messenger,
I'll follow after kind Sir Walter Playnsey,
And his Heroic son my Daughters Joy.
FAther you wrong me, and my Cousin Momford,
I marry Playnsey, troth plight unto her;
Oh it's an impious match! I'll rather have
Than such a mariage-bed, a dismal grave.
Use no more words, no title tattle talk,
The Priest is sent for, Playnsey is a coming,
He shall have you, and you shall have his Land.
But for my Cousin Bess—
Your Cosen-Beggar, Child unto a Traitor;
Go to no more, come hark a word with me.
Ha this is excellent, stripped of his clothes,
His shirt stolen from his back, why this exceeds,
This is a toy to mock an Ape withal.
Nay byr'lady Sir this toy has mocked as well-favour'd a Youth, as your own Son.
Hold ye, there's ten pound, go fetch him new clothes.
Nay Sir he wants no clothes, for he hath a Cloak laid on with gold lace, and an embroidered Jerkin, and thus he is marching hither like the fore-man of a Morris.
Not for 20 l. gold lace embroiderd,
I'll see how he is suited by and by.
I'll tell him so, but pray Mr. let me be at the wedding feast.
And there you'll be hoyting and kissing the Wen∣ches you.
Not I indeed Master, I never use to kiss any, not I.
You know what complaints was made of you the last wedding you were at.
I thank ye Master ye made me stand in a white sheet for ye-
How for me Knave? go to thou lie, thou shalt not be there for that lye.
Pray let me go, there will be all the Youth of our Parish there, good Master?
Well Sir, go your way, but let me hear no ill of ye you were best.
I warrant ye Master, thank ye Sir, hey for our Town.
Green now in faith!
Go, get you gone, I fear we shall fall out,
I wonder what Sir Robert does intend?
Look to it, pine, pull, weep, sob, it shall be so,
Thou shalt be Playnseys wife who ere says no.
Sir Robert since your Cousin is refused
By Mr. Gilbert Playnsey, if she please, and you agree
Your Cousin Elizabeth shall have Tom Strowd;
You know he is my Heir, no Clown, no Swad,
But held in Norfolk for a Lusty Lad.
Let her take whom she will, ell's one to me.
How say you Lady?
For Playnsey's sake
The name of marriage I have sworn to hate.
Good morrow good Sir Walter and Son Playnsey,
I trust Sir Walter gill hath let you know
My purpose, for this marriage with my Daughter?
He tells me he is so resolved Sir Robert,
And in his own power now consists his choice,
But be assured, the searching eye of Heaven
Sees every thought of man, take heed you two
Answer not for each ill deed, and wrong ye do.
Tut tut Sir Walter, God and we for that;
Speak Mr. Playnsey, let Bess Momford hear
How you resolve unto my Daughter Katherine.
I come to mary her.
Think upon your Vow,
See this sad Lady, when you went to France,
You swore at your return to mary her.
Fair be content, my mind therein is changed,
Her Father is disgraced and exiled
And therefore Playnseys Son doth scorn his Child,
Do scorn me, leave me, every way abuse me,
Death will receive me, though you all refuse me.
Nay good Sir Walter be not discontent,
Son Playnsey, Daughter Katherine, let's confer.
How say you Madam, will Sir Robert Westford
Defeat me of the Land I have at mortgage,
Take away all your Jewels, and your plate?
He says he will.
Well let him and he dare.
And if he wrong you Lady come to me.
Momf. Wondrous amazement! what doth Momford see?
Where he most trusted, most impiety.
The Chaplain stays in Heavens name let us in,
They shall be married in Bess Momfords sight.
Father your malice to my Cousin Momford,
This deed of Playnsey whom you call my Husband,
Whom I shall never love, never abide,
Makes me to Death and Shame become a Bride:
But Shame will quickly from my red cheeks fly,
And Death will paint them with his ashy dye.
Come, come, leave prattling, Playnsey comfort Kate.
Fair Love be frolic talk no more of death and care
We'll sport, for I am young, and thou artfair.
Farewell forsaken Turtle, take thy flight
To some more abject mate whilst Kate and I, joys adore.
High Heaven forgive me, Father have remorse,
Let me not thus be hauled to death perforce.
Sir Robert Westford I mislike this match.
It is more than Injury, but Lady grieve not you.
No Sir I am patient.
I pray you go in Sir Walter.
Yes I'll go in,
But Heaven can tell, I hate this forced sin.
What will you do Mr. Strowd?
I scarcely know
Your moods, and these affairs do ••ll out so.
Well at your pleasure, go Huswife get you in.
I will do what you will, yet ere I go
Somewhat on this old man I will bestow,
Thou seem a maimed Soldier, wo is me!
I have a little Gold, good Father take it,
And here's a Diamond do not forsake it;
My Father was a Soldier maimed like thee,
Thou in thy limbs, he by vil'd infamy.
Bith mass I like her, shoe's a Momford right
Of noble blood and the true Norfolk breed;
Hold the good fellow there's one 40 pence
From a poor Yeomans purse, old Strowd of Harling.
I thank you Sir, I have more than I deserve.
I Sir, and more than you shall bear from hence
Come Minx what Jewel did you give this Rogue.
I am a Soldier Sir, the name of Rogue
Ill fits a man of your respect to give
To a poor Gentleman, though in distress.
A Gentleman! and why a Gentleman
Because a Soldier? Come you desper-view.
Deliver me the Jewel or I'll hang thee,
To morrow is the Sessions, I'll make short,
And shave your Gentry shorter by the neck,
A Gentleman! come, come, give me the Jewel,
What makes your Gentry sneaking at my Gate?
I came from Momford banished in Brittany,
He prays ye by this token you would send
A thousand Marks to help him in his need.
Where do you lye Sir?
I lay last night with a Blind-Beggar
That hath a little House on Bednall-Green.
He came but yesterday, I heard of him
Beggars keep lodging, well I'll hamper him,
I know this token, and will keep the same:
But have no 1000 Marks to maintain Rebels.
Base upstart Knight deliver Momfords Seal,
Or by the honour of a Soldiers name
I'll slice thy heart out.
Help me Mr. Strowd.
What help ye to do wrong?
Nay by the rood, though Momford was exiled,
It was told me he should have his Lands and Goods.
There, take them, but do you hear me Sirrah
Take heed I catch you not at the Blind-Beggars.
If I should lye there, though you be a Justice,
I trust to find Friends in my just defence.
Hold thee good fellow, there's the t'other noble,
Bith mass I like thee, you are a tough old Lad
I thank you Sir, Lady I'll take my leave.
Commend me to my Father good old man.
I will, and tell him of Sir Roberts wrong.
Do fellow, say, I scorn his treachery,
And hope his end will be in misery.
I'll tell him what you say.
Father farewell.
Nay it were best ye packed,
Beggar with Beggar, for ye shall away:
Ha Huswife! are you giving Diamonds,
Do you forget your Jewels are all mine,
Did not old Westford pay for this attire?
But off with it, go in, or either drudge
Amongst my Servants to maintain your State,
Or pack, stay not an hour.
You shall not need
To bid me pack, for I'll begone indeed.
To steal and hang, or starve and beg, choose which
Sir Robert by the — you do her wrong.
What's that to you look to your own affairs,
Strowd, Strowd, you think to have the Land at Farnam,
I and shall, and shall—
And will, do you your worst.
You're too saucy Strowd.
Too saucy moody Knight,
Thou durst not thus in scorn to old Strowd prate,
But cock on thine own hill, thus near thy Gate.
I'll meet thee where thou dare, and when thou dare▪
I'll say you are a tall man and thou dost.
Appoint the place.
Thee is a new mown field
Lying by Eastward of a little shed
That stands on Bednall-Green.
I know it, that's the shed the Soldier lay in,
The Close is compased with a quick-set, is it not?
The same.
I like it, what's the hour?
Twixt one and two▪
Hold the Strowd, there's my hand
I'll meet thee, and I'll make thee know me too.
No more, I'll meet thee, else call me Jew.
London lick penny can ye it,—it is licked me with a
witness, I was set ore for a reckoning of 40 shillings, and as fair a Satin suite t'other night, as a man shall lightly see in a Summers day; but if ere it be my fortune to meet with that ill faced Gypsy that stole it, I'll teach him his teripoop for stealing, whilst he hath a day to live again, so woll I: Nay nothing grieved me Swash, but that the slave persuaded me to lye naked for fear of the Fleas; which when I had done he stole me away as fair a shirt of my Mothers own spinning, as a man shall need to pull o'er his ears: and Sirrah in the morning when mine Hostess came up to call me, I was as naked as your Norfolk-Dumplin, as I am a christen man I blushed out of all—
Nay Master I told you at first you should find a sower fellow of that Gypsy, I liked him not he had such a crabtree-fac'd countenance of his own: but come my old Master sent me for you, you must along to the wedding to—
Why so I say now,—it would make a Horse break his Bridle to see the humours of these fellows, I know no more how to please him than I know how to build up Pauls-steeple, so do not I, but come Swash follow me, I'll to him, the—
Tush man it is be, I know him as well as the Beggar knows his dish, it is he that I fetched over for the satin suite, and left him in pawn for the reckoning, he has a fair Cloak on's back, and we could get that we were made men.
Be ruled by me it is our own, do thou take the wall of him, if he take exceptions I'll draw; if he draws his Cloak falls down.
And all fallings are mine Sir, let me alone, I know my cue Strowd, thou had as good have met the Hangman; for thy upper Garment's mine.
—What is the matter with you? so feather-ey'd ye cannot let us pass in the Kings high way?
You must learn to know your Duty, and give your betters the wall.
My Betters the wall, on what acquaintance? ye shall be set up and ye say the word, I'll wash mine hands and wait on you.
What do you prate, nay then have at you Sir.
—And have at you too then e'faith.
Hold, as you are a Gentleman hold.
Hold me no holds, I'll have another bout with ye, or I'll make your sconce and the post ring noon together, and sirrah Gypsy you shall fare the worse for one of your Coats sake, that robed me of a satin suite tother night,—and well remembered whore's my Cloak Swash?
Your Cloaks a good Cloak, take the wall of my Master ye slave you.
I think the fellow be mad,—whore's my Cloak man.
Your Cloak's good Cloak and a fair Cloak, quarrel with my Mr. ye scabs you.
I think the fellow's frompall, I ask thee where my Cloak is.
Let not a man pass unsearched, the Gentleman shall not lose the worth of a mite in my company.
I hope Sir you will not suspect my Boy nor me?
Suspect me no suspects, I am sure my Cloak cannot go without hands, and I'll have it again, or I'll bang it out of the cox∣combs of some of them.
—Sir you mishap lies as near my heart as it had been mine own, and cause I see'you a resolute tall Gentleman, and in re∣spect that I was the occasion of this falling out, my Cloak (simple though it be) cost me 40 French Crowns, take it, it is at your ser∣vice.
Forty French Crowns, forty French Pins, what dost thou tell me of thy Cloak? I scorn to wear ere a mans Cloak under the Element but mine own: but I'll tell thee what, and it were not for thy sake, whom I think an honest kind fellow and so forth, I'd bang this Bacon fan'd slave orethwart his shaoks, he should remem∣ber stealing a Cloak to Dooms day, so should he.
Why Sir I hope you know no harm by me were it in place, where I'd say, he lied in his Throat that but touched the very hem of my reputation with reproach.
Wol't say I lye? thou had as good eat a load of logs were thou, I •ay no harm by thee, and yet I say I have seen an ho∣nectar face than thine hanged, what say thou to it now? and thou be aggrieved mend thy self how thou can, or how thou dare, dost't see now. Nay Swah yonders my father, say nothing of my Cloak Swash.
Well, if I live I'll meet Sir Robert Westford,
But first I'll see if I can find my Son,
And here he is, is it possible my Lands
Should maintain this Attire, you Podigal
Where have you got this trash, unto whose Books
Are you indebted for it, pardon me Gentlemen
For being so sawey in your company;
It is not for a poor Country Yeomans son
To flint it out thus.
Sir you may say your pleasure, is your Son, but thus much I'll assure you, though if he be your on the chiefest Gallants in the Land are enamoured with his good parts and valour.
Nay Gentlemen thus much I'll say for him,
Hoe's a right Norfolk-man mettle, all steel:
But I'll not have him use his bravery.
The time has been when as a Norfolk yeoman
That might despond 500 marks a year
Would▪ wear such cloth as this sheeps russets gray,
And for my Son shall be no President
To break those orders, come off with this trash
Your bought Gentility, that sits on thee
Like Peacock's feathers cocked upon a Raven.
Let true born Gentlemen were Gentries robes,
And Yeoman Country seeming Liveries.
—You'd have the Calf with the white face I think, I am sure yonders old Simsons son of Showdam Thorpe, that wears his great gall gaskins of the Swash-fashion, with 8 or 10 gold laces of a side, and yet, without boast be it spoken, you are more in the Kings Books than he. and pay more scot and lot a fair deal, so ye do.
He is a desperate Cast-away like thee,
And wrongs his fathers credit and his own;
The Sons discent's no better than her fathers.
Why should their clothes be richer? I am as proud,
And think my self as gallant in this gray,
Having my Table furnished with good Beef.
Norfolk temes-bread, and Country home-bred drink,
As he that goes in rattling Taffeta.
Let Gentlemen go gallant what care I,
I was a Yeoman born, and so I'll dye;
Then if thou be my Son be of my mind,
Wast less in rags and spend more in thine House,
Or if thou hast no House to spend it in
Go to a Bawdy-house Mr.
How Knave to a Bawdy-house, no sirrah no
give it maimed Soldiers, and poor helpless Widows.
Off with this trash, on with this seemly weed,
Be not Strowds shadow but be Strowd indeed.
Come hither Swash there is no remedy, I must give the old man good words and speak him fair, for and if he should die to morrow next (as God forbid but he should) he might defeat me of all his Land.
You say true Master, come on with this Jerkin, so now young Master you look like your self, and like my Masters son.
Son what are these that keep you company?
A couple of honest proper Gentlemen they seem to be, but alls one to you, I must keep company with none but a sort of Moms and Hoydons that know not chalk from cheese, and can talk of nothing but how they sell a score of Cow-hides at Lynmarte, and what price Peas and Barley bears at Thetford market.
Then still consort thee with these Gentlemen, I like the carriage of them passing well.
I a murren on em they they have carried away my Cloak amongst 'em.
But let that pass.
I Sir it is past and gon too.
And come along with me to Mile end to my Lod∣ging.
I must talk a couple of cold words with Sir Robert Westford.
Go Swash before, and saddle my bay Nag,
Perhaps I'll ride a mile or two to night:
Kind Gentlemen, I am somewhat troublesome
To press thus rudely into your company;
Come Gentlemen, I'll gratulate your Loves
And your kind favours used unto my Son.
And we live we'll make him spend your living, come Jack lets go, whore's Snip.
Oh Sir at my sweet Boss the Brokers, near fear it there's a sure Dandeno, she cuts it out in Hose and Jerkins, she is an honest dealer, your privy taker, and your sure concealer.
Let's to it and turn again to meet this Gull,
We'll fleece him and his Bags wee they ne'er so full.
Oh hapless, hapless, miserable wretch!
To loose my wealth and all my fathers Lands
Did never move me; but to see my Uncle
Cheat me of all my Jewels, and in spite
Even to my face mary my troth-plight Husband
To his own Daughter, and to see young Playnsey
Embrace another in my promised bed,
And I thrust out upon the wedding day;
Oh this is it that drives me full of woe
Into this sad and solitary Green!
Here to do violence unto my self.
My Daughter in despair, then play thy part,
Prevent her ills that did procure her smart,
Alas where am I? how shall I return
Unto my homely Cabin? whore's my boy?
I prithee do not leave me gentle wag,
Take pity of my miserable state.
Who talks of pity? now alas good man,
What are you blind?
Yes blind, and like to die,
Not for my own, but for thy misery.
Father be comforted, I am but poor,
Yet time has been—
Oh do not sigh Girl,
Grief hath so tyrannised upon my heart
That if you mourn my tears will bear a part.
You are the man I look for.
I am indeed,
And yet thou know me not, alas the while
That blind deceit, should clear eyed love beguile,
Whence spring thy sorrows from some private wrong.
Am I asleep, or do I know his tongue,
Art thou blind say thou, let me see thy face,
Oh let me kiss it too, and with my tears
Wash off these blemishes which cruel time
Have surrow'd in thy cheeks! Oh could thou see,
I'd show thine eyes whom thou dost represent.
I called thee father, I thou shalt be my father,
Nor scorn my proffer, were my father here,
He would tell thee that his Daughter held him dear:
But in his absence Father, thou art he,
Shed but one tear for him, and I for thee
will weep, till from the moister of mine eyes
A little font of crystal tears, shall rise
To bath thine eye lids in, yet do not weep;
Lay all thy griefs on me, for I am young,
And I have tears enough to weep much wrong.
Wilt thou remain with me; I dare not speak
For fear my tongue should my heart's counsel break.
I'll dwell, I'll tend thee, I'll do any thing
To do thee good, because within thy looks
I see the presence of my reverend Father.
Hast'• lost thy Father then?
Father! I have,
List to my words and I will tell thee how.
First lead me to my Cottage, there relate
From the beginning all thy down-cast state.
I tell thee Captain Westford I have done
No more than I can answer, I and will.
Nay Cousin Westford mis-conceit me not,
Or if thou do ell's one, I say again,
You showed a cruel part, and wot the Maid
Be rus'd by me your Betters should decide it.
Decide a pins end, do you take her part,
Each one you saw did seek to get their own,
Why should not I then? shall I undergo
Public displeasure for a pawltry Girl;
She comes not in mine ears.
The more unkind
And cruel you, but wherefore should you mary
Young Playnsey to your Child, considering
He was the troth-plight Husband to your Kins-woman,
The much wronged Daughter of the down-trod Momford.
Alas for her, does she complain to you,
Why and she want a Husband you are a Bachelor,
You may do well to take her.
You had done better,
Had not your avarice broke the contract,
Twixt her and Playnsey.
Well Sir, I will answer what I have done,
Not one word more Sir.
I marry Sir, why this is somewhat like,
Now art thou like thy self, but stand aside,
Whose that, Sir Robert? hoe's as good's his word,
The Captain with him, ah he promised me
To meet me single
Pacify your self,
What I have done I'll stand to, pray forbear,
I'll talk a word or two with Master Strowd,
What's here his son, how and his man too? ha
That's more than promise.
Now Sir Robert Westford you are an early riser,
My last nights promise wakened me before my hour,
Send hence your Son.
It is good, I like you well, send hence your Kinsman,
Yet it is no matter, I have a devise
Shall rid them all, God save you Captain Westford,
Thanks for your friendly company last night.
I take your greetings kindly Mr. Strowd,
And with the tongue of love return it back
With double interest, pray is not this your Son.
I cannot tell, his Mother tells me so.
I shall desire your more acquaintance Sir.
I thank you Sir, I am easier to be acquainted with all, than to borrow money on, I thank my father, but and it please you to drink a Cup of beer or ale, and you'll but walk 'ore the Green to the red lattice yonder, I'll bestow it on you.
Thanks Mr. Strowd, pray walk to my Chamber,
I am desirons to impart my love
Unto your kind acceptance.
Sir I thank you for him.
Please you to walk to Mile end with my Son
And this good fellow, I'll but talk a word
In secret here with Sir Robert Westford,
About Lord Momfords Lands, and follow ye.
At your good pleasure wilt please you walk Mr. Strowd?
Pray lead the way, I'll follow you come hither Swash▪ and it had pleased my Father, I might a had as gallant apparel as he, or another man, but ell's one, a dog has his day, and I shall have mine too, one day when the old man's dead;—I'll make all fly then e'faith.
So they are gone, and now Sir Robert Westford.
Think of your last nights quarrel.
Tut, tut, nee'r prate,
Thus I revenge my wrong, Thus I defend
The truth, and reputation of my cause.
O I am slain.
Then Heaven receive thy Soul,
And pardon me, thy Conscience can tell
I never wished unto thy Soul but well.
What piteous groan calls Momford from his Cell,
Whose this my Brother Westford? what and slain!
Heaven thou art just; he that last day for Gold
Did sell my Daughter, is himself now sold
Into the hands of death. Momford dissemble,
Daughter come forth, and look about this Close,
I heard one groan.
And here's a bloody Coarse.
Look if thou know it.
Oh it is my Uncle Westford,
He that last day with his commanding breath
Chid me out of his doors, now breathless lies
Entreating me, to give his mingled body
A homely entertainment in our Cell.
Heaven thou art just, and dreadful is thy judgement.
Glory not in his Fall, but rather grieve
That in his end thou can him not relieve:
Let's bear him in, and if we can by Art
Upon thy Foe, we'll work a friendly part:
For have he but the smallest sign of breath,
We'll recall life, and rescue him from Death.
But howsoe're the Body stays with me,
Till Justice points him out that murdered thee.
Saddle my horse, there Swash run
Whore's my Son?
At hand quoth Pick-purse,—what's the matter with you trow?
Good Son leave prating, Swash whore's my horse?
I am undone, go post to Chenford, run to Mr. Glasscock,
Give him my Seal-ring, desire him send me.
Whore's my horse I say, the 100 pound he owes me, whore's Cap∣tain Westford, take heed he hear me not, Lord how my heart pants in my bosom, I have slain a man.
Slain a man! oh oh oh oh.
Peace Swash do not cry so.
No, I do not cry, I do but roar.
I had not the power to keep it longer,
Nor to take my horse till I confessed it.
Lay hold on him, and Mr. Strowd once more,
Confess thy guilt.
Why Sir? I not deny
Sir Robert Westford doing me much wrong,
Is by me slain.
And you for this offence,
Shall be conducted safely unto Prison,
Till matters may be better thought upon,
Mean time your own confession is my warrant.
My Father kill a man,—here's a jest to mock an Ape withal, what shall become of me now: Swash hie thee to Chenford for the 100 pound, and soon towards Evening Il'e meet thee at Il∣ford for fear of base Knaves;—I know not whom a man may trust when ones own Father does deceive 'em thus.
Well Gentlemen I do obey the Law,
And yield my body Prisoner to the King,
Soon work what means ye can for my repreeve
Till we may sue for pardon. So adieu my Son,
Heaven give thee grace such desperate bralls to shun.
Get a reprieval call you it,—I know no more how to go about it, than I know how to build Pauls-steeple so I do not: but I'll go seek out a Gentleman, one Frank Canby that served the Car∣dinall, and try what he can do in it; it's an old saying in our Coun∣try, it's better to have a friend at Court than a penny in the purse, it shall go hard but I'll save my father from hanging thats cer∣tain.
GOod Father! gentle Maiden set me down,
My wound I fear will freshly bleed again,
I prithee let thy Daughter make a bed,
I fear my Death-bed, good now send her in.
Daughter I pray go in and make the bed,
If we need help I'll call you, pray you begone.
It doth torment him to behold my sight,
Well Heaven forgive him and restore his health,
He did me more than wrong, and if I see
He be at point of death, I'll let him know,
That I am Momford's Child he wronged so.
Father lend me thy hand now in Heaven's eye
Swear to be secret till thou see me dead,
Or of this wound by the recovered;
Know first I am a Knight, my Name is Westford,
My Wife was Sister to the Baron Momford,
That Momford left his Daughter to my trust,
Which Daughter I have this day turned forth
To seek her living, and from her have kept
Above ten thousand Marks, besides the Lands
Mortgaged unto one Strowd a Norfolk Yeoman,
That Strowd on my abuse done to the Lady
Challenged the field, we fought, and here I fell,
He escaped I hope, Heaven grant he may do well.
It is well Sir that you are so penitent.
Oh Father I had need to rend my heart
In sunder, with true sorrows hourly sighs,
For I have done a deed more impious
Than ever entered in the heart of man,
If ever thou did hear of Momfords name,
His honour, bounty, and magnificence,
If ever thou did hear his late defame,
His accusation, exile, indigence,
Then know that I am he, Momford loved well,
Yet I am he by whom old Momford fell.
Alas Sir! how?
I coveted his Land,
And practised with Sir Walter Playnsey's Son,
An irreligious careless Gentleman;
Yet one that will make show, swear and protest,
His course of life is equal with the best.
O there are many such old man there be,
Too many in this Land like him and me;
We laid this plot, he should go into France,
He did, and served on horse at Amiens,
Where he was wilfully taken Prisoner,
And by his Keepers Daughter understood,
The French should by a treacherous plot win Guineas,
Wherein Lord Momford held a Garrison.
Who were consenting with the French in this?
A Wallown-Captain called Haute Bewmart.
Did Momford know of it?
No (old man) never
But Playnsey counterfeited certain Letters.
Subscribing them with Lord Villiers his name,
In gratulation for betraying Guineas,
These Letters were delivered to a Post,
The Post surprised, examined where he had them,
He answered from Villiers his Secretary:
For in his habit Playnsey was disguised▪
Oh Heaven!
Good father wherefore dost thou sigh?
For grief men's hearts should harbour such deceits.
I faint good father, if thou can relieve me,
Call for thy Daughter, stretch me on a bed:
Bear witness I repent now, help and ease me,
And till I dye conceal my treachery.
Be sure I will, and yet I hope you'll live,
And reconcile the banished Lord your self,
For it was an unjust fact, indeed it was.
Come Daughter help to lead in this Gentleman,
We'll show him all the favour that we can.
Father he fownes.
Come quickly help him in,
I hope he will recover, but if not,
Heaven grant his sins may wholly be forgot.
This dimbed perpetual Rogue Swash, has kept me here in little ease of the bare ground, hungry, cold, and comfortless, ever since two hours before day. I am hungry for the hundred pound he brings, cold at my heart for fear he come without it, and com∣fortless least if he have it, he comes with company, but lupus in fa∣bula here he comes, what and alone! excellent the 100 l. mine own then.
I discover none, the danger is past, I think I may with safety put up an honest weapon, thou terror to all Thieves, sleep there; my young Master promised to meet me, he stays somewhat long, but he knows Swash is able to stand under the strokes of a dozen false slaves, oh that I could meet with a Thief now to try my valour.
Stand sirrah and deliver.
Oh Lord, Thieves, thieves, oh, oh.
Peace Villain, or I'll cut out thy Tongue, and make a ra∣sher of the coals on it, deliver the money.
Yes good Mr. Thief with all my heart, there it is I am glad I had it for you.
So am I too Sir, come hold up I must now bind you hand and foot for running after me.
I pray you do bind me hard, do good Mr. Thief, harder yet Sir.
So now farewell, your money goes with me Sir.
Farewell kind Mr. Thief. O pox choke him for a slave, Thieves, thieves, thieves, help, help, help.
Sirrah Snip be sure you run away with Strowd's sword
I warrant you Sir let me alone for running.
Thieves, thieves, help, help.
How thieves, I'll go, and raise the town Sir, thieves, thieves.
How Thieves,—whore's Snip run with my sword? who's that cries Thieves Swash, how now man come stand to it.
Yes Sir, I am bound to it.
Why what's the matter Swash, how came thou thus, ha.
I am robed Master.
How robed, I hope not so man!
Yes faith there was six Thieves set upon me, I very man∣fully killed seven of the six, and the rest carried away the money, but I shall have it again that's the best on it.
How dost thou know thou shalt have it again Swash?
Why he has left me his bond here to bring it again.
There's a bond with a Halters name,—Swash is all the money gone?
Every penny Master.
What ill fortune is that Swash, what shall we do now trow.
Thieves, thieves, come good Mr. Canby make hast, this way, this way.
Thieves, where Boy? I am almost out of breath with run∣ring, what Mr. Strowd and Swash how comes this.
Why Swash is robed man!
How robed?
Yes faith, but I may thank Snip there that run away with my sword.
Alas Sir I was so amazed I knew not what I did,
Nor whither I ran, till I met Mr. Canbee here!
Robed, I wot I had been with thee Swash.
I honest Mr. Canbee, and you had been with me I had scoped well enough then.
Well Mr. Strowd, as I was passing through Allgate this morning I saw the Shreeves and Constables set towards to New∣gate to fetch your father, the Carpenter in a Cart carried the Jeb∣bet to Bednall-Green, only love to meet you made me neglect the principal business, here's the Protectors Reprieve, I have done the part of a Gentleman, here's Humphrey Gloster good Noble man, he loved your Father well, let not your delay dash all, I was two hours by the clock of my bare Knees to the Protector, prayed the equity of the quarrel, and could Westfords body a been found, the Pardon had been sealed: but haste away with the Repreeve, take horse at Langton, and make speed, or your father will be hang∣ed.
How take horse quoth ye, yes, the Cat would lick her ears and she had 'em, why, I was robed too last night my self at Lang∣ton.
Were you robed Mr. Strowd?
Yes faith, they make a matter of nothing to rob Swash and I now adays, I have not a horse to cast at a dog man not I.
Apox of all ill fortunes, hold Sir, there's five shillings left take it, and go take my horse at the Bell at Stratford, and make hast for fear you come too late.
Troth Mr. Canbee, and ye gave me all that ere ye had, I can but thank you, and your horse were a horse of gold, he shall be forth-comming again. Come Swash let us go.
Mr. Canbee no more but so for this kindness, farewell Mr. Hadland, farewell Snip, pray let's see ye all at the Gallows, till when I bequeath this halter amongst ye, in token of my love, and so adieu.
Farewell Swash and be hanged.
—Canbee, art thou mad to give him thy horse, and five shillings to save his father from hanging.
No you Friday-fac't-frying pan it was to save us all from whipping, or a worse shame; for let your Rogueship understand, that this reprieve is counterfeit and made by me, your ordinary passport maker, that should have lost an ear at Salisbury, and ano∣there at Northampton; the truth is we must leave London, for if the Protector get us under his protection, we shall all go Westward for this warrant.
—Let's turn Gypsies again then, and go about a fortune-telling, it is in good request again now.
That's the smooth foot path up Holborn, no lack there's an odd fellow snuffels in the nose, that shows a motion about Bishops∣gate, we will wheel about by Ratliff and get to his lodging, see shows for a fortnight, till Strowd's nine days wonder of hanging be past, to let us use his motion, which done the boy shall turn girl, thou as I have done already, wash off that Gypsie-colour, and be door∣keeper with the boy, my self with a half vizard will describe, and thus we will live like young Emperors.
•anbee I'll chronicle thee for this conceit. Snip thou shalt have good purchase of the Wenches in the throng.
And if I snip not off their Purses then call me crack.
Strowd I am sorry for this heavy sight.
And by the dread command of my liege Lord,
I come to witness twixt the world and you
What state you dye in, how you will dispose
Your lands, your goods and debts now forfeited,
These he restores thee, yet whilst thou has life
To give unto your son, your friends, or wife.
I humbly thank his royal Majesty,
Wishing long happiness to him and you:
But with your favour my good Lord Protector
I still deny I am a Murderer,
I killed Sir Robert Westford in fair fight;
Our quarrel rising from open wrong,
He offered to his niece the Lady Momford.
All that was certified his Majesty,
But prithee hear me Strowd, Death's fleshless hand
Clapsing the wretched palms of endless woe,
Hath made a circle, and thy soul's the Center,
From which by neither power, prayers, or tears,
If thou dye desperate she can be freed.
My Lord I do beseech ye pardon me,
The worl'd believes that I have murdered Westford,
Or since abused his body being dead,
And shaming at my savage guiltiness,
Have hurled it in some well not to be found;
Is this the matter that I should confess?
It is good Strowd in that make clear thy Soul.
He whose pure blood turns scarlet sins to snow.
Forgive me all my faults and Westford's death:
But if I ever wronged him being dead,
Or moved him from the place whereon he fell,
Not far off from this place where I must fall.
I ask Heavens anger on me, for his grace,
And I can say no more concerning that.
Enough what says thou about Momford's lands.
I say, seeing the King of his good grace
Hath given me all my lands, my debts, and goods,
I give too marks, and all the deeds,
Unto the Lady Elizabeth his Daughter,
And Captain Westford, in whom I put all trust,
Be careful that the Lady be not wronged.
I warrant you Mr. Strowd.
How mean thou to di•pose of all thine own?
I have a will drawn at my house in Harling,
And I confirm that for my Testament.
Are you pleased that will shall be performed,
Heaven's will be done.
But I would fain have seen mine unkind Son.
Tarry a little Executioner.
Hold, hold, hold, let him alone you cross legg'd-harti∣choke, touch him and thou dare.
Hold Hangman and thou be a man, hold for the Kings advantage.
What are these trow?
Two sir that come not without their cards I hope, Fa∣there you have a simple fellow to your Son you see, come who's the shrive here haw.
I do supply his place.
Do ye so, then here's a Mittimus to repreeve my father back again to the Gaol, or a repreeval what do you call it, it's my Lord Cardinal's, and my Lord Protectors own hands, and seals; I as∣sure you Sir.
Proud Winchesters and mine, that's strange, let's see it.
It is not so strange as true Sir, there it is.
Is this your Son Strowd?
I my gracious Lord.
It is the more shame for my Mother else.
Where had you this repreeve?
Of an honest Gentleman Sir, one that can do any rea∣sonable matter with my Lord Protector.
I truly Sir he is one, as honest a Gentleman as Can∣bee.
It may be so, for I know one Frank Canbee,
He served sometimes Bewford the Cardinal,
The commonst cozening Knave in all this Land.
I, I that's he Sir, that's he.
As God mend me it is the very same man, but ell's one for that, he has plaid the kind Gentleman with me, and as God save me, and Swash had not been robed this morning of 100 pound, I had paid him well for his pains too Sir.
Strowd turn your self to Heaven these hopes are vain,
And young Strowd as you hope to have our favour
After your Father's death, I charge you seek
That Canbee forth that forged you this repreeve.
How after my father's death,—I hope it is not come to that now? after all this charge.
Sirrah you, ever choose you such sure Mates,
My Lord Protector pray be good to him.
Nay pray you my Lord be good to my father, and turn him 'ore the Ladder.
—is this my Lord Erector?
How's that my Lord Protector, and you be my Lord Protector, I pray do but set your hand to this Bill, and as God save me, and ere ye come into Norfolk, I'll do you twenty times as good a turn as the hanging of my father comes to, pray you my Lord.
Do my good Lord Erector, and Swash and his Buckler shall be at your service.
Peace, peace, your idle prate, Heaven's peace
Must be my comfort in adversity.
Swash what shall become of me now, I ne'er dare go down into Norfolk again, every clown will brave me, and bid me go to London, and be hanged as my father was.
I, and they'll bid Swash swing in an Halter as his old Master did.
Some good man bring me to an Officer.
It may be a blind wretch may save a subject.
Master, here's a blind man come to see your father hanged.
How a blind man see him hanged? that were strange in∣deed Swash.
What would that aged man, and that fair Maid?
I hope she comes to beg my old Master from the Gal∣lows.
No Swash She should have come in her Smock▪ and then
It may be it is not clean Master.
I heard the people murmur near my house,
A little Cottage yonder on the Green,
That there was come an ancient man to die,
For killing of a Knight last afternoon,
If it be so, the Knight lives, and no doubt
Will be recovered of his dangerous wounds.
Where is he father?
Yonder in my Cottage.
O brave, Master he says the Knight's in his God-piece.
No in his Cottage man, thou mistake.
He named himself but now, and sent us forth,
To know the truth, and he comes after us,
As well as his green wounds will give him leave.
I marry Swash, here's a good old man, and a goodly Mother, brings news for the nonce,—I wo'd not for all the Bull∣locks in Norfolk, th'ad fallen out, that my father had fallen off.
Let Strowd come down, I hope Sir Robert lives,
And if he do, believe me I'll reprove
This over rash proceedings for Strowd's death.
May it please your grace, it was Sessions the last day,
Strowd granted he had killed him, Judgement past,
And my Sons wife the Daughter to Sir Robert,
Hastened (with tears) the execution.
Yonder he comes Master, come you had like to made a fine piece of work here, are you a Knight and can fight no bet∣la.
Health to my gracious Lord the Duke of Gloster.
I am glad Sir Robert Westford of your health,
How do you feel your wounds?
May it please your grace, I hope they will do well,
This good old man, and this fair-comming Maid,
Next under Heaven preserved me from death.
Be thankful to them then, and hear ye young Strowd,
Consider this poor man, and that fair Maid.
Consider her,—I consider well enough, sirrah Swash methinks it is the prettiest Mother that ere man's eyes looked on.
Sir Walter Playnsey take Strowd to your house,
His pardon shall be sent you ere you dine,
So upon Sureties let him be discharged,
But hear you young Strowd, see you find out Canbee,
Or at my hands never expect a favour.
Yes my Lord I'll find him or it shall go hard, vesdiness Swash I am mightily smitten in love with yonder Mother, and I ha not a swelling burning fever, in every member wo'd I might ne'er stir, —yonders Mr. Playnsey has all the talk with her, and yet hoe's no Bachelor.
Cannot you go and take her away from him, I coed do it my self Master.
Isle go to 'em, I'll try,
Goddeen to your Sir.
Pish you are no body Master, let me alone I have a device to get him away, and then do you seas upon the Wench: follow me Master.
Oh brave Swash e'faith.
Now Sir your news?
The haughty Cardinal
Taking advantage of your being from home,
Hath with a crew of his Confederates,
Beset St. Iohnses, and with all his force
Assails to wrong the Lady Eleanor,
And steal her forth the Castle.
Is it possible, that this proud Priest dares offer violence
Unto my Troth-plight Eleanor?
It is too true my Lord.
Where is he now?
Rid to the Court my Lord.
And thither Gloster doth intend to fly,
As swift as quickest speed will give him leave.
Come Sir you'll seek those Cozeners▪
No doubt those copes-mates had my 100 pound,
And do you hear, take your companion with you,
Go and seek them, or for your own part never see my face:
But as for you that trust to every slave,
Wasting my goods, nay jesting out my life.
By false reprieves, and such base practises,
Walk, pack, sink, swim, pine, perish, look not on me,
Till you have found those that have Cony-catch't you.
Hark hither Swash, and it had not been for a blemish to the name of the Strowds, wo'd we had made an end of this braw∣ling at the Gallows, and then thou should a seen whether I wo'd a kept such a coil for a little pawltry loss or no, I warrant thee he ha not the honesty, to cast thee a Noble towards the healing of thy cracked Crown, yet every one says he gave that ill-fac't knave the Hangman five, or six pound.
I that was to buy him a better face Mr. But give him good words, you know the old man is kind enough.
I as any Corssen creature, hoe's won with a Apple, and lost again with a nut, but come Swash we'll go seek out those Co∣ny-catchers, and ere I catch them,—I'll make them pay soundly all for their roguery.
Sir Robert will you shake hands with Mr. Strowd.
Well he may have my hand but not my heart,
Srowd thou did wound me, yet thou did it well,
No more, I'll think on it till my dying day,
I'll sit upon your skirts before, I will.
Oh Uncle have patience.
You are an Agent for the Child of Momford,
I pray you Sir Walter Playnsey make good Bonds,
That Strowd abuse me not, look to it I pray.
I warrant you Sir Robert I'll be sure
Of such security as you shall like.
Come Captain Westford, you shall have the Deeds
Concerning Momford's lands past unto you.
I had rather Sir you kept them in your hand.
Well as you please, yet walk with us I pray,
You brought me to the Gallows, bring me back:
Father farewell, farewell good gentle maid,
I'll rest your Debtor till some other time;
But it was Sir Robert's kindness to reveal his name,
Else Hangman you had had this home-spun suit,
But Heaven be thanked I keep it for my Son,
I hope to drive him from his silken humour.
Come good Mr. Strowd will you go?
Gallows farewell, Strowd's heart is blithe and bold,
Having escaped thy danger being thus old.
A plague of this blind slave, and that base drab,
Else had thou hanged ere I had been discovered,
And on my tongue a mischief, that revealed
Our purpose in the plot of Momfords fall,
But I have it now, I am resolved, hear you Son Playnsey,
I pray you give that Maid a mark in gold,
And Father I must crave a word with thee.
Fair Maid besides his offer take this Gold,
I pray you pardon me, for all the world
I would not do my soul that injury.
Divine immortal, all my Souls delight.
Salute me not with such vain Epithet.
I am wretched, mortal, miserable, poor,
But howsoever base, I'll be no whore.
Wilt thou be then my wife, for she is dead.
It's much unlike,
A Gentleman of your worth will vouchsafe,
A B•ggars Daughter to your Bridal bed.
By Heaven I will if thou w•lt grant me love.
I'll answer you another time kind Sir.
My father hath no Nurse, no Wife, no child,
No servant but my self, and he is blind.
Hark in thine ear one word.
I, I, I, I do remember such a tale I told thee,
Come hither good son Playnsey thou shalt hear it.
Last night at my first dressing I was Lunatic,
Mad that I was hurt, more than of the hurt,
And in my ravening fit told this old fool,
That thou and I did practise Momford's fall,
Now this old Asse-believing I said true,
Comes with my Conscience, bids me advise,
And goes about to make a matter on it,
Ha, ha, old fool go, go, go to thy prayers,
Thou had need of eyes to keep thy Daughter honest.
I guess thy cottage be a brothel house,
Talk thou of Momfords fall and of my madness
I do beseech ye hear me for Heaven's sake.
Tu•, tut, do not tell me of Heaven, or Hell,
Prate not, I'll send the now and then a penny,
But if thou tittle tattle tales of me,
I'll clap thee by the heels, and whip thy Daughter,
Turn thee to the wide world, and let thee starve.
Come come son Plainsey let the Knave alone,
Keep's tongue, and keep his friend, else he gets none.
My Father Sir had pity of your wounds.
Peace Huswife. I have paid him for his pains.
Come son away, and old man hold your tongue,
Remember this old saw, As men are friended,
So either right or wrong their suits are ended.
Oh miserable age!
Oh wretched youth!
Oh times corrupt by men for want of truth!
What ails my father?
Why exclaims my Daughter?
Playnsey the perjured, he that did deride me,
He that did marry Westford's only Daughter,
Courts me again to be his Concubine.
Does he then know thee?
He makes show he doth not.
Oh do not trust him Girl, Westford and he
Are all composed of guile and subtlety.
Alas that this fair world, by sin deformed,
Should bear upon her bosom such a shape
As Westford is; last night expecting death,
Terror dwelt on his heart, which forced him tell
With tears and lamentations his foul facts,
No sooner had he any hope of health,
But he conspired the faultless death of Strowd,
And would not have come forth, had not we been,
But till the man had died kept close within.
Now he denies a deed as clear as day,
Threatens poor want, and low-trod poverty
Must not resist men in authority;
Come lead me in, I would my days were done,
Since vice lays baits which virtue cannot shun.
HOw's this, shall I see all Norwitch in the corner of a little Chamber? I had as lieve thou had told me Charing cross stood in Cheapside, and all one.
And you will not believe me you shall see it your self, it is in this house, it is called a motion: there's first the Master of the mo∣tion, then the Master's Mate, the Mate's Consort, the Consort's Cabin-fellow, the Cabin-fellows Hangby, the Hangby's Man, the Man's Boy, the Boy's Page, the Page's Wench, and all these live upon the motion.
This is old excellent y'faith; come, and I had but one cross in the world to bless me with I'd see it; go you before Swash and show me thither.
Do you see you Wench Master? she is Door-keeper, I have given her earnest to enter her soberly, and pass through her quarters at my pleasure.
Is this she? how now pretty Mother? what Gambols hast ta? can thou describe them? sen ye?
Not I Sir, the Master of the Motion can Sir.
Go call him out then,—What's he? is he ashamed to show his face trow? or is it the fashion trow ye? what Gambols have ye here now? ha?
Why This is Strowd that I fetc'd over with the counterfeit Repreeve, but it is no matter, we'll out-face him. Gentlemen the first conceit you are to see is Tumbling.
Stumbling, What stumbling? I think the fellow be straught.
Sir he means Tumbling, and feats of Activity.
Why man that's as stale as Banks curtal, there were a sort of Tumblers at Windham fair last week, and they have made that so stale in Norfolk and Suffolk, that every wench is turned Tumbler, and ye
ha no better matters ye lose my custom I can tell ye Sirs.
You shall likewise see the famous City of Norwitch, and the stabbing of Iulius Caesar in the French Capitol by a sort of Dutch Mesapotamians.
How the French Capitol! nay I remember Tully's Off∣ces says the Capitol that Caesar was stabbed in was at Rome.
Impute the gross mistake to the fault of the Author; you shall likewise see the amorous conceits and Love songs betwixt Cap∣tain Pod of Pie-corner, and Mrs. Rump of Ram-alley, never descry∣bed before.
Good Master let's see Mrs. Rump of Ram-alley.
How? Captain Pod and Mrs. Rump?—I think this snuf∣ling slave flouts us; then y'faith let's see the sawing of the Devil with a wooden saw.
Or if it please you shall see a stately combat betwixt Tam∣berlayn the Great, and the Duke of Guyso the less, performed on the Olympic Hills in France.
France?—Thou speak all French to me; but off with this snuffling French Mask, and speak in your English voice, or as God sa me I'll beat thy nostrils as flat as a pancake, or a barley froyes.
Alas Sir, the Gentleman has got a mischance lately, and broke his Brow, that makes him wear a Vizard.
Dost tell me on his Brow? what cared I and he had broke his Neck, I'll have it off; what are you the Master of the Motion?—I am glad I know it; Swash look thee here's Canby that cozened me with the false Repreeve.
And here's the slave Snip that ran away with your Sword in a Wenches Petticoat; we'll spoil your motion now we have ye.
I beseech you good Master Swash.
What Gypsy? are you turned Juggler? I'll tickle you.
Hark ye Mr. Strowd.
Mr. Swash as you ever came of a woman—
Let me never come off a woman while I live again if I do not terrify you, I'll motion you, I'll murder your Tamberlayn and his Coatch-horses, I'll stab your Caesar, I'll ravish your Rump, I'll pepper your Pod, I'll powder your Motion, your Norwitch shall down, I am fire, and I'll consume your Motion in a twink∣ling.
Do Swash, and let me alone with these till thou come a∣gain.
Mr. Stro. For mine own part I protest unto you I love you as dear as the heart in my bosom, and protest unto you it went to the very soul of me to hear how that slave Canbee, like a Gypsy, cozened you of a satin suit.
How? how's this, was he the Gypsy that cozened me of my suit?
Jack you're a Gypsy; believe him not Mr. Strowd he has been proved perjured, the slave will fight with his own Father for a Jack of Beer, and kill a sucking Infant for a pint of Wine, and where he says I cozened you of your suit, it was his damned counsel that Swash was robed yesterday of the 100 l.
Mr. Strowd, by this hollow tooth that shall tear that slaves Nose like a piece of Swines flesh, it was he that robed him, and coun∣terfeited the Repreeve; indeed I must confess I had my share; some I have spent, the rest is here, take it Mr. Strowd, and think of honest Jack Hadland as he deserves.
I must give him some to; Mr. Strowd there's 20 l. towards your losses, because I would not have my reputation come in quest∣on before the Protector, nor seem to stain my Lord Cardinal's cloth; there should be an old Harry Angel amongst it, lend it me to swear by a little.
Not one of them and there were a hundred of 'em.
Let me be torn into mammocks with wilde Bears if I make not a gallemaufry of thy heart, and keep thy Skull for my quaffing bowl you base cheating Slave.
—Here's the old Proverb right, When false Thieves fall out, true men come to their own; but say I should take this 40 l. in part of payment, what security shall I have to get the rest? for my Father has vowed ne'er to take me for his Son, till I get his money again, or see you at the Gallows.
Are you fallen out with your father? fall in with us halter shelter, you shall fare no worse than we do.
—Man, what would thou have me to turn Cony∣catcher?
Oh Sir, your only bravest life that can be.
—I think it were not amiss, for I ha seen Wheat and Barley grow amongst cockell and darnel, and many an honest man keep Knaves company; How now Swash, what hast thou done?
I have confounded their Motion, beleaguered their
Castle, battered down the Walls, and taken Tamberlayn the blood▪ Prisoner in a pursuit, to the utter undoing of all Motion-Monger and Puppit-players.
It is well done Swash, but wotts thou what man? I am turned Cony-catcher since thou went.
Cony-catcher? the Devil you are?
Yes y'faith Swash, and if thou wou't do one thing for me now, I'll teach thee to conycatch too when I come into Nor∣folk.
On that condition Master I'll do it what ere it be.
Do but go thy ways to Mile-end-Green to my fathers lodging at the 3 Colts, &amp; do but tell him I cannot find these fellows yet, but as soon as I do meet with them, tell him he shall hear from me.
Yes Sir, I'll go tell him you are with 'em, but you bid me say you could not find 'em.
—By no means Swash, then thou marr'st all, tell him I cannot find 'em, make a lye for me now, I'll make two for thee ano∣there time.
Well on this condition you'll teach me to cony, I am content to lye for you.
Do so; Now Sirs, what course will you take, that I may come by the rest of my money?
Tush we have 100 l. tricks when we want cash one a∣amongst us undertakes the name and habit of some swashing Italian or French Noble-man at least, the rest in Liveries attending, then we come and sojourn at some honest Gentleman's house, till we have eat him out of house and home in diet, and wore his credit out at elbows with taking up commodities at his Merchants, in hope to have all his money at a day, before which day we give him the slip, and to escape pursuit attire our selves like Gypsies, Peddlers, Tin∣cares, or such like disguise; how like you this?
This is old excellent y'faith; well I see I might a kept company with honest men all the days a my life ere I should a learned half this Knavery: but hark my Masters, yonder's the Blind-Beggar of Bednall-Green has the prettiest Mother to his Daughter as a man need to lay his leg over, now if all the wit in your heads can but get her to be my wife, I sho'd think my money every penny better bestowed than other.
You shall have Sir her.
Shall, why well said; come then my mad Viragoes I
have spent many a gray great of honest swaggerers, and tear-Plackets in my days that I never drunk for, and now I'll turn swag∣gerer my self, I'll keep you company and't be but to keep you ho∣nest, true men I cannot, for there's ne'er a finger on your hands but is as bad as a lime twig, I'll do my good will, and I can bring ye to any goodness, then say God a mercy honest Tom Strowd of Har∣ling.
Thou shalt be our chief Captain amongst us.
How your Captain?—I'll make all split then, come my hearts.
Father, dear father succour me from shame,
Young Mr. Playnsey is entered our house,
Hath shut the fore-door up, detains the keys,
And swears to kill me, if I do not yield
To his abhorrid and intemperate lust,
Help me good father o'er the Garden pale,
That I may call for succour on the Green.
No Daughter, sit thee down, sit down by me,
I call you Daughter, being your own desire,
If you be nobly born as you report,
Why should you to escape your own distress
Leave me poor man alone, and comfortless?
He comes!
Let him, sit down, sit down I say.
O how shall I escape reproach this day?
Peace, heaven may give my byzon'd eyes their light,
Stretching these crooked limbs strait and upright.
Art thou fled hither? think thou his weak strength
Can free thee? come, why should this frosty ice
Clasp his cold arms about thy flowering spring?
Nay strive not Bayard, if ye do, by Heaven
I'll draw my Rapier, and with one thrust
Send thee to Charon as a Passenger:
Oh, I am feeble, pray ye hurt me nor,
If it be true, as I have heard it told
You married lately with Sir Robert's Daughter.
Father, I hate her, and she scorns me,
She pulls, she sighs, she pines, she leaves her meat,
She flies by Bridal-bed, she bans, she raves
That ere her father forced her to be mine.
Good Sir comfort her.
Comfott thou me, and I will comfort her.
I will not yield consent to such a sin,
I scorn to be a Princes Concubine.
Wilt thou be then my wife?
No, I have sworn
To dye as pure a Maid as I was born.
How can she be your Wife?
My wife will die.
Tarry that time.
All lingering I defy.
Old man I'll make thee happy by thy grant;
Fair Maid thou shalt be blessed in thy consent;
Deny me and I'll turn a Tereus,
Murder thy Father, then cut out thy tongue,
Deform thy beauty with the hand of wrath,
Lastly make spoil of thy Virginity,
Then leave thee wretched; where if now thou yield,
Against all reproach and wrong I'll be thy shield.
Help me good Father.
Bid a sere dried Reed
Oppose his sapless strength against a green Oak.
See me, I am all youth, all love, all beauty,
Thou beauteous, lovely, youthful, it is thy duty
To love thy like, which duty if thou shun,
My hate thy beauteous youth shall overturn.
Good Sir stand but aside a little while;
I do remember since my self was young
The strong effects of lust; both she and I
Must yield to your desire.
I'll rather dye.
Nay say not so, listen to me my Child.
I marry father if thou can persuade her
I'll make thee rich, and one day mary her.
Fear nothing Child, but use him gently,
And I will fit his hot lust presently.
Come, what resolve you? either yield or dye.
Sir I commit my Daughter to your hands,
But I beseech you woo her with fair words,
She may without compulsion yield at last;
I'll in and we•p, for what can I do more?
You're rich and strong, and I am week and poor.
Hold Father, take that Gold to comfort thee.
For money few men now shun infamy.
Oh me, do you forsake me!
I a while I do,
But Playnsey I'll anon be even with you.
Now pretty Virgin how are you resolved?
I yield, yet though I yield I bend my knees,
And ere my spotless Virgin shape I leese
Let me delat the many miseries—
Come do not stain thy lily cheeks with tears,
Nor fashion to thy self a form of dread,
Thou talk of loss of shape, a fair Lass bears
A shape as goodly in lost Maiden-head,
And far more lovely; then with smiling grace,
They boldly look upon a Lovers face,
Try once, then be assured thoul't not refuse,
Had thou a hundred Maiden-heads to lose.
Impious temptation! I defy thee Playnsey,
Setting my weak strength to resist thy lust;
Off with thy poisonous hands, help, help me Heaven.
But a poor earthly man guided by Heaven
Will keep thee from this deed, hateful as Hell;
Playnsey forbear as thou respects-thy life.
Thou Autum-shaken leaf, thou bare Anatomy,
Thou withered Elder-pith, thou shape of death,
Sent by that blind exorcist to disturb
The pleasures that young Playnsey's heart affects,
Vanish, I know thou art but lither Air,
Thy hand fell lightly on me like thin smoke
That is disperc'st amongst the spreading clouds.
What make thou me a Ghost? come take thy weapons,
Thou shalt soon try I am both flesh and bone.
Hold Villain hold!
No Boy, I am a Man,
Uncle to that wronged Maid, the Blind-mans brother,
Who quaking sits within mourning his Child;
Ar't not ashamed? no thou art impudent,
Westford and you are fleshed in villainies;
Think on your plot about the banished Momford,
If you'll repent it I will use you well;
Make means that Momford may be proved clear,
As you know best his harmless innocence,
And on a Soldiers word I do protest
Momford shall make your peace, and sue your pardon.
What dost thou mean? what's this thou talk to me?
I talk of Treason, rapine, slander, wrong;
Go get thee to Sir Robert, hoe's hard by,
I saw him walking up along the Green;
Stand not to talk, if thou accept my offer
I'll be a faithful servant in this business,
Preserve your credits, and confer with you;
If not, resolve on this, I'll to the King,
And there accuse you of this heinous wrong.
Wilt thou stay here until I fetch Sir Robert?
I will. Go Maid, h•lp the old man to bed,
Hoe's shroudly frighted by this violence.
Wh•t reverend man art thou? or Angel rather,
That speak these wonders of my banished father?
Go honourable M•eden, Momford's Heir,
A little help the old weak blinded man,
That weeping si•s within, trembling for dread
Lest Plains•y had thy chaste youth injured,
Help him, and then I'll tell thee many wonders.
To hear but one word of my fathers weal,
I'll undergo a•l work, all pain, all toil.
Poor Girl, how glad she is to hear the voice
Of Momford's honour? with what nimble •peed
She hies to help a shadow, there•s no beggar,
No poor blind man, that wants her comforting;
I wonder what she'ill think, when she shall find
Only a staff, a scrip, a gown, a bonnet,
And ne'er a body to make use of them?
She comes, and is amazed a• she comes.
Where is the blind man I beseech you Sir▪
Alone I find his garments in his Chair,
Do not amaze me, tell me where he is?
He is within fair Maid.
Aged man,
I should give credit to your milk-white hairs;
Tell me, O tell me, why within a Chair
The case is left; are you a Conjuror,
Where is the blind man that I called my father?
I am no Conjuror, stay here but a while,
And I will bring the blind-man to thy fight,
Stay here, look on this cloudy Element,
And I'll produce him to your hearts content,
Alas where am I sure this Beggars Cell
Is a base Cottage to betray my honour;
I took him at the first to be a Comforter,
But now I see he is expert in shapes:
But why should I dispraise him? he did free
My body from wild Playnsey's luxury.
Methinks he has been all my Joy to me,
Why should there now arise this difference?
Daughter where are you?
Pray where is your brother?
I have no Brother, no kin but one Daughter.
Hoe's an Enchanter sure, his ways I'll shun.
Daughter where are you? I conjure you Child
By the true honour of old Momford's name,
By Momford's faith, that was by fraud exiled,
You would not let his honour die in shame▪
Help me ye powers, that give all Mortals power,
To scope this heavy and too troublous hour.
Spirit avoid me, or if thou be no spirit
Surely it is a damned Magicion.
Fly me, thou alter'st shapes, I do not love thee.
Thou dost; see here the Gold thou sent thy father,
When I, even I my self brought these fair Arms
To wicked Westford's Gate; poor Child be not amazed,
I am thy Father Momford, by traitorous practise banished.
Ah me, that I have lived so long unknown,
I still had such a hope.
Fair Child forbear,
I know Sir Robert Westford, and this Playnsey,
Or one of them at least, will come forthwith;
Say you the blind man is in his bed sick,
And call me Uncle; come, be comforted,
Our sum of honour in despite of guile
Shall brightly shine in England's Hemisphere,
We have been clouded long, but maugre hate,
Truth will advance desert to honor's state.
Dare you trust Strowd in this same stratagem?
Tush fear him not, since his father hath given him over, he hath given o'er all honesty and lives upon the spoil; come ye mad Rogues here's three of us, and here's 30 l. each man take his share, and with his share his charge; We are all for this money to cut the throat of the Blind-beggar, his Brother, and his Daughter.
How? cut their Throats?—I'll see ye hanged first.
Jack thou and I will keep quarter at this end of the Green, and Waylay the old spruce Serving man, he shall be our share, and Tom Strowd thou shalt lie at this corner for the wench, for this way she comes unto the Conduit-head for water, she falls to thee.
And fall thou to her, and ye can but agree of price.
Nay let me alone for falling upon the Wench I warrant ye.
Mr. Playnsey and Sir Robert do you keep about the old Mans Cottage, and when you see his Daughter gone knock out his Brains with his Crutches; thus have you heard your several char∣ges; every man to his Court of Guard, and keep fair quar∣la.
Plotted with good discretion; Son Playnsey
I like it well, that you and I go walk
Near to this Cottage, for it much concerns us
To see this Beggar dead, upon whose breath
Proud slander si•s to blemish our good names,
And blast our honest reputations;
Shake hands and part in hope when next we meet,
Their deaths shall lay all danger at our feet.
Pray heaven it may; a word good Mr. Strowd.
Although you had in charge to kill the Maid,
I do entreat you use some special care
In your attempt, and in the stead of death
Tell her I love her dearly, and that love
Enforced this shift: for though the Wench be poor,
Yet in the glass of my affection
She seems right wealthy, fair and virtuous;
Commend me to her Strowd, and since my wife
Hath given her latest farewell to the world,
Tell her I do intend to mary her;
Mean time convey her to my farm at Rederiff,
And there's 10 Angels more for thy reward:
But be as trusty to me, as the thought
That sleeps within my bosom, so adieu,
I trust the richest of my hopes with you.
Do so, and I do not deceive you let me dye like a Dog on a Pitch-fork;—This is excellent, hire me to steal away the Wench I am in love withal my self, this comes just in the nick in faith, I desire no more, but to meet her. Whose yonder Swash? how now? whither away so fast Swash ha?
What my young Master? why I am going to the three Colts to saddle your Fathers Gelding; we both ride into Norfolk this afternoon.
—Better and better still, thou come as fit for the pur∣pose as a Pudding for a Fryers mouth, so dost thou: I do but stay here to talk 3 or 4 cold words in hugger-mugger with the Blind-beggars Daughter, and I'll ride down into Norfolk with you; and as God wo'd have it, yonder comes the Mother.
Oh what content attends this Country life?
Here proud Ambition's emulating eye
Plays not the find-fault; our thatch'd-shed is built
Without the reach of Treasons bloody Gripe.
To her Master; it is an old saying in our Country, Long Standers are but short Doers, Wenches cannot away with them.
Mass Swash I think thou say true; I'll to her, How now pretty Mother, whither are you going so fast?
Alas good Sir I am a poor man's Child,
My Father is the Beggar of this Green,
That eves upon good peoples charities,
I am agoing with this earthen Pitcher
To fetch clean water from the Conduit-head;
We eat the herbs that grow on the Springs brink,
And count the Conduit-water wholesome drink.
Nay you drink water you are no hostess for me:
You are no hostess for me, fie, fie, I am ashamed of you.
Why? what should I say to her?
What? you should have praised her little foot,
Her handsome shoe belonging to it:
And then a come to her round knee,
And then Master to her belly.
I marry Swash, and I were there once I'd do well e∣nough: but pray thee let me alone, I'll talk to her well enough I warrant thee; this is to the purpose, Wench you know young Mr. Playnsey?
I do remember I have seen the man,
He loves my Father well; why names he Playnsey?
I hope he'ill do me no more injury?
Fie, fie, what have you to do with Playnsey? come to your own business; as thus you must come upon her, Oh Lady bright, pity this Knight, that in this plight is thus tormented, if you be willing, to be billing, I dare hold a shilling you shall be con∣tented.
I marry Swash, this is excellent in faith; coldest not thou a taught me this? but ell's one Swash, I'll win her without these Ballads I warrant you; Well wench, to come to the point, there's young Playnsey loves you well, and he has hired me to watch for thee here, and carry thee to his Farm house at Rede∣riff, where if he find thee, soon at night thou art like to lose thy Maiden-head before morning.
Unhappy wretch, that Playnsey sure was born
To make our House and Family a scorn.
She begins to yield Master, give her not o'er, to her a∣gain Master.
I warrant thee Swash now I am in let me alone. Well Wench, this is the plain English on it, and thou love me no worse than I love thee, instead of carrying thee to his Farm-house at Re∣deriff, I'll ha thee to the Church and mary thee, and of a poor Beggar, Daughter, I'll make thee a wealthy Norfolk Yeomans
wife; what say thou to it now sen ye?
Alas my Father is a poor Blind-man,
And I am all the comfort that he has,
I am his eyes to see, his feet to go,
And hands to dress him, I being gone hoe's left
Eyeless, handles, footless, comfortless,
Yet if you love me as you make a show,
Come to our Cottage: though our State be poor,
We live content and that's a good mans store,
Lay thee Swash, I must go into her Cot-house she says; Well Wench, and thou wot not go with me, thou art ne'er like to see thy Father, nor his Shed more, for Mr. Playnsey and Sir Robert Westford has hired a couple of false Knaves to cut thy fa∣theirs throat, therefore and thou can love me, say, and hold, go thou with Swash and raise the Town, and I'll go back and save thy Father's life I warrant thee.
I'll go with ye, love ye, I'll do any thing so thou wilt save my aged Fathers life.
—Let me be hanged like a Dog and I do not; Swash go you with her and raise the Town, I'll but cross o'er the Sum∣mer lay by the Broom field o'er goodman Dawson's Close and be with you presently;—whither art thou going? thou dost not hear me.
Yes, yes, I must go by the Broom-field, I hear you Sir, come Wench come.
Nay since you are so forward hold, take you the Pit∣cher, I'll go with her my self,—I wot not for any thing but I had turned Cony-catcher, here had been a black day with some body else; come Wench, dry thine eyes, never cry for the matter, the worst is past, thou shalt see the case altered I warrant thee, I'll save thy Father's life fear not.
Oh, oh, oh, I carry the Pitcher I there let it lye, I'll after them.
—I am hurt.
Hold, and thou come of the noble blood of the Trojans hold.
Nay do not think you desperate Cast-aways,
Though time hath hid me with the rind of Age,
And hung his snowy livery of my face,
Though I am old, that I want strength to fight;
If you be men whose fortune's has been shook
By the rough arm of want, or Servitors
That have consumed your living in the wars,
I have a poor blind Brother on this Green,
Who by the Alms of charitable men,
And with the wealth I brought him out of France,
Hath store of Gold, and had you shown your wants
To him or me—
I scorn to make my state known to ever a prowling Beggar on ye all, we know your Brother has Gold, and it is that we come for.
And we'll have it or dye for it.
Murder, help, help.
What murder? whore's the Murderers?
Sir Robert draw, it is my friend that's wronged.
Nay I beseech your worship hold your hands,
Though I be old, I am sufficient
To answer two far better men than these.
Sir Robert, as you are a Knight lay hold upon one, who was have con•ent to rob us in the Kings high way, but would likewise ho• taken away our lives.
Upon my Soul you do the fellow wrong.
Nay, nay Son Playnsey, never take his part;
How should the B•ggar here of Bednall-Green
Get so much wealth, as the world thinks he hath,
And keep his minion at the Beggars house,
But by such practices? yield up thy weapons,
Or set upon him all, I'll answer it.
Well, well, Sir Robert Westford, time has been
The Blind-man and his Daughter did deserve
More friendship at your hands: and Mr. Playnsey
I could repeat, but let old matters rest.
What do ye brave us? set upon the slave.
What is he gone? how did he scope our hands?
—I know not, I had a full blow at his left leg, I had thought I had cut it off.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, Canbee! I Pray Heaven keep the old man from killing ere I come, and I care not.
What Tom Strowd? well met, whore's the Wench? is she safe?
Safe • Dost thou make a question on it? I warrant she is safe enough for telling any more tales, I am no Bungler ab•ut a Wench: but whore's the Blind-beggar and his Brother?
The Beggar is a Devil, and his Brother his familiar; here's old Madge has bit off 100 and 50 Legs and Arms in her days, and yet she could not so much as draw blood of him, hoe's Musket-proof, or he had dyed for it else.
She is at Rederiff then, there I sent Strowd;
VVe'll end this task, and then I'll visit her:
But here's the Cottage, pull the Villain out,
Hoe's both a Felon, and a Murderer.
What means this out-rage at a Blind mans door?
Are Englishmen become so inhumane
That Beggars cannot scope their violence?
Leave this dissembling, and send forth thy Brother,
For he hath robed these honest Gentlemen,
We followed him, and saw him enter here,
Therefore dispatch, and either send him out,
Or else we'll lock the Doors upon you both,
And fire the rotten Cottage 'ore your ears.
Indeed I must confess I have a Brother,
An Ancient Serving-man, maimed in the wars
Under Lord Momfords colours.
For naming Momford run him through the heart.
—Touch him he that dares; as God sa' me I'll be his Priest that touches but a hair of him?
Strowd, I hope you do but jest with us.
Jest me no jests shall ne'er be said, Tom Strowd of Har∣ling stood by and saw a Blind-man murdered, therefore courage old Father, set thy back to mine, and cover thy head with thy Crut∣ches; I'll take up my lodging on Gods dear ground, ever thou shalt take any harm, for the pretty Mother thy Daughters sake.
How now? what quarrels have we here?
Sir Robert Westford, it ill be•eems a man of your estate
To have a hand in such unlawful riots;
Are you there Son? have you so soon forgo
The timeless death of your deceased wife,
To follow such unseemly practises?
Ha, sest me so? dost take the blind mans part?
You are a Strowd right, a Norfolk Yeoman right,
To take part with the weakest; Well done my Boy,
I do forgive all matters that are past,
For joy to see thy heart so well inclined.
Why I thank you Father, and I forgive you too withal my heart.
Sir Walter Playnsey you are mis-inform'd,
We come with no intent of injury,
These Gentlemen were Strangers unto us,
We found sore hurt and robed by a false Thief,
And Brother to this Beggar, whom we saw
Enter into his house.
What say thou Father?
Know thou of such a practise by thy Brother?
Or to thy knowledge is he in the house?
Sir Walter Playnsey, that I take's your name,
So help me Heaven, as I am ignorant
From any such lewd practise of my Brothers:
But since your worships here, I'll call him forth
In person, to make answer for himself,
Desiring you to pardon me a while,
For what with sorrow and with cares down pressed,
My sightless eyes had need to take their rest.
Send us thy Brother and be thou discharged:•
But Mr. Strowd, what can you say to this?
Faith Sir, it is a common saying in our Country, You shall know by the Market-folks how the Market goes; and none knows their Knavery better than I that was one of their com∣pany. Father do you see those two fellows there?
I son, what of them?
Why these were they that cozened me of my satin suit, and with the false Repreeve that had like to a hanged you, and robed Swash of the 100 l. too.
What these Gentlemen?
Gentlemen! as God mend me, a couple of as arrant Co∣ny-catchers as ever pissed▪
Is it possible Son?
Push, you are a Fool Father, you know nothing, I have paid for my learning; and falling into their company in hope to get some satisfaction for all my losses; it was my chance to be by when Sir Robert Westford and Mr. Playnsey there gave them 30 l. to murder the Blind-beggar, his Brother, and his Daughter: but by my means the Beggar and his Daughter are alive, but what's be∣come of his Brother I know not; this, as I am Tom Strowd of Har∣ling, and a true-hearted Norfolk-man, I'll justify against one, two, three, or the whole pack of 'em, when, where, or how they dare, for the very ears and guts of 'em all.
Strowd, you're a Nit, a Slave, and a Peasant.
How a Fessant?—I scorn to soil my hands about thee: but and I had thee alone, with a tough Ashen Gibbet in my hand, and I did not dry bang ye all one after another, I'd eat no meat but Mustard; sen ye?
Strowd have a care you speak nought but truth.
And speak the truth Boy as thou art my Son.
And I do not I'll give you leave to call me Cut, sen ye?
Sir Robert Westford this concerns you near,
And Son it touches your reputation too?
But it shall touch his life that Authors it;
Strowd you are a villain, and for old grudge
Betwixt your Father and Sir Robert Westford,
Forged this surmise, as both these Gentlemen
Are ready on their oaths to justify.
No more, here comes the Slave that robed us.
Robed ye! of what I trow? of your good conditions?
This is he that hack't my Thigh like a leg of Beef.
Thou lie like a Thief.
Are you the Blind-mans Brother?
Sir, I am.
You are accused here of a Robbery,
What can you answer in your own defence?
Sir Walter Playnsey, and good Captain Westford,
First as I look for comfort from above,
I never nursed a thought to that intent:
Indeed these Gentlemen, Strangers to me,
Did draw upon me, and as I suppose,
By the provokement of Sir Robert Westford
And Mr. Playnsey, sought to take my life.
What reason should they have for that?
Your worship shall perceive; Sir Robert Westford
Wounded by Strowd, and desperate of life,
Confessed unto my Brother the Blind-man,
That by the means of him and Mr. Playnsey
They counterfeited these Letters that wrought
Momford's banishment; Besides all this,
My Sword shall justify, that first by bribes,
And then by forcive means he would have forced
My Niece unto his lust. All this is true,
And this I•ll justify upon their bodies in the open lists.
Thou dare not for thy life?
Playnsey I dare,
And wo'd my Sovereign Liege give me but leave,
This Sun should see thy Treasons punished.
Were thou a Gentlemen as thou art a Slave,
I'd make thee eat thy words or dig thy Grave.
Eat a Pudding's end, the old man shall take no wrong Sir.
Sir Robert Westford, your Gentility
Shall not tread down the truth; long has my Soul
Thirsted for this occasion: for when I saw
You falsify your faith, wedding your Daughter
Unto Playnsey's Son, that was the Troth-plight Husband to Bess Momford,
I thought as much as this poor man now speaks,
And will in single combat prove as much;
He of you both that thinks himself most touched,
Take up my Gage.
Westford I'll answer thee.
And I'll maintain Sir Robert Westford's cause.
Take up my Glove then.
Give me it, I'll maintain it my self.
This shall justify that Strowd
And that base Villain were agreed to murder us.
I is the wind ei' that door, I'll take up thy Glove: but—and I bang not thy Coxcomb, hang me la.
I hope this challenged combat will decide the truth.
Which Heaven assisting, and the King well pleased,
Shall be performed this present afternoon;
I'll to the King, and never raise my Knee from the cold earth,
Till I obtain, by privilege of f•ight
A black revenge for worthy Momford's fall.
And thither Westford will I follow thee,
Or born upon the wings of my just cause,
Arrive before thee.
Each man take his way,
St. George and Conquest guide our swords this day.
Courage my Boy, if thou prevail in fight,
I'll swear Lord Momford hath not had his right.
Courage sa' ye? as God mend me, I respect them no more than I do a flap with a Fox tail, and I do not beat'em as ye sho'd cuyle a side of dried Stock-fish, I'll be bound to go to Rome with a Mortar a my head.
Why well said my Son, let's away.
But hark ye Father; you know I am to go amongst the Court-nowles, you must needs let me have good store of money with me, let not the name of STROWDS be disgraced, I pray Fa∣there.
Tush Boy, fear not, I'll carry 500 l. with me, and that shall fly ere thou want.
—And I'll bring some of my own too, or it shall go hard.
Uncle of Gloster, and Lord Cardinal,
Since all our Court has put on smooth-fac'd mirth,
Only to grace your Honoured Marriage,
Embrace each other in the arms of Love,
And as you join your hands, so let your hearts
Knit your affections in a friendly league.
Gloster speaks first, yet speaks he not in fear,
As begging Bewford's friendship, but in love
Both to his King, and to fair Englands good;
Yet ere I set my hand to this new League,
Bewford, if any undisgested wrong
Lies in thy swelling bosom, freely speak't,
And Gloster will as freely answer it:
But if thy Conscience be as clear from soil
Of hateful treachery, as Glosters is,
Give me thy hand, and with thy hand thy heart,
Which Gloster will as charily regard,
As the best blood that's chambered in his breast▪
On that Condition Bewford gives his hand,
And from his heart wipes off all forepass'd wrongs.
Witness this League Lords, and now Ant Ellanor
Heaven give you joy, both of our Uncles love,
And of this new born peace. Now Uncle Gloster I desire to know
The cause of Momford's treason, and his fall,
Which he hath lately undergone in France?
His fall my Liege was great, but his offence
Little or none; for by Velleires his means,
Who as a Prisoner now attends your Grace,
I have found out since Momford's banishment,
That all his accusations were false.
Yet Guineas in which Lord Momford had a charge,
Was yielded up by Treason.
True my Liege,
I have known Momford in my Brothers days,
Put in great trust; yet never heard
That he was found disloyal in his charge.
And Uncle Gloster, we have always had
His honoured age in reverent esteem.
We hear he had a Daughter, where lives she?
Thrust out of all by one old Westford's means.
Methinks it is hard the Child should not enjoy
The riches that the painful Father left.
Good Uncle Gloster let it be your care,
To see old Momferd's Daughter have her right.
But what grave man is that?
Sir Walter Playnsey,
The bosom friend unto exiled Momford.
Sir Walter Playnsey, by our Uncles leave
I pray stand up, methinks those reverent hairs
Deserve a softer pillar than the ground;
I pray stand up, and boldly speak your mind.
My Sovereign Liege, your Subject comes in love
To let you know, that divers Gentlemen,
On what presumption they themselves best know,
Have undertaken to prove in open field,
That the Lord Momford who late fell in France,
Was treacherously accused.
Why? it was your Son
That first p•oduc'd his accusation.
Your Grace will give me leave to clear my self,
For I was neither privy to that fact,
Nor speak in his excuse; he is my Son,
But if in malice he hath wronged Lord Momford,
Let him have Justice, and the Law take place.
Are they resolved to try it out in fight?
They are my Liege, and only wait your pleasure.
Even what our Uncle Gloster will set down
We do assent to.
Herald fetch them in,
See them at all points armed.
Who is the Plaintiff?
I my gracious Lord.
Reach him the Book, and thereon take thine Oath,
That thou art neither drawn by bribes nor hate
To undertake this Comba•.—It is enough.
Speak truth, and nought but truth, so help thee Heaven.
Pleases your Grace, this in a word is all,
Sir Robert Westford and Mr. Playnsey there confessed
To a Blind-man, in hearing of that Maid,
That Playnsey and himself did counterfeit
The Letters that wrought Momfords banishment.
Give him the Book, now answer on thine oath
In thy defence.
Then first my Liege it is false,
Next hoe's a Felon, and by force of arms
Offered to rob these honest Gentlemen
In the high way.
—Then I can hold my tongue no longer, it's an arrant lye my Lord, that's the plain English on it: for I was by when Sir Robert Westford and Mr. Playnsey gave them 30l. to murder the Blind-beggar, his Brother, and his Daughter, and if I had not been, they had been all killed too, so had they.
Fellows what do you say to this?
My Liege I cannot talk, grant me the Combat, and my Sword shall prove Jam a Soldier, and my tongue ne'er knew the art of scolding.
Give him his will, alarm to the fight.
Stay, for me thinks there is some difference,
Both in their years, and their conditions,
And for we highly prize our Subject lives,
Good Uncle Gloster let them choose their weapons▪
It may be a means to save their lives.
And hearten others in pursuit of knowledge.
Herald bring forth all sorts of weapons,
It is the King's pleasure that every man
Make choice of those weapons he hath practised most.
Sir Robert choose your weapon first.
Thanks to my Liege: the common fight of these same serving men is sword and dagger, therefore I'll choose the sword and target they are unskilful in; I take the sword and target for my defence.
And my Liege, because Sir Rob. Westford shall not think I'll take any advantage, I'll answer him at his own weapons.
It is well; on to the next.
Come Captain Westford, you have been in Spain,
And well are practised in the desperate fight of single Rapier?
Playnsey I am pleased.
So are not we, the single Rapier is too desperate,
And therefore choose some other weapon,
Or we will have no Combat fought this day.
Backsword then and't please your Grace.
So, we are pleased.
Sirrah Jack, methinks Sword and Bucklet's a safe fight.
I'll choose no other, and I had a thousand lives.
I do, take your bars of Iron, and your Barn-doors, and I do not bang 'em together like a couple of Cur-dogs, I'll ne'er be seen again.
Sirrah thou fellow.
Anon.
What weapons wilt thou use?
Weapon me no weapons, I can play at wasters as well as another man; but ell's one for that, give me but an ashen Gibbet in my hand, and I do not dry-bang them both, I'll be bound to eat hay with a horse, so will I.
An ashen-gibbet? what dost thou mean by that?
What do I mean by it quoth ye?—I think you be sib to one of the London-Cockneys, that asked, whether Hay-cocks were better meat broiled or roasted, an ashen Plant, a good Cudgel, what sho'd I ca it?
If there be such a weapon in the Court, let one go fetch it him.
Nay I'll make a page of my own age, and fet it my self. Swash bring out my blessed Beggar there.
Yes Sir, here's your blessed Beggar Master.
Look ye Sirs, this is en it, and I do not cudgell'em both with it, I'll give you leave to stick me up at the Court-gate for a Pissing-post, so will I.
But two to one is odds, rather fight single.
No, they know me well enough, I have cudgelled them both before now.
Well, if thou dare oppose them both, have thy desire.
Alarm to the flight.
Fellow, dost hear?
Anon?
What should I call thy Country, and thy name?
Sen ye?
The King wo'd know thy Country, and thy name?
My name? I am not ashamed of my name, I am one Tom Strowd of Harling, I'll play a gole at Camp-ball, or wrassel a fall a the hip, or the hen turn with ere a Courtnoll of ye all, for 20 quarters of Male, and march me height for height.
A lusty fellow trust—
We have too few such Subjects in our Land; whore's the Blind-beg∣gar and his brother?
Where the Blind-beggar is I know not, but here's the pretty Mother his Daughter; and thou be a kind spring all speak a good word for me to my father that I may have her, and as God mend me and ere thou come into Norfolk I'll give thee as good a Dish of Dumplings as ever thou layd'st thy lips too, so will I, sen ye?
How? mary with a Beggar? mix the blood of Strowds with a tatter? either cast her off, or I will cast off thee.
Now we shall have a coil with ye; and ye were not my father I'd knock your pate, so wo'd I.
How's that? do and thou dare.
Strowd, though she be Daughter to a poor Bind-man that long hath lived on good men's charity, do not disdain her. Be her birth as it may, the portion I'll give with her, deserves as good a Husband as your Son.
Bate me an ace of that quoth. Bolton, yet I would I had her as naked as my nayl.
As good a portion as my Son? proud Beggar,
It is not your Clapdish and your patched Gown can do it.
However poor, good Sir digrace me not.
It is my disgrace to be out-worded by a Beggar?
But and thou be such a well-monied man
As thou dost brag, dare drop old Angels with me?
And he that out-drops other, take up all?
That were ambition in a beggar Sir.
It were credit for thee, and thou could out-drop him.
So please my Liege to give me leave, I'll venture
That small Estate I have.
We are content,
Amongst cares it is fit to mix some merriment.
Come hither Daughter; are you ready Master?
—To him Father, never lose a hog for a halfp'worth of tar; come old fellow bring thy white Bears to the stake, and thy yellow gingle boys to the Bull-ring;—Father wherefore do you hang an arse so? they are all our own and there were a comb seck full on 'em.
I thus begin.
And thus I answer thee.
Thus I reply.
And thus do I join issue.
I had rather join issue with the Mother a great deal, had I.
Some more money Swash.
Here Master, we'll outdrop the Beggar, we'll make Gill sweat else.
Hast thou any money about thee Tom?
An hundred angels, and a better penny, Pigs of your own Sow Father.
There's 20 more.
More yet? the Rascal will disgrace me; more yet?
And yet too,—you think beggars have no lice father.
Why how now Strowd, begins it to be low water with ye?
I am even run a ground, have dropped till I can drop no more.
You must even burn of the spit, for I have no more oil of Angels to bast you father.
Nor thou Swash?
Only a broken three farthings that I kept in a corner to buy my wench pins with.
All this is mine then.
I not deny it, it is true
That was our match, and so good Gold adieu.
—I have brought my hogs to a fair Market, must I lose the Mother and all my Gold too?
Yes saith, ell's gone Tom.
This is your foolery Father, and I had don't, we sho'd have had such a scolding with you.
Then Strowd where thou before did scorn my Daughter,
Now I do scorn thy Son; not moved through hate,
For Strowd I hold thee a most honest man,
For right thou did unto Lord Momford's Daughter,
And since thy Son did save my poor Girls life,
And rescued mine with hazard of his own,
This Gold which by our bargain is all mine
I freely give him towards his marriage.
Trust me a gallant Beggar.
Beggar?—He might be a King for his bounty, for he gives away all.
I know the reason of that, he can beg more, and Begging be so good an occupation wo'd I had been bound Apprentice to it seven years ago, there was somewhat to be got by it then, it is out of request now.
This is old excellent, here carryit to my Chamber Swash, and lock the door fast I charge thee.
And I meet no false Knaves by the way; Canbee and Had∣land here had been a simple boon for you now.
And now my Lord, since Momford is proved clear,
And his Accusers have confessed their guilt,
I freely give my Daughter to the man,
Who for the love of Momford (loved of all)
Will take her to his wife.
For Momford's sake, whose honoured deeds
Are writ up with the blood of the proud French,
Were she the meanest and deformed'st Creature
That treads upon the bosom of the earth,
Westford wo'd take, love, live and marry her.
Nay then I see that virtue shall find friends;
Take her good Captain, and for Momford's sake
Use the Maid kindly.
Why farewell 40 pence, I ha fished fair and caught a frog; well Mother, though I am no Gentleman, I coed ha brought you to more Land than a score on 'em, thou should have had 40 as fair milch kine to your pail, as a man sho'd need to see in a Summers day, 4 yoke of Oxen, and three team of Cart-horses; be∣sides; thou should have had thine ambling nag, and thy side-saddle to ha rid on, a little easier than to be jaunted up and down London Streets in a leathern wheel-barrow; and then of the other side there's the old woman my Mother, she would have made thee a vild-good Huswife could have taught thee how to a made butter, and flap-jacks, fritters, pancakes, I and the rarest fools, all the Ladies in the Land know not how to turn their hands to 'em: But I'll take my leave on thee with an oh good night Land lady the Moon is up.
Gl. Card. Momford!
Bold Momford living, and proved Loyal,
Thy Love like a rich Jewel we will wear
Next to our hear•; upon those Gentlemen
That have maintained and proved faithful,
We do confer a 100 Crowns a piece.
Your Grace in this does Momford double right;
And noble Country-men while we do live,
Your Love and Valour must not be forgotten.
How is it you will we deal with your Accusers?
That we refer unto our Uncle Gloster,
Who better knows those passages than we.
Since it is your will my Liege, then thus't must be,
For you Y. Playnsey and Sir Robert Westford
Receive a legal Trial; Canbee and Hadland,
We for a President will have you sent
Out of the Land to dateless banishment.
Thanks your good Honour, and we'll do you more good by cheating your enemies abroad, than ever we did hurt by cozening honest subjects at home.
Good Uncle Gloster, we commend your care
For throwing out such rank weeds forth our Land,
Whose weakened body hath been sick too long,
Wanting tho•e helps that should have made it strong.
Amongst whom Lord Momford you are not the least,
(Pray Heaven you be the last) whom this wilde beast,
Ambitious treason sought to ruinate:
But in requital of your more than wrong
We make you here our Lord High-Treasurer;
And Captain Westford, make you General
Of all our forces mustered up against France.
Thus our disjointed Kingdom being made strong,
Each Member seated in his proper seat▪
Let's in to praise his name, whose powerful hand
Protects the safety of our peaceful Land,

A Symphony. After which the Scene is discovered, Representing the Maritime coast of Albion or England, by its white cliffs encompassed with Seas: flocks of Sheep grazing on the Downs, or tops of them, and Corn fields a far off in prospective.
Represented by a grave personage with a Book and Torch in his hand. The chief property of the Argument being to in∣struck the Auditory, and illustrate the Scene.
NOthing sounds louder in the month of Fame,
Then Oceanus and Bri∣tanias name.
She Queen of Isles, and he the King of Seas,
The marriage now we celebrate of these,
And here invite you Ladies to the feast,
Our fuire, you Gentlemen, our noble guests.
You all are fairly, nobly welcome then,
Pray fall to with your eyes, &amp; know our Scene
Is Albion or Britannia, as by these
White clefts appear, encompassed with Seas.
For the rest, with what affiduall services
He gains her love; and what advantages
Of Pleasure, Glory, Wealth, she gains again,
 (To envy of all lands) by marrying him,
All this our Scene dos represent, mean while
We hope you Ladies with a gracious smile,
And with your favourable breaths will please
To grace our Scene, and serenat our Seas.
Which if you deign, we are assured then
Of the grace and favour of these Gentlemen.
Oceanus, in a Mantle of Seagreen and Silver; his Hair and Beard, blew 〈◊〉 curled, with a Diadem on his head, and a Trident in his hand, mounted on
a Chariot composed of a great Scollop shell, drawn by two Seahorses in swim∣ing posture; the Chariot gliding on the wheels of watermils to stem the waves. Encompassed with Troops of Tritons and Sirens.
O Wretched I!
In fire freeze, in water fry.
Example of Loves cruelty!
What freezing cold
When Brittania I behold!
What scorching fire,
Twixt hot desire,
And chilling fear
Assaults my bosom here!
O cruel cruel God of Love
Makes Lovers such dire torments prove.
Thou a God? thou a fiend,
Hast flames unto no other end;
And piercing darts,
But only to torment poor humane hearts.
Flow flow our tears amain,
For who when Oceanus weeps,
Who all liquid Treasure keeps,
Can from liquid tears refrain?
Groan, groan ye all again.
For who when Oceanus groans,
Who even sadds the very stones
Can from sadding groans refrain.
* How oft have I beat at her shore,
Just like some Lover at his Mistress door,
To weary her to a consent,
And yet, and yet she would ne'er relent?
How oft sprinkled the face of Heaven
With tears that bootless back return.
How oft my sighs to winds have given,
That only hissed them to scorn.
How oft complaind to ruthless rocks,
Whilst wanton Ecco only mocks
My moan, and me:
And when ell's done, I see
Brittania I no more can stir,
* Then very cliffs and rocks encompass her.
* All contained betwixt these Astericons or starry marks may be omitted in the reciting.
Here whilst Oceanus makes a stand, four Dutch Skippers enter with Bowls in their hands, singing, drinking, and dancing: with the lightness of their Song setting off the gravity of tother: declaring the de∣bauch of such people in a calm.
COme Boys, who are ever twixt swimming and sinking,
And let us have a rubbers at drinking.
Hai hai
Bowl away, bowl away.
Set me the bias right boys,
And howl up stiff and tight boys.
Drink, drink,
Merrily drink,
While the flagons do clink,
And the Glasses do think,
And good fellows do think,
That the world goes round a round a,
And no body sober be found a.
Fill the bowls full,
Fill the bowls full boys.
Say what they will,
Say what they will boys,
There is no life but in liquor,
Then take it off quicker and quicker,
And fill it up fuller and fuller.
He is no Sailor
In's drink is a failure,
But only shut row in a Sculler.
The dance,
Full of reeling and drunken postures (to an extravagant fantastic Tune)ending in a scuffle conformable to the rudeness of such people: till Oceanus rousing up himself, at sound of the Boatswains whi∣stle they all cease their jollity, and run off several ways.
* See
As agitated by some furious wind,
Ther's storms and tempests rising in his mind.
What a distracted cloudy men he has?
The angry rack of Heaven is in his face▪
It is natural
Unto us all
Unquiet, troubled to remain
Till we our long desired ends obtain:
But nature ne'er shall to eternity
Produce so unquiet, troubled a thing as he.
See now he dos compose himself to speak
* Those are less dangerous ills that outward break.
BUt why shut I despair
To find
Brittania kind
As she is fair?
No longer then in vain
Isle thus complain;
No longer be her scorn,
Whilst I sigh, and weep, and mourn.
A Noble Lover ever shut
Doe somewhat more then common man,
To make his passions understood,
And show how much he dares and can.
Brittanias love then to obtain,
Isle do things of so high a strain,
Her self shall be enforced to say,
Whatever the event dos prove,
Oceanus only knew the way,
To gain Brittanias love.
British Mariners away,
Hoise your sails, and all to Sea,
Soldiers scour your Armour bright,
And prepare you to the fight,
Brittania to please;
Queen of all Isles, and Empress of the Seas.
Brittania to please, &amp;c.
Fear nor wrack, nor death, for i'll,
Be propitious to ye the while;
Some with wealth, some victory, come
Richly and nobly laden home;
Brittania to please,
Queen of all Isles, and Empress of the Seas.
Brittanta to please, &amp;c.
Soldiers, Mariners, away,
Why d' ye linger, why d' ye stay?
With joy and gladness all should go,
And happy in the honour too,
Brittania to please,
Queen of all Isles, and Empress of the Seas.
Brittania to please, &amp;c.
HOw mighty a Monarch is this love that go
From heavens above,
To depths below,
Which way so ere you tend,
You ner arrive at his dominions end?
What vast extent has his command?
That still,
Makes Sea, and Land,
Obey his will.
And whats more strange again
Makes very senseless things, have sense of him.
In the mean time, sure
That love must mighty be, and pure,
Has all the waters of the main
To purge and wash away it's stain,
And though they altogether came
Yet cod they never quench the flame.
At name of love let none be scandald then
Thats so Ethereal, and divine in them,
Ne'er since they both from Chaos came,
Their hearts ever burned with purer flame,
Nor till to Chaos both return
Ever shall with purer burn.
A Symphony. After which Brittania appears inthrond in state with an im∣perial diadem on her head. In a bright yellow vest, and green mantle richly embroidered with Towns and Cities. A cornu copy, Or horn of abundance under her Arm. Inviro∣ned with the sea, unto which 3 Rivers pour forth their urns, that on the right hand inscribed Severn that on the left Humber, &amp; that under, Thames her situation so contrived as it de∣clares
her temperate clime, equally re∣moved from the Torrid and friged zone.
HAppy Brittania of all Isles below
High heavens the most do's bless,
Did Brittains better know,
But their own happiness
Thou whilst all other Nations, are
Together by their limits tied,
To sad calamities of war,
And wide divisions beside,
Which interest of state they call.
Divided from them all,
By situation dost possess
Such unlimited happiness,
Danger must or swim, or fly,
Ere it can arrive at thee,
And thou no other harms may know
But what from civil wars may grow.
*Which oh, far, far,
Be from thee of all other war.
Far far from thee
That deadly viper be,
That dos corrode, and tear,
The mothers womb that did it bear;
With wounds more deep, and wide,
*Then any other wounds beside.
But oh fly, fly,
As thou would some abhorred disease,
The abhorred memory
Of such fatal times as these.
Divert insensibly thy mind
To thoughts of more delightful kind.
HOw happy am I of all other Lands,
Have the key both of peace and war in my hands,
And can by none invaded be,
Unless my self invadeth me.
But all may sit content, and glad,
Under their own Arbours shade,
Embraced in the arms of peace
Oh how happy days are these?
Oh how happy, &amp;c.
HOw happy am I of all other Lands,
Have the key both of peace and war in my hands,
And can by none impoverished be,
Unless my self impoverish me,
But all may sit content, and glad,
Under their own Arbours shade,
Admiring of their welds increase,
Oh how happy days are these?
Oh how happy, &amp;c.
But stay what waves are these appear,
The billows rise, &amp; yet no storms are near!
O tic the Ocean that dos ride
On the back of a full Tide,
So jolly and so gay,
He were grown young again you'd say.
I see he'll never quit his claim,
Till he enjoys the princely dame.
Who when Brittania heretofore
Betrothed was to the Gallique shore
Ne'er ceased by force and stratagem
  Until he had divorced them.
Here Oceanus enters as before, and makes his solemn Addresses to Brittania.
Fairer then fairest if your Eyes,
Clearer then the clearest Skies,
Deign to look upon a lover,
Who this bold truth dares discover,
That he loves, and loves most true,
And ne'er loved but only you;
Behold of all fair Isles the fairest,
Dearest, sweetest, and the rarest,
The lowliest of your servants hear,
Suspended betwixt hope and fear,
Awaits from you his destiny
Whether he should live or dye.
* whether he in dead low tides,
Should pine away to be denied,
Or else as he was wont to do,
In lively spring tides visit you.
I neither extremity approve
Nor of overflowing love
Nor 'ith Ebb, that love is best
By moderate passion is expressed.
Meaner excellencies move,
Only unto moderate love,
But Brittanias denies
All things but extremities.
Wonder! Oceanus who was wont to be
So rough, shut grow so smooth to flatter me!
How flatten ye? •nd, Britania is as far
'Bove flattery, as others under are;
Nor can low flattery reach her, more than I
Can with my furging billows reach the sky.
To write her praise my waves are too dilute
To speak it, my inhabitants too ••te
Heavens Ciphers, and Fems Tongue can hardly serve,
*To write, and speak her praise, as they deserve.
Cease cease your vain pursuit
And vainer suit
And know that till you've rendered me
For pleasure, honour and utility,
The most delicious and content,
The most renowned, and opulent,
Of all the Isles with circling wave
You ever yet surrounded have,
Never hope my love to gain;
Till then cease, your suit is vain.
Most gladly I accept the task,
And no other favour ask;
What ho there? to delight the fair
Let my twin-lights dance 'ith air
On mast topps and on highest cordage dance
Happy presage of the deliverance
Both from danger, and from fear,
Of the storm tossed Mariner.
Castor and Pollux in Grecian mili∣tarry habits, with bright shining stars in their fore heads appearing &amp; dancing in the clouds, in which the ropes are con∣ceald.
You're not enoufe delighted yet
Wher's old Glaucus? let him get
His activist Phocij, and hear make
Them dance for fair Brittanias sake.
We are so taken with your sports,
And pleasant prospects you discover,
We admit you to our shores and ports
As a friend, though not a lover.
And to your shores and ports we'll bring
Such store of every better things;
Brittania shall, how ever loath,
Admit me as a friend and lover both.
VAlour, the weak so highly prize,
And the strong even deifies;
If any where on earth thou rest,
Tic in the valiant English breast;
Dares of the raging floats to swim
With but a board twixt death and him.
And if they so admired of old,
 Those Argonants with courage bold.
First put to sea and without fear
Could see Sea-monsters swimming there:
Much more would they admire them who
Both sees and overcomes them too.
With a courage bold as they
Daring dangers of the Sea.
No wonder Fortune then, who (as w'ar told)
Assists the brave, the gallant, and the bold,
In all their fights assists the English so,
But chiefly we to Oceanus ow
These following Naval fights &amp; victories,
Our Scene next represents unto your eyes.
A Symphony. After which a Naval fight is represented, while the following Song is sung, Alluding to a victory the English formerly gained of the French by Sea, no•• Sluice in Flanders, when all the French at first encounter leapt overboard to save themselves, as it was reported to the French King by his Easter, in vaunting what brave fellows the French were to leap all into the Sea; and how very cowards the English, when never an one of them durst follow them.
So composed, as the Symphony sounds the Alarm whilst they sing
Alarm, alarm, the Enemy comes,
Sound your Trumpet, beat your Drums;
See the foe comes on amain,
Tack about, the wind to gain;
Charge but the first Squadrons home,
All the rest are overcome.
And see they shift their Sails and stand
With their Rudders all for Land.
Hai hai
Victory victory 
How they fly?
How they cry? 
How to save our Swords the pain
They leap into the watery main:
And whilst in vain one death they shun,
They headlong to another run.
But yet they care not so from us they flee,
For of all deaths, the terriblest are we.
BRave Fellow-souldiers, unto you
Only victory is due.
I've execution done on none
But those you first have overcome;
Whose warlike spoils, and Trophies here,
I unto Brittania bear.
Witness of the valiant acts which you have done,
Take breath, take breath awhile,
And intermit your Noble toil,
The better to prepare
Ye to another war.
For see Spains huge Armado come,
For which your Seas have scarcely room.
You'd say, from multitude of these
Did take the name of narrow Seas.
But fear them not, Isle call
Up winds from Eolus den
Shall dissipate them all.
And then
Once put to flight,
They are vanquish ere they come to fight.
The Dance.
Here the four Winds rush in, winged, with swollen Garments and vizards, white plumes of Herons feathers as pussed from their months; and having danced a furious Dance, menacing the Spanish Armado; they all rush out to Sea.
And that this victory was chiefly obtained by the Seas and Winds is confirmed by that saying of Phillip the second, who hearing of the dissipation of his Fleet, answered, that he had set it forth to fight against men, and not the Elements.
HAppy, happy those who are
Heavens peculiar Love and care;
With whom the Skies, and Seas, and Winds
Against their Enemies combins!
For when
States by common ways grow great,
Then men
Malign, and envy their Estate.
But when
To their greatness Heavens conspire,
Then men
No longer envy, but admire.
FAther of trade and sociable band
Binds worlds to worlds and land con∣joins to land
Great Oceanus easy tic for thee
To waft all nations to fair Brittany,
With all they have of precious and rare
Offering up as tribute unto her.
And to her ports all foreign treasures bring
Flowing unto them every precious thing
Until she's rendered by the golden tide
The richest Isle of all the world beside.
But this we chiefly wonder at in thee
Thou can in love so firm and constant be
In all negotiations else, we find,
As ficcle, and inconstant as the wind,
But this is others praise, and not thine own,
This, this, is mighty work of love alone,
And this great love least wonder thou can do
To change our minds, and hearts, and natures too.
A Symphony. After which Brittani• as before, to her Oceanus with the Trophies of the former maritime vi∣ctories.
BEhold the spoils of Nations here,
Thus lowly at your feet I lay.
Of Nations who are taught to fear
Your power, yet they love your sway.
And best supporters of a Throne,
Are love and fear conjo•nd in one.
And best, &amp;c.
For fear is slavish without love.
And love is childish without fear.
Best conjunction still dos prove,
When they both united are.
And best supporters of a Throne,
Are love &amp; fear conjoint in one.
And best, &amp;c.
Mean time may fair Brittania please,
To accept of them in gracious part,
From him, who offering up of these,
D•s offer up his soul and heart:
And best supporters of a Throne,
Are Land and Sea conjoint in one.
And best, &amp;c.
And we as such from King of seas
Do graciously accept of these,
Who when his latter task is done
May count Brittania his own.
And my swift waves shall faster fly,
Then birds feathered wings 'ith sky,▪
Then ships canvas ones 'ith seas,
And (whats yet more swift then these)
Then Joves forked ones in fire,
To accomplish her desire.
Come Europe, swarthy Africa,
Rich Asia and America
Bring your treasures all away
Tributo to pay
Unto Brittanias Throne
Come quickly come.
Here the four parts of the World enter. Asia in Turkish habit, Africa in Moorish, and all black, America, swarthy in a featherd garment; and Europe fair and richly clad. And dancing first severally their entrance they deliver their riches to Oceanus, who presents them to Brittania, in this following Song.
AS to some Eastern Monarchs Throne
Their vassals all with presents come,
So unto Brittanias here.
All the world their presents bear.
Asia Silk, Europe, fruit
Affrique all its wealth to boot.
Neither dos America
Bring less precious things then they.
Besides the riches either End,
Unto fair Brittania send,
Fragrant Odours, Gumms, and Spice,
Gould, and Gems, of highest price,
Nothing that the sense can crave,
Or gust desire, but here you have.
Now all the world is pervious made;
And so immense is her command,
Brittania dos extend her trade,
Where ever there is Sea, or Land.
And now that Oceanus hath
Performed the task he was to do,
In compliance with our faith,
It rests that we perform ours too.
Hark Hymen then unto the vow,
I make to Oceanus now
When ever I prove false to thee
May I cease an Isle to be.
And may I be a Sea no more
When I quit Brittanias shore:
(c) While ther's Moon, and Months, and Tide,
My love to her shall firm abide.
And mine unto the Ocean
(d) Whilst rivers flow and fountains run.
When we each other cease to love,
(c) He mentions Cynthia or the Moon, who facile∣ats his accesses to Brittania (d) and she the fountains and rivers by whom Oceanus insinuates himself into her bosom, by the one with more occult, by the other with more ways open.
May we both unhappy prove.
And When we each other loath,
May we perish, perish both.
Now 'ts time that we by Thames go
The Land as well as main to please,
Who less to have part 'oth pleasures too
May envy our solemnities.
Though Oceanus here too for has cast
His wanton Arms, about many an Lands wast
And as his loose embraces he bestowed
Wildly from one to tother ebbd and flowd,
Yet now you shall see
Once married he'll be,
As Vxorius or more
Then he was Amorous before.
*Tic not fruition that is dull no no
When they are satiate and full,
Tic men are so.
In heaven theirs no such thing
As surefeiting,
And with immortal viands, none is cloyed
When they are enjoyd;
Both born then of immortal race.
 Tellus her Mother, Heaven, his Father was
Like Promotheus his pain
*Their joys shall still renew again.
NOw shall Brittanias fame be knowns
From Suns rise to his going down;
And now from pole to pole shall she
Renowned and celebrated be.
Whilst other lands were never known
Unto the watery Ocean,
As buried in themselves shall lie
In dust, and dull obscurity;
None concerned in the care
Of what they doe nor what they are.
Now finally shall he and she
Through all the world renowned be.
He for Ring, and she the Gemm,
He Circumference again,
And she the Center whither tend
All his Rhombs and Lines. To end,
He sovereign King of the watery Ball,
And she sovereign Queen of all.
This whilst Fame aloud did voice,
All universally rejoice.
More to which joy then to the feast,
We have invited you our guest.
For other cates divided do grow less,
But joys increase.
A Symphony. When the Scene is changed from a Maritime prospect to the pro∣spect of the Town, where first is repre∣scented a confused crowd of Boys and Girls, Porters, Knitting women, and such like Rabble, in the streets, assem∣bled at the cry of new Ballads about a Ballad singer or two, hoarsely and ridiculously singing this following Ballad to the tune of Packingtons pound.
MY masters all pray hark and draw nigh
To the story we'll tel you by and by,
And he is a foe to Englands Glory
Who is not a friend unto our story,
That tells you with our shipping at sea
How famous and renowned we be.
But oh.
The Hollander he is the sturdiest of all,
And all he meets doth beat and maule,
Yet we beat them, as they beat others,
And still are loving friends and brothers.
King Edgar was first by day and by night,
Did build him a Navy with all his might,
Of ships ten thousand great and small,
As writers report (with lye and all)
When pirats durst as well be hanged,
As appear on our coasts, they were so banged.
But oh.
The Dane, when the English ships they be∣hold
Do tremble more for fear, then for cold,
And when they hear the English comes
They more do trust to their sails then their guns
And away they run to their Lapland witches
To buy them a wind to blow in their breeches,
But oh.
Upon the Mediterranean sea
The Italian triumphs, and who but they?
Until with their ships and Galleys the Turk,
With a vengeance makes the Italians work
But we make very Tattardemallians
Both of the Turk and of the Italians.
But oh.
With the French as oft as the English doe fight,
They beat them soundly and give them their right,
And make them at first encounter be glad
To leap over board as if they were mad,
Poor Monsieur who had rather be drowned
Then against the English to stand his ground.
But oh.
Next come the Spaniard in eighty eight
And thinks to conquer all England strait,
But we taught them this proverb at their return
That they came for wool, and went home again shorn,
And since full oft at Cales &amp; Canaries
Have paid them soundly for all their figa∣ries
But oh.
Now heaven preserve our Navy long,
And make it every day more strong,
And above all, heaven grant that we
May amongst our selves but well agree,
And then a sig for the Spaniard and Dane,
The Italian, the Turk, and the Devil again and Though
The Hollander be the sturdiest of all
And all he meets doth beat and maul,
Yet we'll beat them as they beat others,
And still be loving friends and brothers.
Here all the Rabble vanishes at sight of Brittania and Oceanus appearing Inthrond in state, &amp;c. and sound of delicate Music introducing the last Dance of two gallantly clad, represen∣ting the Nobility and Gentry, who dance to a Courtly measure. Two in civil black Representing the Burgess &amp; Citizen, who dance a Galliard. And lastly, two Country swains in all their Country bravery, dancing a Jig, or Country dance. After which they pause, while this following Song is sung by way of Epologue.
THe marriage of this Royal pair,
Aloud proclaimed every where,
Nobility, Gentry, Citizen, and
Honest Swain, or Countrymen,
Every one in dance declare
How highly they contented are;
And having finished their Ball,
For conclusion of all,
There remains no more to do
But to declare that you're contented too.

HEy Boys! —Never did my Spirit
chirp more cheerfully since I had one.
Here is work for Platonic. Never did
Ladies, brave buxom Girls dispense at
easier rates with their forfeited Honours.
This were an excellent age for that To∣man
Carvilius to live in: who never loved any sheets worcester∣ser
then those his Wife lay in. Nor his Wife any lodging
worse, then where her decrepit Consort slept in. Divorces
are now as common, as scolding at Billingsgate. O Ali∣money,
Alimony a Darling incomparably dearer, then a
seere-icy Bed possessed of the spirit of a dull unactive Hus∣band!
A fresh flowery Spring, and a chill frosty Winter no∣ver
suit well together. He were a rare Justice in these
times of Separation, who had the Ceremonial art to join
Hearts together as well as Hands: but that Chemical Ce∣meant
is above the Alchemy of his Office: or verge of his
ministerial Charge. —Hey day! who comes here? The
very professed Smock-satyr, or Woman-hater in all Europe.
One, who had he lived in that State or under that Zone,
might have compared with any Swetnam in all the Albion
Island.
But sure he has some high design in hand, he pores so
fixedly upon the ground, as on my life he has some swinging
stuff for our fresh Dabrides, who have invested themselves
in the Platonic Order: and retain courage enough to
make an exchange of their old Consorts with their new
Confidants and amorous pretenders. —Let us hear him,
he mumbles so strangely, he must surely either disburden
self, or stifle his teeming Birth for want of timely de∣livery.
Good, as I live wondrous good: this is the way
to catch the old one. Be all things ready Siparius?
How do you mean Sir?
What a drolling bufflehead is this. —He has been
Book-holder to my Revels for decades of years, and the
Cuckoldry Drone, as if he had slept in Triphonius cave, all
his days, desires to know my meaning in the Track of his
own Calling! —Sir, shall I question you in your own Dia∣lect?
Be your Stage-curtains artificially drawn, and so
covertly shrouded, as the squint-ey'd Groundling may not
peep in to your discovery?
Leave that care to me Sir; it is my charge.
But were our Bills posted, that our House may
be with a numerous Auditory stored; our Boxes by Ladies
of quality and of the new dress croudingly furnished; our
Galleries and Ground-front answerably to their Pay
completed?
Assure you self Sir, nothing is a wanting; that may
give way to the Poets improvement.
Thou say well; this is indeed the Poets third
day: and must raise his Pericranium deeply steeped in Fron∣tineack,
a fair revenue for his rich Timonick Fancy; or he
must take a long adieu of the spirit of Sack and that no∣ble
Napry till the next Vintage. —But Siparius.
Your will Sir.
Be sure, that you hold not your Book at too much
distance: the Actors, poor Lapwings, are but pen-fea∣thread:
and once out, out for ever. We had a time, in∣deed,
and it was a golden time for a pregnant Fancy; when the Actor could embellish his Author, and return a Pean to his Pen in every accent. But our great disaster at Canoe, then which none ever more tragical to our Theatre, made a speedy dispatch of our rarest Roscio's, closing them joint∣lie in one Funeral Epilogue. —Now for you Boy, as you play the Chorus, so be mindful of your Hint. I know you to be a Wag by nature; and you must play the Waggish Actor.
I shall not sleep in my action Sir; if your line have so much life as to provoke a laughter; I shall not strangle the height of your Conceit with a dull gesture: nor weaken the weight of your Plot with too flat or un∣becoming a deportment.
Thou promise fairly; go on.
And so does Timon too, or his judgement fails him. —Well, I will accoast him. —Health to our stock of Stoical wit, ingenious Timon. —Come Sir, what brave Dramatic Piece has your running Mercury now upon the Loom? The Title of your new Play, Sir?
Every Post may sufficiently inform you: nay the Fame of the City cannot choose but echo it to you: so much is expected: neither shall you discover a Mouse peeping out of a Mountain, believe it.
No; nor a Monkey dancing his Trick-a-tee on a Rope, for want of strong Lines from the Poets pen.
You are in the right on it, Trillo; These Pigmies of mine shall not play the egregious Puppies in deluding an ignorant Rabble with the sad presentment of a  roasted Savage.
Your Conceit is above the scale of admiration. —But the Subject of your Invention, Sir, where may you lay your Scene: and what Name you bestow upon this long expected Comedy?
My Scene, Trillo, is  Horn-Alley: the Name it bears, is LADY ALIMONY. The Subject I shall not pre∣occupate: Let the Pansies of my thirsty Auditory fall a working; if ever their small expense confined to three
Where th'Stage breaths Lines, Scions, Subject, Action fit,
Th'Age must admire it, or it has no Wit.
This was  CASSANDRA's loss: whom we allow

BEfore I entered, I was told what now
I see deciphered upon every brovv;
A sullen sadness, and close murmurs say,
"The Title is enough to damn the Play
"The Bill condemns before the Action, Pox
"Upon the Poet with his Paradox,
"Noble Ingratitude, o barbarous sound!
"Virtue will die to see that Monster crovvn'd:
Strange voices these, strange censures from the vvits,
For such he take you, every one that sits
Sp•ctat•ur here
usurps a privilege,
Which is unjust, before he hears, to judge,
Wise, and just Juries, who in every cause
Strictly observe the custom of the Lavvs,
The bottom sound, and ne'er their verdicts bring
Upon the superficies of a thing;
They vveigh the ground of matters well, and ne'er
Proceed to sentence till they see all clear;
Have patience then a little, and suspend
Your judgments till you see us at the end
Of the fifth Act; three hours will soon be passed,
In Scions and Songs the minutes fly too fast;
Then if we do'nt maintain our Paradox,
Let me be shamed, and sit three hours in the stocks
For punishing your patience; if the crime
Deserves more rigour, let a longer time
Of penance be prescribed me there; but I
Hope from your judgments, justice, clemency,
A nobler sentence, and that you'll allovv
Me next a Lavvrell vvreath to crown my brovv.
CHarming abode, delightful so∣litude,
Fair places where I first received my life
And love, old trees, clear brooks, whose shade and
murmur
Speak pity for my sorrowful adventure,
Sweet Zephirs, Echo, nocks, and silent forests,
Be witnesses all of my secret griefs:
I am no more now that Zelinda some∣time
Adored by the worthiest Lovers of
The country round about; alas! I serve
Under the habit of a Slave, a traitor
With an unparraleld'd fidelity,
Traitor in Love, I mean, not otherwise,
A Hero, but ungrateful, one who slatters me
In my extreme misfortune, yet would hate me,
If he knew that I Love him. Gentle trees,
Happy are you, although the rigorous Winter
Uses you hardly, for when the fair Spring
Makes the cold to cease, you suddenly
Resume your anciet verdure, and at harvest,
Upon your branches wee see fruits, where formerly
Hung Icicles: my fortune's not so good;
Each of the seasons have twice changed, since Love
Resolved to afflict me, all which time
I've languished continually, and could not
Pretend to the repose my heart hath lost:
He whom I love with so much constancy
Is false and fleeting; o Gods! here he comet.
Ormin, I sought thee.
Sir, I sought you also.
Know that to morrow we will depart hence.
What! will you leave so soon your native country,
These cottages, these woods and these fair
meadows?
I have not hid from thee that in those places
I love the sweet Fatima, a rich
Master-peice
Of Heaven, and hoped to see that Beauty here
So cherished and adored; but I have learned
That she is now at Tunis with her Father;
And though this happy residence may be said
To be a second Paradise, I cannot
See any fair thing here, since she is absent.
How happy is Fatima, and how miserable
Am I! — 
How grievous is her absence to
My amorous soul! to render me by her,
To morrow by the break of day we'll take
Our way for Tunis, I shall be too happy,
If I may see her, and I do believe
That she will bear some part too in my joy;
She had no little trouble, I perceived,
For my departure last, and without doubt
I'm not indifferent to her.
Certainly
Her flame will not be quenched.
That's all my hope.
And that is all my fear — 
Cheer up, cheer up,
Smother your sighs, I have a counter poison
For all your sorrows.
Speak it then without
Holding us long in trouble.
Give me leave.
First, if you please, to take a little breath.
Speak then?
I'm not disposed yet.
Oh thou make me.
Suffer too much? tell it unto us quickly.
You might die with it.
Is it then some misfortune
Sent me by destiny?
I say agiane.
You might die with it, but t'would be with joy;
Fatima yesterday late in the evening
Arrived in these quarters.
Is it possible,
Fatima?
Yes, assure you, I have seen her.
Perhaps thou art deceived.
I am no ass.
I did observe her well, and knew her per∣fectly.
Her Slave, who was my Mistress formerly,
Entered just now with her into that wood.
Good Gods? do I not see her?
Yes, that's she
Which passes by.
What lustre hath her eye,
What grace her gate?
Alas?
I see a thousand new charms there.
Are you besotted? will you not salute her?
No, to perform that complement, I'll give her
A visit, when I shall have without doubt
My soul less in disorder.
For m•
part,
Who do not love so daintily, I will,
Without deferring it, make my address.
Without discovering our selves, we may
From hence know by the usage of the ser∣vant,
In what esteem the Master is at present.
SWeet Beauties welcome, from what quarters come you?
What means this insolent? Go on your way
How's this? instead of kisses and embraces,
As I expected, I am quarrel▪d with:
Charifa, whence this change?
Begone, and leave us.
Thou act well the scornful.
What's that follow
Which follows us?
Tic an impertinent,
Whom I know not.
I am much changed then
Since this last voyage; but thy soul is changed
And not my visage, without doubt thy Mistress
Hath better eyes, and more wit; she will know
An old, and a familiar acquaintance.
who are you then?
My Masters Slave.
What Master?
Should you not know him neither?
Is his name razed out of your memory?
Assuredly, Charifa, this man's mad.
How, Madam, is it possible you can
Forget the valiant Zegry?
Zegry?
Heaven?
What strange inconstancy is this? who e∣ver
Could have imagined it? — 
That noble and illustrious successor
Of those brave warriors who even in Spain
Have gathered Laurels, and brought home fair spoils,
Madam, your faithful Lover, Zaida's bro∣there.
Oh! I remember him.
False, and Ungrateful!
You ask not how he doth.
What interest
Have I in his sweet person? happily
He's dead.
He is indeed.
We are all mortal;
The Prophet hath his soul.
A faithful servant
Would have accompanied his Master; why
Art thou not dead too?
Only to enrage thee.
Zegry discovering himself.
The Prophet hath his soul, o false Fati∣ma!
Is it thus you do express your goodness to me?
Deceitful object, my return, I see,
Displeases you, who would despise me dead,
Must hate me living, I disturb with plea∣sure
That faithless joy which the delightful news
Of my feigned death procured you: I live still
Ungrateful, but I live no more for you:
My passion is transformed all into fury:
As much as I loved you, I now despise you:
My heart shakes of so rigorous a yoke:
Love raises no more sighs, nor fires within me,
Only I sigh that I used so much care
To please you, and if I burn yet, it is
With anger, not with love.
Oh this success
Answers my wishes fully? — 
This confession
Surprises, but no way afflicted me;
My first discourse should make you under∣stand
That I'm not very tender hearted to you,
And, me thinks, after such a clear con∣tempt
As was expressed there you might believe
Nothing should trouble me that comes from you,
Unless your amorous address: I have
A thousand other Lovers braver far
Then you, and therefore I deign not to put you
In the rank of my conquests.
Sure, your pride
Is greater then your beauty, the charm is
Dissolved wherein I formerly was held;
Tic true, I sometime thought you beauti∣full;
But I was amorous, and therefore not
To be believed, having now my spirit
No more disordered, you cease to be fair
And I to be abused, whereas you
Pleased me formerly, it was because
It is impossible for me, when I
Am loved, to be insensible.
I love you?
Heaven! what a strange opinion is this?
I never had but strong aversion for you.
All your endeavours served but to displease me;
But though I hated you, I loved your Si∣ster,
And t▪ was for her sake that I feigned to have
Some pity for your passions; her prayer
A hundred times restain'd my hate, you swear
That your days did depend upon my sight,
And yielding unto her desites I did
Enforce mine eyes to smile, when my heart frowned,
To the end not to be cause of your death.
Your eyes have never made a mortal wound.
Take heed that your do not revive again,
One Only of my looks darted more gently,
Can change this violent anger into love;
But I am very nice of such a look,
It is too rich a price, Sir, for your conquest
I limit my desires to see you never,
Adieu, become wise, and leave me in peace.
YEs false Fatima, I will become wise,
Thy contempt is unjust, but mine is lawful:
Since thou pretend but to make thee hated,
I will obey thee, thy unworthy trophy,
My heart shall be no more, his charms are broken,
His flames are quenched; Alabez, follow her
Close at the heels, even unto her house;
But have a care not to discover thee.
Her pride's unjust, and not to be endured;
Your change herein is but too equitable,
O how well should you do to free your heart
From the imperious captivity
Of such a cruel conqueror, you are
Born with too many fair advantages,
To obtain nothing but eternal wrongs;
There are Sir, other beauties in the world
Which would be glad to share their flame with yours,
To imitate your sighs, and which would tell you
That the resplendent honour of a crown
Is beneath that to be beloved of
An object that one loves Contempt in love
Deserves to be repaid with contempt,
And who refuses, is not worthy of,
For the most part, the person that's refused.
How great my griefs are, and how grievous is
This proud contempt? o light, and wave∣ring Sex!
O black ingratitude! since love began
To trouble Lovers, was there ever torment
Equal to mine? I feel my heart infected
With all imaginary griefs.
Oh? Sir,
Believe me, I know some that are much more
To be lamented, and if what I know
Were reveled to you, you should have great cause
Of comfort by it.
Oh speak, and divert
The grief which doth oppress me. of∣tentimes
A wretch is pleased in his misery
When he sees that he suffers not alone.
O love, I pray thee make his heart grow tender
At the recital of the evil which he
Hath caused me, oh make him Sensible
Of my sad sufferings? — 
A young Beauty, Sir,
Whose name and birth, if you please I'll conceal
Through decency, only thus much I'll tell you,
That she was near to me and loved me deer∣lie,
Scarce yet attained to the fifteenth year,
When love and marriage was proposed to her,
And she commanded to expect for hus∣band
A man too lovely, and to much beloved;
And who for his part was so far from being
Warmed with a mutual flame, that he un∣lawfully
Took an affection for another object:
His faithful Lover with grief understood it
But yet a worse misfortune afterword
Surprised her, the ungrateful brak the ac∣cord
Of the approaching marriage, and departed
For a long voyage without seeing her;
I can assure you that her grief was quick,
And anger ardent after this affront;
But yet her anger was less then her love:
Although, the inconstant left her, she re∣tain'd him
Still in her soul, and valuing not her sex,
Nor fearing death, i▪ the habit of a man
She followed his steps.
O barbarous rigour!
O lamentable passion!
You will be
More touched when you shall know the rest: scarce was
she
Embarked on the sea, when by a new,
And worse misfortune certain infamous to∣verse
Surprised her vessel, and not long time after
They sold her unto that ungrateful man,
Who falsely and unworthly forsook her:
And so at last it happened that Fortune
As well as Love would put her into chains:
But she still without changing heart, or habit,
Found sweetness in this double slavery;
Far from desiring to be free, she followed
Her faithless friend into his native coun∣try,
And fearing not to be discovered,
Served this deceitful Master without hope,
Endeavoured to please him, and therein
Prospered so well, that he esteemed her zeal,
And concealed nothing from her; but this kindness
Was not a cure, but cursive to her grief,
Because it made her privy to the happi∣nes
Her Rival did enjoy in the affection
Of him she loved, who every day protested
Unto her, that rather then lose her love,
He'd lose his life.
Unparalleled punishment!
Cruel injustice!
Gods! he grows tender,
Love be propitious to me, — 
Sir, what say you,
Is not she more then you to be lamented?
Compared to her torments, your afflictions
Are sweet. You answer not.
Yes, yes, I grant it
I ought to hate her, but I've too much weakness:
Oh fair Fatima!
Oh my hard misfortune!
Ormin, what charms she hath?
You answer nothing
To what I said.
What spoke thou to me of?
Of a young maid
Oppressed and injured in love.
My thoughts
Were otherwise employed, and troubled,
I heard thee not, at least I have forgotten.
You seemed to compassionate her grief,
And her misfortune very much.
Alas!
I only thought upon my proper grief.
What! shall the ungrateful and cruel Fatima
Although she quits your heart thus, have the glory
To live still in your memory? oh no,
Banish her thence; but if you'll think of her,
To ease your evils a little, employ your thought
Only to think of her defects; remember
That she's too proud, and fancy to your self
That she's not fair enough, to hold so no∣ble
And such a faithful Lover as you are,
That there is nothing charming in her eyes,
Nor in her cheeks, that her proportion,
Her posture, stature, gate, and carriage
Have nothing commendable, that her wit —
Ormin, no more, I cannot suffer yet
She should be injured; that ungrateful Beauty,
Who laughs with scorn at my sad languish∣meant,
Hath no defect at all but her fierce rigour;
And I fear that in spite of this defect,
My violent love will triumph o'er mine an∣ger.
What, shall Fatima be so proud, and you
So humble? shall she be composed of Ice,
And you of fire? must you persist to love her,
When she despises you? oh fall no more
Into that fatal error. It belongs, Sir
But to low spirits to suffer without hate,
Such a contempt; to leave what flies us,
Is little trouble, and when hope is quenched,
Love should be querched also.
What thou say,
Ormin, is very true, I should indeed
Follow Fatima in her lightness to me,
I should in her unkindness trace her steps,
I should be as insensible as she's
Severe and rigorous, my flam'es an er∣roar,
I doe confess it, but I love this error,
Thy faithful counsels are not seasonable,
Love hath not yet given place unto my rea∣son,
I'm born to languish, and to die for her;
Although she be ungrateful she is not
The less fair for it.
The false hope that flattered me
Fled in a moment; miserable Lover,
And too unjust! — 
FRiend, I am very joyful
To meet thee.
My content is still complete,
When I behold thy face, as in thy absence,
Nothing seems sweet unto me: Now I see
You are habitat like us, this garment is
Well made.
I took it just now in th'apartment
I have in thy abode.
This Shepherds habit
Becomes thee rarely; but for an Almansor,
It is too much abasement.
Sure the habit
Takes nothing from the lustre of the merit,
In imitating thee, I cannot err;
Thee, whose heart is as noble as thy race,
And unto whose aid in an eminent danger
I owe my life.
The Shepherds of this wood
And fair Companion, are descended from
Those Heroes, who in time passed conquered Spain
From those renowned Moors, whose great ex∣ploits
Made the Kings of a hundred Christian people
Tremble for fear, and who seeing Tunis
con∣quer'd
By Charls the fifth, conserve here in these
places
Their glory and their freedom, secretly
Dispose the hearts of the most Zealous Kings
To drive the Christias frō this desolate coūtry,
And are in readiness to join themselves,
And to increase the first fair levies which
Shall be employed on such an expedition.
I know that this fair desert's like a Court:
But hast thou heard yet that Gomella is
Returned heer? suffer me at present, Zegry,
To leave thee, he is my familiar friend,
And I owe him a visit.
Then thou know
Fatima.
Yes, that Beauty hath received
The light from brave Gomella; friend adieu,
I will return to thee with speed, excuse me
At present, I must speak with him upon
A business of importance. — 
A business of importance? oh that word
Redoubles my affliction; to marry
Fatima, without doubt, is his design:
Oh Heave? hast thou ordained that, to make up
The full proportion of my misery,
My dearest friēd should rob me of my Mistress?
Alas! if this be true, grief, fure will kill me;
Dear Ormin, let us use our best endeavour
To hinder this misfortune; I expect
My only remedy from thy advise.
The most resplendent wit yeildeth to thine
In point of knowledge, I have observed in
thee
Something thats great, and extraordinary;
Thy judgment charms me, and thy care sir∣priseth me.
Sir, I'm your Slave, and glory to be so.
No, no, I make thee free, henceforth be thou
Thy Masters friend.
The sweetest liberty
Pleases my fancy less then the chains which
I bear for you.
This zeal so little common,
Makes me grow tender, and amazes me.
Quit, quit thy fetters, Ormin, I commmand it,
Be free.
Since tic your pleasure, I obey;
Alas! what have I said, Love, can I
be
At liberty, when my heart is not free?
ENter again, sweet Said, ceremony
Between us should be banished, wherefore will you
Trouble your self unnecessarily?
Since you will have it so, I'll go no further.
I may assure my self then ere we part,
That Adibar shall have no free admittance
To your society, I have already
Told you, that formerly he loved me;
But now I know that you give laws to him
And I have cause to hope that, if you scorn him,
He may return unto his first subjection.
Fatima, be assured that he shall be
Repulsed, his love will be but troublesome;
But if you love me, forget not to feign
Some kindness for my brother; I beseech you
For my sake give him cause to hope a little.
Adieu, I promise you that at next meeting
I will receive him better. — 
WHat think thou
Of fair Fatima, and of her request?
I think that Adibar is not a person
To be despised.
True, but I am too proud
T'accept a heart that hath been conquered
By any other, and would now be mine
Trough an inconstancy, but if I durst
To love —
Why stop you, Madam?
Oh Medina!
I must not speak the rest.
But I divine it;
You are in love, and I have cause to judge
That it is with Almansor, that fair
stranger
Who, I in love with him?
Why not, I pray you,
Is that a crime?
Oh do not name that love,
Which is no other but a fair esteem.
There is so little difference between
Esteem and love, that often times we take then
One for the other, and are so deceived.
I cannot but remember that my brother
In his last voyage did conclude my marriage
In Argier, that he who's designed to be
My husband, is heer shortly to arrive,
And that my heart ought to reserve it self
Wholly for him. Besides in thy opinion.
Would it not argue a great weakness in me
To love this stranger, though my brothers friend.
Who hath not been above a month among u•
And whose desert as yet's unknown unto me
Seeing this Stranger, who's not of the vulgate,
Deserves to be caressed of your brother,
There's reason to believe that he deserves
To be your Lover, and I can't conceive
Why your mouth will conceal the flame which is
So clearly for him in your eyes and count∣nonce.
As often as he comes with your brother
To visit you, your looks seem to be fixed
Wholly one him, and at the same time also
I observed often that the stranger eyed you
With the same ardour.
Prithee, speak in earnest,
Did see him to behold me oftentimes?
You ask it me with very much impressement:
I do believe in less time then an hour,
That you have questioned me upon this point
More then a hundred times; your curiosity
Gives me a full assurance that his looks
Displease you not, nor wound your modesty
Alas! can one in justice be offended,
To be beloved?
If his love pleases you, I think his
person
Will please you equally.
I consider him
Without interpreter; but perhaps, he loves
Elsewhere, and I may be unpleasing to him.
Madam, although you fain would cover it,
This fond suspicion publishes your flame,
Jealousy always is daughter of love.
would it pleased Heaven, that he were free, and that
He thought me fair, But I see him come forth
Gomella's house, I'll satisfy my
self
In sounding of his soul, upon this bank
I will repose my self, and feign to
sleep.
VVhat's your design? I cannot comprehend it.
VVithdraw, anon thou't understand it better.
Gomella is expecting his return.
In visit, heer I may conveniently
Dream of my new love: Heaven! do I not see
Under that flourishing shade the beauteous subject
Of my sad sufferings? Love in this encounter
Seems to flatter me sufficiently;
It is the lovely Said without doubt:
How sweetly, and with what tranquillity
Doth that fair one repose, whilst wretched I
Languish with the disease which she procures me?
Surely she cannot hear me now, I may
Speak at this present unto her of love,
And not offend her; but alas! the rigour
Of my sad destiny is great, when I
Presume to speak, I fear that she may hear me.
You that have taught me the true use of sighs,
Dear object of my joy and of my griefs;
Suffer my amorous and silent soul.
T▪ express its secret passion before
you,
And to complain heer of a thousand evils
Which you have made me suffer, yet unkrown
Unto your self: and you resplendent sources
Of all my fires, from whence I have derived
Such violent heats, fair charming eyes, the au∣thors
Of my captivity, enjoy the rest,
Which your have taken from me: If I see
The poppies which shut up your lids, be not
Offended that you lose your lights, the Sun
Is subject to the same eclipse, and can
No more then you, dispense himself thereof.
Almansor.
Sure, she dreams.
Oh! rigorous torment!
To burn, to languish, and not dare to speak it,
Alas!
O Heaven! what hear I?
We resent
One and the same heat.
Oh! that it were true!
My modesty, excuse me.
O favourable sleep!
Cruel constraints!
When shall we be content, when shall our plaints
Have end?
In this great ecstasy of joy,
All my respects are vain; to give her thanks.
I'll kiss her fair hands. — 
Hold, insolent; whence doth proceed this bold∣nes? —
What have I done? — 
I came to give you thanks.
For what?
Tic for your goodness.
Now, I know not:
I'm sure I never gave you any matter
For this acknowledgment, who ever will
Consult the appearance of the thing, shall find
That I have much indifference for you;
But though I had less, was it fit to trouble
My rest, in making your acknowledgement?
Excuse my transport, beauteous Shepherdess,
If I had less loved, I had been less guilty;
In this occasion a Wary Lover
Would have expressed little love in showing
Too much respect; and whatsoer my crime be,
It would be pardoned, if you slept still;
But, alas! my good fortune is soon changed,
I find that you awake but to afflict me,
Your eyes in taking unto them again
Their grace and lustre, take unto them also
At the same time their usual cruelty.
And that most charming hope which I so little
Enjoyed, vanished with your sleep.
This is
An ill expression of your self, that word
Of hope gives me astonishment, I never
Gave it, nor took it yet from any person.
If I might dare to credit your discourse,
At least you had not an aversion for me,
Nothing would be equal to my good fortune,
You would not find my presence trouble so∣me,
I should be used better, I should be
Esteemed and possibly—
Proceed.
I might be
Beloved.
Beloved! of whom; if you magine
Of me, you are mistaken.
Notwithstanding
You honoured me so much to tell me so:
If I may but believe your voice, I have
Place in your heart, you are my witness and
My judge both at one time; oh disavow not
That favourable sentence, that fair Oracle
Proceeding from an adorable mouth,
Those words so full of charms pronounced in sleep,
Which promised me blessings sosoon vanished
I dreamt, Almansor, and you are not ignorant
That a dream oftentimes is a deceiver,
And still a lie.
True, a dream is my glory;
But I have passions which are real truths,
The flame with in mine eyes hath appeared to you
Too clear, to be concealed, and the coldness
Which you express unto me, quenches not
My love, altbough it ruineth my hope.
This love comes very late, and really
I'm troubled at it, you know well that I
Am otherwise engaged.
Alas! I cannot
Deny but I have heard say that a Lover
Favoured of Heaven is to come shortly heer
To take you from mine eyes, I know you love him
Before you see him, therefore I'll not trouble
Your pleasures, nor his joy: how great soever
His happiness be, I do intend to suffer it
Without complaining of you, but withal
I doe intend to die. As soon as you
Shall depart hence upon the fatal voyage
Ordained, where your happy marriage
Must be accomplished, Know, at the same time,
That you shall see me in my griefs excess
Depart to go unto the grave, where those
Remains of fire which sparkle in my bosom,
Atter my death shall still yet warm my ashes.
SAID; Fortune doth ow you, Sir, a happier lot
ELM: My good or evil lot depends on you.
All other favours would be troublesome:
Lastly I do adore you, and not fortune.
What expect you from me in the condition
Wherein I am?
Immortal heats and torments;
I still must love without hope to be loved.
Who loves much, may hope to be loved like∣wise.
What may I hope one day for better usage?
Consult with your fidelity upon it.
ELM: Your soul appears too insensible
To love.
SAID: A constant Lover may do much;
The first refusal ought not to astonish
Any one that hath love enough to give it.
Oh this is plain enough to my glad sense!
The blood strikes up unto my brow; alas!
I've said too much, and now I blush for shame on it.
ELM: This glorious confession rendered me
Too happy and content.
SAID: Dreams sometimes are not
Without effect; but the Sun hath already
Finished his career, let us go in
Yet further to discourse upon this matter
I fear that troublesome.
Without too much ambition may I hope
The honour to take you by the fair hand
The one is free, may I presume to kiss it?
I have no need, Sir, of your services.
They may be worth a Strangers, notwith∣standing
Your scorn of me.
In thinking to oblige me,
You may displease me, by this odd expression.
The Prophet, who knows how I reverence you,
Knows also how far forth I fear your anger,
And the cares which I take, should well as∣sure you,
That I come heer but for to honour you:
May I aside declare a secret to you?
Of some importance?
Nothing is so important
As decency, which in the opinion
Of every one, allows we not the Liberty
To hear the secrets of such as you are.
I desire nothing of you what another
Doth not obtain.
His discourse pleases me,
And yours I hate.
You take an unfit time
To tell your secrets, to the indiscreet
Love seldom is propitious; the incivility
Which your pride doth express, is an ill meās
To gain esteem.
I am not heer to take
Lessons from you.
I give them to your equals
To all intents and purposes.
This passion.
Which carries you away, convicted you,
And doth excuse me of the incivility
Wherewith your error charge me; a man
Better instructed, to avoid suspicion,
Would have retired himself out of respect;
You are too gross; but as you are a Stranger,
I ought to bear a little with your ignorance.
You have the faults which you cōdemn in him;
This Stranger doth oblige me, and you trow∣ble me.
Yet you should take away your hand from him — to
Said.
If she should do it, you would be in danger.
In quitting her, you might run to your death.
I respect Said, you I do despise.
If by the same respect I were not stopped,
In my revenge, your punishment should soon
Follow your insolence.
These hasty motions
Are sorry pastimes for me; by this violence
I know that neither of you doth respect me,
But both offend me.
Do you take
Your hand from me to answer his desires?
My Rival will become too proud at this:
Should you affrōt me wit design to please him?
By what right also am I bound to give
You satisfaction?
Madam, I beseech you,
Use no constraint to your free inclination
In my behalf, I know which of us two
Pleases you best, I yield to him in fortune,
And perhaps too in merit, his discourse
Is acceptable, mine is hateful to you;
Of this truth I cannot be ignorant;
Therefore to the end I may not trouble you,
I will retire me, my respect for you
Is stronger then the jealousy, wherewith
My amorous soul is justly seized now,
And I will force all my resentiments for you,
Yea evē to hate my self, if you should hate me.
Let here my happy Rival without trouble
Discourse with you, establish, if you please,
His happiness at the expense of mine;
But take this into your consideration
That Adibar, who quits you with regret,
Though the least loved, is not the least discreet.
Where go you Adibar? come back again.
My absence will oblige you.
No, once more
I say come back again; if you esteem me,
You will return, to take away suspicions
Opposed to my glory, lend me, pray you,
Your hand, and lead me back. — 
Oh! I cannot
Suffer this cruel injury.
Almansor,
Stay I command you, on pain of my hate.
Hear me a word or two,
I can't be moved.
Reason I hear, and duty is my guide.
What unexpected cl•• 〈◊〉 thunder's
this,
Which ruineth my joy thus with my ho∣pe?
Reason I hear, and duty is my guide;
My constancy, at these words gives place
To my despair; and duty is my guide
No, cruel Said in following Adibar,
Tic Love that guides you: but what! I may be
Too rash in censuring her so; perhaps
She doth enforce herself in quitting me,
And doth prefer my Rival here before me,
To take off all suspicion of our love.
She loves, she loves me; oh! what say I,
fool?
without doubt she hath left me through con∣tempt.
Love, like to fickle Fortune is inconstant,
His Empire, doth resemble his who doth
Command the sea, where nothing is secure,
To day a calm, to morrow a sad storm,
And every minute, the most fortunate
Upon that element, may fear a change.
Even in the Port, We often suffer Shipwreck:
These are sad truths, whereof I need not
doubt:
But what makes my Slave so hastily
T'addresse his steps unto me?
Hast thou found
Gomella?
Yes, Sir. and I think that he
Advāceth heer with large steps to embrace yo•▪
Tic that which my care should prevent.
Must I
Withdraw whilst you discourse?
Yes, and be sure
Thou fail not to prepare for me a consort
Of Music.
How a consort, Sir, so late?
Go quickly, and without reply.
Oh! Sir,
How glad am I to see you heer again?
My joy in seeing you is no less great:
But speak we of my mother.
Stay her coming;
To morrow without fail she arrives here
Unknown.
Unknown! and why dares she not to be see•▪
The secret only you must know from her,
Comes not my Sister?
You must not expect her.
Where is her residence?
I cannot tell you.
How's this, Gomella, what can I imagine
In the uncertainty wherein you leave me?
I am astonished at this proceeding;
Your obscure language is a clear presage
Of a concealed misfortune: Oh! my Sister
Is dead, I need not doubt it.
Her death is not
The evil which should attrist you.
What, is it then
Happened unto her?
No, but something worse.
That word is not sufficient to clear me:
Shall I not know why I received an
order
To depart from Tremissa where I was
Brought up, to come with al speed to these quarters,
T'addresse my self to you with confidence,
To change my true name of Abencerage
Into that of Almansor, and to have
A care not to reveal my family?
Upon this point I must shut up my mouth;
I'm not allowed to say more unto you.
It is you Mothers absolute injunction,
And request to me; have but patience
Until to morrow, when you shall be satisfied
From her own mouth; but the Sun, I perceive
Already grows pale before the Moon.
Enter into my cot, and take with me
A poor repast.
I doe desire to be
Dispensed thereof now, if it pleases you.
Where will you go?
Zegry expected me
On my engagement at his house to night.
Zegry, what say you, what charm doth oblige
you
To answer so ill to Abencerage name,
To that debate, which for a thousand reason
Is, between your two houses, as it were,
Hereditary?
A far juster duty
Invites me to love him: but for him,
I'd lost my life in Cairo, treacherous
enemies
Encompassed me round, and had he not
Succoured me speedily, I had been murdered
His name, which I knew well without disco∣vering
Mine own, disturbed my new born amity;
But his, goodness for me, his cares, his kindness•
Soon dissipated all those old resentements;
And so in order to the friendship which
Conjoined us, at last we came together
Into this country, where I was obliged
By the same frienship to lodge no where else
But at home with him.
GOM: Oh Heaven! but proceed.
You know his Sister: at first sight of her,
I was her servant: by a powerful charm
Whose art she only knows, her fair eyes paid
But one look for the purchase of my heart;
And if the God of marriage. —
Soft, hold there.
Take heed you flatter not your self with such
A fatal hope, destroy your passions,
Or you destroy your honour.
How, my honour?
Yes, Sir, your honour, what! doth this discourse
Surprise and trouble you?
I fear the name
Of an ungrateful person.
Fear that also
Of a low spirited one; these shameful motion
Do wound your duty.
May I not know how?
To morrow, when you see your Mother here,
You shall be satisfied, in the mean time,
Hate both the Sister, and the brother.
ELM: Hate them?
I who have been so much obliged unto them?
No, no, I swear —
GOM: Swear not but let us enter;
Your mind will change, when you have heard th'adventure.
THe night approaches, it is time to put
This letter with my hope into thy hands:
Work on her Slave, and act discreetly, that
She take this diamond from thee, afterword
Use all the skill thou hast to know the secrets
Of her disdainful Mistress, and consider
That I expect at thy return to hear
The sentence of my life, or of my death.
Cruel commandment, whereunto I see
My self reduced! — 
One word, Sir, ere I go.
Think well upon it yet, what hope have you?
Your importunities will increase her anger,
And you should do much better, If I durst
To tell you so, henceforth to free your self
Of this unworthy Empire; as love is
The price of love, so hate should always be
The recompense of hate, and of contempt.
Your soul's are too ill suited to unite,
Love loses his power in Antipathies,
And tic an equal crime, Sir, in a contrary
Effect, to hate who Loves us, or to love
Who hates us.
Oh! speak no more on 't unto me:
My evill's invincible, and my soul feels
Too sensibly the charms which doe destroy me;
To overcome my griefs, which have no equals
I seek some gentle succour, and not counsel,
My chain, alas! is too strong, and my heart
Too weak, as not to yield unto the torrent
which carries me away.
O rigorous Fate! — 
But if all your endeavours ate in vain,
If fierce Fatima still persist in her
Former disdains —
what pleasure dost thou take
T'increase my troubles? hide her rigours to me
And speak but of her charms: my heart is tried
By torments great enough, it need not be
afflicted with an evil not yet arrived.
flatter my weakness, though therein thou show
Thy self less faithful, if thou dost desire
To interest thy self in my misfortunes.
Sir, if your eyes could penetrate into
The secrets of my heart, you would soon find
How great an interest I take in them,
And that if your lot lay within my power.
Your pleasures should soon pass your hope, I
call
The Prophet, so much honoured amongst us,
To witness, that I feel the counterstroaks
Of all your troubles, that I'm grieved for them
As much as you, and tremble in like manner,
Lastly that you are dearer to me far
Then you imagine, that my happiness
Depends on the success of your amours,
And that it is for you alone my heart
Makes its devotions.
Grant it gracious Heaven
That thy zeal happily succeed in touching
In my behalf the soul of that ungrateful:
My sister hath already been with her,
And I believe she hath not failed to speak
To her for me, their friendship flatters me;
And gives me leave to hope that who esteems
The sister, may in time cherish the brother.
Adieu, perform thy duty, and return
With speed to calm the tempests of my spirit.
I will endeavour with permission of
The holy Prophet, to hear such success
As I desire.
WHereto shall I resolve me in this sad
Extremity? shall I solicit now
My Rival against my self in the behalf
Of an ingratfull Master that doth wrong me?
And though he appears blind to my disad∣vantage,
Shall I approve my self so more then he?
What shall I press th'effect of what I fear?
Shall I give him content at my sad cost,
By a constraint so cruel? and shall I
Become my self the faithful Minister
Of the injustices which he doth do me?
No, no, let us not serve with so much heat
To trouble us yet with a new misfortune,
A person who cost me so many tears:
If I must die, at least let me not give
Arms for to pierce my heart; of the contrary,
Let me act so, that he may hope for nothing
From fair Fatima, let me without scruple
Betray this false one, and deprive him of
A good which would become so fa'tal to me.
I should ground all the hope thats left unto me
Upon the loss of his. But how is this,
That at these words I tremble with affright?
I find my heart already rises up
Against me in behalf of this false Master.
Alas! how cruel and perfidious
Soar he be, I cannot fail of faith
To wards him, but must love, and serve him truly.
It is so resolved, my anger must give place
Unto the love that reigns in my bosom:
An ill example never justisies
A crime: let us deliberate no more;
But what's the noise I hear? it is Fatima
That passes, and Charifa follows her.
THis foul contemps which Said offers me
Provokes me highly, foe far was this false one
From hindering Adibar to visit her,
(As she engaged herself in promise to me)
That she accepted kindly of his hand,
To disoblige me; tic an injury
Of such a nature as requires revenge.
The affront is known unto your self, you saw it
With your own eyes, and to speak truly Ma∣dame,
The injustice is extreme.
Know that my ingot
Is so too; let us enter, it is late,
This night shall give us counsel.
I'll go one,
And stay no longer, las! I dare not open
My mouth, nor keep it shut. Love, I beseech thee,
Mingle at least some good in the great mass.
Of my misfortunes, grant that in demanding
All things of her, she grant me nothing for
him. — 
Madame, shall I find so much goodness from you
As to allow me the sweet liberty
To leave this letter heer in your fair hands?
It comes from a Lover the most passionate
Of all those which the Lustre of your eyes.
Hath made slaves; and who, not withstan∣ding all
The love where with his soul is seized, hath gre∣ven
you
Some cause of plaint.
Of plaint list Adibar
That writes unto me? Softly to Charifa.
Without doubt tic he,
My heart doth tell me so.
What would that false one
Desire of me?
How cruel is this sweetness
To me? — 
The end of his desires is to
Appear before you, highly to detest
His insolēt crime, he would express the trouble
Wherewith his soul is pressed, to the Divinity
Justly offended, and receive in making
His fault worthy to be forgot, a pardon.
Or death at your fair feet.
I desire not
His death; but I would have him live and hope;
How late soever his repentance comes,
I love it, and 't is welcome. My heart is
Already pacified by thy discourse.
I have for my misfortune, too well sped. — 
Lets see with what, air, in this letter he
Utters his thought, we will go in to read it,
And to give answer; since he is no longer
Obstinate in his coldness, I will send
His pardon signed and sealed.
How full of joy
Will Zegry be at my return?
What say you? 
Tic he that sends me, he will kiss
The words where with you've flattered him.
This is
My answer, go, and carry it unto him. — 
THis in equality astonisheth
And puzleth me, — Charifa!
No, good night.
Hear me, I pray thee.
I take no delight
To talk with fools
Stay yet a little.
I have not the leisure.
Adieu, fair praetor!
Be not so ungentle.
My hād shall speak gould, to supply my mouth
I do'nt believe thee.
Believe the event.
From Zegry take this diamond.
To betraye,
And sell my Mistress? God defend, I will not
Receive it.
Be not such a simple creature.
I take it then to please thee, but accept it
Unto a good intent: the stone's not false,
At least I think so:
Thou may be assured on it,
Tic very fair, and perfect.
Pardon me,
My words might seem t'imply a doubt, that I
Suspected thee, but I am innocent.
Wilt thou not tell me by what fatal error
Thy mistress humour changed so suddenly?
And how it came, that only at the name
Of Zegry her heart presently grew cold,
Although inflamed with my discourse before?
I love thee but too well; and if thou wilt
Be secret, I'll discover unto thee
This secret of importance, this hid mystery.
Thou wilt oblige me much, speak, I'm discreet.
And will concea'lt as closely as thy self.
Fatima then loves Adibar as much
As she doth hate thy Master; but for her,
Adibar by a pleasant fair return
Hath no, less coldness then thy master love.
Thou know that thou art not yet known of her,
And that love oftentimes troubles the brain:
Hence was it, that at first she did believe
That Adibar sent thee to speak to her;
But since she knew her error, she was mad;
I hear a noise, let us speak soft I fear
We should be heard.
THe Devil! where thinks my Master
That I should meet with Ormin? it is night
And I can't find my way.
Prithee be still.
Let me alone, thy honour is not much
In danger with me.
Foh! my diamond
Is fallen from my singer.
Without doubt
The grass conceals it from our sight.
We may
Seek it a good while ere we find it heer.
Yes in this manner, I'll go fetch a light, 
Return I've found it. — 
I should know that voice;
It is Charifa, strange! what might she do
So late heer in these woods? I will approach
A little nearer. — 
Thou but jests with me,
Kiss me no more, if thou dost, I'll
retire.
A rare piece this! I must hear all.
Yes really,
Promise me to be quiet, or I'll leave thee.
This is a little too much liberty
At first, I am a maid that stands upon
My reputation, and fear evil tongues,
I hold my honour very precious to me.
Thou seek to lose it, and invitest him
To take it from thee. — 
What thou speak not
A word unto me.
Excellent adventure!
How doth thy heart sigh, and thy close mouth murmur?
Those liberties, for all what I have said,
May be excused, if thou will marry me;
Thou know that one must marry, to love well
And if I please thee. —
Oh? what impudence?
What say thou?
I am much surprised, by Heaven.
What! answer thou nothing? should this be
Through a contempt? I think that I'm not yet
So torn by time, as not to be thought worthy
To be considered; thou know well
Alabez, if I would have had that fellow.
My marriage with him had been already
Concluded, but that is a lowt, and hath not
The art to please me as thou hast, his faults
Are more considered by me, then his services.
The impudent jeers at me to my face.
That troublesome never did any thing
Which pleased me, he hath a sottish spirit,
And silly carriage; if the fool should marry me
I would not pass my word that he should not
Be one of those which every one points at
With finger, which permit their neighbours to
Think their wives fair, ād which we commōly
Call cuckolds.
SEe heer, I have brought you light.
What have I done? this is a gross mistake.
What think thou; have not I much cause to
be
Well satisfied? I have done nothing then
That ever pleased thee, I've a sottish spirit
And silly carriage. Thou should die with sha∣me.
Why? prithee? I have utteted but a truth.
But a truth, traitress, o thou brazen face!
What! If I married thee, thou dangerous beast
I should be of the number of those people
Which we call cuckolds? thy impertinent tongue
Lied a hundred times, I'd rather choose
A rope then such a bed fellow:
Whence springs
Your quarrel?
Peace a while, I shall in good time
Talk with you, friend, companion of ill luck
We must be gone, there's nothing to be gotten
But blows heer by a fool. — 
Go see whence comes this noise.
Oh have I met thee, — 
precious Apostle?
How base traitor!
Pardon me,
I took thee for another, in good faith:
I sought a ras kal that escaped me,
To whom I did intend that injury
But I shall soon o'er take him without running.
Hast learnt the cause of those cōfused rumours?
No, but I have been beaten by a person,
Who afterword made me excuses for it.
The house is not far of, give order to
The voices to advance, and bid them sing
Near to that Little wood.
See, friends, the place
Where Zasda dwells, if you are ready now.
Begin immediately.
YE deserts, and dark cells
Where night and silence dwells
You whom I trust with my sad cares.
This voice belongs not to our company.
This Stanza finished, let us be prepared
To sing forthwith the air which I composed.
Ye deserts and dark cells,
Where night and silence dwells,
You whom I trust with my sad cares,
With all my deaths, and my despairs,
Rocks, forests, and thick Shades,
Which the Sun ne'er invades,
You in whose bosoms I enclose
My love, my sighs, my plaints, and wees:
Alas! when will you be
Keepers of my felicity?
Ye brooks, and Zephirs sweet,
Which heer in Spring-time meet
To water and perfume these plains
What insolēt voice troubles our confort heer.?
Th'affront shall not pass without punishment
Ye Brooks, and Zephirs sweet,
Which heer in Spring-time meet
To water and perfume these plains
Frequented by the amorous Swains
Favour me not to flovv
Oblige me not to blow,
Until my tears their course have spent,
And my sighs given my greess fult vent,
Then in your Channels glide,
And winds breathe, as before, in pride.
Who art thou that dare heer to trouble me?
My name is too well known to be cons•led.
I'm called Almansor.
Fear, fear then mine anger.
I'm Adibar, thy greatest Enemy
Who to meet thee, have made some weary steps
Unto no purpose; now when least sought
〈…〉
I've found thee; tell me, how comes it
〈◊〉
Take a licence to besiege my Mistress
With so much insolence? dost visit her,
As friend unto her brother, or as Lover
And servant unto her?
Content thy self
To understand that as the brothers friend,
The Sister doth accept my setvices,
And that I reverence her: assure thy self
That if I were so happy as to be
Her Lover, I should be discret enough,
Not to acquaint thee with it.
These refinings,
And juglings which thou use to defend thee,
Cannot withdraw thee from my just revenge,
Thou shalt die.— 
Rather fear that my sword heer — 
Piercing thy heart, quēch thy love in thy blood.
FOr bear, and moderate this barbarous fury,
What means this, friends?
Nothing, since we are parted.
Oh, first you Adibar?
This is not the Song
Which I desire.
Zegry, thou dost me wrong.
What cause, dear friend, could animate thee so?
Permit me, I beseech you having parted you,
To reconcile you too at the same time:
I take an interest in your debits:
Let me know therefore what your differnce is.
Zegry in vain you interpose your self
To hinder the proceeding, my revenged
Is just, and your cares but prolong his life
For some few minures. — 
Dear Almansor tell me
Whence comes so strong a hate between you two?
Relate the cause on it,
Tic not worth the labour;
This petty difference which troubles thee,
Should be determined ere known.
In vain
Thou dost persist to hide this secret from me:
Almansor, I guess at it; sure, some
Beauty
Embroils you; I've heard heer two different consorts.
The rest I do divine.
Friend, I confess it;
We both at one time gave our Averring Music
To one and the same Mistress.
May not I
Know her name, Friend?
Heavens how am I put to ▪t?
Should I tell him that I adore his sister? — 
Friend, this reservednes suits not that name,
I did not hide my amours for Fatima
From thee.
He hath already promised
His sister; I'm confounded; if I dare
To name her, what will he not say? — 
This confused silence should sufficiently
Instruct me that he doth adore Fatima,
And dares not tell it me — 
What! shall I not
Know then what object hath subjected thee?
Her fair name uttered would make us enemies,
Instead of doing thee a courtesy
I should do thee an injure•; adieu;
Dispense me to say more on it.
How is this!
Wilt thou not go unto my house?
Exouse me,
This night I am engaged by promise to
Lodge at Gomella's.
How! Gomella's, say thou?
Yes, I fear that he stays for me, adieu,
I'ue promised him, and I can't fail my word. 
The traitor Loves Fatima: and intends
To marry her: to judge on it otherwise,
Is to abuse my self; yes owing me,
His life, he makes use of it to destroy me;
But he that could save it, can also ruin it;
And his death loudly shall proclaim to all
That the same arm which serves the innocent,
Can punish the ungrateful insolent.
YOu shall not go alone to meet my mother,
I ▪l follow you, Gomella.
That needs not
Her order doth oblige you to expect her
Here at my house.
But nature doth impose
A stronger law upon me.
Sir she hath not
Understood of your coming yet, your sight
Will be too sudden a surprise, for bear
Till I acquaint her with it.
I expect
No blame in this encounter; If I should
Surprise her, it would be delightfully:
Seeing you will, let's go together then.
I do but what I ought.
I speak my thoughts.
Zegry comes forth his house; before I
go,
I must embrace him.
Stay, you may not do it.
Constraint's unjust, as much as it is cruel:
Ought I to fly a friend so dear, so faithful?
Suffer me to speak to him, and I'll follow you
Immediately.
I cannot, for I have an express order
Unto the contrary. — 
ORmin, did thou observe how carefully
That traitor shunned me as soon as he saw me?
Did mark how he was troubled at first,
How he advanced, a step or two to Wards me,
And then went back again, how he resigned
The place unto me in confusion,
Pressed with the stings of his ingratitude?
What ever I observed, it can never
Enter into my thought Almansor should
Be guilty of so base and black a crime;
And though in show I find him culpable,
I esteem him incapable to commit
Any base act; he still appeared unto me
A person of much honour, and too jealous
Thereof, so ill t'imploy the life which he
Holds of you: besides I find within me
A certain secret instinct which I
Can't comprehend, that when I should accu∣se
him,
Forces me to defend him.
Seeing me
To cheris'h that too much beloved Ungrateful,
Thou art accustomed also to caresse him.
I can't believe, neither that he betrays me,
Nor can I doubt ont, that's my punishment.
And those sweet motions, which I scarce can
banish,
Aggravate his offence, instead of lessening it:
Judge then how much I am to be lamented
In this condition, the only good
That rests to me, is to fear nothing more.
Fortune would not afflict me heer by halfs;
I lose a Mistress, and a friend together:
Both injure me, and I have so much weakness,
That I can't hate the Mistress, nor the Friend;
But coldest thou yesterday learn from
Charifa
Why fair Fatima hath so much contempt
Within her bosom for me? thou hast told me
That Adibar doth charm her, but thou hast not
Told me from whence her hatred doth pro∣ceed.
Fatima, if I may believe what hath
Been told me, always did abhor you for
Unfaithfulness, she hath some reason to
Believe you false, and this is that as far
As I can understand, which doth oblige her
To be so cruel to you.
False, say thou?
I never was so.
She hath understood though,
That a maid called Zelinda, fair enough,
Very young, and of an illustrious family,
And who received sometime many services
From you, being almost on the point to see you
Her husband, and when all things were dis∣posed
And ready for the marriage was foully
For saken by you and despised; it seems
That this example touches, and doth teach her
That who can once, can chāge a thousād times.
Ormin, this change is no inconstancy.
It would be very hard to prove it innocent:
Without doubt this pretended marriage
Made a great noise; but I will tell thee all
What will th'ing ratefull say? — 
Before that marriage was concluded which
Was to unite us to Abencerage blood,
And by that means at last to quench the heat
Of an old hatred, fair Fatima was
Already Mistress of my heart; to make me
Take a new chain, Zelinda, whō they offered me
In my opinion, was not fair enough:
So that I saw her without loving her:
Her feeble Beauty could not shake the fetters
Which tied me, yet I endeavoured
To have some kindness for her, but her eyes
Or my heart were not strong enoug to work it;
And if I did her any services,
It was but in design to please my parents:
Fatima there fore is to blame to think
That I am false: since I had never
love
For any but for her.
Alas! I need not
Doubt more of his contempt! I was inquisitive
To know too much, and now I doe repent it. — 
This is a truth, which easily can bee ptov'd?
But how comes it my sister, sup so soon?
Brother, have you received the intelligence
Is given me of the death of him which was
Designed for my husband?
Yes, I've heard it;
It is too true, he died in Argier
Of the spotted fever.
I'm unhappy by it;
But you are near your joy, and may discourse
Of marriage and love.
Oh, Sister, rather
Say that I must no longer now discourse
Of love nor Marriage: say that I must punish
A base and an ungrateful spirit with death
One that hath wickedly betrayed my friēdship:
Fury alone presides now in my soul,
And I must think nor speak of any thing
But of destroying a perfidious wretch.
Who is that traitor? let me know, I pray you,
What signal crime provokes you so highly.
Thou know too well the Author of my in∣jury
His name's Almansor, his love is his crime,
His love! what hear I?
Sister, tic too true.
His insolent love hath stirred up mine anger.
He knows that Almansor loves me,
And that is it enrageth him. — 
His death,
Is just, add he shall die, base, and ungrateful!
Brother, you should examine without passion
All that which might be of a friend suspected,
And we should never judge of his offence
But with much care and much indulgence: al∣ways
Almansor htth appeared too generous
To mingle any foul or unjust thing
In his affections; and he owes you
Too much, to have a thought to wrong a friēd
That saved his life.
Sister, thou dost oblige me;
Thy arguments with little contradiction
Disarm all my resentments quite; Almansor
Is so dear to me, that how ere he wrongs me,
Thou wilt do me a couttesie, to stop
My anger.
Perhaps, you have accused him unjustly.
Would that it pleased Heaven I were abused!
But alas! my suspicion is too just,
I'll tell't thee now; he loves
Who?
Fatima:
How! should he love Fatima? really
That crime is black:
The better to assure thee on it, tic best
Thou go to visit her, I do believe
Thou'lt understand frō her that he adores her,
And that he's false to me.
Trāitor! Inconstant!
Pernicious Spirit!
But, Sister, Why appear you
So troubled in your eyes and countenance?
The trouble of mine eyes clearly denotes
That my heart feels the evils which your friend doth
you,
Your friēd, what hay I said? that name suits ill
With his condition, if he be your Rival,
He's not your friend. Go persently to quench
His life and Love, and wash away the crimes
Of his soul in his blood.
No, Sister, no;
We should examine without passion
All that which might be of a friend suspected,
And one should never judge of his offence
But with much care and much indulgence; al∣ways
Almansor hath appeared too generous,
To mingle any foul, or unjust thing
In his affections; and he owes me
Too much, to have a thought to wrōg a friēd
That saved his life.
In what an error are you?
If I am in an error, I received it
From you: these were your sentiments, good Sister,
And shall be mine.
Then knew I not his crime;
But now that it is plain, take your revenge,
I will no more restrain you.
Stop me rather;
Condemn my anger, not my amity.
In favour of Almansor I would be
Abused; I will accuse him, but I would
That others should excuse him, I speak of
Revenge, but seek it not, and threaten only
But to the end to have my arm restrained.
His passion, perhaps, may be condemn▪d
Unjustly: possibly i• might be born.
Before our friendship, and, perhaps Fatima
Answers unto it, and that to unite them,
Gomellas orders do invite him heer;
If it be so, to free my self from crime,
Sister, tic just I yield Fatima to him:
I'll break my chains, and with a settled heart
Will make the pleasures of my friend mine own.
what strange abuse, what seeret charm thus
softens
Your heart in the behalf of an Ungrateful:
He owes his life unto you: ought he not
T'acquit him self to wards you by all possible
Endeavours? if he be our Rival, can you
Without much weakness tamely give him up
Your Mistress? if he be your friend, as you
Esteem him, ought he not to give you up
The object which you love.
Without reply
Go presently to visit fair Fatima:
And fail not fully to inform your self
Of their intelligence. — 
YOu astonish me;
I can't conceive how one can love a man,
And press his death.
Oh! say not that I love
Such an ungrateful and inconstant wretch:
Believe that if I have fires, they are fires
Of rage, and that my heart will ne'er be queen••
Till this perfidious Lover be a sacrifice
To my just anger.
But you weep, Madam.
True, I weep, Medina:
If that false one should perish, I should die;
I feel that rage and tenderness, hate and love
Triumph by Turns within me: I'm his Enemy
And yet I am his Lover, when my anger
Increases, the other Kinder passion springs:
And though that he be lovely, and hath fall∣sly
Betrayed me, I can neither love, nor hate him
Madam, speak softer, you will else be heard.
Adibar comes to wards us.
I'll not stay.
Said, where go you with my heart?
I pray you,
Leave me alone, and do not trouble me,
Adieu.
•eceive my
services.
• have
•o need of
them.
• do
beseech you, hear me.
You must excuse me, I have other business.
With a look only, consolate my griefs;
•is you I
seek.
And tic you that I fly.
How! treat you such a faithful I over so?
Fatima there will be less cruel to you.
Mock not at her, Fatima is as fair,
Although less proud then you.
what Adibar
Still with this scornful? my revenge is just.
It is time that it break forth. Said, I find
you
In such a black and heavy melancholy,
That I lose the design which brought me hither:
Shall I dare speak of dances, revels, feasts,
And of a marriage in the condition
Wherein you are?
What say you, of a marriage?
Since you press me,
You shall know all; know that my Father ha•
Provided one for me.
For you, Fatima?
Yes, Said, and she bufimes is well forwar•
In your contents I claim an interest:
I should be glad to know your Lovers name.
He's an accomplish▪d man, noble, and bra••
And of a charming presence, and rare meri•▪
I doubt not but you will approve the choice
My Father hath made of him.
How she makes me
Languish to meet death? — 
Well, who is the man?
You know him very well;
He made long time his ordinary residence
At home with you; your brother Zegrys fry••
Have I yet said enough?
Tell me his name too.
Divine you not that he is called Almansor!
I can no more, but faint and die. — 
How she
Is change▪d, she feels my pain, and I'm re∣veng'd
I have much interest in this event.
This match without doubt cannot choose but please
you.
True, I am not of those who through a mix∣me
Of I know not, what modesty, blush at ma∣riage
As if it were a crime, feign to sigh at it,
And yet in secret are sad at the heart,
If it should not be consummate. I assure you.
Upon this point I not dissemble with you:
I no way hate the Lover that▪s designed
me,
I prize his love, his services, his merit
At a high rate, and if he loves me much,
He is no less beloved.
It seems then,
He loves you very much.
I can't express it:
He lives but for me, breaths but for me:
I am the sole original of his good
Or evil fortune when he sees me not,
He is in torments, and when hazard bring me
Unto his sight, again, I have great cause
To fear that he might die with sudden joy;
Lastly if any truth be in his oaths,
All other beauties are contemptible to him.
Oh Heaven! what hear I, where am I? oh
traitor!
Ungrateful wretch! — 
But could you so soon love him
Before you knew him?
I cannot be blame▪d
For this quick love, I saw in him at first
All things that might induce a maid to love
Besides herein I execute the order
My Father doth ordain, I willingly
Obey his will; and since he hath chosen him
For son in law and for support, I think
That he is worthy of it, and conform
My self unto him.
But what are your thoughts
Of Adibar?
I dare not to pretend
To her passed goodness more.
He deserved not
The honour of my love; he changed first,
And I change at my turn.
He was not always
Unworthy to please you; can you forget him.
Yes, and with much justice, and reason too,
He is to me the most ungrateful person
Upon the earth; his contempt was unjust,
But mine is not so. Let us cease to speak
Of that inconstant Lover; I will pay him
Hatred for hatred, contempt for contempt.
Let us again talk of our marriage,
And let me know if I may have the honour
To see you there,
Excuse me, I'm oppress▪d
With a great pain, which is redoubled
Since your discourse, so that I'm rendered
Incapable to be present there, and am
Enforced to quit you at this very instant.
I wait you; suffer me to pay the service
I owe you. — 
I am forced through my weakness
To accept your support. — 
Said feels my discos, but Adibar
Flies me: herein my revenge is complete,
Though my hope be destroyed.
You have lost nothing
By that, Almansor's worth a thousand of him
Judge better of my plaint, what I have said
Is but a fiction; I perceive Medina
And thou are intimate, she could not choose
But tell thee that Almansor's very dear
To the ungrateful Said, this I heard
From thy own mouth.
Well.
This devise of mine,
In feigning that Almansor was to marry me,
Is to revenge me of her for admitting,
Contrary to her promise, my false Lover
To address courtship to her, and to punish her
For the evils which she hath procured me.
How cunning are you! this deceit is notable.
HOw! quit so soon the object of your heart?
I studied more her rest then my content.
You appear seized with an extreme sadness.
I cannot see that suffer which I love
Without grief.
Said sure, repulsed you.
My respect only put me of, and not
Her cruelty,
If she were just, or generous
She would despise a lover that's unsaithfull.
I were to blame, if I should complain of her.
Almansers fortune is more sweet with me.
I'm to well satisfied, to be jealous of it.
You do but flatter you with a vain hope,
Said hath but disdain, and hate for you.
Her hate and her disdain are ended now;
And our hearts speedily shall be united
By marriage.
But Sir, you may be mistaken
In your account, and hope; do you not know
That Zaida's promised?
Rather you may be
Deceived in this point: perhaps you know not
That he who was to marry her, is dead.
How is he dead?
Yes Madam, and fair Said
Propitious at last, will render justice
To my devout affection, and did
Assure me when I took my leave of her
That she would marry me, if I could get
Her brother to consent unto't; adieu;
To obtain this so dear and precious Beauty,
I must address me to her brother, and
Solicit my best friends. — 
WHat have I done?
Alas! my fiction hath only serve▪d
To dispose Said to deprive me of
My Lover.
Madam. —
Leave me; in a fate
So sad as this, every thing hurts, destroys,
And makes me desperate.
Will you not hear me?
No, I hear nothing but the fury which
Reigns in my confef'd spirits, grief seiseth me
And anger doth transport me.
Madam, comfort you.
Oh that I were dead! cease to comfort me
In such a just despair put me to bed,
Or in my grave there to lye buried.
YOu see the cote where I make my abode.
Sir, if you please, I shall defer to be
Private a while here with my son, and pre∣sently
I'm yours.
Oh Madam, oh dear Mother,
In this blessed time shall I obtain the honour
Of your embraces?
Stay, Abencerage,
Know our dishonour first, and show thy self
My son before I embrace thee, I was mother
Of two fair children, when a Ravisher
Stole away both my Daughter, and thy Sister.
Good God! what do you tell me?
That thy Sister
Is ravished.
Name but the Ravisher,
And he is dead.
Come, now embrace me, Son, this saying makes me
Believe that Heaven hath given thee me for to
Revenge me.
Let me know his name, I swear
By the holy Prophet, that his blood shall wash
The injury, and that this arm of mine
Shall sacrifice him in stautly unto you.
Thou shall know all, hearken, and let me speak:
Thou art not ignorant of the enmity.
which reigned for many ages twixt the houses
Of the Zegries, and of the Abencerages:
Now thou must know that on the opinion
Conceived that a marriage would put end
To this contention, my daughter was
Designed for wife to Zegry; every thing
Was ready, and the day appointed, when
Through an aversion, or rather through
Contempt, the treacherous Zegry flying our
Alliance, hastily embark'ed himself
For Argser: and to add unto our griefs,
As soon as this report was spread, my daughter
Was seen no more.
O Heaven! who should be cause
Of this misfortune?
Read this letter heer,
It will inform thee fully
YOu, from whom, I received my breath,
Know that a sad fate worse then death
Is happened to me, all our name
In my loss bear an equal shame:
The false and cruel Zegry is
The Author of my miseries;
For he it it that by his charms
Hath taken me out of your arms.
What have I heard!
Abominable truths.
Zegry her ravisher! oh fatal news!
In this misfortune I had so much judgment
To hide this our dishonour, and her rape:
By the advice of the illustrious.
And wise Gomella, I spread every where
The rumour of her death, and sent thee order
At the same time to depart from Tremissa
And to come heer: lastly in Tunis staying
Thy coming, I passed an unknown life
In tears and lamentation: and seeing
The time of thy return to be at hand,
I came heer to this fatal residence:
I find thee, and my grief is charmed already,
To see my just rage in thy soul imprinted,
And thy brave arm disposed to take revenge,
And to deprive that wretch of life, who hath
Deprived us of honour.
Oh how many
Afflictions seize! my heart!
Tic time to punish,
Not to deplore, in such a fatal fortune
Express thy grief by bloody brave effects
Of rage and courage, vain regrets, and sighs
Suit with my sex, revenge belongs to thee.
Thou know the offender, go repair
Th offence: I would not have reserved for thee
Th Employment, if I could revenge my self
Without thee; and I had already seen
The punishment of Zegry, If I would
Have us▪d Gomellas service; thy arm
only
Must wash the stam of from tby brow; take all
The revenge to thee, as the affront's all thine:
See me no more until thou hast revenged
Thy Sister, Go, seek, find and punish fully
Her barbarous ravisher; adieu, perform
Thy duty, and make thy self to appear
A worthy branch of that ill strions stock
Of Heroes, from whose loins thou art descēded;
To end our common miseries and fears,
Go thou to shed blood, I go to shed tears. — 
OH heard extremities! oh cruel violence!
Alas! the friend that doth oblige me, is
The enemy that wrongs me; I owe then
My safety unto him that robs me of
My honour, ād the man that saved the brother
Hath ruined the Sister! in this case
What counsel should I take? shall I become
Ungrateful, or be infamous, shall I
Break the bond of a holy amity?
Shall I let forth the blood which preserved mine,
That blood in which love will that I have
In∣terest?
And to say all, the blood of my fair Mistress?
She comes forth, and without doubt aims here
Honour will that I fly, but Love restrains me:
HE dares not to advance, his crime intimida∣tes him.
We will pass by the traitor, without speaking
A word.
Dear object of all my affections,
Charm of my Spirits!
Surely, you are mistaken.
You would speak to some other.
Suffer me
T'expresse my passion unto your fair eyes,
Love, —
You take me without doubt for Fatima.
How for Fatima; this wot doth acquaint me
Confusedly with the unjust suspicion
From whence this change springs: possibly you have
Believed that I seck to please her, seeing
The league that it between me, and her Father;
But Heaven, and Love my conqueror, be witness,
That your fair Image wholly doth possess
My heart, that to remove you thence, Fatima
Is altogether incapable, that I look on
Al that is lovely in her without love
And that as sensible only of the darts
Of your rare beauties, I confine my thoughts
And actions to civilities for her.
How do you look upon Fatima then
With an indifference?— Let me see how far
His impudence will go — 
Can you doubt of it? you that have tied all
My senses with such sweet and pressing
bonds?
Can you suspect with any justice, Madam
My heart of treachery, my oaths of false hood,
And believe that my soul hath so much black∣nes,
As to betray my Mistress, my friend,
And my Deliverer? could you imagine,
Without being deceive▪d, that having once
Beheld you, one could love elsewhere? oh no:
For me to be inflamed with a new fire
You are too charming, and I'm too much charmed.
Too much charmed, monster of perfidiousness?
Wilt thou abuse me then after thou hast
Betrayed me, and with an unworthy love
Carried away, wilt thou join impudence
To infidelity?
To insidelity,
What say you, Said? this discourse confounds
me.
I see it plainly, wretch; were it thou less
wic∣ked,
Thou would be less confounded; an ingra∣tefull
Still blushes at reproaches.
An ungrateful?
Doth that word trouble thee? and fairest thou
The name of an ungrateful person more
Then foul ingratitude it self?
I know not
The cause of this your anger, should I never
So much examine me, I still should find
My conscience innocent.
In thy account then
Tic nothing to deceive a maid, to wrong
Thy friend, to fail thy faith, to love Fatima,
Lastly
I, say you?
Yes, thee
Oh! believe me,
I love her not.
Dare thou to say it yet?
Dost thou not love her when thou dost adore her?
Thy false equivocations cannot heer
Abuse me, I know that thou art to morrow
To marry her.
To matry her! o Heaven, believe it not,
I swear.
No, no, forbear, I believe not
The oaths of one that's perjured, every one,
Knows of this marriage,
Who told it you?
A certain person.
Whosoe'r it be,
That certain person lied. Tell me his name,
And my just anger presently shall carry him
The reward of his false intelligence.
Go punish then Fatima, it was she
Her self that told it me.
Oh give less credit,
Adore able Wonder, to such false discourses.
Good God! who ever saw such impudence?
The marriage which she hath forged, is
A falsity; bear witness thou dread Master
Of Heaven that this I speak is truth; but if
I lie, let thy hand with a thunderbolt
Strike me unto the center of the earth:
Let my name be forever odious,
If the fire which I feel proceeds not
wholly from your fair eyes, and if my heart
Ever conceived for Fatima any thing
Beyond a weak esteem.
I must sift yet
This brazen face more thoroughly. — 
How wilt thou prove
The truth of thy assertion?
I can produce.
A hundred proofs to disabuse you
presently.
I'll have but one, and that too very easy;
To put an end to the suspicions,
Which I ve cōceiv'd of thee, give me forthwith
Both thy hand and thy faith.
I give it you
With an excess of yoy. — but what would I,
Give her a hand that must destroy her brother,
And plunge it self in his most noble blood? — 
What dost thou answer me so ill for such
Rare bounties? dost thou murmur to thy self,
Grow pale and study, as if thou resent'st ill
What I propose.
Madam, clean contrary
I was raped with th'unexpected honour,
And happiness wherewith I saw me filled,
And th'excesse of my joy transported me:
I fear through my obedience to betray you,
To make detraction to speak against you,
And to treat Zegry too unciviliy
In giving without his consent my hand
And faith; but this weak fear yields to my flame
Duty prevails not now upon my soul,
And cannot take from me the glorious pur∣pose
Of giving you my heart and hand together.
Thou think on it too late, my mind is changed,
And ne'er shall chāge again, know that I feigned,
Only to try thee, that excess of goodness,
And thy fires for Fatima presently
Burst forth.
Oh! I had never any for her!
Thy deceit 's plain enough, I'm very well
Assured of this fatal matiage:
When I pressed thee to pass thy faith unto me,
I few that thy remorses for Fatima
Accused thee, and thy confusion
Confirmed me in my belieft that she
Received the faith which I demanded of thee.
I offer it unto you.
No thou caust not
Dispose of it. Thou hast already given it,
And wilt abuse me.
You abuse your self
Wiih too much warines.
Hast thou the boldness
To reply yet? Go, go to thy Fatima,
To morrow is your marriage day, I know it.
She hath affections for thee, since thou hast
Refused me.
Hear me, I do beseech you.
No, no? that were too great a weakness in me:
Know that I leave thee, ne'er too see thee more.
A secret poison's hid in the discourse
Of an Ungrateful person, and each word
Atraitor speaks, destroys worse then the sword.
STrange success, this! How is my soul
pos∣sassed
Still with new troubles? must I suffer then
The punishment of a fault which I have not
Committed? when revenge doth press me to
Destroy a friend, must I at the same time
Destroy a Mistress too? must I lose
Said?
Yes my heart, I must loose her presently,
Since in depriving her of a dear brother,
My arm will draw her hate and anger on me:
I should hence forth no longer be so soft,
Tic time to think of Zegrys death, he must
Pay his blood to repair the honout which
He robs me of. This Enemy so dear
Must die, and I must sacrifice him to me;
He comes: at his approach some tēder motions
Oppose my just resentments, and indeed
Render them weak, my friendship combateth
The anger that possesses me, my tenderness
Is less weak, and my fury is less strong.
He saved my life, he ravished my Sister;
Shall I go to embrace him, or to kill him?
AT last I've met with him that wrōgeth me.
Ormin leave us alone.
I will retire me.
Into this thicket secretly to see
What passes, I doubt there will be a quarrel: — 
You appear troubled.
I've much cause to be so.
What troubles you so much?
A wretch, a Traitor,
Whose crime gives me an infinite regret,
And doth deserve more then a single death
To punish it.
May I serve you harem?
Yes, I can't finish my revenge without thee.
Zegry, you can dispose of all my blood.
It is an offer which I can▪t refuse.
Who is the affronter?
Thou art extreme bold:
Know thou not, traitor, that it is thy self?
I?
Thou; ne'er seem to wonder at the thing.
Only defend thy self.
How much am I.
Indebted to thee for this sudden passion,
Tic now the chief point of thy amity:
Thy anger doth oblige me, though it wrōgs me.
I had already in my heart resolve▪d
The design of thy death, and justly too:
My arm was ready for it, when inspight
Of all my fury, at thy first approach
My heart grew tender, and had been reduced
To balance the fierce darts which I had levelled
Against thee, if thy furious transport
Had not called home my choler unto me,
And banished my tenderness.
I'll hear
No more discourse, once again guard thy self
So fierce a fight can't but be sweet unto me
Honour solicits me more justly to it
Then thee, but let me know at least the cause
That doth provoke thee; I will make it plainly
appear that thou complain wrongfully,
And justify my self in Killing thee.
How! feignst thou to be ignorant, and instead
Of making a confession, dost thou threaten me?
Thy base crime grows greater by thy bold∣nes.
Let me at Iast know what that base crime is.
Consult thy conscience, and thou shalt know it,
It will instruct thee that with a false heart
In recompense of all my kindness to thee
Thou rob st me of my Mistress, and that
Through treacheries which cannot be excused,
Thou art to marry her to morrow privately.
If I am criminal, assure thy self,
It is not in this point: I never did
Look on Fatima with desires of love;
Only thou may reproach my heart for ha∣avenge
Sight for thy Sister without thy consent.
How! dost thou love her?
No, no, it would be
An extreme error, I say, I adore her,
I dare not say I love her. That which I
Resent now for her beauties doth surpass
The thing that's called Love.
By this confession,
Dear friend, thou hast restored life unto me.
My griefs and troubles now are waited on
By an excess of pleasure; Said is
Too happy, and her thoughts could never hope
A more illustrious husband: she is free.
The Lover unto whom I gave my word,
Hath seen his destiny determined
By death, and my repose shall fully be
Settled to meet a brother in the person
Of my most dear friend.
What thou offer me
Should be most dear unto me; but dost thou
Know him whom thou make•st choice of for thy brother?
I think, I doe; thy country is
Tremissa,
Thy name, Almansor, and thy family
Is noble and illustrious; and if I
May believe thee, thy greatest glory is
To be my friend.
Thou know st me but by half yet;
I was born heer, and born thy enemy,
More then one just and honest motive doth
Engage me to thy ruin; not to hold thee
Long in suspense, I am Abencerage.
Abencerage.
O Heaven! — 
That wot doth tell thee.
Our difference, and my duty.
I as well
Know as thy self the mutual hatred which
In our two houses seems almost as it were
To be immortal; but thy blood which now
Thou owe to my succour, should for me
Stop the course of it in thy soul; and though
My friendship seems to stagger on this point,
I will content my self to hate thy name,
And love thy person. Yes, pursue thy love
Unto my Sister; by a marriage
We may be tied with new knots, and by
That holy flame, the irreligious heat
Of that so old, and fatal enmity,
Will be extinct.
This marriage would be sweet,
But I can't think of it till by thy death
I have revenged my self upon thee.
How!
It is not that which thou believe provoke me,
Thy name I hate not, but I hate thy person,
And I cannot but in thy blood repair
The wrong which
•thou hast done me.
I?
Yes, Thou.
How ill thou act the astonished,
Thy base crime grows greater by thy boldness.
Let me at last know what that base crime is.
Consult this letter, read, and thou sha• know it.
YOu, from whom I derive my birth,
Know that a sad fate worse then death
Is happened to me; all our name
In my loss bear an equal shame;
The false and cruel Zegry is
The Author of my miseries,
For he it is that by his charms
Hath taken me out of your arms.
Without doubt they will both mistake them∣selves.
I cannot comprehend this dark Enigma.
It is too plain to me here that my sister
Zelinda gives us to understand
That thou art her base ravisher.
Can thou
Suspect me of so foul an action?
Can thou deny it, traitor? and can I Believe it?
Hear me but a word or two.
It would be to no purpose, guard thy self,
I'll hear no more.
How! dares the man that owes me
His life, to assault mine?
That obligation
Cannot divert me from my just revenge:
Thou wronght'st my safety, and my sisters rape,
And so much as life is less dear then honour,
So much an affront which reflects upon it,
Carries it in my soul upon a benefit,
And I am less afraid to be ungrateful,
Then to be infamous; but let us leave
Discourse, and come to action.
Stay, Ungrateful,
Stay yet a little.
Help, Oh help;
WHat noife
Is this I hear?
what rumour is raised up?
Hold, hold!
No, no, go on,
My son, finish thy work.
Their quarrel, Adibar,
Cannot be taken up, therefore let's leave it
To be decided.
No, such a third person
As I, shall never suffer them to fight,
And to look on.
Well then, defend your self.
We't fight all four.
Oh! brother rather lift
Your arm up against me, Even guilty only,
Zegry is innocent,
Whom do I see?
you see Zelinda your unfortunate Daughter,
Who left your family to follow Zegry;
And who in changing fate and habit only,
Could not enforce her soul to the least change:
My heart which was pleased in slavery
By him, forgot it self in following.
Somewhat too constantly this fleeting Lover;
But having known him to be taken with
Another Object. I feared in discovering
My self, to draw upon me his contempt,
And would still suffer the same violence,
If his own interest brake not my silence.
Oh, Daughter!
Oh! my Sister!
Fair Zelinda,
Revenge your self, I mourn you, I accuse
My self, and yield my bosom to your stroke.
Zegry, You need not to fear any thing
From my resentments, if you pity me,
I am not to be pitied
I blush
That after so much goodness as you have
Expressed to me, I have but one soul
Too give you; and if the consent of your
Parents and friends will be propitious to us,
There's nothing can impede our marriage.
This marriage is the chief of all my wishes.
Friend, thou can make me happy too, thy Sister
Depends on thee, thou know, I adore her.
I offered her unto thee, a while since,
And now I do again with height of joy.
All my suspicions are extinguished,
And you must know that following my duty,
I follow my desires; but Adibar
Will complain of it.
Madam, you're deceive▪d,
When I lose all hope, I lose all my flame:
And to express unto you that I do not
Resent it, I will sacrifice my heart
In flames of love to that fair Saint, for whom
I burned formerly; Gomella. may I
Hope your incomparable Daughter?
Adibar,
My family is honoured by your choice.
Fatima, take your husband from my hand.
Such pleasing orders I shall willingly
Obey.
Come, let us go unto the Mosquè
Together, to give thanks unto the goodness
Of Heaven that set an end to our misfortunes,
And made appear by this happy success,
That one may be ingrate, yet generous.
THe Prologue promised something for the Play
Under a penalty, I come to pay
What he engaged for, not to beg applause,
But, if we have transgressed the Comic laws,
To suffer punishment; Beauties, to you
First I address me for the Poets due;
He seeks but justice from your Ivory hands,
As you like or dislike he falls or stands:
Smile on the peace, and no man dares to frown,
Your vote sways both the Cavalier and Clown:
Yours are the leading voices, in your looks
We read our fortune better then in books;
Y▪ are pleased, for Heaven's displayed in smiles, so
thy•▪
I need say nothing to you,, Gentlemen.

Are all things in their preparation
For my immortal guests?
Nothing is wanting
That doth concern my Province sir, I am
Your Officer above stairs. The great Chamber
With the two wooden Monuments to sleep in
(That weigh six load of Timber, sir) are ready.
That for the ••••ce D'amour, whom we call Cupped,
I have trimmed artificially with Roses,
And his Mother's Myrtle. But I have
Committed Sacrilege to please the other,
Death does delight in Ew, and I have robed
A Church-yard for him. Are you sure they'll come
To night? I would fain see this Dwarf called Cupped,
For t'other I look on him in my fancy,
Like a starved Goblin.
Death. I must confess,
Cuts not so many inches in the Say
As our last Venison, it is a thin-chap'd hound,
And yet the Cormorant is ever feeding.
But good sir resolve me,
Are they good spirited Guests? will they tipple
To elevation? do they scatter metal
Upon the VVaiters? will they roar, and fancy
The Drawers, and the Fiddles, till their pockets
Are empty as our neighbours drone? and after
Drop by degrees their wardrobe? and in the morning,
When they have day-light to behold their nakedness,
Will they with confidence amaze the streets?
And in their shirts, to save their pickel'd credits,
Pretend a Race, and trip it like fell footmen?
These rantings were the Badges of our Gentry,
But all their dancing days are done I fear.
These were the garbs, and motions late in fashion
With humorous mortals; but these guests are of
No humane race.
Pray what attendance have they?
Love has two
Gentlemen, that wait on him in his Chamber,
Of special trust, he cannot act without them.
Their names sir, I beseech you?
Folly and Madness.
A pair of precious instruments,
Sure they are well descended sir.
The fool
Could ride a hundred mile in his own Pedigree,
And give as many Coats—
Fools coats, there are
Enough to wear them.
As he had acres in
Eleven fat Lordships,
And plaid at duck and drake with Gold, like Pebbles.
Was this man born a fool?
No, but his keeping
Company with Philosophers undid him,
Who found him out a Mistress they called Fame,
And made him spend half his estate in Libraries,
Which he bestowed on Colleges, took the toy
Of building Quadrangles, kept open house,
And fell at last most desperately in love
With a poor dairy maid, for which he was begged—
A Fool?
And leads the the Van in Cupid's Regiment.
What was the Mad-man sir?
A Thing was born to a very fair per annum,
And spent it all in Looking-glasses.
How?
That's a project I never heard on, Looking-glasses?
How many did he break sir in a day?
They broke him rather, in the right understand∣ing,
For Nature having given him a good face,
The man grew wilde with his own admirations,
And spent his full means upon Flatterers,
That represented him next to an Angel.
Thus blown up, he took confidence to court
A Lady of noble blood, and swelling fortune;
Within three days fell sick of the small Pox,
And on the fourth run mad, with the conceit
His face, when he recovered, would be like
A country Cake, from which some Children had
New picked the plumms.
A brace of pretty Beagles.
They are here.
I see not Death.
He's the last thing we look for.
THough little be the God of Love,
Yet his Arrows mighty are,
And his Victories above
What the valiant reach by War,
Nor are his limits with the sky,
O'er the milky way he'll fly,
And sometimes wound a Deity.
Apollo once the Python slew,
But a keener Arrow flew
From Daphne's eye, and made a wound
For which the God no Balsam found;
One smile of Venus too did more
On Mars, than Armies could before;
If a warm fit thus pull him down,
How will she ague-shake him with a frown;
Thus Love can fiery spirits tame,
And when he please cold Rocks inflame.
Holla! within!
You are welcome Gentlemen; ha?
Quarter, oh quarter, I am a friend sir,
A moveable belonging to this Tenement
Where you are expected, Gupid is come already,
And supped, and almost drunk, We have reserved
According to order, for your palate, sir,
The Cockatrices Eggs, the cold Toad-Pie,
Ten dozen of Spiders and Adders tongues
Your servant Famine, sir, bespoke.
Live, live.
I thank you sir; a curse upon his Physiognomy;
How was I surprised? it was high time to comfort me,
I felt my life was melting downward.
Death, oh Death.
Who's that? I do not like the voice. What art?
A miserable thing.
I, so thou seem;
Hast not a name?
My name, sir, is Despair.
Despair, my time's not come yet, what have I
To do with thee? what come thou hither for?
To find out Death; Life is a burden to me;
I have pursued all Paths to find him out,
And here in the Forest had a glimpse on him,
But could not reach him with my feet, or voice;
I would fain dye, but Death flies from me, sir.
I wonder you should travel in the Forest,
And among so many Trees find none convenient,
Having the tackling ready, about your neck too.
Some great affairs take up the Devils time,
He cannot sure attend these low employments,
Hoe's busy about Leviathans. I know not,
Ther's something in it; you have not made your Will sure.
Yes sir, I carry it wo'me, it wants nothing
But his name, and my subscription.
Whose name?
His name I mean to make my Heir.
Whose that?
That charitable man
Will bring Death to me, there's a blank left for him,
And if you please to do me, sir, the office,
Even you shall be the man; I have professed
An Usurerer this fifty years, and upwards,
The VVidows and sad Orphans, whose estates
I have devoured, are croaking in my Conscience.
And shall he be your Heir that does this feat?
To make you acquainted with this Cannibal
You talk of?
Oh my happiness.
I'll do it.
But I believe you are sorry for your baseness,
Your Ripens and Extortions—
Mistake not,
am sorry for no mischief I have done,
That would come near Repentance, which you know
Cures all the achings of the Soul. If I
Could but be sorry, Death were of no use to me.
Keep ye of that mind, you say very right sir,
I'll try what I can do
With Death, to do your Conscience a courtesy,
He's now within our house; I'll bring you pen
And ink to write my name too, honest Father.
Thou art my dearest child, take all my blessings.
Here's like to be a Fortune.
I want strength
To climb, I see a very pretty twig else 
And space for a most comfortable swing,
It is a hard case the Devil will not help
At a dead lift. 
O my Sciatica.
I have broke my spectacles, and both my hips
Are out of joint, help—
Death will be with you presently, the last course
Is now on the Table that you may not think
The time long, I have brought you▪ ha? rise up sir.
Alas, I have had a fall, I was endeavouring
To do the meritorious work, and hang
My self, for Death me thought was long a coming,
But my foot slipped.
Alas what pity it was?
If I had thought your Soul had been in such
Haste, I would have given you a lift before
I went.
It was my zeal.
Alas it seemed so,
You might have took the River with more ease,
The stream would have conveyed you down so gently,
You should not feel which way your soul was going.
But against the frights, Death might bring with him,
I have brought you a bottle of wine. I'll begin sir.
Would it were poison.
So would not I, I thank you,
It is pure blood of the Grape.
Wine?
A• my charge, I know you do not use
To pay for Nectar,
I bestow it sir.
That's kindly said, I care not if I taste—
In the mean time please you, I'll peruse the Will,
I can put in my own name, and make it fit
For your subscription—what's here?— 
Ha? a thousand pound in Jewels—in ready money
Ten thousand more—Land—have preserve my senses.
I'll write my name and thank Heaven afterwards.
—Here sir, before you can subscribe, the Gentleman
Will come and kill you to your hearts content.
Hum! this foolish wine has warmed me, what do ye
Call the name on it?
Sack.
Sack, my truly son—
Nay sir make hast, for Death will be here instantly.
At his own leisure, I would not be troublesome▪
Now I do know his lodging, I can come
Another time.
But the Will Father, you may write now—
Deeds are not vigorous without legal witnesses;
My Scrivener lives at the next Town, and I
Do find my body in a disposition
To walk a mile or two. Sack do ye call it?
How strangely it does alter my opinion?
Why? have you no mind to hang your self?
I thank you,
I find no inclination.
Sha'not I be your Heir then?
In the humour
And spirit I now feel in Brain and Body,
I may live—to see you hanged; I thank you heartily.
But you will have the conscience, I hope,
To pay me for the wine, has wrought this miracle.
Your free gift I remember, you know, I use not
To pay for Nectar, as you call it. Yet
I am not without purpose to be grateful,
Some things shall be corrected in my Will,
In the mean time, if you'll accept of a 
Small Legacy, this Hemp is at your service,
And it shall cost you nothing, I bestow it.
We men of money, worn w〈…〉nd cares,
Drink in new life, from Win•••• costs us nothing.
Farewell, and learn this Lesson from Despair,
Give not your Father Sack to be his Heir.
Not a tear left? would's brains were in the bottle.
VIctorious men of Earth, no more
Proclaim how wide your Empires are;
Though you bind in every shore,
And your triumphs reach as far
as Night or Day,
Yet you proud Monarchs must obey,
And mingle with forgotten ashes, when
Death calls ye to the crowd of common men.
Devouring Famine, Plague, and War,
Each able to undo Man-kind,
Death's servile Emissaries are,
Nor to these alone confined,
He hath at will
More quaint and subtle ways to kill.
A smile or kiss, as he will use the art,
Shall have the cunning skill to break a heart.
Ho Master, Master.
What's the mátter?
Nothing but to ask you, whether you be
Alive or no, or whether I am not
My own ghost, that thus walk and haunt your house.
Thou look frighted.
Death and his train are gone,
I thank Heaven he's departed; I slept not
One wink to Night, nor durst I pray aloud,
For fear of waking Death; but he, at Midnight,
Calls for a Cup to quench his thirst, a Bowl
Of Blood I gave him for a mornings draught,
And had and Ague all the while he drank it.
At parting, in my own defence, and hope
To please him, I desired to kiss his hand,
Which was so cold, of the sudden sir, my mouth
Was frozen up, which as the Case stood
Then with my Teeth, did me a benefit,
And kept the dancing bones from leaping out,
At length, fearing for ever to be speechless,
I used the strength of both my hands to open
My lips, and now feel'd eve〈…〉 I spake
Drop from it like an Icicle〈…〉
This cold
Fit will be over; what said Cupped?
He
Was fast asleep.
The Boy went drunk to bed,
Death did not wake him?
It was not necessary in point of reckoning.
Death was as free as any Emperor,
And pays all where he comes, Death quits all scores.
I have the sum totalis in my pocket.
But he without more ceremony left
The house at morning twilight.
Ha? they knock—
Get thee a cup of Wine to warm thy entrails. 
Though Love himself be but a water-drinker,
His train allow themselves rich Wines. Your Fool
And Madman is your only guests to Taverns,
And to Excess; this Licence time affords,
When Masters pay, their servants drink like lords.
Sir, they call for you, Cupid's up, and ready.
And looks as fresh, as if he had known no surfeit
Of Virgins tears, for whose fair satisfaction,
He broke his Leaden shafts, and vows hereafter
To shoot all flames of love into their servants.
There are some Music come, to give his godship
Good morrow, so he means to hear one Song,
And then he takes his Progress.
I attend him.
But I have made my own revenge upon him,
For the hard-hearted baggage that he sent me;
And Death I have served a trick for all his huffing.
They think not what Artillery they carry
Along with them, I have changed their Arrows.
How Death will fret to see his fury cozened?
But how will Love look pale, when he shall find
What a Mortality his Arrows make
Among the Lovers? let the God look to it,
I have put it past my care, and not expect
To see them again, or should I meet with Death,
I shall not fear him now; for Cupped, if
Lovers must only by his Arrows fall,
I'm safe, for Ladies I defy you all.
STay Cupped, whither art thou flying?
Pity the pale Lovers dying.
They that honoured thee before, Will no more
At thy Altar pay their vows.
O let the weeping Virgins strew,
In stead of Rose, and Myrtle boughs,
Sad Ew, and funeral Cypress now.
Unkind Cupped leave thy killing,
These are all thy Mothers Doves,
Oh do not wound such noble Loves,
And make them bleed that should be billing.
Fly, sly my Children, love that should preserve
And warm your hearts, with kind and active
Is now become your enemy, a murderer.
This Garden that was once your entertainment
With all the beauty of the Spring is now
By some strange curse upon the shafts of Cupped,
Designed to be a Grave; look every where
The noble Lovers on the ground lie bleeding,
By frantic Cupped slain; into whose wounds,
Distracted Virgins pour their tears so fast,
That having drein'd their fountains, they present
Their own pale Monuments; while I but relate
This story, see, more added to the dead.
Oh sly and save your selves, I am your Parent
Nature, that thus advise you to your safeties.
He's come already.
Ha? what Winter creeps
Into my heart?
He faints, it is now too late,
Some kinder God call back the winged Boy,
And give him eyes to look upon his murders.
Nature grows stiff with horror of this spectacle;
If it be Death to love, what will it be
When Death it self must act his cruelty?
And here he comes, what Tragedies are next?
Two aged pair, these will be fit for death,
They can expect but a few minutes more
To wear the heavy burden of their lives.
Astonishment to Nature, they throw off
All their infirmities, as young men do
Their aerie upper garments. These were the
Effects of Cupids Shafts; prodigious change!
I have not patience to behold 'em longer.
what will it Death advance thy name
Upon cold Rocks to waste a flame,
Or by mistake to throw
Bright Torches into pits of Snow?
Thy rage is lost,
And thy old killing Frost▪
With thy Arrows thou moist try
To make the young or aged bleed, But indeed
Not compel one heart to die.
O Love! oh Death! be it your fate
Before you both repent too late to meet and try
Upon your selves, your sad Artillery.
So Death may make Love kind again,
Or cruel Death by Love be slain.
CHange, oh change your fatal bows,
Since neither knows
The virtue of each others Darts;
Alas, what will become of hearts
If it prove
A Death to Love,
We shall find
Death will be cruel to be kind:
For when he shall to Armies fly,
Where men think blood too cheap to buy
Themselves a name,
He reconciles them, and deprives
The valiant men of more then lives,
A Victory, and Fame.
Whilst Love deceived by these cold shafts, in steed,
Of curing wounded hearts, must kill indeed.
Take pity Gods, some ease the world will find,
To give young Cupped eyes, or strike Death blind.
Death should not then have his own will.
And Love, by seeing men bleed, leave off to kill.
Oh yes, oh yes, oh yes,
All you that delight to be merry come see
My brace of Court Apes, for a need we be three;
I have left my old trade of up and down stairs
And now live by leading my Apes unto Fairs.
Will you have any sport? draw your money, be quick sir,
And then come aloft Jack, they shall show you a trick sir.
Now▪ am I in my Natural Condition,
For I was born under a wandering Planet;
I durst no longer stay with my old Master,
For fear Cupped and Death be reconciled
To their own Arrows, and so renew with me
Some precious acquaintance.
Oh, my heart,
It was Death I fear, I am paid then with a vengeance;
My dear Apes do not leave me, ha? come near—
What goodly shapes they have, what lovely faces!
Ye Twins of beauty, where were all those graces
Obscured so long? what Cloud did interpose
I could not see before this Lip, this Nose?
These eyes? that do invite all hearts to woo, them,
Brighter then Stars; Ladies are nothing to them,
Oh let me here pay down a Lovers duty;
Who is so mad to dote on Women's beauty?
Nature doth here her own complexion spread,
No borrowed Ornaments of white and red;
These cheeks were no adulterate mixtures on them,
To make them blush as some do, fie upon them!
Look what fair cherries on their Lips do grow?
Black cherries, such as none of you can show,
That boast your beauties, let me kiss your a—
What's that? a shot in the shoulder too? ha.
What will become of me now? oh my Apes!
The Darlings of my heart are ravished from me.
No? not yet? nor yet hard-hearted Apes?
I must despair for ever to enjoy them.
Despair? that name puts me in mind,
It is here;
Welcome dear Legacy, I see he was
A Prophet that bestowed it; how it fits me?
As well as if the Hangman had took measure.
It is honour in some men to fight and die
In their fair Ladies quarrel, and shall I
Be afraid to hang my self in such a cause?
Farewell my pretty Apes, when Hemp is ti'd
Drop tears apace, and I am satisfied.
Hence ye profane, and take your dwellings up
Within some Cave, that never saw the Sun,
Whose Beams grow pale, and sick to look upon you;
This place be sacred to more noble Objects,
And see where Nature tired with her Complaints
To Heaven for Death and Cupid's Tyranny
Upon a bank of smiling Flowers lies sleeping,
Cares that devour the peace of other bosoms,
Have by an over charge of sorrow wrought
Her heart into a calm, where every sense
Is bound up in a soft repose, and silence;
Be her Dreams all of me. But to my Embassy.
Cupped, wheresoever thou be,
The Gods lay their commands on thee,
In pain of being banished to
The unfrequented shades below
At my first summons to appear.
Cupped, Cupped.
I am here,
What send the Gods by Mercury?
Thy shame and horror. I remove
This mist. 
Now see in every Grove
What slaughter thou hast made, all these
Fond Cupped were thy Votaries,
Does not their blood make thine look pale?
All slain by thee, two▪ not prevail
To urge mistakes, thy fact appears;
Jove, and the Gods have bowed their ears
To groaning Nature, and sent me
From their high Crystal Thrones to see
What blood, like a dire Vapour rise,
Doth spread his wings to blind the eyes
Of Heaven and Day; and to declare
Their Justice and Immortal care
Over the lower world, but stay
Another must his fate obey.
Death heretofore, the look'd-for close
To tedious life, the long repose
To wearied Nature, and the gate
That leads to Mans eternal fate,
I in the name of every God,
Command thee from thy dark abode,
As thou wilt fly their wrath, appear
At my first Summon—
I am here.
Nature awake, and with thy sleep
Shake off the heavy Chains that keep
Thy Soul a Captive.
Mercury?
Or am I still in Dreams?
Thy Eye
Take truce with tears, see much abused
Nature, whom thou hast long accused,
Leave thy wonder, and attend
What the Gods by Harms send.
But first I charge you to resign
Your fatal Shafts.
I, these are mine.
Cupped, the Gods do banish thee
From every palace, thou must be
Confined to Cottages, to poor,
And humble Cells, Love must no more,
Appear in Princes Courts, their heart
Impenetrable by thy Dart,
And from softer influence free
By their own wills must guided be.
I shall obey.
Death, thou moist still
Exercise thy power to kill,
With this limit, that thy rage
Presume not henceforth to engage
On Persons, in whose breast, divine
Marks of Art, or Honour shine;
Upon these, if thy malice try,
They may bleed, but never die;
These are not to be overcome,
Above the force of Age or Tomb.
Is Nature pleased?
The Gods are just.
To this you both submit?
We must.
Ye are dismissed.
But Mercury,
What satisfaction shall I have
For noble Children in the Grave
By Cupped slain?
They cannot be
Reduced to live again with thee,
And could thy fancy entertain
In what blessed seats they now remain,
Thou would not wish them here.
Might I
With some knowledge bless my eye,
Nature would put on Youth.
Then see
Their blessed condition.
Where am I?
The World no such Perfection yields.
These are the fair Elision fields.
OPen blessed Elizium Grove,
Where an eternal Spring of Love
Keeps each beauty fair, these shades
No chill Dew or Frost invades;
Look how the Flowers, and every Tree
Pregnant with Ambrosia be;
Near banks of Violet Springs appear,
Weeping out Nectar every tear;
While the once harmonious Spears,
(turned all to ears)
Now listen to the Birds, whose Quire
Sing every charming Accent higher.
If this place be not Heaven, one thought can make it,
And Gods by their own wonder led, mistake it.
Oh, who shall guide me hence? old Natures sight
Grows feeble at the brightness of this glory.
I will be Natures conduct.
Mercury—be ever honoured.
Return, return you happy men
To your own blessed Shades again,
Lest staying long, some new desire
In your calm bosoms raise a fire;
Here are some Eyes, whose every beam
May your wandering hearts inflame,
And make you forfeit your cool Groves,
By being false to your first Loves.
Like a Perfuming gale o'er Flowers,
Now glide again to your own Bowers.

WHy how now Insolence?
You know me Sir?
For one that wants good
manners; yes, I know
Your name, and best relation,
you attend
A Page on Ajax Telamon.
And you
In such an office wait upon Ulysses,
But with this 〈◊〉, that I am your better,
In reference to my Lord, as he exceeds
Your Master both in Fortitude and Honour:
Therefore I take this boldness to instruct
Your diminutive Worship in convenient duties,
And that hereafter when you see me pass,
You may descend, and vail, and know fit distance.
To you descend, and vail? to you? poor
Rat!
Is he not poisoned, that he swells so strangely:
I would bestow this admonition, that
You talk within your limits, I may find
A pity for your folly, while you make
Comparisons with me, but let your •ongue
Preserve a modesty, and not dare to name
My Lord, without a reverence, and not
In the same week your Master is in mention,
Least I chas•ise you.
Ha, ha, prodigy!
The Monkey grin•, the Pygmy would be Ramp∣ant:
Sirrah, it is I pronounce, if you have
A mind to lose one of your lug•, or quit
Some teeth that stick impertinent in your gums,
Orrun the hazard of an eye, or have
Your han hes ki knight into a gentle •ullice,
Or tell your Master in whose cause you have
Deserved a ••dgell•ng, and m•rited
A •rutch to carry home your broken body;
Talk on, and when it is too late, you may
R•pen• your impudence.
Mighty man of 〈◊〉!
Is not your n•me Lysippus? what mad Dog
Has bi• thee; thou art wilde, hast lost thy s•nses?
You'll find, I have not.
Is all this in earnest?
And hast thou so much ignorance, to think
That lump of flesh, thy Master (a thing meant
By nature for a flail, and bang the sheafs)
Is fit to be in competition
With the wise Prince of Ithaca? whose name
Shines like a Constellation throughout Greece,
And is looked at with admiration
By friends and enemies? for shame retract
Thy gross opinion, it is possible
Thou moist retrive thy lost wits,
Very well
Then, you do think my little spawn of Policy,
That your sly Master, the oyl-tongu'd Ulysses,
Will win the prize to day, Achilles Armour;
And that the Kingly Judges, and grave Coun∣sell
Will give it against Ajax.
In true wisdom,
As to the best deserver.
Dandiprat.
Remove your selves, and petty diffe∣rinses,
This place is meant the scene for a contention
Between the valiant Ajax Telamon,
And the far famed Ulysses, who shall best
Me it to wear the great Achilles Arms:
Methinks I see Heavens mighty windows open,
And those great souls, whom noble actions here
Translated to take plac• among the Stars:
Look down, and listen with much expectation
Of this days glory. The rough winds (least they
Should interrupt the plea of these Competitors)
S•and close committed in they• horrid caves,
And habus dressed in all his brightest beams,
Cu•bs in his Steeds to stay, to wait upon
The g•eat Decision.
Silence, no noise profane this place, and may
The soul of wisdom be at this great Council.
I need not, Grecian Princes, spend much
time
Or Language, in discousing the occasion
Why this great Council hath been called; Achilles,
Whose very name will be enough to fill
The breath of fame, is here again concerned,
Nor can his honoured ashes b• without
Contention in his sacred Urn, until
The difference between these great Competitors
Be reconciled.
They both, great Agamemnon, are pre∣par'd,
And cheerful, as when Honour called them forth
To fight, impati•ned of delay, or danger.
Attend them hither,
Let the Officers
Take care the Soldiers press not past their limit.
appears, with lightning in his eyes,
His big heart seems to boil with rage.
He was ever passionate:
Here comes Ulysses.
A man of other temper, and as far
From being transported with unhandsome anger,
He seems to smile.
They have both deserved
For their great service in this expedition,
We should with calm, and most impartial souls
Hear and determine; therefore, if you please,
Because the hours are precious, I shall
Desire them lose no time.
We all submit, and shall obey your prudence.
You honour much:
Your Agamemnon— Princes then to you,
I hope you have brought hither, with your per∣sons,
Nothing but what your honours may consent too;
Speak your selves freely then, these are your Judges▪
Who are not only great in birth and titles,
And therefore bring no thoughts to stain their
honour,
But bound by obligation of one Country,
Will love, and do your name and valours justice.
There lies your great reward, Achilles Arms,
Forged by the subtle art of him, that framed
I•ves Thunderbolts, pride of Cyclopian labours,
He that is meant by his kind stars, to have
The happy wearing of them next, may write
Himself a Champion •or the Gods, and Heaven,
Against a race of Giants that wo•lt scale it:
I have said, and we wi•h silence now as deep
As that doth wait on midnight, and as fixed
As marble Images, expect your pleasure.
Great Jove, immure my heart, or go•t it
with
Some ribs of steel, lest it break through this
flesh,
And with a flame contracted from just fury,
Set fire on all the world: How am I fall•?
How shrunk to nothing? my fame ravished from me?
That this sly talking Prince is made my Rival
In great Achilles Armour: Is it day?
And can a Cloud darker than night, so muffle
Your eyes, they cannot reach the Promontory,
Beneath which now the Grecian fleet rides safe,
Which I so late ref•ued from Trojan flames,
When Hector f•ightful, like a Globe of fire,
By his example taught the enrage•d youth
To brandish lightning; but I cannot talk,
Nor knows he how to fight, unless 'ith dark
Wi•h shadows. I confess, his eloquence
And tongue are mighty, but Pelides sword
And armour were not made things to be talked
on,
But worn and used, and when you shall deter∣mine
My juster claim, it will be fame enough
For him, to boast, he strove with Ajax Tela∣mon.
And lost the prize, due only to my merit.
Now Didimus, how goes Ulysses pulse?
Run to his Tent, and fetch him some strong wa∣ters.
This storm shakes not a leaf, it had been
more
Honour for Ajax Telamon to have hired
A True•peter, than make this noise himself.
Silence.
The Duke proceeds.
I am ashamed
And blush, that I can plead so vast a marit:
Why am I not less honour•ble? a cheaper
Portion of wo••h, weighed in the balance, with
This Rival, would so crowd, and fill my scale,
His virtues, like a thin and trembling vapour,
Would lose themselves in the air, or stick a Comet
Upon Heavens face, from whence the matter
spent,
It would fall down, the sport▪ and scorn of I will∣drone,
Allow me then less valiant, pinch all
The Laurels from my brow, that else would grow
there,
The honour of my birth and blood must lift me
Above the Competition with Ulysses;
My Father was Duke Telamon, a name
Fatal to Troy, companion to Alcides,
Whom in the expedition to Colchos,
Ergo was proud to bear: his father Oecus,
Who for his exemplary justice here,
Was by Eternal Patent from the Gods,
Made Judge of souls; him Iupiter begot
On f•ir Egina, from whose womb, I write
My self a third from Jove: But let not this
Entitle me to great Achilles arms,
Without my interest in his blood: Our fathers
Grew from one royal stem, I am his Kinsman,
And I demand in this, but just inheritance.
In what relation of blood can then
Ulysses. of a strange and forfeit race,
Equal in fraud to his Progenitor,
Condemned to labour at the restless stone,
Lay claim to Achilles Arms?
What, asleep Thersander?
No, no, I observe every word, Ulysses
has
Said very well, he was ever a good Orator.
You are mistaken, Sir, it is Ajax pleads,
Ulysses has not spoke one word.
Wast Ajax?
I cry you mercy, it was very handsome,
And to the purpose in my opinion,
Who ever said it.
I entreat your silence.
With all my heart.
It is wonder Princes,
That this Dulichyan King dare bring his face
Before a Sun-beam, and expose that brand
Of infamy, the name of Coward, writ
In Leprous Characters upon his brow,
To the worlds eye.
How Telamon?
Ulysses,
It is I, that said it, and these Kings may all
Remember, when most wretchedly, to save
Those tender limbs of yours, and that warped
face,
When Greece rise up, one man to punish Troy,
Thou cowardly did counterfeit a madness,
Till Palamedes pulled that visor off.
Was Ajax Telamon at that sordid posture?
Nay, was not I the first in field, and eager
To engage my person in these Wars of Troy?
(Witness thou sacred Genius of our Country)
As a curled youth could fly to meet a Mistress,
And print his fervour on her amorous lip:
But for his valour since, let Nestor speak;
That good old man made not his age excuse,
Nor his white hairs, that like a Grove of snow,
Showed what a Winter dwelt •pone his head,
But flung himself on War, when in the heat
Of Bat•el, over-charg'd with multitudes,
And his horse wounded, he espied Ulysses,
To whom in this distress, he called for succour,
When he (unworthy of his name and honours)
Left the old man to struggle with his dangers,
To whom the Gods sent aid. But here's the
justice,
He that dishonourably forsook his friend,
Met with an enemy, that made him call
As loud for his relief; I heard that clamour,
And with my sword cut out my passage to thee,
When thou were quaking at the enemies feet,
And ready to exhale thy panting soul,
I interposed, bestride thy coward body,
And took thy many deaths upon my Target:
I Ajax brought thee off (my least of honours)
And saved thy wretched life.
This Ajax did,
But being done, the honour's over paid,
When he that did the act is Commentator.
If thou could call again that time •••sses,
The wounds upon thee, and thy fears of death,
When thou did skulk behind my shield, and
tremble
At every lightning of a sword, thy soul
Would have a less ambition to contest
For great Pelides Arms.
Ajax will carry it.
It will
Become our prudence to expect, what may
Be said in answer to this accusation;
I have heard an Orator, with that subtle me∣thod
Of art and language, state his Clients cause,
And with such captivating arguments
Prevailed on every ear, it was concluded,
All law must be in favour of that interest,
But when the adverse part was heard, that which
Appeared so sacred in the first relation,
Vanished, and it was the wonder of all men,
By what strange magic they were so deceived:
I speak not this in prejudice of him
That pleads, whom we all know a man made up
Of every masculine virtue, but to stay
(Where two of so much honour are concerned)
Precipitate, and partial votes of merit:
A•ax Has more to say.
I know not how, with safety of mine own,
I should direct your judgements to consider,
That after all this story of my self,
I do not seek these arms, nor court the glory
To wear em, for it is justice to pronounce
They seek me, Ajax, and should prompt you
to
B•lieve, I only worthily can wear 'em.
What hath Ulysses done, he should be named
With Telamon; we have his Chronicle,
He surprised R•esus in his Tent, a great
And goodly act, nay, had the heart to kill him;
He snatched a spy up, Dolon, and dispatcht him
To the other world, a most heroic service!
And had the confidence to filch from Troy,
The dead Palladium, memorable actions:
Fought he with Hector? did he stand immov'd
As I, when I received upon my cask,
A mighty Javelin that he darted at me?
When you, pale with the wonder of my strength,
Forsook your prayers, and gave me from the Gods
Into my own protection, and at last
I was not overcome, but in the face
Of both the Armies, sent this mighty Champion
Staggering home to Troy.
It was a fierce battle,
And Aax lost no honour.
Had I done
But this alone, it might be argument
To prefer Ajax lelamon before
Ulysses to that armour; which In•n thinking
How he'll become, or how he dare sustain 'em,
Their very weight will crack his chine, that Bur∣gonet
Will bring his neck in danger of a cramp,
In pity of his fears, discharge his hope
Of so much steel, he has •he art of running,
Twill much reta d his motion: Are you yet
Considering as doub•full to distinguish us?
Some God convey •hose arms up •n the wings
Of a swift win•i••• he enemies camp,
Guard'em with •ll the strength and soul of Troy,
Let every sword mount death upon the point,
And leave us•o our single fate, who soonest
Should fetch 'em off: Then you should tell your
selves,
How much this Carpet Prince came short of
Ajax,
I had rather fight than talk: Now here him tattle.
An Ajax, an Ajax
If my prayers, with your own, renovvned
Kings,
Could have prevailed with Heaven, there had been
no
Contention for these arms, he might have lived
To have enjoyed them still, and we Achilles.
But since by the unkindness of our fate,
We are decreed to want him (pardon me
If at that word, unmanly tears break forth)
Who can with greater merit claim the armour,
Than he whose piety to Greece and you,
Engaged alone his valour to these Wars,
And made him yours. Nor let it be a sin
Ere I proceed, to pray this justice from you,
That since my adversary hath been pleased
To make a virtue my reproach, and stain
The name of Eloquence, which in me, is not
worth
Your envy, or his rage (since he declares
His incapacity for more than fighting)
You will not judge his dullness an advantage,
Or that which he calls eloquence in me,
A blemish to my cause, who have employed
All that the Gods made mine, to serve my Coun∣trey.
Thersander,
Are you not ashamed to sleep?
Ha? no, I sleep?
I have not escaped a syllable by my honour,
I thought not Ajax half so good an Orator.
Ajax? it was Ulysses that spoke last.
Ulysses? I, I meant Ulysses; did I say
Ajax?
Between you and I be it spoken Diomedes,
Ajax is a blockhead.
Yet he spoke to purpose.
I grant you that; nay, nay, let him
alone.
Silence.
The lu••re of our birth by Ajax boasted,
Which we derive not from our act or virtue,
We vainly call o•r own, nature contributes
A common gloss to all our blood, the honours
And swelling titles, pinned upon our name,
Chance often •amps upon a Fool or Coward:
But if provoked by Ajax, I must yield
Him magnified by blood; that title which
He takes from Jove, makes me his Grandchild
too,
Lacrtes was my father; his Arcesius,
Whom Iupiter begot, no difference here,
But that our Family contained no Uncle
Banished for murder, as in Telamons.
Besides, my mother but remembered, makes
My derivation on both sides Divine,
Which lifts me above Ajax, if I were
No King of Ithaca: but he hath pleaded
A nearer privilege by being Kinsman,
And calls these arms his just inheritance,
Your wisdom could not choose but smile to he••
him,
〈◊〉 his son is yet alive, and Peleus,
Achilles father, Teucer his next Cousin; •
And Ajax to be heir, is worth your wonder;
But you know how to wave impertinence
〈…〉
I need to pray your justice, that we both
May only charge the balance with our merits.
This is not ranting, he is Master of
A worthy temper.
Give him your permissions.
Ajax hath read, not without mighty lungs,
His own bold History, when I shall tell
But my first act for Troy, if it be less
Than all that Ajax yet hath done, or boasted,
And with his own consent too, I quit all:
I have raised your expectations up to wonder,
And there I'll fix it, when I name Achilles,
Whose actions for your service, scorning all
Equality, are owing to Ulysses;
And I may call them mine, that made him yours,
By his sword fell the great Priamides
Hoctor, whose single arm carried the strength
And fate of Ilium: The death alone
Of Hector, is an act, if well considered,
Doth easily exceed, what hath been done
In all your Grecian Commentaries: I armed
Achilles first to do these mighty things,
And for those may deserve Achilles armour,
We must acknowledge all the benefits
Of great Achilles valour are a debt
We owe to Ulysses, who discovered him
Under a Female habit, it was Ulysses
That made him man again, and our great Cham∣peon.
All this is granted, yet I think Ulysses
Lost little blood in any of these services;
What do you think Thersander?
I think as the General thinks, he's wise
enough.
But give me leave to offer to your memo∣rye
Another service, and reduce your thoughts
To Aulis, when our Army shipped, and big
With our desires for Troy, for want of wind
Were locked in the Eubean Bay at Anchor.
When the Oracle consulted, gave no hope
Of the least breath of Heaven, or gentle gale
To be expected, till Diana's anger
Were first appeased by Iphigenias blood;
I melt with the remembrance, and I could
Accuse my faith, but that the public interest
And all your honours, armed me to persuade
Nature, against the stream of her own happi∣nos,
There stands the tear—drowned father Agamem∣non,
Ask his vexed soul (and let me beg his pardon)
How I did work upon his murmuring heart,
Divided twixt a Father and his Country,
To give his child up to the bleeding altar?
Whose drops (too precious to enrich the earth,
The Goddess hid within a cloud) drank up,
And snatched her soul; whose brighter substance
made
One of the fairest Stars that deck yon Canopy.
Had Ajax been employed to have wrought A∣trites
When he was angry with the Gods, to have
given
His only pledge, his loved Iphigenia
Up to the Fatal knife, our Grecian fleet,
Had by this time been rotten in the Bay,
And we by a dishonourable return,
Been wounded in our fems to after ages.
This truth is urged too home.
The Deity appeased with Virgin Sacrifice,
The winds put on fresh wings, and we arrived
Sue•• 〈◊〉 wishes to affrighted Troy;
〈◊〉 after their first battle, they no more
Drew forth their Army, which engaged us to
Nine horrid Winters expectation:
It would be tedious to relate, how active
My counsels were, during this nine years siege,
When Ajax (only good at knocks and vvrest∣ling)
Was of no use, the bold designs I carried,
My care of our defences and approaches,
Encouraging the Soldier, wearied
And vvorn away with empty expectations,
How I did apt provisions, arms, and hearts
To fight withal, I shall not here enforce,
When you whose just commands I still obeyed,
Are conscious of my pious undertakings.
He'll talk eternally.
These actions have deserved no brand of
Covvard,
How it may stain his forehead that accused me,
Judge you, by the short following story, Princes
There was a time, when Agamemnon was
Deluded by a dream, and bid to leave
The siege, which coming to the Soldiers ear,
(Whose fears were helped by superstition)
How did they run to'th ships from every quarter:
Where was the torrent of great Ajax valour
So talked of, that did bear all things before it?
Why, it was here, that torrent carried him too:
I saw and blushed at Ajax preparation
To be aboard, (I will not call it running)
How 〈◊〉 I, careless of all danger, throw
My self among the Mutineers, and court
The Fugitives to face about again,
And build themselves a name, and wealth in
Troy,
Given over by the Gods to be their captive?
What acted Telamon, but unworthy fears,
And rather coward them by his retreat,
Than teach them honour by his own example.
Can Jove hear this? ha!
Look to Ajax.
Contain yourself.
Let me fight him here,
Or you are all confederates in my infamy.
For my sake.
I am patient—
Nor am I without wounds, and crimson cha∣racters,
Which as her ornament, my bosom carries,
Greater than Telamon can boast, although
He fought with Hector, which was but his For∣tune,
And might have been the lot of Agam•mnon,
Of Menelaus, Diomed, my self,
And others, who had equally engaged,
And only chance preferred him to the combat:
But let me not be thought to take from Ajax
His just reward of fortitude, I grant
He did repress the fury of the Trojans,
When they came armed in fires against our Na∣vi,
But it was nor single valour, that repulsed
The numerous enemy. Patroclus had
The armour of Achilles on that day,
Which struck a terror in the Phrygian cou∣rages,
And many Princes swords contributed,
Mine was not idle, and I merit some
Proportion of fame for that days victory;
But if it come with murmuring, defer it,
And make it up in your accounts of honour
Due, for the great Palladium, which I fetched
(Assisted by the valiant Diomedes)
Out of the heart of Troy, spite of the Groves
Of Spears, that grew a bright defence about it,
And Swords, whose every motion darted light∣ning
To guard the fatal Image; in this act
I gave you Troy, till this was ravished from 'em,
It was not in your fate to make a conquest,
Ajax and all the Army might have fought
Against the Moon, with as much hope of Victo∣rye.
This must be granted him a signal Ser∣vice,
I can attest the danger of this action.
I blush, I am compelled to mention these,
But where my honour is traduced, it is just
To make my fairest vindication:
The wealth of Greece should not have bribed me
to
This Contestation; but Achilles armour
Would strike ambitious thoughts into a Her∣mite,
Nor will my limbs much tremble to sustain•
'em
I had the honour at his death, to carry
His body with all that weight of arms upon it,
And placed him in his Tent, although I want
Some bulk of Ajax, I can walk, and fight,
And tell him where he fails, and mark him out
A truer path to Glory, than his strength
Is able to pursue, with no more brains
To guide him, than his empty pannier carries:
Wisemen join policy with force, the Lyon
Thus with the Fox, makes up the Soldiers em∣blame.
And now I look on Ajax Telamon,
I may compare him to some specious building,
His body holds vast rooms of entertainment,
And lower parts maintain the Offices,
Only the Garret, his exalted head,
Useless for wise receipt, is filled with lumber,
A Mastiff dares attempt to combat Lyons,
And I'll find men among your Mercenaries
Shall fly on Hydra's, if you name that valour:
But he, that we call valiant indeed,
Knows how, and when to fight, as well as bleed.
Ulysses, Ulysses.
Please you withdraw your persons for some
minutes,
Is it come to this.
I obey.
I scorn to court
Such staggering opinions, and repent
That I once thought you fit to be my Judges.
For my part, with pardon of the Gene∣rall,
My voice shall be to please them both.
Impossible.
Divide the armour, and compose the diffe∣rinse;
Or give Ulysses, because he has the better
Head-piece, Achilles Helmet; and to Ajax,
Those parts that guard the body.
I am for
Ulysses.
He shall have my vote.
And mine.
Your judgements meet with Agamem•∣nonce,
Entreat the Prince of Ithaca return.
Sir I congratulate your fa•e, you have
With the concurrence of our votes, deserved
To be the second owner of these arms;
Which as the first reward of all your service,
I in their names present: Nor are these Trow∣phies
More than an earnest, and a glimpse, of those
Eternal Monuments shall Crown your VVis∣doom;
VVhere's Ajax Telomon?
Transported hence with fury.
You have honoured your Ulysses, and I
now
Must call these things my blessing, and your
bounty.
Bear them in Triumph to his Tent, and
say,
Wisdom, not down-right Valour wins the
day;
Better is wise Ulysses in the field,
Than the great Master of the seven-sold Shield.
I think Lysippus, we may now be friends,
For though you had a mind to quarrel when
The victory was doubtful, I am not
The more exalted for my Masters triumph,
His wit is none of mine; I honour Ajax
In his own arms; for I have seen him do
Brave things.
Thy hand, I love thee Didimus,
And I will love Ulysses for thy sake too.
But how does thy Lord Ajax take the busi∣nos?
He's mad, and rails at heaven and earth, I
dare not
Come near him—Whose this, Poiybrontes?
Let us forget all differences, and make
Some sport with him—Polybrontes,
I am proud to see your military face.
My Magazine of Valour, I do honour
you,
From that exalted trust upon your Skonce,
To the cold iron Star upon your heel, how
is it?
How is it my Low, and Mighty Poly∣brontes?
Tired out with killing of the Creature,
Wilde Beasts, and Men, will come in•• my
way;
Some, I look dead, others I take the pains
To cut or quarter, as they move my fury,
The hate of Iuno is entailed upon
Our generation I think.
How, Iuno? I pray what kin are you to
Hercules?
I am his son, son to the Theban Her∣cules
That did the mighty Labours; we number twelve,
I have been told too, I am very like him;
There were fifty of us in one night begotten.
You are not, Sir, so big boned as Her∣cules
altogether.
Hang bones, and flesh, and blood,
It is the soul that's tall, a Giants spirit.
Not in that body,
A soul can hardly stand upright in it.
It is the more dangerous, being confined, and
must
Break out like lightning.
What's that upon your hat?
My case of Tooth-picks.
How, it is a Lyons paw.
A Legacy my father left me, part
Of that Nemean Lyon, that he killed,
Whose skin he used to wear, which since these
Wars
I turned into a Knapsack, and it carries
A charm against all venomous B•acts, come near
it,
Vermin he means:
What kind of belt is this?
This was a Serpent, which at Aulis was
Obse••d to climb up to the Sparrows nest,
Where having swallowed nine, Calchas pre∣sag'd,
We should be nine years at the siege of Troy,
And in the tenth be Conqueros, this I killed
With a Flint stone, as it came hissing toward
me,
It had ten row of iron teeth.
Where are they?
All beaten out with that stone I threw at
her.
Nothing scopes you then:
But good Sir favour us, to let us know
How many men have fallen by your sword
During our siege, I know you keep a Cata∣logue.
Not of all,
I only register within my Diary,
The men of honour that I kill, the rest
I leave to the common bills of Mortality.
The men of honour, I pray, Sir.
They rise to—
•oo in my roll.
With your own hand?
Ten Princes, beside two of Priams sons,
Paris and Hector,
Paris is alive.
Not that Paris I killed upon my honour.
And all the Army knows, Achille•
with
His Mirmidons •lieu Hector.
From me tell Achilles
It is false.
He's dead too.
It is well he is so, he that steals my fame,
Must not be long in the number of the living.
You are
The little wonder of the world, you had
Done your self right, to have put in with Ulysses
And Ajax, for the armour.
Had he stood,
There had been no Competitor, Ulysses
Had this day mist his triumph.
Had Ulysses
The armour then?
Given by all Judges.
I believe
The man is so modest, •at mention
Of me, would have recanted his ambition;
Do not I know Ulysses? yes, and Ajax.
Ha!
And all the swelling flies that blow the Army,
I'll tell that Ajax, when I see him next,
That I dare fight?
With whom Sir, dare you fight?
With any man that shall affront you, Sir,
Renowned Ajax, my soul falls to crumbs
That day, I do not honour your remembrance.
Ulysses is a Juggler, I do wonder
It's impudence, to stand in competition
With him, that is the man of men, brave Tela∣mon:
Shall I carry him a challenge; prithee let me,
I long to thunder him.
Stay Weasel!
Or to Agamemnon, or the best of them,
Would I were in my knapsack nibbling cheese
now.
I say the word, be dead.
My brains, my brains!
Ah my own sweet brains; who wants any brains?
Art thou not dead?
Oh yes Sir, I am dead,
Give my Ghost leave to walk a little.
Come back, your name?
Ah, when I was alive, the Soldiers called me—
Agamemnon.
I shall be brained in earnest!
When thou hast past the Stygian Lake, com∣mend
me
To Oecus, one of the Infernal Judges.
I will Sir, I am acquainted with his Clark.
And when I have made my revenge perfect,
I'll visit him my self.
I'll bring you an answer too.
Do so.
I were best to make haste, Sir, Charon stays
for me,
And I shall lose my tide.
Then vanish.
Presto.
There's one dispatched, he's company for
Ghosts,
I know whose fate is next, and then I leap
To immortality: what cloud is that
Descends so big with prodigy, my steel
Shall give the Monster birth, have it is Ulysses,
Come to affront me in Achilles armour:
A thousand serpents creep within my skull:
I'll find the Cowards soul through all this dark∣nos,
Have at thee Politician, dost thou bleed?
Now I have met with, thanks to my good sword,
I kiss thy cold lips, for this brave revenge,
Thou art my own, without competitor,
And must be my last refuge and companion.
Alas poor Telamon!
Who calls Telamon?
One you have known and loved; can you
forget
Calchas so soon?
Our Grecian Prophet, you are very welcome,
What news from the upper World? do they agree
In heaven? we are all to pieces.
I am trusted
With a direction to you, the sacred powers
You serve—
Speak on, but let me tell you as a friend,
They have not used me kindly, but no matter,
I'll be my own revenger.
Sir, take heed.
How you provoke their anger, or contemn
Their Precepts, for the partial acts of men,
They know, and pity that a man so valiant,
Should for a trifle lose his manly temper:
You are not, Sir, forgotten by the Gods
And I am sent, their Prophet to acquaint you,
That what you lost alive by humane Judges,
Their divine Justice shall restore with honour
To your calm dust; for know, those very arms
In which Ulysses triumphs now, shall be
Snatched from him by a tempest, and shall land
A floating treasure upon Ajax Tomb,
And by their stay convince the future age,
Who best deserved i'm; be not then unmanned,
And thus deface the beauties of your reason.
I thank 'em, they are pleased, when I am
dead
To make a restitution to my fame,
And send me home the armour, this is something,
I'll make my self in a capacity
By death to be an object of their justice,
I'll dye immediately, I can do it my self.
Your Piety avert so black a deed!
This is a way to make the world suspect
The worth of all your former actions,
And that they were not births Legitimate,
Born from true honour, but the spurious issue
Of an ung ided heat, or chance: How shall
We think, that man is truly valiant,
And fit to be engaged in things of fright
And danger, that wants courage to sustain
An injury? it shows a fear of others,
To be revenged upon our selves, and he
Is not so much a Coward that flies death,
As he that suffers, and doth fear to live:
Besides, this will enlarge your enemies triumph,
An• in the world opinions, be granted
A tame concession to his worth; nay men,
And with much face of reason, may affirm,
Ulysses did not only win the arms,
〈…〉 Ajax.
Therefore I will dye
With 〈◊〉 own hand, and save that infamy;
I am resolved, all fate shall not prevent it:
Leave me:
I must not.
I am not confined
To place, thy office yet is thy protection,
Do not presume to follow, left my rage
Make me forget your person, and by sad
Mistake, I turn the Priest into a Sacrifice:
Go tell the world I am dead, and make it known,
That Ajax fell by no hand but his own.
This will turn all our Triumph into mourn∣ing,
The glories of our blood and state,
are shadows, not substantial things,
There is no armour against fate,
Death lays his icy hand on Kings,
Sceptre and Crown,
Must tumble down,
And in the dust be equal made,
With the poor crooked sith and spade,
Some men with swords may reap the field,
and plant fresh laurels where they kill,
But their strong nerves at last must yield,
They tame but one another still;
Early or late,
They stoop to fate,
And must give up their murmuring hreath,
When they pale Captives creep to death.
The Garlands wither on your brow,
Then boast no more your mighty deeds,
Upon Deaths purple Altar now,
See where the Victor-victim bleeds,
Your beads must come,
To the cold Tomb,
Only the actions of the just
Smell sweet, and blossom in their dust.
Set forward to the Temple, this was once
A day of Triumph, but the death of Ajax
Will make it dark within our Calendar;
Joys are obortive, or not born to last,
And our bright days are quickly overcast.

IS this the entertainment you promised me in the Jovial Mer∣chants house? Is this the great interest you have in his huge hos∣pitality? when by half an hours attendance and entreats, we can∣not obtain the sight of him.
I wonder at it; Sure some strange disaster has suddenly befallen him. He was, last night the merriest man alive, drank healths; told tales; sung Catches; Trowel the Bowl; Toss the Cannykin; and what not! and all for joy, that his son, he said, was upon his return, whom he has not seen these dozen years, since he sent him a little Lad into France, to be bred there.
I heard he did so; and that in lieu, by way of
Exchange, he brings up the daughter of the Parisian that breeds his son.
Right.
But is that daughter so exquisite a creature, as is this Merchant Matchills own whom you so much extol?
They are both so equally handsome, and ver∣tuous, that, be their dowries so, and their consents alike, I'll take my choice of cross and pile for either, with such a friend as thou art.
Troth, and that's friendly spoken, Mus.
It is so Val. yet not with some policy do I wish thee a fortune: for, insooth. young Gentleman, though I like your person, and some of your qualities, yet by reason of your wants, I find you something heavy on my purse-strings; and my self scarce able to supply you. And, if we fail of good matches, I must even turn you over shortly to the hopes you host of in your City-Mystresses and Tradesmen's wives—.
Peace, prithee hold thy peace.
Friend Cash! Is your Master, Mr. Mitchell yet at leisure 〈◊〉 be seen?
He much desires, sir, to be held excused. It is true that he invited you. His dinner's ready; and his heart welcomes you. But he has met with an unhap∣pie news to day.—
I feared some ill. What is the mat∣la?
His only son, whom he of late expect∣ed home out of France, we hear, is dead.
His daughter will prove a bouncing match then.
That's the impression the heavy news makes in you, Gentlemen.
Come, let's go.
Nay, Gentlemen, although my Masters sud∣den sadness shuts him from you. His meat and wine are ready. There are some good company in his Par∣lore too, Pray stay.
Are his fair daughter, and the French-borne
Damsel there to be seen?
Both. Pray be pleased to enter.
I hope his passionate fit ever you have dined will be past over. He is not wont to suffer long under the hand of sorrow.
It is like that you shall see him ere you go.
In that fair hope we'll enter and fall to.
It is like you shall fall short though of your aim
At my young Mistress, who by this black news,
Becomes my Masters heir, and so the white
That all the gallant suitors of the City
And Court will level their keen shafts at. Where
Are mine own hopes then, that stood as fair
In competition for her, love as any,
When the great noise of her inheritance,
Shall drown each Lovers tongue, that cannot say,
It is a Lords at least, I rather wish
The young man had not did.
Whore's my Boykin? my Friskoe? my De∣light? my Cash? by what better name can I call thee?
O me! Master Strigood, what make you here?
I come to comfort my brother in his sor∣row.
His son is dead, they say. Ha! Is it not so?
And he is almost dead with sorrow: Back sir.
The sight of you, that are his sole vexation, will make him mad.
That is my way to cure him.
Madness drowns grief in any man.—Probatum.
Good Mr. Strigood depart.
Good Mr. Cash, and Mr. Matchils man.
I'll see your Master. What! deny his brother?
His noun natural brother? By the surer side too
We tumbled in one Pannier; though we had
Two Rippiers, Sweet sir, I am the elder too
Strigood was in my mother before Mitchell
Therefore, because I have spent an estate
And he has got-one, must not I maintain
My self the better man?
Yes: if you had the wherewithal.
Sir, you had been as good have held your tongue.
Lend me some money Cash.
I have no money, sir, but what's my Ma∣sters.
Whose money, sir, was that you played last night.
Among the Knights and Braveries at the ordinary?
Gold by the handfuls, Cash! Lend me two pieces.
Speak lower, sir.
Lend me three pieces, Cash.
Before I speak too loud, whose money's that
You use to wear abroad at Feasts and Revels
In silver lace and satin; though you wait
At home in simple Serge, or broad-cloth, sir.
Be not so loud, I pray.
Lend me five pieces.
I shall grow louder else. Who pays your Barber?
I mean not for your Prentice pig-hair'd cut
Your wear at home here; but your Periwigs;
Your locks and Lady-ware that dangle in 'em,
Like straws in the bush natural of a Bedlam?
What mean you Mr. Strygood.
I mean ten pieces now; I'll go no less. Do not I know your haunts?—
You may; you trained one to 'em
Do not I know your our leaps, and vagaries?
Your tiring houses, where you shift your self,
Your privy lodgings, for your trunks and punks?
Your midnight walks and meetings? Come, the money.
And, hark thee, though thou modest my brother by it.
I'll keep thy council: thou shalt find me yertuous.
I want, he gives me nothing; and thou can not
Do him better service, then relieve his brother.
I am in; and must, to hide my old faults, do
Like an ill Painter, lawbe 'em o'er with new.
Quickly. I shall grow loud again else Cash.
Sir, I am in your hands, here are ten pieces.
I hope you will not think my Master for▪••.
No; no for all he has that comes through thy hands.
My nimble Cash; and from his I am sure,
Though I were starving, I should finger nothing.
Will you go now?
I'll see him ever I go,
And dine, if there be meat in the house. What eta's
Are there within •'ll draw a knife amon• 'em.
This desperate old Russian, would undo me,
But he hopes to waste his brother by me.
He has spent himself to beggary; and would fall so,
But that he has pernicious fire in's brain,
That raging spreads to ruin others with him.
I must beware of him,
Is she come too?
Then it is deereed, my Master must, from sorrow, suffer in madness.
Go home Ephraim.
And have a care you suffer not my boy
To Straggle forth among his unhappy play-mates,
For fear of mischief.
It shall be my care.
What do you lock up my brother, ha?—
H' has locked himself up, Madam; and will suffer
None to come at him, till his sorrowful fit
Be somewhat over.
Not's own Sister, ha?—
Nor his half brother neither: yet he's here.
Is he here, ha? That Strygood? Is he here?
Hang him old reprobate. And beshrew thy heart,
For a young varlet, to call him our brother.
It is no marvel, if my brother Matchil
Lock up himself, and such a wickedness
Be in his house, as is that Strygood, ha—
Let him take heed, he comes not in my Nayl reach,
And call me Sister, or my Brother, brother,
Like a debauched old Villain, as he is.
O that my husband Nestlecock were alive,
But for three minutes, to send him to
Newgate, if he presume to call me Sister
But I command you in my husbands name,
Who was a Justice, when he lived, to thrust him
Out of your Masters doors, my brothers house.
Lest I be sick with the loathed sight of him.
You will not disobey this, will you, ha?—
If not, why stir you not? ha.—
I must remove
This fit of hers. There's but one way to do it;
And thats to talk of her white boy, she's fond on.
Will you not send him packing, ha?—
First, Madam.
(By your good Ladyships leave) how does your son
Sweet Master Nehemiah Nestlecock?
I thank you courteous friend. In truth, last night,
One of my Coach-gueldings fell lame, and I,
By that constrained to come afoot,
Was forced to leave my boy at home; or else
He had come with me, to have been a comfort
To his sad Uncle: But I would not now
For twice my Gueldings price, my child were here;
And that foul fiend in the house, whose very looks
Would fright him into sickness.
O good Lady!
I can't so soon forget the fright he took
At seeing the roguish Juggler once eat tow,
And blow it out of's mouth in fire and smoke,
He lay a fortnight by it.
That's two years since.
And he was then but young, he's now a man.
Alack a child; but going in's nineteenth year.
Whore's my Niece Joyce?
Within there Madam; so is Gabriella
The French young Gentlewoman to attend you.
I'll stay with them till I may see my brother.
I hope old Strygood, who now on the sudden
Hath slipped her memory, meets her by the ears first.
But the good minute's come, before I looked for it.
My Master now appears. He looks most sorely
Expressing more of anger then of grief.
I fear, old Strygood was so loud with me,
That he hath over-heard us, and I shall break
Before I am a Freeman.
Sorrow be gone
And puling grief away, whilst I take in
A nobler and more manly Passion;
Anger, that may instruct me to revenge.
My child is lost by treacherous neglect
In that false Frenchman, to whose seeming care
I trusted the chief comfort of my life;
My boy. Nay, read again. It is written, here,
He was grown man:
His man, I think, he said.
Does your man trouble you. I do not like that
And here he writes that in his youthful spring
And heat of spirit, he began to grow
Intemperate and wilde—
Wilde! Are you there?
Which drew him on to riotous expense—
And there again, to riotous expense!
It is I directly that he's troubled with.
And sometimes into quarrels. What of that?
In all this he was still mine own. Oboy—
Some slave has writ some fearful information.
Against me, and he hugs and kisses it.
And had his Guardian had a feeling care
(Hang his French friendship) over my dear child,
As I had over his, these youthful follies
Might have been tempered into manly virtues.
I hear not that.
But I fall back again
From my revenge to grief. Away; I will not.
Here's the death-doing point. These slight disorders.
In my young forward son (I find it here)
Were, by his churlish and perfidious Guardian,
Interpreted no less then Reptobation,
And, by his ignorant cruelty, so punished.
For, here he shuts his ear and door against him:
When suddenly the loose licentious world
Soothes on his youthful, in judicious courage
To imminent destruction; so being engaged
In a rash quarrel, he in duel fell.
The Opponents sword was instrument; yet I infer.
Lafoy, his Guarcian was his murderer.
Farewell, my boy; and this is the last tear
Thou shalt wring from me. Something I'll do,
Shall show a fathers love, and valour too.
I'm young enough to draw a sword in France, yet.
But first—Come hither, Sirrah.
Now it comes.
I purpose straight to order my estate
Look that you forthwith perfect my Accounts;
And bring me all my books of debtor and creditor,
Receipts and payments, what you have in wares,
And what in cash, let me inform my self.
It is as I feared.
I'll set all right and straight,
All statutes, bonds, bills, and sealed instruments
That do concern me, I have in my Closet
Or at my Councels, or my Scriveners.
I'll call in them my self. Why doest thou look so amaz'dly?
Would have me yield a reason? why, I'll tell thee
I mean to make a voyage; and, perhaps,
To settle and proportion out my estate
By Will, before I go. Do you as I command you.
Whatever he pretends, I know his drift:
And, e'te I'll be discovered by my stay;
Being run out, I'll choose to run away.—
My daughter in the first place must be cared for.
I'll make her a good match. My next in blood then,
My Knave-half-brother, and my whole fool-Sister.
But the best is, her Ladyship has enough;
And all I have, in Strygoods hands, were nothing.
Therefore I'll purpose nothing to him. Oh.
The Joy and Torment of my life, at once
Appear to me. I must divide them, thus.
Hence hated issue of my mortal foe
Whom I have fostered with a Parents Piety
As carefully and dearly as mine own.
While the inhumane cruelty of thy Sire
Has to untimely death exposed my son.
Thank me I kill not thee; so leave my house.
There's French enough in town, that may befriend you.
To pack you o'er to Paris; what's your own
Take w'ye, and go. Why cleave you to her so?
Forsake her, cast her off. Are not my words
Of force, but I must use my hands to part ye?
Dear, honoured father, I beseech you hear me.
In parting us you separate life from me,
And therein act a real cruelty
On me your only child, sharper then that,
Which you can but pretend done by her father.
Durst thou speak so?
I cannot live from her.
O monstrous. Pray, your reason. Why not live?
You know, Sir, from our Infancy we have been,
Bred up together, by your tender care
As we had been twin-borne, and equally
Your own; and by a self-same education,
We have grown hitherto, in one affection,
We are hoth but one body, and one mind,
What Gabriella was, I was, what I, was she.
And, till this haplesse hour, you have enjoined me,
Nay, charged me on your blessing, not to arrogate
More of your love unto my self, then her,
That was, because I presumed her father loved,
Or should have loved my son, your brother.
I never knew brother, or sister, I;
Nor my poor self, but in my Gabrella.
Then blame me not to love her, I beseech you
—Upon me knees.
The art knee-deep in rebellion.
Unnatural Gypsy, since thou prov'st my torment
In being the same with her; and hast declared
Thy self no more my child, then she, whom now
I do abhor, avoid, with her, my sight.
Rise, and be gone, lest thou pull curfes on thee
Shall sink thee into earth.
O rather, Sir.
Let me, against whom your fury first was bent
Suffer alone the sharpness of your vengeance:
And let it not be said, because you surmise,
My father lost your son, that, therefore, you
Have cast away your daughter. Hurl me, rather,
Into the ruthless waves to seek my way;
Or do but take her, hold her in the arms
Of your paternal love, and I'll take flight
To wean her to you.
She cannot, may not leave me.
Out of my doors then, with her.—
What's the matter? ha—
Such as you cannot mend, dear Lady Sister.
What come you hither with your Ha—for? Ha—
To comfort you, dear brother, if you'll hear me.
Your son is dead, they say; and here I find
Your daughter is rebellious against; our will.
You speak much comfort, do you not, think you.
But is it so Joyce? ha!—I thought you, Joyce,
Would have rejoiced your father in obedience, Joyce;
And not afflict him with your stubbornness.
O this impertinent woman!
But my brother,
Let me advise you, rather then suffer her
To be an eye-sore to you, put her out,
Where she may learn more duty. If you please
I'll take her home, and show her how it should be
Yes, as you have shown your Nestlecock, your son.
I, there's a child! Brother, you'll pardon me,
If I aspire in hope, that he shall be
Your heir, if Joyce miscarry in rebellion.
And therefore you would breed her. How the devil
Works in a covetous woman! Though a fool too.
Your sonne's an Ass; an Idiot; and your self
No better, that have bred him so. Do you tell me
Of your sweet sugar-chop't Nestle cockscomb?
Ha—
He's fit to inherit nothing but a place
In the Spittle-house, Fools College, yond, at Knights∣bridge.
And did I come to bring thee consolation?
Now let me tell thee, I rejoice in thy
Just punishment, thy scourge of crosses. Thou,
That for these six years space▪ until this day,
Hast kept continual feast and jollity
For thy wives death, who was too good for thee.
Right, for she was my Master, a perpe•••l
Vexation to me, while she was above-ground
Your Ladyship could not have spoke more comfort to me
Then the remembrance of that shook-off Shackle,
Which now, in my affliction makes me smile,
And were I on her grave, I could cut capers.
A further punishment, I pr••hence
Grows in the neck of thy lewd insolence
I could even find in heart to marry again,
In spite, now, of thy witchcraft, my son dead!
My daughter disobedient! and your child
A very chilblain. What have I to do
But marry again: all women are not devil•,
I may yet get an heir unto my mind.
Art thou here too—
Stay, you forget your brother, Mr. Matchil.
You have matched ill once already; and take heed
You match not worse, your children, though un∣toward.
And taking of the devilish Shrew, their mother,
Were likely of your own begetting; Yet
Your second wife may bring you a supply
Of heirs, but who must get them, first is doubtful.
Thy impudence amazes me.
Ha, ha.
I'm sick at sight of the lewd Reprobate.
Dee cast about for heirs; and have besides
Your daughter here, a brother and a sister?
Call not thy self our brother. He appears
U•••nde to me, but thou insufferable,
I loath to look upon thee.
He has spoke
Against her Aunt, her Moon-calf son. I'll make her love me best, and presently.
Brother, I say.
I cannot look upon thee.
Provoke me not to ••each, I charge thee.
Give me leave to speak; Hold you your peace;
Hear but my brotherly advice; and when
Give your consent in silence.
hum hum, &amp;c.
Hear him not.
Nor you neither, hum—hum—hum.
I am not angry with you now; and therefore
I charge you, hear him not.
hum hum—
My advice is thus, that for your daughters good.
For mine own good, and for your Sisters good.
And for her son, your Nephew's good.
How's that? ha!
And chiefly for your own good, and the credit
A wise man would desire to hold in the world,
Think not of marrying, nor of buying horns
At the whole value of your whole estate,
But match your daughter while you have the means
In your own hands; give her a good round portion,
Here are deserving Gentlemen in the house.
Next, think of me your brother, that has spent
In down-right fellowship (heaven knows what
All fraudulent purposes to make any man
A miser or a gainer by it) a fair estate.
And now do want a brotherly supply.
A hundred a year or so: but above all
Fasten your land unto your Sisters son.
That hopeful Gentleman, sweet Nehemiah.
hum.
Now brother you may hear him.
What though it straggle from the name of Matchil.
Remember yet he is your mothers Grandchild.
Why dee not hear him, brother?—
hum.
As I hope
To be a landed man my self,
Had I a thousand yearly, I would leav't him.
Truly, I thank you. Now I'll call you brother.
You're a good natured Gentleman if you had it.
Come home, and see my son.—Will you not hear him? ha
I need not, nor your self. I see you gape
Like monsters that would swallow me alive.
I know your minds; and I will do mine own.
And, thus it is. Stay, let me stay a little.
Look you how wilde he looks.
He's falling mad.
Stark staring mad,
I would he had a wife then,
For nothing else can tame him.
So it shall be.
First, I'll be Master of mine own estate.
Next—
Take a wife to master that, and you.
Next, you Mademoiselle, (on whom with pa∣tience
I cannot look) forsake my house, and suddenly;
Linger not for a man to wait upon you,
But let your black bag guard you, it is a fashion
Begun amongst us here by your own Nation.
And if I longer must call you my daughter,
Forsake you her.
What mine own heart? dear Sir.
At your own choice. I can force her depar∣ture,
Though not persuade your stay, determine quickly
Either to leave her, and enjoy a father,
Or never more expect a fathers blessing.
Dear, mine own heart, leave me, obey your father.
It must be to my death then.
I'll be sudden.
Therefore be you as brief in your resolve.
Alas, poor hearts. Just so loath
To part was I and my son Nehemiah
Today when I came forth.
Niece Joyce, let me
Advise you.—
Pray, Sir, none of your advises.
Let her advise her self; whilst I impart
To you my next intention; which is thus.
To end your strife for shares in mine estate
I'll venture on a wife: indeed I'll marry
Will you so? ha!
Yes indeed La,—
If then
You'll estate nothing on me for my life
Give me a see to help you to a wife,
I can, a good one.
I'll none, Sir, of your good ones.
Besides, Sir, I'm provided.
You are not, are you? ha
Let it suffice, I say it, so quit my house.
Shall I expect then nothing?
Pray sir, do.
It is all I can afford you. You have wit,
Yes, you can dance, tread money out of rushes,
Slight and activity to live upon.
A nimble brain, quick hands and airy heels
To get a living.
Ho.
Pray fall to practice.
I may, sir, to your cost, if you put off
Your daughter with her Sweet-heart, her Mon Coeur
There, as she calls her. Dear, my Lady Sister;
You see how churlishly this Merchant uses us.
He has forgot, sure, he was borne a Gentleman.
Will you be pleased, I speak to you in your ear.
Any way, brother Strigood, Hang him, Nabal,
To warn me out o's house; and not alone,
To turn a stranger from within his gates,
But offer to cast out his child too, ha!
It is about that I'd speak, pray Madam hark you.
Noble Mr. Matchil, though we are your meat
Before we saw you you will give us leave
To take our leaves, and thank you ere we part.
O Gentlemen.
W'have heard your cause of sorrow.
But I have over-past it. Hark ye Gentlemen
You'll give us leave first to salute the Ladies.
Nay, if you love me, hear me first.
Your will, Sir.
Niece, you shall no way disobey your father
In being ruled by me.
So, so, it takes.
You and your second self shall home with me
Until his furious humour be blown over.
To which the first means is to 〈◊〉 his fight,
And then let me alone to make your peace.
We thank your Ladyship.
So let us slip.
Home to my house together.
Hist brother, lead the way.
As glad as ever Fox was of his prey
It is even so, Gentlemen, sorrow finds no lodging.
In my light heart sometimes she knocks at door,
And takes a drink, but here she must not sit by it.
Y' are happy Sir.
Yet I have heard you say
You never tasted joy for divers years
Till your wife died: since when, a King of mirth,
And now to marry again is such a thing.
Yes sir, tic such a thing that I will marry
That I fore know can never disobey me
And I'll defy the devil to dishonest her.
Is she so ugly?
No, he means so virtuous.
Well-said, sir, you shall drink before me. Ra∣chel, Maudlin.
'Protest you shall though't be in my own house.
Now he resumes his humour.
Ratchel I say,
Bring me a kahn of sack.
But how can you
Presume before the dangerous marriage-trial
That she whom you've chosen will be obedient.
D' ye think he has not tried her? There's a question
Well-said again. I was about to say so.
Rachel, some sack, I say. Yes, I have tried her, sir,
Tried her, and tried her again; all over and over
These five years day and night; and still obedient.
Then you are sure to her.
No, I never used
A marriage-question, not a wooing word,
But do all by command, she is so obedient.
And yet she's chaste and virtuous withal.
Well-said again, sir, so I was a saying.
But we have talked away the Gentlewomen.
No matter, let'hem go. Would they were far enough.
Come, the sack, the sack.—Who taught you that curtsy maid.
Pray try a better to the Gentleman.
Protest you shall begin.
In your own house, sir?
•'ll rather g' ye my house, then break my word in it.
Y' are Lord here, and may command me, sir. And so my service to you.
I'll do you reason, sir.
Be ready with your Napkin, and a lower douke maid.
I'll hang dead weight at your buttocks else. So.
Is not this obedience, Gentlemen, Mr. Erasmus?
Mus, I will call thee Mus, I love to be
Familiar, where I love; and Godamercy
For your friend here; you both shall see my daugh∣la.
But my French Damosel and I are parted
I hope by this time. So here's to you Mus.
To me, to me, to me.
Ha boy, art there? dispatch
Your curtsy quickly, and go cal my daughter.
She is gone forth, forsooth.
Forth, ha? when? whither?
La ye, she thinks I'm angry, and the finger
Is in the eye already. Is not this
Fear and obedience, Gentlemen? who went with her.
She went with my Lady Nestlecock, to bring Gabriella on her way they said.
I would
They were all in France together.
What, your daughter?
She comes again, I doubt not. Dry your eyes.
And drink that sack, without a curtsy, drink it.
You do not know my meaning, Gentlemen.
Stay: now give me't again.—Now go and dry
Your face within—without a curtsy? ha!
Now is not this obedience, Gentlemen?
But this is not the rare obedient piece
That you will marry?
You do not hear me say so.
But I presume, as much obedience
In her I have made choice of.
Marry a maid.
And we will be her Hench-boyes, if you please.
No, I'll have no such blades about my wives honchos.
But come, to end this tedious Scene, in which
I have past the Purgatory of my Passions
Of sorrow, anger, fear, and hope at last.
I am refined, sublimed, exalted, fixed
In my true Sphere of mirth; where love's my object.
And bloody thought of black revenge cast by.
Could your fair breast harbour a bloody thought?
For some few minutes, in which ecstasy
I meant to have gone, as other Gallants do.
To fight in France, forsooth, and charged my man
To draw up his Accounts, call in my moneys,
Thought to have made my Will—.
I saw your Cashier
Go forth even now with a story lusty Porter
Laden with money: I will not say my teeth
Watered at it.
But it was enough to make
A very true mans fingers itch.
I cannot
Think he is run away; but yet I like not
His carrying forth, when I say, fetch in money.
But this is from my purpose. Love ye mirth?
Let's in, and drink, and talk. That gives it birth.
I prithee now, I prithee, prithee now
Urge me no more in this case; for I cannot,
Nor I wo' not so I wo' not, I be jealous
Os mine own wife, mine own deat flesh and blood?
That's such a thing! I pidee speak no more on it.
You show you love Raf.
So I hope I do Nan.
My cock, my pity nettle nancy cocksie,
Do I not show my love when I deny thee
Unreasonable requests? I never heard
Of woman that desired a loving husband
To be a jealous Master over her.
Especially a City-Shopkeeper.
The best part of whose trade runs through the hands
Of his fair wife too! It is unreasonable.
And thou the first that ever take up the humour.
And you the first that ever I knew besotted
Into a wilful confidence, which renders
Me to a vile construction; and your self
By leaving me to all assaults and hazards
Have got the reputation of a Wittal.
Or one that seems contented to become so.
Hon soit queen mali ponse.
My Cock, my Nancy Cock, my Cocksie Nancy,
Kiss me, and use thine own conscience: I scorn
The yellow sickness, I, let 'hem all say what they will.
D'einty, come thou to me. I will not lose
An hairs breadth of my humour, nor retain
An ill thought of my Cocks honesty
For all the wealth in the Exchange, not I
I not desire you should, but only that
You will not seem so careless of my credit,
Exposing me to all temptations
Of the wilde Gallantry of the wanton time.
By whom (although my chastity remains
Untouch't) my name and your discretion suffers.
Pish, Honi soit again: Cock, I defy
Calumniation and detraction I.
When I am jealous, let the horne-curse take me;
And let me be with hornets stung to death.
Still you fly from the point, I would not have
You vex your self with causeless jealousy
Over my constant love; but only seem
A little watchful o'er my reputation.
Whereby you may decline men's lewd attempts.
And not to throw me upon opportunities
To draw them on; as if I were a thing
S•• out, as in your shop, for common sale.
Cock, Thou shalt never tie me to it: not I.
I must not lose my harmless recreations
Abroad to snook over my wife at home.
Though have me like the hair-brain'd Point-tagger,
That used to hammer his fingers at one end
Of the shop, while's wife was bargaining at the other?
Not I; sweet Cock, pidee lets hear no more on it.
Now friend! Is your business to me or my wife?
This Superscription will inform you, sir.
To my dear daughter Mrs. Hannah Chameleon, at her shop or house in or near the New Ex∣change.
Take it quickly, what a Knave art thou to put a letter in my hands, that is directed to my wife. Sbobs I would not have opened it for fonrty pound.
If all husbands in the City were of his mind, it were a Forest of fools indeed.
Cock, I must leave thee.
Pray stay a little. This letter's from my fa∣there.
I hope the good Captaine's well.
Yes, very well, pray read his Letter here.
Cock, you shall pardon me. Not I.
I have a match to play at the ducking-pond.
Prithee fore-slow not my occasions, Cock,
As I forbear to pry into thy secrets.
Here's nothing but what I would have you see.
There's for your postage, friend. It needs no an∣swer.
I thank you, Mistress.
But if you will not stay to read this Let∣la.
You shall not deny me one thing.
What is it, quickly? my sweet Nanny Cock.
Here, take this pen: write here a word or sentence.
What you please. But keep it well in mind,
And look that you be sure to know it again
When I shall show it you.
It is done, there: I defy, and dare the de∣vile and all his Clerks to counterfeit my hand. So, my sweet Cock, a kiss and adieu.
Well Raf, remember that you won't be jea∣lous.
Not I, Sbobs yonder comes one of the Blades,
That thou would have me have an eye to; He
That lives by his wits, and yet is seldom sober:
That goes so gallantly, and has no credit,
Nor ever buys with ready money; But
Barters commodity for commodity.
(Such as it is) with Tradesmen's wives, they say.
What call you him, oh Askal; there's another
Comes with him too. Into thy shop, good Cock.
I wo' not stay, not I. So, farewell Cock.
And farewell Coxscombe, some wife would say now.
I am much troubled at his silliness.
And would to right me, strain a women's wit,
Knew I with modesty how to answer it.
Something I'll do.
Was ever such a humour in a man, as this mad
Merchant Matchil is possessed with.
To marry so, to spite his child and kindred.
He has made his daughter by it a match worth nothing.
And there your hope is gone.
And yours in me.
For as I said before, good Valentine.
I must return you to your City wives.
By the old trade to pick your maintenance
Out of em, as you boast you can.
It is well, sir.
And now to let you know that I can live
Without the helps of such cool friends as you.
I'll show you a present probability.
Doest see yond pretty mumping piece in the shop there?
Yes, is that one—?
One of the forty, boy,
That renders tribute in to my Exchecquer.
Did ever lie with her?
How plain you are. Not I, not I.
That▪s her fool-husbands word.
Let it sussice that I have seen her thrice.
And that I lay with, drink, and wear her money.
O it is the sweetest Rogue.
How got you acquainted.
I'll tell you that, walking by chance as now,
Before her shop, where a young Gentleman
Was bargaining, he called me by my name,
Instantly her eye was fixed,
And straight ran over my delineaments,
Which I set to her view; and took occasion
To ask her how the object pleased her.
Bold-face.
I never lost by that.
She then demands, Is your name Askall, sir?
I answer, Yes. Pray of what country, sir?
I told her; when a sudden flaming blush
Did in her face betray the fire of love,
That was at the instant raging in her breast,
She looked me through and through. Sighed, turned away.
Then looked again under her hat-brims thus.
And thus I nimbly catched her with mine eye.
I, thou hast a devilish catch i'that same eye.
Sir, what I have, I have. I gave a leer
With that same eye that made her turn her whitesup.
But to the point.
Why do you think a woman's so quickly brought to the point?
What followed then?
I saw she was struck, and thus I gave her line
To play withal. I whispered in her ear,
The way to find my lodging and my service.
Next morning early comes a message to me,
Inviting me to dinner: Cheer and welcome
Plenteously flowed; and sir, before we parted
Upon some private conference, twenty pieces
Were clutch't into this hand, but with a caution
To be discreet and thrifty of her purse,
And keep a friend in store. I have been modest,
And have not struck her since, but for ten more.
And that's your last.
I le hold you ten o that
See she has spied me.
What lack ye, Gentlemen; fair cut-work bands, boot-hoose, or boot-hoose tops, shirts, wast-coats, night-caps, what will you buy?
I come not now to buy.
But in plain terms to borrow. Do you not know me?
Not on these terms.
Sure thou mistake the woman.
This is not she, thou talk foe freely on Bounce.
She's cautious before thee. Walk off a little.
Now you may hear me, Lady.
Give me leave
A little, first to wonder at your rashness,
To talk so openly before a stranger.
My intimate friend: I'll trust him with my life.
What's that to my unblemish't reputation?
It is not your life can salve that, being wounded.
But thus it is, when women out of goodness
Hazard their fortunes to relieve the wants
Of such as you, that carry no respect,
But to your own licentious Appetites.
And think no favour's sweet, unless you may
Have privilege to boast 'hem to our shame.
I do not boast of yours.
Pray, boast no more
Then you have found, and much good may they do you.
It is not poor thirty pieces can undo me.
No, nor ten more I hope; and that's the sum
I would entreat: all makes but forty pound.
I'll pay thee like a Gentleman, as I am one,
Either in money; or doest hear me, Rogue,
In what shall please thee better. Come, be wise,
Thy husband's a dull ducking Gamester. And
Kennels his water-dog in Turnbull-street.
We'll answer his delights with better sport.
There's your presumption.
No, it is my ambition.
When shall we walk to Totnam? or cross o'er
The water, or take Coach to Kengington
Or Paddington; or to some one or other
Of the City out-leaps for an afternoon,
And hear the Cuckoo sing to the purpose? when?
A woman were a wise one that would trust
Her self in such wilde hands as yours; to have
Her name made Tavern-talk among your blade,
And thrust in the 'list of your loose-hilted Mistresses:
O no; fie no: you cannot think how close
And careful I will be. Hark in thine ear.
I cannot blame this fellow now so much
For using of his wits to get his living,
Though in an idle way; as for traducing
People of worth and virtue, as this woman
Who I am credibly informed is virtuous
And too discreet for him to shark upon.
Therefore to grace himself, he slanders her.
I have always liked his company till now,
And shall hereafter be more wary of him.
Well sir, upon pour faithful protestation,
And vow of secrecy, liere's ten pieces more.
You have found a tender-hearted woman of me
Over your wants; and all the satisfaction
That I desire, is, that I may not suffer
Under a lavish tongue; it is easy payment.
Yes, but I'll pay thee better. Therefore tell me, when we shall meet and have a spirta∣broad.
Your friend stays for you, sir.
Pish, let him stay.
You slight him now, but he knows all your Councels.
By this good tongue, no more then the un∣begotten Hans that I mean to clap into thy Kel∣der.
Nor ever shall: doest think I am so foolish
To talk away my hopes? No, thou art my Fairy,
Pinch me to death when I discover thee.
Go to, avoid suspicion then, besides
I have occasions that do call me hence.
Your stay was somewhat long.
Yet it was to purpose.
As here you may behold, but I must make no words on it.
She has enjoined me that. O'tis a cunning Gypsy.
So't seems, by trusting thee that hast no pow∣er to keep a secret.
Troth, to tell you true.
My conscience will not beare't, I cannot be
So ungrateful to receive a curtsy,
But to acknowledge it.
Yet thou hast the conscience
To work a mans estate out of his hands
By his wives frailty, even to break his back.
It is rather to be feared she may break mine.
She's a tight strong dock't Tit.
O Tradesmen, why do you marry?
Why? to make Tradeswomen.
For Gentlemen that want money and commodity.
You know the thing that I call father in 〈◊〉,
That had my mothers whole estate, and butied her,
Allows me nothing.
Thank your own sweet courses.
My courses are sweet courses, they serve me to live upon.
But I shall put you off
O'one of your sweet courses, or at least
I'll strain a point of friendship to be satisfied
Touching this woman, twill be worth discovery.
But why these cloudy looks? do not you like my courses? ha▪
I cry thee mercy, Val.
I was upon our former subject Matchil.
I there's a hasty match clapped up. You asked
Why Tradesmen marry, there's a marriage now!
A humorous Coxscombe that could never laugh
In all his last wives days; and since her death
Could ne'er be sad. For him to marry his Malkin
For poor and course obedience. Well. I hope
To take my course in his house yet for all.
Her boasted chastity and obedience.
Would thou touch such a thing?
What, not for money?
She can pay well and her ugliness cannot fright me
I can do that work winking.
She can be no such woman.
Tell not me
What any woman can or cannot be,
You'll give me leave to try my fortune with her,
Yes, and walk with you towards it.
No news, no tidings of 'em, Ephraim, ha!
Was even sucg a scope?
Not since the Rape
Of H•llon• I'm persuaded. I have searched
With narrow eyes (as I may say) with care,
And diligence in most secret places.
And can no way inform my self, what is
Betide of the young Damsels, or old Squire.
Your Niece, and the French Virgin, and the man
Unworthy to be called your brother Strigood.
O hang him Villain.
Doubtless it was his plot
To work upon your Ladyships good nature
To harbour them, that he might take the advantage
Of stealing them away.
What to do, ha?
To do? much may be done by his seducements,
On two such tender Virgins, though he should
But plant them in our suburbs: but my fear
Is that he has transported them beyond seas
Into some Nunnery. Your Ladyship
Knows he is adverse in Religion.
I know he is of none.
Satan will work.
The stronger in him, then to their subversion.
How shall I answer now my brother Matchil?
But he is justly served to marry so.
The thought of it torments me. Whore's my comfort?
Whore's Nehemiah, ha?
He's busy, Madam.
What, at his book? or at his music, ha?
That is, his Ballet, or his Jewes Trump. No,
Madam. He is busy at his exercise of Arms
With a new Casting top, a Cat and Catstick,
I bought and brought him home.
I thank you for 'hem,
My careful discreet Ephraim. I like
His harmless exercises well.
I hope,
Your Ladyship can say since I have had
The Government of him under your Ladyship,
I have been careful of the Gentleman,
And have his love withal so much, that I
Dare say (I hope you'll pardon the comparison)
That had you married me (which was as likely
As that your brother would have taken his Maid.
I think that Mr. Nehemiah would not
Have run away in hatred of our Match,
As Mrs. Joyce. it seems, hath done of theirs.
I hope your Ladyships pardon, I understand
My duty.
And you speak but reason Ephraim.
I have given her there a touch of my affection.
Who knows how it may work?
Go call him in.
I would not have him over heat himself.
It is a good care. And Madam, by the way,
Let me advise, that since his riper years
Require, and that fair Propositions
Of marriage are tendered for him, that
We gently by degrees, do take him off
From childish exercise, indeed plain boys play.
More manly would become him.
You would have him
Do worse then, would you? and be nought, you var∣let?
What! would you have him play at Mans-game, ha?
Fore he be married, ha! what, what! how now!
Is it but up and ride w'ye, ha!
I humbly
Beseech your Ladyships pardon, I will call
Sweet Mr. Nehemiah to your worship.
Go, you are an honest man. I know thou love him.
Indeed he's all my comfort and my care
And I must naturally respect all those
That do partake with me my care of him.
my boy Nigh, Son Nehemiah.
F'sooth.
That's my good Lamb. Hold up thy head; and thou.
Shalt have a wife.
But mother f sooth, when I have her,
Will she play with me at peg-top?
At any thing, my boy.
And she have not good box and steel, I shall so grull her.
And then at Mumbledepeg I will so firk her.
But when you're married, you•ll find other pa∣stem.
Whatever I say, I have a meaning though.
But yet, I doubt, I shall not forsake all
My old figures in a year or two.
I know thy will is good to leave thy wag-tricks.
And I commend your understanding in it.
It shows you man, and ready for a wife.
Amardla, f'sooth, I think so; I Amardla.
For I did beat a boy as high as my self
Yesterday, with one hand.
Where was thy tother.
The boy had but one hand f'sooth. I used both.
Well you are too witty to live long, I fear.
But as I was saying, son, I do expect
Sir Sweden Whimtby to bring his Niece.
Who f•sooth, the crying Knight, he that has wept
Ever since his Lady died; and mourns in colours;
Speaks nothing but in verse, and gives me Ballats;
The old Knight Powel, that pronounces what dee call 'hem?
Odes child and Elegies. He has been in∣spir'd.
With the infection of Poetry,
Ever since his wives departure: and it is thought
Nothing can put him out, or cure him of it
But a new wife to kill the furious itch of't,
But is not his Niece too big for me? I would be loath
To be over-match'd.
O witty, witry, still.
But when she comes Nehemiah, What'll you say to her?
I'll give her the time of the day or the night
I warrant her, come at what hour she will.
Why if I eat not all before she come.
(And she must try her, if I do'nt) I'll ask her
If she can speak with plums in her mouth; and then
I'll offer her a long one and two round ones,
And nod at her.
You will not, will you, ha?
Mother, I know both what to say and do
I trust I am not to be taught to woo.
Too witty still, I say, to be long-liv'd.
But hark you mother f'sooth; I am told that you
Bear a months mind to that Sir Whimlby,
And a cross match is talked on betwixt you
And the old Knight, and me and his young Niece.
O ho—is it so?
This is no crafty child.
Let me but see how you will handle him now
And mark how I'll come over her with small Jerks.
O you are a witty wag. A blessing on it.
Madam, Sir Sweden Whimlby and his Niece,
Mrs. Blithe Tripshort.
They are very welcome,
Noble Sir Sweden.
Noble Mrs. Blithe.
Sweet Knight, you're welcome.
Welcome, sweet Lady.
Still weeping.
O good Madam.
Still weeping for a husband.
Ha, ha, ha.
Mother, she puts me on it,
She laughs.
Laugh with her then.
Amardla, so I will, and if you laugh
At me, I'll laugh at you again, so I will.
Ha, ha.
Are you there with me? I'll be here with you then.
Will you eat any Sugar-plums? no, I'll eat 'em for you.
There's ha, ha, ha, ha, for you now.
Do you note, Sir Sweden, what a wag it is.
Walk into the next room Nehemiah. Did you note him?
Madam, to tell you true.
My love to you
Springs from the joy,
I take in your sweet boy
I can take no delight
But in his sight,
Nor any pride
Since my dear Grissel died,
In all, I see on earth or find in books,
But that which overcomes me in his looks.
O sweet Sir Sweden, you have all wooed and won me.
Then all my hopes are frustrate.
My son shall have your Niece, and for mine own part.
You loving him so well, of what's in me.
I can deny you nothing.
Gentle Madam.
She offers up her self; now may the proverb
Of proffered service light upon her.
Nay, Sir Sweden.
Let me entreat you to leave weeping now.
Madam, I cannot so
Forego my woe.
For while I strive
My solace to revive,
I do but still restore
My grief, before
That did beti'd
When my dear Grissel did.
And when your Ladyship appears in sight.
(Pardon) I cannot choose but cry out-right.
Alas, good Knight. He weeps pure Helicon.
He has not wherewithal to quench his love,
But his own tears. A wife would cool him better.
Why sir, does sight of me renew your grief?
O Madam, Madam, yes;
In you the bliss,
That I do miss,
I find enshrined is.
And till, to ease my pain,
I shall regain
In you the Bride,
That in my Grissel died.
So oft as she in you to me appears
My numbers cannot cease to flow in tears.
Good sir, collect your self, and be assured
I am your own, so Neh. may have your Niece,
With her full Dowry of four thousand pounds.
My personal estate is full as much.
That and my self are yours on the cross marriage,
You making me an answerable Joincture.
Is it come so near; I'll cross it, or my star▪
Drop crosses on my head. O vain, vain woman,
To dote on Poetry in an old man.
Ladies may love it in the young and bold,
And when they are sick give gally-pots of gold,
For cordial Electuaries to cheer
Their crop-sick Muses; but to an old and sere
Man that out-lives his labours, who can be
So vain to give her self away but she.
I had been sitter for her, and I'll watch
Occasion yet, perhaps, to cross the match,
I can tu•n Poet too.
Dry now your eyes, and answer me in prose,
Are you content to yield to those conditions
I have propounded, ha!
I am content.
And now for joy could weep,
Finding my Grissel in your Ladyship.
I hope the young ones do accord as well.
Protest, I cannot abide you.
Nor I you.
Amardla, that I cannot.
They are agreed.
Madam, it seems they both are of one mind.
I do not like it. What's the matter Nehemiah?
She is no wife for me, she has broke my Jewes-trump; look you here else. And almost broke my head with one of my bounding stones.
Bless my boy; she has not, has she, ha!
And yet after all that, and for all I offered to teach her to shoot in my Trunk and my Stone-bowe, do you think she would play with me at Trow, Ma∣dam? no, nor at any thing else. I'll none of her.
And yet I'll have her too. If she will promise to do as I would have her hereafter.
There, do you note him there, Sir Sweden?
This child has no childish meaning in it, I war∣rant you.
No Madam, no, I know him inwardly
He is my joy, and she shall be conformable,
Or fare the worse.
She will, I know she will.
Will you not have my son, sweet Mrs. Blithe?
Sweet Madam, what to do? ha, ha, I shall be quickly weary with laughing at him. His fooling will soon be stale and •odious; and then to beat him would be as toilsome to me; and lastly, to be tied to nothing but to cuckold him, is such a common Town-trick, that I scorn to follow the fashion.
Can she talk thus? ha!
A merry harmless Girl.
Fear not, good Madam, she will come about.
A thousand mile about rather then meet him.
I much desire she would; for now my son
Is set a marrying, I warrant it pure thing
It is in pain, till it be at it: ha!
Pray bring her on, Sir Sweden, let him kiss her.
Poor heart, he licks his lips; and look how arseward she is.
Fie Blithe, be courteous, Blithe.
Mother,—she has spit Amard just in my mouth.
Amard, what's that? if you speak French you wrong me.
Gip, Mrs. Tripshort. Is this the manners your Mother left you?
Speak not you of Mothers, Madam.
Sir •w•then, will you s•e my child abused so, ha?
I can but grieve for it, Madam.
My mother is as good as your mother, so she is, for all she's dead.
I, well-said Neh.
Yes, it appears in your good breeding
Your fine qualities express her virtues sussiciently.
How dare you Huswife talk thus to my son, of me, and before my face too? ha! Sir Sweden, can you think well of me, and suffer this, ha?
Alas, good Madam, I am down again I know not what to think of living woman now.
Do you bring your Niece to abuse me?
I am so drowned in tears, that I cannot •ee what to say to it.
Mother, Amardla, the more I look on her, the better I like her.
Say so, my boy. Besides, I have a conceit she can out-scold you▪ and that's more then ever woman did, I think f'sooth.
For thee, I do forbear her.
By your leave, my Lady Nestlecock, I have brought a sister of yours here to salute you.
Though unworthy to be of your Counsel, or at the Ceremony, I heard you were married brother. And by a Sisters name you are welcome.
I thank your Ladyship.
Sir Sweden Whimlby! and your pretty Niece! well met, what affairs have you in hand here? what do you cry for your old wife still or for a new one? But hark, you Lady Sister, whore's my daugh∣la?
Now for a tempest. Truly sir, I know not.
Is shenot with you, ha?
No truly, sir.
She's slipped from me with her good Uncle Strigood.
That Thief has sold her then into some Bow∣dihouse
Was this your project for her education,
To steal my child to make a whore of her?
Are you turned Lady b•ud now for your Niece
Because you have no daughter? O the devil!
If there be Law, I'll trounce your Lady Hagship.
What, what? how now? do you taunt me, sirrah, ha?
I'll make thee an example.
Thou hast made thy self an example, and the scorn of thine own child in marrying of thy drudge there; and thats the cause of her running away thou may think, because she hates to live where she must call her mother that was thy droile.
Droile, I think, she said.
Speak to her, I charge thee, on thy obedience to speak to her.
The droile is now your brothers wife, Madam, and in that setting your Ladyships lavish tongue aside, as good a woman as your self, none dispraised, ha.
Well-said Rachel, hold thine own Rachel. And so to you, sir Sue then.
Mother, come away, mother.
By and by, my boy.
Do you presume to call me drudge and droile, that am a Ladies Sister every day in the week; and have been any time these three days, ha.
That's not every day in a whole week yet.
Thou shalt not dare to call me sister Hus∣wife.
Cods so, and why trow? because a Lady scorns to be a huswife, ha. If you be no huswife, I sc•rn to call
you Sister, I; though my husband be your brother. From whence came you trow, ha?
I know not what to say to the bold-face.
Pray f'sooth come away, I am afeared she'll beat you.
Thanks, my good child, but do not be afraid my Lamb.
Boldface, ha! Her brothers wife▪s a bold-face, but her face is not varnished over, yet like his Lady∣sisters face, but it may be in time when she learns the trick on it, and have as many flies upon it, though not so troubled with 'hem, as a bald mare at Midsummer, ho.
I know not what to say to her, she has charmed the virtue of my tongue.
I never heard her speak so much in all her life, Sir Sweden, nor half so loud. hank heaven, she has a voice yet on a good occasion. And so far I'll maintain her in it. Nephew Nehemiah, when saw you your Cousin Joyce.
O Lute, O mother f'sooth, look you, mine Uncle holds me.
Ah, naughty man, did a so go▪me a stroke, and I'll beat it, •h—.
Your wife has taught you to play the rude companion, has she? Pray take her home sir, and let her discipline your own child if you have one, and let mine alone. You know the way you came, sir; or if you have a mind to stay here, Come Sir Sweden, come away children; I hope I shall find some other room in mine own house, free from your assaults, if not, I'm sure there's Law against Riots. Come Sir Sweden.
Not yet good Madam Nestlecock, you shall hear me.
You have enticed away, then lost my daughter.
And now you're a juggling with your widow wit,
And your small worm here, to catch up for Gudge∣once.
Sir Sweden and his Niece, I know your plot..
She's not fit match for you Sir Sweden; and her son
Much less for your fair Niece. Come dry your eyes,
And look upon him, and not only look,
But laugh at him, I charge you.
I could now for him heartily.
Mark how his mothers milk drops at his nose, while I show you the mother and the child.
He was her youngest son, and all that's left of seven, and dreaming that he needs must prove a Prophet, she has bred him up a fool.
F'sooth mother he mocks me, oh.—
O profane wretch, worse then thy brother Strigood.
Do not cry, Nehemiah, peace, good boy, peace. So so.
A tender mother I must say she has been.
For till he was fifteen, none but her self
Must look his head, or wash his pretty face
For making of it cry. Laugh at her good Sir Sweden.
And before that, till he was twelve years old
She would dance him on her knee, and play wed's Cock.
Ah ah ah ah.—
So well-said, Sir Sweden.
Just so efface my mother would serve me, ha, ha.
Is not this better then whining.
Yes, or perhaps then wiving either.
Do you say so.
Ha, ha.
Well said, Sir Sweden, laugh on. I hope I have done a cure on him, by showing him a
more ridiculous object then himself, to turn the tide of's tears.
Ha, ha.
Laugh still, defy the fiends, women, and all their works.
Ha, ha, ha, let the dead go, and the quick care for themselves. You buried your wife, and cried, and I buried mine.
And laugh; which is the manlier Passion.
He knows not that he is married again.
You are the merriest Merchant, ha, ha, ha.
I think I shall not marry again in haste, ha, ha.
Well-said, hold there. And for your Niece
Let me alone. I'll fit her with a match.
I know a Lad that's worthy of her.
Ha, ha, ha.—
He•ll laugh too much, I fear.
He may at you,
For your officiousness.
How's that?
Ha, ha.—
To thrust your self into unthankful offices.
In things concern you not. Will you turn Matchmaker
For others un-intreated, it is enough.
For you, I hope, that you have matched your self, ha.
Ho! Do you hob, or talk to me?
Who else
Should talk or give you counsel but your wife?
VVell-said Rachel, hold thine own Rachel.
I am matched again.
Ha, ha, ha.
Pox, cry again, or burst thy self with laugh∣ing.
La. Ha, ha, ha. Laugh son Nehemiah.
Ha, ha. ha.
What am I? what do you make of me?
Nay, what have you made your self? best ask the Chimney piece that you have married there.
Durst thou advance a voice against me, ha?
You did commend it in me against your Si∣ster.
And I may better be familiar with you;
Ho, are you not my husband? I am sure
It is not so long since we were married, that
You can forget it, or •opened so soon.
I am not now your slave, to have my face
Washed with your snuffs, nor to be kick't and trod on
Without resistance, nor to make you answers
Merely with silent curtsies, run when you bid go
To fetch and carry like your Spaniel,
In which condition I live•d long enough,
And was content until •ou freed me out on it.
Now free I am, and will be a free woman,
As you are a free-man, ha.
Ha, ha, ha.
O base-borne beggar.
You wrong your wife in that.
How she holds up the wife.
I never begged
Nor moved a lip to be your wife, not I,
You held my service portion good enough,
And for my blood it is no more base then yours,
Since both are mixed in marriage.
Come your way.
And let me hear you speak so much at home.
I hope I may be bolder in mine own house.
So Madam, for the love I have found in yours,
You shall be welcome thither, when y' are sent for.
What a bold piece of Kitchen stuff is this?
Brothery' are matched.
And catched ifacla, ha, ha, ha.
He has not a word to speak.
Follow me home and durst.
Yes sir, I dare without more leave taking, ha.
Was ever comb so cut.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
There's a new Aunt indeed! she brought me nothing.
I have not laughed so much I know not when,
H'has made me laugh until I cry again.
Again, you are welcome, Sir, Mrs. Blithe
Now the unwelcome guests are gone, lets in
And dine, then will we after meat
Of Joinctures, Madam, and of Nuptials treat.
Right sir.
Love, as I shall adore thee for a deity.
Rid me of this ridiculous society.
GOod Mr. Matchil.
Mistress, be not so violent.
Ha.
I'll rather run my Country, Gentlemen, then endure her.
You were best to kill her then, and then you'll have no other course to take, unless you stay and be∣hanged.
I'll make thee glad to fly first.
From my house and husband shall I? from my possessions shall I? And leave you all to spend in riot shall I? No sir, I'll stay and spend my share if you go to that, that will I. And make all fly as well as you, and you go to that, that will I, ha.
Whoop, whow.
Nay, fl be not so loud.
What did thou bring thou drudge thou.
That which you were content to drudge withal, I am too sure of that. The drudge you speak of is no worse then your own wife, I am too sure o'that.
I know not what to say to her.
Did you not fey for better, for worse? And if it were worse then it is, it were all too good for you. And that I hope I shall find some good Friend to know.
That I like well, I'll be her first man.
I trust you have found the drudge to be a woman fit to content a man, and if you grant not that, some better man perhaps shall be a Judge, betwixt you and the drudge.
Better still.
She threatens horns. I think.
Horns. I think, you said. If it were so it were too good for you. Cannot your own wife content you, ha?
She holds up that point stoutly.
That shall be tried.
O for an expert Surgeon now to cast her in a dead sleep, and geld her.
In truth you will be both sorry, when your passion gives but least way to your understandings. Mr. Matchil, let me persuade with you.
Never uniesse you bring her on her knees, to crave forgiveness at my foot.
If you but yield an inch he treads upon your neck, I will not give an under spur-leather for you. But bear it out bravely, and I'll be your servant.
Mrs. Matchil.
Mrs. Match-ill indeed, to be so matched.
So matched▪ how matched? what from the her∣den sinock with lockram upper-bodies, and hempen sheets, to wear and sleep in Holland, and from the dripping-pan to eat in silver, •ha. Do you rapine at your Match, ha. Is wealth contemptible to you?
I was better content in my poverty. I have not been my self, Gentlemen, since he marri∣ed me.
You may be poor again as soon as you please, the door is open, depart at your pleasure; you know the way to your old Aunt the Apple-woman, at Hock∣ly-hole. Take your knitting Needles again, and live with her, go.
No sir, I'll stay with you, and make you as poor before I have done with ye, as I was before you had me Gent. I shall not be my self till then.
The devil you shall. Was ever such a crook∣ed condition crept into a thing like woman?
Yet this sir, is the rare piece of obedience
You boasted of, and said you would defy
The devil to dishonest her, I am sorry
Your judgement led you into such an error,
Already she's my Mistress.
Is she so?
Yes, and I•le call him servant, Gentlewomen use it.
Do so, Mistress.
If she, sir, be your Mistress, Then am I
Your Master-in-law, out of my house I charge you.
Doest thou conspire to grieve him?
Troth, sir, I did but jest. You have my pity.
All are not times for Jest, friend Valentine.
O my affliction!
Have a little patience, sir.
While I talk calmly with her.
Leave me then
A while unto my thoughts. Go into the house.
Pray servant help me here a little. Do so much
As wind up my Jack for me, my Watch I would say.
Her Jack▪ she's in the Kitchen still.
A pretty Watch this, Mistress, what did you pay for it.
Nothing, my husband ga't me.
Pity the Spring is broke, but I can get it mended.
Good servant take it with you then to the Jack-makers, I would say, the Watch-makers. Come Gentlemen, shall we have a crash at cards?
With all my heart. What is your game?
I can play a many old games. One and thirty bone-ace, Tickle me quickly, and my Ladies hole, and sichie. But you shall teach me new ones, though I lose money for my learning, Gleek and Primero, Gresco saut, primofistula, I know all by hear-say. Come let us have a bout at somewhat. I have money e∣nough.
And I'll make shift to ease you of some on it.
Affliction on affliction hourly finds me,
And lays me on the Rack, tearing my heart
Like greedy vultures, O my heart, this heart
That I so long supposed impenetrable
By all the darts of sorrow, is now transfixed,
Shot through and through with torments, and by this.
This last made sensible of all the rest.
My sons untimely death, my daughters loss.
My Sisters follies, and my Brothers vices.
My servants falsehood, and the jeers of strangers
Now wound me all at once; and all through this
Predominant blow, pulled on me by mine own
Impetuous rashness. Let me here consider,
While my hearts torture keeps my soul awake,
The moving cause of all these ill effects.
Mine own unbridled wilde affections.
Scorn of example, and contempt of counsel.
I cannot but observe withal, how just,
A judgement follows mine own wilful acts,
In the same kind of doing ills for ills.
For my lost son, I rashly wrought revenge
Upon an innocent Girl; and with her
Have lost mine own; and for th'unmanly joy
I took in one wives death, because a Shrew.
(Though otherwise virtuous) I am in another
Trebly tormented; not alone with noise,
But with a fear of unchaste purposes,
Which if they come to act, my purse must pay for.
I see my faults, and feel the punishments.
And rather then stand out in my defence
T'enjoy some peace, I will endure some sorrow
And bear it civilly. Within there.
Sir.
Go call your Mistress, pray her to come a∣lone.
My resolution brings me yet some ease:
Men that are borne to serve, must seek to please.
Rachel.
Your pleasure quickly, I have left
My company, my servant, and my friend yond,
Sawing against one another at Corn the Caster; till I come to 'hem.
And then all three to In and In, is it so?
My servant, and my friend and I are even all one.
They are the goodest Gentlemen, the best com∣pany.
Your servant and your friend.
Yes, and my servant plays for me now in my absence, as far as ten pieces go that I left him. My plow goes there, though I am here.
Your plow makes vile baulkes of my money the while.
I am not so ill a huswife as you imagine. And my friend, and my servant have promised to carry me abroad, to this town, and to that town, and tother town, and whow, I know not whither. And my ser∣vant will have me to Hide-Park he says, to see and to show all, as well as the brave Gallants.
This is gallant indeed.
And my friend will carry me to a whatdeecall, a new Academy, where I shall see the rarest music and dancing, he says, and learn the finest Complements. and other courtly qualities that are to be had for mo∣ney, and such instructions for the newest fashions
She will fly to the devil for fashions sake. Pray stay a little, and let me talk calmly with you. You have almost broke my heart.
But not altogether, I hope. I would not win so great a game, without some sport in playing it.
Hear me.
I know you put on this affected carriage,
But to try mastery, and the disease
Being so general among all women,
Is in you therefore more excusable.
O, are you coming?
Hear what I will say to you.
And find in that a husbands good affection.
I love my peace, and would preserve my honour,
Both which are in your breasts to save or spoil.
And can you think the way to purchase peace
Is by a war with me? ho, you are cozened.
Do you think your domineering looks, or noise,
Or blows, can fright me into quietness,
Or that you shall have honour by abasing
Your wife?
You will not understand me.
Ho.
Though I love peace, and would preserve my honour.
I'll yield in both to you, and can, (I have been
So us•d to thraldom) But the world, the world
Is such a Talker.—
I have found the man.
There I would save a reputation.
He's loath to bring it out; I'll close w'ye.
You'll be content so, I will suffer you
To bear a loud command o'er me in public,
That I shall carry it in private. Is it not so?
Truly wife, yes.
You'll give me leave to beat you
In private then.
Nay, we'll bar blows at all times.
But if I chance to give you a rap or two,
Or now and then a nip, and you strike me
Again, I'll strike you some way else, as you
Would not be struck. And so observe my carriage.
The Gentlemen are coming.
O, here they are.
And not by the ears: that's wonderful.
Sir, I perceive my error, and repent it.
Promising you in all my after life,
To be a faithful and obedient wife.
He has fetched her about, it seems.
Grammercy Rachel, bind it with a kiss.
And thus it should be.
Gentlemen, have ye found us?
With joy to see this reconciliation.
Thus shall ye see it ever, Gentlemen.
I knew she would yield, or I should make her heart ache.
What were a husband, if he were not Master?
You have won the sealed, it seems, yet I may hope
I have not lost a Mistress.
Nor I a friend.
In a fair way, Gentlemen, I shall
Abridge her of no courtly privilege.
But no more haytie twaytie tricks, I charge you.
She shall not jaunt to this nor that town with you.
(I thank you for your care) nor to Hide-Park.
Nor to the Academy you tell her of, without my leave.
And do you say so Mistress?
Truly yes.
I am no such woman as you took me for,
With Mr. Matchils leave you may be welcome
Home to his house in good and seemly sort.
Put pray expect no further entertainment
Then he shall well allow of.
I have lost her.
This change is admirable.
Why do you admire it.
Is she not mine? how could you think she durst
Stand out in her rebellion? although the devil
Who soothes all Upstarts dispositions
Into an over-weening of themselves.
Possessed her for a time, had not I power
And virtue do you think to conjure him out?
What have I studied for, think you, ever since
My last wife died, but how to rule the next?
Go get you in, there's something in the house
Worth looking after.
I be sworn, he frights her.
Would I had you within to perform covenants.
What do you grow rebellious again.
Why stir you not else, ha? prithee Sweetheart
Respect my dignity, or only seem to do it.
Yes, I will only seem to do it.
He makes her tremble.
Gentlemen, I must about my house-•ffaires.
So, I take my leave.
Good Mrs. Matchil.
Aha.
And Mr. Matchil, at your own good pleasure.
Having in private something to impart to you,
I would entreat your presence.
Well, Anon, anon.
Your ear before I go good Mr. Matchil.
H'has brought her to her servile old obedi∣ence.
O—oh.
That is a private touch, sir, of the business.
Pox of your Lobster claws. There waanip▪
It will be worth consideration, sir.
Well, Isle come to you presently.
I humbly take my leave.
Any ill news that you change colour so?
No, nothing, nothing but a womanish fear.
Well, you are a happy man that have of recom her.
You know not me yet Gentlemen, I know a word in private would do it.
Yet she desires to have you again in pri∣vate.
It is her abundant love, and pure obedience.
She comes again.
Since you're not yet disposed to enter, sir.
One word more, Mr. Matchil, if you please.
Oh,—I understand you. Go, I'll follow you.
Again, I take my leave.
I must wear Lantern-hornes upon mine arms,
If she use this. Well, Gentlemen, at your own time
Lets see ye. My Rach. shall make you welcome,
And for me, you know me, I will still be Master.—
I come, I come, I come. So, farewell Gentlemen.
Ha, do you run?
What doest thou think of this?
I'll lay all the tricks I have against his brags.
She masters him in private, and that all
This show of her obedience is dissembled.
My hope revives again; we must abroad with her.
But tell me, what new Academy's that
You told her of, I understand not that yet.
Nor have I seen it, but we both will shortly.
It is but of two or three days standing yet.
Where is it? who are the Professors,
And what the Arts?
I'll tell thee all know.
It carries a love-sound; but I am told
It is but private lodgings kept by
Both men and women, as I am informed, after the French manner.
That profess Music, Dancing, Fashion, Comple∣meant.—
And no drabbing?
A little perhaps in private.
But guess now in whose house all this.
I cannot.
Even in your City-Mystresses, that lends you
Money so freely.
Who Chameleon?
Yes sir, I doubt, your borrowing of the wife
Has broke the husband, put'hem off their trade,
And now they seek new ways to live by projects.
And could you keep this from me all this while,
Till I am there, each step's a tedious mile.
But not without me, good Val. We'll find a time.
Together, and our Mrs. Matchil with us.
Cock, I protest Cock, I commend thy course
Thou hast taken in brave Lodgers, gallant Guests,
Guests of the Game Cock; and my house is counted
A house of quality and recreation, Cock,
In civil sort and gentle fashion, Cock,
Sbobs Cock, I know thou would not have it other∣wise
For all the wealth in the Exchange.
But Raf you care not
What people say, so I bring you in profit.
Not I, not I, my little Cocksie Nancy,
Not I, pish, Honey soit queen mali pens.
Some do not stick to say, I know what's what,
And that our house is no better then it should be.
Pish, Honey soit again, in the very teeth of 'hem,
Let 'hem all say what they will. Dainty come thou to me.
But I know what I know, and that our house is
Better then it should be, if some of them
Had but the keeping of it, that speak so ill on it.
And that the Gentlewomen in our house
Are well-condition'd, and as chaste as courteous.
And if you saw, (as they desire I should
See all betwixt their great Resorts and them)
You'd be in love with their sweet way of living.
Then for their dancing, it is so neat and graceful.
See 'hem anon at practice.
Not I, Cock, I'll see nothing.
I will not leave one ducking pond, for ten dancing schools.
Yet I can dance, and love it: you know that Cock.
And though you are a Gentlewoman borne,
You took me for my legs, not •or my arms.
Is not that a good Jest, Cock. Sbobs it was out before
I was aware. Here comes their father.
It seems he has brought in some new scholar.
Where are my daughters, Landlady.
Close in their chamber, sir.
Are none of our Academics come yet?
Not any, sir.
I look for some anon
Pray bid the Girls come down
To practise.
Yes, sir.
Sir, when I was a Bachelor, I practised,
Dancing sometimes.
Indeed, good Landlord?
And maugre wedloek, I have something left
Yet in these legs, that can express at least
Love to the quality.
That shall not be lost,
If I can further it.
I saw last night
Your new French dance of three, what call you it?
O the Tresboun.
I think I could make one in it.
This Gentleman's another, call the Music.
I'll try what you can do.
Cash, Thou art welcome, I am glad I met thee.
But that you had foreknowledge of my habit,
And seen it in my out-leaps, as you call 'hem,
I might have past. But you in this disguise,
None but the devil himself that is your Inmate,
And lodges with you in it, could have known you.
Sure he devised it.
No, you are short.
I learned it of a Jesuite.
And it was but easy: shaving of my old
Gray hair and beard off; clapping on this perrule
After the fashion; having but few wrinkles.
(For which I thank my Batchelourship, I pass
For a brisk youth. But for my Hannibal eye here. And by my brothers
Courteous advice I have taken a course to live
Upon my stock of wit, slight and activity,
With nimble brain, quick hands, and aerie heels, as he told me, ha!
He could not think you would have stolen his daughter to have set up withal.
But now I care not
What the wretch thinks, so he discovers nothing,
I dare trust thee Cash, partly on thy Oath
Which I have taken you know: but more respectively
Upon your forty pieces here, friend Cash,
Which I have also taken: but most of all
For that I know you dare not make discovery,
For fear of Little-ease. That were a prison
Too fearful for such bravery to stoop into.
That keeps me still in awe. It is well you know it.
But it is better, he has no suspicion
That I am run away.
The Musick's ready, sir.
Play then,—the Tresboun.
It was very well done, Landlord, I protest
I love your house the better for your quality.
But if you saw me at the ducking pond,
Me and my Trull.
Your Trull?
I mean, my bitch, sir.
O she would ravish you.
Some other time.
Here comes your wife. The news good Landlady?
News out of France, your fame is spread a∣broad.
How out of France?
Two young French Gentlemen.
New come ashore, the daintiest sweetest Gentlemen
That ever I saw (now you'll be jealous Raf)
Not I.
Are come to lodge here, having heard
It seems, that you profess French qualities.
And instantly desire to be acquainted
With you and your sweet company.
Can they speak English?
One very well: and the tother can say
Tree French crown for two English kiss already,
Now be jealous Raf.
Pish, Honey soit queen mali pens.
You can speak French, Landlord.
So much as you have heard, not one word more.
I assure you but this, Adieu Monsieur and so
I leave you.
Will you not see the Gallants Raf?
Not I, I wo'nt be jealous Cock, and so▪
By the Back-door to the ducking pond. I go.
Enter then Landlady, where be these Girls?
Here they are come.
Stand aside Cash, and be not yet discovered.
Now Ladies, how do y'like your way of living?
I do not like it Uncle.
Troth, nor I sir.
We eat and lodge well; and we wear good clothes.
And keep our credit in the house we live in,
But what we suffer in our reputation
Abroad, is dangerously doubtful.
So, so.
Here we are viewed and reviewed by all com∣ers.
Courted and tempted too, and though w'are safe
In our chaste thoughts, the impious world may say,
We are set out to common sale.
So, so.
And so you are to the utmost of his power
I dare be sworue;
But Uncle, for the time that you intend
To stay, I pray admit no new acquaintance,
Nor any more, lest I for my escape
Venture a leap two stories deep.
Ha! you said?
You know I have disclosed you to no eye
That could take knowledge who or whence you are,
And for the foreign strangers, and such Townsfolks
As knew us not; what need we weigh their thoughts.
Their gold is weight; let that be all we look to.
While our deserving arts and qualities
Require it from 'hem. If they think us wicked,
And hope to get Virginities for salary,
And pay for their deluded hopes before-hand.
What is our act but Justice on their follies,
In taking of their prodigal coin?
I hope,
You deal not that way for us.
Never fear it.
But Uncle, though you have taught us courtly
Gypsy tricks.
That somewhat trench upon our modesties.
Pray let it not be thought we'll sell our honesties.
Trust to my care.
And thats the way to do it.
And in that care be confidently seen,
By a deserving Gentleman, whom I
Present to kiss your hands.
I will see none.
You need not fear me, Lady; for I can
But tell your father, if you slight his servant.
Bless us! what Metamorphosis is this?
It is Cash your fathers man.
Is this the habit of a Merchants Prentice?
Is this the lodging of a Merchants daugh∣la?
Has his great marriage turned my fathers house
Into a sumptuous Palace, that he keeps
Such costly men. Or doth the bravery
Of his late beauteous Bride require such gorgeous
Attendants? Pray what office may you fill
About her person.
Will you home and see?
We are betrayed?
Ha, ha, ha. Be not afraid of Cash.
I know him, and he knows us. He is our friend
And we'll be his. As for his bravery
It is no new thing with him. I know him of old.
This sute's his worst of four.
And he's one
Of the four famous Prentices of the time.
None of the Cream and Cake-boyes, nor of those,
That gall their hands with stool-balls, or their Cat∣sticks,
For white-pots, pudding-pies, stewed prunes, and Tansies.
To feast their Titts at Islington or Hogsden.
But haunts the famous Ordinaries of the time,
Where the best cheer, best game, best company are fre∣quent.
Lords call him Cousin at the Bowling Green; And the great Tennis-Court.
Thy fathers money
Would rust else, Girl. Keep thou our Council Cash.
And we'll keep thine, though't be to the undoing
Of him and all the wretches of his brotherhood,
That love their money, and their base desires,
Better then blood or name.
But can you hold
It good in any servant so to hazard
His Masters livelihood.
Can you hold your peace?
He's wise, and saves by it all this while: He knows
His friends are bound in full two thousand pounds,
For's truth, and his true service, and perhaps,
He is not out above one thousand yet,
Whore's your wit now?
Mistress, I'll do you service, and be true to you.
I'd not have mist of this discovery.—
You see she hearkens to him. Talk aside Cash.
And touch her boldly.
I would not have mist it.
For all the wealth your father has: and at
Convenient privacy. Ple give you reasons,
That shall gain your belief to it.
The French Gallants.
I had almost forgot them. They are a pair
Of delicate young Monsieurs. If they have
But crowns enough, they are the likelicst
Merchants for my new Mart that I can choose.
She said they can speak English, that's a help.
For devil of French have I to entertain 'hem.
See mine own heart, here's more temptation still.
I'll not endure the onset.
I le defend you.
Yet there are graces in their looks methinks,
That do invite my stay.
N' entendes vous, la lingo francois Mon∣sieur dittos.
I would be glad to hear you speak the lan∣gauge
I better understand, and that is English.
In which you are most welcome.
Your fair curtsy
Merits our greatest thanks.
I tanck you, sir.
I have bid France adieu to come and learn
De English very well; I speak a lietel,
But de English Mesteresse can teach de best.
I shall be glad to take my commencements,
Or my first Lessons from these Ladies lips.
A fine forward spark?
O sweet, O delicate.
Ladies, if you will breath into me English,
I shall, if you please, put French into you.
Ʋne pour l'antre, dat is one for anoder.
So they might make a hot bargain on it.
Are these your Civil Gentlemen, Landlady?
He seems a little waggish: but the other
Is wondrous civil. He comes blushingly.
You are before me in the Salutation
Of these fair Ladies, Monsieur Galliard:
Il E'vray Monsieur Papilion, I kiss before, then you moss kiss behind.
But let me pray my tardiness be excused
You pronounce English well sir.
I am glad
You like it Lady.
I like the others as well.
I have before spent many months in Eng∣land:
And my great love unto the Nation,
Especially to the beauties of your Sex,
Retracts me hither, where my friend was never.
Till now that my perfwasion won his company;
And happily, I suppose, we are arrived:
That, to the sight and knowledge we have had
Of Music, Dances, Courtships, and Behaviour.
Through all parts of our Country, France, with an
Addition of all Italy affords.
Where (by all best opinions) even the choicest
Of such court qualities, and active graces,
Have had their Spring, we now, as Fame suggests,
Shall in this fair Society, discern
More then by all our former observation.
Report, sir, speaks too loud on our behalf,
And let me pray ye, that it not beget
Too great an expectation on our weakness,
By your too gentle suffrage. What we can,
We'll do.
O wee dats de best. Doe is de ting
De French man loves: If all your both two daugh∣ters
Show all; all makes but more desire to do.
Speak I no good English, Mademoiselle?
I understand you not.
You no understand me,
Because you think I lie. But if you lie
With me, I make you understand me presently.
This hot-rein'd Mousieur takes 'em for the same.
Strigood would have 'em be I came in time.
At afternoon we'll have an exercise
Of courtship, Gentlemen. In the Interim,
If you will have to stir the appetite,
A dance before our Ordinary we are for you.
And we for you Allon al Agreement Allon
Monsieur Papillion pour l' honour de France.
What are your dances chiefly in request.
Good Landlady, bid the Music be in r•adinesse.
And then see dinner set upon the table.
We have Sir for Corants,—La Miniard,
La Vemimde, Le Marquess, Le Holland,
La Britain, Le Roy, Le Prince, Le Montague,
The Saraband; the Canaries, La Reverree.
For Galliards, the Sellibrand, the Dolphin,
The new Galliard, the Valet Galliard and lepees,
It is all very good Monsieur Papillica Essontes
Mon Amy.
And hark you, Monsieur Strigood, you will be put to it.
I fear no French flashes. Bear up Cash. If we cannot dance 'hem of of their legs, our wenches can,
I warrant thee. Music be ready.
Gallants, what are you pleased to dance?
tells what, &amp;c.
Gentlemen, your dinner stays meat will be cold.
And we are hot, it is better that take cold then we.
But come, one table for us all.
Stri. Agreed, agreed, agreed.
I say so too.
But to my self reserve what I will do.
EPhraim, thou hast made me a man, both without, witness this sword and within, witness this precious book, which I have gotten al∣most by heart already.
But sir, beware you fall not back again Into your childish follies: but go forwards In manly actions: for non progredi est regret.
I know the meaning of that too, Ephraim. That's once a man and twice a child. But if I turn child again, while I have teeth in my head, •'le give Mrs. Blithe leave to dig 'hem out with Sugar∣plums, as she almost did these two of 'hem yesterday, with her knuckles. I would they stuck both in her bum for it, till I we•e married to her, and that shall be shortly, they say, I wo' not turn boy again for that trick.
I hope you will not.
Thou may be sure on it Ephraim: for if I would turn boy again, I have not wherewithal to set up again. Thou saw that, as soon as I had tasted the sweetness of this delis•os book here, I tore and burnt all my ballats, as well the godly as the ungodly. In my conscience as many as might have furnished three Bartholomew Fairs, and then for love of this sword, I broke and did away all my storehouse of tops, gigs, b•l•s, cat and catsticks, pot-guns, key-guns, trunks, tillers, and all; and will I turn boy again can think? ye• I am half sorry, being towards a wife, that I did
not keep 'hem for my children: some money might have been saved by it. And that is a manly and a good husbandly consideration, I take it. But hang covetous∣ness: There comes not a mouth into the world, but there's meat for t; and if I find 'em not play games, their mother will find friends, that shall, for them and her self too
I'm glad to hear such good things to come from you,
And hope that now your judgment's strong e∣nough
To manage my affair. You know my mind, sir.
Amardla Ephraim, twill be hard to compass. For the old Knight will never let me have his Niece, unless he have my mother. He means to truck for her, though, I confess, I had rather call thee father then any man, I know, yet I know not how to bring it about, unless he marry her first; and then she be weary of him, and take thee afterwards to mend her match. I think it must be so, Amardla Ephraim.
Now you fly out again, that's as impose∣sible, as it is unlawful.
Within. Nigh. Nigh.
Peace, my mother comes.
Where are you child? Neh.
I hear her neighing after me, I'll do all I can for thee, Amardla Ephraim.
Look you •on, what kind Sir Sweden has sent you. A dancing frog, you would think it were a∣live, and a ballet of burning the false prophets before they be tried. And another fearful one of the new Antichrist.
Hang baubles, burn ballets, I am a man, and defy boys tricks.
A sudden change, I pray it be good.
Tell me of toys? I have a sword: offer me ballets? I have a book. Speak to me of Sir Sweden, I'll talk to you of Ephraim that gave me these bless∣sings; and is fitter to be my father, (so he is) then the foolishest Knight of 'em all.
Bless my son from too much learning. That book has done him no good, I doubt. He talks and looks so wildly of the sudden.
A ha!
What book is it. Let me see it.
I'll tell you first. It is a book all of Bulls, Jests and Lies Collected by an A. S. Gent. Mother f'sooth, there be such things in it! If you never read it, it is the rarest book that ever you read in your life. Open it where you will, and you shall learn something. As here now. One refusing to eat Cheese∣cakes, was asked his reason. He told them he loved the flesh well, but was afraid of the bones. Then here's the next to it. One asking whence Lobsters were brought: his fellow replied, one might easily know their country by their coat. They are fetched from the red sea. Now would I might never eat more of 'hem, as well as I love 'hem, if I know what Cheese-cakes were made of, or from whence Lobsters came be∣fore.
Is this your book-learning? In troth thou make me laugh.
Laugh on, good Mother. And while you are in the merry mood, let me speak a good word for E∣phraim. I have a mind f'sooth, because he has made me a man, to make him my father, f'sooth.
What, what! How now.
How durst you firrah, move my son in this? ha.
Madam.
Is it but so? ha!
Pray f'sooth hear him speak. He can speak Po∣etry (he says) as well as Knight Whimlbie. Speak Ephraim.
Madam, Fa•re truth h•ve told
That Queens of old
Have now and then
Married with private men.
A Countess was no Blusher,
To wed her Ʋsher.
Without remorse
A Lady took her Horse
Keeper in wedlock. These did wisely know,
Inferior men best could their work below.
Mother f'sooth, Is it not fine?
Nay, Madam, more then so, I'll further go
But you shall not, Sirrah. What, what! how now! Is it but up and ride? ha! Out of my doors thou varlet.
I must out too then, mother I am afraid, oh.—
Good Neh. be pacified, I'll give him a better answer.
But not a word on it now, sweet child, I pray thee.
Here comes Sir Sweden.
Ha, ha, ha, Madam, ha, ha, ha.
I marry Sir Sweden. This is better then O Ma∣dam, O—, when you washed your handkerchiefs in the suds, and then to wring hem out in Poetry.
My tears with the memory of the dead are all fallen into Lethe; and nothing but joy left in me, sinc my hopes are confirmed in your lap. And hang
Poetry: I study profit now. Therefore, look you, Madam, here is a draught of my marriage-instrument to your lap.
His instrument being drawn, I must put up my pipe and be gone.
And here is another draught for sweet Master Nehemiah, for my Niece Blithes Joincture.
O but she says she will not have me.
When did she say so?
Now, now, she spat the word out of her mouth. And I say, if she have not me, you shall whine both your eyes out before you have my mother; and see ne'er the worse, I warrant you.
A cross marriage, or no marriage, I say still.
I say so too, son, Sweet boy, be content.
You spoke well of him behind his back: and made me think you loved him, and would marry him.
Behind his back, I may do much to please you. But when I look upon him, he turns my stomach worse then a fool made of sour wilk.
Marry Gip, Mrs Queasy, my sonne's as sweet as you, I hope, and as wise as you. And sucked as sweet milk as ever the good Cow your mother gave.
Ha, ha, ha.
Patience, good Madam.
I hope the cross marriage is crossed. This is untoward wooing.
Uds so! do you flirt out your unsavoury com∣parisons upon my son?
Flirt not you at me, Madam, lest I flirt your milk-sop under the snotty nose here.
Yes, and I have a sword, and you have got ne'er a one.
You wo' not will you, ha! Do you fly at him, ha!
Fear not, good Madam.
Ephraim, save my boy.
Ha, ha, ha.—
She shall not hurt him. Leave her to me, good Madam.
I ever feared he was not long-liv'd he was so witty. And now I fear, she will be the death of him. I would not he should marry her for a million.
Say not so, mother. I love her better and better still.
I never had play-fellow i my life, but we fell out and in again.
And I must and will marry her, I take my death on it a∣forehand.
O me! he is bewitched to her.
Leave all to me, dear Madam.
As I am to you, I think, Sir Sweden.
Let me alone with her: I'll win her, and he shall wear her▪ fear not. As • was saying, Madam, she speaks as well of him behind his back, as your own heart can wish. And told me she was content to mar∣rye him.
Behind his back? did she so?
Yes truly, Madam.
Lo you there, mother, Let her marry me behind my back then: And when we are married, I'll make her stick to it before my face, I warrant you; or if she will make back-play. I'll play at nothing but back∣gammons with her.
Well, Heaven bless thee, thou art but too good for her.
Speak gently, Niece, I charge you.
Madam, I hope your Ladyship shall find me too good for him. If ever he has me.
Ha! say you so?
She means in well-doing, Madam.
Nay then, I thank you Mrs. Blithe. Assuring you that you shall be no way so good to him, but I will be as good to you.
Agreed again of all hands. But look how she turns and keeps cut like my Sparrow. She will be my back Sweet-heart still I see, and love me behind.
She is yet raw, and has not much been abroad to see the manners of the time. In which my melan∣choly has been her main hinderance. But Madam, there is now that is worth all our sight and observation; A new Academy, where they say, the newest and most courtly carriage and behaviour is taught and pra∣ctised both for young Gentlemen and women. Have you not heard on t?
Yes Sir Sweden; and that the French tongue is taught there with great alacrity; and my son is wished thither, but soft I warrant you.
But let him see it: at least in our company it will embolden him; I mean to carry my Niece thither. I have been a Lover of Arts and Exercises; and know somewhat since my youth. Pray let us spend one hour of this afternoon there.
Pardon me good sir Sweden.
But he shall not mother if you love me: for I mean to perfect my dancing there; and to learn French there; For I mean when I am married to travel into France. But I will first be perfect in the tongue I shall learn it the sooner when I am there you know. Pray let us go to the Acomedy, what dee call it?
The Academy.
Say you so son? then come sir Sweden. Come Mrs. Blithe, we will all go.
I'll wait upon you, though my heart says no.
O mine own heart! how near were we both fallen
Into the Gulf of Ruin?
Thanks for our delivery!
We were upon the brink of main destruction.
Was ever such a Fr•end as this mine Uncle?
Pretending us his children too, and called us daugh∣ters
To those he bargained with to se•l our Maid head?
It was a most damnable practise sie upon him.
And had the Monsieurs been as capable
Of our Virginities, as he was of.
Their moneys, how had we then resisted.
By Venus (mine own heart) my Gentleman
Came up so close to me, that if my voice
Had not been stronger then mine arms (O me!
I tremble fon it yet) I had been vanquished,
But did you note the virtue of the Gentle∣men?
When they were sensible of our fears and tears,
How gently they desisted and with what humanity,
When they perceived how we had been betrayed,
They pitied our conditions; and wooed homditly
Our loves in way of marriage. Provided that
Our births and fortunes might no way disparage
Theirs, being free and generous
I confess
I love 'hem both so well, that if they prove
(As they pretend they are not) our inferiors
In blood and worth, I would take either of'em.
Troth (mine own heart) it is just the same with me.
I care not which I have. And mark a sympathy,
How equally all our •ffections strike.
We both love them, they both love us alike.
But peace. Cash, though he has done us good service,
Must not know all. How goes it within Cash?
And why Cash pray. Have not you changed your names
From Joyce and Gabriella to Jane and Frances.
And is not your Uncle Strigood now become
Your father, by the name of Mr. Lightfoot
The nimble dancing Master? And must I still
Carry the name of Cash? and having lost
My nature too, in having no cash left?
(Pox of the dice) call me Mr. Outlash.
My father will fetch you home with an Inlash,
One o'these days.
But after you, fair Mistress,
Now to your question for the squares within.
I with the Frenchmen, and my Uncle Stri∣good.
Your father Lightfoot, you forget again.
There's a drawn match made: For the Monsieurs
Have taken their money again: And you have still
Your Maidenheads, I hope. But to have heard
The coi•e they kept, the wrangle, and the stir;
And how the young Blades put the old one to it;
Would ha perplexed you more then keeping of
Your Maidenheads from men you love.
You cannot tell that.
O how the old man chafes that you would offer
To make your moan to •hem to move their pity,
And not to make his bargain good; and then
How they put home his baseness to him; to make sale
Of his own blood and honour in his children.
(They knew they said some parents in their coun∣trey,
After their children were turned whores, would share
To live upon the profits, but to sell
Their souls before they were damned, fie; fie, fie, fie).
Till he confessed indeed you were none of his.
But children of some friends of his deceased,
Left to his care sor breeding; which he had
Plenteously given, and thought it might seem reason∣able
To raise his money out of you again.
What an old devil is this?
Baser and baser still.
The Monsieurs cried, and swore if they could sinde
Your Parents were Gentle and virtuous,
Being their first Loves, they would marry you,
To free you from this miserable thraldom.
Brave honest Gentlemen.
Be advised though, Mistress.
I hope I shall.
Beware of Travellers, many pass abroad
For gallant fellows that have run their country,
For picking pockets.
And some you know at home
For cozening their Masters.
You are pleased.
But you have known my love; for Gabriella
Let'hem share her betwixt 'hem. You and I
Made one, may soon make peace with the old man
At home.
O Rogue! I'll tell you more anon Cash.
Come Gentlemen, Monsieur Papillion.
And Monsieur Galliard, all friends, all friends.
A greed, agreed, sir.
And agree for me.
Agree poor tout.
Cheer up your faces Girls.
It was but my trial of your chastity.
And since you have stood firm, I am proud of you.
Trust me, it was but to try you.
Wee wee All, but for try. Trimount, tri∣mount.
No more, but all for try: no man can think,
But'twas too very moshe to take two hundred
Crowns for two pusillages, no, no was but
For try: but and she had not squeak and scrash too
Like to do leetel chat, I had Trimount
One, two, tree, five time, for all your try.
VVhat's past let be forgot. According to
Agreement, Gentlemen, you're now content
To join with us in Academic fellowship,
And for your pastime profess Art and Science,
As we do for our profit: you're expert,
I find; and shall win wonder of our Nation,
To your own much delight out of their follies.
And then for Gamesters, Gentlemen. If you•ll play.
I'll bring ye those shall venture money enough.
We are planted to our wish.
All very good.
All very good; but I would see thee first.
What Ladies will come here to practise complement.
You are still hot upon the female Monsieur Galliard
Monsieur Papillion here flies over •hem.
Ha, ha, ha, what will this world come to?
Landlady, the news?
The old will to it.
As well as the young I see.
To what Landlady?
To fashion following;
A Reverend Lady
Of fifty five; and a Knight of threescore
And upwards, are come hither to learn fashion.
Do you know their names?
Yes, yes: and them; it is that
Begets my wonder.
It is the Lady Nestlecock, and one Sir Sweden VVhimlby.
Wit be merciful unto us.
The Ladies man's without: who came to know if the house were ready to entertain 'hem; do you know 'em Mr. Lightfoot?
I have heard of the Lady. Cash, see if it be E∣phraim.
He cannot know thee. Let him not away,
By any means, his not return to them may keep 'hem back.
It is he, I see him hither.
Landlady, is your husband come from duck∣ing.
Yes, overjoyed with the good sport he has had.
He'll play the good fellow then. Entreat him Cash.
To help thee, put a cup or two upon
That fellow; and hear•st me, spice his cup,
I mean, grave Ephraims cup with this same powder,
Twill lay him asleep, and quickly.
I know the trick on it.
And Landlady, when the Knight and Lady come,
Say we are ready for 'em.
That I shall sir.
It is then an absolute contract. I am yours.
And I am yours as firm as faith can bind.
To which we are de witness. Be so for us,
I am her husband, And she is my wife,
Speak you.
Before Heaven, I do acknowledge it,
But sir, the Church must be observed,
For that.
We'll send for one Minister that shall marry
Us all at once. One kiss till then shall serve.
It is well done Monsieurs, I no sooner turn
My back, but you are on the Damsels lips.
A leetel in de honest way will serve,
But he shall know no-ting.
On with your Masques-Maids,
And take especial heed you blush not through 'hem.
For here are some at hand will put us to it.
It is not my father, nor my Lady Aunt?
I cannot promise you. Be bold and safe.
Bear it out bravely, or our school breaks up
Immediately: and we are broke forever,
Besides, there is no startiug.
That's enough
To make a coward fight, and mine own heart;
We must stand stoutly to it, we lose our loves else.
Well, I am armed.
And I.
Fall into complement.
I muse we lost my man thus.
By your leave, sir.
Are you the Regent of this Academy?
I am sir.
And are those of your Assistants.
Yes sir, and all Professors of Court-discipline,
By the most accurate, yet more familiar
Rules, then have ever yet been taught by any,
For quick instruction both of young and old.
You promise very fairly. For us old ones,
We know and could have done things in our youth,
Which still we have a mind to: but we leave
The practice to our young ones: Here's a pair
Would fine be at it. We'll pay their admittance.
But I'd be glad to see first by your leave,
Some probability of what they shall learn.
And reason good, good Madam. Pray observe there.
Fair star of courtship, my unworthy humble self, a Professed servant to the integrity of beauty, makes this
Clear testimony of your merits, that every eye that sees you,
Owes you his heart for tribute, and that unjustly your beholders live, that live not in your service.
Mother f'sooth, is not this French?
Peace ch•lt. Hear more on it.
Noble sir, you are so exactly deserving in the opinion of all righteous judgements, that the least syl∣lable of your fair testimony, is able to re-edifie the rue∣ins of a decayed commendation.
The best that ever I heard, since I wooed my Grissel.
Was not that a sweet bout, sir?
Yes, yes, it puts me in mind of some sweet bouts I had with one before I married her.
•as he married my Sister trow?
I am forced to give you over, Madam, you have such a preventing and preoccupying wit in all things.
That goes like English Mrs. Blithe. I could learn some of that me thinks.
Best tell your mother so; she may rejoice at it.
There, Lady, was a taste of sweet comple∣meant between persons equally affected. May it please you now to let your son pass upon this demosel. Who being to her a stranger, and raw (as I imagine) in courtship, shall meet with reprehension, that may be for his instruction.
Do Neh. speak to her.
Put of your hat and say—.
What! and her masque on?
That was well-said. Why are they masked, I pray sir?
We are commanded it by the policy of wise authority; for fear young heirs might fall in love with 'em, and sink their fortunes.
You have well satisfied me.
What should I say to one I never saw.
When I was young and bold, I would have said, Lady, you are most auspiciously encountered. And speak it boldly.
Lady, you are most suspiciously accoutred, I speak it boldly.
Auspiciously encountered man.
Auspicously encountered woman, I say.
I commiserate your encounter. It is a most hungry, verminous, impoverish't word sir. It seems you are a stranger by it, to the Innovation of courtship.
What should I say to that now?
He's a weak scholar forsooth, and would be glad to learn.
The acknowledgement of his weakness is the first greece of gradation to perfection, and his glad∣ness the scaling-ladder of resolution.
Pray f'sooth, can you teach me a complement to offer you sugar-plums, and eat 'hem my self: to save my manners and my plums too?
What a wag it is?
What walking dunghill is this? made of the dust swept from the house of ignorance.
What, what! how now, ha? you are a Flapse to term my son so, ha!
O good Madam. This is but school play.
I'll put her by her school-tricks and no only •nmask, but unskin her face too, and she come over my heir apparent with such Billingsgate Comple∣mints.
Sweet Madam, no harm was meant, and no∣thing said in earnest: It was merely but school pra∣ctice, but to show the sweet young Gentleman how he might be subject to the scorn of Court, before he be seen in Complement.
Say you so?
It was told your Ladyship before, that by repre∣hension he might find instructiou.
Right Madam; For no Fencer learns his Science before he receive some hits and knocks too: Oh, I have had many.
Nay, I am satisfied, and pray, that my rash er∣roar may prove pardonable Lady
Rather let me implore your mercy, Ma∣dam—.
It is well, it is well Lets hear an Interchange or two now, of complemental acknowledgement of
courtesies past betwixt Ladies, for the edification of •his fair one, who seems not yet to have taken notice of us, but looks of the ground still.
It is not to find a fescue, sir, among the Rushes.
To pick out a lesson in your crisse-crosse-row of comple∣meant.
Sharp and sudden. She has a good wit I see.
Obe erve, good Blithe, observe.
Can your poor servant express acknowledge∣meant enough, Lady, for favonrs so incessantly hooped upon her, besides the accumulation of many secret be∣nefits?
I cannot but admire, Madam, your noble and illustrious Gratitude, that can give beauty to benefits of so low a birth and condition.
O my Grissel comes to my mind again, she was the gratefullest woman.
If such favours, Madam, should pass under an humble name, Honour would grow idle, and a thankful Nature beguiled of her employment.
You'•l make my zeal hereafter, too bashful to serve your most curious acknowledgement.
Curious acknowledgement! There was a third drawn out.
I am hound by many kindnesses, Madam, to ce∣lebrate the fair memory of you; as the trouble of your Coach twice in one day, besides those inestimable Jewels, the Monkey and Dormouse your Ladyship sent me.
I would you could lend me a sight of 'hem for∣sooth, I love such things devoutly.
You do but open a privy door to my thankful temembrance, Madam, for the bounty of your Squirrel and Paraquitoe.
Faugh, shut that privie-door.
And shut in the Squirrel and the Paraquitoe to be stifled, shall she? O that I could see hem!
Now Madam, and Sir Knight, Is not this neat and handsome?
Truly, truly, it is most admirable pretty.
Nay, if you heard our Lectures, saw our
Dances.
Relished our Music and harmonious voices,
Observed our Rules for fashion and attire,
Our many exact postures and dimensions,
Fit to be used by way of Salutation,
Of curtsy, of honour, of obeisance,
To all degrees of man or womankind,
From the low bent of vassalage, to the head
Of towering Majesty, you should admire.
But do you read and teach all these to your scholars?
Stand forth, Monfieur Galliard. Stay w'are interrupted.
Up maids, and quickly; or it is not your Masques
Can keep you undiscovered. Go, be ready,
With Music and your voices, when I call to ye.
Why are we interrupted? pray proceed.
Mother, it is my naughty Aunt, so it is▪
No matter, son, we'll take no notice of her.
I wonder at the boldness of the drudge though.
I can turn tail too, as well as the great La∣die. Hob.
And do so, Mistress, give her a broad∣side.
Well-said, we'll make our party good, I warrant you.
Sir, we have heard your Fame; and love your Arts.
〈◊〉 pray that our ambition be excused,
Which drew on our Intrusion.
To me and to the place you are all welcome.
And so to all I hope, chiefly to you,
Good Madam Dowager, hoping in good time
I may get good, by doing much good upon you
How likes your L•p•my complement.
Do you bring your rude companions to affront me? Are you so hot? you stir up your cinders before they be cak't.
Still in the Kitchin-dialect.
No ruder then your self, ho.
I brought her, Madam,
〈◊〉 advance my suit to you.
Will you see me abused
•ir 〈◊〉, look to your Niece, the t'other talks to her.
Kind merry Gentlemen, Madam, when I was young I would have done the like. Their com∣ing hither, was as ours was to note the instruct∣once
That are taught here. Pray sir proceed. On with your exercise, that we may all be edified.
We shall do so, sir.
But sir, your Gentlewomen,
That past upon our entrance where are they?
Sir, they were called in haste to private pra∣ctice
With some great Ladies in an upper room.
Umh—private practice. Well, I shall know all.
And they being absent, we shall for the pre∣sent
Only deliver by these Gentlemen,
••me heads of Sciences.
A Song, a Dance, and then
Entreat you take a taste of a collation.
And all most fairly welcome.
The heads of our chief Arts. Your silence, pray you.
The first is the due carriage of the body,
The proper motion of the head, hand, leg,
To every several degree of person,
From the Peasant unto the Potentate;
To your •nferiours how and when to use the Nod,
The Hum, the Ha, the Frown, the Smile,
Upon the fit occasion; and to your equals,
The exactest, newest, and familiar motions
Of eye, of hand, of knee, of arm and shoulder,
That are in Garb, in Congee, Cringe, or Shrug,
In common Curtsy, or Complement,
Lastly, for your Addresses to Superiors.
The Honours, Reverence, or Obeisance,
Proper unto the quality or estate
Of person whatsoever. And so much
For carriage and behaviour. In the next place
You shall have rules for the more graceful wearing
Of your Apparel, with the natural Reasons,
Why some mans hat does better in his hand
Then on his head, and why his coat hangs neater
Upon his elbow, then upon his back,
As also Reasons for Tunes bringing up.
And marriages, together of the fashions
Of man and woman, how his Caller, and her
Black-bag, came on together; how his pocket-comb
To spru•e his Perrule, and her Girdle-glasse,
To order her black pashes, came together;
How his walking in the streets without a cloak
And her, without a man came up together,
Of these, and of a hundred more the like.
We shall demonstrate reasons and instructions.
Shall render you most graceful in each fashion.
The next are skills in instruments, song and dancing
Enough, those shall be made familiar to you
By voice and action instantly. A Song there.
Admirable pretty still.
Are these your Gentlewoman's voices, sir?
They are
What do you keep 'hem up like Nuns,
To sing and not be seen?
Not always sir.
But may it please ye Gentlemen and Ladies,
Now to observe the practice of our feet
In active dancing.
That came I to learn,
And to speak French, do you think sir, you can bring
My mouth to handle the French tongue handsomely.
He's apt to learn, sir, I can tell you that.
Yes. I shall bring his Mout to it. But his Mont is yet a leetel too wide. But he shall have some of de wa∣la debt woman use for anoderting, to bring it bet∣la together, and he shall speak like de French Lady.
Pray sir, if you can like the Ladies daughter of Paris properly.
Now Val. thou know the way.
I wonder sir, Amongst all your Arts and Sci∣ences
You have so little judgement in a face,
Does his mouth appear wide to you? what false glass
Are your eyes made of?
What you mean?
Nay, friend.
Pray sir take no offence. Here was none meant.
Slander is no offence then. He has injured,
By breathing an aspersion on that face,
The life of beauty, and the soul of sweetness.
Wide mouth Y—.
Begar Monsieur, you shall no point out mouth,
No, nor out-face the French man with your great Bull-beef, and Mustard English looks.
Nay, gentle Val. forbear.
I'll stop.
This mouth that knowingly says he dares except
Against a tittle of his face or person.
But as he is an ignorant stranger, and
I must respect the company. I forbear.
However sir, I can but thank your love in 't.
Now it works in her.
Pardon my plainness, Madam.
I never was so taken with Masculine beauty.
And till I win a woman that is like him,
Or has been like him, I can but languish.
They told me I was like him, when I was younger.
And let me tell you y' are a comely Gentleman.
And be you but as honest as y' are handsome, you de∣serve well.
Ʋmh, it is a hard matter to bring those ends to∣gether.
Mother f'sooth. Here's a man now for you to make my father!
Beyond the Knight or Ephraim!
Were I free from the old Knight, I could look well upon him.
Come servant, come away.
By no means, Mistress, I do but sooth her up to jeer her for vou.
If you out-stay her not, you lose your honour.
She'll brag she has out-look't you. If you start.
Nay, and she go to that, I hope I can,
Look as ill favouredly as her self, or a better
Woman then she, and stay in spite of her, ho.
It is well done, Mistress, Madam shall I tell you.
But I would pray you not to storm, but laugh at it.
She says you are no match for me.
Ha, ha, ha.
And knowing I aim at none but some great wi∣dow.
Tells me she knows her husband's but short-lived.
I fear she means to break his heart.
Say you so?
No words, good Madam.
•et more whispering.
Pray Madam let us go. Niece come away,
For I fear Madam, as you wisely doubted,
This is no company for us.
Sir, I hope.
I am not yet so tied, but I may safely
Use my own •reedom, I'll go when I please.
O Grissel, Grissel, when would thou have said so?
Loves power, I hope, hath won on destiny,
To appoint this day for my delivery.
Nay, good Sir Sweden,—Ladies—we have yet
Dancing to come, and a Collation promised.
Yes Gallants, now w' are ready, we but stayed for this fourth man here.
O Chameleon.
Where is your wife? I hope your je lousy.
Locks her not up.
Pish Honi soit. I hate it.
No, she has been preparing of a banquet,
Which now is ready for you, worthy Mr. Lightfoot,
And your fair company; jealousy I defy
The ba•e horn A go, Mr. Askal I.
What does he call you? Rascal?
Askal Madam.
My name is Askal. But the R in Master
Runs in•o't so, that sometimes it sounds doubtful.
I must be Knighted, Euphoniae gratia.
Sir Valentine Askal will come fairly off.
Now note me Mr. Askal, and tell me if ever jealous man came so lightly off.
Sir, your collation stays.
It is well, Gallants and Ladies
Wilt please you enter.
Agreed, agreed, of all sides.
INhospitable! it is inhumane, past
The cruelty of infidels.
Thou speak
But thine own barbarous cruelty, hollow Frenchman.
Abominable hypocrite.
Cunning Villain.
Fie Gentlemen, forbear this unknown lan∣gauge.
And either speak to others understanding,
If you speak Justice:
Give me then my son.
Thou hast thy son, give me my son and daughter.
Pray Gentlemen, if you'll not hear each o∣there, yet both hear me.
I pray Captain speak.
You had his son to foster; he your daughter.
You faithfully affirm you sent his son
For England a month since.
And mine own with him.
You have confessed you put away his daughter.
And mine own with her, through her disobe∣ence.
But it was upon advertisement by letter,
That he had first cast off my son to an
Untimely death.
Some Villain forged that letter,
And let me tell you sir, though in your house,
Lafoy's an honest and a temperate man.
You are rash and unadvised, what Lafoy speaks
I will maintain for truth: what you have done
I wish you could make good; But I may fear
You are marked out by your own wilfulness,
The subject of much woe and sad misfortune.
I know not what I am; but did you know
The number, and the weight of my afflictions,
You could not chide me thus without some pity.
Indeed I pity you, and now you're calm,
Know that Lafoy sent his son over with yours,
And but for some affairs he had with me,
In the Isle of Wight he had embarked himself
With them, and brought hem to you.
There's hope then yet
That my boy lives.
And is come over fear not.
You comfort me, and now Lafoy y' are well∣come.
But to what comfort, having lost my daugh∣la.
Lost or lost not, mine's with her. And I
purpose now to be sad no longer. For I think
I have lost my wife too, there's a second comfort.
Take an example here Monsieur Lafoy,
And shake of sadness; mirth may come unlooked for.
I have lost a son too, a wilde roaring Lad,
About this town. And if I find not him,
I doubt not I shall find, that he has spent me
A hundred pound since I last heard of him.
By the way sir, I sent you a bill of change
Last month, to pay a hundred pieces for me.
It was paid. I have your bill for my discharge.
How now?
Have you found your Mistress.
Nor tidings of her, sir.
She has found then some good exercise, I doubt not.
That holds her so.
Sir, there's a Gentleman
Craves instant speech with you.
Who? or whence comes he?
He will be known to none before he sees you.
And, when you see him, he says he thinks you'll know him.
He's a brave gallant, one of the Alamodes,
Nothing but French all over.
Fetch him me quickly,
It is my son. Grammercie mine own heart,
That wast not light so suddenly for nothing,
Pray Gentlemen, who ever you see, name no man
To me, unless I ask you. He comes, he comes.
I'm grown a proper man. Heaven make me thank∣full.
Just such a spark was I at two and twenty,
Set clothes and fashion by. He thinks to try
If I can know him now. But there I'll fit him.
With me sir is your business?
I presume
You do not know me, sir.
As well as he that got him.
Pray Gentlemen keep your countenances. Not know you sir?
It is like I may have known you here to fore,
But cannot readily collect; perhaps
You are much changed by Travel, Time, and Bra∣very,
Since I last saw you. There he may find.
I partly guess, but will not know him yet.
Good Geutlemen say nothing.
What ails he trow.
He knows me, I fear, too soon. If now my plot fail, and he have a Counterplot upon me. I am laid up.
Do you not know me yet sir.
Know you, or know you not sir, what's your business.
You sometimes had a son sir.
Now he comes to me.
I had sir. But I hear he's slain in France.
And farewell he. Mark how I handle him.
And what sir of my fonne?
He's dead you say.
I mufe the Knave asks me not blessing though.
But to supply his loss you have a daugh∣la
That may endear a son, sir, to your comfort.
Whither now flies he trow! Sir, do you know her.
Or where to find her?
First upon my knees
Let me implore your pardon.
Now he comes home: And I can hold no longer.
My blessing boy, thou meanest. Take it, and well∣come
To a glad father. Rise, and let my tears,
If joy confirm thy welcome.
I may not rise yet sir.
No? why? what hast thou done? whore's young Lafoy?
My true friends son here? whom I now must lock
Up in these arms, amidst a thousand welcomes.
Whore's the young man?
I know not who you mean sir.
Distract me not.
I fear you are distraught.
I know not him. How should he know my son.
Let me look nearer.
Sir, I am your Prentice.
Whow—whow, whow, who—my Thiese and Runaway.
Prav sir afford me hearing.
Sir, your cause
Requires a Judges hearing.
I have put me
Into your hands, and not without much hope,
To gain your pardon, and your daughters love.
It is roundly spoken. Gentlemen, I'll tell you.
This gallant youth, has gallanted away
A thousand pound of mine.
For your advantage sir: For
By this way
Of Gallantry, as you call it, I have travelled
Through the Resorts and Haunts public and pri∣vate
Of all the Gallants in the Town. In brief
I have found your daughter, where she had been lost
For evet in your brother Strigoods hands.
Can bring me thither?
Is my daughter with her?
Madam Gabriella, the French Damsel's there.
And others, men and women, whom you'll know when you come there.
Good sir, lets hasten thither.
You'll aid me, sirs?
Yes, with our lives and fortune.
Be fearless Lady, and upon my life,
Honour, and faith; you are secure from danger.
Sir, I have put me in your hands you see
So liberally that I may fear to suffer,
If not a censure, yet a supposition
Of too much easiness, in being led
So suddenly so far towards your desire.
But my opinion of your nobleness
Joined with your Protestation, pleads my pardon
At least it may, the wretchedness considered,
To which I was enthralled.
It is not more my love
Unto your virtue, and your fair endowments.
Then pity in me labours your release.
Nor is it rather to enrich my self.
Then to save you from so immense a danger,
As you had fallen into by yielding under
Your Uncles weakness in so fond a match.
Bless me from being fool-clog'd.
Now you are free.
If you can think your self so, and but yield
Unto my present Counsel.
Do so Lady
Before you are mist within. Here is the Closet,
And here's the Key in your own hands, And pre∣sently I'll fetch a Priest.
You see
I still deal fairly w'ye; and give you power
To keep guard on your self.
And yet I yield
My self your prisoner.
In: some body comes.
She will be yours. And let me tell you, sir,
I wish you as much joy with her, as I
Have with my Cock.
You have befriended me
In this good enterprise: And one good turn
Requires another. And now for that I told you,
Touching your wife, your Cock you so rejoice in.
Alas. alas, good Gentlemen, you would fain
Have me be jealous. Honi soit, you're short.
Stand by and observe.
Do you begin to boggle,
And when I send for twenty pieces, do you
Send me but ten?
What's that?
Nay mark.
I pray,
What have I had in all by your account.
At several times, you have had fifty pounds of my poor husbands money.
What's that to the free pleasure of my body
Which must afford you sweet and lusty payment?
You froward Monkey. But perhaps you have got
Some new-found Horn-maker, that you may think,
Deserves your husbands money better, for
Doing his Journey-work, one of the Monsieurs,
Or both perhaps in the house here under's Antlers,
It must be so, why else of all the town,
Must I be one of the last that must take notice
Of your new College here, your brazen face Col∣leg
Of feats and fine figures? do you grow weary of me?
Do you grow wilde? speak lower, do you mean to undo me?
Will tother fifty pound undo thee, I have lost
All that I had within among your Monsieurs.
And you must yield supply, or lose a friend
Of me.
What a way would so much money have gone
In betts at the ducking pond?
Will no less serve your turn then fifty?
No less. All makes (you know) but a just hun∣dred.
And there I'll stick; and stick close to thee too,
Else all flies open. What care I who knows
Your credits breach, when you respect not mine.
It is too well known already; All•s too open.
My house, my purse, my wife, and ell's too open.
O me, undone.
Was ever loving husband
So much abused?
Enquire among your neighbours.
Be patient man.
O thou close whore.
Take heed, sir, what you say.
Even now you said she was too open, sir.
You're in two tales already.
I fear he's mad
Or jealous, which is worse.
Pish, Honi soit.
He jealous, he defies it.
Do you deride me?
Sir, you can witness with me, he confessed
Receipt of fifty pounds my wife has lent him,
(False woman that she is) for Horn-making,
Job Journey-work.
You are deceived.
I know.
(At least I think) I am deceived in both.
My money and thy honesty, but the Laws
In both shall do me right, or all shall fly for it.
I'll instantly to council.
Hear me first.
By all means hear her first. Pray grant her that.
I dare not look on her, lest I be tempted
To yield unto my shame and my undoing.
Will you not hear your Cock, your Nancy,
Nanny Cock.
Time was you would not have denied me that.
Nor any thing, if my Cock had but stood upon it.
Such was my love, but now,
But now you're jealous.
Have I not cause?
Here's tother fifty pieces, take 'hem sir.
They are full weight, and truly told.
Brave wench.
If you will law, sir, you shall law for some∣thing.
What dost thou mean?
I hope she'll humble him so,
That he shall keep our chamber-door for us,
While we get boys for him. A dainty Rogue,
She tempts me strongly now. Would she would call me
About it presently.
That money sir
May serve to countenance you among the Gamesters
Within, that blew you up. The Lady widow
May think the better of your credit too,
Being so good in the house.
I'll straight amongst 'em.
Council me not sir. All my joys are gone.
I cannot think now what a ducking pond
Can be good for, except to d•own me in it.
Alas, poor man, I was in this too busy.
Stay, you shall promise me before my hus∣band,
That you will never more attempt my chastity.
That bargaine's yet to make. Though before him
I may say much, I will not stand to that
For all the wealth he has.
You shall protest
Then, fairly, as you are a Gentleman
You never have enjoyed me.
I like that.
No, no, I cannot safely, for in that
I shall surrender up my interest
In's house; and he may warn me out on it. No,
Take heed of that. It is not his tother hundred
Shall make me slip that hold.
I am lost again.
What a bold thief is this! Pray hear me, sir.
You may remember that I asked you once
What Countryman you were.
Yes, when you first cast your good liking on me, and I told you.
Of the Isle of Wight: And what of that?
And you
Call Captain Hardyman, their father-in-law.
You wrong me basely, to say I call him any thing; for he gives me nothing.
You wrong him basely. Look you, Can you read.
I had done ill to venture (as I have done)
On Salisbury plain else. Ho, what's here
That daughter, I sent you order to receive for me an hundred pounds. If you find that your brother the Spendthrift Val. Askal, (Zookes that I) be in any want, furnish him according to your own discretion.
I am Val. Askal, whore's the money? My hundred
pound, have you't.
It seems a Sister of yours had it.
Have you a sister?
He had a daughter by my mother, but
He plac•d her out a child, I know not where
Whore's that young whore trow? Hannah I think
her name was. Hang me if 〈◊〉 know directly.
My wives name's Hannah, sir.
I am that sister, brother, but no whore.
Now Val. your brags to make men think you lay with her.
You have your hundred pound sir. Look you, husband.
This is my fathers letter which you wrote on.
That which you dared the devil and Clerks to coun∣terfeit, read your own hand.
Honi soit queen mali pens.
I must admire this woman.
Dost think I did not know thee.
No sir, nor would I that you should,
Till I had foiled you in your course,
And had my will to make my husband jealous.
My Cock, my Cock again, my Nanny cock,
Cock-all my Cock-a-hoop, I am overjoyed,
See, see thy father too.
This is the woman.
To whom I paid your money.
It is my daughter—.
My blessing on you.—What are you here too.
And ask you blessing too. Your hundred pound Has bound me to it. Heaven bless you, Here's half one still, yes, and the better half, for tother's spent.
O you're a great good husband.
I would be one. And here's a good rich wi∣dow
Now in the house, your countenance may help me,
My Sister and my Brother both can tell you,
How orderly and civilly I live.
O wag.
It is like sir, I shall prove your Furtherer.
What is she?
That Merchants Sister, and a Lady sir.
I would not have him hear.
Well talk aside then.
In that I'm partly satisfied.
I love you sir,
And waited on your wife but as your Sp•e,
For fear he might have led her to more folly.
But saw you not two such Damsels here?
Here are
Some in the house that would not be seen by us.
Because they thought you'd know 'hem.
And if that
Old fellow be your brother Strigood, tic most strange
You know not him here do you?
No not I.
It is my man Cash.
Most wonderful.
We shall know more anon.
Pray haste sir, to discovery: I would f•in
Once see my daughter.
I would see a little
The fashions of the house first.
Pray obscure
Your selves in that by room there, where you may
See and hear all that passes, nor can any
Pass out of the house without your notice.
The Gentlemen and I will mix again
With the Society, if they please.
Agreed.
Within Strigood. Where are you Gent'emen?
Come away Val.
Is not that the Hell-hounds voice?
Yes, it is your brother.
Good Captain go with us upon discovery.
I'll seat you to see all, and be unseen.
Do so good Cock. Do so now sir, I'll fetch the Priest.
O Gentlemen, you have lost such sport, the
Lady
And Merchants wife have been by the ears.
Could not
The old Knight part 'hem?
He has done his best,
And almost lost his eyes in the adventure
Betwixt the Furies talons▪
But are they friends again?
And deep in complement.
Our school affords no such in act or language.
Sister, Indeed I am too much your trouble.
Pray Madam let me serve you truly truly.
I'll be your servant for a year and a day
Indeed, indeed you wrong your self, I am yours.
I am your servants servant, and will serve
Under your Ladyships Cook to do you service.
Indeed you may not.
If I may not be
Accepted for your household servant, let me
Become your Chare-woman▪ in any office
From Cupboard to (lose-stool, I can do all
To do your Ladyship service.
This now savours of Complement indeed.
In sooth, it is sooth, forsooth the tale I tell you.
Well acted mother.
Y' are too obsequious
Good gentle Sister.
I am short of good.
Gentle I grant I am, for I bite no body,
Command me then sweet Madam.
And very well acted Nant.
O you shall pardon me▪
I am no Pope, for your sake would I were.
Your curtsy o'recomes me.
O not so.
I wish it could forsooth, would it were better for you.
Exceeding well acted o'both sides.
Mother and Aunt f'sooth, Amardla you have done it
Better then the two School-Mystresses to d•y
Could do their Whatshicomes, their Complements
I think you call 'hem. But I have lost my Mistress
To complement withal. Mrs. Bli•he Tripshort
Has out-strip't me, Amardla that she has.
Whore's he• wise Uncle should have looked to her.
He's crying all about the house for her,
But cannot find her. How shall I have her now?
Thou shalt not have her boy, she's nought.
Then he's
Nought too. You sha'nt have him.
Nor will, I fear not.
Think of the Gentleman, mother that out-fac'd
The Frenchman for me. I would you had a thousand such in France now.
God-a-mercy boy.
Peace, hear a little more.
Sir; come away.
I have found a careless Curate, that has nothing but a bare Coat too loose shall chopt't up presently. And give him but a piece, he'll fear no Cannon.
I am bound to thee for ever.
Whither goes he?
No matter, let him go t'untrusse perhaps.
I say she is in the house.
She's gone, she's gone.
She's flown out of a window, or chimney-top then.
I'm sure I wrtch't the door with epen eyes
Ever since you entered, as my Lady charged me,
Lest her child might slip out to play i the street.
And I am here you see. He cannot see
He has no more eyes then a sucking pig,
And yet he weeps like a roasted one.
I am abused,
And r•nder me my Niece,
You have stolen her for your son.
My son defies her,
As I do you, old whining withered fellow,
That has no moisture in him but for tears.
That is my Cue. A young well governed man
Were fitter, Madam.
Where have you been servant?
I speak to my Lady.
My Lady, I think you said.
Are you so stout sir▪ ho?
I rather think he plays the cunning hypocrite
With his false tears, and packed her hence himself
My Lady minds you not, and I can learn
To give you a broad side too.
Madam, that cannot be, for I have seen
All that went out, or came into the house▪
Since you. Here came a Church man in ere while.
A Churchman! then I fear she's clbsely mar∣ried unto her wo and mine.
Perhaps to me.
Behind my back you said she would do so.
And before him came in your brother Matchil.
My brother, who her husband?
Yes, with others.
My husband, I think you •aid What a foul house these washing days make?
Nay, it is no Jest Now ••dies let me tell you,
And sad Sir Sweden; pray lend all your ears.
Cash, we are betray•• Cash if we be not nimble.
I smell a Fox. Hy thee up quickly Cash,
And hurry down the wenches We'll make bold with
My Ladies Coach to hurry us away.
But not too fast, Go sir, fetch down the wenches.
Thou shameless Reprobate. Doest thou hang thy head now?
I'll take a course to hang the rest of the.
Your Ladyships well met at the new school.
So is your Chare-woman. Have you profited
By the devils doctrine here? you weep sin Sweden
For the iniquity of the times.
You mean
His Niece, pray Uncle did you meet her,
She's gone away too, after my Cousin Joyce,
And the French maid, I think, she is here again.
Amardla, wipe your eyes, and look Sir Sweden,
The tother honest Gentleman has found her.
And let him take her for his pains for me.
I thank your love. But sir, it is your consent
We only seek.
Sir Sweden, let 'em have it,
This is the Gentleman I would have spoke for:
In birth, in means, in person every way
Deserving her. Take him upon my word.
And Madam, since you stick but upon Join∣cture,
Having heard lately well of his husbandry.
Thank a good sister, sir.
I will secure you
Three hundred pounds a year, your brother knows me.
With make good his word. Agree by your selves.
Upon these terms, it is like we shall agree.
Sir Sweden are you pleased.
Pleased or displeased.
It seems they are married.
Yes, I assure you,
I saw their hands joined, and I heard 'hem both
Answer the Priest.
I will no longer whine.
Heaven give you joy, As you're your own, y' are mine.
There are more weddings in the house, your daughters,
Are linck't by this time to the two young Frenchmen.
His daughters? ours I fear? what French? where are they?
Here sir, undone I fear.
What are you married.
Jun: Sir, she is mine, I must and will main∣tain it.
Jun. And she is mine.
This is your son. And this
Is mine.
This is your daughter. And this mine. Each married to her brother.
Jun. Mon Pere Je desire vestre Benediction Jour pour moi &amp; ma fennue.
You are lost children all, was ever thread
By fate so crossly sp•n, so crossly wed?
I know not how to Bless you, or to look
On your incestuous eyes.
Jun. What is dat Incest,
We have commit noting, we have no time,
Since we were marry for so much as kiss,
Begar no point so much as but one kiss.
Be not dismayed. These marriages are none.
The error of the persons nullifies
The verbal ceremony; and it is well
They past not unto further rites: I'll find
A lawful way to clear all this. And then
As you and they consent, they shall exchange
And marry in due order.
Jun. Sir I tanck you.
You'ave speak very well. And we shall make.
De exchange presently. A new exchange,
De new Exchange indeed, for de husbands
To shange the wives before they can be weary.
Prenez mon frere, la voice la' un pour lautre.
Dere, is one for anoder:
Is each party
Agreed, and so content?
J. Gab. We are.
And we.
Wee wee, I ensues tresbien contult.
Provided that we have our fathers leaves and councels.
Can you seek fathers leaves or councels now,
That have run from 'hem in your disobedience,
Into the snares of hell: too far I fear
To be releast. O hell-bred Villain.
Your brother of one side.
Lend but a patient care.
And by my hopes of your desired pardon
I'll quit you of your fear. It is true, my duty
At my Arrival should have winged me to you.
But hearing of your late, ill talked on marriage.
O that root of mischief,
And of my Sisters flight as •oath to appear to you,
As to presume a welcome; I was curious
First to observe the Town, and taste the news;
When more by Providence then accident,
Here we made choice of lodging, saw and liked
The practices of the Society,
Until this wicked man; (who still presumes
To call you brother,) finding us youthful strangers,
And (as he might suppose) wanton—
He made
A bargain with you for their Maiden heads.
told me that, and how that hellish purpose
Was virtuously declined.
O counterfeit Cash.
But must you therefore, knowing whose sons you were.
Marry you knew not whom.
Pardon me, sir.
Our loves were noble, and by due enquiry,
Fetched from each others faithful breast, the knowledge
Of each other.
What! and marry then
Each his own Sister? Riddle me not to death.
Sir, I have done. And now that I have said
The worst that might have happened by his practice,
To make his shame or his repentance greater,
Who only was my aim. We are not married,
None of us all are married one to other.
No, I assure you sir. Howere I li'd
At their request, (small matter for a friend)
I saw all the hurt the Priest did here to day.
That was upon them two there.
Thank you sir.
You shall be then: And so take hands in earnest.
Is it not a double Match Lafoy?
Without
All manner of condition I consent.
I am full of joy.
O can you pardon me sir.
Good boy, good boy. I know not how a City
Could stand without such Prentices. And hope
This wants few such. But what can thou now say
Brother, of one side for thy self. Speak quickly▪
While the good humour holds me to be friends
With all the world: yet yonder's one lies heavy
Athwart my stomach.
You're full of joy you say.
And I say had it been within my power,
To have broke your heart, I had don't. Therefore in me
Be comforted and love me; for I find
I have no power to hurt you, and will therefore
Attempt no further.
Brotherly spoke in troth.
And worthily worth an hundred mark a month,
Shall have it.
Know then into the bargain, that
I forged the letter that suggeited to you
My Nephews death, in hope of means that way.
Honestly said agaiu. Now what say you?
I say that I am humbled on my knees.
I beg your pardon.
Ell's too well me thinks.
But hark, before you break up school, lets have
Ove frisk, one fling now, one careering dance,
And then pack up.
Agreed, Agreed, Agreed.
Play then Les tous ensembles.
That's the French name on it, Uncle, it is in Dutch
called All-to-mall; and I call it in English.
Omnium Gatherum, it is the daintiest dance.
We had it here to day: I and my mother,
My Aunt and all can dance in it, as well as the best.
With every one in their own footing. Now observe.
You have done well. Now pray lets break up school.
But yet not break up house. My son and daughter.
Have given me power to call their Supper mine.
To which I'll give you welcome, Ale and Wine.

THe clouds of Doubts and Fears are now dispersed,
And Joy, like the resplendent Sun, spreads forth
New life and spirit over all this Kingdom,
That lately gasped with Sorrow.
Now the Court
Puts on her rich Attire, and like fresh Flora,
After the blasts of winter, spreads her Mantle,
Decked with delightful Colours, to receive
The jocund Spring, that brings her this new life.
The Queen comes on, Joy in that face ap∣pears
That lately was overwhelmed in her tears,
Health and perpetual Joy unto the Queen,
Thanks my good Lords, I am prepared to meet it.
How neer's the King?
At hand, my Sovereign.
Welcome that happy word that leads the way,
But yet he is not come, he is not here:
Never so sweet an expectation
Appeared so tedious: pray set on apace,
That I may live yet to an interview
With my loved honoured Lord.
That your delay
May seem less grievous, hear this by the way,
A brief relation of the Kings success
In this his late well-won Battle.
Be it so.
But mention not his dangers, good my Lord.
That were to make his Conquest nothing worth:
It would make Victory upon his head,
As she had flown into his Burgonet,
To shroud her from a storm, and not to sit
Or rather stand triumphant on a foot,
With displayed wings upon the utmost Sprig
Of his high stourishing P•um, vaunting her safety
So perched and so supported by his Valour.
Pray Mother hear the dangers too; the worst
Will make the best the sweeter: I could hear
Of dangers yet to come; and Women may
Discourse of Perils past each Holy-day.
Well said, young Prince, right of the Kings own Metal:
And gracious Madam, let me tell you, though
You do not love to hear of blood and danger,
Y' have brought a Warrior forth, I do foresee't:
I love to speak my thoughts, I hope you trust me,
A right old Courtier I, still true to the Crown.
How this old fellow talks! you said, my Lord,
You would discourse the Battle.
Excellent Prince,
I was in the way: but the Queen put me out on it.
Well, well my Lord, deliver't your own way.
Then, humph, humh, humh, in my own way.
But by the way, no way to derogate
From the Kings matchless resolution.
A word or two of the best Soldier
In all the world (under the King I mean,
I know my limits) that's our brave General,
Lord Sforza, Madam, your stout Country-man,
Though our Kings Subject now; that bore him so
At the great marriage-Triumph in Tourneament,
Tumbling down Peers and Princes, that ever since,
He's called your Champion, and the Queens old Soul∣dier.
But what of him now in the battle?
Marry but this, That as we have a King,
And as the King brings victory, nay life,
Home to his Queen, his Country and our comforts,
Next under Heaven we are to give the praise
To this old Soldier, to this man, the man
Indeed, another man is not to be
(Except the King) named in this Victory.
You seem my Lord to honour Sforza yet
Before the King.
Excuse me gracious Madam,
I know my limits: what? before the King?
I am an old Courtier I, still true to the Crown,
But thus it is declared, that in the battle,
When in the heat of fight the mingled bloods
Of either Army reek'd up to the Sun,
Dimming its glorious light with goryvapour,
When slaughter had ranged round about the field,
Searching how by advantage to lay hold upon out King.
Prithee no more.
Good mother.
At last she spied and circled him about
With Spears and swords so thickly pointed on him.
That nothing but his sacred valour could
Give light for a supply to his relief,
Which shined so through and through his walls offoes,
As a rich Diamond amongst an heap of Ruins,
And so was found by the quick eye of Sforza,
When like a Deity armed with wrath and Thunder,
He cut a path of horror through the Battle
Raining down blood about him as he flew,
Like a prodigious Cloud of pitch and fire,
Until he pierced into the straight, wherein
The Royal Person of our King was at
His last bare stake of one life to a thousand.
I dare not hear it, yet.
Then in a word, old Sforza fetched him off,
And with his sword which never touched in vain,
Set him in the heart of's Army once again.
That I like well.
That did your Champion, Madam,
The Queens old Soldier, and your Father, Lady:
Do ye simple at it? such a Soldier breaths not,
Only the King except: now note the Miracle,
The King received and gave new life at once
Of and unto his Army, which new life
Was straight way multiplied, as if the lives
Of all the slain on both sides were transfused
In our remaining part, who with a present fury
Made on with that advantage on the Foe,
That the whole field was won as at one blow.
I am prevented.
Now cease our Drums, and furl our En∣signs up:
Dismiss the Soldiers, hostile Arms surcease,
Whiles we rejoice, safe in these Arms of Peace.
Go Soldiers, better never stood the shock
Of danger, or made good their Countries cause.
Drink this to the Kings health and victory.
Heaven bless the King, and our good General Sforza.
Long live the King and Sforza, Sforza and the King,
The King and Sforza, Sforza and the King,
Equal at least, and sometimes three notes higher,
Sound Sforza's name then doth the Kings: the voice
Of the wild People as I passed along
Threw up his praises nearer unto Heaven
Ever methought then mine: but be it so,
He has deserved well, now let me again
Embrace the happy comforts of my life.
Through deadly dangers, yea through death it self,
I am restored unto my Heaven on Earth,
My wife and Son: a thousand blessings on thee.
Say, dearest life, whose prayers I know have been
Successful to me in this doubtful War,
How welcome am I?
That's more than I can speak:
For should I bring comparisons of the Spring,
After a Frosty winter to the Birds,
Or rich returns of ventures to the Merchant,
After the twentieth currant news of Shipwreck,
Redemption from captivity, or the Joys
Women conceive after most painful Childbirths,
All were but Fabulous nothings to the Bliss
Your presence brings in answer to my Prayers:
Heaven heard me at the full: when I forget
To send due praises thither, let me die
Most wretched, though my gratitude shall never
Sleep to the inferior means, even to the meanest
Soldier assistant to your safe return,
Especially to you good Sforza, Noble Soldier,
I heard of your fidelity.
My duty Madam.
Are you one of his great Admirers too?
The world will make an Idol of his Valour,
While I am but his shadow: Isle but think on it,
Indeed he's worth your favour, he has done won∣ders.
Let me now speak, I may not hear these wonders bounced,
You do forget your self.
What says my Lord?
Nay I have done.
Gonzago, you and I have changed no words yet;
I have brought Victory home, which may perhaps
Be checked at when my heat shall fall to ashes.
How will you maintain your Fathers quarrels ore his Grave?
I do not hope to outlive you Sir, but if I must,
I sure shall hope to keep your name and right
Alive whilst I live, though I cannot hope
To have so good a Soldier at my Standard
As Warlike Sforza.
This is more and worse
Then all the rest: the child has spoken plainly,
I had been nothing without Warlike Sforza:
Isle make him nothing, and no longer stand
His Cipher that in number makes him ten.
My Lords, my thanks to you for your due care
In my late absence.
All was Loyal Duty,
As we are old Courtiers Sir, still true to the Crown.
I have found you faithful.
It befits true Statesmen
Watchful to be at home against civil harms,
When Kings expose themselves to hostile Arms.
There's a State-Rime now: but Horatio,
Has not Petruccio visited the Court
Since our departure?
Pox on Petruccio.
Bless me, and be good to me: how thinks your
Grace of my Allegiance, and can ask
Me that Question?
Now he is in his Fit.
The Hangman take him. Petruccio King?
Peugh, peugh; I hate to name him.
How can you think your State had been secured
If he had breathed amongst us? That vile wretch,
Whom in your Kingly wisdom you did banish
The Court for a most dangerous Male-content,
After his just repulse from being your General,
When he durst stand in Competition
With brave deserving Sforza here, the best
Most absolute Soldier of the world.
Still Sforza!
Except your Majesty.
There is an Exception wrung out,
He come at Court by my permission?
I should as soon be won to set your Court
On fire, as see him here.
Send for him speedily.
 Your Majesty is pleased to have it so.
And upon your Allegiance
Which you so boast of, let me have him here,
And very speedily; Isle have your head else.
Nay since it is your Highness pleasure, and
So seriously commanded, I will send
My own head off my shoulders, but we'll have him:
In what you can command, I dare be Loyal.
Look to it,
It must be so, this is one of his un-to-be-examin'd hasty Hue∣morse, one of his starts: these and a devilish gift
He has in Venery, are all his faults.
Well, I must go, and still be true to the Crown.
Petruccio sent for! who for braving of
Brave Sforza here, so lately was confined.
I cannot think the Court must hold 'm both
At once, less they were reconciled, which is
As much unlikely: what do you think my Lord?
I know not what to think.
She Sforza's Daughter, say you?
Yes my Lord.
She's a right handsome one: I never knew he had a Daughter.
He brought her o'er a Child with me, when happily I came your Bride, bred her at home, she never saw the Court, till now I sent for her to be some comfort in your long absence.
Sforza's absence, I fear you mean.
And trust me Sir, Her simple Country In∣nocence at first
Bred such delight in me, with such affection,
That I have called her Daughter, to embolden her.
O did you so?
And now she has got some spirit,
A pretty lively spirit, which becomes her
Methinks so like her Fathers.
Very good.
I like her strangely.
What was that she said
To you Conzago?
That Heaven might have pleased
To have fashioned her out to have been a Queen.
Comely Ambition.
Reconcile all quickly,
Or you had better never have been born,
Then disobey my last command, which was
Never• to see the Court till I induced you.
Do you stare at me?
I but obeyed the Queen.
I hope she'll answer't.
No more, Isle talk with you anon.
Come Sforza, Welcome to Court, so is your
Daughter too, I have tan notice of her: O f•irest, welcome.
Come you both with me this night, weel Feast:
Pray bid us welcome all, as but one Guest.
I shall in all obey you.
And for this,
Less then a King I shall abhor to kiss.
Repulsed? disgraced? and made the scorn of the Court?
Is the advancement of an upstart stranger,
Because he is the Queens dear Countrey-man?
Have I for all my many Services,
Found the reward of being made an outcast?
Could not the King be pleased, though he advanced
Sforza unto the Honour I deserved,
To trust me in his service? could he think
My sword could be an hinderance in the Battle,
Or have delayed the winning of the Field!
And must his Court and presence which I have
With my observance dignified, reject me
Now, as a dangerous and infectious person!
Tic a new way to gratify old Soldiers.
So soon returned? I do commend thy speed.
The news at Court.
The King's come bravely home,
And every ear is filled with Victory,
But chiefly with the Fame of Sforza's Valour.
Sforza? Ser. Lord Sforza Sir, I cry him mercy,
The new Lord General.
Thou come too fast
So me thinks too, less it were to better purpose.
The Fame of Sforza's Valour, good if it last.
What other news?
I have told you all the best.
If thou hast worse, let's have it quickly.
You shall, That you may fly the danger.
What is it, without your Preface?
Here are Messengers sent from the King to you; pray Heaven all be well. Ther's the old tutchie testy Lord, that rails, and never could abide you, since the King looked from your Honour.
The hast made me amends, ther's for thy news.
Is this bad news?
Truly my Lord, I think so:
For if the King had sent to you for good,
I think he would have sent one loved you better.
What? then the old Courtier? thou know him not.
Isle show him thee. He is the only man
That does the King that service, just to love
Or hate as the King does, so much and so long,
Just to a scruple or a minute, and then he has an
ignorant Loyalty, to do as the King bids him, though
he fear immediate death by it.
Call him in.
They come.
My masters, come along, and close up to me: my Loyalty defend me, I shall not dare to trust me in this devilish fellows reach else. And thus it is Sir.
It is thus Sir, I can tell you.
Good friends look well to me.
You come with strength of armed men, to bear me
From mine own House which was my appointed Pri∣son,
Unto a stronger Hold.
Look every way.
The King it seems now that his Nignion
General is Landed, cannot think him safe, and I not
Faster: which though I can prevent, I will not.
Come, what Gaol will you remove me to?
I would thou were in Hell for me:
No Sir, I come to call you to the King.
What? with a Guard?
That's for my Self. I know thou love not me.
Nor you me, do you?
Nor cannot, less the King could love thee.
Why perhaps he does, you see he sends for me.
Why if he does, I do, but it is more then I know, or can collect yet by his Majesties affection.
Here's an Humour now.
I know my Loyalty, and I know the King has sent for you; But to what end I know not: and if it be to hang thee I cannot help it. Look to me now my masters. Nor do I care, that's the plain troth on it, while the King is pleased, and thou were my Brother. I am an old Courtier I, still true to the Crown.
I commend your Loyalty: Come, we are Friends.
Look to me for all that.
Were you afraid, you came so armed and guarded?
That's because I would not be afraid: look to me still.
Indeed my Lord you are welcome.
Yes, as much as I look for.
What should the King intend by this? I fear no ill,
For I have done none; therefore I may go.
Perhaps he thinks to make me honour Sforza
Now in his time of Jollity, and be friends:
I need not go for that; he cannot do it,
Yet I will go to tell him so: my Lord,
My joy to see the King will post me faster
Than your grave Loyalty, or Massy Bill-men.
Yes, prithee keep before with thy back to∣wards me, and so long I dare trust thee.
Have an eye though.
Her Father hath surprised her then?
Yes, and means to hurry her away from
Court this night: I heard him threaten it.
But he must not do it, she is too sweet Fla∣vello, and too fit for my embraces, to be snatched away.
Now that shoe's ripe and ready for your use,
Like fruit that cries, Come eat me. Isle not boast
The pains I took to fit her to your Appetite, before she saw you.
How, my careful Agent?
At first sight of her Feature, I foresaw
She was compliable to your affection.
Then by discourse I found she was ambitious,
I plied her then with Pills that puffed her up
To an high longing, till she saw the hopes
She had to grow by. Pray stand close, they come.
Has the air of Court infected you already?
Has the Kings kisses moved by adulterate heat,
Swollen you into astubborn loathsomeness
Of wholesome Counsel? Come your ways; Isle try
If Countrey-Air and Diet can restore you
To your forgotten modesty and Duty.
What have I done amiss?
Do you capitulate?
But so much satisfaction as may make
Thee sensible of shame, I will afford thee:
Did thou not after Banquet, when the King
Heated with wine, and lust raised in his eyes,
Had kissed thee once, twice, thrice, though I looked on,
And all the Presence whispered their cold fears
Of the Kings wantonness and the Queens abuse;
Did thou not then still gaze upon his Face,
As thou had longed for more? O impudence!
Impudence? Sir, pray give it the right name,
Courtship, it was Courtship Sir, if I have learned
Any since I came here.
Brave mettled wench!
I am amazed.
Besides Sir, the Kings kisses
Are great inestimable Honours, and
What Lady would not think her self the more
Honoured, by how much the King did kiss her?
And should he more then kiss, still more Honoured?
It might be thought so.
Durst thou argue thus?
I know he dares not beat me here. Pray Sir
Let me but ask you this, then use your pleasure:
(Cause you stile Impudence, that which I call Court∣ship)
What Courtier sits down satisfied with the first
Office or Honour is conferred upon him?
If he does so, he leaves to be a Courtier.
And not the thing we treat of. Did your self
After the King had graced you once, twice, thrice,
(As he kissed me) expect no further from him?
She's wondrously well read in Court already:
Who in the Devils name has been her Lecturer?
Do but your Majesty observe that, and think
What pains I took with her.
How many Offices
Did you run through before you were made General?
And as the more the King confers upon us,
Is more our Honour, so it is more the Kings,
When most his Favours shine upon Desert.
I like her better still.
Insufferable Bag∣gage.!
Dare thou call any thing in thee Desert?
Or mention those base Favours which the King
Maintains his Lust by, with those real Honours
Conferred on me, who have preserved his life?
Is it such Dignity to be a VVhore?
Pray Sir, take heed: Kings Mistresses must not
Be called so.
Dare thou talk thus to me?
Yes, Sir;
If you dare think me worth the Kings embraces,
In that near kind, howe 'er you please to stile it:
Sure I shall dare, and be allowed to speak.
That word makes thee a Queen.
The King dares not
Maintain it.
And that costs you your Head.
Dear Sir, take heed; Protest I dare not hear you:
Suppose I were advanced so far above you
To be your Queen, would you be therefore desperate,
And fall from what you are to nothing? Pray
Utter no more such words, I'd have you live.
She vexes him handsomely.
As I live she's mad. Do you dream of being a Queen?
Why if I should, I hope that were no Treason:
Nor if I were a Queen, were that sufficient
Warrant for you, to utter Treason by,
Because you were my Father; No dear Sir,
Let not your Passion be Master of your Tongue.
How she flies up with the conceit? do ye hear?
Because you were my Father.
Sovereignty you know, admits no Parentage.
Honour, poor petty Honour forgets Descent.
Let but a silly Daughter of a City
Become a Countess, and note how squeamishly
She takes the wind of her Progenitors.
She has swallowed an Ambition
That will burst her: I'll let the humour forth.
You will not kill your Child?
Though all Posterity should perish by it.
Not for the Jewel in your Ear.
Impudent Harlot! she has heard me value
This Jewel, which I wear for her dead Mother,
I would not part with, whilst I wore my Head;
And now she threatens that: a Kingdom shall not save thy life.
Know where you are, Sir, at Court, the Kings House.
Were it a Church, and this unhallowed Room
Sanctum Sanctorum, I will bring you to your knees,
And make me such a Recantation
As never followed Disobedience;
I'll take thy life else, and immediately.
Treason! a Guard! Treason! &amp;c.
Heaven save the King.
Lay hold on Sforza, the dangerous Traitor.
It is Sforza is betrayed.
Away with him, see he be kept close Prisoner.
Flavello, see that his daughter have convenient Lodge∣ing.
Let me but speak; I hope your Majesty—
Let not a word come from him: hence, away.
What a most dangerous estate even Kings do live in?
When those that we do lodge so near our Breast
Study our Death, when we expect our Rest.
Be comforted good Queen, and I beseech
Your Grace to pardon me in this command
The King has laid upon me.
Lodovico,
I do, and must no less submit my self
To the Kings sovereign will then you: and though
I am committed to your house and custody,
I am his Highness Prisoner: and more,
Though I know not my crime, unless it be
My due Obedience, I am still so far
From grudging at his pleasure, as I fear
To ask you what it is supposed to be;
But rather wait the Event, which though it bring
My Death, it is welcome from my Lord and King.
Was ever Virtue more abused then hers?
Yet thus much, good my Lord, without of∣fence;
Let me demand, Is Sforza still close Prisoner?
Yes, and Petruccio his Adversary
Governs his Place, and high in the Kings Favour.
I will not ask his Trespass neither, it
Suffices it is the Kings high pleasure. But Alinda•
Sforza's fair Daughter, what becomes of her?
Poor virtuous Maid, is she thrown out of Favour
Because I loved her too?
Alas good Queen!
What do you weep? nay then all is not well
With her, I fear.
Good Queen, I fear so too;
And that all ill proceeds from her to you.
I may not understand thee, Lodovico:
I'll still retain the duty of a wife,
Which though it be rejected, shall not throw
Me from the path a Subject ought to go.
Two such wives more might save a Nation.
But see Petruccio the now-powerful man, under tho King.
Horatio with him too, are they such Friends?
None greater since the King was pleased to grace Petruccio.
Madam, however my Person, no less then my Authority, I know is most unwelcome to you; I must appear, and lay the Kings Command upon you, which you must obey.
I must? see, Lodovico, here's a plain
Dealing Lord, that knows, my Love and my
Obedience to the King, and warns me
Faithfully to observe it: good my Lord,
I will obey the Kings Command in you:
Lay it on me. What must I do?
You must go to the Bar, to answer to
Those Accusations that will be brought
Against your Life and Honour, as touching
Your foul Disloyalty unto the King.
He is a Traitor to the King and Me,
That dares accuse me of Disloyalty.
Patience assist me, and control my Passion.
The greatest Crime that ever I committed
Against my Sovereign, was, To be so near
The Vice of Anger in the presence of
One that he loved so well; but pray your Pardon,
Though truly those sharp-pointed words drew Blood
From my oppressed heart: and though you love me not,
I hope you think me innocent.
Would I could.
You do.
I would I durst speak what I think.
My Lord, you ever loved me, can you think?
Come, what I think, I think; my love to you
Was the Kings love, if it were love at all:
If he will say, he ever loved you, I can say so too.
But to speak truth, I know not if I did,
Or I did not; but now you're hateful to me;
That I dare speak, because he hates you soundly.
And your old Russian Sforza, that fell Traitor,
That would have killed the King: do you look up at it?
You may look down with sorrow enough:
Your Country-man, your brave old Champion,
He has Championed you sweetly it seems.
Is there no honest Woman?
What means this unknown Language?
Women are always ignorant of Reproof:
I'll tell you what it means, for that loves sake
You thought I loved you once. Or do you know
What Mars and Venus meant, when injured Vulcan
Had i'm in's Net? Good King, how were thou a∣bus'd?
And this good honest, faithful, loyal Lord,
Full to the brim, of Merit, and true Valour,
By that Blade-brandishing Sforza, that mere Fencer▪
To this great Martialist: but he is fast enough,
And ell's come out, however you'll answer it.
What must I answer? I know not yet your meaning.
Nor ever shall, for me.
You'll know too much
I fear, anon. Come, Madam, will you go?
The High-Court stays your coming.
I must submit me to it, and its Laws;
But to a higher Judge refer my Cause.
Good Queen, thy wrongs are manifest, though none
Must dare to utter them, but in our Moan.
Mount, mount, my thoughts, above the earthy
Of Vassal minds, whilst strength of women's wit (pitch
Props my Ambition up, and lifts my hope
Above the flight of Envy. Let the base
And abject minds be pleased with servile Bondage▪
My Breast breeds not a thought that shall not fly
The lofty height of towering Majesty.
My power upon the weakness of the King
(Whose raging Dotage to obtain my Love,
Like a devouring flame, seeks to consume
All interposed Lets) hath laid a Ground-vvork
So sure upon those Ruins, that the power
Of Fate shall not control, or stop my building
Up to the top of Sovereignty, where I'll stand
And dare the World to dis-commend my Act:
It shall but say, when I the Crown have won,
The work was harsh in doing, but well done.
Flavello, welcome!
Hail, my Sovereign Queen.
It is a brave sound, and that which my Soul thirsts for;
But do not mock mine Ears.
Believe it Madam,
Join your attention but with one hours patience,
And you shall hear the general Voice of the Kingdom
Give you that stile, with large and loud allowance.
Stile thy self happy then, in what Reward
A Subject can receive, or a Queen give.
How moves our great proceedings?
Fairly, thus:
Eulalia, for now I must no more
Give her the Title that belongs unto
Your Execellence, of Queen.
Advance that Harmony.
Eulalia is brought unto the Bar, accused,
Convicted of that high offence, that instantly
Shall pull that Judgement on her, that shall crush
Her into nothing.
Appear the proofs manifest?
That was my care, it behooved me to work the Witnesses, who swore (in brief) most bravely, that they heard Lord Sforza, whom you also may forget now to call Father.
That without your instruction.
They swore, I say, they heard that Sforza boast
The knowledge of the Queen in carnal Lust.
Was that enough?
No, but it served to put
The question to her, Was it true or not?
No, cries the Queen, nor can I think that Sforza
Would lay that scandal on himself and me.
Those Witnesses were two cashiered Lieutenants
That Sforza should have hanged for Mutinies
In the late war, but threw 'em by, it seems,
To serve him in this Office: me they cost
Five hundred Crowns apiece, and well they got it.
But where I left: the Queen denies their Oath.
And though it had been true that Sforza had
Affirmed as much, that had not found her guilty.
What Witnesses were next?
Two dainty devils
Birds, a Doctor and a Midwife, who accused
Themselves for Bawds in the Action, and deposed
I know not how many, how many, how many times,
They saw 'em linked in their unlawful pleasures.
These were the Queens own people, and deserved
A thousand Crowns apiece, and had it instantly,
Afore-hand too.
What could the Queen say then?
She denied all, but in such a patient way,
After her foolish fashion, that it gave strength
To the Evidence against her; then she wept
For their iniquity, and gave them a God forgive ye.
And so attends the censure of the Court,
Which straightway will be given: they'll be set
Before my coming.
Hast, Flavello, hast,
And let thy next news be to this a Crown,
That she is not a Queen, and I am one.
This Father and this Queen I now could pity,
For being hewed out and squared thus to my use,
But that they make those necessary steps
By which I must ascend to my Ambition.
They that will rise unto a supreme Head,
Should not regard upon whose Necks they tread.
MY Lords and loyal Peers.
A new distinction
Between Spiritual and Temporal.
Good Lo∣dovico, peace.
This is a Cause, the which, but for fair Order,
By which I am constrained to be a Judge,
Would rather drive me to a mourning Closet
Then to this Seat; to show my equal grief
Against the Crime and Shame of the Delinquent.
I see you're all amazed, and cannot marvel
At your Astonishment, who do suffer with you
In the great Change Honour compels me to,
Together with Religion, fairly urging
To an high point of Justice, which to utter
Draws faintness from my words, chilling my Blood
Like the departing Breath that separates Life.
For such I held her, and so many years
Retained her in the Closet of my Heart,
Its self-Companion: that till these proofs,
Which now like daggers by compulsive wounds
Have made their passage, she could ne'er have parted.
Royal Hypocrisy!
The Proofs you see are plain,
That she was found—Pray speak it for me.
In Adultery.
And that she sought the Life of fair Alinda
By Sword and Poison both: and of that Cup
It is like my self had tasted,
For my supposed love to that wronged Lady.
You have given her the Bed-right that be∣longed to your wronged Queen, these twelve months.
Our Laws of Sicilie are so well rebated
With Clemency, and Mercy, that in this Case
They cut not Life from one of Royal Blood,
Only take off (as is on her performed)
All Dignities, all Titles, all Possessions,
All means to live, even to her naked hands.
And such, Eulalia, now is your condition.
To work for her living? if she were as young, and no honester then she for whose sake this is inflicted on her, she might find something else a∣bout her, then naked hands, to help at a living shift
Now to this Censure, for due Orders sake,
And for which end this Parliament was called;
Your Voices are required: do ye all approve it?
We do.
We must.
What say you, Lodovico?
We do; Heaven knows against my heart.
My thanks unto you all, that do obey
So well with one consent your Sovereign Lord.
And sacred Sir, thus low, as it becomes me,
Let your poor Hand-maid beg, that you incline
A patient Ear to this my last Petition:
That as you cast me off, as an offence,
You will be pleased to think me not offended,
But pleased in all I suffer: for, Heaven knows,
I am as free from any Passion
Of Anger, Hate, Ripening or Distaste,
Nay, as insensible of Grief or Sorrow,
Or whatsoever Anguish of the Mind,
As I was capable, for ought I know,
Of Joy or Bliss the first hour I was born.
Never made happy till I was your Bride,
In which blessed state I cannot but remain,
While you are pleased, and I obey your will,
Though unto Death, to Banishment or Prison.
Poverty is Blessedness, in which I'll pray
For pardon of the Sins of my Accusers,
And those that have suborned them.
O poor Woman!
So in the blessed continuance of your Days,
I shall pray Heaven to smile on all your Ways.
Nay, stay Eulalia, I have yet a Business
I would have pass the general Consent
Of this Assembly, in which your Voice is useful.
Flavello?
Upon my life, his Marriage with that Start-up,
That Snake this good Queen cockered in her Bosom,
Is not this Royal cruelty?
You wrong your Princely Dignity:
Turn to the King your Father, kneel to him.
And are not you my Mother?
I must and can forget what I have been;
So must not you: your Mother was a Queen.
My present fortune claims no Title in you.
Hurt not your own, by looking down on me.
This I will do as warranted by safety,
Not as a Mother, but Beadswoman, pray
For all that bliss on you a Mother may,
Good Sir, observe the King before his wrath.
Take hold upon you for regarding me.
Let your amazement cease, and now per∣ceive
My Lords in general, that I your King
Am Subject to this all-deserving Lady,
And do require you not alone to hear
What I can say, but without all denial
That you approve, confirm what I will say.
I am by law no less then your consent
Divorced, and free from all impediment
To make my second choice in Marriage,
And therefore crave Alinda for my wife,
And that immediately we solemnise
Our Marriage, and her Coronation.
I hope none rates our will or his own life
So meanly, as to give least contradiction.
O let me lead your voices. Long live
Gonzago and Alinda, King and Queen of Sicily.
O gross Hyocrisie!
My Lord the Prince, pray let your voice be next;
The rest will follow. Why speak you not, my Lord?
She would fain seem to voice in your be∣half,
But in a way that much persuades against you.
Do but your Highness note it.
You Sir, come from that Woman.
She was my mother when she was your wife;
And that's so late, I cannot yet forget it.
But I fear to offend.
O show it in your Duty then, young Prince:
It is true, the Law of Nature-wills a Son
To be a partner in his Mothers woe;
But Laws above that lay a strong command
On Sons to obey the Edicts of their Fathers.
A Fathers frowns are Comets threatening ruin.
Let all your thoughts be free from his offence:
The most Heaven seeks, is our obedience.
In all obey the King; think not of me:
I am no more, nay not so much to you
As is the Beggar whom you may relieve,
Since of all these comforts I am deposed.
Faith thou had not mine, good woman:
I must not call thee Queen now.
Or if you needs will think I am your mother,
Let it be only in the charge I give you,
That since Alinda blessed by providence
Must be invested with the Regal Crown,
You show her that obedience befits a Queen,
And your dread Fathers Wife.
I fear she'll turn him
Traitor, if he give more ear to her enchantments.
Isle show him a way to give her thanks.
Gonzago?
My Royal and dread Father.
Put forth that woman:
Do it without grudge, out of the Court,
I mean to seek her way. Do you refuse?
He does not, shall not, Royal Sir.
Only I beg that I may take my leave.
The wishes a true Subject ought to send
From the most humble heart up to the Throne
Of sacred Majesty, I equally divide
To you my King and Queen,
Professing by the Powers you present,
I part as well content with my condition,
Since it is your command, as ere I was to sit in that Promotion.
Sir, I may not sit to be taunted and upbraid∣ed thus.
Pardon me, mighty Lady, I am as far
From daring to do so, as from a Queen.
And whilst you love the King, and he is pleased,
I shall no less obey you, then I loved you
When I sent for you to the Court, and there into
this heart received you.
I am plainly jeered: hence that woman.
Away with her.
And let it be proclaimed according to the extremity of Law our Censure be observed.
Alas, how can she live one night?
And now to your consent: have I it yet
For Marriage with Alinda? If you are pleased,
Then call us King and Queen.
Long live the King and Queen.
I mean Eulalia
Tic well: on to the ceremonies then. Kings were
But common men, did not their Power get fear.
It is oppression, Tyranny indeed.
Speak lower, good my Lord.
For fear of whom? of what?
You would not that the King should hear you, would you?
Faith if he did.—
Faith then as sure as your tongue's your own now, your whole head would be his then.
If it might so excuse the Queen, I cared not.
It will do the Queen as much good, as the money it might be sold for in the Market; That and the Appurtenances to it, would yield little at the Shambles. Come my Lord, speak privately, and pur∣posely keep your head on your shoulders: it be∣comes the place as well as 't had been made for it. If the King have a mind to turn away his Wife, Isle give him leave to turn mine after her, to wait upon her, rather than to have my head bowled at her, though I were sure it should kiss the Mistress.
Oh but the ensuing danger, my Horatio! The mischiefs that of necessary course must follow, even to the ruin of the State, by the Kings dotage on his second choice, draws blood from Sub∣jest hearts: Oh that lewd Woman!
She is a Woman of middle earth yet. But what shall we dare to say two hours hence? Come, think upon Law and Regal Authority. The Kings Power Warrants his Acts: I know as well as you the Queen Eulalia (Heaven bless her, I hope it is yet no Treason to pray for her) is as virtuous a Lady as ever
beautified a Court, or made a Kings Bed happy, For all the Articles framed against her.
The perfect Pattern of Meekness, Patience, Obedience.
Of all that's good, or should be wished in Woman.
So obsequious a lover of her Husband, that she gave way unto his loose affections, even to this now-she-start-up that supplants her.
She considered she grows old: she reads in her Sons face nigh twenty years of the Kings love to her: and gives him leave to place it now elsewhere.
And is so far from limiting his Choice,
That she possesses it that seeks her blood.
My soul tells me the witnesses against
The Queen, are by this Concubine suborned.
I will not say so.
You cannot choose but think so.
My thoughts are warranted by the Proverb. But come, make up your Face, temper your voice and looks with the rest of the most Honourable As∣sembly: shake off this discontent, it is a disease by which you'll perish else:now all the Court's in height; you to profess distaste! Come, be a looker on at least.
Upon a Court on Fire? O Horatio,
Bright Burning Troy gave not a dearer cause
Of willingness to those affrighted souls
She forced to leave her sinking in her ashes,
To fly for refuge to another Region;
Nor in their flight could they by looks reverted,
See danger in more horrible aspect,
Than I upon the ruins of this Kingdom.
Your stay, my Lord, may prevent danger.
Yes, if it could remove the Fatal cause,
The pride, the cruelty, the Ambition
Of that wild Fury, the outrageous Queen,
Who treads and tramples down the Covernment.
Consider this Horatio, and the means
To work this great effect: and I am yours,
To stay till it be done.
Alinda's Death.
VVho's there?
Is it not necessary? no body: what d' ye fear?
Or can you find how to preserve the State
At a less rate? you know too well the King,
How apt his Nature is to fell oppression.
The burden of whose cruelty long since,
If by the virtuous Clemency of his Wife
It had not been allayed and mitigated,
Had been a general subversion.
And now that Peerless Princess being deposed,
Whose virtue made her famous, and us happy;
And he re-married to this shame of women,
Whose vileness breeds her envy and our mischief,
What can we look for but destruction?
I dare me thinks a little hear you now,
(The Court being surfeited too with wine and noise)
And could almost talk to the point it self,
To your own ear.
It is fit somewhat were done:
I cannot say what: but if the wronged Queen
Be not restored, we show ingratitude,
How much, I may not say: enough to damn us.
I, now you speak.
And though I will not speak it: if the Strumpet:
Be not conveniently and speedily destroyed,
Though death dance with us in the enterprise,
We shall seem born more for our selves than Coun∣trey.
Brave noble resolution!
Nay more, now I will speak.
This way, good Horatio.
That way, or any way; If Poison, Sword,
Policy or Strength may do it—
Speak lower, good Horatio: see the Meg∣neon.
What for him? my Ladies Game-keeper, that understands nothing but Monkeys, Parrots, short-nos'd Dogs and Starlings; Master of her Ma∣jesties Foisting-hounds.
So, he hears you.
Let him; he has no Soul to understand, nor Language to answer a Man: he knows how to diet, disple and perfume the small Cattle he has charge of; for which rare Art, and catching Spiders for prince∣pal Pug, he is raised prime man in his great Mistresses favour.
How the Petitioners flock to him!
Swarm rather, for they are Bees in his head; Oh! he engrosses all the Suits, and commends them to the White Hand, whose disposing will make the whole Kingdom black in Mourning, if Fate by us pre∣vent not. See how he carries it! We might talk what we would, for him. His well-ordered head is so taken up with Particular Affairs, he minds no General talk.
But my good Lord, ▪fore others Ears and Eyes,
Pursue we our Design as all were Spies:
You and the Common Good have won me.
O I embrace you.
Oh—Oh—and Oh-ho—O and alas! O and alack for O—O—O—that ever a true Neapolitan born,
should live to see this day in Sicily! there O-again, • Queen—O me—what wilt thou do? O—O—what shall I do? O—thou moist work and starve; O—and I may beg and live: O—but from thee I cannot live: O—I cannot, nor I wonnot, so I wonnot.
See, here's poor Andrea mourning as well as we,
And all the rest of the poor Queens cast-awayes.
But I can tell him comfort.
Oh—I will hear no comfort.
Yes, and be glad on it too.
Is my Queen Countrey-woman called back again?
No, but the Queen Alinda has enquired for thee, to entertain thee into her service, whilst we and all the rest of our late Queens servants are turned out o'th'Court, and now at this high dinner time too.
She would eat me, would she not?
That would make it a Feast indeed.
But Isle not trust her on a fasting-night: Fools are meat then.
Well said Andrea, witty in thy sorrow: I know thou wilt back again for a new Mistress.
No, no, take you your course, and serve her if you please,
I have played the Fool too long, to play the Knave now.
Isle after my old Mistress.
Thou moist not serve her: that will be brought within compass of Relief, and then thou moist be hanged for her.
If I be hanged for doing good, pray let it not grieve you: and as I am an Innocent, Isle never grieve for you though you be hanged never so justly.
We thank you good Andrea.
Take you your swinge, let me take mine I pray.
Hark, the King drinks now to his new Queen.
So, having turned his old Wife out of door,
A man may drink and frolic with his who—
Would have thought it? did you think to catch me?
Not I Andrea.
Catch me if you can: when it shall be Treason to say there is an honest woman, Isle say my Countrey-woman was justly condemned of Adultery: and till then, I know what to say: Catch me if ye can.
There again: now the Queen drinks.
Poor woman, at what River?
I mean the Queen Alinda.
O the new thing at home here; I will not call her Queen, not I: my Countrey-woman is my Queen.
Why is not she thy Countrey-woman?
She was when she was Sforza's Daughter:
But she has turned a Father out of him.
As here come some to turn us out of the Court.
Away with them: out of the gates, away.
See, here are more of them: more of that hated women's Retinue: away with all.
Beseech you, good my Lord: I hope we are true men.
As I am true to the Crown, not one of you pesters the Court a minute longer: go, you are trash and trumpery: and Isle sweep the Court of all of ye: follow your Mistress: go.
The Fool my Lord shall stay: the Queen asked for him.
Yes yes, the Fool my Lord, shall stay.
The Fool my Lord will not stay.
Will not? how dare thou say so? ha, Fool, ha?
The Fool dare say more than the wisest Lord dares do amongst ye: you will not take my own proper goods from me, will ye?
See what he caries: I heard of Plate and Jewels lost to day.
Let's see, Sir, I will see.
Heyday, here's stuff indeed!
Your VVardrope cannot matched it: pray give me all again; or if you will be the Kings and Queens Takers with that extremity to force my goods from me, then present this to his Highness, and this to Hers; and tell them, it is all the poor dis∣carded Fool could spare them.
No Sir, you shall take them with you, and a whip for advantage, unless you'll stay and serve the Queen.
No Sir, to you with an excuse moi,
If you be your Queens Fool-taker, you may
In Country, Court and City quickly find
Fools upon Fools that I shall leave behind.
New Lords (you know the Proverb) make new Laws,
New Lawyers of an old make a new cause.
New workmen are delighted with new Tools,
And her new Majesty must have new Fools.
New fools she wants, not having you about her,
While the old Fool makes shift to live without her.
Let the Fool go my Lord, it is but a Fool the less,
For he'll get wit by it, to wish himself here again.
If I get but enough to keep me from Court,
I care not.
Farewell Fool, take your Trinkets with you.
Farewell fine Lords, adieu old Courtier.
The Court unclouded of this Factious crew,
Will shine on us that to the Crown are true.
Was ever man so hurried into thraldom,
And locked up in the ignorance of the cause,
Stronger and darker than his Prison walls?
But I must not be Sepulchred alive,
And therefore Keeper, though thy office be
More Devilish than thy visage, yet thy heart
May be humane: let me then conjure thee
To vent the secret forth but in a whisper;
Or should thou utter't in a Tempests voice,
As loud as are my injuries, thou art safe:
I can be here no carry-Tale: I am fast
In thine own custody, thou see:
I pray thee tell me, what's laid unto my charge?
All I can say, It is the Kings pleasure, and you must obey.
Do you bark Sentences, Hell-hound?
My Lord, you're off your Command, and under mine,
You much mistake your self and me.
It is true.
Lions may rage in toils: but whilst they do,
They more enthral themselves: will you sit down,
And promise on your Honour not to force
My counsels from me? Isle deal fairly with you,
(My meaning is, to give him never a word)
I will not lift a finger up against thee,
As I am a Soldier: now prithee tell me,
What say they is my crime?  nay speak it freely.
I can give it hearing:
Or tell me first if thou wilt, how fares the Queen?
What? art thou dumb to that too? Answer me,
Is my Antagonist Petruccio
Repealed to Court yet? thence may spring my mischief.
Why dost not speak? this is dogged silence,
In scorn of me, to mock my misery.
I may not wrong the Honour of a Soldier
In my Revenge, or I would throttle thee.
You're very civil, Hell take your curtsy.
I pity him: but must not dare to show it.
It adds to some men's misery, not to know it.
It is decreed of me, that I must suffer
This Barbarous cruelty; and Isle bravely bear it:
I have not force these double walls to part,
Or mollify the Jailers harder heart.
May spirit then assist me to despise
And bear my scorn above my injuries.
Revenge has cast her self into my hands,
Strangling the Life of Sforza in these Lines:
His Head is in this grasp, but where is Honour?
Must that forsake this Breast? must the pure heat
Of heavenly Honour, yield unto the scorch
Of Hell-bred base Revenge? it must not, cannot:
For as the Sun puts out all baser Fires,
Where Honour shines, thought of Revenge expires.
Besides, he is below my Anger now;
And has no Life but forfeited to Law,
Or the Kings Fury, I'll not question which;
Nor was it justly, he gave me the Affront,
In being made Lord General, when I stood for it.
But the Kings self, in his Election,
He wronged not me no more then I did him,
When the Honour was transferred from him to me.
That's answered clearly, I acquit thee, Sforza.
But now my Loyalty, how shall I discharge
That special Duty I am here commanded,
(Stand back I say) to see the Execution,
And bring the Head of Sforza to the King?
What an addition here is of Advanceme•t?
To make me first a General, then a Hangman:
I'll do him better Service: Loyal Horatio
Would think himself now damned, to leave a tittle
Of the Kings powerful pleasure unfulfil'd.
Call the Keeper.
Here my Lord.
I am to see and speak with Sforza.
Then I doubt not but your Honour has brought Warrant.
My Honour be your Warrant: will not that serve?
I will not lose the Kings Grace for all the
Honours in the Kingdom.
Dost know me, or my place?
Yes, I both know and honour you, as far as my own place gives me leave: but in this I must crave pardon; you may not see him my Lord, by a less War∣rant then the Kings own Signet, and that fetches him out, and it please you.
But have you been so strict to all men else?
Has no man changed a word with him?
Not since
These Keys commanded him, I can assure you,
Not even the Prince himself, who much desired it.
I looked as black on him, as upon you now.
I am no white Prison-Keeper, I, to venture
Mine own Neck for a Prisoner's, at a price,
And give condemned men leave to run away:
No, I am the black Jailer, I, and it is thought,
Lineally descended from Cerberus.
I must commend thy Care; see, there's the Signet.
I'll fetch the Prisoner.
May it please you to come forth, my Lord?
Have I then lived to hear Mans voice again?
Here's the Lord Marshal, and chief Gene∣ral
Of the Kings Forces, come to speak with you.
Those Titles once were mine, but now I must
Attend his pleasure that is Master of them.
All leave the Room, but be at hand.
We shall.
My first object from my long obscurity,
The man that hates me most of all the world?
It is: his news cannot be good. not good?
The better: it is best to know the worst; he cannot deceive me.
My Lord, I do presume I am unwelcome,
Because you are possessed I never loved you:
The Court yields me such Complement; this has
No ampler Comforts in it. But you're deceived,
For you are welcome, sour captious Lord, you're welcome.
Because (love me or love me not) you speak.
I have been here these two and twenty days,
And never heard the voice of Man till now:
Meat I have found, and Lodging; but for Language,
In what part of the world I am, I know not.
Proceed; I value your words well, you see,
That give you six for one; why do you not speak?
I have been used to talk with men that love me not,
And more with Enemies, I dare besworn,
Then Friends: come, speak, I pray, what is it you come for?
Alas! I pity him: his too too much vexation
Has over-tam'd him.
Will you not speak and tell me?
Pray let me ask you first; Have you been kept
So strictly from the Speech of all men?
Ever since I was committed, and from the knowledge
Of why I was committed too; nay, he that keeps me,
'Till now he called me forth, never spake a word:
If I asked him, what News? here he was with me:
Or when he heard from Cuurt? then there again:
Or, why I was committed? still the same answer.
So that I could inform my self of nothing.
Come, if thou be an honest Enemy,
Tell me something:
As thou dost wish my throat cut, tell me something.
You seem to take no notice of the cause of your commitment.
Further than this I cannot: It was the Kings pleasure to command it.
Treason was cried; a Guard: away with him:
But for what cause, unless it were for drawing
My sword upon (O that Rebellions Girl!)
To save her from the danger of his lust,
(Which I tell you I was doubtful of) and so Sir,
Let me ask you, is she still about the Queen? (Queen.
My daughter Sir, I mean.
Yes, much about the
And the Queen loves her?
As dearly as her self.
Nay if you be a Soldier, now speak truly.
The Queen and shoe's all one.
Then there's some hope,
The King yet keeps fair quarter with her.
Women are quickly jealous.
He knows no∣thing,
I'm confident, of all these great proceedings.
Poor man! I pity him: but Isle put him to it.
Will you now answer me as y' are a Soldier
To some few Articles?
You have engaged me.
'T were shame he should die ignorant of at least
The Accusations are laid against him.
Come Sir, your Articles?
You are ac∣cussed
Of an intended Treason against the King.
Who's my Accuser?
Even the King himself.
Umh, umh, umh: he should not be my Judge then.
It is some Devilish dream of his, or else
That Policy that Princes purchase Hell by,
With strong assurance without all exception;
That is, when Soldiers men of best desert
Have merited more then they have means to give,
To cut their lives by whom they only live.
You fly now from the question: y' are en∣gaged by the Honour of a Soldier
Unto that Accusation: guilty or not guilty?
I am not guilty, as I am a Soldier;
And in that Oath I would not be forsworn,
To save as many lives, were they within me,
As perished by my Sword to save his One.
In that I am satisfied: now to the next,
If you will hear it; you shall promise me
To answer without passion I or no.
I will do what I can.
You're next accused
Of fowl Adultery with the Queen Eulalia.
Ho!
Guilty or no?
No Sir, nor dares there be
Such a suggestion in the heart of Hell.
And were he there, that thought, or could but dream
Of such a Scandal, I'd squeeze it out on's Brains.
Then I must hold you to your promise Sir.
A wrestling towards; away west, away.
Nay then I am betrayed.
Forbear I pray.
He comes but to insult and to torment me.
My Lord you much forget, is not this Passion?
Passion of heart! he hopes not for Salvation
That hears with patience but the repetition
Of such a Blasphemy. I must not die,
Until the world be vindicated from
The redamnation such an error threatens.
You see I could oppress you; but all forbear the room.
Do you come to mad me?
If you will be calm, Isle tell you what I come for.
As settled as a Rock beneath a mountain
Here will I sit, and hear thy loudest malice.
If this man be not innocent, virtue lives not.
Now tell me what you come for; and be sure
You ask no more abominable questions,
Whilst calmly I clear these, thus: By the Honour
And faith of a true Soldier, I am clear
Of these suggested crimes, which before Heaven
(Which knows my Innocence) I do not urge
To save my life from the Kings violent Fury,
Nor any way to close with thee in Friendship,
Now that my fortune is at worst. So, speak:
It is long a coming: I begin to think
It is some good, you are so loath to utter 't.
It is, if you can apprehend it so.
My Lord, I take you for my friend, and come
To make my moan to you; insomuch as now
I do conceive you Noble, Virtuous, Honest.
Foh! this is worse than all the rest, this stinks
Of the Court-putrefaction, Flattery, grossly.
But on I prithee: talk is such a novelty,
I will hear any thing.
I could not see your virtue, when it shined
Thorough the radiant favours of the King:
It dazzled me with envy then: but now,
Like the red Sun through cold and misty va∣pours,
I can behold it at the full.
So, so: umh, who: so much for my virtues:
What's your business now?
I say I come to make my moan to you,
Groaning beneath a weighty Injury
The King has thrown upon me.
Has denied him
Something I warrant, that he would have begged;
The making of a Knight, or some such foolery:
What was 't?
In putting a base office on me.
Is the great Marshals and chief Generals
Office, become so base?
No Sir, the Hangmans Office. Read that—
I am commanded there, and warranted
With present speed to bring your Head to him.
A prayer or two, by his great leave and yours,
And you shall have it instantly.
My Lord, you shall not undervalue't so:
That Honour which has won me to you, shall
Work better for your preservation.
I have much more to tell you, and strong Reasons
Why you should live: of the Queens infinite wrongs
And yours, wrought by your Daughters cruel Am∣bition.
This is a nobleness beyond Example:
Sure now you are honest.
There you see my strength:
If now for truth and Honours cause I strain
A point of Loyalty, you will engage
Your Honour to secure me?
I hold my Honour equal to the best,
And prize it still so far above my life,
That to save Kingdoms Isle not forfeit it.
Here in the sight of Heaven I do engage it,
For your security.
I ask no better. Keeper!
My Lord.
Dismiss that Guard, and give us way.
I shall.
Now come my Lord, virtue may be cast by;
But never overcome by Tyranny.
VVars Sword, Laws Axe, or Tyrannies fell Knife,
May overcome my Person, not my life.
For that is yours Petruccio.
Turned out of all, and cast into the world;
And that forbidden too to pity me?
No sucour, no relief to be afforded?
Heaven still is where it was, and cannot lose
The Providence it ever had: let those
That think me wretched now, consider that,
And be with me converted to a Faith
That will proclaim us happy. What's my loss?
What was the State and glory of a Court,
But steps and lights through dangerous Ambition,
To ends beyond our selves, in whose achievements,
We make our selves but nothing to ourselves.
And all that we are then, is to the world,
Which renders us great Titles: which tan off,
We then return unto our selves again,
And all the world is ours: I was not great
Till now; nor could I confidently say
Any thing was mine own, till I had nothing.
They do but sleep, that live in highest Pomp;
And all their happiness is but a dream,
When mine is real: nay, nay, I can prove it.
Their costly fare breeds riot, mine content:
Their rich Attire is but mere Pageantry,
Made to please their eyes: mine keeps me warm,
And healthful, when a cold becomes their sickness.
They boast of Honour and Gentility,
For their Attendants then, when the chief Honour
Of the best woman, meek obedience,
Is my own handmaid; and my Patience
A sweeter servant than Gentility,
Continually my other: for Council and defence, what have I now?
They have the helps of worldly wise men's brains,
And I the comforts of my fruitful Prayers.
They have tall big-bon'd servants for defence:
I the strongst guard of all, mine innocence.
What Music had the Court compared to this,
Or what comparison can all their sports
And Revels hold with those of Kids and Fawns,
And frisking Lambs upon the country lawns?
Which are my hourly pleasant entertainments
In all my wanderings: in which I have not
Hungered at any time, but I have found
Meat which I duly earned: nor ever thirsted,
But I have found a Spring that has refreshed me.
And am no sooner weary, then I find
A shelter or a shade to rest me in:
As now, in which a slumber gins to creep
Over mine Eyes, more soft then any sleep,
Could these my Senses when I lay of late
On Down, beneath the Canopy of State.
Sleep in thy Sainted Innocence,
Whilst Angels watch in thy defence.
Sleep whilst I charm these bubbling Streams
With Music, to make sweet thy Dreams;
Thy Dreams which truly shall relate
The Passages of thy Estate.
Note, first thy Foes in Court conspire
Against thy Life, and Villains hire
To act thy Tragedy.
Lo those the perjured Evidence
That suggested thine offence,
Are hired the second time to be
Co-actors in thy Tragedy.
They have their Fee, and now are sent
Towards thee with a vile intent.
Ill thrive their purposes. Now note
The wrongs that are against Sforza wrought,
Who lives from Speech of all men still,
Pent by the Kings abused will;
Not knowing of the Treachery
That was conspired against him and thee.
Nothing of all that's past knows he,
More then he must a Prisoner be;
Which doth him much impatience bring:
But the bad Queen instructs the King
How his vexation he may end,
Who strictly for his Head doth send.
What from these black intents shall grow,
Is not as yet for thee know.
Now, holy Soul, I must thee set
A course that must thy living get.
Thou must not beg, nor take for need
More then thy Merits proper meed.
First therefore, I thy Brain inspire
With a Divine Prophetic Fire;
Thou shalt be able to Fore-doom
The ends of many things to come.
Into thy Breast I next infuse
The Skill of Med'cine how to use:
Learned Aesculapius never knew
The use of Simples more then you.
Many diseased by Grief and Pain,
Of thee shall Health and Strength obtain.
Next Handy-Works and Literature,
With Education good and pure,
Thou shalt be able to bestow
Upon the Country's Youth, and show
The Elder sort how to improve
Their Welds by Neighbour-hood and Love:
Now when thou from this Trance dost wake,
See that thou present Practice make
Of these thy Gifts, and fear not then
The Practices of Fiends or Men.
What soft? what sweet? what heavenly Trance was this?
I feel my self inspired with holy Flame
Above the heat of Mortals: sure I have
The Spirit of Prophecy, the Gift of Healing,
And Art of teaching hidden Mysteries.
Thanks Heaven, that first did send me Patience
To sweeten my Afflictions, and now
Plentiful means to live, for others Good.
Who live but for themselves, are but for show,
And stand like barren Trees, where good might grow.
Farewell, thou foolish Pomp, and Pride of Court,
Whose shine is but an Ignis fatuus
That leads fond Mortals from the path of Virtue,
And Tracts of real Comforts: thus I shake
Thy wanton Dust from off my Feet, to tread
The ways of Truth and Innocence: this Air
Breaths Health upon me, Peace, and perfect Pleasure.
Where the swollen Courts sophisticated Breath
Did but disease my Blood, and taint my Senses.
It is good Lodovico, though disguised,
I can no less then know him: and the poor Fool
That was my Servant: they come to relieve me
In these disguises, that I might not know
From whom I received Comfort.
To this way
The most unfortunate Queen inclined her course:
And see, already, how her VVants and Woes
Have worn her to the bone: Alas, she's pined!
And look you new Master, yonder's my old Mistress;
What Fools were we; that could not find her sooner!
Alas! I can see through her: there is not
So thin a Queen in the Cards.
Hold thee, good Woman, pray thee take it quickly.
I came now from a Feast where we had plenty,
And brought these Dainties, meant unto another;
But my dear Charity tells me thou dost want it.
I pray thee eat it; do not look, but eat it.
What Traitor art thou, that presents me Poi∣son?
By all the truth and honesty in Man,
It is wholesome Food: see, I will be thy Taster,
Though in good sooth, it grievs me to beguile thee
Of the least Morsel: sure thou hast need of 't▪
Good Woman eat, and let not Famine be
Fearful of Poison, or false Treachery.
Is it not Poison to a loyal heart,
To eat contrary to the Kings Command?
No, if it were, what a many would have been poisoned the last Lent, that may live to be very good Subjects, very good Subjects all the year after, except a few Fish-Dayes?
Alas, we are plain poor Country Folk, and hear no such news.
Why will ye urge so much against your con∣science?
Have you not heard of my banishment, and the Kings Edict,
Proclaiming all men Traitors that relieve me?
We heard indeed the King had put away his old good Wife, and tan a new one: but can we think you are she that was the Queen?
Yes good Dissembler, you do know it, and you;
As sure as I know you for Lodovico,
And you, Sir, for Andrea: Can it be,
That you that have been loyal Subjects, should
Now go about to forfeit thus your Lives?
Pray leave this fooling, Mistress: eat your meat;
And here's good Drink to wash it down: and then
If you have a mind to hang us, let the
Gallows take his due; for my own part, I had
Rather hang like a man, while I am good
For something, then you should pine away to no∣thing.
Fear not you me, pray Sir, nor neglect the care
That's due unto your selves, to injure me.
O dearest Heaven! do you think we'ld injure you,
That venture lives for you? no, gentle Queen.
Lo, there again, that's Treason too, to call her Queen.
No body hears nor sees; pray eat a little.
Do not I hear and see you? I am not safe
In my obedience unto the King,
To hold such conference with you that would
So violate his Laws: but let it warn ye
Off of this course; for I'll appeal to Justice
If you persist in this Rebellion.
Any woman but she, now in her Case, would eat such an Husbands Brains without Butter, rather then forsake good meat; and but for this will∣fullness in her, I should not think her a woman, I. But as she is, new Master, we shall never do good upon her: and therefore since your Grace has not the grace to eat this meat, mark with what a grace or without Grace, I will eat it my self: do you fear Poison?  Now Bottle let me play a part with thee; can you think this Poison, that goes down so merrily?
Much good may it do thee.
Stay, now perhaps she'll eat.
It is like enough; I did but eat to get her an Appetite, therefore I'll even eat on, till all be done, to get her the better stomach: now Bottle, to thee again.
See, here come poor Folks, that perhaps do want
That which superfluously thou hast devoured.
I'll eat again, for that: I am as poor as
they; and you never knew Charity in Beggars towards one another. Bottle again for that.
O Misery! O Desolation!
Diseases, Sicknesses, O Calamity!
What Saints are those that they invoke so?
What is the Cause of these sad Cries, good People?
Go back, if you respect your safety, go;
And look not this way where the Air disperses
Nothing but foul Infection, Pain and Sorrow.
Return, I say, for here you appear strangers,
And run not to the Ruin of your selves:
This way is filed with Cries: you can meet nothing
But Lamentations of a thousand Souls:
Some Lame, some Blind, some Deaf, some Lunatic,
Some struck with Palsy, some with Leprosy;
All sighing, groaning, crying, underneath
The painful weight of Sorrow and Affliction.
What is that woeful part of the Country called,
That suffers this Calamity? and how
Did the Inhabitants there stand affected
To Goodness or Religion?
We are all sinful▪
Yet no way to extenuate our fault,
Or murmur at the Judgement fallen upon us;
We have been held obedient to the Church,
True Subjects to the King, and friendliest Neigh∣bours
Among our selves, all Sicily could boast of:
This part of it, or Province, being called,
The fair Talermian Fields, and is the same
Our Kings have customarily laid out
For their Queens Dowry: and has therefore been
Vulgarly called The Paradise of Love.
Stay there, old man: I have heard there is
Neither Lawyer nor Physician in all the Province.
None could ever get a living amongst um in all their Practise.
It seems they lived then civilly and temperately.
Nor Gentleman nor Beggar in their Con∣fines.
Then sure their Wealth was all commune∣cable.
There could not but be excellent Neighbour-hood.
And, which was worth all the rest, their Priests
Were ever the best good-Fellows in all the Country.
You're now upon the Confines of that Coun∣try,
And cannot scope some dangerous ill,
If you dare taste the Air of it.
That shall be tried; I'll have a whiff on it:
If I get a mischief by it, let the Fools harm be a war∣ning to the Wise.
See more of those distressed Souls that fly
The foul Contagion,
Yet charitable to each others wants:
For here the Deaf conducts the Blind: the Blind
Supports the Lame: the Dumb removes the sick and feeble.
All that can make least shift for it, fly the Place,
Then do not you press torward it.
There will I.
Take up my Habitation.
You're not desperate?
Mark me, good Lodovico, note my Reasons:
This poor afflicted Province was my Dowry:
And the overhasty judging world will say,
According to the Censure passed on me,
My Trespass drew this Evil on the Land.
Tic better that the world should judge so, and perish
For it in it's Ignorance, then you so wilfully
Be cast away: you hear that none escape.
None, Old nor Young, Man, Woman Child, all
In one kind or other, do feel Affliction.
Do any die?
None, though the most do wish
They might, in lieu of their sad sufferings.
And whither now do you intend your travail with your griefs?
We hope a better Air will cure us. But
We are advised by our Divines and Augurs,
By the best means we can, to make our Journey
Towards the Court, to send our sad complaint
Unto the King.
Hear now what he will say)
They find by Divination, that this punish∣meant
Is fallen upon this Province by the Sin
Of the Adulterous Queen, whose Dowry it was.
Did not I tell you?
And that until
His justice take away Her loathed life,
This evil will not cease.
What, the Queen Eulalia's life?
Yes Sir; we hear shoe's banished, and forbid relief:
But nothing save her polluted blood must quench this flame,
In expiation of her Sin and shame.
Dare you stay longer here? pray let us fly.
Why then you think me guilty, Lodovico.
I know not what to think, but that I will not.
Was that your Priests opinion and advice?
Yes, and thus grounded, that our pains began
Just at the hour, the Kings Indulgence
Released her forfeit Life.
It was everso; Priests are but Apes to Kings,
And prostitute Religion to their ends.
Might you not judge as well, it was the injustice and the wrongs the innocent Queen hath suffered, that has brought sense of her injuries upon her Pro∣vince? And that if she had died, her Dowry here with her had also suffered Death? to make it nothing to the King, as he made her.
I, mark ye that: and that your false surmise
Against the Queen has brought this evil on you.
O now my pain increases. 1. O mine Eyes. 2. My Brain. 3. My Bones. 4. My limbs are on the Rack.
It is plain, your fowl mistrust is the infection that rages in you.
Lodovico, peace: where is thy pain good man?
Here in this Arm shrunk up as it were seared with fiery Irons.
Blessed Providence assist me whilst with Prayers I use the gift thou give me for the cure of these afflicted People. Give me thine hand: what feelst thou now?
A precious cooling Balm that has extin∣guished
The scorching heat I felt, and has reduced
My Flesh, my Sinews, and my Arteries,
Into their natural temper and true use.
Join that hand to thy other, and thank Hey∣ven then
That made thee whole.
I do, I do.
Mira∣culous!
O sure you are some Heavenly Saint or Goddess.
Beware Idolatry, and only send
All praise to the power whose mercy hath no end.
Only do this for me: inform the rest
How you have sped, and win them back again,
To the next village: bid them be of cheer,
Whilst I make Holy Prayers for their help.
Isle come and live among you for my hire,
Which shall be cheap, believe me.
All we have
Will be too slight reward: first take my store.
I will but take my next competent meal.
I hope this will be thought but valuable.
I pray take more.
Go back I say with your sad company,
And comfort them with news of your success,
And a full hope of cure to every one
That's Partner in this sad Affliction.
With happy feet I shall spread it through the Country.
O happy woman, now no more a Queen,
But Holy Saint: I see how Providence
Means to advance thy injured innocence.
Isle dwell here now my self, and without fear:
For perfect health I think dwells only where
Good Eulalia remains: I have enough
To buy a Farm for me and poor Andrea.
But what's become of him?
Isle tell you, Lodovico: the poor Fellow
Is gone to taste the Country Air for me,
Lest I might be infected: you shall see
Straight how he speeds.
And that was honest love.
A Surgeon, a Surgeon! Oh a Surgeon!
How now, Andrea?
A Surgeon: Oh twenty Surgeons, bone∣setting Surgeons.
What's the matter man?
I am out of joint. Isle taste no more of such contagious Aires, To save as many Queens as I have hairs. Oh Surgeons and Bone-setters, Bone-setters and Surgeons, all my Bones, all my Bones for a penny.
I have not a finger nor a toe in joint: my Legs,
my Thighs, my Arms, my neck.
My back and Crupperbone is out of joint.
Oh for a Sowgelder, a Surgeon I would say.
Out a joint, out a joint, I am all out a joint.
Thy tongue's not out a joint.
No, nor a Thing
I have that has no Bone in it: All else is out a joint.
This came of tempting Providence: were not you
Told the danger by the many that smarted of it?
I met them all dancing and frisking home.
The blind man made the way: the dumb man sung,
The deaf kept time to his Notes: the lame led on
The Dance to all the rest: whilst I can go
No further.  It was for you I ventured.
And now you repent you meant me so much good.
And now again I do repent that ever I did repent. Oh for a Stone-cutter, a Bone-setter I would say.
Well Sir, give me your hands: stand up.
With as good a will as ever I stood to wo∣man.
Now, how do you feel your self?
In very pretty plight, I feel I am sufficient.
Haugh, heigh—  twill do again: and if I durst venture into that unlucky Country again, I would now teach the Clowns how to Dance for joy.
Yes you shall venture Sir; and by the way,
Isle teach you to teach them to work and pray.
To work and play I pray you,
If there be Heaven on earth, it is this woman.
Then if there be a Purgatory on earth,
Isle venture through it for her, heigh, o, ho.
1. Health and Joy: Health and Joy.
2. O happy woman that ever she came hither!
1. Nay happy we that ere she came among us.
2. What shall we render her in recompense?
All that we have is too little for this woman,
This good woman, this holy woman, this she-Saint,
If there be one above ground.
3. O do not make an If at her, neighbour, lest the ground swallow thee quick in thy Infidelity.
2. Now doubtless, and without all adventure, she is an unknown woman.
3. And therefore a good woman: for it is too true,
All those that are well known are even bad enough:
And known she will not be for all our entreats,
No not so much as from whence she came, we see.
2. And that counsel she may keep still for me:
For doubtless, and without all peradventure
If we had need of another such, 'it were in yain to seek her.
1. Sure it was from Heaven she came,
Where the whole stock of good women were placed long ago.
It is she I'm confident.
Our work lies fairly then before us.
These look like mischievous Robbers.
What can they take from us?
Your Life, I fear.
I have even dined, let 'em take away when they please.
Their looks are murderous.
Fear not, Lodovico: why look ye Friends, so amazedly? ha'ye lost your way? or what do ye seek?
No, we have found our way, it is to you we seek: we dare come roundly to you, for all your
Guard, your old Fool, and your young here.
O my unhappy Fears!
You will not murder me?
It is all the Office we are bound to doe you.
Just Heaven protect me.
Call upon Heaven as you go thitherward:
We may not stay long Invocations.
Pray take me in your way, and run me through her, if you be honest Murderers. Help: Murder, Murder!
O yes! O yes! O yes!
Silence Crier, suspend the Proclamation, to prevent bomina∣tion.
Heaven has sent us aid.
O we are prevented!
On, on; sa, sa; down with their VVeapons, up with their heels, till we insect and rip up the in∣trails of the Cause: what an Assassinate was here at∣tempted?
O infausta D•es! two swords against the naked vvomb of a Woman! and none but weapon∣less men to assist her!
Senex &amp; Ineptus.
That is to say, Give me their Swords un∣der my Fools Coat, I'll hurt no body.
Upon my fecundity, an elegant construction by the Fool. So, I am cedunt arma Togae.
For our attempt Sir, we will answer it: we are for the King.
Then we are for the King, Sir; &amp; in nominee
Majestatis, we command you to attend our present
Office, and then we will examine yours.
And then if you deserve the Gallows, you shall be sure on it: a short breathing-vvhile shall be no hinderance to you. So Crier lift up your Voice, and proceed.
O yes, O yes, O yes: By the Kings most Excellent Majesty, a Proclamation, prohibiting upon pain of Death, any Relief to be given unto the ba∣niched Eulalia.
Now say, Whereas upon just and lawful Trial.
Whereas, &amp;c.
The said Eulalia.
The said Eulalia.
I am that hapless she, that for relief will not beg, nor borrow, nor take of ye.
It is she, and at the price of Life I will re∣lieve her.
How? what have we done? In relieving her from killing, we are all become Traitors.
That's an idle fear: we knew her not,
Which now we do, we may again reliver her
Into their hands, for them to kill her yet:
And then there's no harm done.
So let us give them their swords again; and
when they have done their work, to make all sure,
vve'll hang them for their pains, and so keep the Law
in our own hands while we have it.
O homines insane! quomodo erravistis?
The woman must be saved á manubus istis.
They are Catilinarian Traitors.
You Sir, have reason; you have found her Life
The King has pardoned: and although her Doom
In this her Banishment were heavy, and
A punishment even unto Death, but that
Good soul she works and labours for her food,
You find not yet it is lawful any kill her.
Recte dixisti Domino: therefore Sir,
You that are for the King, as you pretend,
Show us the Imperative mood or warrant for her death,
Or we shall put you into the Optativa mood,
By punishment to wish your selves dead oftner
Or more times than bone fide there be Tenses
In all the Moods of all my Accidences.
For my part Isle forgive them, if they will
Deliver truly who corrupted them,
To rid the world of this weary burden; that I may pray for them.
Can such a goodness deserve so fowl a Cen∣sure?
But first tell me: Are not you two the men that gave false evidence at my Arraignment touch∣ing injured Sforza?
We gave no evidence, nor false nor true.
No countrey-woman, they had no such Beards. But I will try if I can make'm like'em: O rare! what a nimble Barber am I? Lod. They are the self-same men, the two cashiered Lieutenants that Sforza should have hanged for mutinies in the late Wars.
What hinders now their execution?
Digito compass labellum: silence good Pedro.
I do commend your zeal: but Periculum est in via,
We will walk safely: for this time therefore we'll do only thus,
Double our guards upon 'em, and away to prison with them,
Est locus in carcere quote Tullianum appellatur.
We will presume to know who it was that set you awork, before you go,
You will be made to answer it.
A word more, we'll hang you presently, and answer that too: Abite hinc in malam Rem: away with 'm.
Ah Rogues, we'll hamper ye.
Kill a woman because she was a Queen?
We'll hamper ye, and halter ye, and do ye hear? hang ye.
Abi hinc &amp; malam rem, away with'm.
As I am Erudite, idoneus Adolescence,
A very towardly Juvenis. Cups at{que} doceri?
What's that?
Wilt thou be a Scholar?
After you is manners.
Now by mine intellect, discreetly spoken.
Be but my Pupil, I will make thee one,
And dip thy Caput in pure Helicon.
Pray what's my Caput? and what's your Helicon?
Still a desire to learn: this is no Fool.
And by the company hoe's in, I do suspect,
Simile non est Item: hoe's too wise,
To be the thing he seems but in disguise:
Some Lord of Court, his outside non obstante.
It is confessed Sir, I am Lodovico,
Sometimes a Lord of Court when this was Queen.
O Oedipus! I meant this Juvenile.
No truly Sir, your Simile non est Item.
I am no Lord, what ere you like me to.
What I may pass for in the Country I know not,
At Court I was a Fool when she was Queen.
We dare not call her Queen now: but while we
Relieve her not, though we associate her,
We are the Kings true Subjects: and with your leave,
Disclaiming of all Honourable Titles,
VVe'll live amongst ye.
O gracious woman, so I may safely call you,
Who once preserved my life.
Mention not that.
I ought not to conceal it: therefore know
That some years past being employed to Court
To render the Kings Rents for this Province:
Which though I duly did, there was a Lord,
A strange officious one, that charged me deeply,
And all our Province, with detested breach
Of our Allegiance: at which my rage
Banished my reason, and confounded so
My senses, that without respect of Person,
Or Place, which was the Danger of the Law,
I struck him there in Court: and was adjudged
To suffer death for it, till you won my Pardon.
Were you that man?
And it was my
Cozen Lord'I warrant that you boxed.
It is he that briggs so much his truth unto the Crown; I need not name him.
Sed nuns quid sequitur? Pray mark the issue of this Court quarrel. By the way,it is well you have renounced all quality of Court.
Here were no living for you else; for know,
Since this mans trouble, not a Gentleman,
Much less a Courtier dares breath amongst us,
But be as you pretend and write, but Yeoman:
You shall live Jovially with us and welcome,
At your own charge, your own Viaticum.
We have laid up
The murderous minded men in dungeon deep,
Clogged them with Ploughchains, Fetters and Horse∣locks.
VVe'l teach 'm to kill Queens:
Cave, caveto.
We mean this woman, this discarded Queen.
For all the Feasts, the Triumphs and the Glories
That have been spent, at price of great Estates,
In celebration of my high Advancement;
For all the King has in his present being,
His Love to boot, assured in highest measure;
Me-thinks there is yet wanting an Addition
To crown my Happiness: ell's not safe hereafter;
I cannot safely say I am his Wife,
While the other seems contented with a Life. Flavello!
Most Mighty Sovereign.
O most Celestial sound!
Here's all your business granted.
Greatest and best of Queens! All?
See the Kings hand to all: do you mistrust me?
I only look for the poor women's Pardon
That killed her Husband for his gelding the Priest.
If you but manage the Profits of my Fa∣vours with a discreet Hand now, you may soon find the difference between a Minion, and the Son of a Dish-Maker.
I find it in your Gifts, my bounteous God∣dess.
Oh Divine!
And would presume that
I my self were worthy
A place in the Calendar, might I do you Service,
That merited the smallest of your Graces.
Do you know the village where that woman lives?
Who, sacred Deity?
I'm very sick to name her or her Son.
O Eulalia; yes, the very House: it is in your Majesties way now, as you pass to Nicosia: the King is ready, Madam, and calls away; he longs to be at the end of his journey, to perform his Duty in the three Grants belong to you.
O but that Woman, and that hated Boy.
Eulalia▪ Madam?
Thou art a base
Ungrateful Villain to name her to me;
Thou hear me say, I dare not speak her name,
Yet thou dare stab mine Ears again, with it.
Had some received the Favours thou hast done,
Or could but dream of half▪you're like to have,
I should not fear her Ghost; but thou art dull.
O let me take new spirit from your hand,
And say unto your self, She is sure dead.
But the King comes. I am enough inspired.
I will not only have you guiltless, Sir,
But free from least suspect; let but a spark
Of Discontent appear upon your Look,
I'll rip the hollow cave that holds the fire,
And with Death quench it.
I beseech your Highness,
If any alteration in my looks
Be found, or read, let it as well be construed,
It grows but from a filial fear t'offend.
I have forgot I had another Mother:
And humbly at the Feet of this I honour,
I beg her Aid, to win your Favour towards me.
Most gracious Madam, if you knew the Truth,
The fair sincerity I bear in Duty
Towards your Highness—
For what respect, young Prince?
The principal in the World: For that you have
My Fathers Love; and but to Wrong or Grieve you,
Were Stripes or Wounds to his Affection.
So much of my late Mother I remember,
To yield a Reverence to his Contentment, and shall for ever.
My Lord, my Love, what pretty meaning have you?
Do you bring your Son to mock me?
Ha! my Alinda, he's no Son of mine,
That with less Adoration dares look up
On thy Divinity, then the Egyptians
Gave to the Sun it self: but an out-cast Bastard,
And of the daring Giants ignorant Nature,
That warred against the Gods.
I would not move your Anger: pray let this win your Reconcilement.
O thou art gentle, and the life of Sweetness:
Come, my Alinda, I was calling you
To our intended Journey to Nicosta,
Where solemnly I will perform my Vow,
To grant the three demands I promised you,
In the full view of our Nobility.
Which by the Custom of my Predecessors
Have ratified and confirmed the Power
Of Queens, and made them absolute: have you thought
To ask things worthy of your Dignity,
Wherein I fully may declare my Bounty?
I, Sir, shall be so reasonable, that
I doubt not upon the way, or there at very instant,
To crave past my Desert.
O you are modest: but ask home, Alinda.
And by the way, Sir, let it be my Suit,
We give a Visit to distressed Eulalia;
Wherein we may do Charity fitting Princes;
(We may perhaps give Order for her Burial)
Thou art all Goodness: Come, all Friends, Gonzago:
But thank her Clemency.
An Earldom be thou sure of, wise Flavello,
To add to thy improvements: Though it be
No full Discovery, I'll make it serve,
As I will fashion it, to excellent use.
Poison or Sword thou heard him speak?
And in a menacing way: Now what may be
Conjectured by such words, from men whose looks
Show discontent against your Mightiness,
Rests most considerable.
Write, Flavello, write,
Write by that Copy in a States-Man's hand.
Alas, good men! I dare even swear for them,
How ere those words might fall in their discourse,
They had no thought of me: yet this surmise
Gives me an hint to try her Loyalty,
Or make her once more guilty: for my State
Stands by the King, as unto her his hate.
Read it Flavello.
Most Royal and most wronged Sovereign Mistress, be happily assured that the time of your Restoration is at hand: and thatby no loss means then the death of that she-monster that usurps your Dignity. All shall be determined at No∣cosia, by
Your devoted Servant unto death. Nameless.
It is well.
It needs no superscription: only seal it,
And think of your directions and disguise.
It is but your half days journey: and be sure
We are not far behind you.
I fly, my Sovereign.
Now to the King,
Of whose despite I still must sharp the sting.
No news of Lodovico yet, Horatio?
None since he stole from Court upon the Banishment
Of that false wicked woman, whom I cannot
Name to your face or forehead, but I tremble.
Because you fear all horned Beasts.
My Loyalty forbid,
And my infallible Truth unto the Crown,
But I were sensible of the injury.
I know thy Loyalty: but as for Lodovico,
How was my Judgement wronged in him!
And mine.
I thought my self as safe in that mans Coun∣sell—
And so did I,
By my loved Loyalty, think my self safe
In his Advises—
Yet methought he had
A kind of slyness in his Countenance.
Yes, he had ever a kind of a sly look.
That still methought I had a Genius
That checked my forward love, and did inform me
That he would prove disloyal: and for that cause,
To speak plain truth, I never loved him truly.
Will your Majesty believe me? I would I might never rise
Into your Favour (and that I would not say
For all the Traitors Lands in your Kingdom,
Which were no small reward) if that were not
Mine very own conceit of Lodovico
That Traitor; hang him: what should I call him less?
Yet it was given out you loved him.
So it was thought your Highness did.
And that he was your yoak-fellow in the State.
Yes, when he's hanged he shall be King. How Horatio?
Your Majesty knows my thoughts: nay I thank my creation, I was ever
Just of your Majesties mind from my Nativity,
And in that faith Isle die.
Here's a true States∣man now!
Go, send Gonzago to me.
My sweet young Prince?
I shall: but ere I go,
Let me inform your Highness in my thoughts
Of the sweet Prince Gonzago: if ever King
Was happy in a Son, you are in him.
Go, call him to me.
Cherish him, good my Lord:
He will be a sure staff to you in your Age,
And prove a Statesman quickly: I cannot think,
Except in him and your undoubted Queen,
Petruccio and my self, True Loyalty lives.
And here he comes: obedience in his Face
Most brightly shining.
Wait without Horatio.
Gonzago?
My dread Lord.
Did you attempt
Against my strict command to visit Sforza?
It is most true, I did.
You are a Traitor.
Gracious Heaven forbid it.
What was your purpose?
First on my knees let me implore your Royal Pardon.
Well Sir.
My end was noble: as I thought, well suit∣ing
The Honour of a Prince: I would have searched
Into the secrets of his heart by questions,
Whether he had intended or conceived
Treason against your Highness, as it is
Presumed he did: for which he was committed.
My self for that was his Accuser;
How durst you then make a scruple at it?
Still relying on your Pardon, I had thought
To have won confession of it from himself.
Suppose he had confessed it?
I had then
Concluded there had been a Probability
Of my poor mothers falsehood: yet I would have put
That Question to him next.
And say
He had confessed that too?
Then had I saved
Your Laws a needless labour in his death;
And with the same hand made that mother child∣less,
That by her folly forfeited her Husband.
Was that your resolution? but suppose
He had denied all?
All had then been nothing
But a Scandal to my mother and himself:
So good a Soldier would not be a liar
To save an abject life.
Sirrah, you are
His Bastard, not my son, in doing this.
You are my King, would I could say, my Father.
Within there!
Horatio, would you think it? this young stripling
Takes part against me with that Traitor Sforza.
Does your Grace think so?
Think so? I know it.
Then I know it too: Think, did you say? I think it was time to think it.
I knew it not till now.
As I am true to the Crown, just now I knew it too.
O do not so interpret, Royal Sir.
What can be said against it? has not his Grace spoke it?
What must be done with him to please your Majesty?
Convey him from my sight, and let our Marshal
Petruccio take him to safe custody,
Till our further pleasure.
My King, and Fa∣there.
Hence with him I say.
Great Sir, your mercy.
Did not I tell your Majesty there was not,
But in the Queen, Petruccio, and my self,
True Loyalty in the Court? Away you Traitor∣ling.
My Lord, you are too severe.
What? in being true to the Crown? O my Loyalty!
No news yet? no return?
We shall have, Madam.
You made not choice of men of Resolution.
They were the same exasperate cashiered Soldiers
That swear so valiantly against Eulalia.
Many that pass for Soldiers dare swear va∣liantly,
That dare not fight.
Many that dare not fight,
Dare do a murder Madam, such a tame one too.
I am confident they have killed her: however, I have done my best.
Thou hast done nothing whilst that woman lives.
The work was not so course, that your own hand
Could have disdained it, Sir, if you had loved me.
So leave me, negligent Fellow.
Her first months Majesty hath wiped out
The memory of all her former days.
I must not lose her though: this hand then soon
Must do the work, be 't not already done.
How cheers my love? what ominous aspect
Hath wrought this sad Eclipse upon that Beauty,
Whose radiancie only is my life?
Cast by this veil of sadness: quit my fears,
And from my Brows wipe off a score of years.
No? what must then remove it? or dispel
These Clouds, that from the anguish of thy heart
Do cast this shadow ore my happiness?
I must not, will not name it: but you said
You would do something, which it seems
Your wavering love neglects.
Can I neglect
A duty that belongs to my Alinda?
Speak it again: and by my first nights bliss
I had with thee, by this kiss, and by this,
Isle treble in performance all my promises.
Y' are dull in your performances: I will
Not name a request the second time, although my life,
Your dignity, and your Kingdoms safety,
Lie on the rack for 't.
She will not name 't again:
Her last request was for the head of Sforza,
Her arrogant proud Father, whose perverseness
Checq'd at her due promotion; and whose life
Swollen up with Popularity, was my danger,
Threatening no less then ruin on my State.
She will not name 't again, poor tender soul,
Lest she might fall into the interpretation
Of an unnatural child: yet for my safety,
She suffers in desire to have it done.
I have prevented her desire, it is done:
I know Petruccio his Antagonist,
Who had my warrant and Signet for it,
Would not be slack in the execution.
Come, sweet, be fearless: that which your mild good∣nos
Is now so timorous to name, is done.
Is she pursued and put to death?
What she?
Nay, I have said again.
Sforza, my dearest life, the unnatural Home∣cid
That sought thy life and mine, is put to death.
What, my dear Father?
Was it not your Desire?
Here comes sure Testimony: speak Petruccio;
I will not ask, Is 't done? but speak the manner
How Sforza died.
A self-wil'd obstinate man:
Such as he lived he died: and gracious Madam,
That a more bloody Spectacle should not move
Your tender nature to compunction, I brought
But this inseparate Adjunct of his malicious Head
Against you, the King, and the whole Kingdoms good.
This is a token most infallible,
The Jewel that none but the cold hand of Death
Could ravish from him: It is done:
The fear of him is like a storm blown ore:
It is done but this is yet but part of that full satis∣faction
That must confirm my safety: Pray my Lord,
You fatal instrument of my Fathers blood,
Let me not look upon you.
Nay Alinda,
You must not be so sad: your gentle sorrow
In those obsequious Tears expressed, show nature
And Filial piety as he was your Father:
But think upon your wrongs, my dangers, and your own.
Alas my Lord, think you withal, a Father
Is not so early forgot. But sorrow leave me,
And do you give me leave to think, that now
It is no less a Child's part to embrace
Revenge then sorrow for a Fathers loss.
How means my love?
She lives that was his Ruin.
You may remember whom I mean: Eulalia.
Till now, I had no Plea against her life:
Only my care of you might wish her Death,
For your security. Her fowl Adultery
And secret Practices against your Crown,
Were nothing unto me, compared with this.
Now I have lost a Father: she the cause:
He suffers, she survives: where are your Laws?
Sweet, be content.
Content your self great Sir,
With your black infamy: sit down content
On your Majestic Throne, the President
Of Capital contented Cuckolds, do,
Till all your Subjects dance the Hornpipe too.
Nay dear Alinda, do but think—
Think what?
What on a course to be revenged on you?
To serve you in that kind my self?
O torment!
Or rather, let me think your lustful purpose
Was but to rob me of my Virgin-Honour.
And that you put her by but for a time,
Until my youth had quenched your Appetite;
Then to recall her home to your embraces.
She is your wife it seems then still: not I.
You have awaked me from a Lethargy
In which I was confounded: now I see
She and mine Honour cannot live at once:
She dies, Alinda.
And you may consider
A little further yet Sir, if you please:
You Father and maintain a Son (your own
I cannot safely say, and therefore more
Is my vexation) who demeans himself
Not towards me, like one that were your wife.
Hoe's also doomed already, my Alinda.
It may prevent a greater strife hereafter,
Should he but live t'inherit Lands and Titles
That must belong to yours and my succession.
Thy wisdom inspired me: all shall be
(Be thou but my Alinda) ruled by thee.
Seal you that Grant: with this kiss I Seal mine:
My glories were eclipsed, but now they shine.
you're welcome Friends, your prayers and good wishes
Are comforts to me, yet without danger of the Proclamation.
Madam, the Court in all the Bravery
It boasts and borrows, cannot so rejoice
In the bright shining Beauty of their Queen,
As we in your enjoying in this plainness.
Their Bells, and Bonfires, Tilts and Tournaments,
Their Feasts and Banquets, Musics and costly shows
(How ere unpaid for) shall not outpass our loves.
Be you as confident, I will not wrong
A man among you: therefore pray reserve
What is your own, and warrant your own safety.
But how you'll live, we know not: we are now
In our old former Health: the Countrey's cured,
Your Practice at an end: unless you had
The common gift of most Physicians,
To make as many sick, as you make sound,
You will not find a Patient in seven years.
But I have other Arts: sufficient skill
In works of several kinds, the Needle, Loom,
The Wheel, the Frame, the Net-Pin: and choice of
Fingers works are most familiar with me.
And can you handle the Bobbins well, good Woman?
Make statute-Lace? you shall have my Daughter.
And mine, to make Tape-Purles: can you do it?
Yes, and teach all your children works to live on.
The which, together with my own labour,
May bring sufficient for my maintenance:
Without the idle help of Begging, Borrowing,
Or any way infringing the Kings Command.
You'll have a help beyond himself, but bore∣rowing.
Something I have in Book, to help their know∣ledge,
And by practise give them literature.
Then when these serious works and studies toil us,
For Recreation, yet with equal skill,
VVee'l practice divers Instruments, Songs and mea∣sures,
That shall invite the Powers above to smile
On the content of which we them beguile.
Well Mistress, ours is the voice of the whole Country;
All which, or what you please of it, is yours:
Take this House: make your choice of servants.
Take our children: make your own Rates for their Education.
Our Purses and our lives are free to you:
Get what you can, that's your own: will this please you?
Yes gentle Friends, and with as much content
As ere I found in height of Government.
Take your possession then: and let
Posterity record, that without grieving
A Royal Queen once Traded for her living.
Eho, oh, io, where is my learned sister?
Why seem you so distracted?
Proh Sancto Jupiter!
Alas what is the matter?
Hei mihi Qua∣lis erat?
Talis erat qualem nunquam vidi.
Sure, sure, his Scholars have over-Ma∣ster'd him, and whipped him out of his wits.
Corpus inane animae, hold thy peace.
Pray speak, what chance has happened?
Non est nor andi locus: Go forth and see. The
enraged Rurals are in an uproar loud, each one an Hercules furens, a formidabilis formidandus Hostess and quite against the Law
Of nostrum est injuriam non infer,
Are on the point of making themselves merry,
In hanging those ill destined men by the neck
That sought so late to give your neck the check.
O let us fly to rescue them.
Yet I hope
Your hast will bring you short to cut the Rope.
Bring 'em away to present execution:
They have lien too long upon the Countries charge.
We have given 'em bread and water a whole for∣night.
You dare not do it: what Law are we con∣damned by?
Dare we not do it? that word's an hanging matter
Here in our Civil Government: dare not do 't Sir?
VVee'l do it; and when it is done, we'll argue Law with you.
When you have tan our lives, you'll lay the
Law to us: you cannot be so Barbarous.
Impudent Traitors! how dare you say we cannot? yet because we graciously are pleased to put the Law out of our hands, and make you hang your selves, Isle give you Reason: Silence on your lives. First, know, lewd men, y' are Traitors to the King, In offering to be wiser then his Judgement, Which was but Banishment to the good Eulalia:
Seeking most Traitorously to take the life
Of (I do not say the Queen, but) the Kings wife
Of most happy memory.
The good Eulalia?
the Kings wife?
That was:
You shall not catch us tripping Sir,
We are more than your match.
Good I do say she is, and good again
I dare pronounce he 〈◊〉 that by daily pain
Works for her daily bread: and for bare hire,
Teaches our children so, that we admire:
The Infants who have understanding more
Then we their Parents have, or then
Our Fore-fathers before us had.
But brother Lollio, make not your speech so long: what is 't to them? they'll carry none on 't to the other world: let's do what we came to do, even hang 'em. Then, as I said, we'll argle it afterwards.
But brother Poggio, better it is they live
A minute two or three, then such a Speech
As I am now upon, be lost.
See what y' have won by your delay! if she prevent not now
The good we meant her, I dare hang for 'm.
In tempore venimus with a Reprieve, quote omnium Rerum est Primum.
Alas, what mean you neighbours? would you now
For all my labours and my Prayers for you,
Blast me with curses of expiring men?
What trespass have I done you, that for me
You put these men to death against my will?
We do applaud your mercy, gracious Queen.
There now, there they deserve hanging for that:
They call you Queen, against the Proclamation.
Dare you maintain 'em in it, and now speak for 'em?
No, I condemn their faults, and blame their lives;
But have nor Power nor will to judge the men:
You have the will; but to assume the Power,
You take the Kings Right from him: you transgress
As much his Laws in spilling of their blood,
As they had done in mine, had they prevailed.
They do not intend to spill their blood, Country woman, they would but strangle them: never pierce the skin, nor make 'm an hair worse men, if you consider rightly what they are.
But to the point. This is the All and some: We meant you a good turn, and for your sake to have hanged 'em right or wrong. Now since you will needs stand in your own highway of women's wisdom, which is wilfulness
A most Elegant Figure!) Let'em and please you come to the Gallows another day for killing you out right: who can help it?
Oraculously spoken: which of the Sages could said more?
It is not unknown to you, that I can speak like a Sage, and am one of the Sages of our Precinct here for the Laity, though your learning lie another way among us. I am a Sage, and will be a Sage.
And so am I, and will be: and but that wise woman, which is as much to say as a fool for her la∣bore.
Another elegant Figure.
But that, I say, she has gain-said it, we would; yet to show our selves Sages, hang 'em up for Scarcrowes, to fright all their fellows for coming from Court to kill women in the Country.
O how I love a Sage! how many Sages do you allow in your Precinct?
Some three or four main Heads: we have now only Pedro, Poggio and my self:
But we have many Powers under us:
These now are Powers that execute our Commands.
There is as much difference between a Sage and a Power,
As between a Judge and a Hangman.
But is not the learned Curate a Sage amongst ye?
No, as I said before, their learning lies another way: we allow not our Clergy any Tem∣poral Offices, for reasons known unto our selves.
Pray let me have a Sages place amongst ye then: I long to be a Sage.
Brother Andrea, you shall have my voice in your Election.
Sage Brother Lollio, I thank you.
But will ye now, if misericordially
This gracious Foeminine preserve your lives
from the Gallow Tree,
Become new men indeed?
I know they will
When they consider the most dangerous sin,
That threw them on their desperate Attempt,
And their escape from merited Punishment,
They cannot be so graceless, not to turn
To a reformed life: First know, young men,
Your former Act against me an Innocent,
Was Perjury by which I fell, yet flourish.
Consider there how black and fowl your Sin
Is rendered by my Crystal innocence:
Your next Attempt against me, was blacker, Murder,
The very word sounds horrow.
Gentle Madam,
Name it not then: but by your sacred mercy,
Acquit us of the Doom which we so justly
Have drawn upon our selves: and we will spend
Our lives in rendering satisfaction
To your abused goodness.
This is serious.
Or may the earth on which we kneel for favour,
Forced by the weight of our detested Sins, open.
Quick devour us.
So, enough:
Isle take your words.
But now you must reveal
By whom you have been wrought to these fowl Practices.
All, we'll discover all, though justly then we pay our lives to Law.
Good neighbours, Lollio, Poggio, and Andrea, conduct them to my House.
My self also will to be their securer con∣voy go,
For fear the Rustics may presume again
To stretch these penitent necks with halter strain.
You shall do well: I thank your Charity.
Well, since in these we are prevented thus,
Come more, we'll hang 'em, or they shall hang us.
Make me but once a Sage, and then fear nothing.
Thou shalt be one next Sessions, without all peradventure.
When we have tan these men's confessions,
Isle write at large each passage to the King,
Against the good Eulalia's will or knowledge
Isle be your faithful Messenger, my Lord.
Thanks my good Pedro: but remember Silence.
So deep in thought good Madam?
Never enough in contemplation of my Hap∣pines.
It is your Heavenly mind that sweetens all things.
VVhat's the matter man?
Doubtless and without all peradventure, more miracles.
The news, good neighbour.
O neigbours Poggio and Lollio, such a news, such a Discovery, such a thing is come to pass, such a business is come to light, as your hearts never heard, your Tongues never thought, nor your ears ever uttered: you cannot hear it, but it will drown you in a Sea of Admiration, never to rise again in your right wits.
Now am I mad till I hear it.
Thou shalt tell me first whether it be good or bad, or Isle not hear it.
It is good or bad I assure you: and there∣fore you may be gone.
I mean which is it? good or bad?
I say it is good and bad: and you may both stay and be gone, hear it or hear it not, an't' please you.
Nay thou art in thy Jibes now: how good or how bad is thy news?
I pray thee neighbour, I do pray thee how good or bad is it?
Nay then it is neither good nor bad, but both: the best and the worst that ever you heard in your life, and the worst shall out first: what do you think of the woman that we have got among us?
Who, the holy woman? that we are all so bound to pray for? I hope no ell's betide her.
Come, shoe's a witch: flatly and plainly said to be a witch.
Did not I tell you she was an unknown woman, and therefore a good one, quoth you? but say I, doubt∣leslie; and without all peradventure, all that she did was but a kind of witchcraft.
It cannot, fie, it cannot be: how is she found so? Country. I do not say shoe's found a witch, but she's accused for one.
By whom is she accused?
By two brave men at Arms that came from Court
With purpose to have killed her for the same.
To be short, They found her out, and naked swords they drew:
But as they thought to have thrust her through and through,
They both dead Palsie-struck fall to the ground.
And had no strength but of their Tongues to wound
The Fame she had.
Virtue can want no Foes,
With that they cried she was a witch, and swore
She also was that Queen which for a whore
The King had turned away.
This is indeed the best news thou could bring.
Now doubtlessly and without all peradventure, it is the Queen indeed: and if she be not a witch, I am sorry I thought so, with all my heart: where be those men? we'll hang'm presently.
No, the Queen, if she be the Queen, will not have them hurt more then they be: we wet about to execute 'em: but she would not suffer it.
Goodness it self!
Nay without all peradventure, if there be goodness above ground, I said, and I say it again, it is in that woman.
She would have cured 'em presently her self: but could not do it, because the cruel Caitiffs
would not confess their sins, as she made us, you know, before her gift could cure us: by the same token I suffered an hours torment that I might have escaped, because I was so loath to bring out that naughty business betwixt me and the Millers wife.
It was well you confessed at last.
I, and they will be glad to confess, before they be able to stir hand or foot, I warrant: and so I told 'm when I lodged 'em both lovingly together upon straw in my Barn, too good for 'em; and so I told 'em too, for being Traitors to her Holiness.
But whore's our Holy woman?
Our Queen we'll call her now, without all peradventure.
Coming this way to her Court-Cottage here, but very slowly, though our two new neighbours make the best way they can for her through the Peo∣ple that press upon her so with thanks and offerings for their new Healths: but she takes not so much for curing of a thousand mortal People, as I have spent in Turpentine and Tar to keep my Flocklings cleanly in a Spring time. Hark, she comes: this is her Music where ere she goes.
Heaven bless our Holy woman.
Depart good neighbours, good people all de∣part: she'll come abroad again to morrow.
Within Heaven bless our Holy woman.
She thanks you all good People, pray de∣part,
To morrow you shall have the second part:
She shall appear again unto you; pray depart,
The men in Peace, the Wives in quietness,
And let your bigger children still the less.
Heaven bless our Holy woman.
So, now the Hubbub's gone: I pray pass on.
I shall be as weary of the Cottage, as of the Court,
If this noise hold: here's thrusting and crowding
As much as there, only here they have less Pride.
Was ever comfort in the Court like this?
I never lived till now.
Here come more of our weather-headed wise neighbours.
Heaven bless our Holy woman.
Heaven bless your Holiness.
Nay then Heaven bless our Sacred Sovereign.
This Homage fits not me.
We had not lived but by your sacred means;
And will no longer live then be your Subjects.
You go about to cast away your lives:
In serving or in succouring me, you fall
Into Rebellion against the King.
We have no King nor Queen but you.
Heaven bless your Majesty.
Heaven bless your Majesty.
That was pronounced bravely; O my brave new neighbours!
Y' are Traitors All.
In honouring our Sovereign?
I, well said, hold her to it.
How dare you call me so?
We dare, and can prove it good and lawful.
This Province is engaged unto you Madam,
The King made it your Jointure: and we find
No reason but you instantly possess it.
What, and the King alive?
He's dead to you.
Yes, yes, he's dead to you.
Well said again: that's a sound point, be∣sworn
These be true Blades.
I tremble but to hear you,
And will not live an hour amongst you more
But with this freedom, To use my fair obedience to the King.
You shall obey the King then, and we'll obey your Majesty.
O let that Title die with my late Fortune:
Remember it no more, but let me be
As one of you; nay rather, an Inferior,
Or I from this abiding must remove:
Of which I first made choice in truth for love.
O Madam!
Take heed good neighbours,
Beware how you give Dignity or Title; therein you may transgress.
No whit good Madam. Observe the Dialect of France,
And you shall find Madam given there in Curtsy,
To women of low Fortunes, unto whom
It is held a poor addition, though great Queens
Do grace and make it Royal.
It is then the Greatness of
The Person dignifies the Titles, not it the Person.
And in that, Madam, you are in your content
Above all Title's proper to great Princes:
But setting this aside, how thrive your Scholars?
We go fairly on.  look you Sir,
Here's one that knew no letter in the Book
Within these ten days, can read hitherto,
And waits for a new lesson: proceed hither—
And at your hour Isle hear you.
Yes for∣sooth Mistress.
Good Girl, well said: nay, nay, hold up your head: so, so, it is very well: let's see your Sampler:
what an hearts ease is here! Lod. Right in its per∣fact Colours.
Nay she'll do well: now take me out this Flower. Keep your work clean, and you shall be a good Maid.  Now whore's your writing book?
It is here for∣sooth. Pray shall I hay a Joyn-hand Copy next?
No child, you must not Joyn-hand yet: you must your letters and your minums better first. Take heed, you may Joyn-hand too soon, and so mar all: still youth desires to be too forward. Go take your Lute, and let me hear you sing the last I taught you.
Whither do you press? who would you speak withal?
O Sir, for Charity sake give us access unto the holy woman.
Who are you? or from whence?
We are poor Pilgrims man and wife, that are upon our way struck with sad pain and sorrow.
Alas poor Pilgrims! here's she must do you good.
How divine Justice throws my Enemies in∣to my hands? what are your griefs?
My wife is struck with dumbness.
Hold a little,
That's the greatest grief a woman can endure:
But trouble not thy self to seek for cure.
Too many a man in the world will change with thee
A wife that of her Language is too free,
And give good Boot.
Pray Sir be you silent.
And whore's your pain?
Here in this hand;
Which I desire to show in some more privacy.
Because your Blow cannot be safely given here, you think.
O sinful wretch! thou had no pain till now;
Nor was she dumb till divine Providence
Now at this instant struck her. It is now
Just as thou say: and justly are you punished
For treacherous counterfeits. Lodowick search his hand.
His hand is withered, and lets fall a Knife.
As sharp to do a mischief as ere was felt on.
Now take off his false Beard: see if you know him,
And let the woman be unmuffled.
O Devils!
O the last couple that came out of Hell!
These are the other two that damned them∣selves
In perjury against you at your Trial.
How do you master Doctor, and Mistress Midwife?
Is this the Pen your Doctorship prescribes with?
This might soon write that might cure all diseases:
And are these the Labours you go to, Mistress Mid∣night?
Would you bring women to bed this way?
O damnable conspirators!
Pray take 'm hence, their time 's not come for cure yet.
Come away Pilgrims: we'll cure 'em for you,
If your own salves can cure you: O my sweet Pile∣grims.
Faugh, they stink of Treason damnably
What, shall we hang'm? drown 'em? or burn 'em?
They shall taste forty deaths, then take their own.
I, come away with 'em: they shall die forty times without peradventure,
You shall lose me, if you do any violence to any of 'em: but let'm be lodged with those we took to day: Isle feed 'em all.
They'll be a jolly com∣pany.
Pray do as I entreat.
You shall in all command us.
Isle make my Barn a spittle for your conspire∣tors till it be top full, and then set fire on it, and please you.
Do you no harm, and fear none: send your Children.
Long live our Queen.
Your Queen? have you a mind to be hanged?
Queen? have you a mind to be hanged?
our School-Mistress, we would say.
We live secure in spite of Foes: and see,
Where Heaven protects, in vain is Treachery:
Who says out State is low, or that I fell
When I was put from Court? I did not rise
Till then, nor was advanced till now. I see
Heaven plants me 'bove the reach of Treachery.
O happy, happy Saint!
I would she had a Council: she shall have a Council,
And we will be the Heads thereof,
Though I be put to the pains to be President my self.
It is most requisite for her safety: her danger may be great.
A good guard then in my opinion were more requi∣rabble.
It is well considered: she shall have a Guard too: and we will be the limbs thereof, though I be put to the trouble of Captain on it my self.
You will put on all Offices, yet count 'em pain and trouble.
Yes, and perform 'em too here in our Court of Conscience, for here's no other profit to hinder the Duty: let them above do what they list; we will have as much care of our School-Mistress, as they of their Semiramis: I speak no Treason nor no trifles neither, if you mark it. But she must never know this care of ours, She'll urge the Statute of Relief against it.
This is some Courtier sure that's with her; he smells illfavordly.
That made me dog him hither.
He shall not have her out of sight, that's certain.
Nor out of reach neither: a mischief's quickly done.
No Superscription, nor any names unto it. Most Royal and most wronged Sovereign Mistress: (that must needs be me.) Be happily assured your Restoration is at hand; And by no less means then by her Death that usurps your Dignity: (a plain conspiracy against Alinda in my be∣half.) All shall be determined at Nicosia, by
Your Loyal Servants.
Nameless.
You know not the contents then, and are bound by Oath you say not to reveal the senders of this Letter.
It is most true: only thus much I tell you, they are your noble and best chosen Friends.
Heaven! can it be, that men in my respect can plunge into such danger?
So Madam, this being all I had in charge,
I must crave leave (indeed I do not like this
Opportunity, nor well the countenances of these Hobnols.
You are no messenger of such ill Tidings
To part so slightly: indeed you shall not.
She's honied with the news: I have al∣ready
Madam my Reward, and will no longer stay.
Then I must say, you shall stay: or Isle send
A cry as loud as Treason after you.
You'll wrong yourself and Friends then.
You wrong your self Sir, and we charge you stay.
By the command of Peasants?
How! you choplogical Rascal, Peasants!
Down with him into utter darkness.
No-violence good Friends: but if you will detain him
Till I give order for his liberty,
You do the State good service.
May it do you Service?
The State is finely served already.
Me most of all.
Hell cannot hold him faster then.
Madam, hear me.
Mad Ass, hold your prating till she calls you:
Mean time you are fast: it was time we were a Council or a Guard.
I thank thee Providence, I dreamed not of such ready help.
I am struck through with wonder at this Letter:
I could not at the first but think it a Bait
To catch my willingness to such an Act;
Or Gullerie to mock my Hopes or wishes,
In case I had such: therefore I desired
The Messengers restraint from being my Relator:
But now a strong Belief possesses me,
A •oble Fury has stirred up some Friends
To this high enterprise: whereby I gather
My cause is weighed above, whence I shall see
How well my patience over-rules my wrong,
And my Foes ruined with mine Honours safety.
But let my better Judgement weigh those thoughts,
I do not seek revenge, why shall I suffer it?
My causeless injuries have brought me Honour,
And it is her shame to hear of my mis-hap.
And if by Treachery she fall, the world
Will judge me accessory, as I were indeed
In this foreknowledge of the foul intent,
Should I conceal it.
Then here's the trembling doubt which way to take▪
Whether to rise by her Destruction,
Or sink my Friends, discovering their pretence.
Friends have no Privilege to be treacherous:
She is my Sovereigns wife, his chief content;
Of which to rob him, were an act of horror
Committed on himself. The question's then,
Whether it be more foul ingratitude
To unknown Friends, and for an act of Sin,
Then to be treacherous to the Prince I love?
It is resolved: Isle once more see the Court.
O my good Patrons, I must now entreat
Means for my Journey to attend the King,
On a discovery for the present safety
Of his fair Queen: she will be murdered else.
And let her go: we have shut up your news-bringer safe enough, will keep you by your favour, short enough from hindering such a work.
Dear Friends, a small matter will prevent this world of dangers.
Would you have us to become Traitors, to
Supply your wants against the Proclamation?
If you be well, remain so: your Iudustry
Can keep you here: but for a Journey, that
Requires Horses and Attendants: money must he had▪
Which we have not for such an idle purpose.
O hear me.
Will you neglect your House and Trade to meddle any more with State-matters?
And bring our necks in danger to assist you?
Let your own counsel advise you to stay.
How died the Boy?
Gonzago Sir, your Son?
My Son, my Son? you urge the name of Son
To work remorse within me, when I ask
How died that Bastard Boy; no Son of mine.
His last words that he spake to me, were these;
Go, tell the King my Father, that his frown
Hath pierced my heart: tell him, if all his Land
Be peopled with obedient hearts like mine,
He needs no laws to second his displeasure,
To make a general Depopulation:
But that he may not lose so much, I pray
That in my Death his misse-plac'd anger die,
And that his wrath have double force against those
That to his Person and his Laws are Foes.
Did he say so?
And then, as if the Spirit of Prayer
Had only been habitual in his soul,
He did implore Heaven's goodness to come down,
Lifting him hence to shine upon your Crown.
This Boy yet might be mine, though Sforza might have wronged me by the By.
This done, he prayed me leave the Room. I wept: In sooth I could-not choose.
Well, well, you wept, returned, and found him dead in's Bed you say.
Yes, in so sweet a Posture, as no Statuary
With best of skill on most immaculate Marble
Could fashion him an Image purer, slighter.
No more.
I found his stretch'd-out fingers which so lately
Had closed his eyes, still moistened with his tears;
And on his either cheek a tear untried,
Which shone like Stars.
It seems he wept and died.
Prithee no more: I cannot though forget
My threatenings were too sharp: I must forget it.
I charge you that you levy up our Army
Against those Rebels that we hear give succour
Unto the wretched cause of all my mischiefs,
That hated ill-liv'd woman.
O my dread liege?
The matter? speaks; how does the Queen?
O the sweet Queen! I fear, I fear, I fear.
What fear thou? speak the worst I charge thee.
I fear she has a Moonflaw in her brains:
She chides and fights that none can look upon her.
Her Fathers Ghost, in her I think: here she comes.
Whore's this King? this King of Clouts,
Fearful effect of Pride!
This shadow of a King, that stands set up
As in a Press among the Rags and Visors
That represent his deceased Ancestors.
What means my love?
Your love? where is your love?
Where is the preparation that you promised
Of strength to tear in pieces that vile Witch
That lives my souls vexation? your love?
You are a load of torment: your delays
To my desires are Hellish cruelties.
Are these your Promises?
I have given order with all speed I could.
You could cut off an old man in a Prison,
That could make no resistance, and you could
Vex a poor Boy to death, that could but cry
In his defence; that you could do; but this
That has so much show of fear or hardness,
As a few Peasants to maintain a Strumpet
Against your Dignity, is too much to do
For a poor coward King.
What a tyrannous Ambition
Has the Devil puffed up this Bladder with!
I fear her wits are crazed indeed. Alinda,
Hear me gentle love.
O my torment!
As I am true to the Crown, I know not what to say to this: she's falling mad sure.
No, no, you dare not do it: your Army may
Perhaps in the dangerous Action break a shin,
Or get a bloody nose: it now appears
My Father (as it was voiced) was all your valour.
Y' have never a Mars or Cuckold-making General
Now left: and for your self, you're past it.
His' tother wife would not have used him thus.
Quiet Cuckoldrie is better then scolding chastity all the world over.
I see distraction in her face.
Did all your brave Commanders die in Sforza?
By the Kings favour Madam (not to stir
The dust of your dead Father) he has Soldiers
That know to lead and execute no less
Then did victorious Sforza.
Sirrah! you have stirred more then his dust; you have moved his blood in me, unto a Justice that claims, they traitorous head.
My head? and Traitorous? I do appeal un∣to the King.
A King? a Cobweb.
And she the Spider in it I fear.
My Loyalty knows not how to look upon her.
If thou be King, thou yet art but that King
That owes me love and life, and so my subject.
Indeed Alinda;—
Yes indeed Gon∣zago,
Life by inheritance: for my valiant Father
Whose life thou took, gave thine, and so it is mine.
And for your love, you dare not wrest it from me;
Therefore deny not now my just demand,
In that proud Traitors head.
She's mad be∣yond all cure.
Examine his offence, my dear Alinda.
Is it not enough Alinda doth command it?
Are these the Articles you gave me grant of?
Is this the nothing that you would deny me?
Sweet, weigh but his offence.
His Head is my offence: and give me that
Now, without pause, or by the strength of Hercules
Isle take thee by the Horns, and writhe thine own off.
Go from her sight Petruccio; levy up our Forces,
And let the Boy Gonzago be disembowelled,
And sent as a forerunner of our Fury
Unto that Witch, contriver of these woes.
It is done, my liege.
Was ever woman barred her will, as I am?
Here's a fine woman spoiled now, by humo∣ring her at first, and cherishing her Pride.
Sure you have but mocked me all this while:
I am no wife, no Queen, but silly Subject.
It is a disease in her that must be soothed:
Sweet, thou shalt have his Head.
O, shall I so?
Go in, it shall be brought thee.
Mark what I say to bind you to your word:
Do it, or Isle not love you: I can change
Love into hate, hate into love most sweetly:
Let that man live to morrow, Isle love him,
And do fine feats with him, such as your tother wife
And Sforza did; but make much better sport on it.
They were an old dry couple.
Take this, take all.
I leave all to your Kingly consideration:
You know your charge: look to it, and so I leave you.
What wild Affections do in women reign!
But this a Passion past all President.
O it is mere Madness, mixed with Devilish cunning,
To hurl me upon more and endless mischiefs:
It has awaked me to the sight of those
My fury (sprung from Dotage) hath already
Laid in my Path, grim Spectacles of horror,
The blood of Sforza, and that tender Boy:
O let me think no further, yet stay there:
To plunge at first into too deep a Sense
Of soul-afflicting terrors, drowns the Reason,
And stupefies the Conscience, which delivers
Us over to an insensibility
Of our misdeeds, and of our selves: just Heaven!
Afford me light to see I am misled:
But let it not as lightning blast mine eyes,
Confound my Senses, make me further stray,
For ever coming back to know my way.
How fares your Majesty?
O Horatio! shoe's lost, shoe's lost, Horatio.
I would my wife were with her then:
And so would any good Subject say; I think.
What dost thou think?
Marry I think (and so would any good Sub∣jest think, I think) as your Majesty thinks.
What dost thou think of Loyalty now?
Truly I think there's now not any warrant∣able Loyalty left but in Petruccio and my self.
The Queen is now out of my Catalogue, and my Creed too.
What terrible, what hideous noise is this?
Kill him for Sforza, Sforza; kill him, kill him.
My Loyalty defend me! I know not what to make on it.
What art thou? speak: had thou the voice of Hell,
Denouncing all the Furies in it, I dare yet hear thee; speak.
O mighty Sir, Petruccio.
What of Petruccio?
O Petruccio! I tremble but to speak him.
Shall I then with the Prophetic Spirit of a King
Speaks of Petruccio? he is turned Traitor,
And animates the Soldiers against me,
Upon the discontent Alinda gave him
Now in her Fury: is it not so?
It is so, it is so: ne'er ask him for the matter:
I thought so, just, just as your Majesty thought it;
And find withal, that now you have not left
A Loyal heart but in Horatio's bosom,
Now that Petruccio fails: I feared it would come
To that: nay know it: O hang him, hang him,
False hearted villain! he was never right,
And so I always told your Majesty.
The cry comes nearer still: what does he mean,
To bring my Army on to Massacre
Me in my House?
Dread Sir, vouchsafe atten∣tion:
Petruccio is Loyal: it is his Loyalty,
And most sincere obedience to your will,
That brings him to the ruin of his life,
Unless your awful Presence make prevention.
Is then his Loyalty become his danger?
As thus great Sir, in the late Execution
Of Death-doom'd Sforza, which the Soldier
(Not looking on your Justice, but the Feud
That was betwixt Petruccio and him)
Resents as if it were Petruccio's Act,
Not yours, that cut him off: and still, as madly
Bewitched with Sforza's love, as ignorant
Of the desert of brave Petruccio,
They all turn head upon him: and as if
It were in his power to new create him to them,
They cry to him for Sforza, Sforza; or if not,
Petruccio's life must answer Sforza's blood.
Left you him in that distress?
He did prevail
With much entreaty, by some private reasons,
Upon their fury for an hours respite:
In which dear time it is only you may save
Guiltless Petruccio from a timeless Grave.
Thou art a Soldier, art not?
And have commanded in your Highness Wars.
Me thinks I should remember, but Isle trust thee.
I hope you'll be advised, though, how you run
Into this wild-fire of Rebellion.
My Fortune is more desperate then his:
I am beset and circled in with mischiefs.
Way-laid with heaps of dangers every where:
Yet I will on: Kings were not made to fear.
Isle fetch him off, and the more readily,
For my misprision of his Loyalty.
Could I think that man false?
No Sir, nor I:
By all means fetch him off: that Loyal General
Is tenfold worth the whole Rebellious Army:
Save him, and hang them all.
Have you no Faith, nor due obedience
Unto the King? this outrage is against him,
In me he suffers.
We obey the King,
And it is his Justice that we cut your throat,
For doing such outrage in the death of our brave General,
That had you lives more then false drops of blood,
They were not all sufficient satisfaction for his loss.
Your limited hour draws on apace: Prepare.
He's come within that hour, that shall relieve me.
Where is he? is he come?
You are betrayed:
He's fled and gone: no such man to be found.
Then Faith is fled from man: is Sforza fled?
Why should I wish to live, now Honour's dead?
Now take your bloody course, and in my fall,
Martyr the man that saved your General.
Saved him? how saved?
Sforza lives.
How's that? how's that? that, that again.
As I now live, I set him free from Prison,
Trusting unto his Honour to secure me,
In which I did abuse the Kings Authority
To the forfeit of my life.
This sounds: this sounds.
But does this sound well from a Soldiers mouth?
He is not now worthy of death, before He be well whipped for lying.
The King, the King, the King!
He could never come in a better time, to see how bravely we will do justice for him.
How comes this Fury raised amongst ye Soldiers?
Have you forgot my Laws and Person too?
We honour both thus low: now gives us leave
To look like men, and give your Highness welcome
To see a General of your Election
Die with a lie in's mouth: your Soldier here,
None of the good Queens old ones.
Dare you both judge and execute this man?
We dare to kill the Hangman of our General,
And think it fits our Office best: though you
Have Law enough to wave our care and pain,
And hang him up your self: for he affirms
That he let Sforza live against your command;
And that's the lie we treat of.
Isle give you all your Pardons, and him Honour,
To make that true. Sfor. Your Kingly word is taken.
Noble Petruccio, thou art disengaged:
And if the temper of the Kings high Anger
Blow still above his Justice, let it crush
This cloud that holds a shower of innocent blood,
Willing to fall and calm his violent fury.
Our General lives: a Sforza, Sforza.
Sforza!
You have outdone me in Nobility.
I am all wonder: now this man appears
The Mansion and habitual Seat of Honour;
Of which he seems so full, there cannot be
An Angle in his breast to lodge so base
An Inmate as disloyalty: if so,
How was Eulalia false? or how Gonzago,
That tender Boy, the fruit of lawless lust?
There I am lost again: Great Power, that know
The subtlety of hearts, show me some light
Through these Cimmerian mists of doubts and fears,
In which I am perplexed even to distraction:
Show me, show me yet the face of glorious Truth; where I may read
If I have erred, which way I was misled.
Enters. O my dread Lord!
Thy news?
O my sweet Sovereign!
Art thou distracted too?
No Sir: The Queen, the Queen, the Queen's distracted,
And I am like to be, and you, and any man
That loves the King, unless some Conjurer
Be found to lay the Devil: I mean Sforza.
Sforza Sir (would you think?) that monstrous Traitor
Sforza walks in the Court without a Head;
Appeared unto the Queen: I found her talking with him,
Kneeling and praying him to give her Pardon;
Told him indeed it was she that sought his Head,
And that she thought, that being now a Queen,
She might by her Prerogative take Heads,
Whose and as many as she listed: but
She promised she would send it him again,
Or else Petruccio's first: or if he would forgive her
This time, shee'ld do so no more.
He seemed he would not hear her: then she beat
Her self against the walls and floor, and flies
To free her self by the windows: calls for Poison,
Knife, Rope, or any thing, whereby to follow
Her most abused Father. What to make on it,
As I am true to the Crown, I must refer
Only unto your Majesty.
O it is fearful!
My Lord, you saw not the Apparition, did you?
Not I: I saw him not: nor has the Devil
Power in a Traitors shadow to appear
Unto a Loyal Subject. Ho! my Loyalty
And Truth unto the Crown defend me!
See the very foresaid Devil at my Elbow,
Head and all now: avoid, attempt me not Satan,
I do conjure thee by all the virtues of a Loyal Courtier.
They are all too weak to charm a Devil Sir;
But me they may, your Friend.
I defy thee Bubsebel.
What do you see, my Lord?
Look there, the Apparition, there it is;
As like the Traitor Sforza when he lived,
As Devil can be like a Devil—oh!
Fear not: he lives, and Loyal to the King.
Does the King say so?
Give me your hand my Lord,
The king will say so, if this be flesh and blood.
I, if thou be flesh and blood: but how to believe that I know not, when my touch makes me sweat out a whole shower of pure Loyalty.
No more, Horatio: I find that my credulity
Has been wrought on unto my much abuse,
And Sforza now appears an honest man.
Who ever thought otherwise? or how
Could he in nature appear less then Loyal?
O my right noble Lord, I weep thy welcome.
Back Soldiers, to your duty: learn of me
Hereafter how to judge with equity.
Long live the King.
Now in the midst of my soul-frighting obe∣jests,
I cannot but applaud your mutual Friendship.
Yes, and how equally I affect them both.
O that mischance propitiously might be
A light to reconcile my thoughts and me.
May you be pleased Sir then to let the cause
In which your injured Queen, your Son and I,
And truth it self have suffered, be reviewed?
The mischievous creature that was drunk, now's mad
With brain-confounding strong Ambition:
She whom your ill-plac'd love Graced as a wife,
Whom now I am not fond of to call Daughter,
It seems is past Examination.
Mad, mad, most irrecoverably mad.
But let those Hell-bred witnesses be called,
And re-examined.
They are not to be found.
No? where is Flavello?
Not seen in Court these ten days.
Let me out-squeeze that Court-Sponge.
If I do not fetch out the poisonous corruption
Of all this Practice, let me yet be guilty.
From whence art thou?
Your Pro∣vince of Palermo
Thus low submits in duty to your Highness,
The Service and the lives of whose Inhabitants
So truly are subjected to your Power,
That needless is the Preparation
Which with much grief we hear you make against us,
By hostile Force to root up a Rebellion
Bred merely out of Rumour.
Peace, no more:
I find the Province Loyal.
Who made doubt on it?
Isle undertake to find more Toads in Ireland,
Then Rebels in Palermo, were the Queen
(Queen did I call her?) that disloyal woman
And that sly Traitor Lodovico out on it.
See Sforza, see Petruccio, what Lodovico
That trusty and true-hearted Lord has wrote me:
He has ended all my doubts, good man.
Ah, ah! does not your grace come to me now?
I thought I would put your Highness to it for once,
To try what you would say: when Lodovico
Does not prove trusty, then let me be trussed.
It is a most happy Information.
I, do you note the Passages?
It is indeed worthy a Kings regard: you see your way.
Yes, yes, I know now what to do,
And mean to put it presently in Act.
This I foresaw would prove an hour of com∣fort.
The Stars themselves ne'er saw events more plainly.
How full of April-changes is our life?
Now a fit shower of sad distilling Rain,
And by and by the Sun breaks forth again.
FEar not good Madam, trust my care and Reason.
Good Lodovico, though I thank your care
And love to me, yet give me leave to doubt,
That as that cruel and Ambitious woman
Hath overswayed the Judgement of the King,
She may pervert his Royal purposes
Of Peace and love, to your and my destruction.
Before you sent, would you had tan my Counsel.
To end all doubts, see Pedro is returned.
And happily: see Madam.
My Gonzago;
My Prince, I should have said.
Thrice-gracious Mother,
I thank Petruccio, who preserved my life,
For nothing more, then this one minutes Bliss,
In which I find your Blessing in a kiss.
Weep not, fair Sir.
The Lord Petruccio Madam
Presents you these.
Welcome my sweet young Prince.
I thank you Lodovico.
Now I see methinks a Court again.
We shall do shortly; for the King is coming,
And not in terror, but with Grace and Favour.
It is happy Heavenly news.
See here's an Inundation
Of Joys that do like waves overcome each other.
Brave, wise, and valiant Petruccio!
That could so happily deceive the King
By a supposed death, to save the Life
Of my sweet Boy: all that I can be sorry for,
Is this: Alinda is Frantic.
Can that grieve you?
He brings her with him: and I hope the change
Of Air, with wholesome Prayers and Physics Art,
In which I am not ignorant, may restore her.
Madam, the Sun shines fairly.
News, news upon news!
The Queen is killed: is not that it?
No nor the King neither, God bless him: they are both alive, with all their Pomp and Train coming to see our School-Mistress.
Auspicious Prove∣dence!
They take us in their way, for they are pas∣sing to Nicosia, where the King means to keep his word with the Queen, in giving her three what do ye calls?
Three Boons, as the custom is.
Boons? I Boons: I warrant she'll ask no Baubles.
O Mistress, you were careful for her, that comes
I warrant but to jeer you.
Patience would die, if it were not exercised.
But now it rests, that we prepare to entertain our Guests.
We must to welcome them make Holy day,
And give our Scholars leave to Feast and Play.
The Swains you say are perfect in the Dance;
So are my Maids: we'll leave it for the King.
I cannot but applaud your mind, Alinda,
But am not much affected with the Subject
On which you purpose now to cast your Favour.
More scorn upon my life, and rude vexation.
If my fair meaning Sir shall prove mistaken,
It is but a loving purpose lost.
(O that wretch Flavello!)
If she have further purpose then to raise
More sorrow by the Kings displeasure to her.
Let her alone, her Reign's but short we know.
Is this the sound of want and misery?
Of wantonness I fear, and Luxury.
(The villain had no purpose but to flatter.)
O Sir, why came we hither?
Mark the Came∣lion.
It is most sweet Music.
Such as the rudeness of the Country yields Sir,
Hail to the King and Queen, and may the thanks
Which on my knees I offer at those Feet
That beautify and bless this humble Earth
Add many years unto your happy lives.
We have even seen enough: it was all I feared,
To find her knee-deep in Hypocrisy.
Seem not to turn away, most gracious Madam,
Before I show for which I hoped you came,
The manner how I get a competence to live.
Your work you say, though't be of the newest Frame,
I fear your Play is still at the old Game.
Both ways bring money: is it not so forsooth?
Enough, Alinda.
Too much, to tread upon Affliction.
What say you Lodovico?
I say Sir, the distresses of that Lady merit a
Kings Pity, and not such scorn
As I see cast upon her: but the best are women.
No more.
May it please your Highness sit, and note the Play
By which we gain when we lay work away.
The Song I taught you last.
These wenches will be a good help to you at wassel-tide.
We have variety for all the Seasons,
Of such poor entertainments, mighty Queen,
To show our much contentment in their welcome.
Goodness speaks in her.
There's for your Song () No, stay, I may transgress
The Law.
O Devil!
Let her jeer on.)
Not if you give it for her pains, Alinda.
Nay since you warrant it, let's pay and go.
Though I have heard such pains disputed Begging.
As all Arts are, by the Rewards they find.
Nay I beseech your Majesties.
What's the Feat now?
Sir, are you pleased to prosecute your jour∣ney?
Or do these Beauties and delights enchant you?
Ha? no, come, let's away.
Oh let me yet entreat your Highness stay.
Not a stroke more I thank you: we have heard
And seen enough: so much, as I must tell you
I cannot but commend your Parents Wisdom,
Who having Calculated your Nativity,
By which they had the foresight of your fall,
Prevented thus the Planets by their care,
By teaching you to live by Hand and Foot.
Did ever Daughter of a King thus suffer?
Or has she Pride to smile on Injuries?
Sir, you forget Nicosia.
Plots against me?
How's that?
She dreams of Treason intended against me.
No Divination against her own good, I hope.
Mighty Sir, hear me: not to implore your Bounty;
No not your thanks, nor Popular Applause;
But for I am your Subject and your servant,
Bound by your Allegiance as well to prevent
All Ills might pass against you, as to do none.
I could not think it but strict duty in me
To hasten this discovery.
Treason, and a Letter?
We have never a false Brother amongst us, have we?
If ever you held your peace, peace now.
It bears a face of Horror.
Cunning and Gypsy Tricks: will you to Nicosia?
What we meant there, we may do here as well.
The Treason's there intended: look ye my Lords!
How careless is this woman of her safety.
You Sir are careless: for if there be danger,
Where can I fear it but in this place only?
The world holds not an Enemy of mine,
But this enchantress you maintain against me.
Your motion and your own love drew us hither.
I would fain love her, and certainly I should,
But that she still begets fresh cause of Hatred.
She has some Devilish Plot in hand this Instant:
This show is but the straw that hides the Pit.
No enemy but she? to let her know she lies,
Even unto Profanation against that Lady,
Isle speak.
I hope you will not.
The King shall see his error.
Will you?
She her cruelty.
Will you, will you?
The world Eulalia's Piety.
Will you? will you?
What says Lodovico?
Most mighty Sir, we here confess and say.
We? you hear not me say any thing; do you?
What will you say?
That Letter was not ours.
That's well.
We easily believe it.
Nor any day or place as yet set down
Among our selves, for fact against the Queen.
I mean Alinda.
Nor fact intended was there, of death or danger?
It was wished at least by us.
Lord, Lord,
Lord mumb.
Our Guard.
King she's the General grudge of all thy Kingdom.
You do not hear me say so.
Their grudge incites my love: take i'm away.
Come my wronged Alinda: This place shall serve,
And this Assembly, to make a Kings word good.
Make your Demands: three things I promise you.
Ask what you will, even to my dearest blood.
Your Highness will excuse me, if I urge you
To bind it with an Oath?
Give me a Book.
What I have promised to my lawful Queen,
I will perform; ask freely.
Great Queen, vouchsafe to take an Admoni∣tion,
My last and truest Testimony of Love.
The rest were shadows to it.
Well, pray let's hear it.
Let your Demands be for the common good.
Not for your own respects: selflove may hurt you:
Beware Ambition, Envy, and Revenge.
The Oracle could not pronounce more wisely.
Is this your love? it is fear of my just Ven∣geance.
Therefore hear my demands, my King and Husband.
First I demand the lives of these conspirators
Lodovico and Horatio.
Bloody.
Next that your Son, m•ch of the Mothers Nature,
By Act of Parliament be disinherited.
O fearful.
Last, that this woman have her eyes put out,
And be for ever banished your Dominions.
Cruelty and Ingratitude past all Example
Was this your Charity? you have now de∣clar'd it fully:
And I of both have made sufficient Trial.
Come here Eulalia, take now thy wonted Seat and keep it ever.
Thy poverty and patience have restored thee
By the just Providentce: while her Excess and Pride
Casts her before thee, to receive that Doom
She had devised against thy immortal Goodness.
Into perpetual Exile; hence, away with her.
Remember your Oath, my Lord.
My Oath was to perform what I had pro∣missed unto my lawful Queen: that's my Eulalia.
And let good Lodowick and Horatio be restored.
Oh! proh! proh Knife as!
Isle have no hand in blood of any man.
More exclaimations? what distracts you now?
Coram Senatures act est: sub Judice lis est.
Ocurvae in Terris animae: the Rustics
Have tan again the Law into their hands.
And will you tender clemency non justante
A Courtiet hang, his sweet Face nec invent.
What is his Name?
His Name is hight Alphonso
That Treason brought in Pectore &amp; Skonso
Who are the heads of the Judicious Faction?
Andrea, Lollio, Poggio, the Drudges
Have got the Peoples voice to their Judges.
Dare they do this?
Yes Judges they will be,
And kill, they say, the Snake of Treachery.
I hope we may come yet to stay their Sen∣tence.
Pray bring us to the place: where if we can,
Let us avert their Judgement from this man.
And can these turmoils never have an end?
Unless we load our heads and shoulders thus
Our bodies eke with Justice Capa Pe.
And Pepper all our brains with Policy.
It was time to have a care: I, and a piteous care.
A pious care you mean.
Well pious then:
You'll show your own wit, whose clothes soever you wear
(So do the wits of the time) but as I said,
It is time we have a care, for though our Queen,
Our School Mistress I would say, be mercifully, idleful
It is fit that we be prejudicious in the State.
Ju-dicions Brother.
Jew in your face.
Trip me again?
Agree upon it, Brother Sages of the Bench.
My Brother Poggio here said very well
And learnedly and as I would have said my self?
(If you will take his meaning) to wit that as
Our Shool Mistress dotes upon
Clemency, it is fit that we run mad upon cruelty
Someeting her in the midst, we shall jump into the Saddle of Justice.
I do say so, without all peradventure
For if the Candle of her mercy be not put out,
We shall shortly, see more honest men then Knaves among us.
More Knaves you mean Brother.
I mean no more Knaves then your self, Bro∣there.
Agree again, Sage brothers of the Bench: and let no private
Itch grow to a put like Scab.
Then the point:
Do not I understand the purpose of our meeting
Here in our petty Parliament, if I may so call it?
Is it nor for a Reformation, to pull down
The Queens mercy, and set up our Justice?
For the prevention of a superabundance of Treason
Daily practised against her?
Most true. And is it fit therefore that you brabble among your selves, and leave all worse then you found it?
No, we will make such a Reformation, that Treason shall not dare to peep over the Hedge of her Dominion, but we will take it by the nose and punish it indignely: most indignely will we punish it?
All this I grant: but before we sit and bustle on the Bench, because it is, and that without all per∣adventure, the strst time that ever we played so wise a part, is it not fit to take advice among our selves, how to deform our selves in our office.
De did you say? in in you should say.
In with your Horns: how now?
Nay Brothers of the Bench.
Does he think to control me? because he has been a Sexton, and a little more book learned then a Lay man with an Amen forsooth?
Nay Bro∣theirs: this will control the business.
Or because he has been in many a mans grave before him, does he think no man so deep in grave matters as himself?
Well, I forbear.
Shall he bid me In, In? as if I were not his inserior?
I forbear still.
I will show my self his inferior I, and a greater man then he; and to prove my self a great man, let him hang one, I will save two.
Still orbear.
Pray Brothers yet agree: and remember we use no mercy
Let him that uses any mercy lack mercy, for my part.
Then let us sit, and fall to the Business.
Sit and fall: was that so wisely spoken of a book-learned man now?
Still I forbear Passion becomes not Judges,
Now bring in the offender, the new and last offender.
Pray think on your speeches.
I have made speeches that I hope shall make Traitors.
How?
Ashamed to wear their own heads on their shoulders.
A Traitors head is not his own head: it is forfeired by Law to
the King; it is the Kings head.
I say a Traitors head is his own Head: and a good Subjects head is the Kings Head.
I say that's Treason: and the head thou wear is not thine own then, if thou be a good Subject.
Wilt thou tell me that?
Passion becomes not Judges, Brothers of the the Bench.
The offender comes,
Now they are hot, he shall be sure to smoke for it.
Whither do you hale me? you Pease-por∣ridge Peasants:
Is this a place for me to come to Trial in?
If I had broke the Law, as I have not
I am a Peer, and do appeal unto
The Kings high Seat of Justice, publicly.
And will not our low stool of Justice, privily
Serve for a Traitor? ha.
Your selves are Traitors,
In succouring against the Law, a dissolute woman
Whom I command you, in the Kings high name,
To yield into my hands.
You shall be hanged first.
By whose Authority?
By the said wo∣mans Sir.
She is our Queen and her Authority is in our hands.
That speaks you Traitors: and the King has Law against you and her.
When you are hanged he has: to the next able
Tree with him, and hang him presently.
Villains: you dare not so say.
We do all say Hang him with one accord:
If on cord will not do it another shall:
So come away Sir.
Stay: hear a speech first.
You dare not use me thus: dare you take Justice one ye?
Yes Sir, we can spy
Great faults in Noble Coats, with half an eye.
What though we nod? does Treason therefore think
Justice is adle brained? or though she wink
In us (as thus) that she's a sleep? or say
She take a nap, d' ye think she'll sleep for ay?
No, she but dreams a while, to circumvent,
Your veins hopes, with sharper punishment.
For if she be but jogged, no Mastiff takes
Swifter or surer vengeance when she wakes.
I, hang him, hang him.
Is he not hanged yet?
Without all peradventure the Hangman means to hang for him.
Come Sir along, never hang backward, for up you must.
Stay him, my speeches will be lost else.
Your long speeches will loose our purpose again, without all peradventure.
Must I be mocked out of my life? and have
My death by hanging made a sport to Peasants,
In this blind hole of the Kingdom?
Why thou choplogicall Fellow, dost thou not think, there are as good men hanged, and as good sport made of it too, in the bli•• holes of the Kingdom, as in the very eye or open mouth of it? ha!
Away with him without peradventure
I am a Courtier, and servant to the King.
Come all the Court in all your costly Braveries.
And Treason in your Breech, we'll hang you for your Knaveries,
On tree in Hempen twine nay if you come
In open Arms, up shall you all and some.
For though for Tournament your Fems do fly
Run all at Tilt on us, we'll draw you dry.
Tell us you are a Courtier? we find here
F•u••s to correct, which you perceive not there.
So, now away with him, I have spoke my best.
And without all peradventure well said Judge Andrea:
How long must we say away with him? ha!
You hobnailed Rascals: can you think that you
Are fit to spy or corrects faults at Court?
Stay, a short speech for that, and turn him off.
Your shoes at Court are all too fine and thin:
To tread out snuffs and sparks of kindling Sin,
Which let alone the Rushes may take fire.
Then flame, then burn up higher still, and higher:
You warm you at such fire, it is we walk throughout
The hobnailed Common wealth must tread it out.
So, now away with him. Hang him first, d' ye hear
He has the bast clothes, that will encourage
The Hangman the better to turn the rest after him.
Whither away with him?
So, now you see what's become of your fine s••eches.
Will ye, against all my Counsels and requests
Persist to pull destruction by taking others lives upon your own?
And seem to carry it as in care for me?
No, it is in care of our selves, because we know
Not to breed our Children honestly without you.
Have I not often councilled and entreated
You would forbear?
Your councels and entreats
We are bound to disobey by Proclamation:
For we must grant you nothing.
Well found out.
And therefore if you say, Hang not this man We are bound to hang him; we will show our selves the Kings Subjects not yours.
If you can answer't to the King, it is well;
His Majesty is here at hand.
Go leave him unto me.
The King at hand? it is time for us to look about us.
Must not we be hanged now?
It will be so, without all peradventure.
Release your Prisoner, set him free, and go send the rest of the confederats.
I was not bound till now
I have no power to move or stir a limb:
O sacred Queen, use mercy, in ad•udging me,
To present death, to quit me of the torment.
That rages all upon me, all within me.
The sight of you has shot more pains into me
Then I have drops of blood: O let me die.
I cannot give thee death: nor will my prayers
Be prevalent for thy cure poor sinful man!
Till rho layst op the cause of thy disease;
(Thy heinous sin) by fair and free confession.
I hope no cure, and therefore ask no life.
But the Kings Justice to afford me death,
That is no less deserved then desired;
For I confess, This my Device was but
To make my way to you, to have murdered you.
Wrought thereunto by Alinda's Instigation.
More I confess; The Evidence against you,
Whereby you were despos'd, was false.
And all these witnesses which now do bring
Addition to my to my torment, did I hire
Both for their perjury past, and for their late
Attempt upon your life, with the Queens money.
Do you confess it?
Heaven Pardon our misdeed: it is most true.
Heaven grant you all your cures.
All blessings on the Queen.
All was confessed before by Fabio and Strozzo.
And you do well to seem so penitent:
I do forgive you: and will plead your pardon unto the King.
Your sacred mercy Madam, shall save a life then, to be spent in Praises and Prayers for your Grace.
Go, and pray for grace to mend your lives.
So, let's now to the King.
Now look you about you: cast your Coats, and instantly
Hast to the Curate, hoe's preparing sports,
In speech and Dance, to entertain the King:
Go and assist him: that must be the way
To gain your Pardons.
Come then, let's away,
No longer Brothers of the Bench we'll be,
But of the Revels for his Majesty.
These troubles over: let us, now
Surveigh this part of my Possession.
I never saw before. I could contemplate
This late neglected piece of my Estate,
To be the happiest: sure it is no less,
To those that think on earth there's happiness,
The Air disperses pleasure and the Earth
Of fresh delight to every step gives birth.
Here plenty grows, and above it content,
Ore spreads the Face of all the Continent.
Eulalia, thou art happy, and did rise,
Not fall from Court into this Paradise.
Thy can it move my admiration much,
Thy virtue wrought the change, and made it such.
My Lord, the King is sad, what shall we do?
I am as sad as he, and should be dead,
If he were dead: and therefore no fit member
To make Him merry, I: try your vein with him,
Tell him your Daughters dying; that may cheer him.
Are you so tart Court Blain-worm?
Yet can I smile in midst of grief to think
How the Court malice hath been wav'd and punished,
By Rustical simplicity.
The Sun
Appears again in the Kings smiles: observe.
I thank your Majesty, that sweet smile re∣vexed me,
Who smiled?
not I, I'm sure did you: or you?
There could be no such thing: who dares be mer∣rye, when the King's sad?
Yes, here are some now coming, I hear 'm, that are merry in hope to make the King so.
O my Enlalia!
Still the most humble Handmaid
To your high Majesty.
Thy words are sweet:
Yet to my guilty sense they are not less
Then thunder bolts; framed of the wrongs I shot
Against the Heavenly Region of thy mind.
And it is but Justice that the repercussion
Do strike me dead.
No Passion mighty Sir,
O my sweet Queen! but I am thunder struck
Old Lad, art there? still sick of the Kings disease.
If I may presume of any favour, vouchsafe a glance on these.
Beseech your Highness.
Thus have you seen great King in best array,
Nostri Discipuli have made Holy-day,
Whilst I their Paedagogue or petty King
Present in hand this little Royal Thing,
Yclep'd their Queen or Mistress: certe fellow
For that's the Royal School Mists as we call her.
And this her under Usner: vey'ld is she,
Dreading the Power of shinning Majesty.
Might dazzle her Dancing: for nuns est saltandum,
And here are Lads and Lasses that at Random
Have left their works, as we the School &amp; Templum,
To follow us; it is Regis ad Exemplum.
The youth's are muffled for their better graces,
Though you may like their feet, youl'd blame their Faces
But Isle not trouble you with long Oration,
Because I had but short precogitation.
His Highness thanks you: and hath here dis∣posed
An hundred Duccats in this Purse enclosed;
Drink it amongst ye to the Kings well faring,
And see there be no falling out in the sharing
So make your Exit.
Non simus ingrate
Rex &amp; Regina semper sint Beati.
Stay you a while.
You know my Story, Sir, and who have been
My strong abusers, and by me conversed,
Therefore let me Petition: Royal King
You have by these discovered the abuse
That led you into error: and that light,
Which makes discovery of their black misdeeds,
Will show you to a Throne of greater merey
Then you can give.
I must confess I need it,
Be it as thou wilt Eulalia.
Go then, and thank the King.
Long live the King and Queen.
Here's goodness now.
I would the De∣vile
had, 'm that thought ill of her.
And good King Pardon me, and my pure brother Judges, and Sages of the Dorpe here, that would have hanged those Manufactors.
It is quickly grouted.
And Isle as quickly make them run mad with Joy.
My next suit is, (for now I'm set a begging,
You'll Pardon your Alinda.
She is not mine;
Should she recover, as Heavens will be done.
Recover? fear not, Sir, this Traunse hast drowned
Her Frenzy, and she'll live a sober life.
I shall forgive her,
But she must no more, in her recovery:
Be consort or acquaintance unto me:
But whore's Posterity now? O my Boy!
Sir you have had but homely entertainment
Yet in my humble dwelling: now Isle show you
(Since you appear so tender and so good
A Father) the sweet comfort of a Son;
Pray fetch the Prince.
You cannot raise from death.
Can you forgive Pttrucio that deceived you
In his feigned death, to save a real life:
Forgive? he won me in preserving Sforza,
Let me but see my Son, Isle honour him.
See the most Princely virtue that survives.
lives my Gonzago?
If you my Royal Father be not displeased
With me, or my good mother, I shall live.
And long live my sweet Prince.
Let not my joy confound me! whore's Petruccid?
Sforza and he are bringing the entranced Alinda
(Your fair Queen to your presence.)
She is no Queen of mine.
No, hang her, hang her. This, this is the Queen.
A very Queen of harts: a better Title
Crowns not the best of women in our days.
Good Lodovico, may the merited Fame of thy fidelity,
While there are Kings on Earth, Show them to gre∣tifie
All trusty servants: love him Gonzago.
Love him? my Loyalty preserved,
I shall not desire the Princes love my self
If he not gived to faithful Lodovico,
My true yoke fellow in State and Commonwealth.
But here's the man Gonzago, whom thou owe,
A love of equal value to thy life.
I cannot Sir, in duty nevertheless
But fall before your mercy, which I pray for,
That durst assume the hardness to control:
Your Majesty Command.
There is a Loyalty after my own heart now.
Here a new Song, Ealalia unveils Alinda.
Blessed Heaven! she lives and wakes I hope in health.
If she awake to virtue, she is welcome,
Into the the world again: but if she rise
With an Ambitious Throught of what she was
Or meet the light with a presumptuous look:
That renders her in thought but worthy of it:
By this blessed presence I will yet take leave.
To sink her under earth immediately.
Patience good Sforza, see what she will do.
Where have I been? or how am I brought hither?
Or where I am I know not: but that shall not.
Be unto me a wonder: for I know
Were it reveil'd, it could not be so strange:
A stotie as my self was to the world.
How have I wandered in the way of Error!
Till I was worn into an Airy vapour.
Then wrapped into a cloud: and thence distilled,
Into the earth to find a new creation.
It is found: and I am found in better state,
Then I was in, before I lost my Duty.
For in this second Birth: I find a knowledge
How to preserve it: Therefore if an Heart
Dissolved in its Tears may move your Pity
My noble Father, (if I may say Father,)
Whose blessing and forgiveness I entreat,
Let not your frown destroy my future hopes.
What a rich sound were this now, were it real!
As you may think I honour virtue Sforza,
I do believe it is really unfeigned.
It is Heavens goodness to your Grace then Madam.
The more to vindicate your injured virtue.
And manifest your merits to the world,
Thou art mine own again Alinda.
Note her further.
My suit is next to you King, Queen, and Prince,
Whose love, whose Piety, whose Innocence,
I have too much abused that to appeal,
My trespasses at large by due confession.
I should appear but more impertinent to each eye and ear.
My suit is therefore (though you not forget
I ever was) you will be pleased to think,
There is not an Alinda in the world.
So give me leave to leave it: and in this,
I beg my Fathers Aid, to be removed
Back to my country Naples; and in that,
Into the Magdalene Nunnery at Lucera,
To spend this life in Tears for my amiss,
And holy Prayers for eternal Bliss.
So thou art mine for ever.
She has anticipated my great purpose,
For on the reconcilement of this difference,
I vowed my after life unto the Monaste•ie
Of holy Augustinians at Solanto.
O mighty Sir!
It is not to be gain-said.
So hast we to Nicosia, where (my Son)
In lieu of former wrongs, Isle yield thee up my Crown and Kingdom.
Your virtuous mother (whom may you for ever
Honour for her piety) with these true
Statesmen, will enable you to govern well.
Who makes a doubt of that?
And let your study, Sir, be ever watchful
To cherish virtue, as to punish vice.
And see that you considerative be
Of Sforza, in the wrongs he felt by me.
His was the greatest loss.
Sir, I have won:
My wrongs are drowned in her conversion.
Good Sforza, see her placed as she desires,
In that Religious order. I have now
Plighted my Troth to Heaven, and so has she.
O may (Sir) such Wedlock ne'er broken be.
Now with such melting silence as sweet Souls
From Bodies part to Immortality,
May we for better life divided be.
THrough much distress, and many perilous ways
Our Queen at last with more then conquering Bays
Is Crowned with hearts: but now she false again,
And we, except her glory you maintain.
Our good depends on you then, thus it stands;
She cheers our Hearts, if she but gain your Hands.

