I Have observed it too, but the cause is
As unknown to me as actions done in Countries
Not found out yet.
Some Wench, my life to a brass Farthing.
As like as may be:
We Soldiers are all given that way; especially
When our blood boils high, and pulses beat
Alarms to Cupid's Battles; We'r apter
To sally on a young flaming Girl,
Then on an Enemy that braves it before our Trenches.
I ask it not to know his privacies;
For if his freedom doth not acquaint me with them,
Let them be secret still—yet I could wish
An opportunity to tell him, a little circumspection
Would be handsome, and set a gloss upon all.
Times might be chosen of less public notice:
It looks so poorly in a Prince to be thus careless
Of his own affairs: men do so talk on it —
Here comes Inophilus; if any body knows,
It must be he.
Your servant, Captains; saw you the Prince to day?
Not we: we hoped to hear of him from you.
It is strange a man adorned with so much
Wisdom, should on the sudden fall off from the
Care of his own fame! I am his Friend, and so
I know are you; but to speak plainly to you,
He's grown my wonder now, as much as other men's.
I that have found a sweetness in his company
Beyond what ever Lovers dream of in a Mistress,
That as he spoke, methought have smelt the air perfumed; nor could have wished a joy greater then living with him, next those of Heaven, and those preferred the more, because I knew Plangus would be there.
I say, even I of late am grown out of love with any thing that's Mortal▪ since I have found Plangus so far beneath, (I will not say my expectations) but the assurances all good men had of future gallantry. Hoe's melancholy now, and hath thrown off the spirit which so well became him, and all that sweetness which bewitched men's hearts is grown so rugged, so incompos'd to all commerce, men fear he will shortly quarrel with himself. Nay more, he doth not answer the fondness of his Father's love with half that Joy he used to do.
It is now about a Week I have observed this alteration; it shakes him like an Ague once in two days; but holds him lone∣ger then a fit of the Gout: They whisper about the Court as if the King had chid him for it, and now at length found his thaunts.
A poor discovery! Who might not find 'em out that would be so uncivil: I was about to follow him, but thought it an ignoble way, beneath the Name of Friendship, and so de∣sisted. About four days ago, meeting him in the long Gallery, I
asked him how he did; taking me by the hand, he wrung it, and after a sigh or two, told me, Not very well—But he had busi∣nos, and so we parted. I saw him not again in twenty hours af∣la; and then I asked him where he had been so long: He told me (as if he was ashamed to deny me such a poor request) I must not know; and when I told him, his often absence was observed. Is it, saith he? I cannot help it; but it shall no more be so; and at the last he stole away: Since when I saw him not.
O this wicked Peace: Inophilus!
Is there no hopes of War?
To lye at home to see our Armours rust;
We could keep the Prince sober and merry too,
If he would but exchange his Court for a Camp.
The King is old, and dotes upon his Son.
Is loath to venture him to danger:
Yet at this time there is occasion.
The Argives have refused to pay their tribute, and are for cer∣tain preparing for Invasion: Some say they have got into Ibe∣ria already.
Nay then there's hopes:
If we could but find the Prince with a buff Coat again, I should be once more merry.
See the Ambassadors entertained
With such an evenness, as should be used to men
We neither fear nor love; let neither
Too much obsequiousness teach them insolence,
Nor any ill usage brand us with incivility:
Stay you Rinatus. he sighs.
—Open thy bosom and receive torrents of sorrow,
That lie like rocks of lead upon my soul;
Honest Rinatus; experience bids me trust thee
With a mighty secret. Thou can not choose
But know, my son of late is much retired.
I do not like that youth should be thus melancholy:
Let them enjoy themselves, for age will come,
Whose impotence will deny all pleasures.
I do believe he loves me. Ho!
Yes, doubtless, better then sickmen health,
Or those who are penned up in darkness
Love the Sun.
I speak not as if I thought he did not;
For thou know I humour him, afford him
Liberty enough; I never chide him, nor express
The least dislike of any action. Am not I a gentle father?
Me thinks were I a son again, to such a father,
I should not think he lived too long Should thou, Rinatus?
No more doth he, upon my soul:
One command of yours would make him venture upon
Lightning, nay almost make him act a sin,
A thing he fears to name,
I do believe thee:
But yet, me thinks, should he be grown so impious,
There might be found excuses.
A Crown is a temptation; especially so near one:
It is not with Princes as with other Sons; and I am old too;
Hath not my hand the palsy? Doth a Crown become gray hairs?
To be a King might make some men forswear all conscience.
But I know Plangus hath far nobler thoughts;
And yet an Empire might excuse a Parricide.
Sir! sure you are a stranger to your son;
For give me leave to say, your fears are vain:
So great a virtue as the Princes,
Cannot anticipate his hopes by any sin:
Honour and duty have been acquainted with him now too long
To be divorced. Some Sycophants there are
(Such creatures still will haunt the Court) I know
Love not the Prince, because he loves not them.
Sir, shut your ears to them, they will betray you to your ruin.
Jealousy's a disease should be below a King,
As that which seizes on the basest spirits;
Oh shut it from your soul,
One may read in story
What dire effects the fury hath brought forth:
Kings make away their only sons, and Princes their fa∣theirs,
And when they have done, they may despair at leisure.
I do not think Plangus hath plots, or on my Crown,
Or me; he was virtuous always, and is still, I hope:
But why is he so much from Court then, and alone too?
I do but ask the question.
It can be no design, believe me, Sir;
For Crowns are won by other courses.
Aspirers must grow popular, be hedged about
With their Confederates; then would he flatter you,
Be jolly still, as if no melancholy thought were in him.
A guilty conscience would then teach him policy,
And he would seek to take suspicion from all his carriages;
Innocence makes him careless now.
Thou hast almost resolved me;
The tempest in my soul is almost laid,
And wants but time to calm it.
Youth hath its whimsies, nor are we
To examine all their paths too strictly.
We went awry our selves when we were young.
Sir!
Thou moist be gone, Rinatus,
The blessing of an honest servant!
This Rinatus is truer unto me:
He loves the King as well as I Ephorbas;
And may I live but to reward him;
For hoe's too honest for a Court!
How now Artesio? thy looks speak strong amazement;
I am with child to hear the news: Prithee be quick in the deli∣very.
The Prince an't please your Majesty—
What of him Artesio?
I have observed is much retired of late.
So have I too; this is no News.
And I can whisper in your ear the cause.
It was Chance, no Policy of mine, betrayed his privacies:
Ill Offices are not the Engines I desire to rise by;
Only love to the young Prince makes me reveal them.
Nay, nay, without apology;
If it were Treason, it should not go down the sooner
For all the gilded preparation.
Nor am I of so Feminine a humour, as
To mistrust affection delivered bluntly:
Plain meaning, should be plainly told;
Bad Wares may have false lights; good can abide the day.
But I know
The nature of my Office;
Though Kings still hug suspicion in their bosoms,
They hate the causers; Love to hear secrets too,
Yet the Revealers still fare the worse,
Being either thought guilty of ends or weakness.
And so esteemed by those they tell them to▪
Either unfit or dangerous to be trusted,
Perhaps, Sir, when the Prince and you are friends again,
You'll tell me, That had my love been real,
I should have whispered the Princes errors to himself—
Without a syllable of Prologue more—
Or I shall verify your fears.
In this brave City (take it as brief as may be)
There lives a Beauty fit to command
Them that command the World,
And might be Alexanders Mistress, were he yet alive,
And had added Empires as large as his desires:
She's but a private Merchant's Wife;
Yet the Prince is so far gravel'd in her affection,
I fear.—
Then there is hopes I may recall him:
Love is a childish evil, though the effects are dangerous;
A Princes Errors
Grown public, will be scandalous.
Poor boy! perhaps the jealous Husband may commit a murder,
I would not have him cut off so young:
Love should be Princes recreation, not their business.
What Physic must we give him for his cure?
I dare not counsel you;
But in my poor judgement
Some gentle Fatherly persuasions will work upon
So good a nature.
Coldest thou but possibly effect
How I might take him napping?
That is beyond my skill:
But I can show you the House, and time
He walks from hence in, which will be
About an hour hence; for then her Husband
Comes home from the Ryalto.
Time will not tarry for a King; let's go.
What is become of this young Prince? Or where
Doth he bestow himself? Doth he walk invisible?
Where have I been to look him?
The Horses are in the Stables.
His Page and I at home too, that used to be as inseparable Com∣pinions.
Well met Gentlemen, where is the Hermit Plangus?
We cannot tell, nor have we been to seek him.
If at the Court, we should hear presently; if not,
We might be too officious in his search,
And our enquiry might make his absence but so much the more
Notorious; and I'm confident he's well:
His virtue guards him still from all Mischances.
Though his company's the dearest thing I love▪
Yet for his good I could digest his absence,
But that I doubt a mighty mischief might spring
From this small Grain of indiscretion
The King is old, and there are Knaves about the Court
That (if he knew it not) would tell him so:
And men conscious to themselves of a defiance▪
Are still most jealous of a growing worth▪
Perhaps a thinking Father (for plodding is old age's sickness)
May take notice of his Son's retirement, and misconstrue it so:
Nothing is impossible—
Heaven send it otherwise.
This care becomes you Sir; but I dare swear it is need∣less: The King is but an ill dissembler; and had he but the least thought of such a thing, he would hide it less then the Sun conceals his brightness: Besides, a man as great Euphorbus is, whose rule of living hath been directed by the Line of Virtue, cannot mi∣struck that Vice in his own Son, of which himself was never
guilty: Had's younger years been tainted with inordinate de∣sires, or had his Crown been the effect of some audacious crime, perhaps his guilty Conscience might have mistrusted; but it is im∣possible where there is no guilt, to fear a punishment.
You speak my hopes:
But this for certain, Gentlemen,
The King who was admired for his matchless sleeping,
Whose night no noise disturbed, and it was difficult
To wake before his hour, sleeps but unquietly of late,
Will start at Mid-night, and cry Plangus:
Is greedy after News, and walks unevenly,
And sometimes on the sudden looks behind him; and when
One speaks to him, scarcely marks one syllable.
Surely the mind of some distemper shakes
His soul into this looseness.
My Lord, the Prince desires
To meet you half an hour hence in the Gallery.
Me?
Yes my Lord.
I shall. Your Servant, Captains.
Yours, my Lord.
It cannot be so late.
Believ't, the Sun is set, my Dear;
And Candles have usurped the Office of the day.
Indeed methinks a certain mist
Like darkness, hangs on my eye-lids.
But too great lustre may undo the sight:
A man may stare so long upon the Sun, that he
May look his eyes out; and certainly tic so with me;
I have so greedily swallowd thy light,
That I have spoiled my own.
Why should thou tempt me to my ruin thus▪
As if thy presence were less welcome to me,
Then d•y to one, who (tic so long ago
〈…〉 the Sun hath forgot what light is▪
〈…〉 of thy presen•• makes me wish this absence,
〈…〉 himself must suffer an Eclipse,
〈…〉 are still •oils to the brightest splendour:
Some short departure will (like a river stopped)
Make the current of our pleasures run
The higher at our next Meeting
Alas my Dearest!
Tell those so, that know not what it is to part from Blessing;
Bid not him surfeit to taste health's sweetness,
That knows what it is to groan under a Disease.
Then let us stand and out-face danger,
〈◊〉 you will have it so; despise report,
And contemn scandals into nothing,
Which vanish with the breath that utters um;
Love is above these vanities.
Should the innocent thing my Husband take thee here,
He could not spite me but by growing jealous;
And Jealousies black effect would be a cloister
Perhaps to kill me too: But that's impossible,
I cannot dye so long as Plangus loves me:
Yet say this piece of Earth should play the Coward,
And fall at some unlucky stroke,
Love would transport my better half
To its Center, Plangus heart, and I should live in him.
But Sir, you have a Fame to loose, which should be
A Princes only care and darling,
Which should have an eternity beyond his life:
If he should take that from you, I should be killed indeed▪
Why dost thou use these Arguments to bid me go,
Yet chain me to thy tongue, while the Angel-like
Music of thy voice entering my thirsty ears,
Charms up my fears to immobility.
Tic more impossible for me to leave thee,
Then for this carcase to quait away its grave-stone,
When it lies destitute of a soul to inform it.
Mariners might with far greater ease
Hear whole shoal of Sirens singing,
And not leap out to their destruction;
Then I forsake so dangerous a sweetness.
I will be dumb then.
I will be deaf first. I've thought a way now,
I'll run from hence and leave my soul behind me:
It shall be so: and yet it shall not neither;
What shall a husband banish a Prince his house for fear?
A husband? it is but an aerie title,
I will command there shall be no such thing,
And then Andromana is mine, or his, or any man's
She will her self. These Ceremonies
Fetter the world, and I was born to free it.
Shall man, that noble creature, be afraid of words,
Things himself made?
Shall sounds, a thing of seven small letters, give
Check to a Princes will?
Did you not promise me, dear Sir?
Have you not sworn too, you would not stay beyond the time?
Have Oaths no more validity with Princes?
Let me not think so.
Come, I will go, thou shall not ask in vain.
But let us kiss at parting, it may be our last perhaps.
— I cannot now move one foot, though all the Furies
Should whip me forward with their snakes.
Woman thou stol'st my heart, just now thou stol'st it.
A cannon bullet might have kiss't my lips
And left me as much life.
— Are we betrayed?
What art, Speak, or resolve to dye.
A well-wisher of the Prince.
The King?—It cannot be!
Though thou hast thrown all nature off,
I cannot what's my duty.
Ungratious boy, had been the off-spring of a sinfull-bed,
Thou might have claimed Adultery as inheritance;
Lust would have been thy kinsman, and what enormity
Thy looser life could have been guilty of,
Had found excuse in an unnatural conception.
Prithee hereafter seek another father:
Ephorbas cannot call him son that makes lust his deity.
Had I but known. —(but we are hoodwinked still
To all mischances) I should have had a son,
That would make it his study, to embrace corruption,
And take delight in unlawful sheets,
I would have hugged a Monster in mine arms
Before thy mother—good O heavens!
What will this world come to at last!
When Princes that should be the patterns of all virtue
Lead up the dance to vice.
What shall we call our own, when our own wives
Banish their faith, and prove false to us.
Have I with so much care promise,d my self
So pleasing a Spring of comfort? and are all
Those blossoms impt, and buds burnt up by the fire
Of lust and sin!—
Have I thus long laboured against
The billows, that did oppose my growing hopes?
And must I perish in the havens mouth?
No gulf but this to bedevour'd in?
Could not you th's inclination, find out
Another rock to split it self upon?
Had thou hugged drunkenness, the wit or mirth
Of company might have evcus'd it.
Prodigality had been a sin
A Prince might have been proud in, compared to this.
Or had thy greener years incited the to treason
And atteempt a doubting father's crown
It had been a noble vece.
Ambition runs through the veins of princes.
It brings forth acts great as themselves and it.
Spurs on to honour, and resolves great things.
But this, this Lechery is such a thing
Sin is to brave a name for'•,
A prince; I might say my son
(But let that pass) and dare to show
Himself to nought but darkness, &amp; black chambers
Whose motions like some planet
Are all eccentric, not two hours together
In his own sphere, the court.
But I am tame to talk thus; Be gone with as much speed
As a coward would avoid his death.
And never more presume to look upon this woman, this whore.
Thou lose both thy eyes and me else.
Sir, the reverence that I ow my father,
And the injury I have done this Gentlewoman
Had charmed me up to silence but I must
Speak something for her honour:
When I have done, command me to the Altar,
Whilst (I confess) you tainted me with sin,
I did applaud you and condemn my self;
It looked like a fathers care.—But when
You used that term of whore to her that stands there,
I would have given ten thousand Kingdoms
You had had no more relation to me,
Then hath the Northern to the Southern pole.
I should have flown to my revenge swifter then lightning,
But I forbear, and pray imagine not what I had done.
Upon my life she is very handsome.
To be a whore is more unknown to her
Then what is done in the Antipodes;
She is so pure she cannot think a sin
Nor ever heard the Name to understand it.
No doubt these private meetings
Were to read her moral lectures, and teach her
Chastity.
Nay, give me leave Sir,
I Do not say my addresses have been all so virtuous;
For whatsoever base desires a flaming beauty
Could kindle in a heart, were all alive in me;
And prompted me to seek some case by quenching:
Burnings hotter then Aetna.
Imagine but a man that had drunk Mercury,
And had a fire within his Bones;
Whose blood was hotter then the melted Ore,
If he should wish for drink, nay steal it too
Could you condemn him?
Married do they say?
I Did endure a heat
S• as could not cool. It would have killed a Salamander.
Then taught both impudence and wit:
I singled out my foe, used all the arts
That love could think upon, and in the end
Found a most absolute repulse.
Well, Plangus, youth excuses, the first fault,
But a relapse exceeds all pardon.
Cursed be old age, and he that first numbered fourscore:
What Devil has betrayed us both to a doting fool?
Did I but now promise my self what hopes
Ambitious thoughts could reach; and shall I sink
Down to my first foundation without the pleasure of
A Tasted greatness. Death and disgrace,
I Dare provoke the utmost of your malice.
After the sweetness of some sharp revenge.
Madam, my Master.
You may both hang together.
Why this it is, if a man should kill his father
For you, be should be thus rewarded as soon as
Your turns served, I may be hanged that did it.
Since he is dead; How was it done?
Why nothing; only as he was taking water at the
Ryalto, his foot slipped a little, and he came tumbling in the Sea; whence he was taken up, but not alive.
Heaven prospers not these courses,
I see it plainly, let them be acted with as much closeness,
Or to what end soever, they never thrive. Libacer,
We are undone, undone; the King hath found
His Son here, and I have lost him to eternity.
You women are the shallowest creatures;
You never look beyond the present▪
Rome was not built in one day, Madam;
Greatness is never sweet that comes too easily.
Should Plangus be a Fool now, and obey his Father:
Pox of this virtue, it spoils most men living.
We have hopes yet; Revenge is something,
And if my old Trade fail not,
Princes are mortal as well as other men;
Yet my soul inspires me with half a confidence
That Leon hath not died in vain.
I use to see as far into a mischief as another:
I'll go to him, and if I bring him not within this half hour,
As hot and eager on the scent as ever he was,
Take me and hang me at my coming home.
Madam, here is
a Messenger from Court.
If from thence, I may be bold to ask,
How Plangus the noblest Prince alive doth?
Madam, as well as Soldiers can
That are sick for honour, I suppose by this time
H'ath left the Court, and is gone in quest for glory,
Which he intends to ravish from young Argoe's brow,
The valiant Leader of the Argive's Army.
I'm confident then Sir, your business is not to me,
If any body else hath sent you; Sir, be pleased to spare the message,
And tell them, I neither have learnt the trick
Of the Court, nor yet intend it; I want no new Gowns,
And have heard men forswear themselves
In better language, and to better purpose
Then gaining of a Lady's honour.
Madam, My business is from the King,
Who doth entreat you would be pleased to bless the Court,
This afternoon with your fair presence,
And bring an answer, I must not stay for one.
Now we do see an end of all our mischiefs;
The Prince is gone from Court, and the King hath sent for us;
Doth not the name strike terror to thy curdling blood.
No by my troth not at all, as far as I see
You're better then you were. Isle lay my life the old man
Would turn Gamester:
Take my counsel, play deep
Or not at all: Not an Ace under a Kingdom.
Your Grace I hope will remember your poor friends.
If I do find any such thing,
Let me alone to melt his Ice,
Go get me mourning with all hast.
Let froward Fortune do her worst, I shall
Create my greatness, or attempting fall:
And when I fall I will deserve my ruin.
WHat Sir, And are you Melancholy
When fate hath showered a happiness so unexpected on us?
This ugly sneaking peace is the Soldiers rock,
He splits his fortunes on. Bawdry's a virtue to it.
P—of these Beaver-hats they make ones head ache
Worse then a Cap of steel, and bear not off a knock
The tenth part so well.
You're mad for fighting, Gentlemen,
And we shall have enough of it.
The Argives fifty thousand strong,
Have like a whirlwind born down all before um;
And I with 13000. that remain
Yet undisbanded of the last expedition,
Have command to fight that multitude
Of old tough Soldiers: while ours
In a month or two won't have picked up that valour
That in this idle time hath slipped from um;
They have forgot what noise a Musket makes,
And start if they but hear a Drum;
Are these fellows either enough or fit,
On whom a Kingdome's safety should be built:
Indeed were they to encounter some Mistress,
Or storm a Brothel-house, perhaps they'd venture;
But for my part, I yield; nor will I oppose my Father:
If he sees good we perish, I am already sacrificed▪
Yet our enemies shall dearly purchase
Their Victory.
Pray look to your charge, Nicetes, and you
Aramnes with all care and speed▪ and when you come
Into the field; then let me see this countenance,
That frowning smile, and I shall like it.
I love a man runs laughing upon death;
But we lose time in talk.
Your servant Captains. Sir, pray a word with you.
Prithee be short, Inophilus, thou know my business:
Sir, I am mad to see your tameness:
A man bound up by Magic is not so still as you,
Nothing was ever precipitated thus,
And yet refused to see its ruin.
Thou art tedious, I shall not tarry.
You are made General.
I know it:
Against the Argives.
So.
With 13000 men, no more Sir.
I am glad on it, the honour is the greater:
The danger is the greater; You will be killed sir,
And lose your Army.
Is this all, I care not.
But so do I, and so do all your friends.
I smell a Rat sir, there's juggling in this business,
I am as confident of it as I am alive.
The King might within this twenty four hours
Have had peace on fair conditions.
But dishonourable)
And would not. On a sudden uses the Ambassadors scurvily
And provokes the Argives, yet himself in no posture
Of defence.
But—
Pray give me leave sir,
After this you are on a sudden created General,
And packed away with a crowd of unhewn fellows,
Whose courage hangs as loose about them
As a sluts petticoats. Sir, he had other spirits
In the Court created for such perils;
Excuse me, I know you fear not to meet destruction,
But where men are sure to perish,
'• were well the persons were of less concernment.
He might have let you stayed till you had gathered
An Army fit for your Command, and sent
Some petty things upon this expedition,
Whose loss would have been nothing, and of whom
It might have been recorded in our story
As an honour, that they dyed Monuments
Of the Kings folly. But let that pass;
You'll say perhaps, you only have a spirit
Fit for such undertakings — I wish you had not,
Your want then would not be half so grievous.
But here is the prodigy, you must fight them presently.
Come, it is a project put into the Kings head
By some who have a plot on you and him.
It may be so, Imphilus, and I believe
All this is true you tell me, and it might startle
A man were less resolved then I.
But danger and I have been too long acquainted
To shun a meeting now; I am engaged,
And cannot any ways come off with reputation.
Had told me this before, perhaps I might have thought on it:
And yet I should not neither.
If the King thinks I am grown dangerous,
Tic all one to me which way he takes me from his fears,
He could not do it handsomer then thus;
It makes less noise now.—
But come, I must not fear such things, Inophilus:
The King hath more virtue and honour then
To do these actions, fit only for guilty souls;
Nor must I fear when my Inophilus sights by me.
Troth Sir, for all your complement,
If you have no valour but what owes it self to my company,
Your'e like to make cold breakfast of your enemies:
I have other business then to throw away
My life, when there is so much odds against it:
Isle stay at home, and pray for you, that's all Sir.
How! wilt not go then, Inophilus?
The time hath been
I thought it better sport
To bustle through a bristly grove of Pikes.
When I have courted rugged danger with
Hotter desires then handsome faces,
And thought no women half so beautiful
As bloody gaping wounds:
But sir, to go and cast away my self now,
Would not be gallant, nor an action worth my envy:
It is weakness to make those that seek
My ruin, laugh at my folly with jaws stretched wider
Then the Gulf that swallows us.
I know when honour calls me, and when treason
Counterfeits her voice.
Well, stay at home and freeze,
And lose all sense of glory in a Mistress arms.
Go perish tamely, drunk with sin and peace,
And may thou, since thou dare not dye with them,
Out-live thy noble friends.
I thank you Sir, but I cannot be angry.
Yonder's the bones of the Army rallied up together,
But they look• rather as if they came home
From being soundly beaten.
Methinks such tattered Rogues should never conquer,
Victory would look so scurvily among um,
They'd so be-dawb her if she wore clean linen.
Sir, We wear as sound hearts in these torn breeches
As ere a Courtier of them all.
We are not afraid of spoiling our hands for want
Of gloves, nor need we Almond butter when we go to bed.
And though my Lieutenant is pleased to be a little merry,
You shall see us dye as handsomely in these old clothes
As those wear better, and become our wounds as well,
And perhaps smell as sweet when we are rotten.
We hope it, Captains and Fellow soldiers,
We are proud of this occasion to try your valours,
You shall go no farther then your Prince doth,
I'll be no bringer up of Rears.
Let not the number of the Foe affright you,
The more they are, the more will the honour be.
The Lion scorns to prey upon a Hare,
Nor is the blinking Taper fit to try Eagles eyes;
The weight of glory makes our danger light,
When victory comes easily tic half a shame
To conquer.
Isle stay at home and grieve, that so many
Daring souls should dye on such advantage.
Her husband's dead too: Fates let me dye,
I am too happy to remain long thus
Without a ruin great as the height I fell from▪
Plangus was my only obstacle, but him I have
Removed:
But love commanded,
His presence would have countermanded all attempts,
I need not fear his Magic at this distance.
His looks and actions were one entire enchantment, and
Powerful over a Lady's heart.
I sent for her, but she's not come yet.
Who waits without?
There's a mourning Lady sir
Would speak with the King.
Admit her, and be gone.
So rises Phoebus from the gloomy night,
(While pale-fac't Dian makes hast to hide
Her borrowed glory in some neighbouring cloud,
Envying the beauty of the new born day)
When darkness crowds into the other world.
Madam, Why kneel you?
You, at whose name Monarchs themselves might tremble,
And mortals bow with reverence great as they pay to Altars:
Scepters should break in pieces and adore you;
At whose sight the Sun and Moon should blush themselves
To blood and darkness, and falling from their sphere
Brush the audacious world to Atoms, for daring
To behold a lustre so much greater then their own.
Sir, give me leave to wonder
What sin I have committed which calling
Down the vengeance of the gods,
Hath made me author of all this blasphemy.
Sir, I beseech your Majesty if you are angry with your creature,
Speak some cruel word and blast me.
Scorn me not into the other world,
Where I have sins enough of my own to blush for,
And shall not need to dye his cheeks for other men's offences.
Lady, though Parthian darts are not so sharp
As are those killing words, yet that breath which
Utters them, is sweeter then the morning dew.
Isle be dumb, for praises cannot add, but rather
Diminish Andromana's worth.
I wonder now no longer at this language,
It is such as Kings are bred in;
But I beseech you Sir, if there be ought
You will command your servant; if Andromana
Must do or suffer any thing for great Euphorbas,
Lay by your self a minute, and remember
A Merchant's wife must hear you▪
Your husband Leon's dead, I hear Lady.
Nay spare those Pearls, Madam, cast not away
Such treasure upon the memory of one
Who, if the best of men, deserves them not.
Come, come, forget these sorrows Lady,
And wear not mourning weeds before the world's destruction;
Hide not those fair eyes, whose splendour would enrich
Our Court:
Madam, though none there be in Court
Can merit such a beauty, yet I my self
Have taken pains to search a husband for you;
What think you of my self?
Great Sir, your care is like your self, all noble,
But suits with me no better
Then Phoebus horses did with Phaeton,
Ruined the world and him: first, Sir,
You do debase you self to honour her, whose worth
Is less considerable then Lovers oaths:
My husband's ashes are scarce cold yet,
And would your Majesty have me forsake my honour,
And his memory so soon?
I have not paid oblations due to his ashes yet.
You complement away the worth we know you have Andromana,
What say you to the Prince?
I say he is the the Prince, and great Ephorbas son,
He's Plangus, and if you think there yet remains
A title that can be either better or greater,
I think him worthy of it.
But dost think him worthy Andromana?
O heavens! Is Jove worth heaven,
Or doth the Sun deserve to be a light
To all the world, can virtue deserve honour?
Or labour, riches: Can Gods merit Altars?
It might have been a puzzling question
To them whose ears have not been blessed with Plangus worth.
But this it is so below him.
But say he loves thee▪
I dare not say so:
For when I think a Prince pretends to such poor things
As I am, I feel an Ice run through my veins,
And my blood curdles into flakes of snow,
And bids me fear him, not with an awe or reverence
But as a spotted sinful thing which is the worse
For being great. Tic such a fear as I
Should conceive against an armed ravisher.
These things may be expected Lady, I confess
From blood that boils in flames hot as the Sun
In scorching Libra, or sturdy Hercules
When he unmayden'd fifty in one night;
But from a man whose years have tamed those vices.
Whose love is dotage, and not lust,
Who doth adore a handsome virtue, and pays
His vows to it, you should have other hopes.
Plangus is young, a Soldier, and by consequence
Something which youth excuses. But Ephorbas
Hath left those toys behind him when he shook off his youth.
Sir, Now my fears are out.
O virtue! are there just powers which men adore,
And throw away their prayers upon,
That lend their eyes to humane actions, or was the name
Of heaven invented to still petty sinners?
Sir, sure I am mistaken
You are not great Ephorbas Sir, whose virtue
Is a Theme of wonder to all neighbour Nations;
Pray help me to him, I would see that Angel;
The Kingdom's honour, and good men's Sanctuary.
But if you are the man, whom I have prayed for
Oftner then I have slept; pray Sir, belie not
A virtue which I have hitherto admired.
I see you are a stranger, Lady (give me leave to say so)
To Ephorbas;
But if a Lady of thy melting years
Can love this grayness, I vow my Sceptre,
Throne, Kingdom, and my self are thine;
Tha'rt fit to be a Queen.
A Queen! Sir, have your subjects angered you?
Have they rebel▪d, or done some sin that wants a name?
He cleave to the pavement till I have begged a vengeance
Great as their crime; but this you mention
Is a punishment, which your subjects must
Study years to curse you for; No sin deserves it.
You would blind my eyes with throwing gold befor'um,
Or set me up so high on the steep pinnacle
Of honour's Temple, that you would have me not be able
To look down on my own simplicity.
You can create me great, I know Sir, but good you cannot;
You might compel, entice me too perhaps to sin;
But can you allay a gnawing conscience,
Or bind up bleeding reputation:
I did never hear that physic could afford
A remedy for a wounded honour.
You are a Fool, Andromana▪
You must be mine,
Consider on it.
Sir, you may command your vassal,
That's kindly said.
But — I humbly take my leave,
Goodness protect you.
Wait on that Lady forth.
Would there were not a woman in the world
So we had our Prince again.
Sir, are you mad? or have forgot you are a father?
You have undone us all.
Why what's the matter?
O Sir, the Prince.
He is not dead, Rinatus, is he?
Sir, If he be, it is you have murd'red him:
Was it for this you were so jealous tother day?
May my Inophilus never pretend to virtue,
Isle teach him a more thriving art.
Come to the window a little Sir, and hear
How the good people curse you; as cold weather
As it is, some are so hard at it they sweat again.
Prithee unriddle; hast thou drunk Hemlock
Since I saw thee last?
I would not be in my wits for any thing in the world,
My grief would kill me if I were;
He's mad that will speak sense or reason,
Now you have thrown away our Prince thus,
Whose innocence was clearer then his own eyes:
Can you think how you have murdered so much virtue,
And not blush your self to death?
I think indeed I sent him General against the Argives,
But it was his own desire.
It was not his own desire Sir, to have but 13000 men,
Sir was it? Was that Army fit to oppose great Ergo?
There came a Messenger just now, that saw the Prince
Not sixteen miles from hence (for thither is the Foe marched)
Draw up his men to engage the enemy.
For heaven's sake Rinatus, post him back again,
Bid him retreat; command my son from me,
Not to go on till greater forces follow him,
If it be possible redeem the error;
I'd give my Kingdom, life, or any thing
It were to do again.
I'm glad to see this now, heaven send it be not too late.
Nay stand not prating.
Tic from the Army Sir, O heaven I fear;
If from the Army, prithee put on better looks.
Your son, nay more, your dying son,
Commanded me to bring you word,
He died true to his honour, King, and Country-men,
Nor let me stay to see the brightest lamp go out
That ever graced this orb.
O heaven, the King! why this is worse Sir
Then the other, let not us lose you both.
Let me but hear how it was he made his Exit,
And then my glass is run, I will not live
One minute longer.
Sir, thus it was—
Tic scarce three hours ago since the brave
Plangus marched from •axe with an Army,
Whose souls were richer then their clothes by far,
Though their valour had put on all the bravery
That Soldiers ever vvore. The Prince whose presence
Breathed new fire into these flaming spirits,
Resolved to meet the enemy with his handful,
And with a vvinged speed, fell down to the Alain Straights,
Determining there to try it with him.
His Soldiers also true sons of War,
Conteming so great odds, when victory and their Country
Was to crown the Conquerors, whetted
Their eager valours with impatient expectation
of the enemy, who trusting to his multitude came on
Winged both with scorn and anger, to see that paucity
Should dare dispute victory against their odds.
Plangus who though he saw, yet could not fear
Destruction, and scorned to avoid it
When the King commanded him to meet it,
Marshaled his Army to the best advantage,
And having given Zopiro the left wing,
The body to Evarness, himself chose out the right,
Because he would be opposite to Ergo.
And keeping a reserve as great as could be hoped for
From so small a company not above five hundred men,
He gave the command of them to Zenon,
Who with his fellows took it ill they should be so long idle,
And had not the honour to be thought worthy
To dye with the most forward, and would no question have
Refused the charge; but that the smiling Prince
Promised them they should have time to dye.
Words here were needless nor had he time to use them.
What was Inophilus idle all this while?
I only heard the Prince wish just as
He spurred his horse against the valiant Ergo,
He had had fewer by a thousand men
So he had Inophilus.
O traitorous boy!
The Prince and Ergo met; and like two mighty Tides
Encountered.
Here death put on her sable Livery,
And the two Gallants whose valour animated each Army,
Bandied a long time with equal force,
'Till at last great Ergo fell; and on a sudden
Multitudes of men accompanied him, so that
The wing went presently to rout and execution.
Zopiro also, and Evarnes having slain
Their opposite leaders, breath death and destruction
To their reeling Foes.
Thus flushed with victory, and blood the Iberians,
Reveled through the flying field 'till there came on
The enemies reserve of twenty thousand men,
Who fresh and lusty, grinded their teeth for anger
At their fellows overthrow, and pouring on
Our weary Soldiers, turned the stream of victory.
But the Princes valour, and good fortune soon
Overcame this opposition, and having rallied his broken
Troops, went to relieve his friends who had fared worse▪
When presently he saw Evarness who had piled up enemies
About him, as an Obelisk of his own death and victory,
Fall bleeding at his foot, and having kiss't it
With his dying lips, entreated him to save
Himself for a more happy day, and dyed.
It was not long after the gallant Zenon
(Who had performed that day deeds of eternal fame,
And with his few spite of opposition, thrice charged
And routed some thousands of the enemy)
Expired, which when the Prince beheld,
Weeping for anger, he flew amongst his enemies,
Sustained only by the greatness of his courage,
For blood and strength had both forsook him;
He spent that spark of life was left in him,
In slaughter and revenge, when leaning on his weapons point
That dropped with blood as fast as he,
He then conjured me with all speed only to tell the King.
I saw him dye worthy of his father, and himself.
O heaven! what means these acclamations?
What do the Iberians welcome their bloody
Conqueror▪ with so much joy.
Oh! Oh!
O cowardly boy, for that base word includes
All baseness; doth not shame kill thee,
Or fear chill thy dastard blood to an ice,
At sight of that most noble injure▪d ghost?
It is well, dear Plangus (if thy Divinity deserve not
A more lasting name) that thou art come
To take revenge on that most traitorous son,
In's Father's presence, who detests his baseness
More then thy self can do.—
Excuse us dear Renatus,
That wonder froze us to such a silence,
If when we expected such a welcome
As had that Roman son whose mother
Died for joy to see him, we found so cold
An entertainment, something made us looked upon
So eke an inconvenience, that we could not
But put on some small amazement.
And do I hear thee speak again,
And see thee, or only dream a happiness,
Whose reality stars, and my Genius deny me?
Or art thou Plangus Angel come to rouse
Me from despair.
Sir, Pray believe it; and be not backward
In th'entertainment of these Soldiers, if
You esteem it a happiness;
In a word, you are a Conqueror:
And the audacious Argive have paid their
Lives as sacrifices to your offended sword.
A messenger of comfort to a despairing Lover
Is a less acceptable thing, then this thy presence,
If what you fellow told me were untruth,
Thy welcome sight hath amply made amends
For those tormenting fears he put me to▪
But if it were not, let me know what chance redeemed you.
If you have heard how things then went
When I sent away that Messenger.—
Yes, I have heard it:
Then know when death and our own fates
Had sworn our ruin, and wee like some strong wall that
Long resists the iron vomits of the flaming Cannon,
At last shakes it self into a dreadful ruin
To those who throw it down; so had the Iberians
With valour great as the cause they fought for
Strove with a noble envy; who should at first
Out-go his fellow in slaughtering the Argives;
At last oppressed with multitude and toil,
We sunk under the unequal burden;
Then was our emulation changed, and who before
Strove to out-do each other, now eagerly contended
To run the race of death first.
Sir, there it was I (and many other braver Captains) fell,
Being one wound from head to foot.
O then it was Inophilus came in
With about twenty other Gallants, and with what speed
The nimble lightning flies from East to West
Redeemed this bleeding trunk, which
The insulting Argive had encompas't
Blown up with victory and pride;
He with a gallantry like none but great Inophilus,
Being bravely backed by his own Soldiers,
Whose actions spoke them more then men,
Had not Inophilus been by, redeemed the honour
Of a bleeding day. And thus were our troops
As little now as their valour great
Enriched with victory, blood, and Jewels, of which
The opposite Army wanted no store,
Returned with the renown of an achievement
As full of glory and honour to the Conquerors
As ruin to the Argives,
My Liedge—
Had this action, and my merit been so great
As our Prince would make it, I then might
Own it, and expect reward.—
But it was so small, so much below my duty,
That I must upon my knees beg pardon
That I came no sooner.
This is a prodigy beyond what ever yet
Was wrote in story.
Inophilus, we have been too backward
In cherishing thy growing virtue, we will
Hereafter mend it
And, dear Rinatus, be proud of thy brave son,
And let the people honour the remaining Army,
We shall esteem it as a favour done to us;
We have a largess for your valours Captains,
You have not fought in vain.
This day let our Court put on its greatest jollity,
And let none wear a discontented brow▪
For where a frown is writ, vvee'l think it reason
To say, that face hath Characters of treason.
BUt Sir, when you consider she's a woman—
O dear Inophilus!
Let earth and heaven forget, there are such things;
Or if they ever name them, let it be with a curse
Heavy as are the ills they act; a Mandrakes note
Would ring a better peal of Music
In my ears, then those two syllables pronounced again▪
Pray Sir, put off this humour,
This peevish Pet, and reason tamely; Sir, you
Have lost a Wench, and will you therefore lose
Your self too? Hear me but patiently a word or two.
Prithee go teach the Gally-slaves that word,
Things that dare own no thought beyond their chains,
And stand in fear of whipping, and wanting bread:
Bid them be tame and patient that fry in Sulphur,
It is a word I have forsworn to know the meaning of,
Or if I must, it is but to shun it, and hate it more.
Oh! were thy wrongs as great as mine, Inophilus,
Or did thou love me half so well as thou dost Plangus,
Thou would instill into me the poison of revenge,
And puff me up with thought of vengeance,
Till I did burst, and like a breaking cloud
Spread a contagion on those have injured me.
Why this were handsome in some Country-fellow,
Whose soul is dirty
As the thing he's mad for;
It were pretty in a Lady that had lost her Dog,
But—
I know what thou would say,
But for Plangus: Oh tic for none but him to be so.
Those that have injured me are persons
I once held dearer then my eyes, But how much
Greater was my love, so much the more is the offence;
Wounds from our friends are deepest.
Had any but my father—And yet me thinks
That name should have protected me.
Or was it made only to secure offenders?
My life was his, he gave it me, my honour too
I could have parted with; but alas my love
Was none of mine, no more then vows made to a Deity,
And not performed — And for that creature,
Who must be lost for ills through which
I must make way to my revenge,
Had she betrayed my honour to any thing
But him that gave me being,
She had made me half amends, in that my way
To vengeance had been open; Now I am spurred
Forward to revenge by fury, and yet
Held in by the rein of a foolish piety,
That doth no man good but them that use it not:
Tic like the Misers Idol, it yielded him no gold
Till he had broke the head off.
Nay, Inophilus, one secret more,
And the horror of it blow thee from earth to heaven,
Where there are no such things as women,
Twill turn thy soul the inside outside outward.
I cannot get it out. Prithee what is it Inophilus?
Alas! I know not, Sir.
Do but imagine the worst of ills
Earth ever groaned under; a sin nothing but woman,
Nay such a woman as Andromana durst think on;
And it is that.
How revenge transports you!
Princes have lost their Mistresses before,
Nay, and to those have not such right to them
As hath Ephorbas to what Plangus hath;
Who could command her, if not Ephorbas.
But I have — Oh Inophilus — I burst —
Yet it will out — dost thou not see it here
Oh I have known Andromana as
Ephorbas did last night.—
Why Sir, the sin done by your Father is not yours
If you could not help it. —
Why there it is:
Tic that which gnaws me here;
But I swore
By all the gods that she was as innocent
From my unclean embraces, as is
The new fallen Snow, or Ermines that will meet
Ten deaths before one spot: I made my father think
The thoughts of Angels were less innocent then she.
No it was I betrayed him; his virtue was too great,
Not to have suspected it.
How do I look Inophilus.
Like some blessed man that grieved for other sins,
And could out of a good nature part with half
His own whiteness to purge the others stains.
Now thou sooth'st, and like some flattering glass
Presents me to advantage. I am in short,
One born to make Iberia unhappy.
Had I as black a face as is my soul,
You'd find in respect of it Egyptians were snow white.
Me thinks I hear heaven tell me I am slow,
And it is time I had begun revenge.
Ephorbas has done him wrong who loved him
More then heaven or his happiness, and would
Have run out of the world to have left him free,
What ever he would lay claim to but Andromana;
Nay she also had been his, so't could have been without a sin,
But she knew the sin she acted, and yet did it,
And lives free from the stroke of thunder.
Is there such such a thing as heaven, or such a one
As Justice dwells there? and can I ask the question?
O the tameness of a conscience loaded with sin!
Which reasons and talks when it should do.
But I will be revenged, and thus I begin, Inophilus,
Be sure when I am dead to meet my ghost,
And do as that instructs thee; twill tell all the particulars
Of my revenge, who must dye first, who last, and
What way too; I have my lesson perfect.
Is this the revenge befits great Plangus?
Had this been done two days ago —
Thou durst as well have met the lightning
Naked, as have opposed my will thus.
Hear me.
Ask me no questions, nor answer me, — or if you do,
By heaven I'll never speak more.
It is revenge you'd have, and tic a great one, a very noble one
To kill your self▪
Be confident your greatest foes wish nothing more
When after ages come to hear your story,
What will they say? Just as they did of Cato,
He durst not look great Caesar in the face;
So Plangus was afraid and dyed:
A very pretty story, and much to a man's credit;
For shame, dear Plangus (let friendship use that title)
Show your great soul the world believes you're the Master of
(And I dare swear you are) in this action.
Nay rally up your self, and fight it stoutly,
Shake from your mind revenge, and having laid
That passion by, put on that virtue
The world admires in you, it is now the time to show it:
The Sun broke from a cloud doubles his light,
And fire the more resisted flames more bright.
Andromana has injured you scorn her therefore,
And show she had done nothing; I'd not do her the favour
To have one thought for her, or could be troubled
At that she did, — As for your father, Sir,
Besides the tie of nature, he knows not he hath wronged you:
Or if he doth, tic love that cause him; a word that once
Made an excuse with Plangus for what offence soever.
Thou hast wrought upon me,
And I am resolved to live a day or two more:
But if I like it not —
Well, I will go to try to sleep a little — perhaps that may—
I'm strangely Melancholy — prithee lye down by me
Inophilus, I'm safe while in thy company.
Lord! how this spirit of revenge still haunts me,
And tempts me with such promised opportunity,
And magnifies my injuries▪
Sometimes it calls me Coward, and tells me,
Conscience in Princes who are injured like my self,
Is but an excuse they find for that is in truth
Poorness of spirit; or something baser;
It tells me tic a sin to be good when all the world is bad.
It makes me look upon my self, whilst wearing
This garb of virtue, like some old Antiquary,
In clothes that are out of fashion in Iberia.
But I will not yield to it, I know it is a greater glory
to a mans self (and he that courts opinion,
Is of a vulgar spirit) to disobey then satisfy
An appetite which I know is sinful.
Good heaven guard me, how am I tempted.
To put on my former temper, but thus
I fling it from me.
Why how now Prince?
If you part with your darling so easily,
There is small hopes but you have thrown all love behind you.
Heaven, how she's altered!
I that once swore, Jove from the well-tun'd sphere
Ne'er heard such harmony as I did, when she spake;
Me thinks I can now in comparison of her voice
Count Scritch-owls music, or the croaking Toad.
Who is it you speak of Sir?
Tempt me not, Madam, with another word, for by heaven
You know I'm apt being incensed —
Wake not those wrongs that bellow louder in my soul
Then wretches in the brazen Bull, or Jove
Who speaks in thunder; those wrongs my goodness
Had half lay▪d aside. Or if you do,
I have a soul dare what you dare tempt me to.
Sir, I must speak though Jove forbad me
With a flash of lightning.
You think perhaps Sir, I have forgot my Plangus.
But Sir, I have infinitely in ur'd you,
And could not satisfy my conscience,
(If I should say my love too, I should not lye)
Till I had asked your pardon.
Madam, the fault's forgiven and forgotten,
Without you move me to remember•t with a worse Apology.
Live and enjoy your sins, and the angry gods:
Nay the severest plague I wish you, is,
That you may dye without one cross (for afflictions commonly
Teach virtues to them that know them not while prosperous)
Secure without one thought or sense of a repentance.
Me thinks you have a steely temper on, to that
Which the other day you wore, when you were
More soft then down of Bees;
But Sir if you but knew the reason why I have done
The action, which you perhaps call treason to our loves,
You would forbear such language.
Reason! no doubt the man that robs a Church,
Or profaneness Altars, hath reason for what he doth;
To satisfy your lust, you have that reason Madam.
That I have loved you once,
I call heav•n, my own heart, and you to witness;
Now by that love, by all those vows have passed
Betwixt us, hear me.
O heaven! is that a conjuration! things you have broke
With as much ease as Politicians do Maxims of Religion.
But I will hear to know you, and to hate you more.
Speak on.
You know whilst Leon lived, whose due they were,
I out of love resigned my love and honour unto you.
Lust, Madam.
I know not Sir:
Your eloquence gave it that title then.
How many dangers walked I fearless through
To falsify your pleasures? your very will.
Nay more your word, nay if I thought by sympathy
A thought of yours, that I imagined you
Might blush to speak, I made it straight my own,
And waked and studied as much to put it into act,
As doth a Gamester upon loss to compass money.
At last we were betrayed Sir, to your Father's spies,
Who denied us afterwards those opportunities
We stole before, be friended by my husband's ignorance.
Now was I brought to that which is the worst of ills,
A seeing, but not en•oying of that which I held dearest.
To see you daily, and to live without you,
Was a death many degrees beyond my own.
I knew the love was great, so great I durst not own it.
Nay more I knew tvvas noble too, so noble
I knew my husband being dead you would not stick
To ask your fathers leave for public Marriage.
Heaven and the gods can witness I intended it.
Nay farther yet, I knew your fathers love,
Wh•ch would not have denied you any thing,
Would also have granted that.
Madam, you riddle strangely.
When I had forecast these easy possibilities,
lyet foresavv one thing that crossed our designs,
That was a sense of honour I had in me.
Me thoughts in honour I could not condescend, you
Should debase your self so low.
It pleased me better to be your Mistress, then your Queen.
And stolen embraces without the scandal
Of a public eye, were sweeter then those
Which might bring upon me for rising greatness
Is still envied) the rancour of the people, and
Consequently distastes against their Prince.
Sir now we may act safely what might have been
Less secure. Your fathers name gives a protection▪
Or if that startle you, we'll call him husband.
Are you in earnest?
As serious as love can be.
Then I want words to tell you how I hate you:
I would sooner meet Megaera 'tween a pair of sheets.
And can you think I should have so small piety,
As to be false unto my fathers bed?
That I loved you once, I confess with shame, and that I should
Have done so still, had you preserved those flames
I think with horror, but for those sins, and
Whatsoever else I must repent, I shall no doubt
Have great occasion, when I shall see the Kingdom
Enveloped in those swarms of plagues your sins call down,
And feel a share of them my self.
For heaven's sake, Madam! for my father's sake,
Nay for my own too, if that have any interest,
Learn now at last a virtue, that may make us
As happy as much as hitherto unfortunate,
And render your story to posterity so burnished
With your shining goodness, that their eyes may not
Perceive the error of your former years.
Perhaps I then shall have a reverence for you,
As great as any son hath for a fathers wife.
You wonder, Lady, to see me talk thus different
From what you saw me half an hour ago.
I looked upon my self as one that had lost a blessing —
But heaven hath been happier to me, for I am now
So far from thinking you one, that I look upon you
As a ply••e, no sin of good Ephorbas could deserve,
But love to you—
Sir, —
Answer me not in words, but deeds;
I know you always talked unhappily.
And if your heart dare do whats ill,
I know it can well teach your tongue excuses.
And is my love then scorned?
The Chaos of that eternal night possess my breast,
That it may not see to startle at any
Undertakings, though they would make
Medusa's Snakes curl into rings for fear.
If greatness have inspird me with thoughts
Of a more brave revenge▪ they shall be acted.
A husbands murder was such a puny sin,
I blush to speak it; but it was great enough
For a Merchants wife: a Queen must be more
Daring in her revenge, nor must her wrath
Be pacified under a whole Kingdoms ruin.
My better Genius thou art welcome, as
A draught of water to a thirsty man,
I ne'er had need of thee till now.
Muster those devils dwell within thy breast;
And let them counsel me to a revenge, as great
As is my will to act it.
Madam, leave words.
The rest you take in breathing makes your anger cool.
Out with it, and if I do it not, if I startle
At any ill to do you service, though it be to kill my mother,
Let me be troubled with the plague of a tender conscience;
And lye sick of repentance a half year after.
What need I tell thee more? Plangus must dye,
And after him Ephorbas, because he is his father.
Madam, he shall. But give me leave to ask you,
How he, for whom alone of all the world you had a passion,
Is now become an object of the hatred, so great,
As others must dye because they have relation to him.
The air is hot yet with those words
I proffered him in satisfaction.
And he refused it, what need I speak?
Is it safe that he should live knows so much by us?
He had been happy had he never known what virtue meant.
I wonder that paltry thing is not banished earth,
It near did any good yet. Beggeries a blessing to it;
Who ere grew rich by virtue?
Madam, wee are not troubled with it. But to our business,
I have thought a way. You know his father loves him,
Tic he shall ruin him, and lets alone for him.
Pish, pish, that cannot be.
These women are always with their Cannots,
What cannot be? have you but read the Sophie?
You will find that Holy (Oh how I hug that fellow's name)
Ruined great Mirza by his father, and his father by his son.
The great Politician while all the Court
Flamed round about him, sat secure and laughed,
Like those throw fire-works among the waving people,
That have nothing but fire and smoke about them,
And yet not singe one hair. Indeed he fell at last;
It is true, but he was shallow in that part oth'plot.
What have we his example but to learn by it?
Praise Plangus to Ephorbas then so far,
That first he may fear for his Kingdom,
And if you do proceed till he grow jealous of his bed,
Twill do the better.
The King coming, I must be gone,
How fares Andromana?
I'm glad this greatness sits so well about thee;
My Court was blessed that hour I knew thee first.
We'll live and still grow happy; we shall flourish
Like some spreading tree that shall n're cease,
Till its proud height o'er look the skies,
I hope I bad fair for a boy to night.
How happy should I count my self, could I but leave
My Kingdom something that had thy image in it.
Sir, never think Iberia can be happy in another son,
When such a Prince as Plangus lives the heir.
Who is the subject of all men's prayers, nay
The deserver too. There's not a man or woman
In the Kingdom hath one good wish within their breast,
But they strait bestow it upon Plangus, a Prince
Whom mothers show their little children, as something
They should learn betime to worship and admire.
I know, Andromana, but—
Sir, virtues perfection
Is at the height in him. What ever after ages bear
I give the name of worth to, must if compared to him
Be but as foils to set his glory off the brighter.
Nor are the men only thus taken with him.
There's not a Lady in the land but sighs with passion for him,
And dreams on him anights.
Husbands grow jealous of him, yet with joy
That they are Plangus Rivals.
All this is nothing. Men talked as loud of
Me when I was young.
Yea but they say Sir,
You were not half so mincing in your carriage,
Nor so majestic. Besides —
I hope they do not make comparisons.
Sir, I thought we could not have discoursed on a more
Welcome theme then what is full of Plangus.
No more you cannot.
Let him as a less star enjoy his splendour,
But '•must not be so great to darken me.
But prithee do they compare us then?
You're discomposed Sir, I have done.
Nay nothing but the remembrance of a foolish dream.
What say they?
Why Sir, some went so far,
To say, they wondered a Lady of my years
Could marry the father, though a King,
When I might have had Plangus himself.
They did not—
Then I confess I blushed, and had been out
Of temper, but that I thought it might be
The Court fashion to talk boldly.
This story jump't just with my dream to night;
Me thought I saw him threatening to kill me,
Because thou had married me;
But the young saucy boy shall know, I hold
My Sceptre strong enough to crush him into Atoms
Did they not name Inophilus?
I think they did.
He had some share of praises too, but it was so,
As gleanings to a lading cart,
They sometimes fell beside.
Then I am satisfied, tic an aspiring youth.
Tic something that unites Plangus and him so.
I must be speedy in resolves.
Who waits without there?
Oh art thou come? stay, let me breathe, or else,
Nay spare your pains; I know it all,
I saw him drink it with as great greediness,
As usurers do unthrift, lands, or jealous husbands
Confirm their Cuckold-ships by ocular testimony.
It took most rarely,
Beyond our hopes. I'll leave the rest to thee,
Thou art so fortunate in all designs.
Go on and prosper.
And I'll attend for an opportunity to meet
With Plangus, and betray him to ruin
As great as unavoidable.
FOr ought I know my bed may be the next,
Men are not bad by halves, nor doth
One mischief stop a man in his carreir of sin.
There's as much reason ith'one, as the other.
Doth he affect my Kingdom because, ••me old?
No, that's not it; he knows I must dye shortly.
Tic not a desire of rule and glory of their bending knees,
Makes him forget his duty—
He may as well covet Andromana because she's handsome,
He satisfies a lust alike in both; well let him be
My Rival in the Kingdom, it is but what
He was born to, and I must leave it him;
But for my wife he must excuse me,
Nay he shall —
Yet now I think on it better, the grounds are slender,
And my suspicions slight; no evidence against him
But the peoples love, and that's no fault of his
Unless deserving be a crime. Who's without there?
Go call in Plangus, and bid him stay,
For I must speak with him.
Nay then ell's dashed, if once it comes to parley.
I must not have them talk.
But here he is.
All health and happiness attend the Prince.
Pray tell me if you saw the King;
Be short, for I am very melancholy.
He parted hence just now, but
With such a fury revelling in his looks,
There had been less danger in a Basillsk.
Went he this way.
Yes Sir,
But thou dost not know what moved him?
I heard some such words as these.
My Rival in the Kingdom—Theres evidence against him—
The people's love — deserving is a crime —
And somewhat else my fear made me forget.
Who was there with him lately?
I cannot tell, but about a quarter of an hour ago
He asked for you, and every time he named you, he seemed angry
Named me? thou art mistaken.
I had almost forgot Sir,
I have message to you from Andromana.
I will not hear one syllable.
No, so she told me, but she charged me speak it, or dye,
For it concerned your life, which she held dearer
Then her own.
I value it not, but speak the mystery.
When first her lips began to move, a blush
Oreflow'd her face, as if her heart had sent
Her tainted blood to seek a passage out.
Then with a shower of tears she told me, how
Inordinate desires had made her but this morning,
Tempt you to the acting of a sin she would not name;
And that your virtue had so wrought upon her
She had not left one thought unchanged.
She loves you still, but with affection
That carries honour, and converted thoughts;
And next she bad me whisper in your ear,
(For time was short) that if you loved her,
Or your self, or did intend to cherish
The peoples growing hopes, you should not come
When the King sent for you.
For something had incensed him so highly
Against you, that there was mighty danger in it.
She bad me hast, for time would not permit her to say more.
I was scarce out of the chamber, when
Your father came and asked for you,
And bad me seek you out with speed
Sir, I should be most proud to serve you.
I thank thee friend, but prithee tell thy Mistress,
Innocence knows no fear: Tic for guilty souls
To doubt their safety. If she would have me safe,
My only way is by present appearance to clear my self,
For I believe my false accusers wish nothing more,
Then that I should be absent.
The Devil's in him sure, he guesseth so right.
She told me so Sir, and would have wished you to it,
But that there was a way to serve you better by.
She saith Ephorbas told her a few minutes hence,
He would call a council, where they'd consult about you.
The place is hanged so that behind the wall Sir,
You may stand secure, and hear what passes,
And according to what they determine, you may
Provide for your safety, only for more security
She wishes you would arm your self —
Sir, pray resolve, she'll pacify the King,
That you appear not presently,
Well, I will be persuaded:
Tell her, I'm resolved, I will not come.
Happiness attend you, half an hour hence,
I'll wait upon you.
We shall reward thee.
Whence should this kindness come? and on a sudden too?
A strange alteration. She who a day ago
Forgot the vows her soul was fettered in,
And but this morning tempted me to a sin,
I can scarce think on without fear, should on
An instant be careful for my safety,
And that from a principle of virtue too.
Who was that with you Sir just now?
An honest fellow certainly; but one I know not.
An honest fellow call you him.
If he have not Rogue writ in great letters i•'s face,
I have no physiognomy. Pray Sir, what was his business to you?
A message from Andromana,
Who out of love desires me not to go to my father,
Because something hath put him in a fume against me.
Did the King send for you?
He did so.
But upon her entreaty you forbore to go?
What then.
Then you are mad Sir,
And tacitly conspire to your own ruin.
Do, take an enemies advice, and dye the object
Both of their joy and scorn.
Where are your senses Sir? or pray whence springs
This friendship of Andromana's? Alas you should not
Measure her malice by the smallness of your own.
She has injured you, she knows it Sir.
And though at present she enjoys her treachery,
She may soon fall beside it;
Ephorbas's not immortal, nor can she promise to her self
Security when you have power to call her ills in question.
Were it nothing else, her safety would make her
To plot your death. I hinder you in talking,
But pray be gone, and when you see your father,
Speak boldly to him, or you are gone for ever.
I tell thee once again Inophilus,
Since I have said I would not go, both heaven and thee
Shall want a motive to make me stir one foot,
Were danger just there before me, running
With open jaws upon me, and had my word been given
To remain here, I would be forced from life,
Before my place.
Here is a bravery now would make a man
For swear all Gallantry, to fool away your life thus
In a humour— I met the Court just now Sir,
As full of whispers, every man's eyes spoke strong amazeme•
My father's sent for with two other Lords,
Eubulus and Anamedes; and the Court Gates are locked.
Resolve Sir, and command me something, wherein
I may have an occasion to serve you.
Then I resolve to do as I am cautioned;
Walk, in I'll tell thee more.
What was his answer then?
Tell him, I am resolved I will not come. Those were
The very words Sir.
'•was very pretty resolute methinks.
If he be grown so stubborn already,
The next we must expect is action.
But yet he bid me if you asked why he came not,
To find some excuse or other.
He could find none himself then:
Call in the Lords, we must be sudden in our execution:
But prithee one thing more, who was there with him?
No body, but I met going to him young Inophilus.
And heard one servant tell another in great haste
Their Lord would speak with some oth'Captains of the Army.
Sit down my Lords; we have a business with you,
Requires your hands and hearts, both speed and counsel;
Our danger's such, that I could wished had flown
Upon us without warning, for so cross the Fates are,
Our safety must be bought at such a price,
That we must lose what is as dear to us
Almost as it. Tic Plangus death or mine
Must secure the others life; nay startle not.
If I am grown as wearisome to you
As to him, your calling is in vain, my Lords;
Nor shall I labour longer to preserve
A life denied me by the gods and you.
But if there's any here who hath a son
Brought to these years with so much care and love
As mine hath been; think what a grief it is
To lose him, and shed one tear with me.
But for that son to plume kimself with feathers
Plucked from his fathers wings, would melt ones eye-balls.
Yet Plangus who hath vizarded his ends
With virtue, finding it useless now, hath thrown
It from him, and openly attempts my crown and life.
When mischiefs wheel once runs, how fast it speeds,
Headlong to put in act the blackest deeds!
Were my crown his, had he my life to give,
Though he would let me I would scorn to live.
Sir, we are cal•'d upon a great affair,
And if it be true, the speed of our resolves
Shall be as great as it.
Your Majesty hath reigned so happily, and long,
We will not think a time beyond it.
And such, so great your virtue still hath been,
Strangers have been enamoured and admired it.
Our enemies that could have wished it less,
Have yet sate down with envy, not attempted
Ought against you, knowing (I'm codfident)
By such injustice the gods would be their foes.
Me thinks tic therefore much less likely
That Plangus, who hath hitherto been found
A miracle of filial piety,
And one that we may say was born the heir
To all your virtues, all your goodness,
As well as Kingdom; who counts it glory
As much to be an honest man, as a great Prince.
I say for him, whom as he is your son,
And as we hitherto have found him full
Of worth and honour, we cannot but behold
As him in whom the spreading hopes of all
Iberia grow, and promise to themselves
A still green happiness, that ne'er shall know
What Autumn, or a naked Winter means.
For him that hath scarce yet put off
Those clothes which still wear the badges
Of the great danger he was in, not for
Himself, my Liedge, but you and us; for had
He wished the ruin of his father and his Country,
The Argives would have done that for him,
And he not have been called in question.
But when we must remember with what wings
He flew to meet the Torrent, both against
The counsel of his friends, and his own hopes;
How love to you and us spurred him on forward
To those impossibilities, which nothing
But love and valour durst have attempted.
Why then methinks it is strange, yea very strange
Thus in a moment to have flung all nature off,
And all Religion; and that Sir against you,
Whom we all know and think with fear
(But our sading hopes spring fresh from Plangus)
Must shortly pay your tribute to the grave.
Not that we doubt your Majesty hath cause
To apprehend a danger, only it is wished
Those who informed you were examined strictly,
And Plangus sent for to answer for himself.
Slanders like Mists still vanish at the sight
Of Innocents, who bring their lies to light.
If an Oration could have made him clear,
No doubt my fears are vain, and we shall lye
Still sleeping in security, as great
And lasting as Plangus, and his Accomplices
Can wish upon us, nor wake till we are bound
In the securest chains, death's fetters.
That I am old is true, and Plangus knows it,
He would have catched a Cannon bullet sooner else,
Between his naked hands; then have provok'•
My fury; but age hath froze me
To an icy numness, yet shall he know
My veins have fire as well as his, and when
Incen••, my eyes shoot as much poison too.
What you allege about his battle against the Argive
As an excuse, it is a proof against him,
Though thieves rob others, yet they •ight themselves,
For those that rob when strangers set on them,
And all unite against a common enemy.
Had Plangus private interests not held
Him to us, no doubt had left us naked
Of all defence; but an intestine fury,
To see the Argives bear away the fruits
Of all his labours, all his treasons,
Shot him into despair, and made him play
A game was almost lost, rather then give all over.
Besides, that action hath endeared him to the people;
Gained him the Soldiers hearts with so great ease,
The danger's nothing in respect of the rise
He takes from thence to climb up to his ends.
And for the virtue that hath gulled us all,
I'd blush to speak it, that a son of mine
Should ever be so base to seek a cloak
For what he doth, but that I have disclaimed
All my relations to him, and would adopt
A Cannibal sooner for son then he
The evidence we have is what we wish were less,
Then might I hug my Plangus and he me,
But since the Fates and his own ills deny
That intercourse; what can remain,
But that we should proceed to sentence
Speedy as themselves, and stop the ill, which may
Strike when it is night, or while tic called to day.
He knows his guilt too well, and hath denied
To come, that so he might be justified.
Once disobeyed as father, the next thing
Will be Rebellion to me as his King.
As sure as death
This is one of the Rogues that hath his Roguery to act,
And comes in like something that brought news
In the latter end of a play. Now shall we have
Some strange discovery—How the Rogue stares.
No sooner had we shut the gates, my Liedge.
Then an uncertain rumour spread among the people
That Plangus was in danger;
When if your ever saw a Hive of Bees.
How if you stir but one, the whole swarm moves,
And testify their anger; so strait whole crowds
Of people, the greatest half not knowing what they came for, swarmed to the gates, and with confused cries, hindered them∣selves from being understoood; till some having divers times cried Plangus, some their Prince, all with one note made up a common voice, and so continued till some Captains with one or two selected Troops made up to them, and having promised them they would secure the Prince, desired them to withdraw.
And when they came so nigh as to be heard, they did in earnest what the other had attempted with so much noise and failed in; •or they told the Porter in plain Soldiers language, they would either see Plangus safe, or force the gates upon him. He in this exigent hath sent to know your pleasure.
How say you now my Lords,
Where is the innocence, the love to you and us?
For my part I will meet the danger;
Tame expectation is beneath a King,
Only let me entreat you to see my Queen safe.
It is pity she should smart who hath no sin
To answer for, but calling me husband.
Plangus—Iberia shall be thine—But
With the curses of the angry gods, and a kind
Injured dying father.
Heaven bless you Sir, what a despair is this?
Because you hate a hangman, you will be
Your executioner your self. Believe me,
That which presents so great danger to you
I look upon with joy: There is no subject
That loves you or the Prince, but must be glad
To see the zeal Iberians bear to a true virtue,
When bending under an unjust oppression.
No doubt their love had been as great to you,
Had you been in like danger.—Besides, my Lord,
You are not sure it is with the Prince's consent
The Soldiers do this. My life for yours
You will be safe, let the worst come—
Let us go meet your fears.
Happy am I my Lord,
This sudden fright hath rescued me from being made
The subject of some villains lust, who
With his sword drawn just now was forcing me
To lewd embraces, if you command to search the Court,
He cannot be far hence, for he ran that way.
O impudence!
That durst attempt a sin (darkness and woods
Have too many eyes for) in the open Court.
I shall be with you — the Devil hath
Armour on —
Drag him to torture —
My son! why have I lived to see this!
Away with him to death, the air will grow infectious,
Why stay you?
Unhand the Prince, or else by heaven he treads
Into his grave that moves a foot to touch him.
Madam, though Plangus noble self was blind,
And could not see the deep black darkness of your
Hellish actions; his friends had eyes about them.
Was this your love? this your repentance?
This your advice, your counsel? I must confess had I,
And these his noble friends here, been rule•d by him,
Ever this he'd been a sacrifice to your revenge and you.
Why stand you mute Sir? want you a tongue to justify
Your innocence, our swords and we maintain.
And now, my Liedge, we turn to you,
Whom we have served as truly
As ever subjects did any Prince alive,
And whilst you're worthy, we will do so still,
But vvee'l be no mans slaves alive,
Much less be his that is another, while this base Witch,
For so she is, constrains you to do actions
Children would blush at, and wise men laugh at,
Which will after leave you both to repentance and despair.
This beggar, whom to there day you took up as some lost thing,
Gave your honour to, and in that our safety,
That knew less to be good then Devils do, and hath
Ills lodged in her, that would make a hell beyond that
The Furies dwell in. Banish her hence,
Send her to some place, where murders, ripens,
Or sins yet unheard of, do inhabit,
And where she can do us no mischief.
Do you betake your self
To your former virtue, and restore the Prince
To those affections you once had for him,
We then perhaps may live to see Iberia happy.
Why am I forced thus to declare his shame,
Which at the bound strikes me, and is made my own.
You know not how well Plangus can dissemble,
He is an hypocrite, I need not tell you more,
Those three syllables comprehend all ill.
My Queen just now escaped from his base attempt
Wherein he would have forced her to have damned
Herself and him, and dishonoured me.
What meaned that Armour on, and why so guarded?
Where was a danger threatened him?
Or doth he think his conscience could not
Sting him through it?
I wish that he might live, my Lords, but as nature
That as he is my son bids me preserve him;
So honour which pleads to the King stronger
Then nature can▪ tells, me for that very reason,
I can less pardon him then something born
A stranger to my blood.—But I deserve
To dye as well as he; if he be grown
A burden to the earth, I am so too,
That gave the Monster being.
Wherefore let me be dravvn to execution too,
For fathers are guilty of their childrens ills.
Would Plangus then have forc'• Andromana;
Yes, so would Daphne have ravished Phoebus,
I'll undertake Goats are less salt then she—
But for his Armour—can any man that breathes
One common air with her not need an Armour?
Brass walls cannot be security enough.
Why speak you not Sir? are you dumb too?
It is for them to speak are sure to be believed,
And not for him that is condemned as guilty;
Words can excuse slight faults.
If mine are esteemed such, that all my actions,
A speaking duty of one and twenty years
Speak not enough to clear me, silence shall.
I have no more to say therefore,
But to bid you do your duty to the King,
And ask him pardon for the intemperate zeal,
Heaven knows I wished it not, nor would I buy
My safety at one of my father's angry thoughts
Much less his fears,
For those I fall by.
Obey my father, and if ye love me, Gentlemen,
Shed not one tear for Plangus:
For I am timely taken from those plagues
This women's crying sins must bring
Upon Iberia, and make you wish
That you had died as soon and innocent as I.
That I was nothing I confess, that what I am
I owe to Ephorbas; nay, that the greatness
I am now in, tells me it is too high
To be secure, my fears bear witness.
I wish my life would excuse Plangus his,
At least my blood wash off the blackness of his guilt,
Heaven knows it should not be one minute
Ere he should be restored to his former virtues,
But since it cannot be, I'll in and weep,
Not for my self but him.
Millions of plagues go with thee
Sir, you shall along with us, we will not
Trust you, or to the King, or her.
WHat Politician was there ever yet
Who swimming through a sea of plots &amp; treasons,
Sunk not at last in the very havens mouth?
And shall I do so too? No, my thoughts prompt me,
I shall be told in story as the first
That stood secure upon the dreadful ruins
He had thrown down beneath him. Yet I am nigh
The precipice I strive to shun with so much care.
I have betrayed Plangus tic true, and still
Have found a growing fortune, but so long
As jealousy binds up Ephorbas thoughts
From searching deeper deeper; Tic not well
That Plangus lives at all, though he be disgrac't
H'has friends enough about the King, and they will find
A time to pacify him, which will be my undoing,
He must not therefore live. Andromana
Is of that mind too; but how to compass it—
Or when perhaps I have, what will become of me?
Nothing more usual then for those folks
Who have by sinister means reached to the top
Of the mountain of their hopes, but they throw down
And forget the power that raised them;
Indeed necessity enforces them, lest others climb
By the same steps they did, and ruin them.
I must not therefore trust her woman-ship,
Who though I know she cannot stand without me now,
Yet when she's Queen alone
Fortune may alter her, and make her look upon me
As one whose life whispers unto her own guilt;
It is not safe to be the object of a Princes fear.
Then she will find others will be as apt
To keep her up, as I to raise her;
I will prevent her first.
Time is not ripe yet, but when it is
(For I must walk on with her a little farther)
I will unravel all this Labyinth
Even to the King himself. Then let her accuse me,
Though she should damn her self to hell,
I know she'll be believed no more, then
Plangus hath been hitherto.
Thus shall I still grow great, though all the world
Be to a dreadful ruin madly hurled.
I can no longer hold, tic not in the power
Of fate to make me less; bid me out-stare
The Sun, out-run a falling star,
Feed upon flames, or pocket up the clouds,
And so burn up a land with plagues, the son
Of flaming heat, for want of rain
To cool the yawning chaps of the dry earth;
Or if there be a task mad Iuno's hate
Could not invent to plague poor Hercules,
Impose it upon me, I'll do it without a grudge:
Condemn me to a Gally, load me with chains,
Whose weight may so keep me down, I can scarce swell
Under my burden to let out a sigh. I would overcome all
Were there a Deity that men adore
And throw their prayers upon, that would lend
Just ears to humane wishes,
I would grow great by being punished, and be
A plague my self, so that when people cursed
Beyond invention, to their prodigious Rhetoric
This Epiphonema should be added,
Become as miserable as wretched Plangus.
I have been jaded, basely jaded, by those tame fools
Honour and piety, and now am waked into revenge,
Breathing forth ruin to those first spread
This drowsiness upon my soul.
A woman! O heaven! had I been gulled
By any thing had born the name of man!
But this will look so sordidly in story▪
I shall be grown, discourse for Grooms and Foot-boyes,
Be ballated, and sung to filthy tunes.
But do I talk still? well I must leave
This patience: And now Ephorbas
Since thou hast wrought me to this temper,
Isle be revenged with as much skill as thou
Hast injured me. I•e to these presently,
For my hour-glass shall not return ten minutes longer,
And having killed my self before thee,
Isle pluck my heart out, tell thee all
My innocence, and leave thee hemmed in with
A despair thicker then Egyptian darkness.
I know thou can not choose but dye for grief,
But here he is.
Riddle upon riddle: I have dreamt this night
Plangus was cloathd like innocence, all white;
And Andromana then methoughts was grown
So black, nothing but all one guilt was shown.
What shall I do? Shall I believe a dream?
Which is a vapour born along the stream
Of fancy, and sprung up from the gross sumes
Of a full stomach, sent to the upper rooms
Of the brain by our ill Genius to spoil our sight,
And cloud our judgements like a misty night.
Why do I doubt? tic ominous to stay
Demurring when the way is plain: Is day
Or night best to judge colours? shall I stand
Trying the waters soundness, when the land
Pre••nts firm footing? Truth by day appears,
And 〈…〉 •appears hope to find my fears
〈…〉 And yet •e thinks it is very strange
〈…〉 should suddenly thus change,
〈…〉 his nature off, I did not so
〈…〉 young I am res•lvd to know
〈…〉 •ear this mist from fore my eyes,
I• 〈…〉 be done by care, by gold, or spies▪
So Badgers dig the holes
And Foxes live in them: Of all Factors
State-factors are the worst, and yet least to themselves
Of a•l their labour. This Libacer is wading
To the throat in blood to do me service,
And isle reward him with a halter.
Tame fool, can he imagine I remove
A husband and a son, to suffer him
To live still and upbraid my ills.
It is resolved.
But here she is, I must speak fairly for a while:
How doth it succeed now, my darling?
Shall we be great? great alone?
As great as pride and fullness of revenge
Can swell us. Hark in your ear, Madam,
Isle tell you all our plot, but softly,
For perhaps the jealous walls may echo
Back the treason▪
I bore whilst I could, but no tic grown
Too great to be contained in humane breast,
And it shall out, though hooped with walls of brass.
Are they at it? I stood once a listening at their entreaty,
This time at my own I'll stand and hearken.
It is impossible.
I tell you no, Isle aggravate the injuries,
And tell him how basely poorly it was
For a father to betray his son so.
His piety will never—
But his fury shall, Isle stab the King my self, and bring
Those witnesses shall swear it was Plangus.
Nay then tic time to strike;
There, carry thy intents to hell.
Help, Murder, Murder, a Rape, a Rape.
What dismal note was that?
Sir, there you see your Martyr,
Whose force being too weak to save my honour,
His fidelity was greater, and died a loyal sacrifice
Offered by the impious hand of that vile man.
O heaven! doth not the earth yet gape and svvallovv thee.
Thy life shall be my crime no longer; I gave it thee
And thus resume it with a thousand curses.
Sir, I at length am happy
To the height of all my wishes.
I am a going suddenly—from all
My troubles all your fears —
But I will tell my story first—
How you have wronged, and been wronged your self.
This woman— to be short—
Hath tvvin'd like Ivy with my naked limbs
Before she married you—
— And would — Oh — in spite of death
I will go on — have tempted me to bed her since
— Upon refusal she turned her love to hate,
And plots my ruin — And—
Next your death — I can no more—
I killed the instrument — farewell —
—Forgive me—
Can this be true Andromana.
Do you believe it?
I wish I had not cause —
Sir every syllable was true he told you;
Whose words I thus confirm
Ime slain, mercy heaven,
You should have come a little sooner.
Do I see well? or is the Prince here slain?
He is, and cause you love him,
Carry that token of
My love to him, I know he will take it kindly that you take
So long a journey only to see him.
It was the Devil struck sure,
A woman could not do it — Plangus Oh —
Heaven defend us! what a sight is here?
The King, the Prince both slain? what and my son too?
Only this woman living? speak out
Scritch-ovvl, Witch, how came they by their deaths:
By me, how else?
Lets torture her.
I can prevent you, I would not live a minute longer,
Unless to act my ills again, for all Iberia.
I have lived long enough to boast an act,
After which no mischief shall be new—
Lets in, and weep our weary lives away;
When this is told, let after ages say,
But Andromana none could have begun it,
And none but Andromana could have done it.

HA! what divine shapes strike mine eyes, and make
My tongue to falter, and my limbs to shake,
Through a respectful awe and reverence,
Which thus so strongly seyseth on my sense?
These are no Fantasmes, such as we present,
But true Divinities from Heaven sent
To grace our Earthly Theater; then I,
Who cannot stand before such Majesty,
Fall on my knee, and in this posture pray
I may be heard to speak before the Play:
Madam, to you then, from whose beauteous sight
Those lesser Stars derive their borrowed light,
First I address me; and although I'm sent
From the proud Poet with a complement
To let you know that he protests and saith
His Scenes will please, I cannot have that faith:
He swears that he prepares a Piece so rich
In high conceptions, that it will bewitch
Your eyes and ears, a Banquet that may please
The Danity Palates of the Deities:
Unheard of vanity! I cannot choose
But undeceive you, know tic an abuse,
You'll meet with no feast here, since the chief dish
Which he presents, is neither flesh nor fish,
But a mere Fantasme, garnished like a coarse,
Larded, and served up with some love discourse,
Vnsolid matter flourishes of vvitt,
And airy fancies, in my judgment fit
But for the public Stage, not to appear
Within the verge of this illustrious Sphere,
Where nothing but the quintessence of wit
Should dare to enter: humbly I submit
To your transcendent judgment my advise,
And wish it may be found more rash then wise,
For deign to applaud the Play, and I'm content
To suffer for it any punishment,
to Appease the Poet, whose rage will be hot
Upon my head, if you protect me not:
Auspicious Planets, rule this night, and shed
Sweet influences on your board and bed.
ARt sure of it, Clarina? is it possible
That Isabella now is sensible
Of what I suffer for her, and resents
In my behalf the fire which her fair eyes
Have kindled in my heart?
Sir, I assure you,
Tic an undoubted truth, which I received
From her own mouth.
I'm much astonished
With a success so charming.
For my part,
I wonder that you are astonished at it:
Is it so great a miracle, I pray you,
To see a Maid to change? we have a mind
Alternately to turn love into hatred,
Or hatred into love, such an effect
As this so common in our Sex, should not
Seem strange unto you: Isabella. is
Of age sufficient to feel the effect
Both of the fire she kindles, and o'th'evill
Which she procures; the end, Sir, of her coldness
Should not surprise you: who gives love, can easily
Take it again; and when a young heart never
Hath loved any thing, at the first fire
That sparkles, tic inflamed; my Mistress is
At sensible as fair you will be happy,
If you are faithful.
But come thou by her order?
To speak truly,
She willed me to speak as from my self;
But, Sir, your goodness is a gage that makes me
To tell you all, tic by her express order
That I have uttered this secret to you
Of such importance; but you must be silent
And discreet, if yov'll profit by the knowledge.
But may I not at least acquaint her brother
With my good fortune? he is bound by friendship
To favour me, and I should doe him wrong
To disguise any thing to him.
Oh! Sir,
That's it my Mistress, dreads, believe me,
Above all things: so far you must be from
Acquainting him therewith, that you should fear
Least he might have the least suspicion of it:
Know you not yet that her inhumane Father,
Will not permit her to give you her hand,
That to uphold the splendour of his house,
He'll raise his Son unto his Daughtets cost,
And, as tic often practised now a days)
Tosh one designs his goods, and to the other
A Monastery?
I know well that her Father
Hath fuch a purpose, but though he be of
A nature so inhumane, sure, her brother
Is not so barbarous: we are tied together
By such fair bonds of friendship, that I know
He'll mix his interests with mine.
If I
May frelie speak my thoughts here, I must tel you
That interest can break the strongest bonds,
That commonly men better keep their wealth
Then their fidelity, and that there is
No friend which they love equal with themselves
Be sure you trust no person now a days,
Danger still follows too much considence:
The less a good is known, the sweeter tic:
Lastly Sir, keep your secrets to your self,
My Mistress doth desire it.
Oh! Clarina,
It is enough, there is no teason more
In this point to examine now, but I
Obey without dispute; the name of Friend
Must yield to that of Lover; but shall I
See our fair Mistress by thy means this evening?
Sir, it is very late.
I know thy skill.
And thou know ??? 
Yes, your liberalities.
I'll go t'advertise her, as you desire,
And presently return, if you will stay,
Either to bring you up, or to persuade her
To come down to you. ??? 
Oh how sweet it is
To mollisie a hard and cruel heart!
How charming is Love, when tic mutual?
what high content, what ecstasy of joy
Feels a poor captive in his troubles, when
The hand that tames him, helps to bear his chains?
A good gained easily is not esteemed:
The more it costs, the more tic precious:
Although the Horizon's covered with darkness,
I easily discern the door to open;
Doubtless, tic Isabella, I'll advance.
My happiness is greater then I dared
To fancy is, I can't express unto you,
By what so ever endeavour I can use,
The fullnss of my passion and my joy.
Dear friend, I doe beseech thee let us leave
Vain complements, I know shy goodness for me.
Good God! how I'm confounded! tic her brother Fabritio. ??? 
Thou know then, it seems,
How highly fortune is propitious to me,
My marsiage is concluded and agreed,
And thou come without doubt to wish me joy.
Friend ???
I'm certain, it is this that brings thee hither:
Thou wilt congratulate my happiness.
How ready, and ingenious he is
To draw me out of trouble? ??? 
Thou comes to take part in my ravishment.
Thou should doe me a great wrong, to judge otherwise.
Know then that our desires did jump together:
I was a going hastily unto thee
To tell thee the glad no Was, I did believe
Thou knew it not, and did not think to be
Prevented, I am highly redevable
To thy rare friendship.
I doe nothing for thee
That is considerable, my interest
Alone brings me hither, and thou need not
To thank me for it.
How! what interest
Can thou have in this place?
The same which friendship
Enjoyneth me to take in thy contents.
Between two faithful friends, such as we are,
Every thing should be common, joy and happiness
Possesses both, when one of them enjoys it.
Know when I bear a part in thy good fortune,
I more oblige my self then thee, and am
So well paid for my care and tenderness,
That there needs no addition of thanks.
Know also of my part when Fortune doth
Confer her favours on me, they are dubled
When Carlos shares therein, and would diminish
If he should not partake them; but who comes
So late forth of our house?
SIr, enter quickly;
My Mistress Isabella in her chamber
Expected you and will. ???
How, what will she?
Misfortune! tic Fabritio, I must
Dissemble. ??? 
Well, what will she, finish now.
Sir, she would speak with you,
T'expresse the joy whereto her love engages her
On the conclusion of your marriage.
I know her tenderness, and what I owe her;
Carlos and I will see her presently
To give her a good night.
IT is Fabritios voice this which I hear,
I cannot come forth in a fitter time.
I willingly waite on you, your desires
Are mine, you need not doubt them ??? 
Let us enter.
How this success favours my flame! ??? 
But who doth stop me? Heaven! it is a Woman,
It seems she Would speak with me Carlos stay.
I waite you here.
How comes it she withdraws
When I advance?
Without doubt she hath something
To speak to you in private.
In the hope
Wherein I am that I am he you seek,
Be not offended that I dare t'approach:
I've courage and civility enough
T'esteeme me fortunare if I could serve you:
T'engage me, Madame, to the offer which
I make to use my utmost cares and pains
T'accomplish your desires, it is sufficient
That Heaven hath given you the advantage to be
Of that fair Sex unto which all owe homadge:
If I may notwithstanding without giving you
The least offence be honoured to know
Your name, you will increase my Zeal in giving me
So fair a satisfaction.
Take it then,
My dear Fabritio, and know Climene.
Climene, my fair Mistress, what occasion
Could bring thee here at such an hour as this?
Thou doublest my fear and perturbation;
The more thy voice assures me; the more
Uncertain am I: and so far am I
From coming forth of error, that I enter
Into new Labyrinths, and doubts, I was
More happy when I knew thee less; oh what
Design hast thou, I cannot comprehend it?
Leave me to speak, then, I will tell it thee.
I will not say what joy and happy tapture
Seized me when I understood the news,
That by a joint accord our friends and parents
At last had yielded to our marriage;
My love, which thou should not forget, exemps me
To discourse this unto thee, and enjoins me
To a relation much more important,
And much less pleasing,
How! what thing is there
In nature that can trouble our repose,
Since as our hearts, our parents are agreed?
Tic of a longer date then from to day
That Love uses to mingle with his sweets
Much bitterness, those whom he flattered
At first, are seldom happy, his deceit
Is equal to his blindness, and like Fortune,
H'is constant only in inconstancy:
This is a truth, which thou shalt but to sensibly
Conceive: one day which was the fatalist
Of all my life, wherein my father burdened
With age and sickness had the sorry honour
To be by the Duke of Ferrari visited:
This Prince knew me in this extremity,
And thought to see some charms upon my pale
And blubbered face, my no eyes unluckily
Wept unto his, and from the sources of
My tears his flame took birth,
Oh Climene,
I fear ???
That fear offends me; my heart wholly
Was thine, I gave it thee, and the Dukes passion
Stirred up in me nothing but my aversion:
Though I concealed this fire, thou hast no cause
To complain at it, for before it was known,
I hoped to quench it, and I scarce should yet
Reveile it to thee, if thy interest
Obliged me not to speak: on the report
Which was spread of our marriage, the passion
Of the Duke was converted into rage;
He came unto me in his first transport,
Swear to me solemnly that my choice was
The sentence of thy death, that Love opposing
My punishment, he thought to doe more in
Destroying what I loved; and to the end
He might with the more rigour punish me,
He would even to the bottom of thy heart
Go for to seek me: Lastly knowing well
That his desire is to assault my life
In threatening thine, conducted here by love,
And more by fear, I come to conjure thee
T'avoid his fury; fly hence, what soever
Care for me keeps thee back here, and to save
My life, preserve thine.
This discourse is cruel
As much as it appears sweet: should you
Advice me to absent me from your person?
Sure I should little know what tic to love,
To obey you in this point: Come, come, say all,
Confess your love is changed, that my remains
Of hope must vanish, and that the Dukes flame
Hath dazzled you, I see well that mine here
Is troublesome, that you abandon Love
To follow Fortune, and that poor Fabritio
With all his fetters pleases your fair eyes
Less then a crowned Captive: I condemn not
This signal rigour; you deprive me of
A happiness whereof I was not worthy,
And in receiving of a Sceptre offered
Unto your beauties, you obtain much less
Then you deserve. Reign, nothing is dishonou???rabble,
To gain a diademne; and as I love you
More then my self, I shall esteem my death
A fair design, if entering into
A tomb, I leave you in a throne,
Fabritio,
Can thou love me, and speak thus? reallie
Thou detract'st from my glory in this thought
That I can be unfaithful, banish it,
It is thy enemy and mine; suspicion
Between us two should be a hideous monster;
Can thou be ignorant with any justice,
That I love less a sceptre then Fabritio,
And find more joy in being captive with thee
To reign over thy heart, then ore the universe?
It is enough, Climene, my devout
And amorous soul, which ever must adore thee
Although thou should abuse it, would believe thee:
And though a lye carries a swarthy face,
In issumg from thy mouth it would have char???mes;
But how comes it to pass that when they sweet???nes
For my sake flies a crown, thou dost ordain me
To depart, and to leave thee? how to leave thee.
And in a Rivals power to! no, this remedy
Is worse then the disease. Suffer my presence,
Or suffer my despair, what matter is it
Whether the Duke, or absence kill Fabritio
When two inevitable dangers meet
To invade us at once, tic wisdom still
To think of the most pressing, here thy ruin
Is certain, being absent, thou can live;
Consider this, that to what punishment
Soar our love exposes thee, thou can not
Suffer but I must suffer too, nor dye,
But I must cease to live, for know absuredlie
My days shall finish with thy destiny;
When we are dead, the grave shall be a witness
Of our reunion? where I see thee not
No object pleases me; if thou art yet
Incredulous of words and protestations,
At least believe my tears.
Oh open not
Those precious sluices, keep that treasure in;
Increase not my affliction with thy grief:
Not all the blood which tunneth in my veins
Is worth the least drop of these liquid pearls,
The evils wherewith my life is threatened
Are too well payed with a single tear.
Oh leave those vain discourses, and depart.
Well, well, Climene, I must then obey.
I have as much cause here to be afflicted,
As satissied, I fear more thy departure
Then wish it, and I give my faith unto thee,
That thou should not depart, if I could keep thee
And expose but my self. Let's separate;
But what! this fatal image robs me
Already of my strength, spare me, I pray thee,
In parting hence the danger here to dye
In bidding thee adieu. ??? 
Climene flies me;
O lamentable destiny!
FRiend, comfort thee.
I am inconsolable,
And must die, Carlos, since I must absent me.
Thou shalt be happier, if thou wilt hear me,
I have a means that thou shalt not depart,
And yet, in safety too, shalt see Climene,
Alone, and without trouble.
To abuse
Thy friend, is but an odd way, in my judgment,
T'assist him, tic to aggravate my evil,
And not to heal it: is there any art
To tender me invisible?
For once then
Believe that I will doe for thee a thing
Which seems impossible, give me leave to speak
And in a moment thou shalt lose thy grief,
And thy astonishment: Thou know well
That Italy hath for a certain time
Been troubled with two factions, whose partakers
In every city name themselves a loud
The Guelps and Gibelins: on this occasion
My Father and Climenes against each other
Took an immortal hatred; through their credit
And their condition, each made himself
Head of a faction; the Duke receiving
Advertisement thereof, and apprehending.
The issue of this enmity, so strongly
Conceived, made them both to be arrested,
Not withont, reason, and confined them
As prisoners, each one to his own house.
My Father who saw his pretension vain,
Knowing his house was near unto the others,
Had recourse unto cunning, and believed
That every thing was lawful to destroy
The greatest of his enemies; to work then
His ruin, and in private too, he cause
A close Mine to be dug even underneath
His adversaries garden; being finished,
My Father fell sick, and soon after dyed;
I was, as thou know by the right of birth
Heir of his goods, and not of his revenge;
But though I should now have a hatred for
Climene, I should sacrifice it wholly
Unto thy love; in opening this Mine,
Thou may, without being seen, have easy access
Unto thy Mistress, and to execute it
Securely, we will make all men believe
That thou art gone.
How infinitely am I
Indebted to thee? how shall I acquit me?
My friendship is offended very much
At these expressions of acknowledgments.
I'll to the Duke express t'understand
What his intentions are concerning thee.
Enter into my house. ??? 
I'll go t'impart
This secret to Climene. But what hear I?
Doe that which I commanded.
Tic the Duke.
Rage overcomes my reason.
What averseness
So ever Climene hath unto my flame
Some little hope yet flattered my soul,
I've gained her woman; who hath promised
This night to bring me ptivatelie into
Her chamber, the door opens, Iacinta!
Yes every thing succeeds to your wish,
My Mistress is deceived and takes you for
Fabritie, she commanded me to open
Without delay, her order doth excuse me
In letting you to enter, lose no time;
But I hear her descend, speak not a word,
Without doubt, she'll mistake her self.
We will
Be cleared therein, let us approach a little.
Where would thou, my dear Lover?
Ha, dear Lover!
Heavens! what is this I hear!
I have cause, reallie,
To complain of thee, coldest thou not one night
At my request refrain my company?
Yet I excuse thee upon this presumption
That who loves well is little Master of
Himself, and can't deny but my charmed soul
Complains here but of being too much loved.
May I believe this? Heaven! am I enchanted?
Thou need not doubt this truth; when I would be
Angry against thee, suddenly I check
My self, and when my mouth accuses thee,
My soul defends thee.
Fortunate Fabritio ??? 
O happy Rival! ??? 
Thou dost know my love.
I knew it ill. ??? 
What! answer thou nothing?
Doubts thou my flame, or fear thou that another
More pleasing object drives thee from my soul?
What ever happens, rest thy self assured
That my love and my life shall have one course,
And that it is impossible for me
No more to love thee.
How unhappy am I? ??? 
How miserable am I? ??? 
What obliges thee
To murmur still thus to thy self? must I
Confirm my love unto thee by some oaths?
If my flame for thee make not all my glory,
If thou alone possess not my heart,
And all my thoughts, let ???
Swear not ingrate full and perfidious Woman,
It needeth' not, I doe believe thy words.
Thy death shall soon follow thy insolence:
My Guards.
It is in vain to make resistance.
Pursue, and kill him.
Alas! I'm dead with fear.
I faint, I faint, Iacinta, hold me up.
Let him dye, tic but just, too great a merit
Is often a great crime, in ruining
This Rival, I may gain what I desire;
And if he perish not, my hope must perish:
Let's see if the success answeareth my wish.
OH, Sir, tic done, he's dead, in vain he did
Endeavour to defend himself, he fell
Pierced with a thousand mortal strokes, his soul
Found overtures enough to sally forth
His bloody body, covered o'er with wounds
Oh! stay Sir. ???
Thy cares are superfluous.
I am revenged, laciuta, and Fabritio
Is dead.
Oh if you love Climene, enter not
Into the house, she's scarce recovered yet
Of a great faintness which seif d'on her spirits.
The blood which I have shed, will cost her tears,
I will not go, to add unto her griefs,
But retire me, a while, in the mean time,
Valerio, let it be your charge to go
Unto Fabritios Father, to acquaint him
With his sons death, and further let him know
That for his rash and saucy insolence,
He hath received but a just recompense.
WHo enters there?
Madame, it is Valerio,
Who from the Duke Discourses with your Father
What pressing business might bring him here?
To tell you, I should be a Prophetess.
A message at this hower's not ordinary.
It doth appear as strange to me, as you.
Let us expect the issue on it, and change
Discourse,
You fine would have me speak of Carlos;
Madame, confess it.
I cannot deny
But I am pleased, when I hear him praised.
I should not be in my right sense if I
Should speak ill of him, he is a brave man,
And of a Liberal and obliging nature,
He merits much.
But in what manner did he enrertaine
The intelligence thou give him that my h?????? our
Towards him was inclined to more sweetness,
And that my heart at last disp of d it self.
To love him?
With transports, and ecstasies,
Which cannot be expressed.
Hast thou been careful
To tell him cunningly, according to
Those rules I gave thee, that to doe him service
Thou did betray thy Mistress, and give him
That notice without my consent?
Yes, Madame
I told him so, and very handsomely;
But your strange love surprises me, you fear
that he should know it, and yet tell it him:
If he less knew it, would you be more pleased?
What humorous fancies are in Lovers spirits?
Though I love Carlos, (be it reason, or
Fancy that guides me) I believe I doe
My self wrong, when I doe justice to him;
The hashfulnes which Heaven hath put into
Our Sex, for bids us to be free in what
Concerns the point of love; nor must we think
any thing lawful in relation to it:
And by that power, which I know not my self,
I cannot without blushing say, I love:
It seems that our eyes made to tame hearts,
When those that were our captives doe become
Our conquerors, although they find the dart
Lovely and charming that subjected us,
Cannot without some shame, behold this change
The art to despise love, my heart no longer
Can practise, but o Heaven! whom see I Carlos?
So late here in my chamber.
PArdon me
This bold intrusion, seeing the door open,
I could not but lay hold of the occasion;
And following my love, I thought I might
With out offending you with disrespect
Enter, to cast my self at your fair feet.
How fancy you that I can be so little
Respectful of my honour, as to suffer
A visit from you without being offended?
No, Sir, your hope deceives you, and this liberty
You take, denotes in you little love,
Or too much Vanity: can I believe
You love me well, in giving to your self
A licence thus to make foule-mouth'd detraction
Inveigh against me, or can you imagine,
Without great folly in your self, that I
Can approve this design so little modest,
And not b'offended at it?
Though I can
Produce some reason here for my defence,
I hold me criminal, since I offend you,
And should but little profit to persist
In the opinion of my innocence
When your fair mouth condemns me,
I condemn you,
Tic very true, and for your punishment
I banish you; you must go forth.
I dare not
Appeal upon your sentence, but retire;
I obey with regreet, but without murmur.
How Sir, begone so soon, what motives pray you,
Induce you thereunto?
Since you ordain it
I must depart, tic fit that I obey you.
I should think, Carlos, that you obey here
Some what too quickly for a perfect Lover:
Believing that you loved me, I appeared
Too proud, and scornful: it is an asstir'd maxim.
That one loves coldly what he quitteth easily;
Love is but il expressed by respects;
Who readily obeys, knows not to love
I am astonished at this discourse;
Can you Complain, I quit you, Isabella,
When I obey you against my sentiment
When my love glittered in my submission,
And when by a kind heat, which is not common,
My happiness displeases me, when it
Offends you? What would you then have said,
If seeking only my own sarisfaction,
I had preferred my desires and wishes
Before yours? in what manner can? I please you,
If in obeying you, I anger you.
You argue too well for a ????????? love.
Where love is strong, reason ????????? impotent;
The one can't be established, ????????? the other
Subsists; sometimes a maid would be resisted,
And obstinately loved against her consent;
And as her close desires are very seldom
Expressed, she often speaks with intent
To meet a contradiction, and to be
Enforced unto that which she desires:
According to this maxim, possibly,
I have on this occasion discoursed
Conrrarie to my sentiment, and perhaps,
I should be so far from believing me
Injured thereby, that you would have obliged me,
In not obeying me.
I'm raped in pleasant wonder, if those words
Astonish me, they charm me more; if I
Must stay to please you, nothing is more easy,
Then to content you fully in that point:
Seeing obedience is not pleasing to you;
I will stay, Madame, and will not obey.
It is too late; begone, my mind is changed;
Occasion is lost as soon as' passed;
You would have too much pride, and I should have
Too little, if after such a confession
I should detain you here.
This order is
Severe and rigorous.
But it is just:
I love not always to be disobeyed.
Follow Clarina, go, and have a care
You be not seen. O Heaven! I hear my Father.
Alas! we are undone; perhaps, he doubted
Of your intelligence, enter forthwith
Into this closet.
Oh Daughter, daughter!
He appears furious. ??? 
I read my sad misfortune in his eyes.
Can I live after such high injuries?
What is the Matter, Sir?
How! demandest thou?
Dost thou not plainly see in the excess
Of my quick griefs, that I am burthered with
The greatest of misfortunes?
What miffortune.
Oh! Father?
Isabella, Isabella,
I must no more be called by that name.
I feigned in vain, tic best to confess all.
O fatal change. Heaven, who could'er have thought it?
Sir, I beseech you, hear me
What would thou
That I should hear, I know now but to well
What that love costs me which takes pleasure
In blood and tears, and hides deadly poisons,
When it shows flowers.
I confess ???
Oh how often.
Our expectations are deceived, in'wishing
Children, we wish troubles, and punishments.
If his death
Yes, his death is certain,
Suffer
That by my tears ???
Thou shed them in vain.
Father, revenge is easy.
But alas?
What should I enterprise against the Duke?
The Duke? What say you?
Art thou ignorant,
That my son by his order received death?
I know it not; oh miserable destiny?
Valerio from him brought me the sad news,
And would enforce me to agree with him,
That he in killing him did not unjustly:
What cruelty is this? wast not enough,
Through an unjust and barbarous constraint,
To forbid you a just revenge, but even
To complain of the injury?
True, Daughter;
To punish yet my son after his death,
They will I understand it, and not murmur:
It seems they have a mind, that I should go
To kiss the hand that murthets me, as being
Stained, and smoking yet writh my sons blood.
But Sir, consider in this sad conjuncture,
That my dear Brothers body doth expect
Interment.
Yes, I have took care for that,
By order from me it is to be brought
To this apart amened.
THe death, Sir, of your son is but to certain
W'ave brought his body into the next cha??ber.
Some little distance from this place we found it
Stripped, and so much disfigured with wounds,
That we should not have judged it to be his,
If seeking carefully we had not found
His coat not far of, and a little further
His hart: The thing which troubles me most
In this missortune is, that having made
A fruitless search all over for the rest
Of his habiliments, I could not find
Any one of them, and can not imagine
Who should have tan them thence.
Unhappy Son
Of an unfortunate Father!
Sir, you may
From hence see this sad object, if you please
To cause that curtain to be drawn aside.
Draw it, Licastes, let me see my sorrow;
We would be private, every one retire.
I cannot in this Lamentable object
Discern one seature of my Son, and scarce
Will my confusion give me leave to know
Him whom I have begotten, lying thus
In such a mangled condition.
Son, if it may be lawful in the sad
Estate wherein our miseries have put us
For me to use that name sometime so sweet,
I must then say unto thee, that this spectacle
Makes me to feel thy wounds more sensibly
Then thou thy self did when thou did receive them:
Thy miserable destiny and mine
Differs not much, the blood which thou shed'st is
The purest in my veins, the arm whose rigour
Hasted thy death, gave not the fatal stroke
Through thy heart, but it entered in my bowels:
And if we differ any thing in such
A miserable fortune, tic in this,
That I still feel the pressing evils, which thou
Suffer no more. Sources of my afflictions,
Deep wounds, which appear now but bloody mouths,
Whose silent accents seem here to folissit
My arm to a revenge, know that a subject
Holds not his Sovereigns fate between his ha??ds:
In vain ye ask reveng' against such a blood;
Alas here I can offer you no other,
But what my heart makes to flow from mine eyes.
The cruelty of the Duke, Sir, should be punished.
He is my Prince, although in my concernment
A tyrant, subjects destinies depend
Upon their Sovereigns, a crime becomes
Just in their hands; and if at any time
Those earthly Gods ought to be punished',
It must be by a thunder bolt from Heaven:
In this case I should make but vain attempts.
If the Duke dye, shall my Son live again?
But what chance brings Clarina here in such
Distracted haste?
Oh Signeur, oh Madame! ???
What ails thee, art thou mad?
Oh, I have seen ???
What hast thou seen that troubles thee so much?
I have seen, I have seen ???
What hast thou seen?
Speak, I conjure thee.
Since then I must speak it,
I've seen a dead man walk.
You have lost thy reason.
Nothing's more true, that fearful Fantasme foal???lowes
My steps, I hear him, he pursues me; save me.
It is my Brother ???
Strange! It is my Son.
Son, is my soul sure, or am I deceived,
Is this but an illusion which I see
But a vain object formed by my fancy?
If so, finish my life here with my error?
May thou yet be in the number of the living?
Fabritio, first thy body that I see
Or first thy shadow? come thou to fill me
With joy, or with affright? come satisfy me.
Let me embrace thee.
I see the light, Sir, and I find here charms,
Since you esteem my life at such a rate
As to lament it lost; not but as injured
By love and fortune, they should not doe to me
A favour to deprive me of the light;
But though they should oblige me very much,
In the condition wherein my soul
Is now, to quench my fierce flame with my blood,
And though my blood thus shed would make my fortune,
More sweet, I would conserve it, since tic yours.
How comes it that thou hast so strong a hatred
For life? thou can not doubt Climenes love;
The passion of the Duke alarms thee
Too much; if thou love much, thou art no less
Beloved.
A fair appearance oftentimes
Bears false witness, I assured my self
Too much of her fidelity, and though
I could doubt the report my senses made me,
I have too sure a testimony of her
Perfidiousness, since her own mouth confirmed it:
She entertained in amorous discourse
My happy Rival with so passionate
An air, that I forgot both my respect
Unto the Duke, and the care of my life,
In uttering my despite; the Duke possessed.
Strongly with love and hate, gave express order
Unto his Guards to kill me; but I knowing
That my defence then was unprofitable,
Under a dark porch sought my sanctuary,
Whilst an unfortunate stranger walking that way
They took to apprehend me in the dark,
Was suddenly environed with the Guards,
And pierced through with halberds, as soon as
Those murderers were gone, to draw my life
Out of such hazards, and to make this error
More probable, I took the bloody clothes
Of that deplorable body, and was ready
To leave it mine, having cast his into
The current of the river, when a noise
Of voices crossing my design, I was
Constrained to leave that body naked and
Without life, to come speedily to you,
And to advertise you of this event.
I fear the issue of this blessed succsse;
Know that the Duke boasts of thy death already,
He thinks it just, which makes me to judge
That thy preserved life is still in danger;
If thou desire to obey thy Father,
Stay not a minute here, but seek thy safety
In sudden absence,
But What! must I leave
Climene?
She hath left thee, her example
Shows thee the way to infidelity;
If to betray a person that doth love us
Be a base act, to love one that betrays us.
Is no less weakness.
I am still a Loveit,
Though an abused Lover, and she hath.
More beauty then injustice, her crime puts
No fearful object in her eyes and countenance,
Although she cease to love, she cease not
To be beloved, and my heart charmed by her,
Deceives it self, if it thinks to be able
To hate her, though she hath betrayed it.
I find that absence is the only remedy
For this disease, tic fit thy passion yield
To my desires; fly through obedience,
Or through resentment, oh assure thy safety
By thy remove, tic that which Idesire.
And which I fear.
That matters not.
But Sir ???
But I command it thee: for fear to be
Perceived, go forth without attendance and
Without noise unto Carlos house, and there
Pass the rest of the night; to morrow early
Before the day break, take the way to Florence,
Where I have many Fry??ds that will defend thee.
In the mean time I'll send thee by a friend
A horse and money for thy journey; haste.
My Sister.
Add not to my misery
By sad regrets: be gone, be gone; adieu;
Let me embrace thee, I deprive my self
Of my most dear support, but though I lose thee,
Tic with intent to save thee. ??? 
By what cruelty
Banish you my dear Brother?
Isabella,
Thou speak like a Sister, and I act
As Father, it is far more pleasing to me
To have an absent Son, then none at all:
I will deceive the Duke by taking of
His unjust pursuit against his life, when he
Shall fully understand his death: I will
To morrow that my house be all in mourning,
That this corps be interred for my Son;
And to the end that all Ferrari be
Deceived with the Duke, I'll honour it
With funeral pomp, this is a debt we owe.
Unto a blood, whose loss hath conserved ours,
Although we had no further use of it.
Lastly ???
SIr ???
What is it that troubles thee?
I met the Duke, Sir, at our door, he followed
A torch, which might, perhaps, discover me,
I hear noise, he pursues me, oh receive him,
O duty too unjust! cruel constraint!
Go quickly with thy Sister Isabella
Intothat closet.
He goes to Carlos house, what shall I doe?
Come along with me, what should hinder you?
I fear you should be seen, and there fore would
That the light might be put out in this place.
I contradict not, les us enter then.
They are both entered, I must quickly forth:
Fortune no longer seems to be contrary
To my designs; the way is free; but what!
I hear the Fathers voice: oh how unhappy
Am I?
ALphonso, I am not deceived,
Your soon is Living, I have seen him: having
Understood, that Climene in a soowne
Fainted, being careful of so fair a life,
And guided by my love, I went unto
Her house, where happily I saw your son:
I know that she adores him, and dare say
That her disease will Vanish, if he Lives:
Lastly I wish it, and am come of purpose
To be informed clearly of this truth.
SIr, you may easily be cleared herin;
Behold my son, judge if his loss be certain:
You feared him living, doe not fear him dead.
See, his congealed blood fmoaks at your presen??????
It is too much, I'm fully satisfied
That he is dead; but what did Carlos here
Without light?
To secure my Friend, I must
Feign hand somlie ??? 
He seems to be astonished.
Sir, tic not without cause that I am so.
For coming here to understand the news
of my dear Friend Fabritios destiny,
As soon as I entered that open chamber,
His Ghost appeared before me in a posture
So dreadful, that I tremble to think on it:
He had the figure of a fearful Fantasme,
His bosom was opened with a large wound,
His colour pale, and all his bod, bloody.
He came towards me with a staggering pace,
And darted forth a look though languishing
Yet fierce; a bleak, and black blood issued
Out of his mouth, and in his eyes grim death
Walked the round.
I also saw just now
Fabritios shape, but much less horrible,
Mc thought he was allve.
I dare engage
My credit, that your Highness saw his shadow
As well as I.
Tic that which doth confound me.
I still held for a fable what the vulgar
Report, of vain ghosts, and could not imagine
That a spirit once departed from a body,
Should leave the dead to come among the living,
Cease to be simple, and be visible,
Having no more a body. Notwithstanding
This success stattles me, I could not think it,
And now I cannot doubt it. But adieu,
I see your grief increases by my presence.
Sir, I waite on you.
I know what is a Father, and that nature
Will not allow him to pay homadges
To him that lobs him of a Son??? 
How highly ???
Am I indebled to you for this favour? ??? 
It is not great; it were requisire Fabritio
Should instantly betake him to my house,
From whence he may unseen make his escape,
I'll go unto the Duke now, to confirm him
Yet stronger in his error. ??? 
Go, and choose
Florence to morrow for retreat.
Sir ???
Let me
Receive no more replies, doe what I bid thee,
All my desires should be strong laws to thee,
A dew, let me give thee the last embrace.
Sir, notwithstanding all your care, I fear
My brother can't submit himself unto
This severe order; by his last discourse
I comprehended too well that he loves
Climene still after all her contempts,
And that his blinded soul is still resolved
To lose all, rather then to lose her sight.
I will be satisfied heerin, and know
The means to doe it, fail not thou to morrow
Towards the evening to go to Climene:
The evil, that hath surprised her, invites thee
Unto this Duty; for my part, I will
Make Carlos a visit at that time:
If my son stays, I doubt not but to sinde him
In one or to there house; but it is late,
Adieu, in humane Fortune give unto thee
As much rest, as I have unquietnes,
And trouble at my heart. ??? 
Las! mine doth bleed
With double grief, though the first wound be hid,
THis is the Garden, Sir, where presently
My mistress comes to walk her melancholy:
The grief she takes for her Lovers loss.
And her decayed health distracts her judgment;
Although the danger of her malady
Be great, she walks, and would even fly herself.
Be you assured her griefs will suddenly
Conduct her here to weep her sad misfortunes,
And you may see her without witnesses,
And without trouble, if your Highness please
To fetch a turn or two in this close Alley.
Thy care augments my trouble, not my hope;
I burn, and fear to see her equally:
I burn to see her when I represent
Unto my amorous soul a charming Image
With all its beauties, and I fear to see her,
When my sad fancy represents unto me
The rigour of those fair offended eyes:
Tic an undoubted truth, I fear to see
That fair afflicted one to reproach me
The evils wherein my flame hath plunged her,
To say that hatred is the only fruit
Of my addresses, and that with my Rival
My spirit is destroyed.
Your Highness, Sir
Should be prepared against the bloody taunts
Of a beblubbered Mistress: to speak truly,
And not to flatter you, I cannot see
The least hope that she will be wrought to love you
By this sweet way you take; I should advise you
Unto another course, make use of force,
Where kindness cannot work; ravish a good.
Which is denied to you; take her hence,
Who is so foolish and so rigorous,
And force her to be happy against her will.
How, take her hence by force? oh no, I cannot
Consent unto it, force can never be
Compatible with love, I would be loved
Without constraint, and cherished with out fear.
So far would her disdain be by this means
From ceasing, that it would take deeper root,
As having juster ground to propagate.
Your reasons are not altogeither lawful;
Our Sex, Sir, hath strange maxims, oftentimes
It feels not what it doth express, and seldom
Loves Deaths fatal wrecks, after a fortune
Of such a nature, love in women's heart
Turns unto grief, and that grief vanishes:
Her oaths and cries are of no consequence,
Her passion dies, when the object is no more.
Perhaps, Climene at this very hour,
Feels that ambition from loves ashes springs
Within her heart, and that she is prepared,
In spite of her just mourning to profer
The glorious possessor of a throne
Before the sad in habitant of a tomb.
And, possibly, wearied with her affliction,
She would be forced to embrace your love.
To take her hence, and force her unto marriage,
Are the last means which I will try; before
I use towards her the least violence,
I'll see her.
Sir, she comes there.
How she studies,
And how her slow uncertain paces speak
The violent troubles of her spirit, her paleness
Depaints her grief.
Leave me alone, and pass
Into that alley.
Madame, ???
Once again
I say I will be private for a minute;
Retire, and leave me to my self.
But if
The Duke. ???
Be gone, and speak no more of him,
His name is odious to me.
How unfortunate
Am I?
I told you, sweetness would doe nothing
Upon that stubborn spirit.
I will follow
Thy counsel, let us speedily go forth.
My presence would increase her cruelty.
For fear you should be seen, be pleased to stay
Till she goes in; till when I cannot hand sonelie
Draw you from hence; in the mean time your Highness
May in those shady walks divert your sadness.
THou which they say can with facility
Act what inclndes impossibility,
Blind Guide, false Child which can have no pretence
At all unto the state of innocence,
Tyrant of hearts, Love, which hast boasted still
That Death submits unto thy power and will.
Make her to know that the muades thy right
In robbing my Fabritio of the light
And cause him to return again, or give
Me passeport the Shades where he doth live.
The sweetest objects that now strike mine eyes,
Increase the number of my miseries,
The Suune tells me Fabritio's but a shade,
The Lilies at his loss look black and fade,
Those Rose, Queen of the flowers, seems to be
Stained with my Lovers blood, and neepes with me.
Dear Lover, thou sad object of my cries,
Whose image still dwells in my heart and eyes,
Reproach me not that I live yet to morn,
After thy ashes sleep in their cold urn,
Death without doubt are now had joined me
To thy sad shadow, if I could agree
That thou should dye within my heart, oh no
I cannot leave th'y adored Image go.
Thy cruel Rival when he murdered thee
In his conceit, mistook, and murdered me:
His fury was deceived, not satis fied,
In cutting of thy days, Climene dyed,
The Duke betrayed his vows, for I expire
In thy cold ashes, Thou live???st in my sire.
What's that I say, Thou livest in my fire,
Thy living Image is carved in my soul;
But those immortal characters, alas!
Which slatter me, are dead Fabritios.
Unjust and rigorous fate, was it reasonable,
That death should seas him so near marriage?
But wh, dispute I in such great missortunes?
I'll suffer my sad sighs, fotbid my te ares,
And to enuenome my affliction,
I'll cease complaint, nourish my sorrow, and
By prudent cares for fear to weaken it,
I'll strengthen it within, Isle signalise
My griefs by silence better then by speech.
When one hath lost all who complains, receives
A kind of comfort, therefore I'll for bear;
Yes, my dear Lover, to deplore thy death
In stronger terms then plaints and exclamations
But what! I hear a fearful noise beneath me?
It seems that to join me to Fabritio
A sudden thunder doth prep are it self
To come forth from the center of the earth:
The noise redoubles, and renewed strokes
Makes me believe that underneath my feet
They dig graves, I perceive the flowers to fall
The plants to be unrooted, the most settled
And sirmest oaks to tremble; it is time
To fly hence, but I cannot, fear for bids me;
Heaven! the disorder grows, and the earth cleaves
Fabritio comes forth thence, my strengh fails here,
And I am almost dead with fear and weakness.
THanks unto Carlos, and in spite of destiny,
I hope to see Climene in this garden
But to conceal the means on it I must cover
Most carefully the opening of the Mine:
Those stones, and those greene boughs will make the hole
Invisible, I need but seek the ungrateful,
Before I vent my anger; I???le reproach her
With my passed services, with her inconstancy,
And her false oaths; for fear my death should give her,
Some satisfaction, and to th'end t'afflict her,
I will appear unto her, and protest
That I will live yet to abhor her; yonder
I see that fair Inconstant; but alas!
I see her pale, cold, and in dying posture;
At this sad object which confounds me,
A tender pity doth succeed my passion;
And if this pity cause by her misfortune,
Is not yet love, tic something, sure, that's near it,
Climene thou fair object of the flame
which rises up again, when almost dead,
Cast yet a languishing look upon Fabritio;
For all thy anger and inconstancy,
I never sought any revenge against thee;
Return, and if thou wilt not that I live,
At least with one sweet look honour my death:
I hear some coming, I must hide my self.
If I should go into the Mine again,
There's danger I might be surprised.
I have heard strokes which troubled me much
The noise came from this side, let us advance
I see Climene, who fleepes; but alas,
Unparalleled misfortune! she is dead,
And underneath a thick veil, her fair eyes
Are shut up never to be opened:
Tyrannic destiny, by what law is it
That such a rare and exquisite beauty hath
So tragical a fate, and that the Star
Of my nativity, which hath produced
My sires, sends in its morn eternal night?
But I am in an errout; Master piece
Of all perfection, fate is innocent,
And I alone am guilty, tic this arm,
This batharous arm that hath tan hence my Mi???stress
In murdering my Rival.
Oh, alas!
She breathes, she breaths, and opens her eyes
Love, be propitious to me.
Is it thee,
My dear Fabritio, Fantasme of my sonle,
Sweet Shadow of my Lover? what wilt thou?
Her grief distracts her judgment.
Comes thou to reproach me suddenly,
That thou had lived, if thou had not seen me,
And that the fire sometime so fair, which kindled
Our hearts with mutual love, served but to light thee
To descend to the grave?
You are mistaken,
Adoreable Climene.
Tell me then
The cause that brings thee, Come thou to solissit
My heart and arm a while yet to defer
My death, unto the end to revenge thine!
Will thou that this ha??d plunged in the Dukes blood
Make my destruction just, and thine revenged
Speak speak; he shall not long be in condition
To triumph in thy death, in the midst of
His Court, and in the eyes of all Ferrari,
I'll pierce the bosom of that barbarous Prince.
My heart fears but the stroales of your fair eyes,
Know me, and recollect your wandering senses
The excess of your sorrow wrongs you much.
Whom doe I see?
A Prince that loves you.
What fatal accident, what cruel destiny
Presents me, in stead of my Lover,
His murderer, Sir, you must pardon me
This langvage, as a person highly injured:
I can no more respect you: is it possible,
You are not fully satisfied yet
In barbarously depriving me of him,
I loved more then my self, but you must come
To rob me of his Shadow?
This vain shadow
You speak of, is but an illusion
Formed by your fear and your affliction;
And when I've dissipated from your fancy
This fatal image, you will find that I
Have more advantaged, then injured you.
For dead Fabritio, please you to remember,
That it was your interest made me punish him;
The insolent discourse which he held forth,
Carried me justly to that violence:
If I had spared him, I had injured you,
And if I had done less, I had less loved.
Brahis account then I'm indebted to you
For giving, me the greatest of misfortunes,
In killing even before mine eyes the object
Which I adore, without whom the fair light
Is odious to me; you are much deceived
In your pretentions, you have gained nothing
In ruining a Rival, and the art
Whicch you use to asperse his reputation,
Can't hinder him to live with in my soul:
Though this death which I feel lively with in me
Had not expressed so much hate and contempt
As you show love and tenderness, I should
Have loved him so much as I hate you.
I condemn not your just transports, but bear them,
He was your Lover, though he was my Rival;
And I repent my rage in that I wronged
Your charming Image, printed in his soul:
I know that Rival, which was odious to me,
Pleased your fair eyes more then I, his merit
Was that which only rendered him guilty:
I hated him for being too amiable;
But in that hate, I fully did express
My love to you in offering you a heart,
And with that heart a crown. But I offend you,
Your looks speak your disdain. not to provoke you,
I leave you, and hope yet, that you will one day
Have less aversion for me.
Time can never
Cure my disease, death only is its term.
I will approach, I see the Duke retire,
My trouble is passed; and Climene lives;
But, heaven: who comes here again to cross me,
The Funeral is coming.
What, Fabritio's?
It is Iacinta, I need not for her
Keep a aloof of. ??? 
Yes Madame, you may see
The coffin which encloses your dead Lover
From your Balcony at this very instant:
His Father, who intends to celebrate
His mourning, honours Fabritios death
With funeral pomp, and whilst they carry him
Unto the Temple, you may, if you please,
See that unfortunate body pass.
I will so,
It is my last desire,
Enjoy it, Madame,
Behold here the unfortunate Fabritio.
Heaven! where shall I fly safely from this Fantasme.
I dare not stay. ??? 
What! will Iacinta leave me?
I have no other Mistress now but fear.
False and ungrateful Beauty, doe you fly me!
This makes your lightness. To appear too much:
If any justice yet reigns in your soul,
After you have betrayed me, give me leave
To complain my misfortune.
I betray you?
What doe I hear, Heavens! how astonished am I
At this so strange event? if I may here
Believe mine eyes, it is the living portrait
Of my Fabritio, but if I believe
His voice, it is but a deceitful Fantasme
Of such a sa'tfull Lover:
I am that very Lover, who against
Your will could not, in losing all his hope,
Lose his life too ??? yes, I live yet, Ungrateful,
And fear I live for you still in despite
Of my just anger, I know not what power
Opposes it in steed of murmuring,
I sigh, and all the heat that rests with me
Resembles anger less then love.
Now I
Begin again to know Fabritio;
His heart in spite of him doth secretly
Render me justice; and when the false mouth
Condemns me, it seems resolute in thought
That I am faithful.
Faithful? oh it is
Unto the Duke that this speech is addressed
He only is to hope for all your love.
Can thou impute those base thoughts unto me?
They are truths, if I may believe your oaths;
I should doubt yet of this extreme misfortune,
If I had understood it from the mouth
Of any other but your self.
An evil
When it is known, is easy to be cured;
I know thy error, cease to be abuse???d;
If the last fatal evening I expressed
Find words unto the Duke, I did believe
That I discoursed to thee, and so upon
That faith all that I said to him, was wholly
Intended unto thee???, thy only Image,
Which can possess my heart, my memory,
And all my senses with so much renown,
Was only guilty in that fatal moment,
If but a little blindness may be said
To be a crime in Love.
Unto a Lover,
Whose soul resigns it self unto suspicions,
Any excuse is good enough, and passes,
A lye that pleases deceives pleasantly,
And every thing is easily believed,
Which is desired; though all thy reasons were
As false as fair, so sweet it would be to me
To see my scares to end, and in my fancy
To flatter the affliction which thou
Might cause me, that thou would oblige me strongly
To make ????????? yield to be abused.
Let thy heart be
Free from those Low suspicions; if thou wilt
Absent thee, I am ready here to follow thee;
I'll manesest unto thee every where
The clecrenes of my faith, be it to live,
Or dye with thee, let Heaven bless, or deceive
Our expectations, I'll live satisfied,
Or dye content.
What owe I ???
Thou ow'st nothing;
Nothing of thanks, in following thy desires,
I follow my own sentiments; but how
Were it thou secured?
Fortune did favour me,
A stranger passing that night perished
Instead of me, and this Mine gives me means
From Carlos house to enter into thine.
Thou may a while here entertain thy thoughts
In the mean I'll go to fetch my levels:
Pass underneath this arbor, I believe
I hear a noise; as soon as it is night,
I'll come to thee again.
IF I am not deceived, here comes Iacinta,
Climene trusts her with her nearest secrets:
Fortune, it seems, to day in ovary point
Will be sweet to me, if I can oblige her
To go away with us.
Scarce freed yet
From my first fear, I tremblinglie return
Unto Climenes house: Fabritio
Was murdered through my means, and without doubt
He comes to revenge himself upon me
From the other world: my ruin were inevitable
If I should meet that fearful Ghost again.
Stay. ???
Tic the Spirit, good God, I dye with fear!
Oh Genrle Fantasme, have compassion of me;
I doe confess my fault, and promise faithfully
Ne'er to betray you, nor my Mistress more.
Strange! but I must know more. Disguise me no???thing,
If thou dost ???
Touch me not then, I beseech you,
And I will tell you all: tic true, I always
Endeavoured to hurt you, that I studied
To serve the Duke in his amours against you,
And that indead I was cause of your death.
Pernstious spirit. ???
Enter not into fury,
This is not all yet, lend your ear, I pray you,
I had forgot to tell you that the Duke.
By my advise this day hath sexed upon
Climenes rape, and that this very evening
He will attempt this unjust enterprise,
Horrid persidiousnes!
I have told all my faults, now may it please you
That I leave you in peace: for know that nothing
Is so unpleasant to me as discourse
With people of another World. If you
Were not dead, you would be so good unto me,
To grant me pardon upon my repentance.
It would not suite well with a generous spirit
To punish a weak woman. Go. ???
Monsieur Fantasme,
God will receive your soul. ??? Exit Iacinta.
The Duke this night
Intends, it seems, to take away Climene,
Heaven, must my hope be yet again destroyed?
But my heart leaves it self to be assaulted
With a vain sear, seeing I am beloved,
What should I doubt; nothing is strong enough
To disunite two hearts which love hath joined,
This God doth miracles for those that be
His faithful Votaries, and such are we.
Behold the hour, wherein I hope to see
The Beauty which my soul loves and adores:
The Snnne already having run his course,
Darts no more here but a feeble light:
With his last rays he now adorns the West
He sets with glory, shines when he is lost
And the fair remnants of his dying brightness
Makes his fall and loss illustrious,
Pardon, thou glorious Stat, whose splendour hurts me,
If my hope comes, when thy light vanishes:
Ingenious Love, to hurt me more, assembles
That mass of Instre which so charmeth me
In fair Climenes eyes, and presently
Her looks will give me brightness which surpasses
That which thou take from me: But she stays,
Heaven. she neglects me, she appears not:
The Moon is well advanced: and all my hope
Dyes with the day; this long delay denotes
A'fault of love: I hear one walk, and if
My eyes are faithful witnesses, I see
This miracle of Fair ones come at last.
FAbritie ???
Here, fair subject of my flame.
Here's he, who is as faithful as he's happle.
I did not think to have been so long absent.
I fear that I have put thee to some trouble.
Believe, indead, that to Fabritio
The least remove of thy fair eyes is grievous,
I did expect thee sooner, and to speak
The truth resolved to complain unto thee,
Upon this point; but to forget it quire,
It is sufficient that I see thee now;
I have no power to complain before thee,
The present pleasure flattering my thought,
Takes wholly from me the remembrance
Of my passed trouble.
Since love forces thee
Not to accuse me, the same passion
Obliges me too to excuse my self.
It was not the care of these Diamonds
Where with I'm laden, which caused my stay,
It only was the care to take a time
Proper for our departure.
Let's refer
The prosecution of this discourse
Unto another time, and think we now
To finish our designs, and t'haste our slight;
I fear the strokes yet of injurious chance,
She should be trusted least, when she smiles most.
Let's haste, I willingly consent unto it,
I fear least that torch should discover thee,
Oh hide thee!
I will dye rather then hide me;
An outrage is intended to thy person.
I must prevent it, being advertised
That the Dukes ready by a barbarous order
To carry thee away by violence.
SHe must be here
I'll draw a side a little,
But so, that I'll hear all: Go, speak from me.
What suffer thee to be tan hence by force,
And in my presence?
No, if any Violence
Be offered, step forth unto my aid,
In the mean time hide thee, and make me not
To fear for any but my self; Valerio,
What seek you here at such an hour as this?
I could not wish to meet a better object
Then your fair self, a coach near hand attends you,
I must conduct you there, having for it
An express order.
How! from whom have you
This order?
Madame, from the Duke my Master,
Whom every one is bound here to acknowledge
For Sovereign.
Let him be ne'er so Sovereign,
Yet he must know that the free soul of Climene
Is not within his power my heart depends
Upon another, and say what he will,
That is no lawful subject to his Empire.
Madam, I'm sorry ??? but I must obey,
What' thinks he to make himself beloved.
As one makes himself hated' Losing liberty?
Believes he that I should be so simple
To take so many marks of hatred for
Effects of love? what from his enmity
Might I not fear, if when he loves me,
He seeks to persecute me?
I am forced
As much as you are, but it is in vain
For you to give your self o'er to complaints,
Follow me quickly where I go. ???
Stay, stay;
Her beauty will not suffer any outrage
To be done to her person, in my presence,
Or rather I have too much passion
To suffer that she should be injured.
Tic true that troubled much, and desperate
At your contempt I was prepared to take you
Away by force, I did expect the issue,
And will confess, Madame, that in my soul
Love vanquished respect; but presently
At your first words love vanquished at its turn,
Yielded unto respect: cease, cease to fear,
Thou charming wonder, the heate of that love
Some what too violent: should your heart be
Hard as a rock, I only would employ
Respect to touch it, there's more passion in me
Then hate in you: in all the places where
I reign, you shall be Sovereign, and I shall
Esteem me happy, not to give you laws,
But to take them of you.
I should give thanks
Unto the Duke for such a declaration
If I could flatter here Fabritios enemy.
Although his loss hath reason to oblige me,
Since it afflicts you, it afflicted me;
But there runs a report upon this point
Which terrifies me, tic that to your eyes
His Fantasme doth appear.
There's nothing false
In this report, Fabritio since his death
Appeared before mine eyes.
To dissipate
Obnoxious fears which might cause evil visions
Within your fancy, some of my attendance
Shall presently have order not to leave you,
Oh! Sir, this is not it which I demand.
Tic the least duty I must render you:
Suffer them for to guard you.
Sir, it needs not.
Your quietness concerns me, and I must
Take care of it.
So far you would be from obliging me
By this design, that you would hurt me rather;
Of this care therefore I dispense your Highness.
To condescend to your desires herein,
Were to betray you, the sad vision
Of a dead person doth increase your griefs.
Permit ???
No, Sir, command them not to follow;
The vision doth please me, and I fear
To be deprived of its company.
This Spirit will always distract your reason,
As long as you stay in the house alone.
If but to change house will give you content,
I'll satisfy you, Carlos is my neighbour,
I will retire to him.
If you six there,
I contradict it not, his mother is
A very prudent Woman, and her counsels
Will be a great help to your timorous spirits,
Permit me to conduct you to her house.
This prayer is a command, Sir.
I cannot
Refuse to follow, him, especially
Seeing Fabritio likewise hath design
To go there.
What discourse i'th'name of wonder
Might she have all this while there; but good God!
The Duke draws her away, I'll succour her.
This Fantasm's nothing else but the effect
Of a sad thought, the senses are all hurt,
When the solo's troubled.
I'll put out the light.
Lastly l' promise you that there's no Fantasme,
Nor ever was; but what is that I see?
O prodigy! o Heaven! how am I troubled?
It is Fabritio, who is come to take
Climene from you.
O Fabritio,
Unto what danger comes thou to expose thee?
Climene, save thy self, or leave me perish.
My life's in danger, when thou hazardest
Thy self. I doe withdraw now, follow me.
Advance, Guards, I'll be cleared in this point,
Leave me not, I command ye.
She is gone.
I'll follow her.
Sir doubt not on it, it is
Fabrotio's shadow.
No matter, I'll be satisfied therein.
I'll go to aid my friend, this noise doth make me
To judge that his life runs some danger here.
It is impossible to take a Fantasme;
Yet he is taken, and it is a sensible,
And solid body.
Traitor, and the greatest
Of all my enemies.
Oh Sir! what fault
Hath Carlos committed? never had you
A subject yet more faithful.
What is that?
Tic Carlos, strange! this is a new surprise:
Here all my arguments are vain. Come you,
Carlos, to take Climene from my hands?
I, Sir? by no means; the noise which I heard
Drew me unto this place to know the cause on it.
Who came into this garden then to stop me?
It was Vabritios shadow, can you doubt out?
We can give you a certain testimony
Thereof, as knowing well his voice and visage.
I observed them my self very distinctly.
Assure ye, Sir, it was Fabritios shadow.
I'm stranglie troubled at this prodigy;
Climene was persuaded by my reasons
To quit this house, and I was bringing her
Unto thine, when that spirit came and parted us,
So that we have lost each other in the dark.
This success, Sir, strikes me with terror too.
Carlos, we must find out this charming Beauty,
And for her safety bring her home to thee:
Seek thou of than side, the rest follow.
Oh heaven! we are undone, the plots discovered:
If the Duke find Fabritio, his ruin
Is certain, but if in spite of the night
I'm not abused, I see a woman coming
Towards me.
FAbritio, is it thee?
No.
Oh, my grief!
Although it be not he, at least it is
His second self, tic Carlos. ???
Oh! dear Sir,
How misetable am I?
I know, Madame,
All your misfortune, having understood it.
From the Dukes mouth, who very much in passio??,
Seeks you with no ordinary care.
Fabritio's here about, if he should be
Unfortunately sound, it were impossible
To save him afterword; Sir, if you love him,
Divert his danger, overtake the Duke;
To draw him hence, tell him that I am ready
To come forth of this fatal place, and that
I've promised to stay here till you come,
To go with you unto your house.
I fly;
In the mean time, find, if you can your Lover,
And tell him what hath happened, above all
fail not to be here presently, your self.
Fortune; I fear is not propitious
Enough unto me, to permit me now
To find Fabritio, with too much heat
Her anger doth pursue me, to consent
That I shall have this happiness, notwithstanding
I hear a noise, perhaps Love favourable
To my chaste flames, guides my Lover here:
But what, they are two women; they have seen me,
Or I am much deceived, I must be gone
To seek Fabritio, and to shun their presence.
IT is my Mistress, Madame, approach boldly,
And give me leave to go immediately
Into the house, my conduct, and my cares
Are here superfluous.
Stay, she goes away,
And I see her no more, come, let us follow.
Good God! if I should meet the spirit again
Which I foe dread?
Thou know all these turnings,
And thou can guide me; Go before.
Who, I? defend me, God, from such a rudeness,
I know my duty well, though a gross Girl,
Madame, you are to go first, I'm to waite you
Oh if the spirit should come to punish me
For my late treason! ??? 
But thou tremble.
Alas! there's reason for it.
Stav here then,
I'll follow her without thee, ho, Climene!
She leaves me alone, oh, I am lost!
Madame, where run you?
Doe not stay my steps.
Should you be ne'er so angry, by your favour,
You shall not follow her.
Thy importunity
Is really, extreme, why dost thou stop me?
Because I love you, you would be in danger,
Should you go on, your safetie's dear unto me,
And I'll take care on it.
Leave me.
No, I must not:
I'll tell you a strange thing a fearful Spirit
Haunteth those places,
First a waggish Spirit?
Hobgoblin, or a Robin, Good follow?
No, he's not pleasant, rather on the contrary,
It is an evil, and a mischievous spirit.
Who told it thee?
Mine eyes, which did not lye.
And Is wear to you that I've twenty times
Seen it in several figures, sometimes like
A man, and sometimes like a ravenors beast,
And still at every bout mischievoullie
Ready to break my neck.
Climene then
Is not in safety here.
I know not that;
But I believe there is a league between them
They agree very well: But see the spirit
In form now of a Giant; Heaven protect me.
IT is Iacinta, and Climene is
Without. doubt with het.
It approaches to us,
Oh let us fly, tic death to meet with it.
It stopps at me, o Heaven, what fear have I?
Climene, stay, and hear me, I'm Fabritio.
It is my brother, strange surprise! I will
Speak soft and conterfeit my voice to find
What his design is, ??? 
The injurious Duke,
Fro?? whom my cares would take thee, see keth thee
Without doubt at this instant, let us lose
No time to shun his violence, but haste we
To Carlos house: besides, I fear my sister,
For she at home this evening said unto me,
That she would come to visit thee: if she
Should see me, presently my Father, who
Thinks me already far of from this place,
Will understand the contrary. This is not
To detract from my Sister, she is good.
And very innocent, but her fault is
She cannot hold her peace.
Continue, Brother,
I'm much obliged unto you, pray, proceed.
Misfortune! tic my Sister Isabella.
Pursue, good Brother.
Las! I've said too much,
Excuse the fears and weakness of a Lover?
If thy heart felt such seizures thou should know
That the God, who is President of love,
Is but a timorous child, and trembles always:
I doe confess, that I am ignorant
In maxims of this nature, and indead
Too innocent to understand them well:
Concerning your abode, which I have learned
With some regrett, for being known to me
It is not less secret: I will make appear
By silence and discretion, that I am
A better Sister to you then you are a
Brother to me.
Oh! Sister, what sweet sentiments have you?
How shall I merit them?
I hear some body,
Brother, let us withdraw.
I'll take your counsel; go forth of this dwelling
To Carlos house, I'll follow you immediately.
YOu see Climene stays here, as I said,
Conduct her! tic enough, Im satisfied,
And will go forth content.
Madame, tic Carlos,
Follow me without fear, speak soft ???
Tic Carlos,
I'll follow him without constraint. ??? 
Guards, waite upon Climene for this night,
My eyes must be deprived of the happiness
To see her, my love urges me in vain
To follow her, defer we till to moron
To render her a visit, the good which
I expect thence would be too dearly bought
If it should cost a trouble to Climene.
Depart we, and lets flatter us with hope
That we through perseverance shall o'rcome,
And that there is no heart so hard by charm,
Which those fires in my bosom cannot warm.
FAbritio.
My Climene.
Heaven! what hear I?
My judgment is confounded here; Climene
Is gone with Carlos, yet some secret charm
Which I can't comprehend, holds her here
In conference with the shadow of the dead.
Every one is retired we are alone,
The Duke is also gone out of the garden:
Let's finish the design we have in hand,
Let's press it on, and fly we without fear
That Tyrants love, for whom I've so much horror
In what a hideous gulf of black despair
Am I plunged by this prodigy? first a truth,
Or first a dream?
Haste we, but I'm afraid
That in the dark we shall not find the Mine.
No matter we caan go out of the garden
Another way, the key of the back door
Which I have here about me privately,
Will give us passage forth to Carlos house,
Where' against the light returns, I will be ready
To embrace thy fortune, and to follow thee,
Go where thou wilt.
By what expressions. ???
Tic enough, make me no reply, but follow,
We Iose time,
There's no doubt of it, tic certain,
Fabritio either dead of living steal
Away Climene; ha! I cannot suffer,
This outrage in my sight: come, I'm resolved
To lose my self, or reskue her; O Heavens!
WHom see I here? misfot tune! oh unlucky
Encounter! but, perhaps, I am deceived,
Is it you, Isabella?
Strange? What hear I?
First possible that Carlos should not know me?
Are all my features suddenly defaced?
No, they remain yet, only I have cause
To think that they are razed out of thy memory
Oh, Madame, this suspicion is unjust,
I will upon this point tell you the truth
With all sinceritic.
Pray, What sincerity
Can one expect from you?
Condemn me not
Before you hear me: I had a design
Which prospered not, my intent was to bring
Another woman here, and I confess
That I am sorry now to see you Madame.
In her place, your fair presence is indead
A trouble at this time. But ???
It suffices,
Ungrateful, thy crime is acknowledged,
And more sincerely then I could have thought
Suffer me to express my self.
It needs not,
What explication can be more clear?
Hear what remains.
No, I will hear no more,
All thy disguisements are superfluous.
But know ???
What should I know more? hast thou not
Told me that thy solo's fleeting, thou intende'st
To bring another Woman here, thou wilt
That I believe it, and I doe believe it.
I have not. ???
True, thou hast not any thing
For me but coldness, and presumption;
To see me in her place, thou say, you are sorry,
And with an unjust passion thy salfe spirit
Carried away, goes from inconstancy
To incivility.
Give me leave to speak.
What can thou say unto me?
That thou acknowledge the Empire of
A Worthier object, that in vain thy heart
Hath stood against her charms, and that to gain thee
I have too little beauty?
Oh deceive not
Your self with so much art, and I beseech you
Be less unjust to my poor heart that loves you.
In losing such a heart as thine, I shall
Lose little, it is faithless, base, and treacherous,
And I pretend not any thing unto it;
Adieu.
What without hearing me, oh stay,
I doe beseech you, stay.
My presence here
Doth trouble you.
It is a real truth.
A real truth,
Ungrateful?
You shall not go forth before
You've heard me, suffer me upon this point
T'ex press my thought.
I should again be troubled
With thy discourse.
What I shall say unto you
Can easily be verified.
No, no,
I forbid thee to justify thy self.
For the last time yet give me leave to say,
That it is you alone whom I adore,
That I am wholly yours.
Well, let me see then,
If I have any power yet in thy soul.
Madame, command, you shall be satisfied.
Say nothing more then to excuse thy self,
And leave me to depart. this I command,
Obey me in this point.
For such a perfect Lover as I am,
It is a crime to obey too readily.
No, no, I have some power upon thy spirit,
Show thy respect by thy obedience,
Love by respect is very ill expressed,
Who can obey well, knows not to love,
This favourable council, cruel Beauty,
Was given to Carlos.
Yes to Carlos faithful,
But this fatal advise, whereof thou dost
Presume so much, was never given unto
Carlos inconstant,
Madame, what's my crime?
Ungrateful, I will tell it thee, tic true
I had for thee something about my heart
That savoured of tenderness and that
I know not what began to differ little
From the toy called Love; at last I was
Tainted with that disease, when for my punishme??t
I knew my love produeed but thy hate;
True, thou feel it no more, now that thou see
That I am touched; I become trouble some
To him that's dear to me; now that my flame
Appears, thine is consumed, and beginning
To love, I cease to be beloved. Beloved?
what have I said'? I learn by the effects,
That thou feignest always, and did never love me
What can thou answer to excuse thy self.
So just a reproach cannot but confound thee;
Thou striv'st not more to justify thy self,
Thy silence speaks thee guilty and confounded.
This trouble which appears in my countenance
Proceeds from your injustice, not my crime.
What have I said here which thou can deny?
Defend thy self.
You have forbidden me
To justify my self. I fear you would be
Offended still with my discourse.
No, no
Speak, Carlos, now my anger's vanished;
Although thou should be false, and prove in???constant.
In such a high degree as to betray me,
I might co??plain thereof, but could not hate thee
And whatsoever change thy heart should make.
I should excuse thee if thou did desire it.
Upon your fair hands for this sweet expression,
Let me imprint my joy, and my resentment.
WHat doe I see?
But Madame, your suspicions
Injute my love extremely.
My suspicions
Give Carlos intimation that I love him.
You love him?
Heaven! what hear I?
O hard Fortune!
I must dispose my self to dye, he'll kill me ??? 
Father.
Unworthy object of my anger
In stly provoked, I'm thy enemy,
Call me no more thy Father: how! presum'st thou
T'offend me in foe high degree as thus
Against the rules of reason and of honour
To come to Carlos at his house by night,
And in despising the Religious Cloister
Whereto I've destined thee, to give thy self
Over to base amours?
I doe beseech you,
Hear me, grant me that savour, will you, Sir
Refuse me?
Yes, every thing except death.
Hear equitic oppressed by my mouth,
If her flame be a crime, I m guilty only;
Yes if it be a fault, deign to remember,
That I am the cause on it, and whom you ought
Only to punish, be more just without
Being more gentle, save the innocent.
And destroy the offender.
No, against me
Bend all your fury, if it be a crime
To love, it is a virtue to be loved:
The tenderness which I resent for Carlos
Denotes his merit, and sets forth my weakness:
And if my passion be worthy death,
Carlos is free, and I alone am guilty.
Perfidious, thou shalt dye then.
Oh, abandon
That thought.
Then Carlos with my honour take
Away my life, that is the only way
To make her crime safe; nothing but my death
Can stop her punishment.
Fear nothing from me,
I have respect for you, and since I could not
Appease your anger. I oppose no further
But rather press you now that Isabella
May perish
How? doe you press my destruction?
Oh now's the fatal moment, wherein I
Have just cause to complain of destiny
My heart is pierced with grief to see you here
With such injustice to become my judge,
And not my complice. I was well resolved,
Carlos, to dye, and quarrelled not with fate,
So long as I thought to expire for thee;
But I believed not in this adventure
That Love as well as Nature would betray me,
And that I should at last go to the grave
Thus by a Fathers stroke, and Lovers sentence.
Madame, I've said but what I should have said:
Once more I doe repeat it, since your daughter
Must dye, Sir, and I cannot hinder it,
Content your self to strike, but pray mistake not
The bosom, here direct your strokes, tic here
That Isabella's lodged, here she is Mistress,
Here she is criminal, here you must assault her
To punish her, and in piercing my heart,
You cannot miss her.
Oh, believe him not;
Turn your arms here.
Ready to shed my blood,
I feel my tears flow, and my choler's cold:
I only by a sudden strange effect
Am vanquished in the fight, let us feign yet,
Carlos, your cunning for a little time
Retards her Punishment, but fatisfy me
Upon a thing that brought me here, and wick
Doth trouble me extremely tell me truly,
Is my Son here, or no; if he be here,
His death is but too certain.
I assure you,
He is not here, Sir.
Since you doe assure me,
I will not doubt it.
WE are free at last
From the Dukes hands.
O Heaven! first possible?
Fabritio yet present him to mine eyes?
I gave, Sir, too much credit to your words. ??? 
He was not here, Sir, when I said them to you,
Thou blinded Son, through what ingratitude
Build'st thou thy pleasures upon my disquiet?
What hath made thee despise a Fathers Will,
whom thou know cherishes thy life so much
And why in violating all the rights
Of nature, dost thou make so small account
Of the light which thou owe me? Ungrateful?
The care, Sir, of my safety troubleeh you
Too much, I doe not hate the light, but love is
Less then Climene.
I commanded thee
To quit this residence.
But I received
Another order.
How! from whom?
From Love.
Love makes no laws but for those that will take 'em;
And reason now forbids thee to embrace it
Oh reason, Sir, had left me, and I was
Too much enchained, to depart.
Can thou
Stay without shame, after an infidelity?
Climene is as constant as she's fair:
My spirit was struck with an injust suspicion,
I'm disabused, and she's ready here
To follow me.
To follow thee?
Yes Sir,
To follow him, I have engaged my self;
Though his condition be changed, I am not.
I always doubted till this very moment.
Whether a woman could love constantly;
But if your love hath any reason with it,
Haste you to go out of his fatal country.
There's nothing that shall stop my steps to more???row
Sir, I swear to you. ???
Friend, thou shalt not swear.
If you believe it not, I doe assure you,
You are in an extreme error; who can stay us?
Pehaps, It may be I.
You?
Yes, I will
Tell you a sad adventure, which should be
Equally grievous to us both; Climene
Is by a fatal chance committed to
My guard, and I'm responsible for her.
I've the Dukes order for it, and to add
To the misfortune, I thought to have taken
Climene, and I took your sister for her.
What! this was then the cause which troubled you
So much but now?
You have but little reason
To doubt of it; but understand my trouble
In this extremity, if Climene flies,
I shall be forced to expose Isabella
Instead of her to the Dukes passions:
I love her, and tic now no longer time
To disguise my thoughts to you, Judge, I pray you,
If in this danger I ought to expose her.
How great is our misfortune?
Not so great
As it appears unto you; to be free
Of all scare, get ye gone all four togeither.
The Duke will be reduced afterword
To be appeased.
This is a most sure way;
But whence proceeds this noise?
Sir, diverse men
Armed with halberds desire speech with you.
Tic the Duke and his Guards, sure, their design
Surprises me.
I have lost all my hope.
Carlos, assuredly my sonne's discovered.
We will be presently cleared on that point.
Without light let Fabritio stay here,
And if he doubts that they are come to seek him
Behind this false wall he may hide himself:
See, how it turns; before his death my Father
Fearing the malice of his enemies,
Caused it to be made in secret for him,
And I know that there is no wit so subtle,
That can find out Fabritio in this place.
To save thy life, doe this, Son, I conjure thee;
And I Climene pray thee.
I obey
As son, and I obey no less as Lover.
Let's cease discourse, and go forth presently.
Heaven! must I always be distracted thus
Twixt fear and hope, and must so just a love
Have such a rigid fortune? the Duke loves,
Or abhors her, and I know that there's reason
To fear all things from him that hops nothing;
And that? bove all things it is dangerous
To be competitor with his Prince, and Rival
Unto his Master. But what??? hear I not
Some person walk, at if he would come to me?
I've passed through a straight way, now I enter
Into a greater, yet am still in doubt,
My hope's confounded, and my spirits dark,
Which should light me in these obscurities?
Am I'mongst mortals? am I in some cave?
Am I upon the earth, or in is center?
Murdered Fabritio offered himself
To my remembrance, would Heaven punish me
For his unjust death? but I hear a noise,
Who's there?
Fabritio.
Fabritio!
Appears his Fantasme here then for my punish???meant,
And am I sunk down into Hell alive
To suffer for the evils I've made him suffer?
I hear the Dukes voice, which I know full well.
Is it you then, Sir Duke?
The art not deceived.
I am the author of thy death, I will not
Say any thing unto thee for to save
My life, thou can without crime take it fro?? him
Who hath tan thine from thee, all the fear which
Rests unto me in this sad misfortune,
Proceeds from my crime, not from my death;
And if now any grief oppresses me,
Tic not to dye, but to dye culpable.
He thinks me still dead, I will profit by
This error. ??? 
Duke, you have just cause to fear
My fury, your fate now is in my power,
Nothing can stop the course of my revenge;
I can now sacrifice your blood to mine;
But, Sit, you are my Prince, and I le not doe it;
Injustice I abhor, and notwithstanding
My anger, I would rather suffer it
Then execute it.
The mote thy respect
Appears for me, the more unjust's thy death
And the more black my crime; by this, my fault
Becomes doubly condemnable, the less
Sevete thou art in punishing me, the more
I'm worthy punishment. But if thy shadow
Pretends to respect me, what obliges thee
To persecute me thus in every place?
How comes it that thou dost confer upon me
Imperfect favouts? why dost thou pursue me?
What first thou dost desire?
Since you ordain it
I'll speak it then; know, Sir, that this your trow???ble
Shall never see an end before you cease,
To love Climene.
Cease to love Climene?
Oh! that's too much presumption, I may cease
To live, but not to love her, to obtain
Thy wishes, thou should ask a possible thing;
But I should have abused thee if I had
Flattered thy hope that I would cease to love
That charming Beauty.
To love in this manner
Is to love like a tyrant.
Well, I know
That I love like a tyrant, but no matter:
Know also that. Love who gives Law to me,
Is yet a blinder tyrant far then I:
To force me to love this ungrateful Mistress,
He hath to much strength, and I so much weak???nes
Only the hope that I can give thee is,
Never to see her more, yet still to love her.
He that can lose the object, can lose also
The flame, the heart holds not what the eye is
Deprived of, Love from our will hath his power;
To cease to love, there needs but the desire:
To put out all your flames, quench all your hope,
And yield Climene to my constancy.
But if I should doe so, what's thy design?
To marry her.
To marry her? what! art thou
Not dead then?
What have I said?
Thou should be
Of the number of the living for this works;
Who cherishes a body, must not be
A shadow. Speak, and believe that thy death
Hath cost me tears.
He feigns for to know me,
And to destroy me afterword. ??? 
He answeareth not a word; Lets seek about.
But least he should go forth, it is requisite
To keep this port: to know too where I am,
Tic best to make a noise; hola! who's there?
Some one come to me.
Heaven! whereto am I
Reduced? but let me, ere they bring a light
Advance to wards the wall, and hide my self
Behind it.
I'll be cleared in this doubt,
Here comes a light.
DOe we not see the Duke?
See I again my Mistress?
Oh! we sought
Your Highness every where.
Is this enchantment?
Where am I?
In my house.
But where is he?
Who, Sir?
Your Son.
My Son.
Your Highness is abused.
I've spoken with him;
Use no deceit towards me.
Those are visions.
They are truths, but he can't come forth, seek ca???refully
On every side.
Oh Carlos how I fear!
I say, be not afraid.
Sir, I've seen nothing.
Heaven! what new prodigy is this? Judge all
If I have reason to believe my self
Enchanted: I went forth the garden, thinking
To see before mine eyes Fabritios Ghost,
When suddenly I fell into a precipice;
And passing through places which I know not,
Arrived here, where to increase the horror
Of my sad soul, his shadow once again
Appeared before me, spake long time unto me,
And used persuasions to make me cease
To love Climene, and to yield her to him.
This discourse gave me much incertainty
Of his condition; I doubted if
He was dead; but surprised and amazed
By this success, I need no more to doubt it.
Would that it plased Heaven he were alive,
I should be free then of that sad remorse
Which wounds my conscience, I would doe him justice,
And banishing my fires, would satisfy
My self in rendering him happy.
Sir,
It is an easy generosity
To lament, an oppressed enemy
That is no longer to be feared, you think
My son dead, and on that account, bewail him,
But if he were alive indead, you would
Be less humane.
I would not break my word.
By Heaven, by fair Climene, by all nature,
I swear to you Alphonso, that if now
Fabritio yet alive should by a miracle.
Appear before mine eyes, so far would I
Be from opposing still his just desires
That I would willing lie resign unto him.
That Beauty so beloved and Cherished.
Behold me living then, most generous Prince,
Feep your word and your oath, and make me happy.
Is this a Fantasme? Heaven!
Shake of your fear.
It is Fabritio living, and his death
Is but a feigned thing.
Sir, at your feet
I humbly doe expect the blessed effect
Of what you promised.
I'll keep my word,
Climene's yours.
Sir, favour my poor family
In every point, givs Carlos too in marriage
Unto my daughter, and approve with me
Their innocent desires,
I humble crave
That favour from your Highness
I consent to it;
Carlos, enjoy your wish, although I am
Deceived by your artifice; but losing
My Mistress, I lose my injustice too:
In not betraying me, you did betray
My glory, who commands ill, should be ill
Obey'd', unjust designs may justly be
Destroyed: Come follow me, and whilst your joys
Are making ready, rell me by what Art
The Amorous Fantasme plaid his subtle part.
LEt me Star gaze a while, and calculate
Those Heavens, to know our fortune, or our fate
Before I dare to speak; I cannot see
One cloud appear that should discourage me;
Tic a good omen: Fair Queen of this night,
Not Cynthia, but a Goddess far more bright,
To you I kneel. From him, whose glory is
To offer you a pleasing Sacrifice,
I mean the ambitious Poet I am come,
Humbly to beg a favourable doom
Upon his Fantasme, who although he be
At the full point of his felicity
A perfect body now, yet if you frown
Upon his action, and so cry him down,
No more a feigned Fantasme to be made,
He dyes indead, and flies into a shade.

